
<div class="page"><div class="seq">page 973</div><p class="text">h a b
is in english, as in other languages, a note of
aspiration, sounded only by a strong emission of
the breath, without any conformation of the or-
gans of speech, and is therefore by many gramma-
rians accounted no letter. the h in english is
scarcely ever mute at the beginning of a word, or where it im-
mediately precedes a vowel; as house, behaviour: where it is
followed by a consonant it has no sound, according to the
present pronunciation: but anciently, as now in scotland, it
made the syllable guttural ; as right, bought.
h.a. interjecf. [ha, latin.] -
i. an expression of wonder, surprise, sudden question, or sud-
den exertion.
you shall look fairer ere i give or hazard:
what says the golden chest ? ha / let me see.
ha! what art thou ! thou horrid headless trunk
it is my hastings rowe's jane shore.
2. an expression of laughter. used with reduplication.
he faith among the trumpets ha, ha, and he smelleth the
battle afar off. - job xxxix. 25.
ha, ha, ’tis what so long i wish'd and vow'd ;
our plots and delusions
have wrought such confusions,
that the monarch's a slave to the crowd. dryden.
ha ak. m. s. a fish. ainsworth.
jha beas corpu.s. [latin.] a writ, the which, a man
indicted of some trespass, being laid in prison for the same,
may have out of the king's bench, thereby to remove him-
self thither at his own costs, and to answer the cause there.
- cowel.
harerda'sher... n.s. [this word is ingeniously deduced by
minshew from habt ihr doss, german, have you this, the ex-
pression of a shopkeeper offering his wares to sale.] one who
sells small wares; a pedlar.
because these cunning men are like haberdashers of small
wares, it is not amiss to set forth their shop. bacon.
a haberdosher, who was the oracle of the coffee-house, de-
clared his opinion. - addison.
ha(pe rdin e. m. s. a dried salt cod. ainsworth.
ha(ber geon. n.s.. [haulergeon, french; halhergium, low lat.]
armour to cover the neck and breast; breast-plate; neck-
piece; gorgot.
and halbert some, and some a habergion;
shaksp.
so every one in arms was quickly dight. fairfax.
the shot let fly, and grazing
upon his shoulder, in the passing,
lodg'd in magnano's brass halergeon. hudibras.
habi/liment. n. s. [halilement, french.] dress ; clothes;
garment.
he the fairest una found,
strange lady, in so strange habiliment,
teaching the satyres. fairy queen.
my riches are these poor haliliments,
of which if you should here disfurnish me,
you take the sum and substance that i have. shakespeare.
the clergy should content themselves with wearing gowns
and other habiliments of irish drapery. swift.
to habi'll tate. v. n. [habiliter, french..] to qualify;
to entitle. not in use.
divers persons in the house of commons were attainted,
and thereby not legal, nor habilitate to serve in parliament,
being disabled in the highest degree. bacon.
habilita tion. n.s.. [from habilitate.] qualification.
the things are but habilitations towards arms; and what is
habilitation without intention and act 2 bacon.
habi'll ty. n.s.. [habilite, french.j faculty; power: now
ability.
ha/bit. m. s. [habitus, latin.]
1. state of any thing: as, habit of body.
2. dress; accoutrement; garment.
i shifted
into a madman's rags, t’assume a semblance
the very dogs disdain’d ; and in this habit
met i my father. shakespeare's king lear.
vol. i.
h a b
if you have any justice, any pity;
if ye be any thing, but churchmen's habits. shakespeare.
both the poets being dressed in the same english habit,
story compared with story, judgment may be made betwixt
them. dryden:
. . the scenes are old, the habits are the same
we wore last year. dryden.
changes there are in veins of wit, like those of habits or
other modes. temple.
there are among the statues several of venus, in different
habits. addison on italy.
the clergy are the only set of men who wear a distinct
habit from others. swift.
3. habit is a power or ability in man of doing any thing, when
it has been acquired by frequent doing the same thing. locke.
he hath a better bad habit of frowning than the count pa-
latine, shakespeare.
4. custom; inveterate use.
the last fatal step is, by frequent repetition of the sinful
act, to continue and persist in it, 'till at length it settles into
a fixed confirmed habit of fin; which being that which the
apostle calls the finishing of sin, ends certainly in death;
death not only as to merit, but also as to actual infliction.
south.
no civil broils have since his death arose,
but faction now by habit does obey;
and wars have that respect for his repose,
as winds for halcyons when they breed at sea. dryden.
the force of education is so great, that we may mould the
minds and manners of the young into what shape we please,
and give the impressions of such habits, as shall ever afterwards
remain. atterbury.
to habit. v. a. [from the noun..] to dress; to accoutre;
to array.
present yourself and your fair princess
before leontes :
she shall be habited as it becomes
the partner of your bed. shakesp. //inter's 7%.
having called to his memory sir george villiers, and the
cloaths he used to wear, in which at that time he seemed to
be habited, he thought him to be that person. clarendon.
they habited themselves like those rural deities, and imi-
tated them in their rustick dances. dryden.
ha bitable adj. [habitable, fr. habitabilis, lat.] capable
of being dwelt in ; capable of sustaining human creatures.
by means of our solitary situation, we know well most part
of the habitable world, and are ourselves unknown. bacon.
that was her torrid and inflaming time;
this is her habitable tropigue clime. donne.
the torrid zone is now found habitable. cowley.
look round the habitable world, how few
know their own good, or knowing it, pursue. dryden.
habitableness. m. s. [from habitable.] capacity of being
dwelt in.
the cutting of the equinoetial line decides that contro-
versy of the habitableness of the torrid zone. azre.
those ancient problems of the spherical roundness of the
earth, the being of antipodes, and of the habitablens of the
torrid zone, are abundantly demonstrated. ray:
ha bitance. n.s.. [habitatio, latin.] dwelling; abode.
what art thou, man, if man at all thou art,
that here in desart hast thine habitance 2
and these rich heaps of wealth do's hide apart
from the world's eye, and from her right usance.
spenser's fairy queen.
ha'bit ant. n. s. [habitant, fr. habitans, latin.] dweller;
one that lives in any place; inhabitant. -
not to earth are those bright luminaries
officious; but to the earth’s habitant. milton.
pow’rs celestial to each other's view
stand still confest, though distant far they lie,
or habitants of earth, or sea, or sky. pope.
habitation. n.s.. [habitation, french ; habitatio, latin.]
1. the state of a place receiving dwellers, -
io u amplitude
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 974</div><p class="text">h a b
h a g
amplitude almost immense, withstl.
numerous, and ev'ry star perhaps a world
of destin'd habitation. milton.
2. act of inhabiting ; state of dwelling;
palaccs,
for want of habitation and repair,
dissolve to heaps of ruins. denham.
rocks and mountains, which in the first ages were high
and craggy, and consequently then inconvenient for habita-
tion, were by continual deterration brought to a lower pitch:
//oodward.
3. place of abode ; dwelling.
wisdom, to the end she might save many, built her house of
that nature which is common unto all; she made not this or
that man her habitation, but dwelt in us. hooker.
god oft descends to visit men
unseen, and through their habitations walks
to mark their doings. milton.
habitator. m. s. [latin.] dweller; inhabitant.
the sun's presence is more continued unto the northern in-
habitants; and the longest day in cancer is longer unto us
than that in capricorn unto the southern habitators. brown.
haeroru al. adj. [habituel, from habit, fr. j customary ; ac-
customed; ifiveterate ; established by frequent repetition. it
is used for both good and ill.
sin, there in pow'r before .
once actual; now in body, and to dwell
habitual habitant. - milton.
art is properly an habitual knowledge of certain rules and
maxims. south.
- by length of time
the scurf is worn away of each committed crime:
no speck is left of their habitual stains ;
but the pure ether of the soul remains. dryden.
'tis impossible to become an able artist, without making
your art habitual to you. dryden.
habitually. adv. [from habitual.] customarily; by habit.
internal graces and qualities of mind sanctify our natures,
and render us habitually holy. atterbury.
to habituat. e. v. a. [habitaer, fr.] to accustom; to use
one’s self by frequent repetition ; with to.
men are first corrupted by bad counsel and company, and
next they habituate themselves to their vicious practices.
tillison.
such as live in a rarer air are habituated to the exercise of a
greater muscular strength. arbuthnot.
ha 31tude. n.s. shabitudo, lat. habitude, fr.]
1. relation ; respect ; state with regard to something else.
we cannot conclude this complexion of nations from the
vicinity or habitude they hold unto the sun. brown.
the will of god is like a streight unalterable rule; but the
various comportinents of the creature, either thwarting this
rule, or holding conformity to it, occasions several habitudes
of this rule unto it. hale's origin of mankind.
it results from the very nature of things, as they stand in
such a certain habitude, or relation to one another. south.
as by the objective part of perfeot happiness we understand
that which is best and last, and to which all other things are
to be referred ; so by the formal part must be understood the
best and last habitude of man toward that best object. norris.
in all the habitudes of life
the friend, the mistress, and the wife;
variety we still pursue. swift.
2. familiarity ; converse; frequent intercourse.
his knowledge in the noblest useful arts,
was such dead authors could not give;
but habitudes with those who live. dryden.
to write well, one must have frequent habitudes with the
best company. -
3. long custom ; habit; inveterate use. this is more pro-
perly habit.
mankind is willing to continue in a pleasing error, strength-
ened by a long habitude. dryden.
thy ear, inur'd to charitable sounds,
and pitying love, must feel the hateful wounds
qf jest obscene, and vulgar ribaldry,
the ill-bred question, and the loud reply,
brought by long habitude from bad to worse;
must hear the frequent oath, the direful curse. prior.
4. o power of doing any thing acquired by frequent repeti-
10n. -
. it is impossible to gain an exact habitude, without an infi.
hite number of acts and perpetual practice. dryden.
habn a b. adv. [hap me hap, or map; as would nould, or me
*; will mill, or ne will; that is, let it happen or not..]
***ndom ; at the mercy of chance; without any rule or
certainty of effect.
... he circles draws and squares
with cyphers, astral *. &gt;
then looks 'em o'er to understand 'em,
*ough set down halia at random. hudibras.
to hack. v. a. spaccan, saxon; hacken,
1. to cut into small pieces; to chop; to cut sli
to hack. v. n. to hackney; to turn hackney or p
dutch; hacher, fr.
from acare, an axe, saxon.]
- ght'v wi.
quent blows; to mangle with unskilful bij y with fre-
commonly some notion of contempt or malignit -
he put on that armour, whereof there was no one pi
wanting, though hacked in some places, bewraying son o:
not long since passed. o:
what a slave art thou, to hack thy sword as thou hio lity,
and say it was in fight ! one,
shakespear.' -
richard the second here was hack'd to i. ; henry iv.
* &gt; -- shakes
i'll fight 'till from my bones my flesh be 'k. !p.
one flourishing o of his #: o: shaft,
is hackt down, and his summer leaves as faded
by envy's hand, and murder's bloody axe. 'shi she
burn me, hack me, hew me into pieces. †
b not the hack'd helmet, nor the dusty field, rjden.
ut purple vests and flow'ry garlands please. :
but fate with butchers .# thy o stall addison,
meek modern faith to murder, back and mawl. » p
2. to speak unreadily, or with hesitation. ot.
disarm them, and let them question; let them keep their
limbs whole, and hack our english. shakpa,
rostitute.
hanmir,
hackle. m. s. raw silk ; any filmy substance unspun,
take the hackle of a cock or capon's neck, of a plover's
top : take off one side of the feather, and then take the haci,
filk, gold or silver thread, and make these fast at the bent of
the hook. walton's anglr,
to ha’ckle. v. a. [from hack.] to dress flax. •
ha ckney. m. s. shacnai, welsh; hackeneye, teuton, hajueit
french.j 2
1. a pacing horse. -
2. a hired horse ; hired horses being usually taught to pace, of
recommended as good pacers.
light and lewd persons were as easily suborned to make an
affidavit for money, as post-horses and hackney; are taken to
hire. bacon,
who, mounted on a broom, the nag
and hackney of a lapland hag,
in quest of you came hither post. hudibra,
3. a hireling ; a prostitute.
three kingdoms rung
with his accumulative and hackney tongue. rossommer,
that is no more than every lover
does from his hackney lady suffer. hadilraj,
shall each spurgall'd hackney of the day,
or each new pension'd sycophant, pretend
to break my windows. pope,
4. any thing let out for hire.
a wit can study in the streets;
not quite so well, however, as one ought;
a hackney coach may chance to spoil a thought. pot,
5. much used ; common. - -
these notions young students in physick desive from their
hackney authors. ... harvo,
to hackney. v. a. [from the noun..] to practise in one
thing; to accustom, as to the road.
he is long hackney'd in the ways of men. shaftara
ha'cqueton. n.s.. [haquet, old french, a little horse.] some
piece of armour. - - - -
you may see the very fashion of the irish horseman in o
long hose, riding shoes of costly cordwain, his hatso o
his habergeon. spensor's state of loans.
had. the preterite and part, pass of have, i had boo."
had better, &amp;c. means the same as, it would be * fro
or you; or, it would be more eligible: it is always used o:
tially, not indicatively; nor is have ever used to that im
port. we say likewise, it had been better or west.
i had rather be a country servant maid,
than a great queen with this condition. shakstart,
had we not better leave this utica, allison's cali,
to arm numidia in our cause: hsn
ha'd dock. n.s.. [hadat, fr.] a sea-fish of the cod kind,”
small. - -
the coast is plentifully stored with pilchards, o
and haddocks. heft -
haft. n. s. spaept, saxon; host, d
hold.] a handie; that part of any intrum"
into the hand. did
this brandish’d dagger ...', 0.lib.
i'll bury to the haft in her fair breast. dryd. o
these extremities of the joints are the **"...'.
the members. dryden o
a needle is a simple body, being only mo o: o
sword is a compound, because its haft or o logic.
materials different from the blade. - # also:
to haft. v. a. [from the noun.j to set in a i. j: cd,
hag. m. s. [pexerre, a goblin, saxon; hrekle, a witch,
1. a fury; a she monster. thus
dutch, from to so."
nt that is taken<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 975</div><p class="text">h a i
o
o
o:
o
o
thus spoke th’ impatient prince, and made a pause;
his foul hags rais'd their heads, and clapt their hands;
and all the powers of hell, in full applause,
flourish'd their snakes, and tost their flaming brands. crash.
2. a witch ; an enchantress. -
qut of my door, you witch you hag, you baggage, you
poulcat, you runnion. shakespeare.
3. an old ugly woman.
such affectations may become the young; "
but thou, old hag, of threescore years and three,
is shewing of thy parts in greek for thee dryden.
to hag. v. a. [from the noun..] to torment; to harrass
with vain terrour.
that makes them in the dark see visions,
and hag themselves with apparitions. hudibras.
how are superstitious men hagged out of their wits with the
fancy of omens, tales, and visions ! l’estrange.
hagard, adj. [hagard, fr.]
1. wild; untamed ; irreclaimable.
as hagard hawk, presuming to contend
with hardy fowl above his able might,
his weary pounces all in vain doth spend,
to truss the prey too heavy for his flight.
she’s too disdainful;
i know her spirits are as coy and wild,
as hagard as the rock. shakespeare.
2. [hager, german.] lean; rugged; perhaps, ugly. to this
sense i have put the following passage; for the author ought
to have written hagard.
a hagged carion of a wolf, and a jolly sort of dog, with
fairy queen.
good flesh upon's back, fell into company together. l’estr.
3. deformed with passion; wildly disordered.
fearful besides of what in fight had pass'd, -
his hands and hagard eyes to heav'n he cast. dryden.
where are the conscious looks, the face now pale,
now flushing red, the down-cast hagard eyes,
or fixt on earth, or slowly rais'd
ha'go ard. m. s.
1. any thing wild or irreclaimable.
i will be married to a wealthy widow,
ere three days pass, which has as long lov'd me
as i have lov'd this proud disdainful haggard.
2. a species of hawk.
does the wild haggard tow'r into the sky, -
and to the south by thy direetion fly sandys.
i enlarge my discourse to the observation of the aires, the
brancher, the ramish hawk, and the haggard. s/alton.
3. a hag. so garth has used it for want of understanding it.
beneath the gloomy covert of an yew,
in a dark grot, the baleful haggard lay, -
breathing black vengeance, and infecting day. garth.
ha(oc ardly. adv. [from haggard.] deformedly; uglily.
for her the rich arabia sweats her gum ;
and precious oils from distant indies come,
how haggardly foe'er she looks at home. dryden.
ha’og ess. m. s. [from hog or hack...] . a mass of meat, gene-
rally pork chopped, and inclosed in a membrane. in scotland
it is commonly made in a sheep's maw of the entrails of the
same animal, cut small, with suet and spices. -
ha(og is h. adi. [from hag.] of the nature of a hag ; de-
formed; horrid. .
but on us both did haggish age steal on, -
and wore us out of act. shakespeare.
t, ha(ggle. v. a. [corrupted from hackle or hack.] to cut ;
to chop; to mangle : always in a bad sense.
suffolk first died, and york all haggled o'er
comes to him where in gore he lay insteep'd. shakosheare.
to ha'go le. v. m. to be tedious in a bargain; to be long in
coming to the price.
ha'go ler. m.s.. [from haggle.]
1. one that cuts.
2. one that is tardy in bargaining. . . . .
ha'giod rapher. m. s. [3.2.32 and 73%2.] a holy writer.
the jews divide the holy scriptures of the old testament
into the law, the prophets, and the hagiographers.
hah. interject. an expression of sudden effort.
her conts tuck'd up, and all her motions just,
she stamps, and then cries hah / at ev'ry thrust. dryden.
hail. m. s. shazel, saxon.] drops of rain frozen in their fall-
ing. locke.
smith.
shakspeare.
thunder mix’d with hail,
hail mix’d with fire must rend th’ egyptian sky.
to hail. v. m. to pour down hail. - -
my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation when it
shall hail, coming down on the forest. if xxxii. 19.
hail. interj. [hael, health, saxon : hail, therefore, is the same
as salve of the latins, or dyizios of the greeks, health be to
you..] a term of salutation now used only in poetry; health
be to you. it is used likewise to things inanimate.
hail, hail, brave friend
say to the king the knowledge of the broil.
milton.
shakespeare,
her fick head is bound about with clouds:
it does not look as it would have a hail
or health wish'd in it, as on other morns.
the angel hail
bestow'd, the holy salutation us'd
ben. johnson.
long after to blest mary, second eve. milton.
farewell, happy fields,
where joy for ever dwells's hail horrors hail
infernal world ! and thou profoundest hell
receive thy new possessors milton.
... all hail, he cry'd, thy country's grace and love;
once first of men below, now first of birds above. dryden.
hail to the sun' from whose returning light
the chearful soldier's arms new lustre take. -
7- hail. v. a. [from the noun.j. to salute; to call to.
a galley drawing near unto the shore, was hailed by a
turk, accompanied with a troop of horsemen. knolles.
thrice call upon my name, thrice beat your breast,
and hail me thrice to everlasting rest. dryden.
ha'ilshot. n.s.. [hail and shot..] small shot scattered like
hail.
the master of the artillery did visit them sharply with mur-
dering hail/hot, from the pieces mounted towards the top of
the hill. hayward.
hoos. n, so [hail and done.] a particle or single ball
of hail.
rowe.
you are no surer, no,
than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
or hail/lone in the sun.
hard hail/lones lye not thicker on the plain,
nor shaken oaks such show’rs of acorns rain.
haily., adj. [from hail.] consisting of hail.
from whose dark womb a rattling tempest pours,
which the cold north congeals to haily showers.
hair... n.s.. [hæn, saxon.]
i. one of the common teguments of the body. it is to be
found upon all the parts of the body, except the soles of the
feet and palms of the hands. when we examine the hairs
with a microscope, we find that they have each a round bul-
bous root, which lies pretty deep in the skin, and which draws
their nourishment from the surrounding humours: that each
hair consists of five or six others, wrapt up in a common te-
gument or tube. they grow as the nails do, each part near
the root thrusting forward that which is immediately above it,
and not by any liquor running along the hair in tubes, as
plants grow. quincy.
my fleece of woolly hair uncurls. shakspeare.
shall the difference of hair only, on the skin, be a mark of
a different internal constitution between a changeling and a
drillf - locke.
2. a single hair.
shakespeare.
dryden.
pope.
naughty lady, - - -
these hair, which thou do'st ravish from my chin,
will quicken and accuse thee. shakesp. king lear.
- much is breeding;
which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life,
and not a serpent's poison. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
3. anything proverbially small.
if thou tak'st more
or less than just a pound; if the scale turn
but in the estimation of a hair,
thou diest. . shakespeare's merchant of venice.
he judges to a hair of little indecencies, and knows better
than any man what is not to be written. dryden.
4. course; order; grain; the hair falling in a certain direction.
he is a curer of fouls, and you a curer of bodies: if you
should fight, you go against the hair of your profesion.
- shakespeare's merry loves of windsor.
ha'irbrained. adj. [this should rather be written hare-
brained, unconstant, unsettled, wild as a hare.] wild; irre-
gular; unsteady. -
let's leave this town; for they are hairbrain'd slaves,
and hunger will enforce them be more eager.
- shakespeare's henry vi.
hair breadth n s [hair and breadth.] a very small dis-
tance; the diameter of a hair.
seven hundred chosen men left-handed could sling stones
at an hairbreadth, and not miss. judg. xx. 16.
i spoke of most disastrous chances,
of moving accidents by flood and field;
of hairbreadth 'scapes in th’ imminent deadly breach.
shakosheare.
hai'reel. n.s. the name of a flower; the hyacinth.
hair cloth. n.f. [hair and cloth.j stuff made of hair, very
rough and prickly, worn sometimes in mortification.
it is composed of reeds and parts of plants woven together,
like a piece of haircloth. grew's museum.
hairla’ce. n.s.. [hair and lace.] the fillet with which wo-
men tie up their hair.
some worms are commonly resembled to a woman's hair-
lace or fillet, thence called tenia. harvey.
5
if
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 976</div><p class="text">h a l
h a l
if molly happens to be careless,
and but neglects to warm her hairlace,
she gets a cold as sure as deo: . -
hatrie’s adj. [from hair.] wanting hair, , .
while cards have arm'd their thin and hairls scalps
against thy majesty. . . shakespeare;
hatriness. n.s.. [from hairy.] the state of being covered
with hair, or abounding with hair.
*ha". ry. adj. [from hair.] -
1. overgrown with hair; covered with hair.
she his hairy temples then had rounded
with coronet of flowers. shakespeare.
children are not hairy, for that their skins are more perspir-
swift.
able. bacon.
2. consisting of hair.
storms have shed
from vines the hairy honours of their head. dryden.
hake.. n. s. a kind of fish.
the coast is stored with mackrel and hake. carew.
ha'kot. m. s. [from hake..] a kind of fish. ainsworth.
hal, in local names, is derived like al from the saxon pealle,
i. e. a hall, a palace. in gothic all signifies a temple, or
any other famous building. gilson's camden.
halberd. n.s. shalebarde, french; halleharde, dutch, from
barde, an axe, and halle, a court, halberds being the common
weapons of guards.) a battle-axe fixed to a long pole.
advance thy halherd higher than my breast. shakesh.
our halberd; did shut up his passage. shakes. henry vi.
four knaves in garbs succinct, a trusty band,
caps on their heads, and halberd; in their hand,
draw forth to combat on the velvet plain. pope.
ha/lberdier. m. s. shacbardier, fr. from halherd..] one who
is armed with a halberd.
the duchess appointed him a guard of thirty halberdecry,
in a livery of murrey and blue, to attend his person. bacon.
the king had only his halberdeers, and fewer of them than
used to go with him. clarendon.
ha'lcyon. m. s. shakyo, lat.] a bird, of which it is said that
she breeds in the sea, and that there is always a calm during
her incubation.
such smiling rogues, as these, sooth ev'ry passion,
bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks -
with ev'ry gale and vary of their masters. shakespeare.
amidst our arms as quiet you shall be,
as lalcyons brooding on a winter sea. dryden.
ha'lcyon. adj. [from the noun..] placid ; quiet ; still ;
peaceful.
when great augustus made war's tempests cease,
his halcyon days brought forth the arts of peace. denham.
no man can expect eternal serenity and halcyon days from
so incompetent and partial a cause, as the constant course of
the sun in the equinoetial circle. bentley.
hale. adj. [this should rather be written hail, from hal,
health.) healthy; sound; hearty; well complexioned.
my seely sheep like well below,
for they been hale enough i trow,
and liken their abode. spensor.
some of these wise partizans concluded the government
had hired two or three hundred hale men, to be pinioned, if
not executed, as the pretended captives. addison.
his stomach too begins to fail;
last year we thought him strong and hale,
but now he's quite another thing:
i wish he may hold out ’till spring. swift.
to hal e. v. a. [hasen, dutch ; halor, french..] to drag by
force ; to pull violently and rudely.
fly to your house;
the plebeians have got your fellow tribune,
and hale him up and down. shakesp. coriolanus.
my third comfort,
starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast
hald out to murder. shakespeare.
give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him, lest
he ha'e thee to the judge. luke.
he by the neck hath hal’d, in pieces cut,
and set me as a mark on every butt. sandys.
thither by harpy-footed furies hal’d,
at certain revolutions, all the damn'd
are brought. milton.
this finitious gravity is drawn that way by the great artery,
which then subsideth, and haloth the heart unto it. brown.
- who would not be disgusted with any recreation, in itself
indifferent, if he should with blows behaled to it when he had
no mind locke.
in all the tumults at rome, though the people proceeded
sometimes to pull and hale one another about, yet no blood
was drawn 'till the time of the gracchi. swift.
#.'s so o wo pulls and hales.
* * * * * * ; ulsa a l'u85. r- -
diale&amp;s. o l is so o: and all the teutonick
* a moiety; one part of two; an equal part,
an half acre of land. i sam. v.
many might go to heaven with half the ho xiv. i4,
hell, if they would venture their industry the right o 30 to
well chosen friendship, the most noble ben, jthson,
of virtues, all our joys makes double,
and into halves divides our trouble.
or what but riches is there known
which man can solely call his own;
in which no creature goes his half,
unless it be to squint and laugh?
no mortal tongue can half the beauty tell;
for none but hands divine could work so well, d d
of our manufacture foreign markets took off one *
the other half were consumed amongst ourselves, y dh
denhan,
hudibra,
the council is made up half out of the noble -:
half out of the plebeian. addison oil,
half the misery of life might be extinguished, would intil
alleviate the general curse by mutual compassion, aidson
her beauty, in thy softer half
bury'd and lost, she ought to grieve. prior
natural was it for a prince, who had proposed to him;
the empire of the world, not to neglect the sea, the half of
his dominions. arbuthnol,
2. i o has a plural signification when a number is
1v10 cc1,
had the land sele&amp;led of the best,
half had come hence, and let the world provide the res.
drdin,
half, adv. r)
1. in part; equally.
i go with love and fortune, two blind guides,
to lead my way; half oth, and half consenting. dryden,
2. it is much used in composition to signify a thing imprised,
as the following examples will show.
half-b loop. m. s. one not born of the same father and
mother.
which shall be heir of the two male twins, who, by the
dissection of the mother, were laid open to the world? who.
ther a sister by the half-blood shall inherit before a brother's
daughter by the whole-blood : litto,
half-blood ed. adj. [half and blood.] mean; degenerat,
the let alone lics not in your good will.
nor in thine, lord.
—half-blood d fellow, yes. shuks). king lor,
half-cap. m. s. cap imperfectly put off, or saintly moved,
with certain half caps and cold moving nods,
they froze me into filence. shaos. town of aioi,
ha'lf endeal. m. s. (half and bail, saxon. part offs.
half face d. adj. [half and faced.] showing only part of the
face; small faced ; in contempt.
proud incroaching tyranny
burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colour:
advance, a half faced sun striving to shino, shalftir.
this same has faced fellow, shadow; go mo this min:
he presents no mark to the enemy; the foeman may with:
great aim level at the edge of a penknife. shakstart,
half hatched, adj. [has and hatch..] imperso hatch.d.
here, thick as hailstones pour, 3.
turnips, and half-hatch'd eggs, a mingled show'r, go,
among the rabble rain. i
half-heard. adj. imperfeotly heard; no heard to an end.
not added years on years my task could close;
back to thy native islands might'st thou sail,
and leave has-heard the melancholy tale.
half-moon. n.s. - docris.
1. the moon in its appearance when at half increase ord:
2. anything in the figure of a half moon.
see how in warlike muster they appea": . moh
in rhombs and wedges, and half-moon; and wings. *
half-pen.y. m.s. plural half-pence...[has and pen).]
1. a copper coin, of which two make a po: es, and?"
bardolph sole a lute-case, bore it two" leagu so
it for three half-pence. %d:
i thank o: sure, dear friend, my thanks too.
of a half-peny. is coat
he cheats for half-pence, and he doffs his co drio,
to save a farthing in a ferryboat. as 01:
never admit this pernicious coin, swift,
single half-peny. - - - ingo:
2. . £o. of an adjective conjoined with anyth";
which it denotes the price. ld for 1
o: shii be in england seven half-po" *::::
env. • ---&gt; bru
p %. will wonder how wood could go ho
seal for so great a sum of bad no an #: our own.”
here could not obtain the same favour. *" i.
ence as we used to do. - ike carried"
h: n.f. [half and pike.] the small plk
post,
no not so much
fh - - c his
o †. various ways of paying * salute with o
half'
pike.
- o<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 977</div><p class="text">half on t. m. s. shalf and pint..] the fourth part of a quart.
one half-pint bottle serves them both to dine;
and is at once their vinegar and wine. pope.
half-schola r. m. s. one imperfeotly learned.
we have many half scholars now-a-days, and there is much
confusion and inconfiitency in the notions and opinions of
some persons. //atts.
half-seas over. a proverbial expression for any one far ad-
vanced. it is commonly used of one half drunk.
i am half-seas o'er to death;
and since i must die once, i would be loth
to make a double work of what's half finish'd. dryden.
half-sic hted. adj. [half and sight.] seeing imperfectly;
having weak discernment.
. the officers of the king's houshold had need be provident,
both for his honour and thrift: they must look both ways,
else they are but has-fighted. bacon.
half-sphere. m.s.. [has and sphere.] hemisphere.
let night grow blacker with thy plots; and day,
at shewing but thy head forth, start away
from this half-sphere. bon. johnson.
half-stor ain.e.d. adj. [half and/orain.] half-bred; imperfect.
i find i’m but a half strain'd villain yet,
but inungril-mischievous; for my blood boil'd
to view this brutal act. dryden.
half-swor d. m. s. ciose fight; within half the length of a
sword.
i am a rogue, if i were not at has sword with a dozen of
them two hours together. shakespeare,
half way. adv. shalf and way.] in the middle.
fearless he sees, who is with virtue crown'd,
the tempest rage, and hears the thunder found;
ever the same, let fortune smile or frown :
serenely as he liv'd resigns his breath;
meets deitiny halfway, nor shrinks at death. granville.
half-wit. m. s. [half and wit..] a blockhead ; a foolish
follow. -
half wits are fleas, so little and so light,
we scarce could know they live, but that they bite. dryden.
half-witt e.d. adj. [from has wit.) imperfectly furnished
with understanding.
i would rather have trusted the refinement of our language,
as to found, to the judgment of the women than of half-
witted poets. swift.
jack had passed for a poor, well-meaning, half-witted,
crack-brained fellow : people were strangely surprised to find
him in such a roguery. arbuthnot's hist. of john bull.
when half is added to any word noting personal qualitics,
it commonly notes contempt.
ha'lieut. m. s. a sort of fish. ainsworth.
ha'li do m. n.s. [pali; born, holy judgment, or pali; and dame,
for lady..] our blessed lady. in this it should be hasidam.
by my halidom, quoth he,
ye a great master are in your degree. hubberd’s tale.
hat, im ass. m. s. [pali; and mos...] the feast of all-souls.
she came adorned hither like sweet may ;
sent back like halimass, or shortest day. shakespeare.
ha'lituous. adj. [halitus, lat..] vaporous ; fumous.
we speak of the atmosphere as of a peculiar thin and hali-
tuous liquor, much lighter than spirit of wine. boyle.
hall. m. s. [pal, saxon; halle, dutch..]
1. a court of justice; as, westminster hall.
o lost too soon in yonder house or hall. pope.
2. a manour-house so called, because in it were held courts for
the tenants.
captain sentry, my master's nephew, has taken possession
of the hall house, and the whole estate. addison.
. the publick room of a corporation.
with copedition on the beadle call,
to summon all the company to the hall.
. the first large room of a house.
that light we see is burning in my hall.
courtesy is sooner found in lowly sheds
with smoky rafters, than in tap'stry halls -
and courts of princes. - milton.
iiallt lu j.ah. m. s. [for] praise ye the lord. a song
of that,ksgiving.
then shall thy saints
unfained hallelujah, to thee sing, -
hymns of high praise. milton.
singing those devout hymns and heavenly anthems, in
which the church militant seems ambitious to emulate the
tiiumphant, and echo back the solemn praises and hallelujahs
of the celestial choirs. boyle.
ha'iloo. interj. [the original of this word is controverted :
some imagine it corrupted from a lui, to him others from
allons, letus go and skinner from halor, to draw.] a word
of encouragement when dogs are let loose on their game.
some popular chief,
more noisy than the rest, but cries halloo,
and, in a trice, the bellowing herd come out.
to h.a. lloo. v. n. [haser, fr.]
vol. i.
3
garth.
4
shakspeare.
drydon. .
1. to cry as after the dogs.
a cry more tuneable
was never halloo'd to, nor chear'd with horn. sha's rare.
2. to treat as in contempt. 1.
country folks haloa and housed after me, as the arrantest
coward that ever shewed his shoulders to his enemy. sidny.
7% ha'i, loo. v. a. -
1. to encourage with shouts.
if, whilst a boy, jack ran from school,
fond of his hunting-horn and pole,
though gout and age his specd detain,
old john halos his hound again.
2. to chase with shouts.
if i fly, marcius,
hallao me like a bare.
3. to call or shout to. -
when we have found the king, he that first lights on him,
halloo the other. shakspeare's king lear.
to hal low. v.a. [palsian, ball3, saxon, holy. ]
1. to consecrate; to make holy.
when we sanctify or hallow churches, it is only to testify
that we make them places of publick resort; that we invest
god himself with them, and that we sever them from com.
mon uses. h. : {er.
it cannot be endured to hear a man profess that he putteth
fire to his neighbour's house, but yet so hallowath the same
with prayer, that he hopeth it shall not burn. h234er.
is’t cade that i have slain, that monstrous traitor :
sword, i will hallow thee for this thy deed,
and hang thee o'er my tomb, when i am dead.
my prayers
are not words duly halow'd, nor my wishes
more worth than vanities; yet pray'rs and wishes
are all i can return. shakspeare's henry viii,
god from work
now resting, bless'd and hallow'd the seventh day,
as resting on that day from all his works, -
prior.
shakespeare's coriolanus;
s haosh.
but not in silence holy kept. asion.
then banish’d faith shall once again return,
and vesłal fires in hallow'd temples burn. dryden.
no satyr lurks within this hallow'd ground;
but nymphs and heroines, kings and gods abound. granv.
2. to reverence as holy; hallowed be thy name.
hallucis arios...m. s. shallucinatio, lat..] errour; blun-
der; mistake; folly.
a wasting of flesh, without cause, is frequently termed a
bewitched disease; but questionless a mere hallucination of the
vulgar. harvey.
this must have been the hallucination of the transcribes,
who probably mistook the dash of the i for a t. addison.
hal m. m. s. [pealm, saxon.] straw; pronounced haun ,
which see.
h a lo. m. s. a red circle round the sun or moon.
if the hail be a little flatted, the light transmitted may grow
so strong, at a little less distance than that of twenty-six de-
grees, as to form a halo about the sun or moon; which halo,
as often as the hailstones are duly figured, may be coloured.
mewton.
i saw by reflexion, in a vessel of stagnating water, three
hao's, crowns or rings of colours about the sun, like three
little rainbows, concentrick to his body. newton.
hatse ning: adj. [hal, german; has, scottish, the neck.]
sounding harshly 3 inharmonious in the throat or tongue.
not in use.
this ill hasoning horny name hath, as cornuto in italy,
opened a gap to the scosis of many. carew.
ha lse r. m. / [from pair, neck, and reel, a rope. it is now
in marine pronunciation corrupted to hawser.] a rope less
than a cable.
a beechen mast then in the hollow base
they hoisted, and with well-wreath'd hasors hoise
their white sails. chasman.
no hussers need to bind these vessels here,
nor bearded anchors; for no storms they fear. dryden,
to halt. v. m. speak, saxon, lame; peakan, to limp.]
1. to limp ; to be lame.
and will she yet debase her eyes
on me, that halt and am mis-shapen thus shoare.
thus inborn broils the factions would engage,
or wars of exil'd heirs, or foreign rage,
'till halting vengeance overtook our age.
spenser himself affects the obsoletc,
and sidney's verse halts ill on roman feet. pope.
2. to stop in a march.
drydin.
i was forced to halt in this perpendicular march. addison.
3. to hesitate; to stand dubious. - - -
how long half ye between two opinions i kong.
4. to fail; to faulter. -
here's a paper written in his hand;
a halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
fashion'd to beatrice. shakes care.
all my familiars watched for my halting, saying, perad-
1 o x vcilture<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 978</div><p class="text">venture he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him.
jeremiah.
ial.t. adj. [from the verb.] lame; crippled.
h *:::: o hither the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the
blind. luke.
halt. n.s.. [from the verb.] - -
1. the act of limping; the manner of limping.
2. [alte, french..] a stop in a march.
the heav'nly bands
down from a sky of jasper lighted now
in paradise, and on a hill made halt. milton.
scouts each coast light armed scour
each quarter to descry the distant foe,
where lodg’d, or whither fled, or if for fight -
in motion, or in halt. milton.
without any halt they marched between the two armies.
clarendon.
he might have made a halt 'till his foot and artillery came
up to him. clarendon.
ha’lter. n.s.. [from halt..] he who limps.
halter. m. s. spealrtne, saxon, from palr, the neck.]
1. a rope to hang malefactors.
he's fled, my lord, and all his pow'rs do yield ;
and humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
exped your highness' doom of life or death. shakespeare.
they were to die by the sword if they stood upon defence,
and by the halter if they yielded; wherefore they made choice
to die rather as soldiers than as dogs. hayward.
were i a drowsy judge, whose dismal note
disgorgeth halters, as a juggler's throat
doth ribbands. cleaveland.
he gets renown, who, to the halter near,
but narrowly escapes, and buys it dear. dryden's juvenal.
2. a cord ; a strong string.
whom neither halter binds nor burthens charge. sandys.
to ha'lter. v. a. [from the noun..] to bind with a cord;
to catch in a noose.
he might have employed his time in the frivolous delights
of catching moles and haltering frogs. atterbury.
to hal v e. v. a. [from half, halves.] to divide into two parts.
hal ves. interj. [from has, halves being the plural.] an ex-
pression by which any one lays claim to an equal share.
have you not seen how the divided dam
runs to the summons of her hungry lamb
but when the twin cries halves, she quits the first. cleaveland.
ham, whether initial or final, is no other than the saxon pam,
a house, farm, or village. gibson's camden.
ham. n.s. [pam, saxon; hamme, dutch.]
1. the hip; the hinder part of the articulation of the thigh
with the knee.
the ham was much relaxed; but there was some contrac-
tion remaining. // isoman.
2. the thigh of a hog salted.
who has not learn'd, fresh sturgeon and ham pye
are no rewards for want and infamy pope.
ha mated. adj. [hamatus, lat. j hooked ; set with hooks.
to hamble. v. a. [from han.] to cut the sinews of the
thigh; to hamstring.
ham e. m. s. spama, saxon.] the collar by which a horse
draws in a waggon.
ham let. m. s. spam, saxon, and let, the diminutive termi-
nation.] a small village.
within the self-same lordship, parish, or hamlet, lands have
divers degrees of value. bacon.
he pitch’d upon the plain
his mighty camp, and, when the day return'd,
the country wasted and the hamlets burn'd. dryden.
hammer. n. s. [pamen, saxon; hammer, danish.]
i. the instrument consisting of a long handle and heavy head,
with which any thing is forged or driven.
the armourers,
with busy hammers closing rivets up,
give dreadful note of preparation. shakosheare.
the stuff will not work well with a hammer. tacon.
it is broken not without many blows, and will break the
best anvils and hammers of iron. brown's vulgar errours.
every morning he rises fresh to his hammer and his anvil.
- south.
the smith prepares his hammer for the stroke. dryd. juv.
2. anything destructive.
that renowned pillar of truth and hammer of heresies, st.
augustine. hakewill on providence.
7% ammer. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to beat with a hammer.
his bones the hommer'd steel in -
2. to forge or form with a hammer. strength surpass. sandys.
some hammer helmets for the fighting field. dryden.
&gt; drudg’d like a smith, and on the anvil beat,
till he had hammer'd out a vast estate. dryden.
i must pay with hammrod money instead of milled, dryden.
3. to work in the mind; to contrive by int -
used commonly in contempt. ive by intelle&amp;tual labour:
wilt thou still be hammering treachery
to humble down thy husband and thyro, s}
he was nobody that could not hammer out of hi wałoston.
invention by this witcraft, and picture it according ls o: 3n
some spirits, by whom they were stirred and? i. o
name of the people, hammered up the articles. sulded in the
to ha(mmer. v. n. dyward,
1. to work; to be busy: in contempt.
nor need'st thou much importune me to that
whereon this month i have been hammering. so
i have been studying how to compare “start,
this prison where i live unto the world;
and, for because the world is populous,
and here is not a creature but myself,
i cannot do it; yet i’ll hammer on't. sha;
2. to be in agitation. offtar,
vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand;
blood and revenge are hammering in my head, into
hammerer. m. s. [from hammer.] he who wo. 4.
hammer. 3.
hammerhard., n.s.. [hammer and hard.]
hammerhard is when you harden iron or st
hammering on it.
ha m mock. n. s. spamaca, saxon.] a swinging bed
prince maurice of nassau, who had been some to
hammocks, used them all his life. temph
hamper. m. s. [supposed by minshew to be contraaj.
hand panier; but hanaperium appears to have been a words.
in use, whence hanaper, hamper.] a large basket for to
what powder'd wigs what flames and darts! 5**
what hampers full of bleeding hearts swift
to ha'mper. v. a. [the original of this word, in its press.
meaning, is uncertain : junius observes that hampions in teu-
tonick is a quarrel: others imagine that hamperor hanaper
being the treasury to which fines are paid, to hamor, with
is commonly applied to the law, means originally to fine.]
i. to shackle; to entangle, as in chains or nets.
o loose this frame, this knot of man untie!
that my free soul may use her wing,
which now is pinion'd with mortality,
eel with much
moon.
as an entangl’d, hamper'd thing. harltro.
we shall find such engines to assail,
and hamper thee, as thou shalt come of force. milon.
what was it but a lion hampered in a net! l'erag,
wear under wizard-masks their talents,
and mother wits before their gallants;
until they're hamper'd in the nooze,
too fast to dream of breaking loose. hudibra,
they hamper and entangle our souls, and hinder their flight
upwards. tillison.
2. to ensnare; to inveigle; to catch with allurements,
she’ll hamper thee, and dandle thee like a baby. shaks.
3. to complicate; to tangle.
engend'ring heats, these one by one unbind,
stretch their small tubes, and hamper'd nerves unwind. blith.
4. to perplex; to embarrass by many lets and troubles,
and when th’ are hamper’d by the laws, **
release the lab’rers for the cause. hudibrai,
hamstring. m. s. [ham and siring.) the tendon of the him.
a player, whose conceit
lies in his hamsiring, doth think it rich
to hear the wooden dialogue, and sound l
*twixt his stretch'd footing and the scaffoldage. swift.
on the hinder fide it is guarded with the two ho
- wijnan, t
to ha'mstrino. v. a. preter. and part, pass hamstro !"
the noun..] to lame by cutting the tendon of the ham,
hamsiring'd behind, unhappy gyges dy’d; dir
then phalaris is added to his side. o
han for have, in the plural. obsolete. . s .
ha naper. m. s. [anaporium, low latin.] a "*". 'i.
exchequer. the clerk of the hanaper receives the fees
to the king for the seal of charters and patents, . date.
‘fhe fines for all original writs were wont to be *:::
ly paid into the hanaper of the chancery. . laced onbon-
ha'nces. n.s. [in a ship.] falls of the fife-rails po way, 114s.
nisters on the poop and quarter-deck down o #.
ha'nces. [in architecture.] the ends of o me, 0s
and these are the arches of smaller circles than ** †.
middle part of the arch.
the sweep of the arch will -
inches, and perhaps you must cement p*
courses in the hance, to make them long **
fourteen inches.
hand. m. s. [pano, pont, saxon,
dialects.] :
1. the pasm with the fingers; the member *
or use any instrument. - aid foot.
they laid hands upon him, oo
they hand in hand, with wandering step o' **
through eden took their solitary w*}” that
not contain abo" to:
es to many of ti
ugh to contal"
-&gt;
moxon.
and in all the teutonick
h which wo h;3<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 979</div><p class="text">h a n
h a n
... e.
-o-
that wonderful instrument the hand, was it made to be
idle * - berkley.
2. measure of four inches; a measure used in the matches of
horses ; a palm.
3. side, right or left.
for the other side of the court-gate on this hand, and that
hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits.
4. part; quarter; fide.
it is allowed on all hands, that the people of england are
more corrupt in their morals than any other nation this day
under the sun. swift.
5. ready payment with respect to the receiver.
of which offer the bassa accepted, receiving in hand one
year's tribute. knolles's history.
these two must make our duty very easy; a considerable
reward in hand, and the assurance of a far greater recompence
hereafter. tillotson.
6. ready payment with regard to the payer.
let not the wages of any man tarry with thee, but give it
him out of hand. tob. iv. 14.
7. rate ; rice.
time is the measure of business; money of wares: busi-
ness is bought at a dear hand, where there is small dispatch.
bacon.
8. terms; conditions; rate.
with simplicity admire and accept the mystery; but at no
hand by pride, ignorance, interest, or vanity wrest it to ig-
noble senses. taylor's worthy communicant.
it is either an ill sign or an ill effect, and therefore at no hand
consistent with humility. taylor's rule of living holy.
9. act; deed; external action.
thou sawest the contradiction between my heart and hand.
king charles.
io. labour; act of the hand.
alnaschar was a very idle fellow, that never would set his
hand to any business during his father's life. addison.
i rather suspect my own judgment than i can believe a fault
to be in that poem, which lay so long under virgil's correc-
tion, and had his last hand put to it. addison.
ii. performance.
where are these porters,
these lazy knaves y’ave made a fine hand / fellows,
there's a trim rabble let in. shakespeare.
12. power of performance.
he had a great mind to try his hand at a spectator, and
would fain have one of his writing in my works. addison.
a friend of mine has a very fine hand on the violin.
addison,
13. attempt; undertaking.
out of them you dare take in hand to lay open the original
of such a nation. spenser on ireland.
14. manner of gathering or taking.
as her majesty hath received great profit, so may she, by a
moderate hand, from time to time reap the like. bacon.
15. workmanship; power or act of manufacturing or making.
an intelligent being, coming out of the hands of infinite
perfeotion, with an aversion or even indifferency to be re-
united with its author, the source of its utmost felicity, is
such a shock and deformity in the beautiful analogy of things,
as is not consistent with finite wisdom and perfection. cheyne.
16. manner of acting or performing.
the master saw the madness rise;
his glowing cheeks, his ardent eyes ;
and while he heav'n and earth defy'd,
chang'd his hand, and check'd his pride. dryden.
17. agency; part in action.
god must have set a more than ordinary esteem upon that
which david was not thought fit to have an hand in. south.
18. the aet of giving or presenting.
let tamar dress the meat in my sight, that i may eat it at
her hand. 2 sam. xiii. 5.
to-night the poet's advocate stand, -
and he deserves the favour at my hand. addison.
19. act of receiving any thing ready to one's hand, when it
only waits to be taken. - -
his power reaches no farther than to compound and divide
the materials that are made to his hand; but can do nothing
towards the making or destroying one atom of what is already
in being. locke.
many, whose greatness and fortune were not made to their
hands, had sufficient qualifications and opportunities of rising
to these high posts. addison.
2c. care; necessity of managing.
jupiter had a farm a long time upon his hands, for want of
a tenant to come up to his price. l'esirange.
when a statesman wants a day's defence,
or envy holds a whole week's war with sense,
or simple pride for flatt'ry makes demands,
may dunce by dunce be whistled off my hand. pope.
21, 1)ischarge of duty. -
let it therefore be required, on both parts, at the hands of
exod. xxxviii. 15. -
the clergy, to be in meanness of estate size the apostles; at
the hands of the laity, to be as they who lived under's.
apostles. - hocker.
22. reach ; nearness: as, at hand, within reach, near, ap-
proaching.
your husband is at hand, i hear his trumpet. shao.
cousins, i hope the days are near at hand -
that chambers will be safe. shakspeare,
he is at hand, and pindarus is come
to do you salutation. shakoff care.
the fight of his mind was like some sights of eyes; rather
strong at hand than to carry afar off. bacon.
any light thing that moveth, when we find no wind,
fheweth a wind at hand. bacon.
a very great sound near hand hath strucken many deaf.
- bacon.
it is not probable that any body should effect that at a dis-
tance, which, nearer hand, it cannot perform. brown.
when mineral or metal is to be generated, nature necds
not to have at hand salt, sulphur, and mercury. boyle.
23. manual management.
nor swords at hand, nor hising darts afar,
are doom'd to avenge the tedious bloody war. dryden,
24. state of being in preparation.
where is our usual manager of mirth
what revels are in hand? is there no play,
to ease the anguish of a torturing hour * shakespeare,
25. state of being in present agitation.
i look’d upon her with a soldier's eye;
that lik'd, but had a rougher task in hand
than to drive liking to the name of war. shakespeare.
it is indifferent to the matter in hand which way the searned
shall determine of it. locke.
26. cards held at a game.
there was never an hand drawn, that did double the rest of
the habitable world, before this. bacon.
27. that which is used in opposition to another.
he would dispute,
confute, change hands, and still confute.
28, chem of a&amp;tion.
consult of your own ways, and think which hand
is best to take. ben. johnson.
they who thought they could never be secure, except the
king were first at their mercy, were willing to change the
hand in carrying on the war. clarendon.
29, advantage ; gain ; superiority. -
the french king, supposing to make his hand by those rude
ravages in england, broke off his treaty of peace, and pro-
claimed hostility. hayward.
30. competition; contest.
she in beauty, education, blood,
holds hand with any princess of the world. shakes ca; c.
31. transmission; conveyance; agency of conveyance.
the salutation by the hand of me paul. col. iv. 18.
32. possession; power.
sacraments serve as the moral instruments of god to that
purpose; the use whereof is in our hands, the effect in his.
hooker.
and though you war, like petty wrangling states,
you're in my hand; and when f bid you cease,
hudibras.
you shall be crush'd together into peace. dryden.
between the landlord and tenant there must be a quarter of
the revenue of the land constantly in their hands. locke.
it is fruitless pains to learn a language, which one may
guess by his temper he will wholly neglect, as soon as an ap-
proach to manhood, setting him free from a governor, shall
put him into the hands of his own inclination. locke.
vectigales agri were lands taken from the enemy, and di-
stributed amongst the soldiers, or left in the hands of the pro-
prietors under the condition of certain duties. arbuthnot.
33. pressure of the bridle.
hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
make gallant show and promise of their mettle. shakoff.
34. method of government; discipline ; restraint.
menelaus bare an heavy hand over the citizens, having a
malicious mind against his countrymen. 2 mac. v. 23.
he kept a strict hand on his nobility, and chose rather to
advance clergymen and lawyers. bacon’s henry vii.
however strict a hand is to be kept upon all desires of fancy,
yet in recreation fancy must be permitted to speak. locke.
35. influence; management.
flattery, the dang'rous nurse of vice, -
got band upon his youth, to pleasures bent. . . daniel.
36, that which performs the office of a hand in pointing. .
the body, though it moves, yet not changing perceivable
distance with other bodies, as fast as the ideas of our own
minds do naturally follow one another, the thing, seems to
stand still; as is evident in the hands of clocks and shadows of
sun-dials. loved locke.
. agent; person employed ; a manager. . .
37 †. o o: o he can save himself and his ro.
i osin<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 980</div><p class="text">h a n
h a n
from ruin, under the worst administration, what may not his
subjects hope for when he changeth hands, and maketh use of
the best ? swift.
38. giver, and receiver. , - - -
this tradition is more like to be a notion bred in the mind
of man, than transmitted from hand to hand through all ge-
nerations. - tillotson.
39. an actor; a workman; a soldier.
your wrongs are known : impose but your commands,
this hour shall bring you twenty thousand hands. . drydon.
demetrius appointed the painter guards, pleased that he
could preserve that hand from the barbarity and insolence of
soldiers. - dryden.
a dictionary containing a natural history requires too many
hands, as well as too much time, ever to be hoped for. locke.
40. catch or reach without choice. -
the men of israel smote as well the men of every city as
the beast, and all that came to hand. judges.
a sweaty reaper from his tillage brought
first fruits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf, -
uncull'd as came to hand. milton.
41. form or cast of writing. -
here is th’ indictment of the good lord haslings,
which in a set hand fairly is engross'd ; -
eleven hours i’ve spent to write it over. shakosheare.
solyman showed him his own letters intercepted, asking
him if he knew not that band, if he knew not that seal
o knolles.
being discovered by their knowledge of mr. cowley's hand,
i happily escaped. denham.
if my debtors do not keep their day
deny their hands, and then refuse to pay,'
i must attend. dryden.
whether men write court or roman hand, or any other,
there is something peculiar in every one's writing. cockburn.
the way to teach to write, is to get a plate graved with
the characters of such hand you like. locke.
constantia saw that the hand writing agreed with the con-
tents of the letter. addison.
i present these thoughts in an ill hand; but scholars are bad
penmen: we seldom regard the mechanick part of writing.
filton on the classicks.
they were wrote on both sides, and in a small hand. a luth.
42. hand over head. negligently ; rashly ; without seeing
what one does.
so many strokes of the alarum bell of fear and awaking to
other nations, and the facility of the titles, which, hand over
head, have served their turn, doth ring the peal so much the
louder. bacon.
a country fellow got an unlucky tumble from a tree: thus
'tis, says a passenger, when people will be doing things hand
over head, without either fear or wit. l'asirange.
43. han d to han d. close fight.
in single opposition, hand to hand,
he did confound the best part of an hour. shakos eare.
he issues, ere the fight, his dread command,
that slines afar, and poniards hand to hand,
he banish’d from the field. dryden.
44. hand in hand. . in union; conjointly. -
had the sea been marlborough's element, the war had been
beflowed there, to the advantage of the country, which would
then have gone hand in hand with his own. swift.
45. hand in han d. fit; pat.
as fair and as good, a kind of hand in hand comparison,
had been something too fair and too good for any lady in bri-
tany. shakspeare's cymbeline.
46. hand to mouth. as want requires.
i can get bread fron hand to month, and make even at the
year's end. l’e/orange.
47. to bear in hand. to keep in expe&amp;tation; to elude.
a rascally yea forsooth knave, to bear in land, and then
stand upon security. shakespeare.
4%. to te hand and glove. to be intimate and familiar;
to suit one another.
to han p. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to give or transmit with the hand.
judas was not far off, not only because he dipped in the
same dish, but because he was so near that our saviour could
hand the sop unto him. brown's wulgar errours.
i have been shewn a written prophecy that is handed among
them with great secrecy. - -&gt;
2. to guide or lead by the hand.
angels did hand her up, who next god dwell. donne.
by safe and insensible degrees he will pass from a boy to a
* which is the most hazardous step in life: this therefore
* be carefully watched, and a young man with great di-
isence handed over it. locke
3. to size; to lay hands on. -
*t him, that makes but trifles of his eyes,
first and me: on mine own accord, i'll off. shakoffeare,
4. to manages to move with the hand.
addison.
'tis then that with delight i rove
upon the boundless depth of love:
i bless my chains, i hand my oar,
northink on all i left on shoar. p
. to transmit in succession, with - 1- sir,
5 to another. &gt; own; to deliver from on
they had not only a tradition of it in ge
several the most ... os of
which they handed downwards to the success. ar it o,
i know no other way of securing these i. podo.
making them numerous enough to be hand. o and
ages. l to house
arts and sciences consist of scattered theorems and dijn,
which are handed about amongst the masters, and on practices,
to the filii artij, ’till some great genius appears o o
o disjointed propositions, and reduces ao.
system. ar
y one would think a story so fit for age to talk £o
fancy to hear, were incapable of being handed down * isl-
pope's pss. -
hand is much used in composition for o:
able by the hand, as a handjaw; or borne in the ha o
handbarrow. hd, as a
ha's bbarrow.m. s. a frame on which anything; carried
by the hands of two men, without wheeling on th: o
a handbarrow, wheelbarrow, shovel and o: jo
set the board whereon the hive flandeth on ah. o
and carry them to the place you intend, t!,
hand basket. m. s. a portable basket.
you must have woollen yarn to tie grafts with, and a small
hand-tasket to carry them in.
hand: eell. m. s. a bell rung by the hand.
the strength of the percussion is a principal cause of the
loudness or softness of sounds; as in ringing of a hand-lel
harder or softer. bacon.
hand: breadth. n.s. a space equal to the breadth of the
hand; a palm.
a border of an hand-breadth round about. exod oxy. 2.
the eastern people determined their hand-breadth by the
breadth of barley-corns, six making a digit, and twenty-four
a hand's breadth. aitol.
ha'nded. adj. [from hand.]
1. having the use of the hand left or right.
many are right handed, whose livers are weakly cons.
tuted ; and many use the left, in whom that part is strongest.
brown's pugar errau,
morting,
allaimir,
2. with hands joined.
into their inmost bow'r
handed they went. afton,
ha'nder. n.s.. [from hand.] transmitter; conveyor in suc-
cession.
they would assume, with wond’rous art,
themselves to be the whole, who are but part,
of that vast frame the church ; yet grant they were
the handers down, can they from thence infer
a right to interpret? or would they alone,
who brought the present, claim it for their own? do
handfast, n.s.. [hand and soft.] hold; custody. oslo.
if that shepherd be not in han soft, let him fly, shaijiar,
ha'ndful. m. s. [hand and s.l..]
1. as much as the hand can gripe or contain. *
i saw a country gentleman at the side of rosamond's ford,
pulling a handful of oats out of his pocket, and go."
ducks about him. aljon. fros.
2. a palm ; a hand’s breadth; four inchcs. -
take one vessel of silver and another of wood, each full of
water, and knap the tongs together about an honolio
the bottom, and the sound will be more resounding from the
vessel of silver than that of wood. voll.
the peaceful scabbard where it dwelt,
the rancour of its edge had felt;
for of the lower end two handful hairs,
it had devour'd, it was so manful.
3. a small number or quantity.
he could not, with such a handful of me
cannon, propose reasonably to fight a batto.
. as much as can be done. -
4 being in possession of the town, they had their o
defend themselves from firing. in which the i.
han d-gallop. m. s. a slow easy gallop, in whic
presses the bridle to hinder increase of spool; ... ty of mum’
ovid, with all his sweetness, has as little * and is
bers and sound as he he is always upon a hand go "do
verse runs upon carpet ground.
has d-gun. n.s. a gun wielded by the hand. ts or root-
guns have names given them, some" serpen
- in othes so
• * : roce nes; others in
nous birds, as culverines or colubrino; d muskets.
n, and without
cartnail,
- - land gun; all
spects, as cannons, demicannons, hand-gun; camdo
* , -
ha'n dicraft. m. s. [hand and croft l, the hand
- - r - -
1. manual occupation; work performed by particulus
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 981</div><p class="text">h a n -
h a n
particular members of convents have excellent mechanical
geniuses, and divert themselves with painting, sculpture, archi-
tecture, gardening, and several kinds of handicrafts. addison.
2. a man who lives by manual labour.
the cov'nants thou shalt teach by candle-light,
when puffing smiths, and ev'ry painful trade
of handicrafts, in peaceful beds are laid. dryden.
the nurseries for children of ordinary gentlemen and han-
dierests are managed after the same manner. gulliver's trav.
han dick aft's man. m. s. [handicraft and man.] a manufac-
turer; one employed in manual occupation.
o milerable age virtue is not regarded in handicraftsmen.
shakespeare.
- he has simply the best wit of any handicraftsman in athens.
shakespeare.
the principal bulk of the vulgar natives are tillers of the
ground, free servants, and handicraftsmen ; as smiths, masons,
and carpenters. bacon.
o the prokaneness and ignorance of handicraftsmen, small
- traders, servants, and the like, are to a degree very hard to
be imagined greater. swift.
it is the landed man that maintains the merchant and shop-
keeper, and handicraftsman. - swift.
handr. y. adv. [from handy..] . with skill; with dexterity.
ha's dis: ss. m. s. [from handy.) readiness; dexterity.
ha's d1 v or k. m. s. [handy and work.] work of the hand;
product of labour; manufacture.
in general they are not repugnant unto the natural will of
god, which wisheth to the works of his own hands, in that
they are his own handiwork, all happiness; although perhaps,
for some special cause in our own particular, a contrary deter-
mination have seemed more convenient. hooker.
as proper men as ever trod upon neats-leather have gone
upon my handiwork. shakespeare.
the heavens declare the glory of god, and the firmament
sheveth his handiwork. psalms.
. . he parted with the greatest blessing of human nature for
the hon fivork of a taylor. l'e/irange.
han dker chief. m. s. [hand and kerchief.] a piece of silk
or linen used to wipe the face, or cover the neck.
she found her fitting in a chair, in one hand holding a let-
ter, in the other her hander chief, which had lately drunk up
the tears of her eyes. sidney.
he was torn to pieces with a bear: this avouches the shep-
herd's son, who has not only his innocence, but a handkerchief
and rings of his, that paulina knows. shakespeare.
the romans did not make use of handkerchiefs, but of the
lacinia or border of the garment, to wipe their face. arbuthnot.
to ha'nd le. v. a. [hand, len, dutch, from hand.]
1. to touch ; to feel with the hand.
the bodies which we daily handle make us perceive, that
whilst they remain between them, they hinder the approach of
the parts of our hands that press them. locke.
2. to manage; to wield.
that fellow handles his bow like a crowkeeper. shakesp.
3. to make familiar to the hand by frequent touching.
- an incurable shyness is the general vice of the irish horses,
and is hardly ever . in flanders, because the hardness of the
winters forces the breeders there to house and handle their
colts fix months every year. temple.
4. to treat, to mention in writing or talk.
he left nothing fitting for the purpose
untouch'd, or slightly handled in discourse. shakespeare.
her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice,
thou handlost in thy discourse. shakeshcare.
leaving to the author the exact handling of every particu-
lar, and labouring to follow the rules of abridgment. 2 mac.
of a number of other like instances we shall speak more,
when we handle the communication of sounds. bacon.
by guidus ubaldus, in his treatise, for the explication of
this instrument, the subtleties of it are largely and excellently
handled. jwilkins's daedalus.
o in an argument, handled thus briefly, every thing cannot
be said. atterbury.
5. to deal with ; to prastise. --
they that andle the law know me not. jer. ii. 8.
6. to treat well or ill.
o talbot, my life, my joy, again return'd
o how wert thou handled, being prisoner * shakespeare.
they were well enough pleased to be rid of an enemy that
…” had handled them so ill. clarendon.
- 7. to practise upon; to transact with. -
- or pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; you shall see
o how i’ll handle her. shakespeare.
ha’nd le. m. s. [panole, saxon.]
1. i hat part of anything by which it is held in the hand; a haft.
no hand of blood and bone
can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
unless he do profane, steal, or usurp. shakespeare.
fortune turneth the handle of the bottle, which is easy to
be taken hold of; and after the belly, which is hard to grasp.
bacon.
vol. i.
there is nothing but hath a double handle, or at least we
have two hands to apprehend it. taylor.
a carpenter, that had got the iron work of an axe, begged
only so much wood as would make a handle to it. l'estrange.
of bone the handles of my knives are made,
yet no ill taste from thence affects the blade,
or what i carve; nor is there ever left
any unfav'ry haut-goust from the haft. dryden.
a beam there was, on which a beechen pail
hung by the handle on a driven nail. dryden.
2. that of which use is made.
they overturned him in all his interests by the sure but
fatal handle of his own good nature.
south.
ha'nd less. adj. [hand and loss.] without a hand.
speak, my lavinia, what accursed hand
hath made thee handles, p shakespeare.
his mangled myrmidons,
noseless, handless, hackt and clipt, come to him,
crying on hector. shakespeare.
ha'ndmaid. m. s. a maid that waits at hand.
brave burgundy, undoubted hope of frances
stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee. shakespeare.
she gave the knight great thanks in little speech,
and said she would his }. poor remain. fairfax.
i will never set politicks against ethicks, especially for that
true ethicks are but as a handmaid to divinity and religion. bac.
heav'n's youngest teamed star
hath fix’d her polish'd car,
her sleeping lord with handmaid lamp attending. milton.
love led them on ; and faith, who knew them best
thy handmaids, clad them o'er with purple beams
and azure wings, that up they flew so drest,
and speak the truth of thee on glorious themes
before the judge. amilton,
those of my family their master slight,
grown despicable in my handmaid's fight. sandys.
by viewing nature, nature's handmaid, art,
makes mighty things from small beginnings great;
thus fishes first to shipping did impart,
their tail the rudder, and their head the prow. dryden.
since he had placed his heart upon wisdom, health, wealth,
victory and honour should always wait on her as her hand-
maids. addison.
then criticism the muse's handmaid prov’d,
to dress her charms and make her more belov’d. pope.
ha'ndmill. n.s. [hand and mill.] a mill moved by the hand.
oft the drudging ass is driv'n with toil;
returning late, and loaden home with gain
of barter'd pitch, and handmills for the grain.
hands off. a vulgar phrase for keep off; forbear.
they cut a stag into parts ; but as they were entering upon
the dividend, hands off, says the lion. l’estrange.
hand's ails. n.s. sails managed by the hand.
the seamen will neither stand to their handsails, nor suffer
the pilot to steer. temple,
hand's aw. m. s. saw manageable by the hand.
my buckler cut through and through, and my sword hack'd
like a handsaw. shakespeare.
to perform this work, it is necessary to be provided with a
strong knife and a small hands, w. mortimer.
hand's el. m. s. shansel, a first gift, dutch..] the first act of
using any thing; the first act of sale. it is now not used,
except in the diale&amp;t of trade.
the apostles term it the pledge of our inheritance, and the
dryden.
hansel or earnest of that which is to come. hooker.
thou art joy's handsel; heav'n lies flat in thee,
subject to ev'ry mounter's bended knee. herbert.
to ha'nd sel. v. a. to use or do any thing the first time.
in timorous deer he handsc's his young paws,
and leaves the rugged bear for firmer claws. cowley.
i’d show you -
how easy'tis to die, by my example,
and handsel fate before you. dryden.
hatndsome. adj. [handfaem, dutch, ready, dexterous.]
1. ready; gainly; convenient.
for a thief it is so handsome, as it may seem it was first
invented for him. spensor.
2. beautiful with dignity; graceful.
a great man entered by force into a peasant's house, and,
finding his wife very handsome, turned the good man out.o...is
dwelling. addison.
3. elegant; graceful.
that easiness and handsome address in writing is hardest to be
attained by persons bred in a meaner way. felton.
4. ample; liberal : as, a handsome fortune.
5. generous ; noble: as, a handsome action.
ao ha'ndsome. v. a. [from the adjective.] to render ele-
gant or neat.
him all repute
for his device in handsoming a suit; -
to judge of lace he hath the best conceit.
ha'ndsomely, adv. son handsome.]
io
donne.
1. conveniently;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 982</div><p class="text">h a n
iently; dexterously. -
i. o . may joonvey any fit pillage that cometh
handsomely in his way. - spenser.
where the kind nymph, changing her faultless shape,
becomes unhandsome, handsomely to 'scape. waller.
2. beautifully; gracefully.
. elegantly; neatly.
3 ... after he hath sawn down a tree, hath wrought
it handsomely, and made a vessel thereof. wisdom.
4. liberally ; generously. -
i am finding out a convenient place for an alms-house,
which i intend to endow very handsomely for a dozen super-
annuated husbandmen. addison.
ha'ndsomeness. n.s.. [from handsome.] beauty; grace; ele-
rance.
§ accompanying her mourning garments with a doleful coun-
tenance, yet neither forgetting handsoments; in her mourning
garments, nor sweetness in her doleful countenance. sidney.
for handsomenes' sake, it were good you hang the upper
glass upon a nail. bacon.
in cloths, cheap handsomenes; doth bear the bell. herbert.
persons of the fairer sex like that handsomeness for which
they find themselves to be the most liked. boyle.
ha'ndvice. n.s. [hand and vice..] a vice to hold small work
in. moxon.
ha'ndwriting.. n.s.. [hand and writing.] a cast or form of
writing peculiar to each hand.
that you beat me at the mart, i have your hand to show ;
if the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave me, ink,
your own handwriting would tell you what i think. shak.
to no other cause than the wise providence of god can be
referred the diversity of handwritings. cockburn.
ha'ndy. adj. [from hand.]
1. executed or performed by the hand.
they were but few, yet they would easily overthrow the
great numbers of them, if ever they came to handy blows.
knolles.
both parties now were drawn so close,
almost to come to handy blows.
2. ready; dexterous; skilful.
she stript the stalks of all their leaves; the best
she cull'd, and them with handy care she drest.
the servants wash the platter, scour the plate;
and each is handy in his way.
. convenient; ready to the hand.
the strike-block is a plane shorter than the jointer, and is
more handy than the long jointer. moxon.
ha'ndydandy. n.s. a play in which children change hands
and places.
see how yond justice rails upon yond simple thief! hark in
thine ear: change places; and, handydandy, which is the jus-
tice, which is the thief ? shakespeare.
neither cross and pile, nor ducks and drakes, are quite so
ancient as handydandy. arbuthnot and pope.
to hang. v. a. preter. and part. pass. hanged or hung, an-
ciently hong. [pangan, saxon.]
1. to suspend ; to fasten in such a manner as to be sustained not
below, but above.
strangely visited people he cures;
hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
put on with holy prayers. shakespeare.
his great army is utterly ruined, he himself slain in it, and
his head and right hand cut off, and hung up before jerusa-
lem. south.
2. to place without any solid support.
thou all things hast of nothing made,
that hungst the solid earth in fleeting air,
vein'd with clear springs, which ambient seas repair.
sandys.
3. to choak and kill by suspending by the neck, so as that the
ligature intercepts the breath and circulation.
he hath commission from thy wife and me
to hang cordelia in the prison.
hanging supposes human soul and reason;
this animal's below committing treason:
shall he be hang'd, who never could rebel?
that's a preferment for achitophel.
4. to display; to show aloft.
this unlucky mole misled several coxcombs; and, like the
hanging out of false colours, made some of them converse with
rosalinda in what they thought the spirit of her party. addison.
5. to let fall below the proper situation; to decline.
there is a wicked man that hangeth down his head sadly;
but inwardly he is full of deceit. ecclus. xix. 26.
the beauties of this place should mourn;
th’ immortal fruits and flow’rs at my return
should hang their wither'd head; for sure my breath
is now more pois'nous.
hudibras.
dryden.
dryden,
shakespeare.
dryden.
dryden.
the rose is fragrant, but it fades in time; jden
the violet sweet, but quickly past the prime;
white lilies hang their heads, and soon decay;
and whiter snow in minutes melts away. dryden.
the cheerful birds no longer fing;
each drops his head, and hangs his wing. -
6. to fix in such a manner as in some directions to be ‘prior,
the gates and the chambers they renewed, and . moveable,
upon them. 2 oddoo,
7. to cover or charge by any thing suspended. at, iv. 5,
hung be the heav'ns with black, yield daytonight!
the pavement ever foul with human gore; ght! shot,
heads and their mangled members hung the door
8. to furnish with ornaments or draperies often. theoli
musick is better in chambers wainscotted than . ed .
if e'er my pious father for my sake §4. baton,
did grateful off'rings on thy altars make,
or i increas'd them with my sylvan toils,
and hung thy holy roofs with savage spoils,
give me to scatter these.
- dr don
sir roger has hung several parts of his house wi jden,
phies of his labours. * with the tro-
drydm
to hang. v. n. addison,
1. to be suspended; to be supported above, not below
over it a fair portcullis hong, -
which to the gate direetly did incline,
with comely compass and compacture strong. soft
2. to depend; to fall loosely on the lower part; to dangle tr.
upon her shoulders wings she wears, gle,
like hanging sleeves, lin'd through with ears. hudibral
if gaming does an aged sire entice,
o: young master swiftly learns the vice,
nd shakes in hanging sleeves the little box and dice,
3. to bend forward. ging ce, dryden.
by hanging is only meant a posture of bending forward to
strike the enemy. addison.
4. to float; to play.
and fall these sayings from that gentle tongue,
where civil speech and soft persuasion hung?
5. to be supported by something raised above the ground,
whatever is placed on the head may be said to hang; as we
call hanging gardens such as are planted on the top of the
house.
prior,
- addison,
6. to rest upon by embracing.
she hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
she vied. shaloftir.
to-day might i, hanging on hotspur's neck,
have talk'd of monmouth's grave, shakosheart.
faustina is described in the form of a lady fitting upon a
bed, and two little infants hanging about her neck, patham,
7. to hover; to impend.
he hath a heavenly gift of prophecy;
and sundry blesfings hang about his throne,
that speak him full of grace. shakespeare,
odious names of distinetion, which had slept while the
dread of popery hung over us, were revived. alterbury.
8. to be loosely joined.
whither go you ?
to see your wife: is she at home?
-ay, and as idle as she may hang together.
9. to drag ; to be incommodiously joined.
in my lucia's absence
life hangs upon me, and becomes a burden.
io. to be compact or united ; with together.
in the common cause we are all of a piece; we hang tog-
ther. dolo.
your device hang; very well together; but is it not liable to
exceptions f addison,
11. to adhere, unwelcomely or incommodiously. - d
a cheerful temper shines out in all her conversation, *
diffipates those apprehensions which hang on the tim”."
the modest, when admitted to her presence. - addijn,
shining landskips, gilded triumphs, and beautiful .
disperse that gloominess which is apt to bang upon to
shakhart,
addison,
in those dark disconsolate seasons. aidjo,
12. to rest; to reside.
sleep shall neither night nor day
hang upon his penthouse lid. shalftist,
13. to be in suspense; to be in a state of uncertaino.
thy life shis... in doubt before thee, and th;".
day and night, and shalt have none assurance of thy!" dust.
14. to be delayed; to linger.
a noble stroke he lifted high,
which hung not, but so swift with tempest so" milton,
on the proud crest of satan.
she thrice essay’d to speak: her accents hung, drydon,
and fault'ring dy'd unfinish'd on her tong". y
15. to be dependant on. d
oh, how wretche -
is that poor minot hangs on princes' favours! :
great queen! whose name strikes haughty”" prior,
on whose just sceptre hang; europa's scale.
16. to be fixed or suspended with attention. k
though wond'ring senates hung on al he spoke, post.
the club must hail him master of the joke.
17. to have a steep declivity. sussex
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 983</div><p class="text">h a n
*
:
*
o
--
:
:
.
.
:
.
. sussex marl shews itself on the middle of the sides of hang-
ing grounds. amortimer.
18. to be executed by the halter.
the court forsakes him, and sir balaam hangs.
19. to decline; to tend down.
his neck obliquely o'er his shoulders hung,
press'd with the weight of sleep that tames the strong. pope.
ha'nger. m. s. [from hang.] that by which any thing hangs:
as, the pot hangers.
hatnger. n. s. [from hang.] a short broad sword.
ha'nger-on. m. s. [from hang.] a dependant; one who eats
and drinks without payment.
if the wife or children were absent, their rooms were sup-
plied by the umbrae, or hangers-on. brown's vulgar errours.
they all excused themselves save two, which two he
reckoned his friends, and all the rest hangers-on. l'estrange.
pope.
he is a perpetual hanger-on, yet nobody knows how to be.
without him.
ha'nging. m. s. [from hang.]
1. drapery hung or fastened against the walls of rooms by way
of ornament.
like rich hangings in an homely house,
so was his will in his old feeble body. shakespeare.
being informed that his breakfast was ready, he drew
towards the door, where the hangings were held up. clarendon.
now purple hangings cloath the palace walls,
and sumptuous feasts are made in splendid halls. dryden.
lucas van leyden has infected all europe with his designs
for tapestry, which, by the ignorant, are called ancient hang-
ings. dryden.
rome oft has heard a cross haranguing,
with prompting priest behind the hanging.
#. any thing that hangs to another. not in use.
a storm, or robbery, call it what you will,
shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
and ieft me bare to weather. shakespeare.
ha’nging. participial adj. [from bang.]
1. foreboding death by the halter.
surely, fir, a good favour you have ; but that you have a
banging look. shakespeare.
what æthiops lips he has
how foul a snout, and what a hanging faces dryden.
2. requiring to be punished by the halter ; a hanging matter.
ha(ngman. m. s. [hang and man j
1. the public executioner.
this monster sat like a hangman upon a pair of gallows; in
his right hand he was painted holding a crown of laurel, and
in his left hand a purse of money. sidney.
who makes that noise there who are you ?
—your friend, fir, the hangman; you must be so good, fir,
to rise, and be put to death. shakespeare.
men do not stand
in so ill case, that god hath with his hand
sign'd kings blank charters to kill whom they hate;
nor are they vicars, but hangmen to fate. donne.
i never knew a critick, who made it his business to lash the
faults of other writers, that was not guilty of greater himself;
as the hangman is generally a worse malefactor than the cri-
minal that suffers by his hand. addison.
2. a term of reproach, either serious or ludicrous.
one cried, god bless us! and amen the other;
as they had seen me with these hangman's hands:
listening their fear, i could not say amen,
when they did say god bless us. shakespeare.
he hath twice or thrice cut cupid's bowstring, and the lit-
tle hangman dare not shoot at him. shakespeare.
hank. n.s.. [hank, islandick, a chain or coil of rope.]
1. a skein of thread.
2. a tye ; a check; an influence. a low word.
do we think we have the hank that some gallants have on
their trusting merchants, that, upon peril of losing all former
scores, he must still go on to supply? decoy of piety.
t, hatnker. v. n. [hankeren, dutch..] to long importu-
nately; to have an inceslant wish : it has commonly after
before the thing desired. it is scarcely used but in familiar
language. -
and now the saints began their reign,
for which th’ had yearn'd so long in vain,
and felt such bowel hankerings, -
to see an empire all of kings. hudibras.
among women and children, care is to be taken that they
get not a hankering after these juggling astrologers and fortune-
tellers. l’estrange.
the shepherd would be a merchant, and the merchant
hankers after something else. l’eslrange.
dost thou not hankar after a greater liberty in some things?
if not, there's no better sign of a good resolution. calamy.
the wife is an old coquette, that is always hankering after
the diversions of the town. - addison.
the republick that fell under the subjection of the duke of
florence, still retains many hankerings after its ancient liberty.
han’t, for has not, or have not.
swift.
prior.
h a p
that roguish leer of your's makes a pretty woman's heart
; ake: you ban't that fimper about the mouth for nothing. addis.
hap. n.s.. [anhap, in welsh, is misfortune.]
1. chance; fortune.
whether art it were, or heedless hap,
as through the flow'ring forest rash she fled,
in her rude hairs sweet flowers themselves did lap,
and flourishing fresh leaves and blossoms did enwrap. spens.
2. that which happens by chance or fortune.
curst be good haps, and curst be they that build
their hopes on haps, and do not make despair -
for all these certain blows the surest shield. sidney.
to have ejected whatsoever that church doth make account
of, without any other crime than that it hath been the hap
thereof to be used by the church of rome, and not to be
commanded in the word of god, might haply have pleased
some few men, who, having begun such a course themselves,
must be glad to see their example followed. hooker.
things casual do vary, and that which a man doth but
chance to think well of cannot still have the like hop. hooker.
solyman commended them for their valour in their evilhaps,
more than the victory of others got by good fortune. knoller.
a fox had the hap to fall into the walk of a lion. l'estrange.
3. accident; casual event; misfortune.
nor feared she among the bands to stray
of armed men; for often had she seen
the tragick end of many a bloody fray:
her life had full of haps and hazards been. fairfax.
hap-haza r d. m. s. chance; accident: perhaps originally
hap hazards.
the former of these is the most sure and infallible way; but
so hard that all shun it, and had rather walk as men do in the
dark by hap-hazard, than tread so long and intricate mazes for
knowledge' sake. hooker.
we live at hap-hazard, and without any insight into causes
and effects. l’estrange.
we take our principles at hap-hazard upon trust, and then
believe a whole system, upon a presumption that they are
true. locke.
to hap. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. to happen; to have the casual consequence. .
it will be too late to gather ships or soldiers, which may
need to be presently employed, and whose want may hap to
hazard a kingdom.
2. to come by chance; to befall casually.
run you to the citadel,
and tell my lord and lady what hath hap'd. shakespeare.
in destructions by deluge, the remnant which hap to be
reserved are ignorant people. bacon.
ha'ply. adv. [from hap.]
1. perhaps ; peradventure; it may be.
this love of theirs myself have often seen,
haply when they have judg'd me fast asleep. shakespeare.
to warn
us, haply too secure, of our discharge
from penalty, because from death releas'd
some days. milton.
then haply yet your breast remains untouch'd,
though that seems strange. rowe.
let us now see what conclusions may be found for instruc-
tion of any other state, that may haply labour under the like
circumstances. swift.
2. by chance; by accident.
leviathan, which god of all his works
created hugest, that swim the ocean stream,
him haply slumb'ring on the norway foam,
the pilot of some small night-founder'd skiff
deeming some island off, as seamen tell,
with fixed anchor in his scaly rind,
moors by his side. milton.
ha pless. adj. [from hap.] unhappy; unfortunate; luckless ;
unlucky.
haples; ægeon, whom the fates have mark'd
to bear th’ extremity of dire mishap! shakespeare.
here haples; icarus had found his part,
had not the father's grief restrain'd his art. dryden.
did his haples; passion equal mine,
i would refuse the bliss. smith.
to ha'ppen. v. m. [from hap.]
1. to fall out; to chance; to come to pass.
bring forth your strong reasons, and shew us what shall
happen. - isaiah.
say not i have finned, and what harm hath happened unto
inc, ecclus. v. 4.
if it so fall out that thou art miferable for ever, thou hast
no reason to be surprized, as if some unexpected thing had
happened to thee. tillotson.
2. to light; to fall by chance. -
i have happened on some other accounts relating to morta-
lities. graunt.
ha(ppily. adv. [from happy.] -
1. fortunately; luckily; successfully.
6 i come
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 984</div><p class="text">h a r
h a r
i come to wive it wealthily in padua;
if wealthily, then happily in padua. shakespeare.
preferr'd by conquest, happily o'erthrown,
falling they rise to be with us made one. waller.
nj is it so trivial an undertaking to make a tragedy
end happily; for 'tis more difficult to save than kill. dryden.
2. addressfully ; gracefully; without labour.
form'd by thy converse, happily to steer
from grave to gay, from lively to severe.
3. in a state of felicity; as, he lives happily. - - - -
4. by chance; peradventure. in this sense happily is written
erroneously for haply.
one thing more i shall wish you to desire of them, who
happily may peruse these two treatiscs. digby.
ha'poiness. n. s. [from happy.]
1. felicity; state in which the desires are satisfied. *
happiness is that estate whereby we attain, so far as possibly
may be attained, the full possession of that which simply for
its if is to be desired, and containeth in it after an eminent
fort the contentation of our desires, the highest degree of all
our perfection. hooker.
oh! happines of sweet retir’d content,
to be at once secure and innocent. denham.
philosophers differ about the chief good or happines of
indil. temple.
the various and contrary choices that men make in the
world, argue that the same thing is not good to every man
alike: this variety of pursuits shews, that every one does not
place his happiness in the same thing. locke.
2. good luck; good fortune.
3. fortuitous elegance; unstudied grace.
certain graces and happinesses, peculiar to every language,
give life and energy to the words. denham.
some beauties yet no precepts can declare;
pope.
for there's a happiness as well as care. pope.
form'd by some rule that guides but not constrains,
and finish'd more through happines; than pains. pope.
ha'ppy. adj. [from hap; as lucky for luck. j
1. in a state of felicity; in a state where the desire is satisfied.
at other end uran did strephon lend
her happy making hand.
am i happy in thy news
—if to have done the thing you gave in charge,
beget you happiness, be happy then ;
for it is done.
truth and peace, and love, shall ever shine
about the supreme throne
of him, t' whose happy making fight alone,
our heav'nly guided soul shall climb. milton.
though the presence of imaginary good cannot make us
happy, the absence of it may make us miserable. addison.
2. lucky ; successful; fortunate.
chymists have been more happy in finding experiments than
sidney.
shakespeare.
the causes of them. boyle.
yet in this agony his fancy wrought,
and fear supply'd him with this happy thought. dryden.
3. addressful; ready.
one gentleman is haffy at a reply, and another excels in a
rejoinder. swift.
ha queton. m. s. a coat of mail. spenser.
har a ngue. m. s. [barangue, french. the original of the
french word is much questioned : menage thinks it a corrup-
tion of hearing, english ; junius imagines it to be discours aw
rang, to a circle, which the italian arringo seems to favour.
perhaps it may be from crare, or orationare, orationer, oraner,
aranger, haranguer.] a speech; a popular oration.
gray-headed men, and grave, with warriors mix’d,
aff mble, and harangues are heard; but soon
in factiots opposition. milton.
nothing can better improve political schoolboys than the
art of making plausible or implausible harangues, against the
very opinion for which they resolve to determine. swift.
many preachers neglect method in their harangues. isaits.
7 hara's gue. v. n. [haranguer, french..] to make a
speech to pronounce an oration.
to i+arangue. v. a. to address by an oration; as, he ha-
rangued the troops.
har a n guer. m. s. [from harangue.] an orator; a publick
spoker: generally with some mixture of contempt.
to har ass. v. * [harassor, french, from hards, a heavy
buckler, according to du cange.] to weary; to fatigue;
to tire with labour and uneasiness.
these troops came to the army but the day before, harassed
with a long and wearisome march. bacon.
our walls are thinly mann'd, our best men slain 3
the test, an heartless number, spent with watching,
and haras'd out with duty. c
n • ... " dryden.
.**e oppress'd, and haras'd out with care,
sinks down to rest. addison
out increases the force of the verb. -
harass. n.s.. [from the verb..] waste; disturbance.
the men of judah, to prevent
the "aros of their land, best me round. milton,
*
ha'rbinger. m. s. [herberger, dutch, one w
vide lodgings or an harbour ło, thos: o: . o to pro-
runner ; a precursor. 'l asso.
make all our trumpets speak, give the
those clam’rous harbingers of to: and o o,
i'll be myself the harbinger, and make jo i ałoszar,
the hearing of my wife with your jo. shak
sin, and her shadow death, and misery ałostart,
death's harbinger. 2 mil.
and now of love they treat, 'till th' eveni it::h.
love's harbinger, appear'd. 2 vening star,
- foh.
before him a great prophet, to proclaim milton,
his coming, is sent harbinger, who all
invites. mil.
as ormond's harbinger to you they run; lilot,
for venus is the promise of the sun. drd,
er.
hat&amp;bour. m. s. sherbarge, french : herher -
italian, j f. [ &amp; “x h &gt; herlerg, dutch; diago,
1. a lodging; a place of entertainment.
for harbour at a thousand doors they knock'd;
not one of all the thousand but was lock'd, " " '
doubly curs'd
be all those easy fools who give it harbour.
2. a port or haven for shipping.
three of your argoses
are richly come to harbour suddenly.
they leave the mouths of po,
that all the borders of the town o'erflow;
and spreading round in one continu'd lake,
a spacious hospitable harbour make. alison
3. an asylum ; a shelter ; a place of shelter and securit."
to ha'rbou r. v. n. [from the noun..] to receive citestin.
ment; to sojourn; to take shelter.
this night let's harbour here in york.
they are sent by me,
that they should harbour where their lord would be.
shakstart.
dj&amp;n.
raw.
sha'jor.
shaoffears.
southwards they bent their flight,
and harbour'd in a hollow rock at night:
next morn they rose, and set up every sail;
the wind was fair, but blew a mackie gale. dojo,
let me be grateful; but let far from me
be fawning cringe, and false dissembling lock,
and servile flattery, that harbours oft
in courts and gilded roofs. p}|†,
to ha'r bou r. v. a.
1. to entertain ; to permit to reside. - -
my lady bids me tell you, that though she harbour; you is
her uncle, she's nothing allied to your disorders. ahaftart.
knaves i know, which in this plainness
harbour more craft, and more corrupter elds,
than twenty silky ducking observants. shakspeare,
let not your gentle breast harbour one thought
of outrage from the king. rows.
we owe this old house the same kind of gratitude that we
do to an old friend who harbours us in his declining condition,
nay even in his last extremities. po.
how people, so greatly warmed with a sense of liber's
should be capable of harsouring such weak superlito; "
that so much bravery and so much folly can inhabit to
breasts. p#.
2. to shelter; to secure. - -
harbour yourself this night in this castle: this cou".
very dangerous for murthering thieves to trust a logo
among them. so
har bou rage. m. s. [herbergage, fr. from harlour.] shelios;
cilt crtall) ment. - -
let in us, your king, whose labour'd spirits,
forewearied in this action of swift speed, -
crave harbourage within your city walls: so
ha/r bour e.r. m. s. [from harbour.] one that enterto
another.
ha r bou rless. adj. [from harbour.]
being without lodging; without shelter.
har brough for harbour.
hard. adj. [bearb, saxon; hard, dutch.]
1. firm; resisting penetration or separation; "
to be pierced or broken.
repose you there, while i to the hard hos,
morehard than is the stone whereof'tis ro",
which even but now, demanding after you,
denied me to come in.
2. difficult; not easy to the intellcot, d, are
some diseases, when they are easy to be * sidoj.
be known. or small
the hard causes they brought unto moses; but o
matter they judged themselves.
wanting harbour;
soft-
s
otsost; not */
soft.*
lord 10
when hard words, jealouses, and so hurû.
set folks together by the ears. 'd
'tis hard to say if clymene were o o'd
more by his pray’r, whom she so dearly lov’d, drio,
or more with fury fir’d. ised to use, to is:
as for the hard words, which i was oblige ’’ jo<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

9
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 985</div><p class="text">| h a r
h a r
either terms of art, or such as i substituted in place of others
that were too low. arbuthnot.
3. difficult of accomplishment; full of difficulties.
is any thing too hard for the lord * genesis.
possess
as lords a spacious world, t'our native heav'n
little inferior, by my adventure hard
with peril great atchiev'd. milton.
long is the way
and hard, that out of hell leads up to light:
our prison strong. milton.
he now discerned he was wholly to be on the defensive,
and that was like to be a very hard part too. clarendon.
nervous and tendinous parts have worse symptoms, and
s
- are harder of cure, than fleshy ones. wiseman.
--- the love and pious duty which you pay,
have pass'd the perils of so hard a way. dryden.
4. painful; distressful; laborious action or suffering.
rachael travailed, and she had hard labour. geness.
worcester's horse came but to-day ;
and now their pride and mettle is asleep,
o their courage with hard labour tame and dull,
that not a horse is half of himself. shakespeare.
continual hard duty, with little fighting, lessened and di-
minished his army. clarendon.
when sebastian weeps, his tears
come harder than his blood. dryden.
- a man obliged to hard labour is not reduced to the necessity
of having twice as much victuals as one under no necessity to
work. cheyne.
5. cruel; oppressive; rigorous : as, a hard heart.
the bargain of julius iii. may be accounted a very hard
one, brown's wulgar erreurs.
whom scarce my sheep, and scarce my painful plough,
the needful aids of human life allow ;
so wretched is thy son, so hard a mother thou. dryden.
if you thought that hard upon you, we would not refuse
you half your time. dryden.
a loss of one third of their estates will be a very hard case
upon a great number of people. locke.
no people live with more ease and prosperity than the sub-
jects of little commonwealths; as, on the contrary, there are
none who suffer more under the grievances of a hard govern-
ment than the subjects of little principalities. addison.
to find a bill that may bring punishment upon the inno-
cent, will appear very hard. swift.
6. sour; rough; severe.
what, have you given him any hard words of late?. shak.
rough ungovernable passions hurry men on to say or do
very hard or offensive things. atterbury.
7. unfavourable; unkind.
as thou lov'st me, do him not that wrong,
to bear a hard opinion of his truth. shakespeare.
absalom and achitophel he thinks is a little hard on his
fanatick patrons. dryden.
some hard rumours have been transmitted from t'other side
the water, and rumours of the severest kind. swift.
8. insensible; inflexible.
if i by chance succeed
in what i write, and that's a chance indeed,
know i am not so stupid, or so hard,
not to feel praise, or fame's deserv'd reward.
... ? 9. unhappy; vexatious. - -
it is a very hard quality upon our soil or climate, that so
excellent a fruit, which prospers among all our neighbours,
will not grow here. - temple.
10. vehement; keen; severe: as, a hard winter; hard weather.
11. unreasonable; unjust.
it is a little hard, that in an affair of the last consequence to
the very being of the clergy, this whole reverend body should
be the sole persons not consulted. swift.
it is the hards case in the world, that steele should take
up the reports of his faction, and put them off as additional
fears. sil d swift.
. forced; not easily granted.
i 2 if we assow .."; couple, at the end of one hundred
o years, to have left ten pair of breeders, which is no hard sup-
* position; there would arise from these, in fifteen hundred
years, a greater number than the earth was capable of. burnet.
13. powerful; forcible. -
the flag was too hard for the horse, and the horse flies for
o saccour to the man that's too hard for him, and rides the one
to death, and outright kills the other. l'estrange.
let them confider the vexation they are treasuring up for
dryden.
-- themselves, by struggling with a power which will be always
- too hard for them. - . addison.
o a disputant, when he finds that his adversary is too hard
watts.
for him, with slyness turns the discourse.
14. austere; rough, as liquids. - -
in making of vinegar, set vessels of wine over-against the
noon sun, which calleth out the more oily spirits, and leaveth
- the spirit more four and hard. bacon,
vol. i.
15. harsh; stiff; constrained. -
9thors, scrupulously tied to the practice of the ancients,
make their figures harder than even the marble itself. dryden:
his diction is hard, his figures too bold, and his tropes,
particularly his metaphors, insufferably strained. dryden.
16. not plentiful; not prosperous.
there are bonfires decreed; and, if the times had not
been hard, my billet should have burnt too. dryden,
#7. avaricious; faultily sparing.
harp. adv. [hardo, very old german.]
1. close; near: often with by.
, hard by was a house of pleasure, built for a summer re-
tiring place. sidney.
they doubted a while what it should be, ’till it was cast up
even hard before them ; at which time they fully saw it was a
iilan. sidney.
a little lowly hermitage it was,
down in a dale hard by a forest's side,
far from resort of people that did pass
in travel to and fro, - spensor,
scarce had he said, when hard at hand they spie -
that quicksand nigh, with water covered. spenser.
when these marshal the way, hard at hand comes the
master and main exercise. shakespeare.
abimelech went hard unto the door of the tower, to burn
it with fire. - judges.
the philistines followed hard upon saul. 2 samuel.
hard by a cottage chimney smokes,
from betwixt two aged oaks. milton.
2. diligently ; laboriously ; incessantly; vehemently ; car-
nestly; importunately.
geneura rose in his defence,
and pray'd so hard for mercy from the prince,
that to his queen the king th' offender gave.
dryden,
an ant works as hard as a man who should carry
a ver
heavy load every day four leagues. zo.
whoever my unknown correspondent be, he presses hard
for an answer, and is earnest in that point. atterbury.
3. uneasily; vexatiously.
when a man's servant shall play the cur with him, look
you it goes hard. - shakespeare.
4. distressfully ; so as to raise difficulties.
the question is hard set, and we have reason to doubt. brown.
a fog, that was hard set by the huntsmen, betook himself
to a stall for sanetuary. l'estrange,
5. fast; nimbly; vehemently.
the wolves scampered away as hard as they could drive.
- l’e/irange.
6. with difficulty; in a manner requiring labour.
solid bodies foreshow rain, as boxes and pegs of wood
when they draw and wind hard. bacon.
7. tempestuously; boisterously.
when the north wind blows hard, and it rains sadly, none
but fools fit down in it and cry; wise people defend themselves
against it. taylor.
ha'rdbound... adj. [hard and bound.] costive,
just writes to make his barrenness appear,
and strains from hardbound brains eight lines a-year. pope,
to harden. v. n. [from hard.] to grow hard.
the powder of loadstone and flint, by the addition of whites
of eggs and gum-dragon, made into paste, will in a few days
harden to the hardness of a stone. bacon,
to ha'rden. v. a. [from hard.]
1. to make hard; to indurate. -
sure he, who first the passage try'd,
in harden'd oak his heart did hide,
and ribs of iron arm'd his side.
a piece of the hardened marl.
2. to confirm in effrontery; to make impudent.
3. to confirm in wickedness; to make obdurate.
but exhort one another daily, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of fin. hebrews.
he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning
unto the lord. 2 chron.
it is a melancholy consideration, that there should be several
among us so hardened and deluded as to think an oath a proper
subject for a jest, - addison.
4. to make insensible; to stupify. -
religion sets before us not the example of a stupid stoick,
who had by obstinate principles hardened himself against all
sense of pain; but an example of a man like ourselves, that
had a tender sense of the least suffering, and yet patiently en-
dured the greatest. tillotson.
years have not yet hardened me, and i have an addition of
weight on my spirits fince we lost him. swift to pope.
5. to make firm; to endue with constancy.
then should i yet have comfort? yea, i would harden my-
self in sorrow. job.
one raises the soul, and hardens it to virtue; the other
softens it again, and unbends it into vice. dryden.
ha'rd ener, n.s.. [from hardon.] one that makes any thing
, dryden.
woodward.
hard,
1o z -
hardfa'voured.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 986</div><p class="text">h a r
hardfa'vour e.d. adj. [hard and favour.] coarse of feature;
harsh of countenance. `
when the blast of war blows in your ears,
stiffen the finews, summon up the blood,
disguise fair nature with hardfavour'd looks,
then lend the eye a terrible aspe&amp;t. shakespeare.
the brother a very lovely youth, and the fister "hard-
l’estrange.
avottred.
f when vulcan came into the world, he was so hardfavoured
that both his parents frowned on him. dryden.
hardha’nded. adj. [hard and hand.] coarse; mechanick;
one that has hands hard with labour,
–hardhanded men that work in athens here,
which never labour'd in their minds offinow. shakespeare.
ha'rdhead. n.s. shard and head.j clash of heads; manner
of fighting in which the combatants dash their heads toge-
ther.
i have been at hardhead with your butting citizens; i have
routed your herd, l have dispers'd them. dryden.
hard he’ar rep. adj. [hard and heart.] cruel; inexorable;
merciless ; pitiless; barbarous; inhuman; savage ; uncom-
passionate.
hardhearted clifford, take me from the world ;
my soul to heav'n. shakespeare.
can you be so hardhearted to destroy
my ripening hopes, that are so near to joy dryden.
john bull, otherwise a good-natured man, was very hard-
bearted to his sister peg. arbuthnot.
hard hearted ness. n.s.. [from hardhearted.] cruelty; want
of tenderness; want of compassion.
hardheartedness and cruelty is not only an inhuman vice, but
worse than brutal. l'a/trange.
how black and base a vice ingratitude is, may be seen in
those vices which it is always in combination with, pride and
hardheartedness, or want of compassion. south.
hardheartednes is an effential in the charader of a liber-
time. ** - clarissa.
hardihead. . n.s. [from hardy.] stoutness; bravery. ob-
ha'rdihood. { solete.
enflam'd with fury and fierce hardyhead,
he seem'd in heart to harbour thoughts unkind. -
and nourish bloody vengeance in his bitter mind. spenser.
boldly assault the necromancer's hall,
- where if he be, with dauntles, hardo... milton.
hardiment, n. s. . [from hardy, hardiment, adv. f rench.]
courage; stoutness; bravery. not in use.
but full of fire and greedy hardiment,
the youthful knight could not for aught be staid. spensor.
on the gentle severn's sedgy bank,
in single opposition, hand to hand,
he did confound the best part of an hour
in changing hardiment with great glendower. shakespeare.
- zeal was the spring whence flowed her hardiment. fairs.
hardin ess. n.s. soardios, french ; from hardy. j
1. hardship; fatigue. -
they are valiant and hardy; great endurers of cold, hun-
ger, and all hardings. speoser.
2. stoutness; courage; bravery. -
if we, with thrice such powers left at home,
cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
let us be worried; and our nation lose
the name of hardings; and policy. shakespeare.
perkin had gathered together a power of all nations, neither
in number nor in the hardings; and “ourage of their persons
contemptible. bacon.
he has the courage of a rational ofeature, and such an har-
dinos; we should endeavour by custon and use to bring children
io. “ locke.
criminal as you are, you avenge yourself against the hardi.
nos; of one that should tell you of it. speciator.
3. effrontery; confidence.
hoopla poured. adj. shard and labour.] elaborate; studied;
diligently wrought. -
how chearfully the hawkers cry
a fatire, and the gentry buy
while my hardlabour'a poem pines,
unfold upon the printer's lines. swift.
hardly. adv. [from hard.] -
i. with difficulty ; not easily.
touching things which generally are received, although in
themselves they be most sertain, yet, because men presume
them granted of all, we are hardlift able to bring such proof
of their certainty as may satisfy gainsayers, when suddenly
and besides expectation they require the same at our hands.
hooker.
ripeness
$ might trou-
sharpest and subtlest
there are but a few, and they endued with great
of wit and judgment, free from all such affairs *
ble their meditations, instructed in the
points of learning; who have, and that very hardly, been
able to find out but only the immortality of the soul. hooker.
god hath delivered. ...". thorp as the two-edged sword,
p**ing the very closes; and most unsearchable corners of the
heart, which the law of nature can hard,
ardly
means, possibly reach unto. *% human hw, by no
there are in living creatures parts that nour; voter,
easily, and parts that nourish and repair jo *nd repair
the o: o trees are more close info than thos
of oaks and ashes, whereby th in those
out. 2. ** * an asso
the father, mother, daughter they invite: basin.
hardly the dame was drawn to this repast. 2
recov'ring hardly what he lost before,
his right endears it much, his purchas. m
false confidence is easily taken up, and o, laid o:-
il.
2. scarcely; scant; not lightly; with no likelihood. south,
- the fish that once was caught, new bait will hard bit
drjin
they are worn, lord consul, so *} on.
that we shall hardly in our ages see
their banners wave again. shakes,
hardy shall you find *} one so bad, but he o
credit of being thought good. s o
3. almost not ; barely. olish,
the wand'ring breath was on the
weak was the pulse, and hardly heav
there is hardy a gentleman in the
near alliance with some of that body.
wing to part,
d the heart. drydin,
nation who hath of 4
4. grudgingly; as an injury. swift,
i unwittingly
have aught committed it is hardly borne
by any in this presence, i defise
to reconcile me.
5. severely ; unfavourably. shaftar,
if there are some reasons inducing you to think hardy of
our laws, are those reasons demonstrative, are they necessary
of mere possibilities only hai.
6. rigorously; oppressively.
many men believed that he was hardly dealt with. clarindon.
they are now in prison, and treated hardy enough; for
there are fifteen dead within two years. addison,
they have begun to say, and to fetch instances, where he
has in many things been hardy used. swift.
7. unwelcomely; harshly.
such information comes very hardly and harshly to a grown
on 3 and, however softened, goes but ill down. loft,
8. not softly; not tenderly; not delicately.
heav'n was her canopy; bare earth her bed;
so hardly lod g’d. dryden.
ha'rdmouther adj. [%rd and mouth.] disobediens oft.
rein; not sensible of the bit.
'tis time my hardmouth'd coursers to controul,
apt to run riot, and transgress the goal. dryden,
but who can youth, let loose to vice, restrain?
when once the hardmouth'd horse has got the rein,
he's past thy pow'r to stop. drydon.
hardness. n.s.. [from hard.]
1. purity; power of resistance in bodies.
*hardness is a firm cohesion of the parts of matter that make
up masses of a sensible bulk, so that the whole does not easily
change its figure. lotke.
from the various combinations of these corpuscles happen
all the varieties of the bodies formed out of them, in colour,
taste, smell, shardness, and specifick gravity. woodward,
2. difficulty to be understood.
this label on my bosom
is so from sense in hardness, that i can
make no collection of it. shaloftsart,
3. difficulty to be accomplished. ' - - - - -
it was time now or never to sharpen my intention to pierce
through the wardness of this enterprize. - .
concerning the duty itself, the hardnes; thereof is not o
as needeth much art. ho:#r.
4. scarcity; penury. -
the tenants poor, the hardnes of the times, f
are ill excuses for a servant's crimes. swift,
obduracy; profligateness. -
5 every § of fin introduces unto the o
*gree of hardnos, and an #tness to continue in that fin, sah
6. coarseness; harshness of look. dn's of
by their virtuous behaviour they compensate the her .
their favour, and by the pulchritude of their souls ma #:
what is wanting in the beauty of their bodies.
7. keenness; vehemence of weather or seasons, ither the
if the hardness of the winter should spoil them, o timer,
loss of seed nor labour will be much. mor
8. cruelty of temper; savageness; harshness; barbarity.
we will ask,
that if we fail in our request, the blame
may hang upon your hardnes. ...
they quicken sloth, perplexities unty, 1:
make roughness smooth, and hardns, molliff.
9. stiffness; harshness. f the pain
sculptors are obliged to follow the manners of the p
shafts eart.
denham,
tess,
and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 987</div><p class="text">h a r
and to make many ample folds, which are insufferable hard-
neffo, and more like a rock than a natural garment. dryden.
ro. faulty parfimony; stinginess. - -
ha roock. m. s. i suppose the same with burdock.
why he was met ev'n now,
crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
with hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers. shakesp.
hards. m. s. the refuse or coarser part of flax.
ha'roship. n.s.. [from hard.]
1. injury; oppression. - -
they are ripe for a peace, to enjoy what we have con-
quered for them ; and so are we, to recover the effects of their
•-hardships upon us.
swift.
2. inconvenience; fatigue.
they were exposed to hardship and penury. sprat.
you could not undergo the toils of war,
nor bear the hardships that your leaders bore. addison.
in journeys or at horne, in war or peace,
by hardships many, many fall by ease. prior.
ha'rdw are. m. s. shord and ware..] manufactures of metal.
ha'row areman. m. s. shardware and man.] a maker or
seller of metalline manufactures. . . .
one william wood, an hardwareman, obtains by fraud a
patent in england to coin copper to pass in ireland. swift.
hatdy; adj. [hardi, fr.) --
1. bold; brave ; stout; daring; resolute. -
try the imagination of some in cock fights, to make one
cock more hardy, and the other more cowardly. bacon.
. recite -
the feats of amazons, the fatal fight
betwixt the harty queen and hero knight. dryden.
who is there hardy enough to contend with the reproach
which is prepared for those, who dare venture to dissent from
, the received opinions of their country? ... locke.
could thirst of vengeance, and desire of fame,
excite the female breast with martial flame :
and shall not love's diviner pow'r inspire
more hardy virtue, and more gen’rous fire 2 prior.
2. strong; hard; firm. - - - - -
is a man confident of his present strength an unwhol-
some blast may shake in pieces his hardy fabrick. south.
3. confident; singudent ; viciously stubborn.
hare and he re, differing in pronunciation only, signify both
an army and a lord. so harold is a general of an army;
haremon, a chief man in the army; herwin, a victorious
army; which are much like stratocles, polemarchus, and he-
ge/stratus among the greeks. gibson's camden.
hare. m. s. [pana, saxon; aarh, erse.]
1. a small quadruped, with long ears and short tail, that moves
by leaps, remarkable for timidity, vigilance, and fecundity ;
the common game of hunters.
dismay’d not this
our captains macbeth and banquo:
as sparrows, eagles; or the hare, the lion. shakespeare.
we view in the open champaign a brace of swift grey-
hounds coursing a good stout and well breathed hare. more.
your dressings must be with hare’s fur. jwiseman.
poor is the triumph o'er the timid hare. thomson.
2. a constellation.
- the hare appears, whose active rays supply
a nimble force, and hardly wings deny. creech.
t. hare. v. n. [harier, fr.] to fright; to hurry with ter-
i ous.
to hare and rate them, is not to teach but vex them. locke.
ha(rebell. m. s. [hare and bell.] a blue flower campaniform.
thou shalt not lack
the flow'r that’s like thy face, pale primrose; nor ,
the azur'd harebell, like thy veins. shakesp. cymbeline.
hare brained. adj. [from hare the verb and brain..] volatile;
unsettled ; wild; fluttering; hurried.
that harebrained wild follow begins to play the fool, when
others are weary of it. bacon,
hare foot. n.f. [hare and foot.]
1. a bird. ainsworth.
2. an herb. ainsworth.
harelip. m. s. a fissure in the upper lip with want of sub-
stance, a natural defect. - &amp;#inty.
the blots of nature's hand
shall not in their issue stand ;
never mole, harelip, nor scar,
shall upon their children be. shakespeare.
the third stitch is performed with pins or needles, as in
harelips. - wiseman.
haresear. n.s.. [buftkurton, lat.] . a plant. miller.
ha(rier. n.s. ifrom hare.] a dog for hunting hares. ainsw.
to hark. v. n. [contracted from hearken.] to listen.
the king,
to me inveterate, harks my brother’s suit.
pricking up his ears, to hare
if he could bear too in the dark. . . hudibras.
hark. inters. [it is originally the imperative of the verb hark.]
• list hear ! listen!
7
shakespeare.
_what harmony is this 2 my good friends, har} f shakes.
the butcher saw him upon . i. with a piece of e.
and called out, hark ye, friend, you may make the best of
your purchase. . . l’estrange.
hark! methinks the roar that late pursu'd me,
sinks like the murmurs of a falling wind. .
invi #. how loud the woods
nvite you forth : thomson.
har.l. n. } fon \
1. the filaments of flax.
2. any filamentous substance. +
the general sort are wicker hives, made of privet, willow,
or harl, daubed with cow-dung. mortimer.
ha'rlequin. m. s. [this name is said to have been given by
francis of france to a busy buffoon, in ridicule of his enemy
charles le quint. menage derives, it more probably from a
famous comedian that frequented m. harley's house, whom
his friends called harlequino, little harley. trev.] a buf-
foon who plays tricks to divert the populace; a jack-pudding;
3 z2 ill.
the joy of a king for a victory must not be like that of a
harlequin upon a letter from his mistress.
the man in graver tragick known,
though his best part long since was done,
still on the stage defires to tarry ;
and he who play'd the harlequin,
after the jest still loads the scene,
unwilling to retire, though weary. prior.
ha'rlot. n s. [herlodes, welsh, a giri. others for her.
det, a little whore. others from the name of the mother of
william the conqueror. hurlet is used in chaucer for a low
male drudge..] a whore; a strumpet.
away, my disposition, and possess me with
some harlot's spirit. shakespeare.
they help thee by such aids as geese and harlots.
ben. johnson.
the barbarous harlots crowd the publick place;
go, fools, and purchase an unclean embrace.
ha'rlotry. m. s. [from harlot.]
1. the trade of a harlot; fornication.
nor shall,
from rome's tribunal, thy harangues prevail
'gainst harlotry, while thou art clad so thin
2. a name of contempt for a woman. -
a peevish self-will'd harlotry,
that no persuasion can do good upon.
harm. n.s. [peanm, saxon.]
1. injury ; crime; wickedness.
2. mischief; detriment; hurt.
we, ignorant of ourselves,
beg often our own harms, which the wise powers
deny us for our good. - shakespeare.
how are we happy still in fear of harm p -
but harm precedes not fin. milton.
they should be suffered to write on : it would keep them
out of harm’s way, and prevent them from evil courses. swift.
to harm. v. a. . to hurt; to injure. ,
what sense had i of her stol’n hours or lust? -
i saw’t not, thought it not, it harm'd not me. shak. othell.
passions ne'er could grow
to harm another, or impeach your rest. waller.
after their young are hatched, they brood them under their
wings, left the cold, and sometimes the heat, should harm
them.
ha'rmful. adj. [harm and full.]
noxious; injurious; detrimental.
his dearly loved squire
his spear of heben-wood behind him bare,
whose harmful head, thrice heated in the fire,
had riven many a breast with pike-head square. spenser.
let no man fear that harmful creature less, because he sees
the apostle safe from that poison. hall.
the earth brought forth fruit and food for man, without
any mixture of harmful quality. raleigh.
for flax and oats will burn the tender field,
and sleepy poppies harmful harvests yield. dryden.
ha'rmfully. adv. [from harmful.] hurtfully; noxiously ;
detrimentally.
a scholar is better occupied in playing or sleeping, than
spending his time not only vainly, but harmfully in such kind
of exercise. ascham.
ha’s mfulness. m. s. [from harmful.], hurtfulness; mis-
chievousness; noxiousness.
ha'rm less, adj. [from harm.]
1. innocent; innoxious; not hurtful.
touching ceremonies harmless in themselves, and hurtful
only in respe&amp;t of number, was it amiss to decree that those
things that were least needful, and newliest come, should be
the first that were taken away hooker.
she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye
on him, her brothers, me, her master; hitting
each cbject with a joy. shakespeare.
2. unhurt;
rowe.
dryden.
dryden.
dryden.
shakespeare.
ray.
hurtful; mischievous;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 988</div><p class="text">h a r
h a r
. unhurt; undamaged. - -
2 #. be careful to gain by his labour, or at
least to save himself barmless, and therefore suit his work
flightly, according to a slight prio: raleigh.
hossly. adv. [from harmles...] innocently; without
: without crime.
h; spent that day free from worldly trouble, harmlessly,
and in a recreation that became a churchman. walton.
bullets batter the walls which stand inflexible, but fall
harmlessly into wood or feathers. decay of piety.
ha'rmlessness. n.s.. [from harmless.] innocence; freedom
from tendency to injury or hurt.
when, through tasteless flat humility,
in dough-bak'd men some harmlessnes; we see,
'tis but his phlegm that's virtuous, and not he. donne.
compare the harmlessness, the credulity, the tenderness, the
modesty, and the ingenuous pliableness to virtuous counsels,
which is in youth untainted, with the mischievousness, the
slyness, the craft, the impudence, the falshood, and the con-
firmed obstinacy in an aged long-practised sinner. south.
#::::::::::: adj. [&amp;twalks; ; harmonique, fr.] -
1. relating to musick; susceptible of musical proportion to
each other.
after every three whole notes, nature requireth, for all har-
monical use, one half note to be interposed. bacon.
2. concordant; musical; proportioned to each other: less pro-
perly.
harmonical sounds, and discordant sounds, are both active
and positive; but blackness and darkness are, indeed, but pri-
vatives. bacon.
so swells each wind-pipe; ass intones to ass,
harmonick twang of leather, horn, and brass. pope.
harmo'nious. adj. [harmonieux, fr. from harmony.]
1. adapted to each other; having the parts proportioned to
each other; symmetrical.
all the wide-extended sky,
and all th’ harmonious worlds on high,
and virgil's sacred work shall dye. cowley.
god has made the intelle&amp;tual world harmonious and beauti-
ful without us; but it will never come into our heads all at
once; we must bring it home piece-meal. locke.
2. having sounds concordant to each other; musical; sympho-
ill ou s.
thoughts that voluntary move harmonious numbers.
milton.
the verse of chaucer is not harmonious to us: they who
lived with him, thought it musical. dryden.
harmo'niously. adv. [from harmonious.]
1. with just adaptation and proportion of parts to each other.
not chaos-like, together crush'd and bruis’d; -:
but as the world, harmoniously confus'd :
where order in variety we see,
and where, though all things differ, they agree. pope.
that all these distances, motions, and quantities of matter
should be so accurately and harmoniously adjusted in this great
variety of our system, is above the fortuitous hits of blind ma-
terial causes, and must certainly flow from that eternal foun-
tain of wisdom. bentley.
2. musically; with concord of sounds.
if we look upon the world as a musical instrument, well-
tuned, and harmoniously struck, we ought not to worship the
instrument, but him that makes the musick. stillingfieet.
harmo'niousness, n, s, [from harmonious.] proportion; mu-
sicalness.
70 harmonize. v. a. [from harmony.] to adjust in fit pro-
portions; to make musical.
love first invented verse, and form'd the rhime,
the motion measur'd, harmoniz'd the chime.
harmony. n.s. [**wiz; harmonie, fr.]
1. the just adaptation of one part to another.
. the pleasures of the eye and ear are but the effeas of equa-
lity, good proportion, or correspondence; so that equality
and correspondence are the causes of harmony. bacon.
- the harmony of things,
as well as that of sounds, from dissord springs. denham.
sure infinite wisdom must accomplish all its works with con-
dryden,
summate harmony, proportion, and regularity. cheyne.
2. just proportion of sound; musical concord.
the sound
symphonious, of ten thousand harps that tun'd
angelic harmonies. milton.
harmony is a compound idea, made up of different sounds
united. watts,
3. concord; correspondent sentiment.
in us both one soul,
harmony to behold in wedded pair'
* goateful than harmonious sounds to th' ear. milton.
i no sooner in my heart divin'd,
my heart, which by a secret harmony
still moves with thine, join’d in connexion sweet ! milton,
ha'rness. n.s.. [harnois, fr. supposed !. -
runnick; hiairn, welsh and to- "on,
1. armour; defensive furniture of war. somewhat anti -
a goodly knight, all dress'd in harnes, meet ntiquated.
that from his head no place appeared to hire s
of no right, nor colour like to right • spensor.
he doth fill fields with harness. "sui
were i a great man, i should fear to drink; ałostart,
great men should drink with harnes; on their that sh
2. the traces of draught horses, particularly of cars. ał.
pleasure or state: of other carriages we say geer. ages of
or wilt thou ride thy horses shall'b: trapp'd "…
their harness studded all with gold and peal.".
their steeds around, ałoskar,
free from their harness, graze the flow'r
to ha'rness. v. a. e. # noun.] y ground. doin,
i. to dress in .
he was harnes' light, and to the field goe
full fifty years, harness'd in rugged #. he, shais,
i have endur'd the biting winter's blast, row
2. to fix horses in their traces. !!!,
before the door her iron chariot stood,
all ready harnessed for journey new. spin
harnos; the horses, and get up the horsemen, and ;
forth with your helmets. tr. xlvi
w. i ow my ground, my horse is harnsld and j
to my plough. hale's origin a -
y ploug to the harnessed yoke gin of manlind,
they lend their shoulder, and begin their toil. thomson
harp. m. s. [peanp, saxon; harpe, fr. it is used iro
both the teutonick and roman diale&amp;s, and has been long
in use.
romanus; lyraplaudat tibi, barbarus harpa, wen, fort]
1. a lyre; an instrument strung with wire and commonly
struck with the finger.
arion, when through tempests cruel wreck
he forth was thrown into the greedy seas,
through the sweet musick which his harp did make,
allur'd a dolphin him from death to ease. shinsor:
they touch'd their golden harps, and hymning prais'd
god and his works. miln,
nor wanted tuneful harp, nor vocal quire;
the muses sung, apollo touch'd the lyre. drydin,
2. a constellation.
next shines the harp, and through the liquid skies
the shell, as lightest, first begins to rise;
this when sweet orpheus struck, to list'ning rocks
he senses gave, and ears to wither'd oaks. cruth,
to harp. v. n. [harper, fr. from the noun.]
1. to play on the harp.
i heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps. rev.
things without life giving sound, whether pipe of harp,
except they give a distinetion in the sounds, how shall it be
known what is piped or harped? i cr,
the helmed cherubim,
and sworded seraphim,
are seen in glitt'ring ranks with wings display'd,
harping in loud and solemn quire, - - - - - -
with unexpressive notes to heav'n's new-born heir. mir,
you harp a little too much upon one string. cla.
2. to touch any passion, as the harper touches a fligi"
dwell on a subject.
gracious duke,
harp not on that, nor do not banish reason
for inequality; but let your reason serve .."
to make the truth appear. shais, massor m*
for thy good caution, thanks: '; mikh
thou'st harp'd my fear aright. shahsaari's mio
p he o: hats
roud and disdainful, harping on what am,
not what he knew i ...? shauff. ant, andclo"
ha'rper. m. s. [from ...} a player on the harp.
never will i trust to ... e
nor to the motion of a sch y's tongue; t
nor wooe in rhime, like a blind harper's song. *t
i’m the god of the harp: stop, my fairest:-inv ill
nor the harp, nor the harper, could fetch her ‘. dart
ha'rping iron. n.s.. [from harpago, lat.] a be, hales as:
with a line fastessed to the handle, with which "
struck and caught. -
the boat which on the first assault did go,
struck with a harping iron the younger so -
who, when he felt his side so rudely got # s/k,
loud as the sea that nourish’d him hero" d. ] he that
harpone’er. n.s. sharponeur, fr. from harpoon.
throws the harpoon in whalefishing. . . .
harpo'on. n.s. sharpon, fr.] aharping .
harpsicorp.’m.j. a musical instrument, " g
and played by striking keys. - fr.]
ha'rpy. n.s. sharpyia, lat. harpie, *†, to the fo of
1. the harpies were a kind of birds whic womes,
with with
2 .
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 989</div><p class="text">h a r
o
-i.
***
--
*-
-
*-
* --
women, and soul long claws, very filthy creatures; which,
when the table was furnished for phineus, came flying in, and
devouring or carrying away the greater part of the victuals,
did so defile the rest that they could not be endured. raleigh.
that an harpy, is not a centaur is by this way as much a
truth, as that a square is not a circle. locke.
2. a ravenous wretch ; an extortioner. -
i will do you any ambassage to the pigmies, rather than hold
three words conference with this harpy. shakespeare.
ha'roy ebuss. n.s. [see arquebuse..] a handgun.
ha'roy ebuss er. m. s. [from harquebus;..] one armed with
a harquebuss.
twenty thousand nimble harquebusiers were ranged in
length, and but five in a rank. knolles.
harrida. n. m. f. [corrupted from haridelle, a worn-out
worthless horse. j a decayed strumpet.
she just endur'd the winter she began,
and in four months a batter'd harridan;
now nothing's left, but wither'd, pale, and shrunk,
... to bawd for others, and go shares with punk. swift.
ha'rrow. m. s. [charroue, french ; harcke, german, a rake.]
a frame of timbers crossing each other, and set with teeth,
drawn over sowed ground to break the clods and throw the
earth over the seed.
the land with daily care
js exercis'd, and with an iron war
of rakes and harrows. dryden.
two small harrows, that clap on each side of the ridge,
harrow it right up and down. mortimer.
to ha(rrow. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to cover with earth by the harrow,
friend, harrow in time, by some manner of means,
not only thy peason, but also thy beans. tuser.
2. to break with the harrow.
can’st thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow
or will he harrow the valleys after thee : job.
let the volscians
plow rome, and harrow italy. shakespeare.
3. to tear up; to rip up.
i could a tale unfold, whose lightest word
would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres.
shakespeare.
imagine you behold me bound and scourg’d,
my aged muscles harrow'd up with whips;
or hear me groaning on the rending rack. 3702.
a. to pillage; to strip; to lay waste. see harry, which in
scottish is the same thing.
as the king did cocel in good commonwealth laws, so he
had in secret a design to make use of them, as well for col-
lecting of treasure as for correcting of manners; and so mean-
ing thereby to harrow his people, did accumulate them the
rather. bacon.
5. to invade; to harass with incursions. [from penglan,
saxon.] obsolete.
and he that harrow'd hell with heavy flowre,
the faulty souls from thence brought to his heavenly bowre.
fairy queen.
most glorious lord of life, that on this day
did'st make thy triumph over death and sin;
and having harrow'd hell, did'st bring away
captivity thence captive, us to win.
6. to disturb ; to put into commotion.
be written harry, harer, french.]
most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder. shakesp.
amaz'd i stood, harrow'd with grief and care. milton.
ha'rrow. interj. an exclamation of sudden distress. now
out of use.
harrow now out and weal away, he cried;
what dismal day hath sent this cursed light,
to see my lord so deadly damnify'd :
harrow er. m. s. [from harrow.]
1. he who harrows.
2. a kind of hawk.
to ha(rry. v. a. sharer, fr.]
1. to teaze; to hare; to ruffle. -
thou must not take my former sharpness ill.
—i repent me much
that i so harry'd him. shakes care.
2. in scotland it signifies to rob, plunder, or oppress: as, one
harried a nos!; that is, he took the young away : as also, he
harried me out of house and home; that is, he robbed me of my
goods, and turned me out of doors. see to harrow.
harsh. adj. [hervishe, german, skinner.]
1. austere; roughly sour.
our nature here is not unlike our wine ;
some sorts, when old, continue brisk and fine:
so age's gravity may seem severe,
but nothing harsh or bitter ought to appear. denham.
sweet, bitter, sour, harsh and salt, are all the epithets we
have to denominate that numberless variety of relishes. locłe.
vol. i.
spensor.
[this should rather
spensor.
ainsworth.
the same defe&amp;t of heat which gives a fierceness to our #4.
tures, may contribute to that roughness of our language,
which bears some analogy to the harsh fruit of colder co.
tries. of:
2. rough to the ear. swift.
a name unmusical to volscian ears,
and harsh in sound to thine. shakoff care,
age might, what nature never gives the young,
have taught the smoothness of thy native tongue;
but satire needs not that, and wit will shine
through the harsh cadence of a rugged line. dryden.
the unnecessary consonants made their spelling tedious,
and their pronunciation harsh.
- dryden.
thy lord commands thee now
with a harsh voice, and supercilious brow,
to servile duties. dryden.
3. crabbed; morose; peevish.
he was a wise man and an eloquent; but in his nature
harsh and haughty. bacon.
bear patiently the harsh words of thy enemies, as knowing
that the anger of an enemy admonishes us of our duty. taylor.
no harsh refle&amp;tion let remembrance raise;
forbear to mention what thou can'st not praise. prior.
a certain quickness of apprehension inclined him to kindle
into the first motions of anger; but, for a long time before
he died, no one heard an intemperate or harsh word proceed
from him. atterbury:
4. rugged to the touch; rough.
black feels as if you were feeling needles points, or some
harsh sand; and red feels very smooth. boyle.
5. unpleasing; rigorous.
with eloquence innate his tongue was arm'd;
though harsh the precept, yet the preacher charm’d, dryden.
ha'rsh ly. adj. [foom harsh.]
1. sourly ; austerely to the palate, as unripe fruit.
2. with violence; in opposition to gentleness, unless in the so-
lowing passage it rather signifies unripely.
'till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
into thy mother's lap; or be with ease
gather'd, not harshly pluck'd.
3. severely; morosely ; crabbedly.
i would rather he was a man of a rough temper, that would
milton,
treat me harshly, than of an effeminate nature, addison.
4. unpleasantly to the ear.
my wife is in a wayward mood to-day;
i toll you, 'twould sound harshly in her ears. shakspeare,
get from him why he puts on this confusion,
grating so harshy all his days of quiet
with turbulent and dang'rous lunacy. shakespeare.
the rings of iron that on the doors were hung,
sent out a jarring found, and harshy rung,
ha'rshness. m. s. [from harsh.]
1. sourness; austere taste.
take an apple and roll it upon a table hard : the rolling
doth soften and sweeten the fruit, which is nothing but the
smooth distribution of the spirits into the parts; for the un-
equal distribution of the spirits maketh the harshness. bacon.
2. roughness to the ear.
neither can the natural harshnes, of the french, or the per-
petual ill accent, be ever refined into perfect harmony like
the italian. dryden.
cannot i admire the height of milton's invention, and the
strength of his expression, without defending his antiquated
dryden,
words, and the perpetual harshness of their sound 2 dryden.
'tis not enough no harshness gives offence;
the sound must seem an echo to the sense. pope.
3. ruggedness to the touch.
harshnes, and ruggedness of bodies is unpleasant to the
touch. bacon,
4. crabbedness; moroseness; peevishness.
thy tender hefted nature shall not give
thee o'er to harshness : her eyes are fierce, but thine
do comfort and not burn. shakespeare.
hart. m. s. [peopt, saxon.] a he-deer of the large kind;
the male of the roe.
that instant was i turn'd into a harf,
and my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,
e'er since pursue me. shakespeare,
the deer
and fearful harts do wander every where
amidst the dogs. - my's virgi'.
ha rts horn. m. s.
hartshorn is a drug that comes into use many ways, and
under many forms. what is used here are the whole horns
of the common male deer, which fall off every year. this
species is the fallow deer ; but some tell us, that the medici-
nal hartshorn should be that of the true hart or stag. the salt
of hartshorn is a great sudorifick, and the spirit has all the
virtues of volatile alkalies: it is used to bring people out of
faintings by its pungency, holding it under th; nose, and
pouring down some drops of it in water. hill.
11 a ramose<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 990</div><p class="text">h a s
h a t
ramose concretions of the volatile salts are observable upon
the glass of the receiver, whilst the spirits of vipers and harts-
horn are drawn. isoodward.
ha'rtshor n. m. s. an herb. , ainsworth.
hart-royal. n.s. a plant. a species of buckthorn plan-
tain. * ,
hartstongue. n.s. [lingua cervina, lat..] a plant.
it commonly grows out from the joints of old walls and
buildings, where they are moist and shady. there are yory
few of them in europe. miller.
harylangue is propagated by parting the roots, and also by
seed. mortimer.
ha'rtwort. n.s.. [tordylium, lat.] an umbelliferous plant.
- amiller.
ha'rvest. n.s. spamperz, saxon.]
1. the season of reaping and gathering the corn.
as it ebbs, the seedsman
upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain, o
and shortly comes to harves. shakespeare.
with harves? work he is worse than in spring. l'estrange.
2. the corn ripened, gathered and inned.
from ireland come i with my strength,
and reap the harves? which that rascal sow'd. shakespeare.
when the father is too fondly kind, -
such seed he sows, such harves shall he find. dryden.
3. the product of labour.
let us the harves? of our labour eat; r
'tis labour makes the coarsest diet sweet. dryden.
ha'rwest-home. n.s.
1. the song which the reapers sing at the feast made for having
inned the harvest. r
your hay it is mow'd, and your corn is reap'd ;
your barns will be full, and your hovels heap'd ;
come, my boys, come,
come, my boys, come,
and merrily roar out harves?-home. dryden.
2. the time of gathering harvest. -
at harve/i-home, and on the shearing-day, -
when he should thanks to pan and pales pay, dryden.
3. the opportunity of gathering treasure.
his wife i will use as the key of the cuckoldy rogue's cof-
fer; and there's my harve/l-home. shakespeare.
ha(rv est-lor d. m. s. the head reaper at the harvest.
grant harvosī-lord more by a peny or two,
to call on his fellows the better to do. tuffar.
too. m. s. [from harvos'.j one who works at the
harvest.
ha r v esq. man. m. s. sharvg/? and man.] a labourer in har-
west.
like to a harves?man, that's task'd to mow
or all, or lose his hire. shakespeare.
to hash. v. n. [hacher, fr.] to mince ; to chop into small
pieces, and mingle.
he rais'd his arm o
above his head, and rain’d a storm
of blows so terrible and thick,
as if he meant to hash her quick. hudibras.
what have they to complain of but too great variety, tho’
some of the dishes be not served in the exactest order, and
politeness; but hashed up in haste. garth.
hask. m. s. this seems to signify a case or habitation made of
rushes or flags. obsolete.
phoebus, weary of his yearly task,
- established hath his steeds in lowly lay,
and taken up his inn in fishes has. spensor.
ha’s let. } m. s. [hosla, islandick, a bundle; haserel, has-
ha'r's let. tereau, hassier, fr.] the heart, liver, and
lights of a hog, with the windpipe and part of the throat to
1t.
haso, n.s. spepr, saxon, whence in some provinces it is yet
called bapse.] a clasp folded over a staple, and fastened on
with a padlock.
have doors to open and shut at pleasure, with hasps to
them. mortimer.
7 hasp. v. m. [from the noun..] to shut with a hasp.
hassock. m. s. shafeek, german. skinner.]
i. a thick mat on which men kneel at church.
he found his parishioners very irregular; and in order to
make them kneel, and join in the responses, he gave every
one of them a hosock and common prayer book. addison.
2. in scotland it is applied to any thing made of rushes or pri-
yet, on which a person may fit: it is theref bable th
haffock and has are the . erefore probable that
hast. the second person fingular of have.
*a.t.e. n.f. [hase, fr. hajie, dutch.j
i. hurry; speed; nimbleness; precipitation.
spare him, death !
but o, thou wilt not, cans not spare
foste hath never time to hear. crashaw
9. ines reform’d, and not compos'd in haste o
polish'd like marble, would like marble last; 2
but as the present, so the last age writ;
}. both i * like negligence and wi. ls.
n as much hose as i am, i cannot for,. ... *k,
ample. o orbear giving.
the wretched father, running to their aid drydo,
with pious hosle, but vain, they next invade
2. passion; vehemence. dj&amp;n,
i said in my hosle, all men are liars.
7% hast e. - psalm,
to ha’s ten. } v. m. shafter, fr. haslen, dutch.]
1. to make haste; to be in a hurry; to be busy,
o i have not hastened from being a pino, to ... speeds.
2. to move with swiftness; eagerness; or hurry. ce, jr.
'tis cinna, i do know him by his gait;
he is a friend. cinna, where hasle so r
they were troubled and hased * q o
all those things are passed away like a shadow, and,"
that has!ed by. y adow, and % pot
hasling to pay his tribute to the sea, ision,
like mortal life to meet eternity. dinham
these rites perform’d, the prince, withoutd.h y
hasles to the nether world, his destin'd way. drd
...to distant sparta, and the spacious waste tjah,
of sandy pyle, the royal youth shall has. p
soon as the sun awakes the sprightly court, ot,
leave their repose, and haslen to the sport. prior
to haste. { v. a. to push forward; to urge on:
to ha’s ten. cipitate; to drive to a swifter fice. &gt;
let it be so hosted, that supper be ready at the farthes 5
five of the clock. so
all hopes of succour from your arms is past; * --
to save us now, you must our ruin hosle. djin,
each sees his lamp with diff'rent lustre crown';
each knows his course with diff'rent periods bound;
and in his passage through the liquid space,
nor has ens, not retards his neighbour's race. prior,
ha'st ener. m. s. [from haslen.] one that hallens or hurris,
ha's tily. adj. [from hasty.]
i. in a hurry; speedily ; nimbly ; quickly.
a voice, that called loud and clear,
to pre-
come hither, hither, o come haslily soft,
if your grace incline that we should live,
you must not, sir, too hastily forgive. wallir,
the next to danger, hot pursu'd by fate,
half cloth'd, half naked, hasliy retire, djin,
2. rashly ; precipitately.
without considering consequences, we haft; engaged in
a war which hath cost us fixty millions. silji,
3. passionately; with vehemence.
ha's tiness. m. s. [from hosty.]
1. haste; speed.
2. hurry ; precipitation.
a fellow being out of breath, or seeming to be for histo
with humble hostings told basilius. sidn'),
3. rash eagerness. • . ."
the turns of his verse, his breakings, his propriety, his
numbers, and his gravity, i have as far imitated as the so
verty of our language, and the hostints of my perfoo
would allow. dolo
there is most just cause to fear, lest our hasins to embo:
a thing of so perilous consequence, should cause o o
feel those evils. ..it',
4. angry testiness; passionate vehemence.
ha's tings. n.s. [from hasly..] peas that come o 'till the
e set 'till iii
the large white and green hostings are not to
cold is over. -
ha'sty. adj. [hasis, fr. from hosle; hagfig, dutch,
1. quick; speedy. y
is this the counsel that we two have shar'd,
the sisters vows, the hours that we have spent,
when we have chid the hasy footed time
mirimir,
so - -
for parting us! sastar,
2. passionate; vehement. ding; but ho
he that is slow to wrath is of great understan "#.
that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.
. rash ; precipitate. -
3 seest §. man that is hosly in his words? too
hope of a fool than of him. hine heist?
be not rash with thy mouth, and let no ". w, 2.
hosty to utter any thing before god.
. early ripe. it before
4 # shall be a fading flower, and as the hasly o:
the summer. - owts,
ha'sty-pudding. m. s. a pudding made o:
boiled quick together; as also of oatmeal and w*
gether. - -
sure hasy-pudding is thy chiefest o sh dorso,
with bullock's liver, or some stinking hih. er for the hill.
hat. n.s. space, saxon; hatt, german.] a co" hat, and h"
she's as big as he is ; and there's her thrum slot.
muffler too. - '' out<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
9
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 991</div><p class="text">h a t
h a t
out of mere ambition you have made
your holy hat be stampt on the king's coin.
his hat was like a helmet, or spanish montero.
hershes o'er his head in air appear'd,
and, with soft words his drooping spirits cheer'd ;
his hat adorn'd with wings disclos'd the god,
and in his hand he bore the sleep compelling rod. dryden.
hathand. m. s. [hat and band.] a string tied round the hat.
they had hats of blue velvet, with fine plumes of divers
shakes rare.
baco .
colours, set round like hathands. bacon.
room for the noble gladiator see
his coat and latland shew his quality. drydon.
hat case, n.s.. [hat and case..] a slight box for a hat.
- i might mention a hatcase, which i would not exchange
for all the beavers in great britain. addison.
to hatch. v. a. [hecken, german, as skinner thinks, from
heghen, eghen, ceg, egg, saxon.] -
1. to produce young from eggs by the warmth of incubation.
he kindly spreads his spicious wing,
and hatches plenty for th’ ensuing spring.
the tepid caves, and fens and shores,
their brood as numerous hatch from th’ eggs, that soon
bursting with kindly rupture, forth disclos'd
their callow young.
2. to quicken the egg by incubation.
when they have laid such a number of eggs as they can con-
veniently cover and hatch, they give over, and be in to fit. ray.
others hatch their eggs and tend the birth, 'till it is able to
shift for itself. addison.
3. to produce by precedent action.
which thing they very well know, and, i doubt not, will
easily confess, who live to their great both toil and grief,
where the blasphemies of arians are renewed by them ; who,
to hatch their heresy, have chosen those churches as fittest nests
where athanasius's creed is not heard. ahooker.
4. to form by meditation; to contrive.
he was a man harmless and faithful, and one who never
hatched any hopes prejudicial to the king, but always intended
his safety and honour. hayward.
5. [from hacher, to cut.] to shade by lines in drawing or
graving.
who first shall wound, through others arms, his blood
- appearing fresh,
shall win this sword, silver'd and hatcht.
such as agamemnon and the hand of greece
should hold up high in brass; and such again
as venerable nestor, hatch'd in silver,
should with a bond of air, strong as the axle-tree
on which heav'n rides, knit all the grecian ears
to his experienc'd tongue. shakes care.
those tender hairs, and those hatching strokes cf the pen-
cil, which make a kind of minced meat in painting, are ne-
ver able to deceive the fight. dryden.
to hatch. v. n.
1. to be in the state of growing quick.
he observed circumstances in eggs, whilst they were hatch-
ing, which varied. boyle.
2. to be in a state of advance towards effect.
hatch, n. s. [from the verb.]
1. a brood excluded from the egg.
2. the act of exclusion from the egg.
3. disclosure; discovery.
something's in his soul,
o'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
and, i do doubt, the hatch and the disclose
will be some danger. shakespeare's hamlet.
4. [ha-ca, saxon; hecke, dutch, a bolt.]. a half door; a door
with opening over it: perhaps from hacher, to cut, as a hatch
is part of a door cut in two.
something about, a little from the right,
in at the window, or else o'er the hatch. shakespeare.
5. [in the plural.] i he doors or openings by which they descend
from one deck or floor of a ship to another.
‘i o the king's ship, invisible as thou art,
there shalt thou find the mariners asleep
under the hatches. shakespeare's tempest.
there she's hid ;
the mariners all under hatches stow'd. shakesp. temps?.
so seas, impell’d by winds with added pow'r,
denham.
milion.
chapman.
assault the sides, and o'er the hatches tow'r, dryden.
a ship was fasten’d to the shore;
. the plank was ready laid for safe ascent,
for shelter there the trembling shadow bent,
and skip'd and sculk'd, and under hatches went. dryden.
6. to be under hatches.
verty, or depression. -
he asures us how this fatherhood continued its course, ’till
the captivity in egypt, and then the poor fatherhood was
under hatches. locke.
7. hatches. floodgates. ainsworth.
70 hatchel. v. a. shachelen, german.] to beat flax so
as to separate the fibrous from the brittle part.
to be in a state of ignominy, po-
the asbestos, mentioned by kircher in his description of
china, put into water, moulders like clay, and is a fibrous
small excrescence, like hairs growing upon the stones ; and
for the hatchelling, spinning, and weaving it, he refers to his
mundus subterraneus. //codward.
hatchel. m. s. [from the verb ; hachel, german.] the in-
strument with which flax is beaten.
hatc heller. m. s. [from hatchel.] a beater of flax.
hatchet. m. s. shache, hachette, french ; ascia, latin.]
a small axe.
the hatchet is to hew the irregularities of fluff. moxan.
his harmful hatchet he hent in his hand,
and to the field he speedeth. spensor.
ye shall have a hempen caude then, and the help of a
hatchet. shakspeare’s henry vi.
nails, hammers, hatchet: sharp, and halters strong,
- crashaw.
tyrrheus, the foster-father of the beast,
then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fist. dryden.
our countryman presented him with a curious hatchet ; and
asking him whether it had a good edge, tried it upon the
donor. addison.
hatc het-face. m. s. an ugly face; such, i suppose, as
might be hewn out of a block by a hatchet. -
an ape his own dear image will embrace;
an ugly beau adores a hatchet-face. dryden.
ha’t chmen t. m. s. [corrupted from atchievement. see at-
chievement.] armorial escutcheon placed over a door at
a funeral.
his means of death, his obscure funeral,
no trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
no noble rites nor formal ostentation,
cry to be heard. shakespeare.
ha’rchway. m. s. [hatches and way.] the way over or
through the hatches.
to hate. v. a. spazian, saxon.] to detest ; to abhor; to
abominate; to regard with the passion contrary to love.
you are, i think, assur’d i love you not.
—your majesty hath no just cause to hate me. shakespeare.
do all men kill the thing they do not love?
—hates any man the thing he would not kill
—ev'ry offence is not a hate at first. shakespeare.
those old inhabitants of thy holy land thou hats for doing
most odious works. ///d. xii. 4.
but whatsoever our jarring fortunes prove, -
though our lords hate, methinks we two may love. dryden.
hate. m. s. space, saxon.] malignity; detestation; the con-
trary to love.
speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
your favours nor your hate. shakespeare.
have to mezentius, arm'd five hundred more. dryden.
nausicaa teaches that the afflicled are not always the objects
of divine hate. . . broome's notes on the odyssey.
hateful. adj. [hate and full.]
1. that which causes abhorrence; odious; abominable; de-
testable. .
my name's macbeth.
—the devil himself could not pronounce a title
more hateful to mine ear. shakespeare.
there is no vice more hat ful to god and man than ingra-
titude. - - peacham.
what owe i to his commands
who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down,
to fit in hateful office here confin'd,
inhabitant of heav'n, and heav'nly born ? milton.
i hear the tread
of hateful steps: i must be viewless now. milton.
but umbriel, hateful gnome 1 forbears not so;
he breaks the vial whence the sorrows flow. pope.
2. that which feels abhorrence; abhorrent; detesting; malig-
nant; malevolent.
palamon, compell’d
no more to try the fortune of the field;
and, worse than death, to view with hateful eyes
his rival's conquest. -
hatefully. adv. [from hateful.]
1. odiously; abominably.
2. malignantly; maliciously.
all their hearts stood hatefully appaid
long since. chapman.
they shall deal with thee hatefully, take away all thy la-
bour, and leave thee naked and bare. ezek. xxiii. 29.
hateful ness. m. s. [from hateful..] odiousness.
hater. n.s. [from hate.] one that hates; an abhorrer; a
detester. -
i of her understood of that most noble constancy, which
whosoever loves not, shews himself to be a hater of virtue,
dryden.
and unworthy to live in the society of mankind. sidney.
whilst he stood up and spoke, ..
he was my master, and i wore my life
to spend upon his haters. shakespeare.
an enemy to god, and a hater of all good. 7'0tun.
they<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 992</div><p class="text">h a v
h a v
they never wanted so much knowledge as to inform and
col.i.ate them of the unlawfulness of a man's being a mu-
derer, an hater of god, and a covenant-breaker. - south.
ha's rep. n.s.. [from hate.] hate; ill-will; malignity; ma-
jevolence; dislike; abhorrence; detestation; abomination ;
the passion contrary to love. - - -
fiored is the thought of the pain which any thing present
or absent is apt to produce in us. locke.
i wish i had a cause to seek him there,
to oppose his hatred fully. - shakespeare:
hatrol is the passion of defiance, and there is a kind of
aversation and hostility included in its very effence; but then,
if there could have been haired in the world when there was
searce any thing odious, it would have acted within the com-
pass of its proper object. south.
hatreds are often begotten from slight and almost innocent
occasions, and quarrels propagated in the world. locke.
retain no malice nor hatred against any : be ready to do
them all the kindness you are able. jwake.
she is a presbyterian of the most rank and virulent kind,
and consequently has an inveterate hatred to the church. swift.
hatred has in it the guilt of murder, and lust the guilt of
adultery. sherlock.
to hatter. v. a. [perhaps corrupted from latter.] to
harass; to weary; to wear out with fatigue.
he's hatter'd out with penance. dryden.
hatter. m. s. [from hat..] a maker of hats.
a hatter sells a dozen of hats for five shillings a-piece. swift.
ha’ttock. n.s.. [attock, erse.] a shock of corn. dic.
hau'berk. n.j. [hauberg, old french..] a coat of mail; a
breastplate.
him on the hauberk struck the princess sore,
that quite disparted all the linked frame,
and pierced to the skin. fairy queen.
hauberks and helms are hew’d with many a wound 5.
the mighty maces with such haste descend,
they break the bones, and make the solid armour too,
dryden.
to have. v. a. in the present i have, thou has, he hath ; we,
ye, they have ; pret. and part. pass had [haban, gothick;
pabban, saxon; helben, dutch ; avoir, french ; avere, ital.]
i. not to be without.
i have brought him before you, that after examination had
i might have something to write. acts, xxv. 26.
2. to carry; to wear. -
upon the mast they saw a young man, who sat as on horse-
back, having nothing upon him. sidney.
3. to make use of.
i have no levite to my priest. judges.
4. to possess.
he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that ga-
thered little had no lack. exod. xvi. 18.
5. to obtain; to enjoy; to possess.
now, o father, glorify me with thine own self, with the
glory which i had with thee before the world was, jo. xvii. 5.
6. to take; to receive.
a secret happiness, in petronius, is called curiosa flicitas,
and which i suppose he had from the feliciter auders of ho-
race. dryden.
7. to be in any state; to be attended with or united to as acci-
dent or concomitant.
have i need of madmen, that ye have brought this fel-
low * 1 sami. xxi. 15.
8. to put ; to take.
that done, go and cart it, and have it away. toffor.
9. to procure; to find.
i would have any one name to me that tongue, that one
can speak as he should do, by the rules of grammar. locke.
10. not to negle&amp;t; not to omit.
i cannot speak; if my heart be not ready to burst well,
sweet jack, have a care of thyself. shakespeare's henry iv.
your plea is good; but still i say beware :
laws are explain'd by men; so have a care. pope.
11. to hold; to regard.
of the maid servants shall i be had in honour. 2 sam.
the proud have had me greatly in derificn. psalms.
12. to maintain; to hold opinion.
sometimes they will have them to be natural heat, whereas
some of them are crude and cold; and sometimes they will
have them to be the qualities of the tangible parts, whereas
they are things by themselves. s*** bacon
13. to contain. -
you have of these pedlars that have more in 'em than you'd
think, sister. shakespeare.
i will never trust a man again for keeping his sword clean;
nor believe he can have ever - - - - - -
y thing in him, by wearing his
apparel neatly. c , dy rx
- shakespeare.
14. to require; to claim. speare
. ...what would these madmen have 2
first they would bribe us without pence,
... us without common sense,
nd with 'r ,
out pow'r enslave, i}ryden,
-
16. to be engaged, as in a task or emp
19. it is most used in english, as in other european lan
- - ties
ha’ver is a common word in the northern “”
15. to be a husband or wife to another,
if i had been married to him, for
all he was ;. -
apparel, i would not have had him. e was in woman';
sha {e
loyment. *star,
if we maintain things that are established
with a number of heavy prejudices, deeply o **have to flows
of men. ooted in the hearts
the spaniards captain never hat, to meddle with #:
- r s loi-
diers pay. speoser on lo
of the evils which hindered the peace a
of that land, the inconvenience of the law, was the first
which you had in hand. so...;
in !eal ...; - - . ireland.
kings have to deal with their neighbours, their wives o:
y *
children, their prelates or clergy, their nobles, their merch
and their commons. i chants
nd good orderin,
17. to wish; to desire: in a lax sense. basin,
i had rather be a door-keeper in the -
to dwell in the tents of wo. house of my go thin
i would have no man discouraged with that kind of .
series of actions, in which the choice of other. lse of
necessities, may have engaged him. , or nis own
18. to buy. aidon.
if these trifles were rated only by ar so...!
should have them much .." y art and *:
as an auxiliary verb to make the tenses; hav. off guages,
or has, the preterperfeot; and had and hift o:
perfect. (crpiu-
if there had been words enow between them to have ex
pressed provocation, they had gone together by the ears. -
i have heard one of the greatest geniuses this o:
duced, who had been trained up in all the polite flies of all-
tiquity, assure me, upon his being obliged to search into.
cords, that he at last took an incredible pleasure init. moss.
i have not here considered custom as it makes things ef -
but as it renders them delightful; and though others #!
made the same reflections, it is possible they may not have
drawn those uses from it. addison.
that admirable precept which pythagoris is said to so,
given to his disciples, and which that philosopher must have
drawn from the observation i have enlarged upon. addison.
the gods have placed labour before virtue. addison,
this observation we have made on man. addison.
evil spirits have contracted in the body habits of lusion:
sensuality, malice and revenge. addison,
there torments have already taken root in them. alior,
that excellent author has shewn how every particular cul-
tom and habit of virtue will, in its own nature, produce the
heaven, or a state of happiness, in him who shall hereafter
practise it. addison.
20. have at, or with, is an expression denoting resolution to
make some attempt. they seem to be imperative expressions;
have this at you; let this reach you, or take this; have with you;
take this with you : but this will not explain have at it, or have
at him, which must be considered as more elliptical; as, we
will have a trial at it, or at him.
he that will caper with me for a thousand marks, let him
lend me the money, and have at him. shatsouri.
i can bear my part; 'tis my occupation: have of it with
you. shakstart,
i never was out at a mad frolick, though this is the maddest
i ever undertook: have with you, lady mine; i take "."
your word. dydn,
haven. n.s.. [haven, dutch; hatre, french.]
1. a port; a harbour; a station for ships.
love was threatened and promised to him, and his cos,
as both the tempest and haven of their best years. sidij.
order for sea is given: s:
they have put forth the haven. o
after an hour and a half sailing, we entered into *.*
haven, being the port of a fair city. - ...!!.
the queen scheld, as soon as day appeard,
the navy under sais, the haven clear'd. donham,
we may be shipwreck'd by her breath:
love, favour’d once with that sweet gale,
doubles his haste, and fills his sail,
*till he arrive, where she must prove is...hr
the haven, or the rock of love. unior a
2. a shelter; an asylum. -
all places, that the eye of heaven visits, softaro
are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
ha’v ener. m. s. [from haven.] an overloo of a port.
these carss and dukes appointed their special offico, 25
- caro,
receiver, havener, and customer. 1
ha’v er. m. s. [from have.] possessor; holder.
valour is the chiefest virtue, and soft.*
- - ', 'co- t -
most dignifies the haver. for 04:5;
crly 40th f;0s,
as, haver bread for oaten bread: perhapo po rly ave",
avona, latin.
when you would anneal,
e
he
take a blue stone, such as.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 993</div><p class="text">h a u.
h a v
make haver or oat cakes upon, and lay it upon the cross bars
of iron. peacham.
haught. adj. [haut, french.]
1. haughty; insolent; proud; contemptuous; arrogant, ob-
solete.
- the proud insulting queen,
with clifford and the haught northumberland,
have wrought the easy melting king, like wax. shakesp.
no lord of thine, thou haught insulting man;
nor no man's lord. shakespeare.
2. high 5 proudly magnanimous.
*** | his courage haught,
desir'd of foreign foemen to be known,
and far abroad for strange adventures sought. spensor.
o ha'u ghtily. adv. [from haughty.] proudly; arrogantly;
contemptuously.
o her heav'nly form too haughtily she priz'd;
*: his person hated, and his gifts despis'd. dryden.
ha'u ghtiness. n.s.. [from haughty.] pride; arrogance; the
quality of being haughty. -
• * by the head we make known our supplications, our threat-
- nings, our mildness, our haughtings, our love, and our ha-
- - tred. dryden.
haughty. adj. [hautaine, french.]
1. proud ; lofty; insolent; arrogant; contemptuous.
his wise, being a woman of a haughty and imperious na-
ture, and of a wit superior to his, quickly resented the disre-
spect she received from him. clarendon.
i shall sing of battles, blood and rage,
and haughty souls, that mov’d with mutual hate,
- in fighting fields pursu'd and found their fate. dryden,
-- 2. proudly great.
o our vanquish’d wills that pleasing force obey:
- her goodness takes our liberty away;
- and haughty britain yields to arbitrary sway. prior.
3. bold; adventurous; of high hazard. obsolete.
who now shall give me words and sound
equal unto this haughty enterprize :
or who shall lend me wings, with which from ground
my lowly verse may loftily arise 2 fairy queen.
ha’v ing.. n.s.. [from have.]
1. possession; estate ; fortune.
my having is not much ;
i'll make division of my present with you:
hold, there's half my coffer.
2. the act or state of possessing. -
of the one side was alleged the having a picture, which
the other wanted; of the other side, the first striking the
shield. sidney.
thou art not for the fashion of these times,
where none will sweat but for promotion ;
and having that, do choak their service up, -
even with the having. shakesp. as you like it.
. behaviour; regularity. this is still retained in the scottish
diale&amp;t. it may possibly be the meaning here. -
the gentleman is of no having : he kept company with
the wild prince and poinz : he is of too high a region ; he
shakespeare.
- knows too much. shakespeare.
- ha'viour. n. s. [for behaviour.] conduct; manners. not
--- used.
• - their ill haviour garres men missay
. . . both of their doctrines and their fay. spenser.
--- 7, haul. v. a. [haler, french, to draw.] to pull; to draw;
to drag by violence. a word which, applied to things, im-
o plies violence; and, to persons, aukwardness or rudeness.
- this word is liberally exemplified in hale; etymology is re-
:-- garded in hale, and pronunciation in haul.
o thy dol, and helen of thy noble thoughts,
-- is in base durance and contagious prison,
- haul'd thither by mechanick dirty hands. shakespeare.
the youth with songs and rhimes,
some dance, some haul the rope. denham.
-- some the wheels prepare,
o- and fasten to the horses feet; the rest
with cables haul along th' unwieldly beast. dryden.
..". in his grandeur he naturally chuses to haul up others after
* him whose accomplishments most resemble his own. swift.
thither they bent, and haul'd their ships to land;
t. e crooked keel divides the yellow sand. pope.
romp-loving miss
is haul’d about in gallantry robust. . - thomson.
* haul. m. s. [from the verb.] pull; violence in draggiog.
- the leap, the slap, the haul. thomson,
o haum. m. s. [or hame, or halin; pealm, saxon ; halh, dutch
o and jdanish.j straw.
- in champion countrie a pleasure they take
o to mow up their haume for to brew and to bake:
- the haume is the straw of the wheat or the rie, -
o which once being reaped, they mow by and by. tosor.
--&gt; having stripped off the haum or binds from the poles, as
you pick the hops, stack them up. airtimer;
haunch. n.s.. [hancke, dutch ; hanche, french; anca, italian.]
o vol. i.
1. the thigh; the hind hip,
hail, groom | didst thou not see a bleeding hind,
whose right haunch earst my stedfast arrow stake? spensor,
to make a man able to teach his horse to stop and turn
guisk, and to rest on his haunches, is of use to a gentleman
both in peace and war.
2. the rear; the hind part. locke,
thou art a summer bird,
which ever in the haunch of winter fings
the lifting up of day. shakespeare.
to haunt. v. a. [hanter, french.]
i. to frequent ; to be much about any place or person.
a man who for his hospitality is so much haunted, that no
news stir but come to his ears. sidney.
now we being brought known unto her, after once we
were acquainted, and acquainted we were sooner than our-
selves expected, she continually almost haunted us.
- sidney.
i do haunt thee in the battle thus,
because some tell me that thou art a king. shakespeare.
she this dang'rous forest haunts,
and in sad accents utters her complaints, waller,
earth now
secur'd like to heav'n, a seat where gods might dwell,
or wander with delight, and love to haunt
her sacred shades.
celestial venus haunts idalia's groves;
diana cynthus, ceres hybla loves. pope,
2. it is used frequently in an ill sense of one that comes unwel-
conne. w
you wrong me, sir, thus still to hannt my house;
i told you, fir, my daughter is dispos'd of. shakespeare,
oh, could i see my country-seat i
there leaning near a gentle brook,
sleep, or peruse some ancient book;
and there in sweet oblivion drown
those cares that haunt the court and town. swift,
3. it is eminently used of apparitions or spectres that appear in
a particular place.
foul spirits haunt my resting place,
and ghastly visions break my sleep by night.
all these the woes of oedipus have known,
your fates, your furies, and your haunted town. pope.
to haunt. v. n. to be much about; to appear frequently.
i’ve charged thee not to haunt about my doors: -
in honest plainness thou hast heard me say,
my daughter's not for thee. shakespeare's o:hollo.
where they most breed and haunt, i have observ'd
the air is delicate. shakespeare's macbeth.
haunt. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. place in which one is frequently found.
we set toils, nets, gins, snares and traps, for beasts and
milton,
fairfax.
birds in their own haunts and walks. l'estrange.
to me pertains not, she replies,
to know or care where cupid flies;
what are his haunts, or which his way,
where he would dwell, or whither stray. prior,
a scene where, if a god should cast his fight,
a god might gaze and wonder with delight !
joy touch'd the messenger of heav'n , he stay'd
entranc'd, and all the blissful haunt survey'd,
2. habit of being in a certain place.
the haunt you have got about the courts will one day or
another bring your family to beggary. - arbuthnot.
ha'unter. m. s. [from haunt..] frequenter; one that is often
found in any place. -
the ancient grecians were an ingenious people, of whom
the vulgar fort, such as were haunters of theatres, took plea-
sure in the conceits of aristophanes. wotton on education,
o goddess, haunter of the woodland green,
queen of the nether skies. dryden.
ha(vock. n.s.. [hafog, welsh, devastation.] waste; wide and
general devastation; merciless destruction.
having been never used to have any thing of their own,
they make no spare of any thing, but havock and confusion of
all they meet with. spenser on ireland.
saul made havock of the church. aeïs, viii. 3.
ye gods ! what havock does ambition make
among your works' addison's cato,
the rabbins, to express the great havock which has been
made of the jews, tell us, that there were such torrents of
holy blood shed, as carried rocks of a hundred yards in cir-
cumference above three miles into the sea. addison,
if it had either air or fuel, it must make a greater havock
than any history mentions. cheyne.
ha vock. interj. [from the noun..] a word of encourage-
ment to slaughter.
why stand these royal fronts amazed thus?
pope.
cry havock, kings shakespeare.
ate by his side,
cries havock 1 and lets loose the dogs of war. shakes care.
to ha'vock. v. a. [from the noun.]
to waste; to destroy ;
to lay waste.
ii b
whatsoever
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 994</div><p class="text">h a w
h a z
whatsoever they leave, the soldier spoileth and *:::::.
so that, between both, nothing is left. penser.
see, with what heat these dogs of hell advance,
to waste and havock yonder world, which i ilt
so fair and good created 1. -- - - milton.
ha’utboy, n.s.. [haut and bois.]. a wind instrument. igh f haw:
i told john of gaunt he beat his own name; for you mig o now hawthorns bloss. awthorn held. dodo,
have truss'd him and all his apparel into an eel-skin: the case *..." i on), now the daisies spring, po.
of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him. shakespeare. * € /2470t/?orn w. o ins thanjin.
now give the hautboys breath; he comes, he comes. dryden. ha wo o 77. s: || . inse&amp;t. -
ha(ut boy strawberry. see str aw berry. the hawthorn fly is ack, and not big. wahn.
haw. m. s. [pas, . hawth "...s.o. *xon; hoy, dutch.j graf, dried to
- eed of the hawthorn. - - -
1. t ho. bramble with kernel and haw. tussor. make hay while the sun shines.
sort which produces the smallest leaves is preferabl
its branches always grow close together. o, to
there is a man haunts the forest, that abuses o mikr.
plants with carving rosalind on their barks; hangs youn
hawthorns, and elegies on brambles. shakes, o o
some in their hands, beside the lance and #. like it.
the boughs of woodbine or o *
because
&gt; camden', romain
d hips portend cold winters. make poor men's cattle break their necks : -
store of haws and hips p bacon's natural history. set fire on barns and hay stacks in the night,'
his quarrel to the hedge was, that his thorns and his bram- and bid the owners quench them with
heir tears. shaft.
bles did not bring forth raisins, rather than haws #. o: have heats of dungs, and of %); and herbs his o
- 7"ange. - -
2 'one in the eye. g or if the earlier season lead bao,
3. [paga, saxon; haw, a garden, danish..] a small piece of to the tann'd hay cock in the mead. millin,
ground adjoining to an house. in scotland they call it haugh. bring them for food sweet boughs and offers cut,
upon the haw at plymouth is cut out in the ground the nor all the winter long thy jok shut... my, virgil.
portraiture of two men, with clubs in their hands, whom they some turners turn long and slender sprigs of ivory, as finis
term gog and magog. - carew. as an * o: / k amoon,
to haw. v. n. [perhaps corrupted from hawk or hack.] to oy some boy cock, or some shady thom,
speak slowly with frequent intermission and hesitation. he bids his beads both even song and morn. dydn,
'tis a great way; but yet, after a little humming and haw-. the best manure for meadows is the bottom of has so.
ing upon't, he agreed to undertake the job. l’estrange. and hay stacks. - fortimor.
hawk. n.s.. [habog, welsh; paroc, saxon; accipiter.] hoy and oats, in the management of a groom, will make
1. a bird of prey, used much anciently in sport to catch other ale. swift,
birds. -
to dance the hay. to dance in a ring; probably from d.
ncing
do'st thou love hawking thou hast hawks will soar
above the morning lark. shakespeare.
it can be no more disgrace to a great lord to draw a fair
pisure, than to cut his hawk's meat. peacham.
whence borne on liquid wing
the sounding culver shoots; or where the hawk,
high in the beetling cliff, his airy builds. thomson.
2. [hoch, welsh. an effort to force phlegm up the throat.
to hawk. v. n. [from hawk.]
1. to fly hawks at fowls; to catch birds by means of a hawk.
ride unto st. alban's,
whereas the king and queen do mean to hawk. shakespeare.
one followed study and knowledge, and another hawking
and hunting. locke.
he that hawks at larks and sparrows has no less sport, though
a much less considerable quarry, than he that flies at nobier
game. locke.
a falc'ner henry is, when emma hawks;
with her of tarsels and of lures he talks. prior.
2. to fly at ; to attack on the wing.
a faulcon tow'ring in her pride of place,
was by a mousing owl havcd at and kill’d. shakes care.
whether upward to the moon they go, -
or dream the winter out in caves below,
orhawk at flies elsewhere, concerns us not to know. dryden.
3. [hoch, welsh.] to force up phlegm with a noise.
come, fit, fit, and a song. shall we clap into’t round-
ly, without hawking or spitting, or saying we are hoarse,
which are the only prologues to a bad voice? shakespeare.
she complained of a stinking tough phlegm which she
hao'ed up in the mornings. //iseman.
blood, cast out of the throat or windpipe, is spit out with
a hawking or small cough; that out of the gums is spit out
without hawking, coughing, or vomiting. harvey.
4. to sell by proclaiming it in the streets. [from hock, german,
a falcfman.]
his works were hawk'd in ev'ry street;
but seldom rose above a sheet. swift.
h*y*ed. adj. [from hawk.] formed like a hawk's bill.
flat noses seem comely unto the moor, an aquiline or
hawked one unto the persian, a large and prominent nose unto
the roman. brown's pulgar errours.
hawker. m. s. [from hock, german.] one who sells his
woos by proclaiming them in the fired.
!, saw my labours, which had cost me so much thought
bawled about by common hawkers, which i once intended
for the consideration of the greatest person. swift.
to grace this honour’d day the queen proclaims,
by herald hawkers, high heroick games:
she summons all her sons; an endless ban
pours forth, and leayes unpeopled half the land. pope.
hawkweed. n. s. a plant.
oxtongue is a species of this plant. miller.
howses. n.s. [of a "p.j. two round holes under the ship's
head or beak, through which the cables pass when she is at
anchor. harris.
ha worhorn. ”. s. spao, sonn, saxon.] a species of med.
lar; the thorn that bears haws; the white thorn.
in england is to make hedges:
of it about london; but that
-
the use to which it is applied
there are two or three varieties
round a hay cock.
i will play on the tabor to the worthies,
and let them dance the hay.
this maids think on the hearth they see,
when fires well nigh consumed be,
there dancing hays by two and three,
just as your fancy casts them.
the gun and glist'ning, which with at
and study'd method, in each part
hangs down,
looks just as if that day
snails there had crawl'd the hay. song.
hay. n.s.. [from haie, french, a hedge.] a net which inclos
the haunt of an animal.
coneys are destroyed by hoys, curs, spaniels, or tumblers
bred up for that purpose. mortimer.
haymaker. m. s. [aay and make.] one employed in dying
grass for hay.
as to the return of his health and vigour, were you here,
you might enquire of his haymakers. pope to swift.
hazard. m.j. [hazard, french; azar, spanish; hsi, ru-
nick, danger.]
1. chance; accident; fortuitous hap.
i have set my life upon a cast,
and i will stand the hazard of the die. shaksat.
i will upon all hazards well believe -
thou art my friend, that know'st my tongue so well.
- shakstar.
where the mind does not perceive conneetion, there men's
opinions are not the product of judgment, but the effects of
chance and hazard, of a mind floating at all adventures,
without choice and without direction. loft,
shaoffsaro.
drayton,
2. danger; chance of danger.
we are bound to yield unto our creator, the nther of:
mercy, eternal thanks, for that he hath delivered his law unto
the world; a law wherein so many things are laid open, *
light which otherwise would have been buried in darknes,
not without the hazard, or rather not with the hazard, but
with the certain loss of thousands of souls, most undoubtedly
now saved. - h.
the hazard i have run to see you here, should mo
that i love not at a common rate. ryan,
men are led on from one stage of life to another in a o:
dition of the utmost hazard, and yet without the o -
hension of their danger. - giri.
3. a game at dice.
o
the duke playing at hazard, held in a great many o
together, and drew a huge heap of gold. - it
a- - - ance ; [0
to hazard. v. a. [hazarder, fr.] to expose to r
put into danger. - - inion
they might, by persisting in the extremity of o
hazard greatly their own estates, and so weaken hoer,
which their places now give. f
- - - - to- rtune
it was not in his power to adventure upon his o so
or bearing a publick charge to hazard himself agłł 11:4}d.
of private condition. hizar!
- - - - aw huza'
by dealing indifferently mercies to all, you may
sheiko.
your own share.
to hazard. v. n.
1. to try the chance.
i pos
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 995</div><p class="text">h e a
o
i pray you tarry; pause a day or two,
before you hazard; for in chufing wrong,
i lose your company. -
shakespeare.
2. to adventure; to run the danger.
she from her fellow-provinces would go,
rather than hazard to have you her foe. waller.
ha’zardable. adj. [from hazard.] venturous; liable to
chance.
an hazardable determination it is, unto fluetuating and in-
different effects, to affix a positive type or period.
ha’zar der. m. s. [from hazard.] he who hazards.
ha’z ardry. n.s.. [from hazard.] temerity; precipitation;
rash adventurousness. obsolete.
hasty wrath, and heedless hazardry,
do breed repentance late, and lasting infamy. spenser.
ha’za rdous. adj. [hazardeux, fr. from hazard..] dangerous;
exposed to chance.
grant that our hazardous attempt prove vain,
we feel the worst, secur'd from greater pain.
ha’z ardously. adv. [from hazardous.]
chance.
haze. n.s.. [the etymology unknown.] fog; mist.
to haze. v. n. to be foggy or misty.
to haze. v. a. to fright one. ainsworth.
hazel. n.s.. [barel, saxon; corylus, lat.] nut tree.
the nuts grow in clusters, and are closely joined together
at the bottom, each being covered with an outward husk or
cup, which opens at the top, and when the fruit is ripe it
falls out. the species are hazelnut, cobnut, and filbert.
the red and white filberts are mostly esteemed for their fruit.
brown.
dryden.
with danger or
miller.
kate, like the hazel twig,
is straight and slender ; and as brown in hue
as hazel nuts, and sweeter than the kernels. shakespeare.
her chariot is an empty hazel nut. shakespeare.
why fit we not beneath the grateful shade,
which hazels, intermix’d with elms, have made : dryden.
there are some from the size of a hazle nut to that of a
man's fist. jwoodward.
ha'zel. adj. [from the noun..] light brown ; of the colour
of hazle.
chuse a warm dry soil, that has a good depth of light hazel
mould. amortimer.
hazelly. adj. of the colour of hazel; a light brown.
uplands consist either of sand, gravel, chalk, rock or stone,
hazelly loam, clay, or black mould. mortimer.
ha’zy. adj. [from haze.] dark; foggy; misty.
our clearest day here is misty and hazy; we see not far,
and what we do see is in a bad light. burnet's theory.
oftengender'd by the hazy north,
myriads on myriads, insect armies waft. thomson.
he. pronoun, gen. him; plur, they ; gen. them. [hy, dutch; pe,
saxon. it seems to have borrowed the plural from sir, plu-
ral bar, dative birum.]
1. the man that was named before.
all the conspirators, save only he,
did that they did in envy of great caesar.
if much you note him,
you shall offend him, and increase his passion ;
feed and regard him not. shakespeare.
i am weary of this moon ; would he would change. shakesp.
adam spoke;
shakespeare.
so cheer'd he his fair spouse, and she was cheer'd. milton.
when adam wak'd, he on his side -
leaning half rais'd hung overher. milton.
thus talking, hand in hand along they pass'd
on to their blissful bow'rs. milton.
extol -
him first, him last, him midst. milton.
2. the man; the person. it sometimes stands without refe-
rence to any foregoing word.
he is never poor
that little hath, but he that much desires.
. man or male being.
3 such mortal drugs i have ; o mantua's law
- y he that utters them.
is death to any shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
i fland to answer thee, or any he the proudest of thy sort.
shakespeare.
trcs and his race the sculptor shall employ,
and he the god who built the walls of troy. dryden.
4. male: as, a he bear, a he goat. it is used where the male
and female have not different denominations.
the he's in birds have the fairest feathers. bacon.
# in the two last senses he is rather a noun than pronoun.
f
daniel.
old english, whence by contraction head...] . .
1. the part of the animal that contains the brain or the organ
of sensation or thought.
vein healing verven, and head purging dill. spenser.
over head up-grew -
milton,
insuperable height of loftiest shade.
7 --
ad. m. s. spearob, pearo, saxon; hoofd, dutch; howed,
h e a
the dewy paths of meadows we will tread,
for crowns and chaplets to adorn thy head. dryden.
i could still have offers, that some, who hold their heads
higher, would be glad to accept. swift.
2. person as exposed to any danger or penalty.
what he gets more of her than sharp words, let it lie on
my head. shakespeare.
who of all ages to succeed, but feeling -
the evil on him brought by me, will cuise
my head? ill fare our ancestor impure.
3. he ad and ears. the whole person.
in jingling rhimes well fortify'd and strong,
he fights intrench'd o'er head and ears in song.
4. denomination of any animals.
when innocent desired the marquis of carpio to furnish
thirty thousand head of swine, he could not spare them ; but
thirty thousand lawyers he had at his service. addison.
the tax upon pasturage was raised according to a certain
rate per head upon cattle. arbuthnot.
5. chief; principal person; one to whom the rest are subordi-
nate ; leader; commander.
for their commons, there is little danger from them, ex-
cept it be where they have great and potent heads.
your head i him appoint;
and by myself have sworn, to him shall bow
all knees in heav'n, and shall confess him lord. milton.
the heads of the chief se&amp;ts of philosophy, as thales,
anaxagoras, and pythagoras, did consent to this tradition.
tillotson.
6. place of honour; the first place.
notwithstanding all the justices had taken their places upon
the bench, they made room for the old knight at the head of
them. addison.
7. place of command.
an army of fourscore thousand troops, with the duke of
marlborough at the head of them, could do nothing.
addison on the war.
milton.
granville.
bacon.
8. countenance; presence.
richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
shakespeare's richard ii.
with cain go wander through the shade of night,
and never shew thy head by day or light. shakespeare.
ere to-morrow's sun shall shew his head. dryden.
9. understanding; faculties of the mind: commonly in a ludi-
crous sense.
the wenches laid their head; together. l’estrange.
a fox and a goat went down a well to drink : the goat fell
to hunting which way to get back; oh, says reynard, never
trouble your head, but leave that to me. l’estrange.
work with all the ease and speed you can, without break-
ing your head, and being so very industrious in starting
scruples. dryden.
the lazy and inconsiderate took up their notions by
chance, without much beating their head, about them. locke.
if a man shews that he has no religion, why should we
think that he beats his head and troubles himself to examine
the grounds of this or that doctrine : locke.
when in ordinary discourse we say a man has a fine head,
we express ourselves metaphorically, and speak in relation to
his understanding; and when we say of a woman she has a
fine head, we speak only in relation to her commode. addison.
we laid our heads together, to confider what grievances
the nation had suffered under king george. addison.
io. face; front; fore part.
the gathering crowd pursues;
the ravishers turn head, the fight renews. dryden.
ii. resistance; hostile opposition.
then made he head against his enemies,
and hymner slew. fairy queen.
sometimes hath henry bolingbroke made head against my
power. shakespeare.
two valiant gentlemen making head against them, seconded
by half a dozen more, made forty run away. raleigh.
sin having depraved his judgment, and got possession of his
will, there is no other principle left him naturally, by which
he can make head against it. outh.
12. spontaneous resolution.
the bordering wars in this kingdom were made altogether
by voluntaries, upon their own head, without any pay or
commission from the state. davies.
13. state of a deer's horns, by which his age is known.
it was a buck of the first head. . shakespeare.
the buck is called the fifth year a buck of the first head.
shakespeare.
14. individual. it is used in numbers or computation.
if there be fix millions of people, then there is about four
acres for every head. graunt.
15. the top of any thing bigger than the rest. -
his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron. 1 sam.
as high
as his proud head is rais'd towards the sky,
so low tow’rds hell his roots descend. denham.
- trees,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 996</div><p class="text">h e a
h e a
trees, which have large and spreading head, would lie
with their branches up in the water. woodward.
if the buds are made our food, they are called head; or
tops; so head of asparagus and artichoaks. watts.
head is an equivocal term ; for it signifies the head of a
nail, or of a pin, as well as of an animal. watts.
16. the fore part of any thing, as of a ship.
by gallies with brazen head; she might transport ove. indus
at once three hundred thousand soldiers. raleigh.
his gallies moor;
their head, are turn'd to sea, their sterns to shore. dryden.
17. that which rises on the top. -
let it stand in a tub four or five days before it be put into
the cask, stirring it twice a-day, and beating down the head
or yeast into it. mortimer.
18. the blade of an axe.
a man fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree,
and the head slippeth from the helve. deut. xix. 5.
19. upper part of a bed.
israel bowed upon the bed's head.
20. the brain.
as eastern priests in giddy circles run,
and turn their heads to imitate the sun. pope.
21. dress of the head. -
ladies think they gain a point when they have teazed
their husbands to buy them a laced head, or a fine petticoat.
- swift.
gen. xlvii. 31.
22. principal topick of discourse.
these heads are of a mixed order, and we propose only such
as belong to the natural world. burmet's theory.
'tis our great interest, and duty, to satisfy ourselves on
this head, upon which our whole conduct depends. atterbury.
23. source of a stream.
it is the glory of god to give ; his very nature delighteth
in it: his mercies in the current, through which they would
pass, may be dried up, but at the head they never fail. hooker.
the current by gaza is but a small stream, rising between
it and the red sea, whose head from gaza is little more than
twenty english miles. raleigh's history.
some did the song, and some the choir maintain,
beneath a laurel shade, where mighty po
mounts up to woods above, and hides his head below. dryd.
24. crisis ; pitch,
the indisposition which has long hung upon me, is at last
grown to such a head, that it must quickly make an end of
me, or of itself. addison.
25. power; influence; force; strength; dominion.
within her breast though calm, her breast though pure,
motherly cares and fears got head, and rais'd
some troubled thoughts. milton.
26. body; conflux.
people under command chuse to consult, and after to march
in order; and rebels, contrariwise, run upon an head together
in confusion. bacon.
a mighty and a fearful head they are,
as ever offer'd foul play in a state. shakespeare.
far in the marches here we heard you were,
making another head to fight again. shakes care.
let all this wicked crew gather
their forces to one head. ben.johnson.
27. power ; armed force.
my lord, my lord, the french have gather'd head. shafts.
at sixteen years,
when tarquin made a head for rome, he sought
beyond the mark of others. shakes are,
28. liberty in running a horse.
he gave his able horse the head,
and bounding forward struck his agile heels
against the panting sides of his poor jade
up to the rowel-head. shakes care.
* ;freedom from restraint; a metaphor from horseman-
!p.
god will not admit of the passionate man's apology, that
he has so long given his unruly passions their head, that he can-
not now govern nor controul them. south.
30. it is very improperly applied to roots.
how turneps hide their swelling head; below,
and how the closing coleworts upwards grow. gay.
31. head and shoulders. by force; violently.
...pople that hit upon a thought that tickles them, will be
still bringing it in by head and shoulders, over and over, in
several companies. l’estrange.
they bring in every figure of speech, head and shoulders by
main force, in spite of nature and their subject. felton.
ho adj. chief; principal; as, the head workman; the head
the horse made their escape to winchester, the head
quarters.
t., head. v. a. [from the noun.] clarendon.
*. to lead; to influence; to direct; to govern.
abas, who seem'd our friend, is either fled
” what we fear, our enemies does had.” dryden.
4.
nor is what has been said of princes les, tr
governours, from him that heads an arm
of a family, or of one single servant.
true of all of
y to him that is mo
this lord had headed his appointed bands south,
in firm allegiance to his king's command.
2. to behead; to kill by taking away the head. prior.
if you had and hang all that offend that wa b
years together, you'll be glad to give out a . ut for ten
more heads. ommission for
3. to floany thing with a head, or principalpan shatson,
headed with flints and feathers bloody d o
arrows the indians in their quivers hide. y 'f !-- 6
of cornel-wood a spear upright, air, qun,
headed with piercing steel, and polish'd bright
4. to lop trees. -
you must disbranch them, leaving
it may be necessary to head them too.
head ach. a. s. [head and ach.j pain in the head
from the cruel headach, -
riches do not preserve.
nothing more exposes to headachs,
coughs, than keeping the head warm.
in the headach he orders the opening of the vein oft
head.
djin.
only the summit entire:
mrino,
sidn -
colds, catarihs, o
loft,
efore-
at some dear idle time, arbuthit,
not plagu'd with headachs, or the want of
headband. m. s. [head and band.]
1. a fillet for the head; a topknot.
the lord will take away the bonnets, and the ho
2. the band at each end of a book. isaiah,
headb9rough. n.s.. [head and borough..] a consible; ,
subordinate constable. 2.
here lies john dod, a servantof god, towhom he is gone
father or mother, sister or brother, he never known.'
a headborough and a constable, a man of fame, &gt;
the first of his house, and last of his name, camdo,
this none are able to break thorough,
until they're freed by head of borough. hudibra,
he address. m.s.. [head and dress.]
1. the covering of a woman's head.
there is not so variable a thing in nature as a lady's hol.
ihyme. post,
dress: i have known it rise and fall. adison,
if ere with airy horns i planted heads, -
or discompos'd the headdres of a prude. po.
2. o thing resembling a headdress, and prominent on th:
head.
among birds the males very often appear in a most beius.
ful headdress, whether it be a crest, a comb, a tuft offeathers,
or a natural little plume, erected like a kind of pinnacle on
the very top of the head. addiso,
he ader. m. s. [from head.]
1. one that heads nails or pins, or the hke,
2. the first brick in the angle.
if the header of one side of the wall is toothed as much is
the stretcher on the outfide, it would be a stronger toothing,
and the joints of the headers of one side would be in the so
dle of the headers of the course they lie upon of the **
off,
he’ado arcle. n.s.. [head and gargl.] a diseaso, iso
in cattle. -
for the headgargle give powder of fenugrek: mirimor,
headiness. n.). [from hady..] hurry; rathnes; stubboss-
ness; precipitation; obstinacy. - d
if any will rashly blame such his choice of old o uil-
wonted words, him may i more justly blame ** o
either of withess headings in judging, or of headless o .
in condemning. }ss,
he’adla nd. n.s.. [head and land.]
1. promontory; cape. • * , , * herokk
an heroick play ought to be an imitation of i. sub-
poem, and consequently love and valour ought to be aow:
jea of it: both these fit william davenono.
but it was so as discoverers draw their mo, with po.
and promontories. w
2. ground under hedges. about
now down with the grass upon headland; about, tsir,
that groweth in shadow so rank and so stout, s
he adless, adj. [from head.]
1. without an head; beheaded.
his shining helmet he 'gan soon unlace, soft.
and left his headloss body bleeding at to place.
were is a man, a duke, and next of blood,
i would remove these tedious stumbling blocks, soft”
and smooth my way upon their heads necks. *
on the cold'earth lies th' unregarded "#. dinho
a headloss carkass, and a nameless thing.
prickly stubs, instead of trees, * o &gt; djio,
headles; the most, and hideous to behold.
2. without a chief. it flirio
they rested not until they had made the emp".
less about seventeen years. 3. obstimao
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 997</div><p class="text">h e a
h e a
3. obstimate; inconsiderate; ignorant; wanting intelle&amp;lso
perhaps for heedless. - -
him may i more justly blame and condemn, either of wit-
less headiness in judging, or of heads, hardiness in condemn-
ing. spenser,
he’adlong. adj.
1. steep ; precipitous.
2. rash; thoughtless.
, sudden ; precipitate.
it suddenly fell from an excess of favour, which, many ex-
amples having taught them, never stopt his race ’till it came
to a headlong overthrow. sidney.
he’adlong. adv. [head and long.]
1. with the head foremost. it is often doubtful whether this
word be adjective or adverb.
i'll look no more,
lest my brain turn, and the deficient fight
topple down headlong. shakespeare.
who, while he steering view'd the stars, and bore
his course from africk to the latian shore,
fell headlong down. dryden.
headlong from thence the glowing fury springs,
and o'er the theban palace spreads her wings. pope.
2. rashly ; without thought; precipitately.
to give ahab such warning, as might infallibly have pre-
vented his destruction, was esteemed by him evil; and to push
him on headlong into it, because he was fond of it, was ac-
counted good. south.
some ask for envy'd pow'r, which publick hate
pursues and hurries headlong to their fate;
down go the titles. -
3. hastily; without delay or respite.
unhappy offspring of my teeming womb 1
dragg'd headling from thy cradle to thy tomb.
4. it is very negligently used by shakespeare.
hence will i drag thee headlong by the heels,
unto a dunghill, which shall be thy grave. shakespeare.
he"admould-shot. n.s.. [head, mould, and shot..] this is when
the sutures of the skull, generally the coronal, ride; that is,
have their edges shot over one another; which is frequent in
infants, and occasions convulsions and death. &amp;minoy,
he adpiece. m. s. [head and piece.]
i. armour for the head ; helmet; morion. -
i pulled off my headpiece, and humbly intreated her pardon,
dryden,
dryden.
or knowledge why she was cruel. sidney.
the word is giv'n ; with eager speed they lace
the shining headpiece, and the shield embrace. dryden.
a reason for this fiction of the one-eyed cyclops, was their
wearing a headpiece, or martial vizor, that had but one fight.
broome.
this champion will not come into the field, before his
great blunderbuss can be got ready, his old rusty breastplate
scoured, and his cracked headpiece mended. swift.
2. understanding; force of mind.
'tis done by some severals
of headpiece extraordinary, lower messes -
perchance are to this business purblind. shakespeare.
eumenes had the best headpiece of all alexander's cap-
tains. prideaux.
he adquarters. n.s.. [head and quarters.] the place of ge-
neral rendezvous, or lodgment for soldiers. this is properly
two words.
those spirits, posted upon the out-guards, immediately
scour off to the brain, which is the headquarters, or office of
intelligence, and there they make their report. collier.
he'adship. m. s. [from head..] dignity; authority ; chief
place.
he/adsman. m. s. [head and man.] executioner; one that
cuts off heads.
rods broke on our associates bleeding backs,
and headsmen lab’ring 'till they blunt their ax dryden.
ie’adst all. m. s. [head and slall.] part of the bridle that
covers the head.
his horse, with a half-cheek’d bit, and a head?all of sheep's
leather, which being restrained to keep him from stumbling,
hath been often burst, and now repaired with knots. shakesp.
headst on e. m. s. [head and stone..] the first or capital
ftone.
the stone, which the builders refused, is become the head-
æon. ps. cxviii. 24.
he adstron g. adj. shead and strong.] unrestrained; violent;
ungovernable; resolute to run his own way: as a horse whose
head cannot be held in.
an example, for headstrong and inconsiderate zeal, no less
fearful than achitophel for proud and irreligious wisdom.
- hooker.
how now, my heads?rong / where have you been gadding?
—where i have learnt me to repent the sin
of disobedient opposition. shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
but such a head, irong potent fault it is,
that it but mocks reproof. shakspeare's twelfth night,
vol. i.
he ill aspires to rule
cities of men or headstrong multitudes, -
subject himself to anarchy within. milton,
there's no opposing the torrent of a head?rong multitude.
l’estrange.
now let the headstrong boy my will controul:
virtue's no slave of man; no sex confines the soul:
i, for myself, th’ imperial seat will gain,
and he shall wait my leisure for his reign. dryden.
your father's folly took a head/lrong course;
but i’ll rule yours, and teach you love by force. dryden.
can we forget how the mad headstrong rout -
defy'd their prince to arms, nor made account
of faith or duty, or allegiance sworn ? phillips.
i'll try if yet i can reduce to reason
this head/frong youth, and make him spurn at cato. addis.
you will be both judge and party: i am sorry thou disco-
verest so much of thy headstrong humour. arbuthnot.
“he’adworkman. n.s.. [head work and man.] the foreman,
or chief servant over the rest. properly two words.
can wood be otherwise regarded than as the mechanick,
the headworkman, to prepare furnace and stamps ? swift.
he’ad.y. adj. [from head.]
1. rash; precipitate; hasty; violent; ungovernable; hurried
on with passion.
take pity of your town and of your people,
while yet the cool and temp'rate wind of grace
o'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds
of heady murther, spoil and villany.
i am advised what i say:
neither disturb’d with the effect of wine,
nor, heady rash, provok'd with raging ire ;
albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad. shakespeare.
i’ll forbear,
and am fall'n out with my more heady will,
to take the indispos'd and fickly fit
for the sound man.
wives, the readiest helps
to betray heady husbands, rob the easy, ben, johnson.
those only are regarded who are true to their party; and
all the talent required is to be hot, to be heady, to be violent
on one side or other. temple.
men, naturally warm and heady, are transported with the
greatest flush of good-nature. addison.
2. apt to affect the head.
i was entertained with a sort of wine which was very
heady, but otherwise seemed to be sack. boyle,
since hearty beef and mutton will not do,
here's julep-dance, ptisan of song and show:
give you strong sense, the liquor is too heady;
you're come to farce, that's asses milk, already. dryden.
flow, welsted flow, like thine inspirer, beer;
heady, not strong; and foaming, though not full.
3. violent; impetuous.
never came reformation in a flood
with such a heady current scow’ring faults;
nor ever hydra-headed wilfulness
so soon did lose his seat. shakespeare,
to heal. v. a. [halgan, gothick; paelan, saxon; heelen,
dutch.]
1. to cure a person; to restore from hurt or sickness.
i will restore health, and heal thee of thy wounds. jer. xxx.
who would not believe that our saviour healed the sick, and
raised the dead, when it was published by those who them-
selves often did the same miracles 2 addison.
physicians, by just observations, grow up to an honourable
degree of skill in the art of healing. jwatts.
2. to cure a wound or distemper.
thou hast no healing medicines. jer. xxx. 13.
a fontanel had been made in the same leg, which he was
forced to heal up, by reason of the pain. wiseman.
3. to perform the aet of making a sore to cicatrize, after it is
cleansed.
after separation of the eschar, i deterged and healed. wisemi
4. to reconcile: as, he healed all diffensions.
to heal. v. m. to grow well. used of wounds or sores.
those wounds heal that men do give themselves. shakes.
abscesses will have a greater or less tendency to heal, as
shakespeare,
shakespeare.
pope,
they are higher or lower in the body. sharp.
he’aler... n.s.. [from heal.] one who cures or heals.
i will not be an healer. isaiah,
hr’aling. participial adj. [from heal.] mild; mollifying ;
gentle; assuasive: as, he is of a healing pacifick temper.
health. n.s.. [from peel, saxon.]
1. freedom from bodily pain or sickness.
health is the faculty of performing all actions proper to a
human body, in the most perfeoł manner. quincy.
our father is in good health, he is yet alive. genesis.
may be he is not well;
infirmity doth still negle&amp;t all office,
whereto our health is bound, shakespeare.
elfare
1 i c 2.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 998</div><p class="text">h e a
|
2. welfare of mind; purity; goodness; principle of salvation.
there is no health in us. . . common prayer.
the best preservative to keep the mind in health, is the
faithful admonition of a friend. bacon.
3. salvation spiritual and temporal.
my god, my god, why hast thou forsaken me, and art so
far from my health, and from the words of my complaint? ps.
4. wish of happiness used in drinking.
come, love and health to all;
i drink to th’ general joy of the whole table. shakespeare.
he asked leave to begin two health; : the first was to the
king's mistress, and the second to his wife. howel.
for peace at home, and for the public wealth,
i mean to crown a bowl to caesar’s health.
he’alth ful. adj. [health and full.]
1. free from sickness.
adam knew no disease, so long as temperance from the for-
bidden fruit secured him: nature was his physician, and in-
nocence and abstinence would have kept him healthful to im-
mortality. - south.
2. well disposed.
such an exploit have i in hand,
had you an healthful ear to hear it. * shakespeare.
3. wholesome ; salubrious.
many good and healthful airs do appear by habitation and
proofs, that differ not in smell from other airs. bacon.
- while they pervert pure nature’s healthful rules
to loathsome sickness; worthily since they
god's image did not reverence in themselves. milton.
our healthful food the stomach labours thus,
at first embracing what it straight doth crush.
4. salutary; productive of salvation.
pour upon then the healthful spirit of thy grace. com. prayer.
he’alth fully. adv. [from healiyul.]
1. in health.
2. wholesomely.
he/alth fuln ess. n.s. [from healt'sul.]
1. state of being well.
2. wholesomeness; salubrious qualities.
you have tasted of that cup whereof i have liberally drank,
which i look upon as god's physick, having that in healthful-
moss which it wants in pleasure. king charles.
we ventured to make a standard of the healthfulns of the
air from the proportion of acute and epidemical diseases. graunt.
to the winds the inhabitants of geneva ascribe the health-
fulness of their air; for as the alps surround them on all sides,
there would be a constant stagnation of vapours, did not the
north wind put them in motion. addison on italy.
healthily. adv. [from healthy.] without sickness or pain.
he alt hiness. m. s. [from healthy.] the state of health.
healthless. adj. [from health.]
1. weak; sickly; infirm.
2. not conducive to health.
he that spends his time in sports, is like him whose gar-
ment is all made of fringes, and his meat nothing but sauces;
they are healthloss, chargeable, and useless. taylor.
honor. adj. [from heato.) wholesome; salutary. not
used.
shall i not then be stifled in the vault,
to whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
and there he trang!'d eremy romeo comes shakes cars.
healthy, adj. [from health.]
1. enjoying health; free from sicknes; ; hale; sound.
the husbandman returns from the field, and from manuring
his ground, strong and healthy, because innocent and labo:
i:ott's. south.
temperance, industry, and a publick spirit, running thro'
the whole body cf the people in holland, hath preserved an
infant commonwealth, of a sickly constitution, through so
oany dangers, as a much more healthy one could never have
dryden.
dryden.
struggled against without those advantages. swift.
air and exercise contribute to make the animal healthy.
arbuthnot.
2. conducive to health ; wholesome.
sooning or husbandry, and working in wood, are fit and
healthy recreations for a man of study or business. locke.
# * *s. in beasts the same as the fifter birth in woinc in ,
heap. n.s. soap, saxon; hoop, dutch and scottish.]
1. many single things thrown together; a pile; an accumulation.
the way to lay the city flat,
and bury all which yet distinctly ranges,
in heaps and piles of ruin. shakespeare.
the dead were fallen down by heaps, one upon another.
//isd. xviii. 22.
huge heaps of slain around the body rise. is. }.}}|
oice in its first beginnings had only a few heaps of earth
fo, is dominions. addison on italy.
tis one thing, only as a heap is one. blackmore
2. a crowd; a throng; a rabble. - -
a cruel tyranny; a *ap of vassals and slaves, no freemen,
- o no stirp of ancient families. bacon.
3. clutter; number driven together.
2. to accumulate ; to lay up.
to hear. v. n. [byrian, saxon; howren, dutch.]
1. to enjoy the senie by which sounds are distinguished,
5. to try; to attend judicially.
heard signifies a keeper, an
an universal cry resounds aloud;
the sailors run in heaps, a helples, crowd.
to heap. v. a. [from the noun.] dryin,
i. to throw on heaps; to pile; to thro
w together.
heap on wood, kindle the fire. ezek. xx
• *xiv. 10,
though the wicked heap up silver as t -
as the clay ; but the just so o he duff, and talment
divide the silver. ab, xxvii
how great the credit was, wherein that of..." 16,
served, may be gothered from the vast riches wi. w as pre-
heaped up from the offerings of all the grecian ...
they who will make profession of painting jo
treasures out of their reading, and there will find o up
t it on, and the innocent shall
derful means of raising themselves above others. }.
3. to add to something else. jin,
for those of old,
and the late dignities heap'd up to them,
we rest your hermits. - shak,
he aper. m. s. [from heaf.] one that makes piles ...”
heapy.6d. [from hop.] lying in heaps. *p.s.
where a dim gleam the paly lanthorn throws
o'er the mid pavement, heapy rubbish grows. g
scarce his head sy,
rais'd o'er the heasy wreath, the branching cl:
lies slumb'ring sullen in the white abyss. c toso.
- sound is nothing but a certain modulation of the external
air, which, being gathered by the external ear, beats, as is
supposed, upon the membrana tympani, which mo the
four little bones in the tympanum; in like manner as tist.
by the external air, these little bones move the internal air
which is in the tympanum and vestibulum; which internal
air makes an impression upon the auditory nerve in the laby-
rinth and cochla, according as it is moved by the little bones
in the tympanum : so that, according to the various reflexions
of the external air, the internal air makes various impressions
upon the auditory nerve, the immediate organ of hearing; and
these different impressions represent different sounds, &amp;#9.
the object of hearing is sound, whose variety is soorist,
that it brings in admirable store of intelligence. hilder,
princes cannot see far with their own eyes, nor hear with
their own ears. tensk,
2. to listen ; to hearken to ; as, he heard with great attention,
so spake our mother eve, and adam heard,
well-pleas'd, but answer'd not. miki,
great laughter was in heav'n,
and looking down, to see the hubbub strange,
and hear the din. miło,
3. to be told ; to have an account: with of
i have heard by many of this man. aï, ix. 13.
i was bowed down at the hearing of it; i was dismayed at
the seeing of it. isaiah,
har of such a crime
as tragick poets, since the birth of time, * !
ne'er feign'd. tai's joiral.
this, of eldest parents, leaves us more in the dark, who
by divine institution, has a right to civil power, than "
who never heard any thing at all of heir or descent, loft,
to hear. v. a.
1. to perceive by the ear.
the trumpeters and fingers were as one soun).” be hord
in praising the lord. 2 o
and sure he hard me, but he would not lear. **
2. to give an audience, or allowance to speak.
he sent for paul, and heard him concerning" so in
christ. - /ois, xxiv, 24.
i must beg the forbearance of censure, 'til i have o
heard out in the sequel of this discourse. -
3. to attend ; to listen to; to obey. prosis,
a scorner heareth not rebuke.
- tarning isom
hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning.
me ezek, iii. 17.
- - - tour heasts,
to-day if ye will hear his voice, harden no
4. to attend favourably. g, so
they think they shall be heard for their much *
since ’tis your command, what you fo wc doha".
are pleas'd to hear, i cannot grieve to * post,
the goddess heard.
dill.i.1%
hear the causes, and judge righteously.
6. to attend, as to one speaking.
on earth . .
who against faith or conscience can
infallible
be heard msillo,
7. to acknowledge a title. a latin phrase.
or hearst thou rather pure ethereal tream, moss,
whose fountain who shall tell? birth : prior,
har's thou submissive, but lowly bit oil; as hard.
d is sometimes *** * too,
l
|
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 999</div><p class="text">h e a
h e a
:-
:
bearht, a glorious keeper: sometimes final, as cyneheard, a
royal keeper. gibson's camden, it is now written herd; as,
cowherd, a cowkeeper; pynb, saxon.
he’arer. m. s. [from hear.]
1. one who hears.
and so was she dulled withal, that we could come so near
as to hear her speeches, and yet she not perceive the hearer; of
her lamentation. sidney.
st. john and st. matthew, which have recorded these ser-
mons, heard them; and being hearers, did think themselves
as well respected as the pharisces. hooker.
words, be they never so few, are too many, when they
benefit not the hearer. hooker.
the hearers will shed tears,
and say, alas! it was a piteous deed shakespeare.
tell thou the lamentable fall of me,
and send the hearers weeping to their beds. shakespeare.
2. one who attends doctrine or discourse orally delivered by
another; as, the hearers of the gospel.
3. one of a colle&amp;ted audience.
plays in themselves have neither hopes nor fears;
their fate is only in their hearers ears. ben. johnson.
her hearers had no share
in all she spoke, except to stare. swift.
he aring. m. s. [from hear.]
i. the sense by which sounds are perceived.
bees are called with sound upon brass, and therefore they
have hearing. bacon's natural history.
2. audience. -
the french ambassador upon that instant
crav'd audience; and the hour, i think, is come
to give him hearing. shakespeare.
3. judicial trial.
agrippa and bernice entered into the place of hearing. æs.
the readers are the jury to decide according to the merits
of the cause, or to bring it to another hearing before some
other court. - dryden.
those of different principles may be betrayed to give you a
fair hearing, and to know what you have to say for yourself.
addison.
4. note by the ear; reach of hearing.
- if we profess, as peter did, that we love the lord, and
profess it in the hearing of men; charity is prone to hear all
things, and therefore charitable snen are likely to think we do
so. hooker.
in our hearing the king charged thee, beware that none
touch absalom. 2 sam. xviii. 12.
you have been talked of since your travels much,
and that in hamlet’s hearing, for a quality
wherein they say you shine. shakespeare.
the fox had the good luck to be within hearing. l'ejirange.
to he arken. v. n. [peancman, saxon.]
i. to listen ; to listen eagerly or curiously.
the youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
her father keeps from access of suitors. shakespeare.
he hearkens after prophecies and dreams. shakespeare.
they do me too much injury,
that ever said i hearken'd for your death:
if it were so, i might have let alone
th’ insulting hand of douglas over you. shakespeare.
the gaping three-mouth'd dog forgets to snarl;
the furies hearken, and their snakes uncurl. dryden.
louder, and yet more loud, i hear the alarms
of human cries:
i mount the terrass, thence the town survey,
and hearken what the fruitful sounds convey. dryden.
he who makes much necessary, will want much ; and,
wearied with the difficulty of the attainment, will hearken
after any expedient that offers to shorten his way to it.
rogers.
2. to attend; to pay regard.
hearken unto me, thou son of zippor. numbers.
those who put passion in the place of reason, neither use
their own, nor hearken to other people's reason, any farther
than it suits their humour. locke.
there's not a blessing individuals find,
but some way leans and hearkens to the kind. pope.
he arkener. m. s. [from hearken.] listener; one that
hearkens.
he arsay. m.s.. [hear and say..] report; rumour; what is not
known otherwise than by account from others.
for prey these shepherds two he took,
whose metal stiff he knew he could not bend
with hearsay pictures, or a window look. sidney.
he affirms by hearsay, that some giants saved themselves
upon the mountain baris in armenia. raleigh's history.
all the little scramblers after fame fall upon him, publish
every blot in his life, and depend upon hearsay to defame him.
addison.
hearse. m. s. [of unknown etymology.]
1. a carriage in which the dead are conveyed to the grave,
2. a temporary monument set over a grave.
to add to your laments,
wherewith you now bedev king henry's hears,
i must inform you of a dismal fight. shaftoffeare,
heart. m. s. [peopt, saxon; hertz, german.]
1. the muscle which by its contraction and dilation propels the
blood through the course of circulation, and is therefore con-
sidered as the source of vital motion. -
2. it is supposed in popular language to be the seat sometimes of
courage, sometimes of affection, sometimes of honesty, or
baseness.
he with providence and courage so passed over all, that the
mother took such spiteful grief at it, that her heart brake
withal, and she died. - sidney.
thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart blood there,
rather than made that savage duke thine heir,
and disinherited thine only son. shakes?eare,
snakes, in my heart blood warm'd, that sting my heart.
shakespeare,
our battle is more full of names than yours,
our men more perfeot in the use of arms,
our armour all as strong, our cause the best;
then reason wills our hearts should be as good. shakspeare.
i thank you for my venison, master shallow.
—master page, much good do it your good heart. shakoff.
but since the brain doth lodge the pow'rs of sense,
how makes it in the heart those passions spring :
the mutual love, the kind intelligence -
*twixt heart and brain, this sympathy doth bring. davies.
we all sct our hearts at rest, since whatever comes from
above is for the best. l’eslrange.
the only true zeal is that which is guided by a good light
in the head, and that which consists of good and innocent af.
fe&amp;tions in the heart. sprat.
prest with heart corroding grief and years,
to the gay court a rural shed prefers. pope.
3. the chief part; the vital part ; the vigorous or efficacious
part.
barley being steeped in water, and turned upon a dry floor,
will sprout half an inch ; and, if it be let alone, much more,
until the heart be out. bacon.
4. the inner part of any thing.
some englishmen did with great danger pass by water into
the heart of the country. abbot's description of the world.
the king's forces are employed in appeasing disorders more
near the heart of the kingdom. hayward.
generally the infide or heart of trees is harder than the out-
ward parts. boyle,
here in the heart of all the town i'll stay,
and timely succour, where it wants, convey. drydon.
if the foundation be bad, provide good piles made of heart
of oak, such as will reach ground. moxon.
5. person; character. used with respect to courage or kindness.
the king's a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
a lad of life, an imp of fame. shakespeare.
hey, my hearts ; cheerly, my hearts. shakespeare.
what says my heart of elder ha! is he dead? shakespeare.
6. courage; spirit.
if it please you to make his fortune known, i will after take
heart again to go on with his falsehood. sidney.
there did other like unhappy accidents happen out of eng-
land, which gave heart and good opportunity to them to re-
gain their old possessions. sponsor on ireland.
wide was the wound; and a large lukewarm flood,
red as the rose, thence gushed grievously,
that when the painim spy'd the streaming blood,
gave him great heart and hope of victory. fairy queen.
eve, recov'ring heart, reply'd. milton.
having left that city well provided, and in good heart, his
majesty removed with his little army to bewdley. clarendon,
finding that it did them no hurt, they took heart upon't,
went up to't, and viewed it. - l’estrange.
the expelled nations take heart, and when they fly from
one country invade another. temple.
7. seat of love.
ah! what avails it me the flocks to keep,
who lost my heart while i preserv'd my sheep? pope.
8. affection; inclination. -
joab perceived that the king's heart was towards absalom.
2 sam. xiv. 1.
means how to feel, and learn each other's heart,
by th’ abbot's skill of westminster is found. daniel.
nor set thy heart,
thus over-fond, on that which is not thine. milton.
'tis well to be tender; but to set the heart too much upon
any thing, is what we cannot justify. l'estrange.
a friend makes me a feast, and sets all before me; but i
set my heart upon one dish alone, and if that happen to be
thrown down, i scorn all the rest. temple.
then mixing pow'rful herbs with magick art,
she chang'd his form who could not change his heart. dryd.
what did i not, her stubborn heart to gain
but all my vows were answer'd with disdain. dryden.
9. memory;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1000</div><p class="text">h e a .
h e a
. memory: though south seems to dislinguish. -
9 *... o, attained to, concerning god and his
working in nature, the same was delivered over by heart and
tradition from wise men to a posterity equally zealous.
raleigh.
we call the committing of a thing to memory the getting
it by heart; for it is the memory that must transmit it to the
heart; and it is in vain to expect that the heart should keep
its hold of any truth, when the memory has let it go. south.
shall i in london act this idle part :
composing songs for fools to get by heart. pope.
ro. good-will; ardour of zeal. to take to heart anything, is to
be zealous or solicitous or ardent about it.
if he take not their causes to heart, how should there be but
in them frozen coldness, when his affections seem benumbed,
from whom theirs should take fire? . hooker.
if he would take the business to heart, and deal in it effec-
tually, it would succeed well. bacon.
the lady marchioness of hertford engaged her husband to
take this business to heart. clarendon.
amongst those, who took it most to heart, fir john stawel
was the chief. o clarendon.
every prudent and honest man would join himself to that
side which had the good of their country most at heart. addis.
learned men have been now a long time searching after the
happy country from which our first parents were exiled: if
they can find it, with all my heart. woodward.
i would not be sorry to find the presbyterians mistaken in
this point, which they have most at heart. swift.
what i have most at heart is, that some method should be
thought on for ascertaining and fixing our language. swift.
11. passions; anxiety; concern.
set your heart at rest;
the fairy land buys not the child of me.
12. secret thoughts; recesses of the mind.
michal saw king david leaping and dancing before the
lord, and she despised him in her heart. 2 sam. vi. 16.
the next generation will in tongue and heart, and every
way else, become english ; so as there will be no difference or
distinction, but the irish sea, betwixt us. davies.
thou sawest the contradiction between my heart and hand.
king charles.
would you have him open his heart to you, and ask your
shakespeare.
advice, you must begin to do so with him first. locke.
men, some to pleasure, some to business take;
but every woman is, at heart, a rake. pope.
13. disposition of mind.
doing all things with so pretty a grace, that it seemed ig-
norance could not make him do amiss, because he had a heart
to do well. sidney.
14. the heart is confidered as the seat of tenderness: a hard
heart therefore is cruelty.
i’ve seen thee stern, and thou hast oft beheld
heart hardening spectacles.
such iron hearts we are, and such
the base barbarity of human kind. rowe.
15. to find in the heart. to be not wholly averse.
for my breaking the laws of friendship with you, i could
find in my heart to ask you pardon for it, but that your now
handling of me gives me reason to confirm my former dealing.
sidney.
shakespeare.
16. secret meaning; hidden intention.
i will on with my speech in your praise,
and then shew you the heart of my message. shakoff care.
17. conscience; sense of good or ill.
every man's heart and conscience doth in good or evil,
even secretly committed, and known to none but itself, either
like or disallow itself. hooker.
18. strength; power; vigour; efficacy.
try whether leaves of trees, swept together, with some
chalk and dung mixed, to give them more heart, would not
make a good compost. bacon.
that the spent earth may gather heart again,
and, better'd by cessation, bear the grain. dryden.
... sao must be taken not to plow ground out of heart, because
if is in heart, it may be improved by marl again. martimer.
19. utmost degree.
- - this gay charm,
like *.sight gipsy, hath, at fast and loose,
beguil'd me to the very heart of loss. shakespeare.
20. life. for my heart seems sometimes to signify, if life was
at stake ; and sometimes for tenderness.
i bid the rascal knock upon your gate,
and could not get him for my heast to joi.
shakespeare.
i gave it to a youth, kespeare
# prating boy, that begg'd it as a see:
1 could not fir my heari deny it him. shakespeare.
profoundly skill'd in the black art,
as english merlin for his heart. hudibras.
21. it is much used in composition for mind, or affection.
heart. -
.." * / [heart and ach..] sorrow ; pang; anguish
2
to die—to sleep-
no more ; and, by a sleep, tosa we
the heartach, and the thquama food,
hoo." ot. and b **htar'', h.,ld
iow. - - - - nd break.] owipowsi. so.
better a little chiding than a great deal of ;
heart-breaker. n.s. a cant name for *...*
supposed to break the heart of all her lowers. h's cuts,
like samson's heartbreakers, it grew
in time to make a nation rue. hud;
heart-ereaking. adj. overpowering with sorrow udibra,
those piteous plaints and sorrowfī ao tine w.
which late you poured forth, as ye did fit”
beside the silver springs of helicone,
making your musick of heartbreaking mone. s
heart-breaking.. n.s. qverpowering grief. otsir,
what greater heartbreaking and confu;
one, than to have all his secret faults lai
tence of condemnation passed upon him
on can there he to
4 open, and fift.
heart-burned, adj. [heast and burn.] *:
how tarily that gentleman looks! i no. .
i am heart-burn’d an hour after. so.
f.
heart-bur ning.. n.s.. [heart and burn.]
1. pain at the stomach, commonly from an acrid humour
fine clean chalk is one of the most nobi -
powerfully corrects and subdues the acrid h
mach: this property renders it very servic
algia, or heart-burning.
2. discontent; secret enmity:
in great changes, when right of inheritance is broke, ther:
will remain much heart-burning and discontent among the
meaner people. . - swiftu pot,
heart-dear. adj. sincerely beloved.
the time was, father, that you broke your word,
when you were more endear'd to it than now;
when your own percy, when my heart-diar harry,
threw many a northward look to see his father
bring up his pow'rs; but he did long in vain! shalofture,
heart.ease, n. s. quiet; tranquillity.
what infinite heart-east must kings neglea,
that private men enjoyo shahsouri,
he art-easing. adj. giving quiet.
but come, thou goddess fair and free,
in heav'n yelep'd euphrosyne,
and by men heart-easing mirth. milo,
heart-felt. adj. felt in the conscience,
what nothing earthly gives, or can destroy,
the soul's calm sun-shine, and the heartfolijoy,
is virtue's prize. pot,
he art-peas. n.s. a plant with round seeds inform of peas,
of a black colour, having the figure of an heart of a white
colour upon each. miller.
heart-quelling. adj. conquering the affection.
and let fair venus, that is queen of love,
with her heart-quelling son, upon you smile. spetsr,
heart-rending. adj. killing with anguish.
heart-rending news, and dreadful to those few
who her resemble, and her steps pursue;
that death should licence have to rage among ll."
the fair, the wise, the virtuous, and the young! wallr,
heart-robb ing. adj. ecstatick; depriving of thought ob:
solete.
sweet is thy virtue, as thyself sweet art;
for when on me thou shinedst, late in sadness,
a melting pleasance ran through every part, sons
and me revived with heart-rolling gladness. posts,
heart-sick, adj.
1. pained in mind. - in soul, then
if we be heart-sick, or afflicted with an uncertainou."
- assis,
we are true desirers of relief and mercy.
2. mortally ill; hurt in the heart.
3. romeo, hide thyself.
—not i, unless the breath of heart-soo groans, shaissouri.
mist like, infold me from the search of eyes. acjo
hearts-ease. n.s. a plant. nd
hearts-ease is fsort of violet that blows all *:::::is,
often in winter: it sows itself. . -
heart-sore. n.s. that which pains the mind.
wherever he that godly knight may find, fairy qu".
his only heart-sore and his only foe. dons of
h ...' d heart.] the ten
eart-string. m. s. [siring ano
nerves supposed to brace and sustain the he*
o absorbents, and
umours in the flo-
cable in the cardi.
hoodward.
he was by jove deprived ived. soo
of life himself, and heart-firing of * eagle rived, "
how, out of tune on the string very kao
—not so; but yet so false, that he grieves o:
- - - iii] .
a*#). grates my o: : what should io
except he thinks i live too long; c thee to
i. i. i. openish, i cannot * taylf.
be sad 'till thy heart-firings crack. there;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1001</div><p class="text">o
|-
:
:
i.
o
o
**
there's the fatal wound,
that tears my heart-strings; but he shall be found,
my arms shall hold him. granville.
heart-struck. adj.
1. driven to the heart; infixed for ever in the mind.
* who is with him *
—none but the fool who labours to out-jest
his heart-struck injuries.
2. shocked with fear or dismay.
he added not ; for adam, at the news
heart-struck, with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
shaftoffeare.
that all his senses bound ! milton.
heart swel ling. adj. rankling in the mind.
drawn into arms, and proof of mortal fight,
, through proud ambition and heart-swelling hate. spensor.
tieart-whole. adj.
1. with the affections yet unfixed.
you have not seen me yet, and therefore i am confident
you are heart-whole. dryden.
cupid hath clapt him o' th' shoulder; but i'll warrant him
heart whole. shakespeare.
2. with the vitals yet unimpaired.
heart: wou n'ded. adj. filled with passion of love or grief.
mean time the queen, without reflection due,
heart-wounded, to the bed of state withdrew. pope.
iie art-wou nding. adj. filling with grief.
with a shriek heart-wounding loud she cry’d,
while down her cheeks the gushing torrents ran,
fast falling on her hands. rowe.
he arted. adj.
hearted.
he ne'er like bullies coward hearted,
attacks in publick to be parted.
t h e arten. v. a. [from heart.]
1. to encourage; to animate ; to stir up.
palladius blaming those that were slow, heartening them that
were forward, but especially with his own example leading
them, made an impression into the squadron. sidney.
my royal father, cheer these noble lords,
and hearten those that fight in your defence:
unsheath your sword, good father; cry, st. george. shak.
this rare man, tydides, would prepare;
that he might conquer, hearten’d him.
thus hearten’d well, and flesh’d upon his prey,
it is only used in composition: as, hard
gay.
chapman.
the youth may prove a man another day. dryden.
2. to meliorate or renovate with manure.
the ground one year at rest; forget not then
with richest dung to hearten it again. may's wirgil.
hearth. m. s. the pavement of a room on which a fire is
made ; the ground under the chimney.
hoop'd out of rome: now this extremity -
hath brought me to this hearth. shakes care.
cricket, to windsor chimneys shalt thou leap,
where thou find'st fires unrak'd, and hearths unswept,
there pinch the maids as blue as bilberry. shakespeare.
good luck befriend thce, son ; for at thy birth
the fairy ladies danc'd upon the hearth. milton.
the vanquish'd fires withdraw from every place;
or, full with feeding, sink into a sleep :
each houshold genius shews again its face,
and from the hearths the little lares creep.
he’artily. adv. [from hearty.]
1. from the heart; fully.
i bear no malice for my death;
but those that sought it, i could wish more christians;
dryden.
be what they will, i heartily forgive them. shakespeare,
if to be sad is to be wise,
i do most heartily despise
whatever socrates has said,
or tully writ, or wanley read. prior.
2. sincerely ; actively; diligently ; vigorously.
where his judgment led him to oppose men on a publick
account, he would do it vigorously and heartily; yet the op-
position ended there. atterbury.
3. eagerly ; with desire.
as for my eating heartily of the food, know that anxiety
has hindered my eating 'till this moment. addison.
heartiness. m. s. [from hearty.]
1. sincerity ; frcedom from hypocrisy. .
this entertainment may a free face put on ; derive a liberty
from heartines, and well become the agent. shakespeare.
2. vigour; eagerness.
the anger of an enemy represents our faults, or admo-
nishes us of our duty, with more heartings; than the kindness
of a friend. taylor.
he’artless. adj. [from heart.] without courage; spirit-
less.
ijoyed oft to chase the trembling pricket,
or hunt the heartless hare 'till she were tame. spensor.
then hopeless, heartles, 'gan the cunning thief,
persuade us die, to stint all further strife. fairy queen,
vol. i.
what, art thou drawn among these heartly; hinds?
turn thee, benvolio; look upon thy death. shakespeare.
thousands besides stood mute and heartles; there,
men valiant all ; nor was i us’d to fear. cowley.
the peasants were accustomed to payments, and grew
heartles, as they grew poor. temple.
hartles; they fought, and quitted soon their ground,
while our's with easy victory were crown'd. dryden.
he'art lessly. adv. [from heartles...] without courage 5
faintly; timidly. -
he/art less ness. m. s. [from heartly..] want of courage or
fpirit; dejection of mind. . -
hearty. adj. [from heart.]
1. sincere; undissembled; warm ; zealous.
they did not bring that hearty inclination to peace, which
they hoped they would have done. clarendon.
but the kind hosts their entertainment grace
with hearty welcome and an open face ;
in all they did, you might discern with ease -
a willing mind, and a desire to please." dryden.
every man may pretend to any employment, provided he
has been loud and frequent in declaring himself hearty for the
government. swift.
. in full health.
, vigorous; strong. - - - -
whose laughs are hearty, though his jests are coarse,
and loves you best of all things but his horse. pope.
4. strong; hard ; durable. - o -
oak, and the like true hearty timber, being strong in all
positions, may be better trusted in cross and transverse work.
j/otton's architecture.
hearty-hale. adj. [heart and hale.] good for the heart.
vein-healing verven, and head-purging dill,
sound favory, and basil hearty hale. spenser.
he &amp; t. m. s. [peat, paez, saxon; heete, danish.]
1. the sensation caused by the approach or touch of fire.
heat is a very brisk agitation of the insensible parts of the
object, which produces in us that sensation from whence we
denominate the object hot; so what in our sensation is heat,
in the object is nothing but motion. locke.
the word heat is used to signify the sensation we have when
we are near the fire, as well as the cause of that sensation,
which is in the fire itself; and thence we conclude, that there
is a sort of heat in the fire resembling our own sensation :
whereas in the fire there is nothing but little particles of mat-
ter, of such particular shapes as are fitted to impress such mo-
tions on our flesh as excite the sense of heat. jwatts.
2. the cause of the sensation of burning.
the sword which is made fiery doth not only cut by reason
of the sharpness which simply it hath, but also burns by means
of that heat which it hath from fire. booker.
3. hot weather.
after they came down into the valley, and found the in-
tolerable heats there, and knew no means of lighter apparel,
:
they were forced to go naked. bacon.
mark well the flow'ring almonds in the wood ;
the glebe will answer to the sylvan reign ;
great heats will follow, and large crops of grain. dryden.
the pope would not comply with the proposal, as fearing
the heats might advance too far before they had finished their
work, and produce a pestilence among the people. addison
4. state of any body under the action of the fire.
the heats smiths take of their iron are a blood-red heat, a
white flame heat, and a sparkling or welding heat. moxon.
5. fermentation ; effervescence.
6. one violent action unintermitted.
the continual agitations of the spirits must needs be a
weakening of any constitution, especially in age; and many
causes are required for refreshment betwixt the heats. dryden.
7. the state of being once hot; a fingle effort.
i'll strike my fortune with him at a heat,
and give him not the leisure to forget. dryden,
they the turn’d lines on golden anvils beat,
which look as if they struck them at a heat. tate.
8. a course at a race, between each of which courses there is
an intermission.
feign'd zeal, you saw, set out the speedier pace;
but the last heat, plain dealing won the race. dryden.
9. pimples in the face; flush. -
it has raised animosities in their hearts, and heats in their
faces, and broke out in their ribbans. addison.
10. agitation of sudden or violent passion; vehemence of
action. -
they seeing what forces were in the city with them, issued
against the tyrant while they were in this heat, before prac-
tices might be used to dissever them. sidney.
the friend hath lost his friend;
and the best quarrels, in the heat, are curst
by those that feel their sharpness. shakespeare.
it might have pleased in the heat and hurry of his rage, but
must have displeased in cool sedate reflection. south.
11 d "we<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1002</div><p class="text">h e a
we have spilt no blood but in the heat of the battle, or the
chase. atterbury.
one playing at hazard, drew a huge heap of gold; but, in
the heat of play, never observed a sharper, who swept it into
his hat. swift.
11. faaion; contest; party rage. - -
they are in a most warlike preparation, and hope to come
upon them in the heat of their division. - shakespeare.
i was sorry to hear with what partiality and popular heat
elections were carried. king charles.
what can more gratify the phrygian foe
than those distemper'd heats 2 dryden.
12. ardour of thought or elocution.
lead it to her
with all the strength and heat of eloquence,
fraternal love and friendship can inspire.
t. heat. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to make hot ; to endue with the power of burning.
he commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven
times more than it was wont to be heated. dan. iii. 19.
2. to cause to ferment.
hops lying undried heats them, and changes their colour.
a43rtimer's husbandry.
addison's cato.
3. to make the constitution feverish.
thou art going to lord timon's feast.
-ay, to see meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools. shakesp.
whatever increaseth the density of the blood, even with-
out increasing its celerity, heats, because a denser body is hotter
than a rarer. arbuthnot on aliments.
4. to warm with vehemence of passion or desire.
a noble emulation heats your breast, -
and your own fame now robs you of your rest. drydon.
5. to agitate the blood and spirits with action.
when he was well heated the younger champion could not
stand before him ; and we find the elder contended not for the
gift, but for the honour. dryden.
heater. m. s. [from heat..] an iron made hot, and put into
a box-iron, to smooth and plait linen.
heath. m. s. serica, lat.j
1. a shrub of low stature: the leaves are small, and abide green
all the year. aziller.
in kent they cut up the heath in may, burn it, and spread
the ashes. 4%rtimer's hussandry.
oft with holder wing they sparing dare
the purple heath. thomson,
2. a place overgrown with heath.
say, from whence
you owe this strange intelligence or why
upon this blasted heath you stop our way
with such prophetick greeting. shakespeare's macbeth.
health and long life have been found rather on the peak of
derbyshire, and the heaths of staffordshire, than fertile soils.
temple.
3. a place covered with shrubs of whatever kind.
some woods of oranges, and heaths of rosemary, will smell
a great way into the sea. bacon.
heath-cock. m. s. [heath and cock.] a large fowl that fre-
quents heaths. -
cornwall hath quail, rail, partridge, pheasant, heath-cock,
and powte. carews, survey.
heath-pout. n.s.. [heath and pout..] a bird.
not heath-tout, or the rarer bird
which phasis or ionia yields,
more pleasing morse's would afford
than the fat olives of my fields. dryden.
heath-peas. n.s. a species of bitter vetch, which see.
hath: rose. m.s. sheah and ros...] a plant. ainsworth.
heathen. m. s. sheyden, german.] the gentiles; the pa-
go, the nations unacquainted with the covenins of grace.
peliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy
holy name. i coron. xvi. 33.
if the opinions of others, whom we think wej of, be a
ground of assent, men have reason to be heathens in japan,
mahometans in turkey, papists in spain, and protestants in
england. locke.
ln a p*per of morality, i consider how i may recommend
the particular virtues i treat of, by the precepts or examples
of the ancient heathens. addison.
heathen. adj. gentile ; pagan.
it was *possible for a heation author to relate these things,
because, if he had believed them, he would no longer have
been a heathen. addison.
heathenish. aff, [from heathen.]
'• belonging to the gentiles.
hen, the apostles of our lord and saviour were ordained
to alter the laws of heathenish religion, chosen they were, st.
o **pted; the rest unschool. altogether, and unlettered
2. wo ; §o: rapacious ; cruel. hooker.
- * vloors did tread under their heathem; h feet what
*tie they found yet ther. standing. ish fee *:::::::
that execrable cromwell made a heathem;
man edict against the episcopal clergy, to:
proach, pray in publick, baptize’.
school. 2 • marry, bu
heathenishly. adv. [from heathem; -
of heathens. wh.] after the m
he’athen is m. m. s. [from *athen..] gentilism,
her inhu.
uld neither
sy, nor teach
south,
anner
it signifies the acknowledgment of ...onism.
sition to heathenism. tue o oppo.
he’athy, adj. [from heath.] full of heath. ammond,
this sort of land they order the same way with the heat
land. - . artimer'; hus,
to heave. v. a. pret. heaved, anciently hove; 3. andy,
or hoven. ; part bino,
1. to lift; to raise from the ground.
so stretch'd out huge in length the arch fiend la
chain'd on the burning lake; morever hence y,
had ris'n, or heav'd his head, but that the will
and high permission of all-ruling heaven
left him at large. m;
2. to carry. illn,
now we bear the kin
tow'rd calais : grant him there; and there bei
heave him away upon your winged thoughts
athwart the sea.
3. to raise; to lift.
so daunted, when the giant saw the knight,
his heavy hand he heaved up on high,
and him to dust thought to have batter'd quite, sosr
i cannot heave of .
my heart into my mouth. eifiedra:
y #. dy'd in fight; shałoston,
fought next my person, as in consort fought,
save when he heav'd his shield in my defence,
...and on his naked side receiv'd my wound, dryden,
4. to cause to swell.
the groans of ghosts, that cleave the earth with pain,
and heave it up: they pant and stick half way. dryden.
the glittering finny swarms,
that heave our friths and croud upon our shores, thus,
5. to force up from the breast.
made she no verbal quest?
-yes, once or twice she heav'd the name of father
pantingly forth, as if it prest her heart, sho, king liar,
the wretched animal heav'd forth such groans,
that their discharge did stretch his leathem coat
almost to bursting. shakespeare'. a you hiti,
6. to cxalt; to elevate.
poor shadow, painted queen;
one hav'd on high, to be hurl’d down below. som.
7. to puff; to elate.
the scots, heaved up into high hope of victory, took the
english for foolish birds fallen into their net, forsook their
hill, and marched into the plain. hayward,
7 a heave. v. n.
1. to pant; to breathe with pain.
'tis such as you,
that creep like shadows by him, and do figh
at each his needless heavings; such as you
nourish the cause of his awaking. shor.
he heaves for breath, which, from his lungs supply'd,
and fetch'd from far, distends his labring fide. dyin,
2. to labour.
the church of england had struggled and heavid at a st-
formation ever since wickliff's days. attorius),
3. to rise with pain; to swell and fall.
thou hast made my curdled blood run back,
my heart heave up, my hair to rise in bristles.
the wand'ring breath was on the wing to part; drydon
weak was the pulse, and hardly heav'd the heart. o g
no object affects my imagination so much as ** of
ocean : i cannot see the heaving of this prodigious to
- - ishment,
waters, even in a calm, without a very pleasing *:
prior.
ng seen,
shaisar,
dyin,
frequent for breath his panting bosom heaves.
the heaving tide '; trivia,
in widen'd circles beats on either side. gay's trio.
4. to keck; to feel a tendency to vomit,
heave. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. list; exertion or effort upwards.
none could guess whether the next he
would settle them on the first foundation,
ave of the eartholo
or swallow them.
dji",
2. rising of the breast.
there's matter in these fighs;
you must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
3. effort to vomit.
4. struggle to rise.
but after many strains and heaves, hidirai,
he got up to his saddle eaves. he jews,
heave oftring, n.s. an offering among the ye
these profound ho
hałft.
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1003</div><p class="text">h e a
h e a
**
-
*
--
..
* *
--
o
*
ye shall offer a cake of the first of your dough for an heave
offering, as ye do the heave offering of the threshing floor. numb.
heaven. n.s. [peopon, which seems to be derived from
peopb, the places over head, saxon.]
1. the regions above; the expanse of the sky.
a station like the herald mercury,
new lighted on a heaven kiffing hill.
thy race in time to come
shall spread the conquests of imperial rome;
rome, whose ascending tow’rs shall heav'n invade, .
involving earth and ocean in her shade. dryden.
the words are taken more properly for the air and ether
than for the heavens. raleigh's history.
this act, with shouts heav'n high, the friendly band
applaud. dryden.
some fires may fall from heaven. temple.
2. the habitation of god, good angels, and pure souls departed.
it is a knell
that summons thee to heaven, or to hell. shakes. macbeth.
these, the late
shakespeare.
heav'n banish’d host, left desert utmost hell. milton.
all yet left of that revolted rout,
heav'n fall’n, in station stood, or just array,
sublime with expectation. milton.
3. the supreme power ; the sovereign of heaven.
now heav'n help him | shakespeare.
the will -
and high permission of all-ruling heav'n ...
left him at large. milton.
the prophets were taught to know the will of god, and
thereby instruct the people, and enabled to prophesy, as a
testimony of their being sent by heaven. temple.
4. the pagan gods; the celestials.
take physick, pomp ; -
expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
that thou may’s shake the superflux to them,
and show the heavens more just. shakespeare's king lear.
they can judge as fitly of his worth,
as i can of those mysteries which heaven -
will not have earth to know. shakespeare's coriolanus.
heav'ns what a spring was in his arm, to throw ! . .
how high he held his shield, and rose at ev'ry blow. doyd.
5. elevation; sublimity. -
o, for a muse of fire, that would ascend
the brightest heav'n of invention. sha'offeare.
6. it is often used in composition. -
hea v en-becot. begot by a celestial power.
if i am heav'n-begot, assert your son
by some sure sign. dryden,
heav en-born. descended from the celestial regions; native
of heaven.
if once a sever fires his sulphurous blood,
in ev'ry fit he feels the hand of god,
and heav'n-born flame.
oh heav'n-born sisters! source of art |
who charm the sense, or mend the heart ;
who lead fair virtue's train along,
, moral truth, and mystick song! pope.
heaven-bred. produced or cultivated in heaven.
much is the force of heav'n-bred poesy.
heaven-built. built by the agency of gods.
his arms had wrought the destin’d fall
of sacred troy, and raz'd her heav'n-built wall.
he a v fn- directf d.
1. raised towards the sky.
who taught that heav'n-aircołod spire to rise 2 pope.
2. taught by the powers of heaven.
o sacred weapon; left for truth's defence;
to all but heaven-directed hands deny'd ;
the muse may give it, but the gods must guide. pope.
iwf'a v enly. adj. [from heaven.]
1. resembling heaven ; supremely excellent. -
as the love of heaven makes one heavenly, the love of vir-
tue virtuous, so doth the love of the world make one become
worldly. sidney.
not maro's muse, who sung the mighty man ;
nor pindar's heav'nly lyre, nor horace when a swan. dryd.
2. celestial ; inhabiting heaven.
adoring first the genius of the place,
then earth, the mother of the heav'nly race.
he'av enly. adv.
1. in a manner resembling that of heaven.
in these deep solitudes and awful cells,
where heav'nly pensive contemplation dwells,
and ever-musing melancholy reigns,
what means this tumult in a vestal's veins: pope.
2. by the agency or influence of heaven. -
truth and peace and love shall ever shine
about the supreme throne
of him, t' whose happy-making fight alone,
our heav'nly guided soul shall climb.
dryden's juvenal.
shakspeare.
pope.
drydon.
milton.
he'avenward. adv. [heaven and peano, saxon.] towards
heaven. *
i prostrate lay,
by various doubts impell’d, or to obey,
or to object ; at length, my mournful look
heav'nward erect, determin'd, thus i spoke.
heavily. adv. [from heavy.]
1. with great ponderousness.
2. grievously; afflictively. -
ease must be impracticable to the envious : they lie under
a double misfortune ; common calamities and common bles-
prior.
sings fall heavily upon them. collier.
3. sorrowfully ; with grief.
i came hither to transport the tydings,
which i have heavily borne. shakespeare.
this o'neil took very heavily, because his condition in the
army was less pleasant to him. clarendon.
4. with an air of dejection. -
why looks your grace so heavily to-day ? -
—o, i have past a miserable night. shakspeare.
he’avi ness. n.s.. [from heavy.]
1. ponderousness; the quality of being heavy; weight.
the subject is concerning the heaviness of several bodies, or
the proportion that is required betwixt any weight and the
power which may move it. - j%ilkins.
2. dejection of mind; depression of spirit. -
we are, at the hearing of some, more inclined unto sorrow
and heavines ; of some more mollified, and softened in mind.
hooker.
against ill chances men are ever merry;
but heavines; foreruns the good event. shakespeare.
let us not burthen our remembrance with
an heavines that's gone. shakespeare.
heavings, in the heart of man maketh it stoop; but a good
word maketh it glad. prov, xii. 25.
ye greatly rejoice ; though now for a season ye are in hea-
viness, through manifold temptations. 1 pet. i. 6.
3. inaptitude to motion of thought ; sluggishness; torpidness;
dulness of spirit; languidness; languor.
our strength is all gone into heaviness,
that makes the weight. shakspeare.
what means this heavines that hangs upon me?
this lethargy that creeps through all my senses addison.
he would not violate that sweet recess, -
and found besides a welcome heavings,
which seiz'd his eyes. dryden.
a sensation of drousiness, oppression, heavings, and lasi-
tude, are signs of a too plentiful meal. arbuthnot.
4. oppression ; crush; affliction: as, the heavings of taxes.
5. deepness or richness of soil.
as alexandria exported many commoditics, so it received
some, which, by reason of the fatness and heavines of the
ground, egypt did not produce ; such as metals, wood, and
pitch. arbuthnot on coins.
heavy. adj. [peari;, saxon.]
1. weighty ; ponderous ; tending strongly to the center; con-
trary to light.
mersennus tells us, that a little child, with an engine of
an hundred double pulleys, might move this earth, though it
were much heavier than it is, /wilkins.
2. sorrowful ; dejected ; depressed.
let me not be light;
for a light wife doth make a heavy husband. shakespeare.
3. grievous ; oppressive; afflictive.
menelaus bore an heavy hand over the citizens, having a
malicious mind. 2 44ac. v. 23.
let not your ears despise my tongue for ever,
which shall possess them with the leavies; sound
that ever yet they heard. shakespeare's macbeth.
if the cause be not good, the king himself hath a heavy
reckoning to make. shakespeare's henry v.
pray for this good man, and for his issue,
whose heavy hand hath bow’d you to the grave,
and beggar'd yours for ever. shakspeare's macbeth.
chartres, at the levee,
tells with a sneer the tydings heavy. swift.
4. wanting alacrity; wanting briskness of appearance.
my heavy eyes, you say, confess
a heart to love and grief inclin'd. prior.
5. wanting spirit or rapidity of sentiment; unanimated.
a work was to be done, a heavy writer to be encouraged,
and accordingly many thousand copies were bespoke. swift.
6. wanting activity; indolent; lazy.
fair, tall, his limbs with due proportion join'd;
but of a heavy, dull, degenerate mind. dryden.
7. drousy; dull; torpid. -
peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep.
luke, ix. 27.
8. slow ; sluggish. , 1x. 33
but let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,
and heavy gaited toads lie in their way. shakspeare.
9. stupid,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1004</div><p class="text">h e c
h e d
. stupid ; foolish.
9 *i. heavy headed revel, east and west
makes us traduc’d, and tax'd of other nations. shakespeare.
i would not be accounted so base minded, or heavy headed,
that i will confess that any of them is for valour, power, or
fortune better than myself. knolles.
10. burdensome ; troublesome 3 tedious.
i put into thy hands what has been the diversion of some of
my idle and heavy hours. locke’s epistle to the reader.
when alone, your time will not lie heavy upon your hands
for want of some trifling amusement. - swift.
11. loaded; incumbered; burthened.
hearing that there were forces coming against him, and not
willing that they should find his men heavy and laden with
booty, he returned unto scotland. bacon's henry vii.
12. not easily digested; not light to the stomach.
such preparations as retain the oil or fat, are most heavy to
the stomach, which makes baked meat hard of digestion. arb.
13. rich in soil; fertile, as heavy lands.
14. deep; cumbersome, as heavy roads.
heavy adv. as an adverb it is only used in composition ;
heavily.
your carriages were heavy laden; they are a burden to the
weary beast. isa. xlvi. 1.
come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and i
will give you rest. matt. xi. 28.
hebdomad. n.f. [heldomas, latin.] a week; a space of
seven days.
computing by the medical month, the first heldomad or sep-
tenary consists of six days, seventeen hours and a half. brown.
hebdo"madal. adj. [from hebdomas, latin.] weekly ;
hebdo'madary. ! consisting of seven days.
as for hebdomadal periods, or weeks, in regard of their
sabbaths, they were observed by the hebrews. brown.
to hebe^tate. v. a. [hebeto, latin; hebeter, french..] to
dull; to blunt; to stupify.
the eye, especially if he'etated, might cause the same per-
ception. harvey on consumptions.
beef may confer a robustness on the limbs of my son, but
will hebetate and clog his intellectuals. arbuthnot and pope.
hebetation. m. s. [from hetetate.]
1. the aet of dulling.
2. the state of being dulled.
he betude. m. s. [hebctudo, latin.] dulness; obtuseness;
bluntness.
the pestilent seminarics, according to their grossness or
subtilty, activity or hebetude, cause more or less truculent
plagues. harvey on the plague.
he braism. m. s. [hebraisine, french ; hebraisinus, latin.] a
hebrew idiom.
milton has infused a great many latinisms, as well as grae-
cisms, and sometimes hebraisms, into his poem. spectator.
he braist. n.s.. [hebraeus, latin.] a man skilled in hebrew.
he brici an. m. s. [from hebrew.] one skilful in hebrew.
the words are more properly taken for the air or ether than
the heavens, as the best hebricians understand them. raleigh.
the nature of the hebrew verse, as the meanest habrician
knoweth, consists of uneven feet. peacham.
he caromb. m. s. [hecatombe, french ; ;x&amp;tegen.] a sacri-
fice of an hundred cattle.
in rich mens homes
i bid kill some beasts, but no hecatombs;
none starve, none surfeit so. donne.
one of these three is a whole hecatomb,
and therefore only one of them shall die. dryden.
her triumphant sons in war succeed, -
and slaughter'd hecatombs around 'em bleed. addison.
he"ct ical.
hect ick. łaj. [heołique, french, from £1;..]
1. habitual; constitutional.
this word is joined only to that kind of fever which is slow
and continual, and ending in a consumption, is the contrary
to those fevers which arise from a plethora, or too great ful-
ness from obstruction. it is attended with too lax a state of
the excretory passages, and generally those of the skin;
whereby so much runs off as leaves not resistance enough in
the contractile vessels to keep them sufficiently distended, so
that they vibrate oftener, agitate the fluids the more, and
keep them thin and hot. &amp;uincy.
a heclick fever hath got hold
of the whole substance, not to be controul’d. donne.
2. troubled with a morbid heat.
no heołick student scars the gentle maid. taylor.
he’ctick. m. s. an hectick fever.
like the hectick in my blood he rages,
and thou must cure me shakespeare'
z - peare's hamlet.
*ctor. m. s. [from the name of he?or, the great homeric
w - - - - - -
...” bully; a blustering, turbulent, pervicacious,
those usurping heilors, who pretend to honour without re-
ligion, think the charge of a l
but by blood. § a lye a blot not to be wo .
we'll take one cooling cup of near
and drink to this celestial loor.”
to he'cror. v. a. [from the noun..] to threat; pror.
with insolent authoritative terms. *3 to treat
they reckon they must part with honou -
opinion, if they suffer o to be o: o their
- gover ! st
the weak low spirit fortune mo" tongu',
but she's a drudge, when hector'd by the brave &gt;
an honest man, when he came home at night no 'juan,
fellow domineering in his family, hectoring § sery another
calling for supper. 4, buthnot's his }}. 2nd
to he cror. v. n. to play the bully; toil.’” bill,
they have attacked me, some with piteous mom, -
cries, others grinning and only shewing their to o:
ranting and hectoring, others scolding and reviling. o
one would think the hectoring, the flooming o
and all the different species of the angry, should too. o
don carlos made her chief director, od,
that she might o'er the servants bor.
hedera'ceous, adj. [hederaceus, lat.] producing is
hedge. m. s. [pe 35o, saxon.] a fence mad y.
with prickly bushes, or woven twigs.
it is a good wood for fire, if kept dry
for stakes in hedges.
the gardens unfold variety of colours to the
morning, and the hedges breath is beyond all perfu
through the verdant maze
of sweet-briar hedges i pursue my walk. thomso
henc e, prefixed to any word, notes something mean, yon.
the lowest class: perhaps from a hedge, or age.
man without any known place of birth.
there are five in the first shew: the pedant, the braggart
the hedge-priso, the fool, and the boy. so.
the clergy do much better than a little hido, contemptible
illiterate vicar can be presumed to do. soft.
a person, who, by his style and literature, seems to his
been the corrector of a hedge-proft in little britain, proceeded
gradually to an author. swift.
to hedge. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to inclose with a hedge, or fence of wood dry or growing,
hodge thy poss-shon about with thorns. edus, xxviii. i.
those alleys must be hedged at both ends, to keep out the
don
swift.
diff,
o round ground,
3 and is very isol
4:riner.
eye eye
isle, p#t,
vile, of
barn man, a
wind. bagh,
2. to obstruct.
i will hedge up thy way with thorns. hsii.6.
3. to incircle for defence.
england, hedg'd in with the main,
that water-walled bulwark, still secure
and confident from foreign purposes. shaft. king john,
there's such divinity doth hedge a king,
that treason can but peep to what it would. shao, hamlet.
4. to shut up within an inclosure.
it must not be paid and exported in ready money; so say:
our law; but that is a law to hedge in the cuckow, and serves
for no purpose: for if we export not goods, for which of
merchants have money due to them, how can it be paid by bills
of exchange? lai.
5. to force into a place already full. this seems to be mio
for edge. ho edge in, is to put in by the way thoro kit
room; but hedge may signify to thrust in with difficulty, as into
d hedge. self
you forget yourse -
to hedge me in. get y shakes, julius co.
when i was hasty, thou delay'dst me longer:
i pr’ythee, let me hedge one moment more
i. promise; for thy life preserv'd. r o:
when you are sent on an errand, be fuse to hedge in o
business of your own. soft's direction; to the foo"
to hedge. v. n. to shift; to hide the head. sity, am
i myself sometimes, hiding mine honour in my o o
fain to shuffle, to hedge, and to lurch. ‘.
hedge-born. adj. [hedge and born.] of no known blo
meanly born. - - - -
he then, that is not furnish'd in this fort,
doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
and should, if i were worthy to be jog",
be quite degraded, like a hedo-born swain,
osort,
that doth presume to boast of gent; blood. &amp; :
hedge-creeper. [hedge and crop.] one that
hedges for bad purposes. also,
hedge-fumitory. m. s. a plant; smariaso
hedge-hog. n. s. [hedge and hog ; erinaceus.] hedge,
1. an animal set with prickles, iike thorn: "****
like hedge-hogs, which
lie tumbling in my bare-foot way,
their pricks at my foot-fall.
few have belief to swallow, or hope “ k
the collyrium of albertus; that is, *.". i.
dark: yet thus much, according.” ho re
right eye of an hedge-hog, boiled in oil, o .
brazen vessel, effect, brown
d mount
"...' so-
nough to experio
on &amp; see is th:
ceipt, will to
served in”
errori,
the
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1005</div><p class="text">is i, e
h e e o
the he go-oo: hath his bookside and sanks thick so woh
strong and sharp prico'es; and besides, by the help of a os-
cle, can contract himself into a globular figure, and wish-
draw his whole under-part, l:eed, belly and legs, within lis
thicket of pricoles. ray on the cre-to-o.
2. a term of reproach.
oid'st thou not kill this king?
— craft ye.
do'e grant me, hedge-hag p shao. rio iii.
. a plant; trefoil; medica echinata. aijioarth.
- - - - - r
4. the globe fin; or is chinatus. ain, worth.
he poo-hyssop. m. s. [hedge and sysop.] a species of willow-
wort; or, ola.
hoo-op is a purging medicine, and a very rough one :
externaily it is said to be a vulnerary. hill's asat. 42-dica.
he dg e-must ard. m. s. a plant.
hed ge-nettle. m. s. a plant; galeopsa. ainsworth.
hedge-not e. m. s. [hedge and note.] a word of contempt for
low writing.
voen they began to be somewhat better bred, they left
these 'ce notes for another sort of poem, which was also full
of pleasant raillery. dryden.
iiedge-pig. m. s. [hedge and pig.] a young hedge-hog.
thrice the branded cat hash mew’d,
thrice and once the hedge-pig whin'd. shakoff. micheth.
hedge-row. n.s. hodge and row.] the series of trees or
bushes planted so inclosures.
sometime walking not unseen
by hedge row elms, on hillocks green. milton.
the fields in the northern side are divided by hedge-rows of
myrtle. berkley to pope.
hedge-spar row. m. s. shedge and sparrow ; currica.] a
sparrow that lives in bushes, distinguished from a sparrow
that builds in thatch.
the hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long,
that it had its head bit off by its young. shakespeare.
he'pg|ing-bill. m. s. [hedge and bill.] a cutting hook used in
making hedges.
comes master dametas with a hedging-bill in his hand,
chaffing and swearing. sidney.
hedger. m. s. [from heft.] one who makes hedges.
the labour’d ox
in his loose traces from the furrow came,
and the swink'd hedger at his supper s.t. milton.
he would be laughed at, that should go about to make a
fine dancer out of a country hedger at past fifty. locke.
to hed, v. a. sp. ban, saxon.] to mind; to regard; to
take notice of ; to attend.
with pleasure argus the musician heed; ; -
but wonders much at those new vocal reeds. dryden.
he will no more have clear ideas of all the operations of
his mind, than he will have all the particular ideas of any
landscape or clock, who will not turn his eyes to it, and with
attention herd all the parts of it. locke.
heed. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. care; attention.
with wanton heed and giddy cunning,
. the melting voice through mazes running. milton.
take heed that, in their tender years, ideas, that have no
natural cohesion, come not to be united in their heads. locke.
thou must take heed, my portius;
the world has all its eyes on cato's son. aldson.
2. caution ; fearful attention; suspicious watch.
either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is caught as men
catch diseases, one of another ; therefore, let men take heed
of their company. shakespeare's henry iv.
take heed; have open eye; for thieves do foot by night:
take head ere summer comes, or cuckoo birds affight.
shakesp. merry iłzves of sf indsor.
. care to avoid.
we should take heed of the negle&amp;t or contempt of his wor-
ship. tillotson.
4. notice; observation.
speech must come by hearing and learning; and birds give
more heed, and mark words more than beasts. bacon,
5. seriousness; staidness.
he did unseal them; and the first he view’d,
he did it with a serious mind; a heed
was in his countenance.
6. regard; respectful notice.
it is a way of calling a man a fool, when no heed is given to
what he says. l'hosłrange.
he'edful. adj. [from heed.]
1. watchful ; suspicious; vigilant.
give him heedful note; .
for i mine eyes will rivet to his face;
and, after, we will both our judgments join,
in censure of his seeming. shakoffeare's hamlet.
2. attentive; careful; observing : with of.
i am commanded
to tell the passion of my sovereign's heart;
vol. i.
shakosheare.
where fame, late ent’ring at his hood cars,
ii h plac'd thy beauty's image and thy virtue. so scare.
to him one of the other twins was bound,
whilst i had been like locofol of the other. shak speare.
thou, houl of advice, secure proceed;
my praise the precept is, be thine the deed. poe.
heedfully. adv. ifrom held/ul..] attentively; carefully;
cautiously.
let the learner maintain an honourable opinion of his in-
structor, and heed/asy listen to his instructions, as one willing
to be led. //atts.
heedfulnes5. m. s. [from heedful..] caution; vigilance; at-
tention. -
heedily. adv. cautiously; vigilantly. i}}#,
heed in ess. n.s. caution; vigilance. dic.
heedlfss. adj. [from heed.] negligent; in attentive; care-
less; thoughtless; regardless; unobserving : with s.
the heed's lover does not know
whose eyes they are that wound him so. //7.' r.
heedless of verse, and hopeless of the crown, -
scarce half a wit, and more than half a clown. dr.&amp;n.
some ideas, which have more than once offered themselves
to the senses, have yet been little taken notice of ; the mind
being either heedless, as in children, or otherwise employed,
as in men. ilocke.
surprizes are often fatal to heedles; unguarded innocence.
sherlock.
heed lessly. adv. [from heedles...] carelessly; negligently;
inattentively.
whilst ye discharge the duty of matrimony, ye her issy
slide into sin. arbuthnot and pope.
heedlessness. m. s. [from heed's...] carelessness; thought-
lessness; negligence; inattention.
in the little harms they suffer from knocks and falls, they
fhould not be pitied, but bid do so again; which is a better
way to cure their herdlofts. lock.
heel. m. s. [pole, saxon.]
1. the part of the foot that protuberates behind.
if the luxated bone be distorted backward, it lieth over the
heel bone. - //jewian's surgery.
2. the whole foot of animals.
the stag recals his strength, his speed,
his winged heels, and then his armed head;
with these to avoid, with that his fate to meet;
but fear prevails, and bids him trust his feet. denham.
pegasus appeared hanging off the side of a rock, with a
fountain running from his heel. 24.4/on.
3. the feet, as employed in flight.
nothing is commoner, in times of danger, than for men to
leave their masters to bears and tygers, and shew them a fair
pair of heels for't. l'estrange.
4. to be at the heels. to pursue closely; to follow hird.
sir, when comes your book forth
—upon the heels of my presentment.
but is there no sequel at the heel; of this
mother's admiration ?
5. to attend closely.
could we break our way
by force, and at our heel; all hell should rise
with blackest insurrection, to confound
heav'n's purest light. affilizit.
6. to pursue as an enemy.
the spaniards fled on towards the north to seek their for-
tunes, being still chased by the english navy at their heels, un-
til they were fain to give them over for want of powder. bacon.
want! hungry want! that hungry meage fiend,
is at my heels, and chaces me in view. otway.
7. to follow close as a dependent.
through proud london he came sigling on,
after th’ admired heels of bolingbroke. so soare.
8. to lay by the hloos. to fetter; to shackle; to put in gyves.
if the king blame me for’t, i’ll lay ye all
by th' heels, and suddenly; and on your heads
clap round fines for neglect.
one half of man, his mind,
is, sui juris, unconfin'd,
and cannot be laid by the heels. hu ihras.
i began to smoke that they were a parcel of mummers; and
wondered that none of the middlesex justices took care to lay
some of them by the heels. adason.
9. anything shaped like a heel.
at the other side is a kind of heel or knob, to break clots
with. mortimer's higoanary.
io. the back part of a stocking: whence the phrase to be out at
heels, to be worn out. -
a good man's fortune may grow out at heel. shaftspeare,
to heel. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to dance.
shakos. tomon.
shakso. hasn't.
shao-arc.
i cannot sing,
nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk. shakespeare.
2. to lean on one side; as, the shop kees,
11 e 7,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1006</div><p class="text">h e i
h e l
. v. a. to arm a cock. - - -
#". ...? [from heel.] a cock that strikes well with his
howe. n.s.. [heel and piece.]. a piece fixed on the hinder
part of the shoe, to supply what is worn away. - f
to he' el-pi e ce. o o [heel and piece.] to put a piece o
- - neel.
lo. bull for new heel-piecing her shoes. arb.
hefr. n.s. [from heave.]
1. heaving; effort.
may be in the cup .
a spider steep'd, and one may drink; depart,
and yet partake no venom; for his knowledge
is not infected : but if one present
th'abhorrent ingredient to his eye, make known
how he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides
with violent hosts. - shakesp. //inter's tale.
for haft. 1 handle.
2. [f o, fide devours both blade and host. it allor.
he gir a. m. s. [arabick.] a term in chronology, signifying
the epocha, or account of time, used by the arabians and
turks, who begin their computation from the day that ma-
homet was forced to make his escape from the city of mecca,
which happened on friday, july 16, z. d. 622, under the
reign of the emperor horacleus. harris.
he'iffr. n.s. [peoprone, saxon.j . a young cow. *
who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh,
- and sees fast by a butcher with an axe,
but will suspect ’twas he that made the slaughter? shakoff.
a heiser will put up her nose, and snuff in the air, against
rain. bacon.
for her the flocks refuse their verdant food,
nor thirsty heisers seek the gliding flood. pope.
heigh-ho. inter j.
1. an expression of flight languor and uneasiness.
high-ho an’t be not four by the day, i’ll be hang'd. shak.
2. it is used by dryden, contrarily to custom, as a voice of
exultation.
we's toss off our ale 'till we cannot stand,
and heigh-ho for the honour of old england.
heich r. m. s. [from high.]
1. elevation above the ground: indefinite.
into what pit thou secst,
from what height fall’n.
an amphitheatre's amazing height
here fills the eye with terror and delight.
2. altitude; definite space measured upwards.
abroad i’ll study thee,
as he removes far off, that great heights takes. donne.
there is in ticinium a church that is in length one hun-
dred feet, in breadth twenty, and in height near fifty. bacon.
an amphitheatre appear'd,
rais'd in degrees, to fixty paces rear'd;
that when a man was plac’d in one degree,
height was allow'd for him above to see. dryden.
3. degree of latitude. latitudes are higher as they approach
the pole.
guinea lieth to the north sea, in the same height as peru
to the south. abbot's description of the i/orld.
4. summit ; ascent; towering eminence; high place.
from alpine heights the father first descends ;
his daughter's husband in the plain attends. dryden's zn.
--, -’.
-
dryden
milton.
alddison -
lence.
by him that rais'd me to this careful hight,
from that contented hap which i enjoy’d. shakoshcare.
ten kings had from the norman conqu'ror reign'd,
when england to her greatest height attain'd,
of pow'r, dogminion, glory, wealth and state. daniel.
every man of learning need not enter into their disficulties,
of climb the heights to which some others have arrived. i, au.
6. the utmost degree; full completion.
puticsaction doth not rise to its height at once.
i)id not she
of timna first betray me, and reveal
the secret, wrested from me in the height
bacon.
of nuptial love profess'd? milton.
hide me from the face
of god, whom to behold was then my height
of happiness milton.
despair is the height of madness. sherlock.
7. utmost exertion.
come on, sir;
breeding.
8. state of excellence; advance towards perfeotion.
social duties are carried to greater heights, and enforced
... with stronger motives, by the principles of our religion. ado;
t., heighton. v. a. [from height.] p c ts.
1. to raise higher.
* to improve; to meliorate.
3. to aggravate.
i shall now put you to the height of your
shakespeare.
4. to improve by decorations.
he inou.s. adj. [haineux,
he inously. adv. [from leinous.] atrociously; wick
he ino us n ess. m. s. [from
5. flevation of rank; station of dignity; great degree of excel-
foreign states used their endeavour
- s to height
fions, and plunge us into all the evils $on our cons.
of a civil war. addison
s in a room, contri - -
as in - • contrived for state, the height of the roof
should bear a proportion to the area ; so in the heighton;
poetry, the strength and vehemence of figures shoi o of
to the occasion. jo
- }'}o
french, from hain, hate. ...”
- - ; or fro
thame.] atrocious; wicked sh
the teutonick hion, in a bi
a high
degree.
to abrogate or innovate the
angels should attempt, it were
crilege.
this is the man should do the bloody deed:
the image of a wicked heinous fault -
lives in his eye.
as it is a most heinous, so it is a most
despise him that can destroy us.
gospel of christ,
- if men
most heinous and a or
ccursed so-
hoor.
shaisor,
dangerous impiety to
illo,
/ei ily; wickel.
*inous j atrociousness 5 wick.
ness.
he who can treat offences, provoking god, as jess and
trifles, must have little sense of the *nosis of them. r.
heir. m. s. [heire, old fr. hares, latin.]
1. one that is inheritor of any thing after the present poss,
an heir significs the eldest, who is, by the laws of eno.
to have all his father's land. t”“s,
what lady is that? loft,
—the heir of alanson, rosaline her name. shaljean
that i'll give my voice on richard's side, -
to bar my master's heirs in true descent,
god knows, i will not do it. shaftaro,
being heirs together of the grace of life,
sunk is the hero, and his glory lost,
and i his heir in misery alone. pope.
the heirs to titles and large estates have a weaknes, in
their eyes, and a tenderness in their constitutions. swift,
2. one newly inheriting an estate.
the young extravagant heir had got a new steward, and
i pet. iii, 7.
was resolved to look into his citate. swift.
to heir. v. a. [from the noun..] to inherit.
his sons in blooming youth was snatch'd by fate;
one only daughter heir'd the royal state, drydin,
heir ess. m. s. ifrom heir.] an inheritsix; a woman of
inherits.
an heirs, she, while yet alive;
all that was her’s to him did give. wallor.
æneas, though he married the heirs of the crown, yet
claimed no title to it during the life of his father-in-law, dji.
heir less. adj. ifrom weir..] without an hoir; wanting one
to inherit after him.
i still think of
the wrong i did myself; which was so much,
that heirles it hath made my kingdom, shikssor.
he irship. m. s. [from heir.] the state, character, or privi"
leges of an heir. • 1 - . . . . .
a layman appoints an heir or an exccutor in his will, o
build an hospital within a year, under pain of bog deprive
of his heirship. ayliff's parro.
he rloom. n.s.. [heir and geloma, goods, sax.] ano
ture or moveable decreed to descend by inheritance, and thest-
fore inseparable from the freehold.
achilles' sceptre was of wood,
transmitted to the hero's line; -
thence through a long descent of kings swft
came an heirloom, as horner sings. 1 or
held. the preterite and part, pass of hold. . . . eidos,
a rich man beginning to fall, is held up of io j
if minerva had not appeared and had his " rosio,
executed his design. no
helacai. associatus, fr. from ol emo";"
the lustre of the sun, or falling into it. -
had they ascribed the heat of the season to this to:
would not have computed from its heliacal ascent.
he'll aca lly. adv. [from heliacal.] - hat is, wo
from the rising of this stir, not cosmically, the lo
the sun, but holiacally, that is, its emertion o s. broom.
the sun, the ancients computed their canicular o ido
he is tempestuous in the summer, when ho do
and rainy in the winter, when he rios so : is
he lical adv. [helice, fr. from to j spiral;
circumvolutions. -
the screw is a kind of wedge, multipi ... •
a helical revolution about a cylinder, o .
from any stroke, but from a vectis at one end ol '!'
helioid parabola, in mathematicks, 9;
led or continued by
is motion of
joini,
he parabolio o
- is of
- f' - the axis 0
is a curve which arises from the lupposition "... into the
common apollonian parabola's being * t
ah to
- - in through
periphery of a circle, and is a line then o
- .." }
extremities of the ordinates, which do no" “”
towas.
the centre of the said circle.
harris.
'•'t rick
heliocess"<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1007</div><p class="text">h e l
helioce’ntrick, adj. [heliocentrique, fr. oxley, and zargov.]
the heliocentrick place of a planet is said to be such as it
would appear to us from the sun, if our eye were fixed in its
centre. harris.
he lioscope. m. s. [helioscope, fr. #743, and oxorfo.] a sort
of telescope fitted so as to look on the body of the sun, with-
out offence to the eyes. harris.
he liotrope. m. s. (#agp and teto ; heliotrope, french ;
heliotropium, lat...] a plant that turns towards the sun; but
more particularly the turnsol, or sun-flower.
'tis an observation of flatterers, that they are like the he-
liotrope; they open only towards the sun, but shut and con-
tract themselves at night, and in cloudy weather.
government of the tongue.
he lispherical. adj. [helix and sphere.]
the helispherical line is the rhomb line in navigation, and
is so called because on the globe it winds round the pole spi-
rally, and still comes nearer and nearer to it, but cannot ter-
minate in it. harris.
het,ix. m. s. [helice, fr. ac.] part of a spiral line; a cir-
cumvolution.
find the true inclination of the screw, together with the
quantity of water which every helix does contain. //ilkins.
hell. m. s. [pelle, saxon.]
1. the place of the devil and wicked souls,
for it is a knell
that summons thee to heaven, or to hell.
shakespeare's macbeth.
if a man were a porter of hell gates, he should have old
turning the key. shakespeare's macbeth.
let none admire
that riches grow in hell; that soil may best
deserve the precious bane.
hell's black tyrant trembled to behold
the glorious light he forfeited of old. cowley.
2. the place of separate souls, whether good or bad.
i will go down to my son mourning to hell. gen. vi. 35.
he descended into hell. apostles creed.
3- temporal death.
the pains of hell came about me; the snares of death over-
took me. psalm xviii. 4.
4. the place at a running play to which those who are caught
are carried.
then couples three be straight allotted there;
they of both ends the middle two do fly ;
the two that in mid-place, hell called were,
must strive with waiting foot, and watching eye,
to catch of them, and them to hell to bear,
that they, as well as they, hell may supply. sidney.
5. the place into which the taylor throws his shreds.
this trusty squire, he had, as well
as the bold trojan knight, seen hell;
not with a counterfeited pass
of golden bough, but true gold lace.
in covent-garden did a taylor dwell,
who might deserve a place in his own hell. king's cookery.
6. the infernal powers.
much danger first, much toil did he sustain,
while saul and hell crost his strong fate in vain. cowley.
7. it is used in composition by the old writers more than by the
modern.
hell-black, adj. black as hell.
the sea, with such a storm as his bare head
in hell-black night endur'd, would have boil'd up,
and quench'd the stelled fires. shakesp. king lear.
hell-ered. adj. [hell and bred.] produced in heli.
'heart cannot think what courage and what cries,
with foul enfould red smoak and flashing fire,
spensor.
amlton.
hudibras.
the hell-bred beast threw forth unto the skies.
hell-eroy h. m. s. shell and broth..] a composition boiled up
for infernal purposes.
adder's fork, and blind worm's sting,
lizard's leg, and owlet's wing ;
for a charm of pow'rful trouble,
like a hell-broth boil and bubble. shakes). macbeth.
hell-doo med. adj. [hell and doom.] consigned to hell.
and reckon'st thou thyself with spirits of heav'n,
hell-dom'd / and breath'st defiance here and scorn, , .
where i reign king : milton.
hell-gov erned. adj. dire&amp;ted by hell.
earth gape open wide and ate him quick,
as thou do'st swallow up this good king's blood,
which his hell-govern’d aim hath butcher'd. shakespeare.
hiell-hate.d. adj. abhorred like hell.
back do i toss these treasons to thy head,
with the hel-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart. shakespeare.
hell-haunt f d. adj. [hell and haunt.] haunted by the devil.
fierce osmond clos'd me in the bleeding bark,
and bid me stand exposed to the bleak winds,
bound to the fate of this hell-haunted grove.
dryden.
hell-hous d. m. s. spelle punb, saxon.]
h e l
1. dog of hell.
from forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
a hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death. shakespeare.
now the hell hound, with superior speed
had reach'd the dame, and, faithing on her side,
the ground with issuing streams of purple dy'd. dryden.
2. agent of hell.
i call’d
my hell-hound; to lick up the drass, and filth,
which man's polluting fin with taint had shed
on what was pure. as; too.
hell-kite. m. s. shell and kite.] kite of infernal breed. the
term hell prefixed to any word notes detestation.
did you say all what all ; oh, holl site / all
what, all my pretty chickens, and their dam,
at one fell swoop shakesh. macleth.
he'llebor.e. n.f. [helleborus, lat.] christmas hower.
helle bore //hite. m. s. [veratrum, lat.] a plant.
there are great doubts whether any of its species be the
true hellebore of the ancients. miller.
hellen1so. m. s. [exxoviro; j a greek idiom. ainsworth.
hellish. adj. [from hell.]
i. sent from hell; belonging to hell.
o thou celestial or infernal spirit of love, or what other
heavenly or hellish title thou list to have, for effects of both i
find in myself, have compassion of me. - sidney.
victory and triumph to the son of god,
now entering his great duel, not of arms,
but to vanquish by wisdom hellish wiles. milton.
2. having the qualities of hill; infernal; wick, d; detestable.
no benefits shall ever allay that diabolical rancour that fer-
ments in some hellish breasts, but that it will foam out at its
foul mouth in slander. south.
hellishly, adv. [from hells!...] infernally; wickedly; de-
testably. -
hellishn ess. m. s. [from heliss.] wickedness; abhorred
qualities.
hellward. adv. [from hell.] towards hell.
be next thy care the sable sheep to place
full o'er the pit, and hellward turn their face. pope.
hei m denotes defence: as eadhem, happy defence; sighsm,
victorious defence; berthelm, eminent defence: like amyntas
and boetius among the greeks. gilson's camden.
hel.m. m. s. spelm, saxon, from hilan, to cover, to protect.]
1. a covering for the head in war; a helmet; a morrion; an
headpiece.
france spreads his banners in our noiseless land;
with plumed helin the slay’r begins his threats. sia'ospeare.
mnestheus lays hard lood upon his helm. dryden.
2. the part of a coat of arms that bears the crest.
more might be added of heius, crests, mantles, and sup-
porters. camden's remains.
3. the upper part of the retort. -
the vulgar chymists themselves pretend to be able, by re-
peated cohobations, and other fit operations, to make the di-
itilled parts of a concrete bring its own caput moriaum over the
helm. - - boyle.
4. [pelma, saxon.] the steerage; the rudder.
they did not leave the helm in storms;
and such they are make happy itates. ben. johnson.
more in prosperity is reason tost
than ships in storms, their helms and anchors lost. denham.
fair occasion shews the springing gale,
and int’rest guides the helin, and honour swells the sail.
- prior.
5. the station of government. -
i may be wrong in the means; but that is no objeason
against the design : let those at the helm contrive it better.
6. in the following line it is difficult to determine whether stors-
man or defender is intended : i think seesonan.
you slander
the heins o' th' state, who care for you like fathers,
when you curse them as enemies. shakespeare.
to hel.m. v. a. [from the noun..] to guide ; to conduct.
hanmer.
the very stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed,
must give him a better proclamation. shakspeare.
helmed. adj. [from helm.] furnished with a headpiece.
the helmed cherubim
are seen in glittering ranks with wings display’d. milton.
he lm et. m. s. [probably a diminutive of helm.] a helm ;
a headpiece; armour for the head.
i saw him down; thrice up again, and fighting;
from helmet to the spur all bleeding o'er. shaospeare.
sev’n darts are thrown at once, and some rebound
from his bright shield, some on his helmet found. dryden.
helmi'n thick. adj. [from £29.1933, j relating to worms. dics.
to help. v. a. preter. helped, or hop : part. hoped, or h.pen.
[hilpan, gothick; pelpan, saxon.] -
1. to assist ; to support 3 to aid.
let
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1008</div><p class="text">h e l
h e m
},et us work as valiant men behoves;
for boldest hearts good fortune helpeth out. fairfax.
o lord, make haste to help me. psalms.
god helped him against the philistines: 2 chron, xxvi, 7.
they hoped them in all things with silver and gold, 1 esdr.
a man reads his prayers out of a book, as a means to op
his understanding and direct his expressions. stilling eet.
2. it has, in familiar language, the particle out, which seems
to have meant, originally, out of a difficulty.
this he conceives not hard to bring about,
if all of you should join to help him out. dryden.
what i offer is so far from doing any diskindness to the cause
these gentlemen are engaged in, that it does them a real ser-
vice, and helps them out with the main thing whereot, they
stuck. soodward's natural history.
the god of learning and of light, -
would want a god himself to help him out. swift.
3. to raise by help : with up.
woc to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not
another to help him up. eccl. iv. io.
4. to enable to surmount: with over.
wherever they are at a stand, he'p them presently over the
difficulty without any rebuke. locke.
5. to remove by help : with off.
having never learned any laudable manual art, they have
recourse to those foolish or ill ways in use, to help off their
time. locke.
6. to free from pain or vexation.
help and case them, but by no means bemoan them. locke.
7. to cure; to heal: with of. obsolete.
love doth to her eyes repair,
to help him of his blindness.
8. it is used commonly before the disease.
the true calamus helps coughs. gerard.
9. to remedy; to change for the better.
cease to lament for that thou can'st not help;
and study help for that which thou lament'st. shak socare.
io. to prevent; to hinder.
those few who reside among us, only because they cannot
help it. swift.
if they take offence when we give none, it is a thing we
shakespeare.
cannot help, and therefore the whole blame must lie upon
them. sanderson.
it is a high point of ill nature to make sport with any man’s
imperfeotions, that he cannot help. l'//irange.
those closing skies might still continue bright;
but who can help it, if you'll make it night. dryden.
she, betwixt her modesty and pride, -
her wishes, which she could not help, would hide. dryden.
it is reckoned ill manners for men to quarrel upon diffe-
rence in opinion, because that is a thing which no man can
help in himself. swist.
1 i. to forbear; to avoid.
he cannot help believing, that such things he saw and
heard. atterbury.
i cannot help remarking the resemblance betwixt him and
our author in qualities, fame, and fortune, pope.
12. to promote; to forward.
and they helped forward the afflictive. zech.
if you make the earth narrower at the bottom than at the
top, in fashion of a sugar-loaf reversed, it will help the expe-
rimlent. bacon.
13. to help to. to supply with ; to furnish with.
whom they would help to a kingdom, those reign; and
whom again they would, they displace. i 4/ac. viii. 13.
the man that is now with tiresias can help him to his oxen
again. l'a/irange.
i4. to present at table.
in plenty starving, tantaliz'd in state,
a. complaisantly help'd to all i hate ;
"reated, caress'd, and tir’d, i take my leave. o
to help. v. n. 2 2. y c pope
i. to contribute assistance.
sir, how come it you
have hosp to make this rescue shakeshcare.
discreet followers and servants hop much to reputation.
* bacon.
bennet's grave look was a pretence,
and danby's matchless impudence
josep'd to support the knave. dryden.
a generous present helps to persuade as well as an agreeable
person. o garth.
2. to bring a supply.
h some, wanting the talent to write, made it their care that
h **otos should help out where the muses failed. rymer.
flp. m. s. [from the verb; hope, dutch.]
i. *s aid; support; succour.
***, *poiting to recover the city, hardly escaped his
o: hands by the good help of his uno. y j.
h * may be beholden to experience and acquired notions,
where he thinks he has not the least !op from them. locke.
4. remedy.
helper. m. s. [from help.]
1. an affistant; an auxiliary; an aider; one that he
2. one that administers remedy.
3. one that supplies with any thing wanted: with to
helplessly, adv. [from hips;..] without
helplessness. m. s. [from hel's...] want of ability;
helter-skelter. adv. [as
7% heive. v. a. [from the noun.]
hem. n.s. [pem, saxon.]
1. the edge of a garment doub
so great is the stupidity of some of those
have no sense of the help administred to them. , that they may
2. that which gives help. smiric.
though these contrivances increase the po
proportionably protract the time: that o they
one man may do in a hundred days, ma 'y such
mediate strength of a hundred men in on: da
virtue is a friend and an help to nature -
luxury that destroys it, and the diseases of vice and
the natural product of the fins of intemperan
another help st. paul himself affords ust ce. south,
owards the att
ing the true meaning contained in his e ifties, in-
3. that which forwards or promotes. pittles loft,
coral is in use as an help to the teeth of children, p
- uci!,
there is no help for it, but he must be
- taught accordin,
to comply with that faulty way of writing. got according
ps or assists,
there was not any left, nor any helper for israel, 2 kiti,
we ought to receive such, that we might -
to the truth. 2. ght be *::::
. it is impossible for that man to despair who o o
his helper is omnipotent. taylor's rule of living o
compassion, the mother of tears, is not
always a merei
spectator, but an helper oftentimes of evil. d:
jiro,
caveil
hath brought me up to be your daughter's d
as it hath fated her to be my motive” ower,
and helper to a husband. shaison
4. a supernumerary servais.
i live in the corner of a vast unfurnished house: my simily
consists of a steward, a groom, a helper in the stable, a so.
man, and an old maid. swift to pot,
he lpful. adj. [help and full.]
1. useful; that which gives assistance.
let's fight with gentle words,
'till time lend friends, and friends their hijlswords.
shahjart.
he orders all the succours which they bring;
the helpful and the good about him run,
and form an army. dijli,
2. wholesome ; salutary.
a skilful chymist can as well, by separation of visible clo-
ments, draw helpful medicines out of poison, as poison out of
the most healthful herbs. raleigh', hjo,
helplfss. adj. [from help.]
i. wanting power to succour one's self.
one dire shot
close by the board the prince's main-mastbore;
all three now helples; by each other lie. drydin,
let our enemies rage and persecute the poor and the ho
les; ; but let it be our glory to be pure and placcable. roi.
2. wanting support or assistance.
how shall i then your help!s fame defend ?
*twill then be infamy to seem your friend. post,
3. irremediable; admitting no help.
such helplis; harms it's better hidden keep,
than rip up grief, where it may not avail. sposo,
4. unsupplied; void; with of. this is unusual, perhaps in-
proper. -
naked he lies, and ready to expire,
helples of all that human wants require. dror,
ability; with-
out succour. wisit
of succour. !rr;
sooner fancies, from o
- - *c.
rceabo, the darkness of hell; bell, so he, .
confusion.] in a hurry; without order; tuo"
sir john, i am thy pistol, and thy friend;
and helter-sell, r have i rode to england, softir.
and tidings do i bring. so o:
he had no sooner turned his back but they wer 'elias.
skelter, throwing books at one another's heads, o
helve. m. s. [polye, saxon.] the handle of an * her is
whereby no
rakigo's hist".
to fit with a helve us
the slipping of an axe from the helve,
slain, was the work of god himself.
handle.
led and sewed to koop the to
from spreading ... and to
5* r hite and go
rowlers must be made of even cloth. " so
without hem, seam, or thread hang"; by, sudden and yoko
2. [hemmen, dutch..] the noise uttered by *
expiration of the breath.
i would try if i could cry hon,
he loves to clear his pipes in
for;,
and have him. . so ::se
good air, and ** fo.so
!
ji-
halder on so,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1009</div><p class="text">h e m
h e n
*
#::::::::::::: adj. [from hemisphere.]
pleased with any one who takes notice of the strength which
he still exerts in his morning hems. addison.
3. interjeff. hem [lat.]
to hem. v. a. -
1. to close the edge of cloth by a hem or double border sewed
together.
2. to border; to edge.
all the skirt about -
was hem'd with golden fringe. fairy queen.
along the shoar of silver streaming thames,
whose rushy bank, the which his river hems. spensor.
3. to enclose ; to environ ; to confine; to shut: perhaps al-
ways with a particle; as, in, about, round.
so of either side, stretching itself in a narrow length, was
it hemmed in by woody hills, as if indeed nature had meant
therein to make a place for beholders. sidney.
what lets us then the great jerusalem
with valiant squadrons round about to hem
why, neptune, hast thou made us stand alone,
divided from the world for this, say they ;
hamm'd in to be a spoil to tyranny, -
leaving affliction hence no way to fly daniel.
i hurry me in haste away,
and find his honour in a pound,
hemm'd by a triple circle round,
chequer'd with ribbons, blue and green. pope.
to hem. v. n. [hemmen, dutch..] to utter a noise by violent
expulsion of the breath.
he micranx. m. s. [#wizu, half, and xedulov, the skull, or
head..] a pain that affects only one part of the head at a
time. quincy.
he micycle. n.s. [o.skuxx@”.] . a half round.
he mina. m. s. an ancient measure: now used in medicine
to signify about ten ounces in measure. quincy.
he'mipledy. m. s. [#pairv, half, and ranrro, to strike or seize.]
a palsy, or any nervous affection relating thereunto, that
seizes one side at a time; some partial disorder of the nervous
fystem.
he misphere. m. s... [ogistaotov; hemisphere, french.]
the half of a globe when it is supposed to be cut through its
centre in the plane of one of its greatest circles.
that place is earth, the seat of man; that light
his day, which else, as th' other hemisphere,
night would invade.
a hill
of paradise, the highest from whose top
the hemisphere of earth, in clearest ken
stretch'd out to th’ amplest reach of prospect lay. . . milton.
the sun is more powerful in the northern hemisphere, and
in the apogeum; for therein his motion is slower. brown.
in open prospect nothing bounds our eye,
until the earth seems join'd unto the sky;
so in this hemisphere our utmost view
is only bounded by our king and you.
fairfax,
milton.
dryden.
half round ;
hemisphe'rick. containing half a globe.
the thin film of water swells above the surface of the water
it swims on, and commonly constitutes hemispherical bodies
with it. boyle;
a pyrites, placed in the cavity of another of an hemispherick
figure, in much the same manner as an acorn in its cup,
iwoodward on fossils.
he’mistick. m. s. [**1542,09; hemistiche, fr.] half a verse.
he broke off in the hemistick, or midst of the verse ; but
seized, as it were, with a divine fury, he made up the latter
part of the hemistick. dryden's dufresnoy.
he's lock. m. s. [pemloc, saxon.]. an herb.
the leaves are cut into many minute segments: the petals
of the flower are bifid, heart-shaped, and unequal: the flower
is succeeded by two short chanelled seeds. one sort is some-
times used in medicine, though it is noxious ; but the hem-
lock of the ancients, which was such deadly poison, is gene-
rally supposed different. miller.
he was met even now,
crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
with hardocks, hemlock. shakespeare's king lear.
we cannot with certainty affirm, that no man can be nou-
rished by wood or stones, or that all men will be poisoned by
hemlock. locke.
he'morrhage. 7 m. s. [&amp;#1-#xysz; hemorragie, french.] a
#...? violent flux of blood.
great hemorrhagy succeeds the separation. ray.
twenty days fasting will not diminish its quantity so much
as one great homorrhage. arbuthnot on aliments.
he morrhoids. n.s. [złosjoids; ; hemorrhoids, french.]
the piles; the enrods. -
i got the hemorrhoids. - swift.
he’morrhoid a. adj. [hemorrhoidal, fr. from hemorrhoids.]
belonging to the veins in the fundament.
besides there are hemorrhages from the nose and hemorrhoidal
veins, and fluxes of rheum. ray on the creation,
vol. i.
hemp agrimony, n. 4. a plant.
emp
o#. o the i. a battle stood
- eeches, spouting hemorrhoidal blood. ro...?
hemp, n. s: [baenep, saxon; hampe, dutch; ~i? %
fibrous plant of which coarseinen and ropes are made.
it hath digitated leaves opposite to one another: the flowers
have no visible petals; it is male and female in different plants.
its bark is useful for cordage and cloth. miller.
let gallows go for dog; let man go free,
and let not hemp his windpipe suffocate. shakespeare.
hemp and flax are commodities that deserve encouragement,
both for their usefulness and profit. mortimer.
the common
agrimony is found wild by ditch
fides of rivers. grimony nd wild by ditches and
w - miller,
he'mpen. adj. [from hemp.] made of hemp. atter
in foul reproach of knighthood's fair degree,
about his neck a hempen rope he wears. fairy queen,
behold
tjpon the hampen tackle ship-boys climbi -
ys climbing. shak -
ye shall have a hempen caudle then, and the #:‘.
hatchet. shak
i twitch'd his dangling garter from his knee; bakespeare.
he wist not when the hempen string i drew. gay.
hen. m. s. [penne, saxon and dutch; han, german, a cock.]
i. the female of a house-cock.
2. the female of any land-fowl.
the peacock, pheasant, and goldfinch cocks have glorious
colours; the hens have not. bacon.
whilst the hen bird is covering her eggs, the male generally
takes his stand upon a neighbouring bough within her hear.
ing, and by that means diverts her with his songs during the
whole time of her fitting. addison.
o'er the trackless waste
the heath hen flutters. thomson.
hen-driver, n. s. [hen and driver.] a kind of hawk.
the hen-driver i forbear to name. jwalton.
he’n-harm. } m. s. a kind of kite. ainsw. so called
he’n-harrier. probably from destroying chickens. py-
gurgus. -
hen-hearted, adj. [hen and heart.] dastardly; cowardly;
like a hen. a low word.
hen-pfcke d, adj. [hen and pecked..] governed by the wife.
a stepdame too i have, a cursed she,
who rules my hen-peck'd fire, and orders me. dryden.
the neighbours reported that he was hen pecked, which was
impossible, by such a mild-spirited woman as his wife. arbuth.
hooor. n.j. [hen and rooft.] the place where the poultry
relt.
many a poor devil stands to a whipping post for the pilfer-
ing of a silver spoon, or the robbing of a hen-roos. l’esor.
her house is frequented by a company of rogues, whom
she encourageth to rob his hen-roofts. swift.
if a man prosecutes gipsies with severity, his hen-rooft is sire
to pay for it. addison.
hey oft have fally'd out to pillage
the hen-roofts of some peaceful village. tickell.
he’nbane. m. s. [hyoscyamus, lat.] a plant.
it is very often found growing upon the sides of banks and
old dunghills. this is a very poisonous plant. * amiller.
that to which old socrates was curs'd,
or henbane juice, to swell 'em 'till they burst.
he’nbit. n.s. [4/ine soliis hed.raceis...] a plant.
in a scarcity in silesia a rumour was spread of its raining
millet-seed; but it was found to be only the seeds of the ivy.
leaved speedwell, or small herbit. derham's phys. theology.
hence. adv. or interj. [peonan, saxon; hennes, old english.)
i. from this place to another.
discharge my follow’rs; let them hence away,
from richard's night to bolingbroke's fair day. shakespeare.
th' almighty hath not built
here for his envy ; will not drive us hence. amilton.
a sullen prudence drew thee hence
from noise, fraud and impertinence.
2. away; to a distance. a word of command.
be not found here; hence with your little ones. shakesp.
hence with denial vain, and coy excuse. milion.
3. at a distance; in other places. not in use.
why should i then be false, since it is true
that i must die here, and live hence by truth shakespeare.
all members of our cause, both here and hence,
that are infinewed to this action. shakespeare.
4. from this time; in the future.
he who can reason well to-day about one sort of matters,
cannot at all reason to-day about others, though perhaps a year
hence he may. locke.
let not posterity a thousand years hence look for truth in the
voluminous annals of pedants. arbuthnot.
5. for this reason; in consequence of this.
hence perhaps it is, that solomon calls the fear of the lord
dryden.
roscommon.
the beginning of wisdom. willotson.
6. from this cause; from this ground.
11 f by
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1010</div><p class="text">h e r
h e r
by too strong a projecile motion the aliment tends to pu-
trefaction: hence may be deduced the force of exercise in. help-
ing digestion. arbuthnot on aliments.
7. from this source; from this original; from this store.
my flora was my sun; for as
one sun, so but one flora was :
all other faces borrowed hence --
their light and grace, as stars do thence. . suckling.
8. from hence is a vicious expression, which crept into use even
among good authors, as the original force of the word hence
was gradually forgotten. hence signifies from this.
an ancient author prophesy’d from hence,
behold on latian shores a foreign prince dryden.
to hence. v. a. [from the adverb.] to send off; to dispatch
to a distance. obsolete.
go, bawling curl thy hungry maw go fill
on yon foul flock, belonging not to me;
with that his dog he henc'd, his flock he curst.
hence fo'rth. adv. [penonpon's, saxon.]
forward.
thanes and kinsmen,
henceforth be earls. shakespeare's macbeth.
never henceforth shall i joy again;
never, oh never, shall i see more joy. shakes). hen. vi.
happier thou may’st be, worthier can'st not be;
taste this, and be henceforth among the gods,
sidney.
from this time
thyself a goddess. milton.
i never from thy side hen-forth will stray, -
*till day droop. milton.
if we treat gallant soldiers in this sort,
who then henceforth to our defence will come dryden.
hencef9 rw ard. adv. [hence and forward.] from this time
to all futurity.
henceforward will i bear
upon my target three fair shining suns.
pardon, i beseech you;
hences?rward i am ever rul’d by you. shakespeare.
the royal academy will admit henceforward only such who
are endued with good qualities. dryden.
henchman. m. s. [pync, a servant, and man, skinner; beirarz,
a horse, and man, spelman.] a page; an attendant. ob.
solete.
why should titania cross her oberon
i do but beg a little changeling boy, -
to be my henchman. shakspeare.
three henchmen were for ev'ry knight assign'd,
all in rich livery clad, and of a kind. - dryden.
7% hend. v. a. spenban, saxon, from hend, low latin, which
seems borrowed from hand or hond, teutonick.]
1. to seize; to lay hold on.
with that the sergeants hent the young man stout,
and bound him likewise in a worthless chain. fairfax.
2. to crowd; to surround. perhaps the following passage is
corrupt, and should be read hemmed; or it may mean to take
possion.
the generous and gravest citizens
have bent the gates, and very near upon
the duke is entering. shaks care.
hende cagon. m. s. [oxz and 2&amp;viz.] a figure of cleven
fides or angles.
hens fret. n.s. fumaria spium, hedge fumitory.
hepatical. adj. [hepaticus, latin; hepatique, french, from
hepat ick. : #723.j belonging to the liver.
if the evacuated blood be florid, it is stomach blood; if red
and copious, it's hepatick. harvey on consumptions.
the cystick gall is thick, and intensely bitter; the hepatick
gall is more fluid, and not so bitter. a, buthnot on aliments.
heps. m. / hawthorn-berries, commonly written hips. ainsw.
in hard winters there is observed great plenty of heps and
haws, which preserve the small birds from starving. bacon.
heptaca psola r. adj. [...12 and capsula.] having seven ca-
vities or cells.
ho ptagon. m. s. sheptagone, french; tız and yovsz.] a
figure with seven sides or angles.
hoosa l. goj. [from heptagon.] having seven angles or
1ccs.
hoarchy, n.s. sheptarchie, fr. o.12 and 23%.] a seven-
fold government.
in the saxon heptarchy i find little noted of arms, albeit the
germans, of whom they descended, used shields. camden.
england began not to be a people, when alfred reduced it
into a monarchy; for the materials thereof were extant be-
fore, namely, under the heptarchy. hale's origin of mankind.
the next returning planetary hour
of mars, who shar'd the heptarchy of pow'r,
- his steps bold arcite to the temple bent. dryden.
her: pron. [bena, pen, in saxon, stood for their, or of them,
which at length became the female possessive.]
i. belonging to a female; of a she 5 of a woman.
- about his neck
*gon and gilded snake had wreath'd itself,
\
shakspeare.
who with her head, nimble
the opening of his mouth.
still new favourites she chose,
'till up in arms my passion rose,
and cast away her yoke.
one month, three days, and ha
judith held the to. o, if an hour,
wond’rous beautiful her face;
but so weak and small her wit,
that she to govern were unfit,
and so susanna took her place.
2. the oblique case of she.
england is solidly king’d,
#. o so fantastically borne,
hat fear attends her not. shakeszaro, r.
she cannot seem deform'd to me, a&amp;sear', henry v,
and i would have her seem to otherss.
in threats, approach'd
shaksp. 4, jou liki,
cowl,
col.
the moon arose clad o'er in light, coll,
with thousand stars attending on her train;
with her they rise, with her they set again. col;
should i be left, and thou be lost, the sea
that bury'd her i lov’d, should bury me. " dr
hers. pronoun. this is used when it refers to so-
ing before: as, such are her “harms, such charms: o 0-
this pride of hers, -
upon advice, hath drawn my love from her, shifts,
thine own unworthiness, ; :- ".
will still that thou art mine not his, confess.
ol
some secret charm did all her ads attend, cul.
and what his fortune wanted, hers could mend. djilî
i bred you up to arms, said you to power, -
indeed to save a crown, not hers, but yours, dyin,
herald. m. s. [herault, french; herald, german.]
1. an officer whose business it is to register genealogos, jo
ensigns armorial, regulate funerals, and ancients; to cany
meliages between princes, and proclaim was and peace.
may none, whose scatter'd names honour my book,
for flict degrees of rank or title look,
'tis gainst the manners of an epigram,
and i a poet here, no herald am.
when time shall serve, let but the herall cry,'
and i'll appear again. shakyo, king liar.
embassador of peace, if peace you chuse;
bo. jiho,
or herald of a war, if you refuse. - djio,
- please thy pride, and search the heral's roll,
where thou shalt find thy famous pedigree. djin,
2
• a precursor; a forerunner; a harbinger.
it is the part of men to fear and tremble,
when the most mighty gods, by tokens, send
such dreadful herall, to astonish us, shais, join cesar,
it was the lark, the herald of the morn." saipart.
3. a proclaimer; a publisher.
after my death i wish no other herald,
no other speaker of my living actions,
but such an honest chronicler as griffith. shaksar,
to herald. v. a. [from the noun.] to introduce as by in
herald. a word not used.
we are sent from our royal master,
only to herald thee into his fight,
not pay thee. soison.
heraldry. m. s. [heraulderie, french, from hiraid.]
1. the art or office of a herald.
i am writing of heraldry. patham,
grant her, besides, of noble blood that ran drydor
in ancient veins, ere heraldry began. yist,
2. registry of genealogies.
*to no false wrado, when madness drew dino
her pedigree from those who too much knew. thi, who
3. blazonry. -
metals may blazon common beauties; she colini,
makes pearls and planets humble herally.
herb. m. s. [herle, french; herba, latin.] d have so-
herbs are those plants whose stalks are soft, an lois,
thing woody in them; as grass and hemlock.
in such a night
medea gather'd the enchanted herbs
that did renew old aeson.
with sweet-swelling half
espoused eve deck'd first her nuptial #. lie
unhappy, from whom still conceal d does
shalot.
milo,
colo,
of hero; and roots the harmless luxury. then we cal”
if the leaves are of chief use to us, ifolio lo
herbs ; as sage and mint. . .
herb eating animals, which do
grinders, and chew much. . a plant
herb christopher, or bane-berries. n. f plant.
herba'ceous. adj. [from herba, latind
1. belonging to herbs. or trunk; but at horld.
- strom
n't ruminate, h" o:
arbuthnot on 4"
ginger is the root of neither tree m juco, bo'
ceous plant, resembling the water flower. erly. -
2. feeding on vegetables; perhaps not p*p to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1011</div><p class="text">h e r
h e r
.
. their teeth are fitted to their food; the rapacious to catch-
ing, holding, and tearing their prey; the herbaceous to gather-
ing and comminution of vegetables. drham,
he'rbage. n.s. [herbage, french.]
1. herbs colle&amp;tively; grass; pasture.
- rocks lie cover'd with eternal snow;
thin herbage in the plains, and fruitles, field. dryden.
at the time the "eluge came the earth was loaded with
herbage, and thronged with animals. //oodward,
2: the tythe and the right of pasture. ainsworth.
herbal. m. s. [from berb...] a book containing the names
*o of plants.
... we leave the description of plants to herbals, and other
like books of natural history. bacon.
such a plant will not be found in the herbal of nature. brown.
. as for the medicinal uses of plants, the large herbals are
ample testimonies thereof. more's antid. against atheism.
, our herbal are sufficiently stored with plants. baker.
he realist. n.s. [from herbal..] a man skilled in herbs.
herbalists have distinguished them, naming that the male
whose leaves are lighter, and fruit rounder. brown.
her bar. m.s. [a word, i believe, only to be found in spenser.]
herb; plant.
the roof hereof was arched over head,
z and deck'd with flowers and hero, daintily. fairy queen.
he’r bar1st. "...s [herbarius, from herba, latin.] one skilled
in herbs.
.*aris?, have exercised a commendable curiosity in sub-
dividing plants of the same denomination. boyle.
* : * '99 much swayed by the opinions then current
*mongst herbarisis, that different colours of multiplicity of
leaves in the flower were sufficient to constitute a specifick
difference. ray on the creation.
as to the fuci, their seed hath been discovered and shewed
me first by an ingenious herbarist, derham,
herbelet. * / [diminutive of herb, or of herbula, latin.]
a small herb,
these herbelts, which we upon you strow. shakes.
frbe'scent. adj. [hirlescens, latin.] growing into herbs.
herbid. adj. [orbidus, latin.] covered with herbs.
horsor ist. n.s. [from *erb.] one curious in herbs. this
seems a mistake for herbaris.
a curious herbors has a plant, whose flower perishes in
about an hour. ray.
her borough. n. s. [herberg, german.] place of temporary
residence. now written harbour.
the german lord, when he went out of newgate into the
cart, took order to have his arms set up in his last harborough.
- ben. johnson's discoveries,
he'rbous. adj. [herbosus, latin.] abounding with herbs.
herbulent, adj. [from herbula..] containing herbs. diff.
hoosas. * / [herb and woman.] a woman that sells
crbs. -
i was like to be pulled to pieces by brewer, butcher, and
baker; even my herbwoman dunned meas i went along. arb.
he’rey. adj. [from herb.] having the nature of herbs.
no substance but earth, and the procedures of earth, as tile
and stone, yieldeth any moss or herby substance, bacon.
herd. m. s. [peons, saxon.]
i. a number of beasts together. it is peculiarly applied to black
cattle. flocks and herds are sheep and oxen or kine.
note a wild and wanton herd,
or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
fetching mad bounds.
there find a herd of heifers, wand'ring o'er
the neighbouring hill, and drive them to the shore. addison.
2. a company of men, in contempt or detestation.
survey the world, and where one cato shines,
shakespeare.
count a degenerate herd of catilines. dryden.
i do not remember where ever god delivered his oracles by
the multitude, or nature truths by the herd. locke.
3. it anciently signified a keeper of cattle, and in scotland it
is fill used. [by b, saxon.] a sense still retained in composi-
tion: as goatherd. -
to he r d. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to run in herds or companies.
weak women should, in danger, herd like deer. dryden.
it is the nature of indigency, like common danger, to en-
dear men to one another, and make them hard together, like
fellow-sailors in a storm. norris.
2. to associate; to become one of any number or party.
i'll hord among his friends, and seem - -
one of the number. adson's city.
run to towns, to herd with knaves and fools,
and undistinguish'd pass among the crowd. j/alsh.
to herd. v. a. to throw or put into an heid. -
the rest,
however great we are, honest and valiant, ---
are herded with the vulgar. ben. johnson's catiline.
her d g room.. n.s. [he d and groom.] a keeper of herds. not
in use.
5
but who shall judge the wager won or lost;
'hat shall yonder heragroom, and none other. spensor.
he'rdman. {": [herd and man.] one employed in tend-
he'rds man. i̇ ing herds: formerly, an owner of herds.
a herdsman rich, of much account was he,
in whom no evil did reign, or good appear. sidney.
and you, enchantment,
worthy enough a herdsman, (if e'er thou
these rural latches to his entrance open, -
i will devise a cruel death for thee. shakes. jointer's tale.
scarce themselves know how to hold
a sheephook, or have learn'd ought else the least
that to the faithful herdman's art belongs. milton.
there oft the indian herdsman, shunning heat,
shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds
at loop-holes cut through thickest shado. ash. par. loft.
$o stands a thracian herdsman with his spear
full in the gap, and hopes the hunted bea. dryden.
the herdsmen, round *
the chearful fire, provoke his health in goblets crown'd.
dryden's virgi's georgicks.
when their herdsmen could not agree, they parted by con-
fent. locke.
here, adv. [pen, saxon; hier, dutch.]
1. in this place.
before thy here approach, .
old siward, with ten thousand warlike men,
all ready at appoint, was setting forth. shakesp. macbeth.
i, upon my frontiers hero,
keep residence. milton.
here nature first begins
her farthest verge. - milton.
how wretched does prometheus' state appear,
while he his second mis’ry suffers here / cowley.
to-day is ours, we have it here. cowley.
2. in the present state. -
thus shall you be happy here, and more happy hereafter.
bacon's advice to williers.
3. it is osed in making an offer or attempt.
then here's for earnest:
'tis finish’d. dryden.
4. in drinking a health.
here's to thee, dick. cowley.
however, friend, here's to the king, one cries;
to him who was the king, the friend replies. prior.
5. it is often opposed to there; in one place, distinguished from
another.
good-night: mine eyes do itch;
doth that bode weeping?
—'tis neither here northere. shakespeare's othell.
we are come to see thee fight, to see thee foigne, to see
thee traverse, to see thee here, to see thee there, shakespeare.
then this, then that man's aid, they crave, implore;
post here for help, seek there their followers. daniel.
i would have in the heath some thickets made only of sweet-
briar and honey-suckle, and some wild vine amongst; and the
ground set with violets; for these are sweet, and prosper in the
shade; and these to be in the heath here and there, not in
order. bacon.
the devil might perhaps, by inward suggestions, have
drawn in here and there a single proselyte. gov. of the tongue.
your city, after the dreadful fire, was rebuilt, not pre-
sently, by raising continued streets; but at first here a house,
and there a house, to which others by degrees were joined.
spratt's sermons.
he that rides post through a country may be able to give
some loose description of here a mountain and there a plain,
here a morass and there a river, woodland in one part, and
savanas in another. - locke.
6. here seems, in the following passage, to mean thi, place.
bid them farewel, cordelia, though unkind;
thou losest here, a better where to find. shakes). k. lear.
here agours. adv. [here and about..] about this place.
i saw hereabouts nothing remarkable, except augustus’s
bridge. - - 4ddison on italy.
here after. adv. [here and after.]
1. in time to come; in futurity.
how worthy he is, i will leave to appear hereafter, rather
than story him in his own hearing. shakespeare.
the grand-child, with twelve sons increas'd, departs
from canaan, to a land hereafter call’d
egypt. milton.
hereafter he from war shall come,
and bring his trojans peace. dryden.
2. in a future state. -
you shall be happy here, and more happy hereafter. bacon.
here after. m. s. a future state. this is a figurative noun,
not to be used but in poetry.
'tis the divinity that stirs within us;
'tis heaven itself that points out an hereafter, -
and intimates eternity to man. *f;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1012</div><p class="text">h e r
i still shall wait
some new hereafter, and a future state.
her ea’r. adv. [here and at..] at this. - - - -
- one man coming to the tribune, to receive his donative,
with a garland in his hand, the tribune, offended hereat, de-
manded what this singularity * ? płocker.
"... adv. [here and by. this,
ho: ao the †. #. which were dead before,
it is nothereby either one way or other determined. . hooker.
hereby the moors are not excluded by beauty, there being
in this description no confideration of colours. brown.
the acquisition of truth is of infinite concernment: hereby
we become acquainted with the nature of things. watts.
here'pitable. adj. [hares, lat..] whatever may be occu-
pied as inheritance. - - -
adam being neither a monarch, nor his imaginary monar-
chy hereditable, the power which is now in the world is not
that which was adam's. locke.
he’reditament. n.s. sharedium, lat..] a law term de-
noting inheritance, or hereditary estate. - -
hereditary. adj. [hereditaire, french; hereditarius, lat.]
possessed or claimed by right of inheritance; descending by
inheritance.
to thee and thine, hereditary ever,
prior.
remain this ample third of our fair kingdom. shakespeare,
these old fellows
have their ingratitude in them hereditary. shakespeare.
he shall ascend
the throne hereditary, and bound his reign
with earth's wide bounds, his glory with the heav'ns.
milton.
thus while the mute creation downward bend
their fight, and to their earthly mother tend,
man looks aloft, and with erected eyes
beholds his own hereditary skies.
when heroick verse his youth shall raise,
and form it to hereditary praise. dryden's virgil.
here'ditarily. adv. [from hereditary.] by inheritance.
here is another, who thinks one of the greatest glories of
his father was to have distinguished and loved you, and who
loves you hereditarily. pope to swift.
here1'n. adv. [here and in..] in this.
how highly soever it may please them with words of truth
to extol sermons, they shall not herein offend us. hooker.
my best endeavours shall be done herein. shakespeare.
since truths, absolutely necessary to salvation, are so clearly
revealed that we cannot err in them, unless we be notoriously
wanting to ourselves, herein the fault of the judgment is re-
solved into a precedent default in the will. south.
here1’nto. adv. [here and into.] into this.
because the point about which we strive is the quality of our
laws, our first entrance hereinto cannot better be made than
dryden's ovid.
with consideration of the nature of law in general. hooker.
hereosf. adv. [here and of..] from this; of this.
hereof comes it that prince harry is valiant. shakespeare.
hereo'n. adv. [here and on..] upon this.
if we should strictly insist herson, the possibility might fall
into question. brown's wugar errours.
here out. adv. [here and out.]
1. out of this place.
a bird all white, well feather'd on each wing,
here-cut up to the throne of god did fly. spensor.
2. all the words compounded of here and a preposition, except
hereafter, are obsolete, or obsolescent; never used in poetry,
and seldom in prose, by elegant writers, though perhaps not
unworthy to be retained.
her emi'tical. adj. [it should be written eremitical, from ere-
hite, of #79 (gp, a desart; heremitique, french.] solitary;
fuitable to a hermit.
you describe so well your heremitical state of life, that none
of the ancient anchorites could go beyond you for a cave in
a rock. o pope.
he'resy. m. s. [herse, french ; haeresis, latin; &amp;6=rig..] an
opinion of private men different from that of the catholick
and orthodox church. -
heresy prevaileth only by a counterfeit shew of reason,
whereby notwithstanding it becometh invincible, unless it be
convicted of fraud by manifest remonstrance clearly true, and
unable to be withstood. hooker.
as for speculative hereftes, they work mightily upon men's
wits; yet do not produce great alterations in states. bacon,
. let the truth of that religion i profess be represented to her
judgment, not in the odious disguises of levity, schism, heresy
novelty, cruelty, and disloyalty. king chara.
o of soario, french ; &amp;eta;: and &amp;#x?..]
eader in heresy; the head of a herd of hereticks.
the pope declared him not only an heretick, but an here-
sarch. stillin
he(retick. m. s. [heretique, fr. tillingfieet.
1. one who propagates his private o
catholick church.
dietrix};..]
pinions in opposition to the
these things would be prevented, if no
schismatick be suffered to go into thos, ...” herito ot
no hereticks desire to spread - bacon,
their wild opinions like these epicures. d.
bellarmin owns, that he h , , , , oatitt,
father. &gt; as quoted a heretiri instead of:
when a papist uses the word hereticis, #: tarning,
protestants; when a protestant uses the y means
- word, h
persons wilfully and contentiously obstinate in i: o
m
errouns, watt;', i.-
2. it is or has been used ludicrously for any one
is erroneous.
i rather will suspect the sun with cold
than thee with wantonness; thy honour fland,
in him that was of late an heretick, 2
as firm as faith. shaks,
heret1cal... adj. [from heretick.] containing heref speare,
how exclude they us from being any part of the §
christ under the colour of heresy, when the
it possible even for him to be, as touching
persuasion, heretical, who in their opinion
church, but holdeth the chiefest place of
same * hof
constantinople was in an uproar, upon an ignorant so
that those words had some heretical meaning. c deta) ;
here"tically. adv. [from heretical.] with heresy. ity.
hereto. adv. [here and to..] to this; add to this,
heretofo re. adv. [heretz and fore.] formerl
i have long defired to know you heretofore,
your virtue, though i love not your person. side;
so near is the connection between the civil state and. i.
ous, that heretofore you will find the government and #.
hose opinion
hurch of
y cannot but grant
his own personal
not only is of the
authority over the
y; anciently,
with honouring
priesthood united in the same person. south
we now can form no more -
long schemes of life, as heretofore. swift.
her eunto... adv. [here and unto.] to this.
they which rightly consider after what sort the heart of man
hereunto is framed, must of necessity acknowledge, that whoso
assenteth to the words of eternal life, doth it in regard of his
authority whose words they are. hailer.
agreeable hereunto might not be amiss to make children
often to tell a story of any thing they know. lait,
here with. adv. [here and with..] with this.
you, fair fir, be not herewith dismaid,
but constant keep the way in which ye stand. ... somsr.
herewith the castle of hame was suddenly surprised by the
scots. hayward,
he'riot. n.s.. [bene; lb, saxon.] a fine paid to the lord at
the death of a landholder, commonly the best thing in the
landholder's possession.
this he detains from the ivy; for he should be the true
possessory lord thereof, but the olive dispenseth with his con-
science to pass it over with a compliment and an herit every
year. howth; wotal forst.
though thou consume but to renew,
yet love, as lord, doth claim a brist due. chavdin'.
i took him up, as your beriot, with intention to have ma"
the best of him, and then have brought the whole produce of
him in a purse to you. dryden's don silasia,
heritable. adj. theres, lat.] a person that may inho
whatever may be inherited. -, -11
by the canon law this son shall be legitimate and hai",
according to the laws of england. hal's common law,
he'ritage. n.s.. [heritage, french.] -
1. inheritance; estate devolved by succession; estion go.
let us our father's heritage divide. , , , hilled tall,
he considers that his proper home and heritogo" o:
world, and therefore regards the events of this with the his
ference of a guest that tarries but a day. 'giri,
2. [in divinity.] the people of god. - p,
o lord, save thy people, and bless thineherit". o ".
herma’phrodite. m. j. [hermaphrodite, french, isom
#ons and dogcorn j an animal uniting two sexes,
man and wife make but one right lovil.”
canonical hermaphrodite. - o:
monstrofity could not incapacitate from marrio” w o:
hermaphrodites. - arhukoto o:
hermaphrodi'tic al. adj. [from harmaphroditi.] paso";
of both sexes. - litical
there may be equivocal seeds and hormoralia
ples, that contain the radicality of different 9" he ima.
hermetical. i adj. [from hermes, of moo
hermetick. ; gined inventer of chymist:
french.j. chymical. - -
an hometical seal, or to seal any thing o
heat the neck of a glass 'till it is just ready to melt, o,
with a pair of hot sincers to twist it close together. ift of
the tube was closed at one end with diachylon, 1. book,
an hermetical seal. : th.
hermetically. adv. [from hermetical.] according *
hermetical or chimick art, s . he
princi.
brown.
|y, is to
and this
--
y; hermoso,
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1013</div><p class="text">h e r
s
o
.
o:
-
* *
o
he suffered those things to putrefy in hermetically sealed
glasses, and vessels close covered with paper; and not only so,
but in vessels covered with fine lawn, so as to admit the air
and keep out the insects: no living thing was ever produced
there. bentley.
he’rmit. m. s. [hermite, french; contracted from eremite,
ignorns.]
1. a solitary; an anchoret; one who retires from society to
contemplation and devotion.
a wither'd hermit, fivescore winters worn,
might shake off fifty looking in her eye. shakespeare.
you lay this command upon me, to give you my poor ad-
vice for your carriage in so eminent a place: i humbly return
you mine opinion, such as an hermit rather than a courtier
can render. bacon's advice to williers.
he had been duke of savoy, and, after a very glorious reign,
took on him the habit of a hermit, and retired into this soli-
tary spot. addison on italy,
2. a beadsman; one bound to pray for another. improper.
for those of old,
and the late dignities heap'd up to them,
we rest your hermit. - shakespeare.
he'rmitage. n.s.. [hermitage, french..] the cell or habita-
tion of a hermit. -
by that painful way they pass
forth to an hill, that was both steep and high;
on top whereof a sacred chapel was,
and eke a little hermitage thereby.
go with speed
to some forlorn and naked hermitage,
remote from all the pleasures of the world.
and may at last my weary age
find out the peaceful hermitage,
the hairy gown and mossy cell,
where i may sit and rightly spell
of every star that heav'n doth shew,
and ev'ry herb that sips the dew. milton.
about two leagues from fribourg we went to see a hermi-
tage : it lies in the prettiest solitude imaginable, among woods
and rocks. addison on italy.
he'rmit ess. n. s. [from hermit.] a woman retired to devo-
tion.
hermi't1cal. adj. [from hermit.] suitable to a hermit.
hermod actyl. n.s.. [ions and 3xolvagp.]
hermodactyl is a root of a determinate and regular figure,
and represents the common figure of a heart cut in two, from
half an inch to an inch in length. this drug was first brought
into medicinal use by the arabians, and comes from egypt
and syria, where the people use them, while fresh, as a vomit
or purge ; and have a way of roasting them for food, which
they eat in order to make themselves fat. the dried roots
are a gentle purge, now little used. hill's mat. med.
hern. n.s. [contracted from heron, which see.]
birds that are most easy to be drawn are the mallard, swan,
hern, and bittern. peacham on drawing:
he’rn hill. m. s. [hern and hill.] an herb. ainsworth.
hernia. m. s. [lat..] any kind of rupture, diversified by
the name of the part affected.
fairy queen.
shakespeare,
a hernia would certainly succeed. wiseman's surgery.
het.o. n. s. [heros, latin; #535.]
i. a man eminent for bravery.
i sing of heroes and of kings,
in mighty numbers mighty things. cowley.
heroes in animated marble frown. pope.
in this view he ceases to be an hero, and his return is no
longer a virtue. pope's odyssey.
these are thy honours, not that here thy bust
is mix'd with heroes, or with kings thy dust. pope.
2. a man of the highest class in any respect; as, a hero in
learning. -
he'roess. n.s.. [from hero; herois, lat..] a heroine; a fe-
male hero. not in use.
in which were held, by sad decease,
heroes and heroesos. chapman.
he rosical. adj. [from hero.] befitting an hero; noble; il-
lustrious ; heroick. -
musidorus was famous over all asia for his heroical enter-
prizes. - sidney.
though you have courage in an heroical degree, i ascribe it
to you as your second attribute. dryden.
herosic aliy. adv. [from heroical.] after the way of a hero;
suitably to an hero.
not heroically in killing his tyrannical cousin.
free from all meaning, whether good or bad;
and, in one word, heroically mad.
heroick. adj. [from hero ; heroique, fr.]
1. productive of heroes.
bolingbroke
from john of gaunt doth bring his pedigree,
being but the fourth of that heroick line. shakespeare.
2. noble; suitable to an hero ; brave; magnanimous; intre-
pid; enterprising; illustrious.
ol. i.
sidney.
dryden.
not that which justly gives heroickname
o person, or to poem.
verse makes heroick virtue live,
but you can life to verses give.
3. reciting the acts of heroes. used of poetry.
methinks heroick poesy, 'till now,
like some fantastick fairy land did show. cowley.
i have chosen the most heroick subject which any poet could
desire: i have taken upon me to describe the motives, the be-
ginning, progress and successes of a most just and necessarv
war, - dryden;
an heroick poem is the greatest work which the soul of man
is capable to perform: the design of it is to form the mind to
heroick virtue by example. drydon.
heroickly. adv. [from heroick.] suitably to an hero. he-
roically is more frequent, and more analogical.
samson hath quit himself
like samson, and heroickly hath finish'd
a life heroick. milton,
e"roine. n.s. [from hero; heroine, fr.] a female hero.
anciently, according to english analogy, heroes.
but inborn worth, that fortune can controul,
new-strung, and stiffer bent her softer soul ;
the heroine assum'd the woman's place,
confirm'd her mind, and fortify'd her face.
then shall the british stage
more noble characters expose to view,
and draw her finish'd heroines from you. addison.
he'roism. n.s.. [heroisme, fr.] the qualities or chara&amp;ter of
an hero.
if the odyssey be less noble than the iliad, it is more in-
structive: the iliad abounds with more heroism, this with more
morality. broome's notes to the odyssey,
heron. n.s.. [heron, fr.]
1. a bird that feeds upon fish.
so lords, with sport of stag and heron full,'
sometimes we see small birds from nests do pull. sidney.
the heron, when she soareth high, sheweth winds. bacon.
2. it is now commonly pronounced i.
the tow'ring hawk let future poets fing,
who terror bears upon his soaring wing;
let them on high the frighted hern survey,
and lofty numbers paint their airy fray. gay.
he'ron ry. } n.s, [from heron; commonly pronounced
he'ron shaw. hernry..] a place where herons breed.
they carry their load to a large heronry above three miles.
derham's physico-theology.
he'rpes. n.s.. . [forts.] . a cutaneous inflammation of two
kinds: miliaris, or pustularis, which is like millet-seed upon
the skin; and exedens, which is more corrosive and pene-
trating, so as to form little ulcers. quincy.
a farther progress towards acrimony maketh a herpes ; and,
if the access of acrimony be very great, it maketh an herpes
exedens. jwiseman's surgery.
herring. m. s. shareng, french; paening, saxon.] a small
sea-fish. -
the coast is plentifully stored with round fish, pilchard,
herring, mackrel, and cod. carew's survey of cornwal.
buy my herring fresh. swift,
hers. pron. the female possessive used when it refers to a
substantive going before: as, this is her house, this house is
hers. see her.
how came her eyes so bright not with salt tears;
milish,
waller,
dryden,
if so, my eyes are oftner wash'd than hers. shakespeare.
whom ill fate would ruin, it prefers ;
for all the miserable are made hers. //allers
i see her rowling eyes;
and panting, lo! the god, the god, she cries;
with words not hers, and more than human sound,
she makes th' obedient ghosts peep trembling through the
round. o roscommon.
herse. m. s. shersia, low latin; supposed to come from
penian, to praise.] this is likewise written hearse; see hearse.
1. a temporary monument raised over a grave.
2. the carriage in which corpses are drawn to the grave. '
when mourning nymphs attend their daphnis' herse,
who does not weep that reads the moving verse roscom.
on all the line a sudden vengeance waits,
and frequent herses shall besiege your gates. pope.
t. herse. v. a. [from the noun.] to put into an herse.
i would my daughter were dead at my foot, and the jewels
in her ear. o, would she were hers'd at my foot, and the
ducats in her coffin. shakespeare's merchant of penice.
the grecians spritefully drew from the darts the corse,
and hers'd it, bearing it to fleet. chapman.
the house is hers'd about with a black wood,
which nods with many a heavy-headed tree. crashaw.
herself. pronoun.
1. a female individual, as distinguished from others.
the jealous o'er-worn widow and herself,
since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen, -
are mighty gossips in this monarchy. shakespears.
1 i 2. being<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1014</div><p class="text">;
h e y
- h e. t
2. being in her own power; mistress of her own thoughts.
the more she looks, the more her fears increase,
at nearer fight; and she's herself the less. dryden.
. the oblique case of the reciprocal pronoun; as, she hurt
zlf.
*f; daughter of pharaoh came down to wash hers/f.
exodus.
she returned answer to herself. - judges.
he'sselike. adj. [herse and like..] funereal; suitable to fu-
s.
*. in the old testament, if you listen to david's harp,
you shall hear as many herselike airs as carols. bacon.
t, he'ry. v. a. [perian, saxon, to praise, to celebrate.] to
hallow; to regard as holy. now no longer in use.
thenot, now nis the time of merrymake,
nor pan to hery, nor with love to play;
like mirth in may is mectest for to make,
or summer shade, under the cocked hay. sponsor.
but were thy years green as now be mine,
then wouldst thou learn to carol of love,
and hery with hymns thy las's glove. sponsor.
he's itancy. m. s. [from hostate.] dubiousness; uncertainty ;
suspence.
the reason of my hostancy about the air is, that i forgot to
try whether that liquor, which shot into crystals, exposed to
the air, would not have done the like in a vess] accurately
stopped. - boyle.
some of them reasoned without doubt or hostancy, and lived
and died in such a manner as to slew that they believed their
own reasonings. atterbury.
t. hesitate. v. a. shafta, latin ; hoster, french..] to
be doubtful; to delay; to pause ; to make difficulty.
a spirit of revenge makes him curse the grecians in the
seventh book, when they hostate to accept hector's chal-
lenge. - pope.
willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike,
just hint a fault, and hostate dislike;
alike reserv'd to blame or to commend,
a tim’rous foe, and a suspicious friend. pope.
hesir ation. m. s. [from hesitate.]
1. doubt; uncertainty ; difficulty made.
i cannot foresee the difficulties and hostations of every one :
they will be more or fewer, according to the capacity of each
peruser. woodward’s natural hilary.
2. intermission of speech; want of volubility.
many clergymen write in so diminutive a manner, with
such frequent blots and interlineations, that they are hardly
able to go on without perpetual hesitations. swift.
hest. m. s. spore, saxon.] cominand; precept; injunction.
obsolete, or written behest.
thou dost afflict the not deserver,
as him that doth thy lovely hesis despise. spensor.
thou wast a spirit too delicate
to act her earthy and abhorr'd commands,
refusing her grand hesis. shakeshcare.
heteroclite. m. s. [heteroclite, fr. heteroclitum, latin;
£rst's and xxiv.o.] -
1. such nouns as vary from the common forms of declension,
-
by any redundancy, defect, or otherwise. clarke.
the hot recline nouns of the latin should not be touched in
the first learning of the rudiments of the tongue. j/atts.
2. anything or person deviating from the common rule.
he feroc li tic al. adj. [from heteroclito...] deviating from the
common rule.
in the mention of sins heteroclitical, and such as want either
name or precedent, there is oft times a sin, even in their hi-
storics. brown’s pulgar errours.
i: e ter opox. adj. thrtered:c, french ; sts; o' and 3%z.]
deviating from the established opinion; not orthodox.
partiality may be observed in some to vulgar, in others to
heterodox tenets. o locke.
he teredox. m. s. an opinion peculiar.
not only a simple heterodox, but a very hard paradox it will
seem, and of great absurdity, if we say attraction is unjustly
appropriated unto the loadstone. brown's /ulgar errours.
iiete rogo neal. adj. [heterogene, french; irofos and yevos.]
not of the same nature; not kindred.
let the body adjacent and ambient be not commaterial,
but merely heterogeneal towards the body that is to be pre-
solved: such are quicksilver and white amber to herbs and
flies. - bacon's natural history.
the light, whose rays are all alike refrangible, i call fim-
ple, homogeneal, and similar; and that whose rays are some
more refrangible than others, i call compound, heterogeneal,
... and dissimilar. new
hieter z 27. / shot 21-2-2.2:44 £101027.
9. enetty. n.s.. [heterogeneite, fr. from heterogeneous.]
“otion of nature; contrariety or dissimilitude of quali.
1cs.
2. opposite or diffirmilar part.
. burnt with an open fire in a chimney, is se-
** into ashes and soot; whereas the same wood, di-
stilled in a retort, does yield far other heter,…,
resolved into oil, spirit, so o *::::::::: and is
heterogenequs. adj. [+o, and yiwo.] n. *k,
opposite or dissimilar in nature. tkind:;
i have observed such heterogeneous bod: -
included in the mass of this sandstone. too, * found
hetero'sci ans. m. s. [rego, and axix.] those *::::
dows fall only one way, as the shadows of us who o sha-
of the tropick fall at noon always to the north, we north
to i.† v. a. part, hewn or hewed. [peasan, saxon; haulson,
1. to cut by blows with an edged instrument; to hack
o: io the o steel did light, -
and made such way that hew’d it quite in two:
i had o quite in twain, sosr.
once more to hew thy target from thy brawn
or lose my arm for’t. &gt;
he was hewn in pieces by hamilton's fiends, i.
one vane was so grievously hewn, that many so
have died of less than half his hurts, whereof he was * s
shałsoar.
- haro
2. to chop; to cut. ajivard,
he from deep wells with engines water drew,
and us’d his noble hands the wood to hero. dodo
3. to cut, as with an axe: with the particles down, wh
nifies to fell; up, to excavate from below;
he that depends
upon your favours, swims with fins of lead,
and hows down oaks with rushes. shakes aro, coriolinus
braye followers, yonder stands the thorny wood, -
which, by the heav'n's assistance and your strength,
must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night. so h.wi.
scarce can i speak, my choler is so great:
oh! i could hew up rocks, and fight with flint, shaloft,
yet shall the axe of justice hew him down,
en it fig-
off, to spirit,
and level with the root his lofty crown. sando.
he from the mountain hewing timber tall,
began to build a vessel of huge bulk. millin,
we'll force the gate where marcus keeps his guard,
and hew down all that would oppose our passige. also,
4. to form or shape with an axe: with out.
thou hast howed thee out a sepulchre here, as he that howed
him out a sepulchre on high. isa. xxii. 16.
nor is it so proper to hew out religious reformations by the
sword, as to polish them by fair and equal disputations, k. c.
this river rises in the very heart of the alps, and has along
valley that seems hown cut on purpose to give its waters apas-
sage amidst so many rocks. addison on italy,
5. to form laboriously.
the gate was adamant; eternal frame; -
which, hew’d by mars himself, from indian quarries came,
the labour of a god. dyson's falls.
next unto bricks are preferred the square hown stone. art.
i now pass my days, not studious nor idle, rather polishing
old works than hewing out new. . pope to swift.
he'w er. m. s. [from h.w..] one whose employment is too
wood or stone.
at the building of solomon's temple there were solo
thousand howers in the mountains. r bon.
hexagon. n.s. [hexagone, french; £ and yoz.] asso
of fix fides or angies: the most capacious of all to go
that can be added to each other without any interio; “
therefore the cells in honeycombs are of thatform.
hexagonal. adj. [from hexagon.] having fix sides of cgi-
in crs.
as for the figures of crystal, it is for the most po o:
mal, or fix-cornered. - †
many of them shoot into regular figures; * go;
bastard diamonds into hexagonal. j.
hexagony. m. s. [from hexagon.] a figure of fixo lar
when i red in st. ambrose of hexagonio, or * -
cellars of bees, did i therefore conclude that too." .
thematicians ? bramh. o hitti,
hexx meter. m. s. so and airew.j.a verse o ho-
the latin hoanor has more sect than to o;do,
roick. - * co-
hexangular. adj. [.. and angulus, lat.] having six cof
ners. ord.
hexangular sprigs or shoots of chrystal. , , o
hexa'pop. m.s. (£ and wojo.j. an animal witho ic
i take those to have been the hexapods, from * eates,
greater sort of beetles come ; for that sort of hexapodias' r},
in america. in a
hexaostick. n.s. so and ozo; j a po of o
hey, into isroom high. as expression.93%
hortation: the contrary to the latin *.
shadwell from the town retiros, .
to bless the wood with o o
then hey for praise and panegyro. sick 4,
he’yday. interj. *. high day.] an expression off"
exultation, and sometimes of wondo thou't
alex-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1015</div><p class="text">h i d
h i e
o
o:
thou'lt say anon he is some kin to thee,
thou spend'st such heyday wit in praising him. shakespeare.
'twas a strange riddle of a lady,
not love, if any lov'd her, heyday ! hudibras.
he'y day. m. s. a frolick; wildness.
- at your age -
the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
and waits upon the judgment. shakespeare.
he'ydf gives. m. s. a wild frolick dance. obsolete.
but friendly fairys met with many graces,
and light-foot nymphs can chase the ling’ring night
with heydigives, and trimly trodden traces. spensor.
h1a"tron. m. s. [from hio, lat..] the act of gaping.
men observing the continual hiation, or holding open the
camelion's mouth, conceive the intention thereof to receive
the aliment of air; but this is also occasioned by the greatness
of the lungs. brown's wulgar errours.
hia’rus. n.s. [hiatus, lat.] -
1. an aperture; a gaping breach. -
those hiatus's are at the bottom of the sea, whereby the
abyss below open into and communicates with it. woodward.
2. the opening of the mouth by the succession of an initial to
a final vowel. --
the hiatus should be avoided with more care in poetry than
in oratory; and i would try to prevent it, unless where the
cutting it off is more prejudicial to the sound than the hiatus
itself. - pope.
hue &amp; rnal. adj. [hihernus, lat..] belonging to the winter.
this star should rather manifest its warming power in the
winter, when it remains conjoined with the sun in its hiber-
rial conversion. brown's vulgar errours.
hiccius doccius. m. s. [corrupted, i fancy, from hic ost
doctus, this or here is the learned man. used by jugglers of
themselves...] a cant word for a juggler; one that plays fast
and loose. * =
an old dull sot, who told the clock
for many years at bridewell dock,
at westminster and hicks's hall,
and hiccius doccius play’d in all ;
where, in all governments and times, --
h' had been both friend and foe to crimes. hudibras.
hiccosu gh. n.s.. [hicken, danish.] a convulsion of the sto-
mach producing sobs.
so by an abbey's skeleton of late
i heard an eccho supererogate - -
through imperfection, and the voice restore,
as if she had the hiccush o'er and o'er. cleaveland.
sneezing cureth the hiccough, and is profitable unto women
in hard labour. - brown’s vulgar errours.
if the stomach be hurt, singultus or hiccough follows.
sosoman's surgery.
*--
to hi’ccouch. v. m. [from the noun..] to sob with convul-
sion of the stomach.
t., hickup. v. n. [corrupted from hiccotsgh..] to sob with a
convulsed stomach.
quoth he, to bid me not to love,
is to forbid my pulse to move,
my beard to grow, my cars to prick up,
os, when i'm in a fit, to hickup., hudibras.
h1'ckw a ll. ; n, s. a bird. ainsworth.
! i'ckw ay.
o part, pass of hide.
of his fame shall be atchiev'd, renown on earth ;
and what most merits fame, in filence hid. milton.
other hidden cause
left them superior. milton.
nature and nature's laws lay hid in night 3
god said, let newton be, and all was light. pope.
7, hipr. v. a. preter. hid; part, pass hid or hidden, sploan,
saxon.) to conceal ; to withold or withdraw from fight or
wledge.
kno avont, and quit my fight; let the earth hide thee! shak.
his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels
of chaff. shakosheare's merchant of penice.
nile hears him knocking at his sev’nfold gates,
and seeks his hidden spring, and fears his nephews fates.
dryden.
thus the fire of gods and men below:
what i have hidden, hope not thou to know. i}ryden.
the sev'ral parts lay hidden in the piece;
th’ occasion but exerted that, or this. dryden.
then for my corps a homely grave provide,
which love and me from publick scorn may hide. dryden.
seas hid with navies, chariots passing o'er -
the channel, on a bridge from shore to shore. . dryden.
with what aflonishment and veneration may we look into
our own fouls, where there are such hidden stores of virtue and
knowledge, such inexhausted sources of perfection ? addison.
the coasty being makes a much longer voyage than ulysses,
puts in practice many more wiles, and hides himself under a
greater variety of shapes. addison.
hideous. adj. [hideux, fr.]
hell trembles at the fight, and hides its head
} #." darkness, while on earth each heart
s filled with peace. rowe's royal conv
to hide. v. m. #. lye hid; to be concealed. yal conver!.
a fox, hard run, begged of a countryman to help him to
fome hiding place. - l'estrange,
our bolder talents in full view display'd
your virtues open fairest in the shade:
bred to disguise, in publick ’tis you hide,
where none distinguish 'twixt your shame and pride,
weakness or delicacy. pope.
hide and seek, n. s. a play in which some hide themselves,
and another seeks them. -
the boys and girls would venture to come and play at hide
and seek in my hair. gulliver’s travels.
hide. m. s. [pyoe, saxon; haude, dutch.]
1. the skin of any animal, either raw or dressed.
the trembling weapon past
through nine bull hides, each under other plac'd
on his broad shield.
pisistratus was first to grasp their hands,
and spread soft hides upon the yellow sands.
2. the human skin : in contempt.
oh, tyger's heart, wrapt in a woman's hide 1
how could's; thou drain the life-blood of the child: shafts.
his mantle, now his hide, with rugged hairs
cleaves to his back ; a famish’d face he bears. dryden.
3. a certain quantity of land. [hide, hyde, french ; hida, bar-
barous latin, as much as one plough can till.] ainsworth.
one of the first things was a more particular inquisition
than had been before of every hide of land within the precine's
of his conquest, and how they were holden.
hide bou'nd. adj. [hide and bound.] -
1. a horse is said to be hidebound when his skin sticks so hard
to his ribs and back, that you cannot with your hand pull up
or loosen the one from the other. it sometimes comes by
poverty and bad keeping; at other times from over-riding, or
a surfeit. - , farrier's dic7.
2. [in trees.] being in the fate in which the bark will not
give way to the growth.
a rootes a tree may be hidebound, but it will not keep open
without somewhat put into it. bacon's natural history.
like stinted hidebound trees, that just have got
sufficient sap at once to bear and rot. wist.
3. harsh; untractable. , -
and still the harsher and hidebounder,
the damsels prove, become the fonder.
4. niggardly ; penurious; parsimonious.
3
dryden.
pope.
j/otton.
hudibras.
answorth.
1. horrible; dreadful; shocking. -
if he could have turned himself to as many forms as pro-
teus, every form should have been made hideous.
some monster in thy thoughts,
too hideous to be shewn. shakespeare's othello.
i fled, and cry’d out death !
hell trembled at the hideous name, and figh’d
from all her caves, and back resounded death.
milton.
her eyes grew stiffen'd, and with sulphur burn;
her hideous looks and hellish form return ;
her curling snakes with hisings fill the place,
and open all the furies of her face. dryden,
2. it is commonly used of risible objecis : the following use is
less authorited. -
'tis forced through the hiatus's at the bottom of the sea
with such vehemence, that it puts the sea into the most hor-
rible disorder, making it rage and roar with a most hideous
and amazing noise. !/oodward’s natural history.
3. it is used by spenser in a sense not now retained; detestable.
o hideous hanger of dominion. spensor.
h1'deously. adv. [from hideous...] horribly; dreadfully ; in
a manner that shocks. -
i arm myself
to welcome the condition of the time;
which cannot look more hideously on me, -
than i have drawn it in my fantasy. sha'esheare.
this, in the present application, is hideously profane ; but
the sense is intelligible. collier's defence.
h1'deousness. n.s.. [from hideous.] horribleness; dreadful-
ness; terrour. -
h1'der. n. s. [from the verb.] he that hides,
to h1 e. v. n. [ple:san, saxon.]
1. to hasten; to go in haste.
when they had mark'd the changed skies, -
they wist their hour was spent; then each to rest him hics,
fairy queen.
my will is even this,
that presently you his you home to bed. shakspeare.
well, i will hie,
and so bestow these papers as you bade me. shakespeare.
some to the shores do fly,
some to the woods, or whither fear advis'd ; -
but running from, all to destruction hie. daniel.
the
sidney.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1016</div><p class="text">h i g
h i g
the snake no sooner hist,
dut virtue heard it, and away she hy'd. crashaw.
thither, full fraught with mischievous revenge,
accurs'd, and in a cursed hour, he hier. milton.
thus he advis'd me, on yon aged tree
hang up thy lute, and his thee to the sea;. waller.
the youth, returning to his mistress, hier. dryden.
2. it was andiently used with or without the reciprocal pronoun.
it is now j: obsolete in all its uses.
auster spy’d him;
cruel auster thither hy'd him. crashaw.
hi’erarch. n.s. [for and 26x; ; hierarque, fr.] the
chief of a sacred order.
angels, by imperial summons call’d,
forthwith from all the ends of heav'n appear'd,
under their hierarchs in orders bright. milton.
hierarchical. adj. [hierarchique, french.j belonging to
sacred or ecclesiastical government.
h1’erarch y. m. s. [hierarchie, french.] -
1. a sacred government; rank or subordination of holy beings.
out of the hierarchies of angels sheen, -
the gentle gabriel call'd he from the rest. fairfax.
he rounds the air, and breaks the hymnick notes
in birds, heav'n's choristers, organick throats;
which, if they did not die, might seem to be
a tenth rank in the heavenly hierarchy. donne.
jehovah, from the summit of the sky,
environ'd with his winged hierarchy,
the world survey’d. sandys.
these the supreme king
|exalted to such pow'r, and gave to rule,
each in his hierarchy, the orders bright. milton.
the blesledest of mortal wights, now questionless the high-
est saint in the celestial hierarchy, began to be so importuned,
that a great part of the divine liturgy was addressed solely to
her. howel's vocal forest.
2. ecclesiastical establishment.
the presbytery had more sympathy with the discipline of
scotland than the hierarchy of england. bacon.
while the old levitical hierarchy continued, it was part of
the ministerial office to flay the sacrifices. - outh.
consider what i have written, from regard for the church
established under the hierarchy of bishops. swift.
hieroglyph. m. s. [hieroglyphe, french; isos, facred,
hieroglyphick. 5 and yxso, to carve.]
1. an emblem; a figure by which a word was implied. hiero-
glyphicks were used before the alphabet was invented. hiero-
glyph seems to be the proper substantive, and hieroglyphick the
adjective.
this hieroglyphick of the egyptians was ere&amp;ted for parental
affection, manifested in the protection of her young ones,
when her nest was set on fire. brown's vulgar errours.
a lamp amongst the egyptians is the hieroglyphick of life.
jwilkins's daedalus.
the first writing men used was only the single pictures and
gravings of the things they would represent, which way of
expression was afterwards called hieroglyphick. j/zodward.
- between the statues obelisks were plac'd,
and the learn'd walls with hieroglyphicks grac'd. pope.
2. the art of writing in picture.
no brute can endure the taste of strong liquor, and conse-
quently it is against all the rules of hieroglyph to assign any
animals as patrons of punch. swift.
hie rog lyphical. }*. [hieroglyphique, french ; from the
hieroc lyphick. in oul ii.
1. charged with hieroglyphical sculpture.
in this place stands a stately hieroglyphical obelisk of theban
marble. sandys’s travels.
2. emblematical; expressive of some meaning beyond what im-
mediately appears.
th’egyptian serpent figures time,
and, stripp'd, returns into his prime;
if my affe&amp;tion thou would'st win,
first cast thy hieroglyphick skin. cleaveland.
the original of the conceit was probably hieroglyphical,
which after became mythological, and, by a process of tradi-
tion, stole into a total verity, which was but partly true in its
morality. brown's vulgar errours.
horneaux. adv. [from hieroglyphical.] emblema-
tically.
others have spoken emblematically and hieroglyphically as
the egyptians, and the phoenix was the hieroglyphick of the
sun. …” * - r brown's wulgar errours.
hiero graphy. m. s. sisoo; and yeo.] holy writing.
hie *qphant. m. s. [saozon;..] one who teaches rules of
religion; a priest.
herein the wantonness of poets, and the crafts of their
* o: and hierophants, o go; fan-
yone people. ale's origin o ankind.
to h1(ggle. j. n. [of uncertain so o, cot-
rupted from haggle.]
* * * chaffers to be penurious in a bargain.
in good offices and due retributi
ing and niggardly: it argues an . not be pinch.
wronged, to#: and dodge in the amends.” where ":
ase thou art | - al,
to higgle thus for a few blows,
to gain thy knight an op'lents -
why all this higgling o thy ; about s lo.
sum ? does this become the generosity of the . *pil
john bull arbuthnot's j. £ and rich
2. to go selling provisions from door to door. # o: bull.
o meaning, such provisions being cut into n.
higgledy-piggeldy. adv. a cant
higgle, which denotes any confused o: i. from
huddle of provisions together. • * agger city,
hojo. m. s. [from higgle.] one who sells provision; by
o: adj. so . hoogh, dutch.]
i. long upwards ; rising above from the
centre : opposed to o: or long *** or from the
their andes, or mountains, were far hi.
with us ; whereby the remnants of the o:
were, in such a particular deluge, saved. i.
the higher parts of the earth being continually #:
and the lower continually gaining, they must of herosio.
length come to an equality. burnet'; #. 2t
2. elevated in place; raised aloft : opposed to low, try,
they that stand high have many blasts to shake them
and, if they fall, they dash themselves to piece; "
shateft. ki
high o'er their heads a mould'ring .# o: iii.
that promises a fall, and shakes at ev'ry blast. bo.
reason elevates our thoughts as high as the stars, and leads
us through the vast spaces of this mighty fabrick; yetitcoms
far short of the real extent of even corporeal being, lai.
3. exalted in nature.
the highest faculty of the soul. baylor,
4. elevated in rank or condition: as, high priest,
he wooes both high and low, both rich and poor. shais.
o mortals' blind in fate, who never know
to bear high fortune, or endure the low, drydon,
5. exalted in sentiment.
solomon liv'd at ease, nor aimed beyond
higher design than to enjoy his state, miło,
6. difficult; abstruse.
they meet to hear, and answer such high things. shahs,
7. boastful; ostentatious.
his forces, after all the high discourses, amounted really
but to eighteen hundred foot. clarendon.
8. arrogant; proud; lofty.
the governor made himself merry with his high and threat-
ening language, and sent him word he would neither give not
receive quarter. clarendon,
9. severe; oppressive. - -
when there appeareth on either fide an high hand, violent
prosecution, cunning advantages taken, and combin."
then is the virtue of a judge seen. baton,
io. s. ; illustrious.
rust me, i am exceeding weary. -
—i had thought, . dust not have attacked so .
blood.—it doth me, though it discolours the compo
my greatness to acknowledge it. shalot.
11. violent; tempestuous; loud. applied to the wind.
more ships in calms on a deceitful coal, !.
or unseen rocks, than in high storms are lost. o:
spiders cannot weave their nets in a high wind. hi o
at length the winds are rais'd, the storm blows high;
be it your care, my friends, to keep it "p
in its full fury.
12. tumultuous; turbulent; ungovernable.
not only tears ithi
rain’d at their eyes, but high winds worse within,
began to rise ; high passions, anger,
i. ic. o: hate, shook fore miło,
their inward state of mind.
can heav'nly minds such high resentmentshow, droit,
or exercise their spight in human woe? - so
- - --~~~ * used only in
13. full; complete: applied to time; now
speech. -
p high time now 'gan it wax for una fair, fairy q to
to think of those her captive parents dear. with o
sweet warriour, when shali i have peo" y soft,
high time it is this war now ended were. . that force;
it was high time to do so; for it was no o chronio
were already upon their march towards the *. cliro.
it was high time for the lords to look o : highluxus);
14. raised to any great degree 3 as, high pleasure; *s
a high performance; a high colour:
adjo's co.
solomon liv'd at o: full miło,
of honour, wealth, high fare. ics. bois'
high sauce, and spices are fetched from the indies
15. advancing in latitude from the line. this
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1017</div><p class="text">h i g
*
*
s
o
:
high-co'lou red.
they are forced to take their course either high to the north,
or low to the south. abbot’s description of the #orld.
16. at the most perfect state; in the meridian; as, by the sun it
is high noon: whence probably the foregoing expression,
high time.
it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should
be gathered. gen. xxix. 7.
17. far advanced into antiquity.
the nominal observation of the several days of the week,
is very high, and as old as the ancient egyptians, who named
the same according to the seven planets.
18. dear ; exorbitant in price.
if they must be good at so high a rate, they know they may
be safe at a cheaper. south.
19. capital; great; opposed to little: as, high treason, in op-
position to petty.
high; m. s. high place; elevation; superiour region: only
used with from and on.
which when the king of gods beheld from high,
he figh’d.
on high. aloft; above; into superiour regions.
- wide is the fronting gate, and rais'd on high,
with adamantine columns threats the sky. dryden.
high is much used in composition with variety of meaning.
high-ble'st. adj. supremely happy.
the good which we enjoy from heav'n descends;
but that from us ought should ascend to heav'n
so prevalent, as to concern the mind
of god high bloft, or to incline his will,
hard to belief may seem.
h1'gh-blow n.
brown.
dryden.
milton.
swelled much with wind; much inflated.
i have ventur'd,
like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
these many summers on a sea of glory;
but far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride
at length broke under me, and now has left me,
weary, and old with service, to the mercy
of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me. shakoffeare.
hi’o h-porn. of noble extraction.
cast round your eyes
upon the high-born beauties of the court;
there chuse some worthy partner of your heart.
h1(gh-built. adj. -
1. of lofty structure.
i know him by his stride,
the giant harapha of gath; his look
haughty as is his pile, high-built and proud.
2. covered with lofty buildings.
in dreadful wars
the high-built elephant his castle rears,
looks down on man below, and strikes the stars.
having a deep or glaring colour.
a fever in a rancid oily blood produces a scorbutick fever,
rowe.
milton.
creech,
with high-coloured urine, and spots in the skin. floyer.
high-designing. having great schemes.
his warlike mind, his soul devoid of fear,
his high-designing thoughts were figur'd there. dryden.
high. f.e. d. pampered.
a favourite mule, high-fed, and in the pride of flesh and
mettle, would still be bragging of his family. l’estrange.
high-flaming. throwing the flame to a great height.
hecatombs of bulls to neptune slain,
high-flaming, please the monarch of the main. pope.
high-fl'er. n.s. one that carries his opinions to extrava-
all cc.
g she openly professeth herself to be a high-flier; and it is not
improbable she may also be a papist at heast. swift.
h1'ch-flown. adj. [high and sown, from sy.]
1. elevated; proud. -
this stiff-neck’d pride nor art nor force can bend,
nor high flown hopes to reason's lure descend. denham,
2. turgid; extravagant. - - -
this fable is a high-flown hyperbole upon the miseries of
marriage. - l'eorange.
hic, h. flying. extravagant in claims or opinions.
clip the wings
of their high-flying arbitrary kings.
high-heaped. adj.
1. covered with high piles. - - -
the plented as board high-heap'd with cates divine,
dryden's wirgil.
and o'er the foaming bowl the laughing wine. pope.
2. raised into high piles.
i saw myself the vast unnumber'd store
of brass, high-heap'd amidst the regal dome. poe.
high-heel. d. having the heel of the shoe much raised.
by these embroider'd high-heel'd shoes,
she shall be caught as in a noose. swift.
h1'gh hun g. hung aloft. -
by the high-hung taper's light,
i could discern his cheeks were glowing red. drydon,
high-mettle d.
vol. i.
proud or ardent of spirit.
h i g
he fails not in these to keep a stiff rein on a jo,
p - -mettled
egasus; and takes care not to surfeit here, as he had done on
other heads, by an erroneous abundance. garth.
z -
high-misped. proud; arrogant.
my breast i’ll burst with straining of my courage,
but i will chastise this high-minded strumpet, shakoff care.
because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou ifandest
by faith: be not high-minded, but fear. ron. xi. 20.
high-pri'ncipled. extravagant in notions of politicks.
this seems to be the political creed of all the high-principled
men i have met with. - swift.
high-re'd. deeply red.
oil of turpentine, though clear as water, being digested
upon the purely white sugar of lead, has in a short time af-
forded a high-red tineture. boyle on colours.
high-se’asoned. piquant to the palate. -
be sparing also of salt in the seasoning of all his victuals,
and use him not to high-seasoned meats.
locke.
high-sighted. always looking upwards.
let high-sghted tyranny range on,
*till each man drop by lottery. shakespeare.
high-spi'rited. bold; daring; insolent.
high-sto'mached. obstinate; lofty.
high-flomach'd are they both, and full of ire;
- in rage, deaf as the sea, hasty as fire. shakes care.
high-ta's ted. gustful; piquant.
flatt'ry still in sugar'd words betrays,
and poison in high-tasted meats conveys. denham.
high-visced. enormously wicked.
be as a planetary plague, when jove
will o'er some high-vic'd city hang his poison -
in the sick air. shakespeare.
hi'gh-wrought. accurately finished; nobly laboured.
thou triumph'st, victor of the high-wrought day,
and the pleas'd dame, soft smiling, lead'st away.
his gh land. m. s. [high and land.] mountainous region.
the wond'ring moon
beholds her brother’s steeds beneath her own;
the highlands smoak'd, cleft by the piercing rays. addison.
ladies in the highlands of scotland use this discipline to
their children in the midst of winter, and find that cold wa-
ter does them no harm. locke.
highla'nder. m. s. [from highland.] an inhabitant cf
mountains ; mountaineer.
his cabinet council of highlanders.
h1'ghly. adv. [from high.]
1. with elevation as to place and situation; aloft.
2. in a great degree.
whatever expedients can allay those heats, which break us
into different factions, cannot but be useful to the publick,
and highly tend to its safety. addison.
it cannot but be highly requisite for us to enliven our faith,
by dwelling often on the same considerations. atterbury.
3. proudly; arrogantly; ambitiously.
what thou wouldst highly,
that thou wouldst holily; wouldst not play false,
and yet wouldst wrongly win. shakeshcare.
4. with esteem; with estimation.
every man that is among you, not to think of himself
more highly than he ought to think. ram. xii. 3.
h1'gh most. adj. [an irregular word.] highest; topmost.
now is the sun upon the highmosi hill
of this day's journey.
h1'ghness. m. s. [from high.]
1, elevation above the surface; altitude; loftiness.
2. the title of princes, anciently of kings.
most royal majesty,
i crave no more than that your highness offer'd.
how long in vain had nature striv'd to frame
a perfeoł princess, ere her highness came : waller.
beauty and greatness are eminently joined in your royal
highness.
3. dignity of nature; supremacy. -
destruction from god was a terrour to me, and by reason
of his highnes; i could not endure. job, xxxi. 23.
hight. [this is an imperfeot verb, used only in the preterite
tense with a passive signification: patan, to call, saxon; hosen,
to be called, german.]
1. was named ; was called.
the city of the great king hight it well,
wherein eternal peace and happiness doth dwell.
within this homestead liv'd, without a peer
for crowing loud, the noble chanticleer,
so hight her cock. dryden's nan's pris.
2. it is sometimes used as a participle passive: called; named.
it is now obsolete, except in burlesque writings.
amongst the rest a good old woman was,
hight mother hubberd. huboerd's tal.
hearn he hight. - pope.
highwater, n.s.. [high and water.] the utmost flow of to e
tide.
11 h
pope.
addison.
shałoszare,
shakespeare.
dryden.
soon t? .
they
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1018</div><p class="text">h i l
h i n
they have a way of draining lands that lie below the high-
water, and are something above the low-water mark. mortin.
highwa'y. m. s. [high and way.]
1. great road ; publick path.
so few there be - -
that chuse the narrow path, or seek the right:
all keep the broad highway, and take delight !,..., ()
with many rather for to go astray. - fairy &lt;!een.
two inscriptions give a great light to the historics of appius,
who made the highway, and of fabius the dictator. adson.
ent’ring on a broad highway,
where power and titles scatter'd lay, -
he strove to pick up all he found. swift.
2. figuratively a train of action with apparent consequence.
i could mention more trades we have lost, and are in the
highway to lose. child on trade,
highway man. n.f. [highway and man.] a robber that plun-
ders on the publick roads.
'tis like the friendship of pickpockets and highwaymen,
that observe strict justice among themselves. . . bently.
a remedy like that of giving my money to an highwayman
before he attempts to take it by force, to prevent the sin of
robbery. swift.
hi’d later. m. s. an herb. ainsworth.
hilarity.. n.s. shilaritas, latin.] merriment; gayety.
averroes restrained his hilarity, and made no more thereof
than seneca commendeth, and was allowable in cato; that
is, a sober incalescence from wine. brown.
hild, in aeirick's grammar, is interpreted a lord or lady: so
hildebert is a noble lord; mahtild, an heroick lady. gilson.
hi’ldi ng. m. s. [pild, saxon, signifies a lord : perhaps hilding
means originally a little lord in contempt, for a man that has
only the delicacy or bad qualities of high rank; or a term of re-
proach abbreviated from hindrling, degenerate. hughes's spens.]
1. a sorry, paltry, cowardly fellow.
he was some hilding fellow, that had stol’n
the horse he rode on. shakes care.
if your lordship find him not a hilding, hold me to more in
your respect. shafts eare.
a base slave,
a hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth. sha'is). cymbeline.
2. it is used likewise for a mean woman.
laura, to his lady, was but a kitchcm wench :
helen and hero, hidings and harlots. shakes care.
this idle toy, this hilding scorns my power,
and sets us all at naught. rowe's jane shore.
hill. m. s. [pil, saxon.] an elevation of ground less than a
in ou ytal il.
my sheep are thoughts, which i both guide and serve;
their pasture is fair hills of fruitless love. sidney.
jerusalem is seated on two hills,
of height unlike, and turned side to side. faisax.
three sides are sure imbar'd with crags and hills,
the rest is easy, scant to rise espy'd ;
rut mighty bulwarks fence the plainer part:
so art helps nature, nature strengtheneth art. fairsax.
when our eye some prospect would pursue,
descending from a hill, looks round to view. granville.
a hill is nothing but the nest of some metal or mineral,
which, by a plastick virtue, and the efficacy of subterranean
fires, converting the adjacent earths into their substance, do
increase and grow. choyo.
h1's lock. ii. s. [from hill.] a little hill.
yet weigh this, alas! great is not great to the greater:
what, judge you, doth a hillock show by the lofty olympus!
idney.
sometime walking not unseen
by hcdge-row elms, on hillicks green. a stan.
this mountain, and a few neighbouring hillocks that lie
scattered about the bottom of it, is the whole circuit of these
dominions. - addison on itty.
ho goj. [from hill.] full of hills; unequal in the sur-
dcc.
towards the hilly corners of druina remain yet her very
aborigines, thrust amongst an assembly of mountains. hows.
climbing to a hilly steep,
he views his herds in wales afar. dryden.
. . . ... lo! how the norick plains
rise hio, with large piles of slaughter'd knights. philips.
his; countries afford the most entertaining prospects, tho’
a man would chuse to travel through a plain one. addison.
hitor. m. s. soilo, sixon, from pealsan, to hold.] the handle
of any thing, particularly of a sword.
now fits expectation in the air,
and hides a sword from hilt unto the point,
with crowns imperial; crowns and coronets. shakes care.
take thou the hilt, -
ang when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
gile thou the sword. shakespeare's julius cæsar.
be his this sword, whose blade of brass displays
a ruddy gleam; whose hill, a silver blaze. pope's odis).
him. spirm, saxon.]
1. the oblique case of he.
me he restored unto my office, and him he h
2. him was anciently used for it in a neutral o gen. xi,
the subjunetive mood hath evermore -
- some coni, a
joined with him. conjuncion
hi'msflf. pron. [him and self.] 4xido,
1. in the nominative the same as he, only more -
- - - - emphati
more expressive of individual personality. phatical, and
it was a sparing speech of the ancients to sa
- * - ,- - that a fo
is another himself; for that a friend is far m y, a friend
ore than hifts.
with shame remembers, while himself was one boon,
of the same herd, himself the same had done, dooh
2. it is added to a personal pronoun or noun, by way of chhan,
tical discrimination. y of empha-
xi, himself returned again. o,
god himself is with us for our captain: jo,
3. in ancient authors it is used neutrally for itself. chron.
she is advanc'd
above the clouds as high as heav'n himself. so
4. in the oblique cases it his a reciprocal §.”
david hid hims!f in the field. samid
5. it is sometimes not reciprocal.
i perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil dispos.
tion made him seek, his death; but a provoking no.
- - - s. , lot
awork by a reproveable badness in himself. slator,
nothing in nature can so peculiarly gratify the pool.i.
sitions of humanity, as for one man to see another so o
himself as to figh his griefs, and groan his pains, to fift.
joys, and do and feel every thing by sympathy. so
by h1n1s elf. lone; unaccompanied.
ahab went one way by himself, obadiah went another way
by himself. king.
h. n. m. s. [.onl a measure of liquids among jews, conti.
ing about ten pints.
with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour, mingled with the
fourth part of an him of beaten oil. exid, xxix. 40.
hind. adj, compar, hinder; superl, hindns. [onsin, saxon]
backward; contrary in position to the face: is, hind kg.
sec h in der and hin dmost. -
bringing its tail to its head, it bends its back soft 'tilis
head comes to touch its hind part, and so with its armous ga.
thers itself into a ball. roj,
the flag
hears his own feet, and thinks they found like more,
and fears his hird legs will o'ertake his fore. post,
his d. m. s. [pinbe, saxon, from himnus, latin.]
1. the she to a stag ; the female of red deer,
how he flew, with glancing dart amis,
a gentle hind, the which the lovely boy
idid love as life. fairy quo.
can'st thou mark when the hind; do calve? job,
nor hercules more lands or labours knew, - -
not though the brazen-footed hind he flew. dryden,
2. spine, saxon.] a servant.
a couple of ford's knaves, his lind, wereo so
their mistress, to carry me in the name of foul cloaths to
datchet-lane. shor.
3. [joineman, saxon.] a peasant ; a boor; a mon rustick,
the dutch, who came like greedy hio; boro,
to reap the harvest their ripe years did yield,
now look like those, when rolling thundes; r03s, i.
and sheets of lightning blast the standing field. dyson,
he cloth'd himself in coarse array, dron'. folk;
a lab’ring hind in shew. - po o
his dberries. m. s. the same as raspboo. 4.
to hinder. v. a. spinbman, saxon.] to obstruct; to 1993
to let ; to impede.
hinder me not, seeing the lord hath roo 6.
the whole world shined with clear light, so
hindered in their labour. h imo is
if the alms were hindered only by entreaty ".
obertv 2w4
not tied to restitution, because entreaty took not o
from the giver. tor's rule of o #.
solitude damps thought and wit: too much compa tool,
pates and hinders it from fixing.
what hinders younger brothers,
from having the same right? :-nodiment,
to #. n. to raise hindrances; to cause o
you minimus of hindering knot-grass made. on of
this objection hinders not but that to o: as in
some commander, enterprised for the christia dojo,
executed happily, may be written. . . hi
his de r. adj. [from hind.] that who"
trary to that of the face: opposed to fore. their hio feet,
bears, fighting with any man, stand ..". embrace’
and so this did, being ready to give * sao
incnt. tan while
a the inder feet of the horse stuck to ***".
: of families,
being fathers lok.
in a posities. “
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1019</div><p class="text">h i n -
h i r
:
o
o
*
the body reared up in the air, the poet with great di -
kept his from inj great o:
h1'nperance. ": s (from hinder.] impediment; let; stop ;
obstruction; with of sometimes with to before the thing him.
dered; with to before the person. o
false opinions, touching the will of god to have things
done, are won to bring forth mighty and violent prastices
against the hinderances of them, and those practices new opi-
nions more pernicious than the first; yea, most extremely
sometimes opposite to the first. hooker.
they must be in every christian church the same, except
mere imposibility of so having it be the hindarance. hootor.
what hinderance have they been to the knowledge of what
is well done :
- - dryden.
haye we not plighted each our holy oath,
one soul should both inspire, and neither prove -
his fellow's hind"rance in pursuit of love dryden.
he must conquer all these difficulties, and remove all these
hinderances out of the way that leads to justice. atterbury.
hi'nperer. m.s.. [from hinder.] he or that which hinders or
obstructs. -
brakes, great hinderers of all plowing, grow. may.
h1's perling. m. s... [from hind or hinder.j a paltry, worth-
less, degenerate animal.
h1'ndermost. a j. [this word seems to be less proper than
hindinoff.] hindmost; last; in the rear.
he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and
leah and her children after, and rachel and joseph hinder-
most. . . - geness.
like to an enter'd tide, they all rush by, -
and leave you hirderonoff. shakespeare.
h1'ndmost, a j. [hind and mg/?..] the last; the lag ; that
which comes in the rear. -
'tis not his wont to be the hindmos' man, . -
whate'er occasion keeps him from us now. shakoff. h. vi.
he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmoft of thee,
even all that were feeble behind. deut. xxv. 18.
let him retire, betwixt two ages cast,
the first of this, and bindings of the last,
a losing gamester. - -
the race by vigour, not by vaunts is won;
s so take the hindrosł, hell— he said, and run.
hing e. m. s. [or hingle, from hangle or hang.]
1. joints upon which a gate or door turns.
at the gate
of heav'n arriv'd, the gate self-open'd wide,
on golden hinges turning. azilton.
then from the hinge their strokes the gates divorce,
and where the way they cannot find, they force. denham.
heav'n's imperious queen shot down from high;
at her approach the brazen hinges fly,
the gates are forc'd. - - o dryden.
2. the cardinal points of the world, east, west, north, and
south. - - -
if when the moon is in the hinge at east,
the birth breaks forward from its native rest;
full eighty years, if you two years abate,
this station gives.
3. a governing rule or principle. -
• the other hinge of punishment might turn upon a law,
whereby all men, who did not marry by the age of five and
twenty, should pay the third part of their revenue. temple,
4. to be off the his ges. to be in a state of irregularity and
disorder.
the man's spirit is out of order and off the hinges; and
'till that be put into its right frame, he will be perpetually
disquited. tillotson.
methinks we stand on ruins, nature shakes
about us, and this universal frame
so loose, that it but wants another push
to leap from off its hinges.. .
to h1ng e. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to furnish with hingcs.
2. to bend as an hinge. -
be thou a flatt’rer now, and hinge thy knee;
and let his very breath, whom thou’lt observe, ,
blow off thy cap. shakespeare:
t. hint. v. a. senter, french. skinner.] to bring to mind
by a slight mention or remote allusion ; to mention imper-
fectly. -
willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike,
just hint a fault, and hesitate dislike.
in waking whispers, and repeated dreams,
to hint pure thought, and warn the favour’d soul. thomson.
to hint at. to allude to ; to touch slightly upon.
speaking of augustus's actions, he still remembers that
agriculture ought to be some way hinted at throughout the
whole poem. addison on the georgicks.
hint. n.s.. [from the verb.] -
1. faint flotice given to the mind; remote allusion; distant
insinuation.
dryden.
pope.
creah', manilius.
1)ryden.
pope.
let him strioly observe the first stirrings and intimations,
the first hints and whispers of good and evil, that pass in his
heart. south.
2. suggestion; intimation.
on this hint i spake, - - - -
she lov'd me for the dangers i had past. shakes. othello.
aetions are so full of circumstances, that, as men observe
some parts more than others, they take different hints, and
put different interpretations on them. addison.
hip. n.s. spype, saxon.]
1. the joint of the thigh. -
how now, which of your hips has the most profound sci-
atica : shakespeare.
hippocrates affirmeth of the scythians, that, using conti-
nual riding, they were generally molested with the sciatica,
or hip gout. - brown's wulgar errours.
2. the haunch; the flesh of the thigh.
so shepherds use
to set the same mark on the hip
both of their sound and rotten sheep.
against a stump his tusk the monster grinds,
and ranch'd his hips with one continu’d wound. dryden.
3. to have on the hip. [a low phrase.] to have an advantage
over another. it seems to be taken from hunting, the hip or
haunch of a deer being the part commonly seited by the dogs.
if this poor brach of venice, whom i cherish
for his quick hunting, stand the putting on. -
i'll have our michael cassio on the hip. shakesh. othello.
hip. n. s. [from peopa, saxon.] the fruit of the briar or the
dogrose. -
eating hips and drinking watery foam. hulberd's tale.
why should you want : behold, the earth hath roots;
the oaks bear masts, the briars scarlet hips. shakspeare.
years of store of haws and hips do commonly portend cold
winters. - bacon's natural history.
to hip. v. a. [from hip.]
1. to sprain or shoot the hip,
his horse was hipp'd. -
2. hip-hop.
hop.
your different tastes divide our poets cares;
one foot the fock, t’ other the buskin wears:
thus while he strives to please, he's forc’d to do’t,
like volscius hip-hop in a single boot. congreve.
hip. interjece. an exclamation, or calling to one ; the same
as the latin eno, heus! ainsworth.
o ! adj. a corruption of hypochondriack. ainsworth.
hippocentaur. m. s. so-oxogo; hipt-centaure, french.]
a fabulous monster, half horse and half man. -
how are poetical fictions, how are hippocentaurs and chi-
meras to be imaged, which are things quite out of nature,
and whereof we can have no notion f - dryden.
his ppocrass. n.s. shy;ocras, french; quas vinum hippocratis.]
. a medicated wine.
sack and the well-spic'd hippocras, the wine,
wassail the bowl, with ancient ribbands fine. king.
h1'ppocrat es’s sleeve. n. s. a woollen bag made by joining
the two opposite angles of a square piece of flannel, used to
strain syrups and decoctions for clarification. . . .3aincy.
h1'ppock iff. m. s. [sao go and yes! ; hippogrift, french.]
a winged horse; a being imagined by ariosto.
he caught him up, and without wing
of hippogriff bore through the air sublime.
hippo por amus. m. s. ['woo; and ororzoo’.] the river
horse, an animal found in the nile. ,
hipshot. adj. [hip and shot.j sprained or dislocated in the
hip.
'why do you go nodding and waggling so like a fool, as if
hudibras.
- shakespeare:
a cant word formed by the reduplication of
milton.
you were hipshot * says the goose to the gosling. l'estrange.
hi'pwort. m. s. ship and wort.] a plant. ainsworth.
to hire. v. a. [pynan, saxon.]
1. to procure any thing for temporary use at a certain price.
his sordid avarice rakes
in excrements, and hires the jakes. dryden's juvenal.
2. to engage a man to temporary service for wages.
they weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith,
and he maketh it a god. ija. xlvi. 6.
i cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
are hir'd to bear their slaves. shakespeare.
3. to bribe. -
themetes first, 'tis doubtful whether hir’d,
or so the trojan destiny requir’d,
mov'd that the ramparts might be broken down.
4. to engage for pay : with the reciprocal word.
they that were full, hired out themselves for bread ; and
they that were hungry, ceased. - sam, ii. 5.
5. to let; to set for a time at a certain price. this, to pre-
vent ambiguity, has sometimes the particle cut; as, he hired
out his house to strangers.
hire. m. s. [pyre, saxon.]
dryden.
1. reward
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1020</div><p class="text">h i s
h i s
1. reward or recompence paid for the use of any thing.
- ages paid for service.
2. w *... thanks and goodly meed to that good sire ;
he thence departing gave for his pains hire. spensor.
i have five hundred crowns,
the thrifty hire i sav'd under your father. . . shakspeare.
though little was their hire, and light their gain,
yet somewhat to their share he threw. dryden.
all arts and artists theseus could command,
who sold for hire, or wrought for better fame. pryden.
hi'reling.. n.f. [from hire.]
1. one who serves for wages. -
the hireling longs to see the shades ascend,
that with the tedious day his toil might end,
and he his pay receive. sandys.
in the framing of hiero's ship there were three hundred car-
penters employed for a year, besides many other hire ing; for
carriages. wilkins's dadalus.
'tis frequent here to see a freeborn son
on the left hand of a rich hireling run.
2. a mercenary; a prostitute.
now she shades thy evening walk with bays,
no hireling she, no prostitute to praise. pope.
h1'reling. adj. serving for hire; venal ; mercenary; doing
what is done for money.
then trumpets, torches, and a tedious crew
- of hireling mourners for his funeral due. dryden.
hi'rer. n. s. [from hire.]
1. one who uses anything paying a recompence; one who em-
ploys others paying wages.
2. in scotland it denotes one who keeps small horses to let.
hirsu’t e. adj. [hirsutus, lat..] rough ; rugged.
there are bulbous, fibrous, and hirsute roots: the hirsute
is a middle sort, between the bulbous and fibrous ; that, be-
sides the putting forth sap upwards and downwards, putteth
forth in round. bacon's natural history.
his. pronoun possive. [pyr, saxon.]
1. the masculine possessive. belonging to him that was before
mentioned.
england his approaches makes as fierce
as waters to the sucking of a gulph. shakes. henry v.
if much you note him,
you shall offind him, and extend his passion. shak. macb.
heav'n and yourself
had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,
and all the better is it for the maid :
your part in her you could not keep from death;
but heav'n keeps his part in eternal life. shak. ro. and jul.
if our father carry authority with such disposition as he
bears this last surrender of his, it will but offend us. shakesp.
he that is nourished by the acorns he picked up under an
oak in the wood, has appropriated them to himself: nobody
can deny but the nourishment is his. locke.
whene'er i stoop, he offers at a kiss;
and when my arms i stretch, he stretches his. addison.
2. it was anciently used in a neutral sense, where we now say
zty.
dryd, juvenal.
who can impress the forest, bid the tree
unfix his earth-bound root ” shakespeare's macbeth.
not the dreadful spout,
shall dizzy with more clamour neptune's ear
in his descent. shakespeare's troilus and crossida.
there's not the smallest orb, which thou behold'st,
but in his motion like an angel fings,
still quiring to the young-ey’d cherubims. shakosheare.
this rule is not so general, but that it admitteth his excep-
tions. - carew's survey of cornwal.
opium loseth some of his poisonous quality, if it be va-
poured out, mingled with spirit of wine. bacom.
3. it is sometimes used as a sign of the genitive case: as the man
his ground, for the man's ground. it is now rarely thus used,
as its use proceeded probably from a false opinion that the s
formative of the genitive was his contracted.
where is this mankind now who lives to age
fit to be made methusalem his page 2 donne.
by thy fond consort, by thy father's cares,
by young telemachus his blooming years. pope.
4. it is sometimes used in opposition to this man's.
were i king,
{o} cut off the nobles for their lands,
efire his jewels, and this other's house, shak -
5. anciently idios. hakoshcare.
loy of us, each for his self, laboured how to recover
lm. - -
72 hiss. v. n. [hissen, dutch.]
1. to utter a noise like that of a serpent and some other animals.
it is remarkable, that this word cannot be pronounced with-
out making the noise which it fignifies.
in ths *ight of this bath to be thrown into the thames
and cool’d glowing hot, in that surge, like a horseshoe; thing
of that; hising hot, sour.
sidney.
the merchants shall his at thee.
see the furies arise :
see the snakes that they rear,
how they his in their hair. dryden's
against the steed he threw
his forceful spear, which, hising as it flew
pierc'd through the yielding planks. 2 d
2. to condemn at a publick exhibition; which is som oln.
done by hising. ctimes
men shall pursue with merited disgrace;
his, clap their hands, and from his countr
to hiss. v. a. spircean, saxon.]
1. to condemn o o to explode.
every one will his him out to his disgrace. ---!"
she &amp;: so shamefully fail in the ki act, fo o
a plaudite, she would deserve to be his doff the so i.
i have seen many successions of men, who havei, †:
selves into the world, some bolting out upon the stage o
vast applause, and others histd off, and quitting it with i.
grace. drydor
will you venture your all upon a cause, which wo t
hised out of all the courts as ridiculous calier on doolin;
2. to procure hisses or disgrace. “3.
thy mother plays, and i
play too; but so disgrac'd a part, whose issue
will his me to my grave. shakes. iwinter'
is: what's .. newest grief? of isinter'; til,
—that of an hour's age doth his the speaker,
each minute teems a new one. shakespeare's michih,
hiss. m. s. [from the verb.] -
1. the voice of a serpent, and of some other animals,
he his for his return'd, with forked tongue
to forked tongue. miło,
2. censure; expression of contempt used in theatres. -
he heard
on all sides, from innumerable tongues,
a dismal universal his, the sound
ezek. xxvii. 3.
alexander', fuff,
y chase. sanji,
of publick scorn milo,
fierce champion fortitude, that knows no fears
of hiss, blows, or want, or loss of ears. po,
hist. inters. [of this word i know not the original: some
thought it a corruption of hush, hush it, hist, hiji; but i have
heard that it is an irish verb commanding silence.] an ex-
clamation commanding silence.
mute silence his along!
'less philomel will deign a song,
in her sweetest saddest plight,
smoothing the rugged brow of night. miłon.
hist, hit, says another that stood by, away, dodor; for
here's a whole pack of dismals coming. swift.
histo rian. m. s. shiftoricus, latin ; historien, french j a
writer of facts and events; a writer of history,
what thanks sufficient, or what recompence
equal, have i to render thee, divine -
hi/?orian / milton.
our country, which has produced witers of the first fig";
in every other kind of work, has been very barren in go!
his?:rians. aisi,
not added years on years my task could close,
the long his orian of my country's woes.
#3: { adj. [hisionique, f. historicus, lat.]
1. containing or giving an account of faas and even:
because the beginning seemeth abrupt, it needs to:
know the occasion of these several adventuro 5 for t; silo-
thod of a poet historical is not such as of an o
in an hisłorical relation we use terms that * mo
and best known. borno's ilo.
here rising bold, the patriot's honest face;
there warriors frowning in historick brass.
2. suitable or pertaining to history or narrative.
with equal justice and historick care,
their laws, their toils, their arms with
histo rica lly.. adv. [from historical.] i
history; by way of narration.
the gospels, which are weekly read, do -
clare something which our lord jesus chri
spoke, did, or suffered in his own person.
when that which the word of god doth * d sourgest
rically, we construe as if it were legally meant, an ot isio
further than we can prove it was intended, do wo " hor,
the laws of god itten, ishi"
after his life has been rather invented than wo los.
confider him historically as an author, yoo." on hot";
works he has left behind him. pope o to record
to histo'rify. v. a. [from hisory.] to relate ; .
in history.
o 's
post,
his compare. poir.
n the manhos ol
all historio de-
it himself titor
hoor.
t delives ho
o, muse, hisłcriff
her praise, whose praise to learn your
-: £d m?,
skill hath o
th:
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1021</div><p class="text">h i to
the third age they term historicon; that is, such wherein
matters have been more truely historified, and therefore may
h be believed. brown's wulgar errours.
is tokio grapher. m. s. stropsz and vexpo ; historiographe
fr.] an historian; a # :*:::::: ©2 ; historiographe,
the method of a poet historical is not such as of an histori-
ographer. stensor.
what poor ideas must strangers conceive of persons famous
among us, should they form their notions of them from the
writings of those our historiographers 2 addison.
i put the journals into a strong box, after the manner of
the historiographers of some eastern monarchs.
arbuthnot's hisory of yohn bull.
historio graphy., mos.. [trogiz and yozoa.j the art or
employment of an historian.
history. m. s. sirogiz; his oria, lat. h;soire, fr.]
1. a narration of events and facts delivered with dignity.
justly caesar scorns the poet's lays;
it is to history he trusts for praise.
pope.
2. narration; relation.
the history part jav within a little room. wiseman.
what histories of toil could i declare :
but still long-weary'd nature wants repair. pope.
3. the knowledge of facts and events.
history, so far as it relates to the affairs of the bible, is ne-
cessary to divines. watts.
history piece. n.s. a picture representing some memorable
event.
his works resemble a large hisory piece, where even the
less important figures have some convenient place. pope.
histrio'nical. q adj. [from his?rio, lat. hisłrion, fr.]
histrio'nick. { befitting the stage; suitable to a player;
becoming a buffoon; theatrical.
histrio'nically. adv. [from hisłrionical.] theatrically; in
sthe manner of a buffoon.
to hit. v. a. [from isius, latin, minshew; from hitte, da-
nish, to throw at random, junius.]
1. to strike; to touch with a blow.
when i first saw her i was presently stricken; and i, like
a foolish child, that when any thing hits him will strike him-
self again upon it, would needs look again, as though i
would persuade mine eyes that they were deceived. sidney.
his conscience shall hit him in the teeth, and tell him his
fin and folly. south.
2. to touch the mark; not to miss.
is he a god that ever flies the light 2
or naked he, disguis’d in all untruth 2
if he be blind, how hit:eth he so right 2 sidney.
so hard it is to tremble, and not to err, and to hit the
mark with a shaking hand. south.
3. to attain; to reach ; not to fail: used of tentative experi-
ments.
were i but twenty-one,
your father's image is so hit in you,
his very air, that i should call you brother,
as i did him. shakespeare.
search every comment that your care can find,
some here, some there, may hit the poet's mind. roscomm.
birds learning tunes, and their endeavours to hit the notes
right, put it past doubt that they have perception, and retain
ideas, and use them for patterns. locke.
here's an opportunity to shew how great a bungler my
author is in hitting features. atterbury.
4. to suit; to be conformable to.
hail, divinest melancholy
whose saintly visage is too bright
to hit the sense of human fight. milton.
5. to strike; to catch by the right bait; to touch properly.
there you hit him: st. dominick loves charity exceeding-
ly; that argument never fails with him. dryden.
6. to hit off. to strike out; to fix or determine luckily,
what prince soever can hit off this great secret, need know
no more either for his own safety, or that of the people he
gover i) s. temple.
7. 'to hit out. to perform by good luck. . . . .
having the sound of ancient poets ringing in his ears, he
mought needs in finging hit out some of their tunes. speoser.
to hit. v. n.
1. to clash; to collide. -
if bodies be extension alone, how can they move and hit
one against another; or what can make distinct surfaces in an
uniform extension ? locke.
bones, teeth, and shells being sustained in the water with
metallick corpuscles, and the said corpuscles meeting with and
hitting upon those bodies, become conjoined with them.
łłocodward.
2. to chance luckily; to succeed by accident; not to miss.
oft expe&amp;tation fails, and most oft there
where most it promises ; and oft it hits. . .
where hope is coldest, and despair most fits. shakoffeare.
3. to succeed; not to miscarry. o
vol. i,
h i to
the experiment of binding of thoughts would be diver-
fified, and you are to note whether it hits for the most part.
- - bacon's natural hisłory.
but thou bring’s valour too and wit,
two things that seldom fail to hit.
- - hudibrar.
this may hit, 'tis more than barely possible. dryden.
all human race would fain be wits,
and millions miss for one that hits. sws:
4. to light on. o
there is a kind of conveying of effeotual and imprinting
passages amongst compliments, which is of fingular use, if a
man can hit upon it.
you've hit upon the very string, which touch'd,
echoes the found, and jars within my soul;
there lies my grief. dryden's spanish fryar.
it is much, if men were from eternity, that they should
not find out the way of writing sooner: sure he was a fortu-
nate man, who, after men had been eternally so dull as not
to find it out, had the luck at last to hit upon it. tiloson.
there's a just medium betwixt eating too much and too
little; and this dame had hit upon't, when the matter was so
ordered that the hen brought her every day an egg. l'eor.
none of them hit upon the art. addison.
there's but a true and a false prediction in any telling of
fortune; and a man that never hits on the right side, cannot
be called a bad guester, but must miss out of design. bently.
hit. m. s. [from the verb.] - -
1. a stroke. -
the king hath laid, that in a dozen passes between you and
him, he shall not exceed you three hits. shakosp. hamlet.
so he the fam'd cilician fencer prais'd,
and at each hit with wonder seem amaz'd.
2. a chance; a fortuitous event. -"
to suppose a watch, by the blind hits of chance, to per-
form diversity of orderly motions, without the regulation of
art, this were the more pardonable absurdity. glanville.
if the rule we judge by be uncertain, it is odds but we
shall judge wrong; and if we should judge right, yet it is not
properly skill, but chance; not a true judgment, but a lucky
hit. south.
bacon.
dryden.
but with more lucky hit than those
that use to make the stars depose. - hudibras.
the fisherman's waiting, and the lucky hit it had in the
conclusion, tells us, that honest endeavours will not fail.
d'estrange.
if casual concourse did the world compose,
and things and hits fortuitous arose,
then any thing might come from any thing; -
for how from chance can constant order spring? blackmore.
3. a lucky chance.
have all his ventures fail'd : what, not one hit 2 shakoff.
these hits of words a true poet often finds, without seek-
ing. dryden's disresnoy.
if at first he minds his hits,
and drinks champaigne among the wits,
five deep he toasts the tow'ring lasses. prior.
to hitch. v. n. [piezan, saxon, or hocher, french. skinner.j
to catch ; to move by jerks. i know not where it is used
but in the following passage ; nor here know well what it
in earl s.
whoe'er offends, at some unlucky time
slides in a verse, or hit.hes in a rhyme;
sacred to ridicule his whole lifelong,
and the sad burthen of some merry song. pope.
to hitch el. v. a. [see hatchel.] to beat or comb flax
or hemp.
h1’rchel. m. s. [heckel, german.]
which flax is beaten or combed. -
hit he. m. s. [p;82, saxon.] a small haven to land wares out
of vessels or boats : as qaseenhithe, and lambhithe, now lant-
beth.
hither. adv. [bson, saxon.]
1. to this place from some other.
caesar, tempted with the fame
of this sweet island, never conquered,
and envying the britons blazed name,
o hideous hunger of dominion, hither came.
men must endure
the instrument with
c? ‘’sor.
their going hence, even as their coming hither. shaksp.
who brought me hither
will bring me hence, no other guide i seek. milton.
2. it is used in opposition: hither and thither, to this place and
that.
3. to this end; to this design; to this topick of argument:
[huc, latin. huc refer exiium.] not much used.
hereupon dependeth whatsoever difference there is between
the flates of saints in glory; hither we refer whatsoever be-
longeth unto the highest perfestion of man, by way of service
towards god. hocker.
hither belong all those texts, which require of us that we
should not walk after the flesh, but after the spirit. tillotson.
11 i h1's her.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1022</div><p class="text">h o a
h o a
mi'rner, ad;. superl, hithermoff. nearer; towards this part.
after "...it t sort
the hither side, a different forts -
#. high eighting hills descended. milton.
an eternal duration may be shorter, or longer upon, the
bio, end, namely, that extreme wherein it is finite. hale.
hororoost. adj. [of hither, adv.] nearost on this side.
that which is eternal can be extended to a greater extent
at the hithermost extreme. hale.
horherto, adv. [from hither.]
. yet; to this time.
r hiirt, i have only told the reader what ought not to be
the subject of a pieture or of a poem. dryden.
- 2. in any time till now.
more ample spirit than hitherto was wont,
here needs me, whiles the famous ancestries -
of my most dreadful sovereign i recount. fairy queen.
3. at every time till now; - -
in this we are not their adversaries, tho' they in the other
hitherto have been ours. hooker.
hitherto, lords, what your commands impos'd -
i have perform’d, as reason was, obeying. milton.
hitherto she kept her love conceal’d,
and with those graces ev'ry day beheld
the graceful youth. dryden.
he could not have failed to add the opposition of ill spirits
to the good: this alone has hitherto been the practice of the
moderns. dryden's juvenal.
to correot them, is a work that has hitherto been assumed
by the least qualified hands. swift.
h1'the rward. r adv. [by serpeanb, saxon.] this way;
#::::::::: towards this place.
some parcels of their power are forth already,
and only hitherward. shakespeare's coriolanus.
the king himself in person hath set forth,
or hitherwards intended speedily. shakesp. henry iv.
a puissant and mighty pow'r
is marching hitherward in proud array. shakespeare.
look now for no enchanting voice, nor fear
the bait of honey'd words; a rougher tongue
draws hitherward. milton.
hiv.e. m. s. spype, saxon.]
1. the habitation or artificial receptacle of bees.
so bees with smoke, and doves with noisome stench,
are from their hives and houses driv'n away. shakespeare.
so wand'ring bees would perish in the air,
did not a sound, proportion'd to their ear,
appease their rage, invite them to the hive. waller.
bees have each of them a hole in their hives: their honey
is their own, and every bee minds her own concerns. addison.
2. the bees inhabiting a hive.
the commons, like an angry hive of bees
that want their leader, scatter up and down.
3. a company being together.
what modern masons call a lodge was by antiquity called
a hive of free masons; and therefore, when a dissention hap-
pens, the going off is to this day called swarming. swift.
to hiv e. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to put into hives; to harbour.
mr. addison of oxford has been troublesome to me: after
his bees, my latter swarm is scarcely worth hiving. dryden.
when bees are fully settled, and the cluster at the biggest,
hive them. mortimer's husbandry.
2. to contain, as in hives; to receive, as to an habitation.
ambitious now to take excise
of a more fragrant paradise,
he at fuscara's sleeve arriv'd,
where all delicious sweets are hiv'd. cleaveland.
to hive. v. n. to take shelter together; to reside collectively.
he sleeps by day
more than the wild cat: drones hive not with me,
therefore i part with him. shakespeare.
in summer we wander in a paradisaical scene, among groves
and gardens; but at this season we get into warmer houses,
and hive together in cities. pope's letters.
hrvok. n.s...[from hive..] one who puts bees in hives.
let the hiver drink a cup of good beer, and wash his hands
and face therewith. mortimer.
shakespeare.
ho. } inters. [eho!. latin.] a call; a sudden exclamation
hoa. to give notice of approach, or anything else.
what noise there, h;? shakespeare.
here dwells my father jew: hoa, who's within shakes.
stand, ho! speak the word along. shakespeare.
- when i cried hoa s
!. *:::: kings would start forth, and cry,
our will.
ho, ho, come forth and flee. §:
bo, swain, what shepherd owns these ragged sheep
hoar. adi. s dryden,
... while.” [pan, saxon.]
a people,
whom ireland sent from loughs and forrest, hore
b l ... i. bliss, all assaults fairfix,
affling, like thy hoar cliffs the loud sea-
2. grey . age. y d sea-wave. thomson,
it govern'd was and guided evermore
through wisdom of a matron grave and hear.
now swarms the populace, a countless throng : spesor,
youth and hoar age, and man drives man along p p+
- f.
3. white with frost.
hoar-frost. n.s.. [hoar and fros...] t -
in frosty mornings on the so 1 the congelations of dew
when the dew was gone up, behold upon the face f
wilderness there lay a small round thing, as sm. i. the
frost on the ground. rad that.
in farenheit's thermometer, at thirty-two degree, xvi, 14,
ter in the air begins to freeze, which is hoar-froi, 2
hoard. m. s. [ponb, saxon.] a store laid up in
hidden stock; a treasure.
i have a venturous fairy, that shall seek
the squirrel's heard, and fetch thee thence new nuts. shot
they might have even starved, had it not been i. o
providential reserve, this hoard, that was stowed in the st ls
underneath, and now seasonably disclosed. o
to hoard. v. n. to make hoards; to lay up store, wrd,
he fear'd not once himself to be in need,
the wi.
4thulhu.
societ; a
nor car'd to hoard for those whom he did breed. soft
happy always was it for that son, -
whose father for his hoarding went to hell? shahjari
to hoard. v. a.
1. to lay in hoards; to husband privily; to store secretly.
the hoarded plague of the gods requite your love; so,
you hoard not health for your own private use, -
but on the publick spend the rich produce. drydin,
you will be unsuccessful, if you give out of a great man
who is remarkable for his frugality for the publick, that i.
squanders away the nation's money; but you may safely relate
that he hoards it. arbuthnot's art of political lying.
a superfluous abundance tempts us to forget god, when it
is hoarded in our treasures, or considered as a safe, independent
provision laid up for many years. rogers,
2. it is sometimes enforced by the particle up.
i have just occasion to complain of them, who, because
they understand chaucer, would hoard him up as misers do
their grandam gold, only to look on it themselves, and hinder
others from making use of it. drydon,
the base wretch who hoard; up all he can,
is prais'd, and call’d a careful thrifty man. drydon,
hoa'rder. n.s.. [from hoard.] one that stores up in secret.
since commodities will be raised, this alteration will be an
advantage to nobody but hoarders of money. iwk,
ho’arhou nd. m. s. [marrubium, lat.] a plant. -
haarhound has its leaves and flower-cup covered yely thick
with a white hoariness: it is famous for the relief it gives in
moist asthmas, of which a thick and viscous matter is th:
cause; but it is now little used. - hill.
ho’ariness. n.s.. [from hoary..] the state of being whitish;
the colour of old men's hair.
he grows a wolf, his hoarines remains,
and the same rage in other members reigns. drio,
hoarse. adj. [bar, saxon; harsh, dutch) having *
voice rough, as with a cold; having a rough sound.
come, sit, sit, and a song. ---
— clap into’t roundly, without hawking of o:
saying we are hoarse. shalftir.'s 4). hill.
the raven himself is hoarse,
that crokes the fatal entrance of duncan ', mikh
under my battlements. shaloftus: mo
he sped his steps along the hoarse resounding shore, dj4.
the stock-dove only through the forest coo
mournfully hoarse. - sh voice
ho’ar sely. adv. [from hoars...] with a sough his woicc,
the hounds at nearer distance hasoyboy"; drydt,
the hunter close pursu'd the visionary maid. in y
ho’ars eness. m. s. [from hoarse.] roughness o, 0:
the voice is sometimes intercluded by * to:
viscuous phlegm.
i had a voice in heav'n, ere sulph'rous so. , arthur,
had damp'd it to a hoarseness. o
the want of it in the wind-pipe occasions o.
gullet, and difficulty of swallowing: arbuthnot s
ho’ary. adj. [pan, panung, saxon. see hoar.
1. white; whitish. • *
this she rested on her arm recin".
this".
- - ali jo,
the hoary willows waving with the w*
2. white or grey with age. . . -
a comely palmer, clad in black attire, sorso.
of ripest years, and hairs all hoary grey. festy of to
jo marvelling at the courage and o him, is
hoary old prince in his so great extremity, di o ho!
sent him again into the city. fili
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1023</div><p class="text">h o c
y - ---,
h o g
-
--
---
has then my hoary head deserv'd no better; row.
then in full age, and hoary holiness,
retire, great preacher, to thy promis'd bliss. prior.
3. white with frost.
the seasons alter; hoary headed frosts - -
fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose. shakespears.
4. mouldy; mossy; rusty. -
there was brought out of the city into the camp ver
coarse, hoary, moulded bread. knolles's hislory.
hobnob. . this is probably corrupted from hab nab by a coase
pronunciation. see hae nab.
his incensement at this moment is so implacable, that satis.
faction can be none, but pangs of death and sepulchre: hob-
mob is his word; give’t, or take’t. shakespeare.
to ho'bble. v. n. [to hop, to hopple, to hobble.]
1. to walk lamely or aukwardly upon one leg more than the
other; to hitch; to walk with unequal and encumbered steps.
the friar was hobbling the same way too. dryden.
some persons continued a kind of hobbling march on the
broken arches, but fell through: ` addison.
was he ever able to walk without leading-strings, without
being discovered by his hobbling? swift.
2. to move roughly or unevenly. feet being ascribed to verses,
whatever is done with feet is likewise ascribed to them.
those ancient romans had a sort of extempore poetry, or
untuneable hobbling verse. dryden.
while you pindarick truths rehearse, -
she hobbles in alternate verse. - prior.
ho’bble. m. s. [from the verb.] uneven aukward gait. -
one of his heels is higher than the other, which gives him
a hobble in his gait. gulliver's travels.
ho’bbler. n. s. [from hobby..] . . . .
for twenty hobblers armed, irishmen so called, because they
served on hobbies, he paid six-pence a-piece per diem. davies.
ho’bblingly. adv. [from hobble.] clumsily; aukwardly;
with a halting gait.
ho’bby. n.s.. [hobereau, french.]
i. a species of hawk.
they have such a hovering possessien of the waltoline, as
an hobby hath over a lark. - bacon.
the people will chop like trouts at an artificial fly, and
dare like larks under the awe of a painted hobby. l’estrange.
larks lie dar'd to shun the hobby's flight. dryden.
2. [hoppe, gothick, a horse; habin, french, a pacing horse.]
an irish or scottish horse; a pacing horse; a garran. see
hobbl er. - -
3. a stick on which boys get astride and ride. . . . .
those grave contenders about opiniative trifles look like
aged socrates upon his boy's hobby horse. glanville.
as young children, who are try’d in
go-carts, to keep their steps from sliding,
when members knit, and legs grow stronger;
make use of such machine no longer;
but leap pro libitu, and scout -
on horse call’d hobby, or without. prior.
no hobby horse, with gorgeous top,
could with this rod of sid compare. swift.
4. a stupid fellow. - - -
i have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you,
which these hobby horses must not hear. shakespeare.
hobgoblin. m. s. [according to skinner, for robgoblins, from
robin goodfellow, hob being the nickname of robin : but
more probably, according to wallis and junius, hopgoblins em-
puse, because they do not move their feet: whence, says wal-
zis, came the boys play of fox in the hole, the fox always hop-
ping on one leg.j. a frightful fairy. -
fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
attend your office and your quality:
crier hobgoblin, make the fairy o-yes.
hospit. n.s. a small mortar to shoot little bombs.
hosen ail. n.s. [from hobby and nail.] a nail used in shoeing
a hobby or little horse; a nail with a thick strong head.
steel, if thou turn thine edge, i beseech jove on my knees
thou may'st be turn'd into hobnails. - shakespeare.
we shall buy maidens as they buy hobnail, by the hun-
dred. shakespeare.
ho’bnailed. adj. [from hobnail.] set with hobnails.
would'st thou, friend, who hast two legs alone,
would'st thou, to run the gantlet, these expose
to a whole company of hobnail'd shoes? dryden's juv.
hock, n. s. [the same with hough; pop, saxon.] the joint
between the knee and the fetlock.
1, hock. v. a. [from the noun..] ...to disable in the hock.
hock. n. s. [from hockheim on the maine.] old
.hock a more. } strong rhenish.
restor'd the fainting high and mighty,
with brandy, wine, and aqua vitae;
and made 'em stoutly overcome -
with bachrarch, hockamore and mum. hudibras.
wine becomes sharp, as hock, like vitriolick acidity. floyer.
if cyder-royal should become unpleasant, and as unfit to
2.
shakespeare.
bottle as old hockamore, mix one hogshead of that ad none of
... tart new cyder together. amortimer.
hockher b. m. s. shock and herb.] a plant; the same with
mallows. . - ainsworth.
to hocki.e. v.a...[from hock.] to hamstring; to out the
finews about the ham or hough. . - hanmer.
hqgjs pocus. [the original of this word is referred by
tillotson to a form of the romish church: junius derives it
from horced, welsh, a cheat, and poke or pocus, a bag, jug-
glers using a bag for conveyance. it is corrupted from some
words that had once a meaning, and which perhaps cannot
e discovered.]. a juggle; a cheat. - - - -
. this gift of hocus pocusing, and of disguising matters, is
- surprising: - - - l’estrange.
hod. n. j. [corrupted perhaps in contempt from hood, a hod
being carried on the head..] a kind of trough in which a
labourer carries mortar to the masons. . . .
a fork and a hook to be tampering in clay, * .
a lath, hammer, trowel, a hod or a tray. . . . tussor.
hoodman. n. s: [had and man.] a labourer that carries
mortar. -
hodmando'd. n. s. a fish. . . ... " : " . . -
those that cast their shell are the lobster, the crab, the
crawfish, and the hodmanded or dodman. bacon.
hopge-podge. m. s. shach: poche, hochepot, quasi hachis en pot,
french..] a medley of "g." boiled together.
they have made our english tongue a gallimaufrey, or
hodge-podge of all other speeches. . . . - spenser.
it produces excellent corn, whereof the turks make their
trachana and bouhourt, a certain hodge-podge of sundry ingre-
., dients. - - sandys's travels.
gdiernal. adj.. [hodiernus, latin.] of to-day.
hoe. n.s.. [houe, french; houwe, dutch..] an instrument to
cut up the earth, of which the blade is at right angles with
the handle.
they should be thinned with a hoe. mortimer.
to hoe. v. a. [houer, french; houwen, dutch..] to cut or
dig with a hoe.
they must be continually kept with weeding and hoeing.
- - - martimer.
hog.. n.s. [hwch, welsh.j
1. the general name of swine. . . . . - ,
this will raise the price of hogs, if we grow all to be pork-
£aters. , - . - shakespeare.
the bog, that plows not, nor obeys thy call,
lives on the labours of this lord of all. pope.
2. a castrated boar. - • , -
3. to bring hogs to a fair market. to fail of one's design.
- you have brought your hogs to a fair market. spectator:
4. hog is used in lincolnshire for a sheep of a certain age, i
think of two years. - - - - skinner.
hogcote. n.s. shog and cote.] a house for hogs; a hogsty.
out of a small hogcote fixty or eighty load of dung hath been
raised. . : . . - - - mortimer.
hoggerel. n.s. a two year old ewe. . . ainsworth.
hogh. n. s. [otherwise written ho, how, or hough, from hoogh;
dutch.j a hill; rising ground; a cliff. obsolete.
that well can witness yet unto this day,
the western hogh, besprinkl'd with the gore ! .
of mighty goemot. . . . - fairy queen.
ho'cher d. n.s. shog and pyrb, a keeper.] a keeper of hogs.
the terms hagherd and cowkeeper are not to be used in our
poetry; but there are no finer words in the greek.
- broome's notes on the odyssey.
hocq is h. adj. [from hog.] having the qualities of an hog;
brutish; greedy; selfish. - -
suspicion miso had, for the hoggish shrewdness of her brain,
and mopsa, for a very unlikely envy. sidney.
hoggishly. adv. [from hoggish.] , greedily; selfishly.
hoog gis hness. n.s.. [from hoggish.] brutality; greediness ;
selfishness. -
ho'osbe ans. - * - " -
hoogs brea d. - }. s. plants. ainsworth.
hogsmus hrooms. - - - - - -
hogs fennel. n.s.. [hog and fennel.] a plant. ainsworth.
hoogshead. m. s. shog and head.] -
1. a measure of liquids containing fixty-three gallons. . .
varro tells, that every jugerum of vines yielded fix hundred
urns of wine: according to this proportion, our acre should
yield fifty-five hogsheads, and a little more. arbuthnot.
2. any large barrel. - "- - - - - - -
biow strongly with a pair of bellows into a hogshead, putting
into it before that which you would have preserved; and in
the instant that you withdraw the bellows, stop the hole. bacon.
they slung up one of their largest hogsheads: i drank it off;
for it did not hold half a pint. . gulliver’s travels.
hoogsty. m. s. shog and sly..] the place in which swine are
shut to be fed. - -
the families of farmers live in filth and nastiness, without
a shoe or stocking to their feet, or a house so convenient as
an english hogsly. , swift.
hogwash.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1024</div><p class="text">h o l.
h c) l
--
hogwash. m. s. [hog and wash..] the draft which is given to
swine. - - -
your butler purloins your liquor, and the brewer sel's you
hogwash. arbuthnot's history of john bull,
hoipes. n.s. shoeden, welsh; formina levioris famo, latin.]
an ill-taught aukward country girl.
t, horode n. v. n. [from the noun..] to romp indecently.
some of them would get a scratch; but we always disco-
vered, upon examining, that they had been haidening with the
young apprentices. - swift.
t, horse. v. a. [ hauffer, french. j to raise up on
to hoist. ; high. -
'tis the sport to have the engineer hoist up with his own
petar. shakoffeare's hamlet.
join you with me;
we'll quickly hoist duke humphrey from his seat. shakes?.
hoise sail, and fly;
and in thy flight aloud on cratis cry. chapman's odyssey,
auria had hoised sail, and was on his way toward the bay
of naupactus. knolles's history.
they loosed the rudder-bands, and hoised up the mainsail to
the wind, and made toward shore. aeis, xxvii. 40.
that man which prizeth virtue for itself, and cannot cndure
to hoise and strike his sails, as the divers natures of calms and
storms require, must cut his sails of mean length and breadth,
and content himself with a slow and sure navigation. raleigh.
what made absalom kick at all the kindnesses of his fa-
ther, but because his ambition would needs be fingering the
sceptre, and hojsling him into his father's throne : south.
we thought for greece
the sails were hoisted, and our fears release. dryden's an.
they his him on the bier, and deal the dole,
and there's an end. dryden's prs.
what haste she made to hois? her purple sails
and to appear magnificent in flight,
drew half our strength away. dryden's all for love.
their navy swarms upon the coasts: they cry
to hoist their anchors, but the gods deny. dryden’s aen.
seize him, take, hoist him up, break off his hold,
and toss him headlong from the temple's wall. southern.
if 'twas an island where they found the shells, they straight-
ways concluded that the whole island lay originally at the bot-
tom of the sea, and that it was hois?ed up by some vapour from
beneath. . //codward's natural //i/lory.
hol. d, in the old glossaries, is mentioned in the same sense with
wold, i. e. a governour or chief officer; but in some other
places for love, as holdlic, lovely. . gilson's camdin.
to hold. v. a. preter. held; part. pass. held or holden, [haldan,
gothick; palban, saxon; henden, dutch..]
1. to grasp in the hand; to gripe; to clutch.
lift up the lad, hold him in thy hand. geness.
france, thou may’s hold a serpent by the tongue,
a fasting tyger safer by the tooth, -
than keep in peace that hand which thou do's hold. shak.
2. to conneet; to keep from separation.
the loops held one curtain to another. exod. xxxvi. 12.
3. to keep ; to retain ; to gripe fast; not to let 89.
too late it was for satyr to be told,
or ever hope recover her again;
in vain he seeks, that having cannot hall. fairy queen.
prove all things: hold fast that which is good. 2 thos. v.
4. to maintain as an opinion. -
thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of baalam. rev.
5. to consider ; to regard.
i as a stranger to my heart and me
hold thee from this for ever. shakosh. king lear.
6. to think of ; to judge with regard to praise of blame.
i hold him but a fool, that will endanger
his body for a girl that loves him not. shakos care.
one amongst the fair'st of greece,
that holds his honour higher than his case. shakoff care.
this makes thee blessed peace so light to holl,
like summer's flies that fear not winter's cold. fairfax.
hold such in reputation. philipp.
... he would make us amends, and spend some time with us,
if we held his company and conference agreeable. bacon.
as chaucer is the father of english po try, so i holl him in
the some degree of veneration as the grecians held homer, or
the romans virgil. dryden.
ye latian dames, if any here
hold your unhappy queen amata dear! dryden.
7. to receive, and keep in a vessel.
she tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold
8 o her fit vessels pure. aozn
so contain ; to receive into itv : r x + y to o
holds sixt o l] its capacity: as, a hogshead
y-three gallons; the sack is too little to hold the grain.
9. to keep ; not to sp;]]. -
- broken cisterns that can hold no watcr. joremiah.
10. to keep; to hinder from escape.
c o pit shall never hold
cicitial spirits in bondage, milton.
ii. to keep from spoil; to defend.
with what arms
we mean to hold what anciently we claim
of empire. -
12. to keep from loss. milon,
man should better hold his place
by wisdom. -
13. to have any station. miło,
the star bids the shepherd fold;
now the top of heav'n doth hold.
and now the strand, and now the plai * pla
their ardent eyes with bloody so,
qbserve the youth who first appears in fight • dryden,
and holds the nearest station to the light. to"
14. to possess; to have. o dijk,
holding corioli in the name of rome,
even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
*"!",
to let him slip at will. shal
the castle, holden by a garrison of germans, he &amp; fore,
to be besieged. 'o'
assuredly it is more shame for a man to los. o:
holdith, than to fail in getting that which hero. had i he
15. to possess in subordination. au, au, w,
he was willing to yield himself unto soy -
and of him to hold o, for a o o
the terms too hard by which i was to hold • aholl: ,
the good. - m.
16. to suspend; to refrain. sol,
men in the midst of their own blood, and -
sailed, held their hands, contrary to th. laws o
necesity. - - **
death ! what do's o hold thy blow
what thou do'st, thou do'st not know. croslaw
17. to stop; to restrain. -
we cannot hold mortality's strong hand. shaftar,
fell, banning hag! inchantress, hold thy tongue, so.
when straight the people, by no force compello !
nor longer from their inclination held,
break forth at once. walr,
unless thou find occasion, holl thy tongue;
thyself or others, careless talk may wrong, denham,
hold your laughter, then divert your fellow-servants,
- swift's directions to the roman,
boon,
18. to fix to any condition.
his gracious promise you might, -
as cause had call'd you up, have held him to, shajari,
19. to keep ; to save.
stay but a little; for my cloud of dignity
is held from falling with so weak a wind,
that it will quickly drop : my day is dim. software,
20. to confine to a certain state.
the most high then shewed signs for them, and hostill the
flood, 'till they were passed over. 2 esdr, xiii. 14.
21. to detain ; to keep in confinement or subjection,
him god hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death,
because it was not possible that he should be holdin of it. aoi.
22. to retain ; to continue. -
these reasons mov’d her star-like husband's heart;
but still be held his purpose to depart. dryden,
23. to practise with continuance. -
night
and chaos, ancestors of nature, hold
eternal anarchy.
24. not to intermit.
seed-time and harvest, heat and hoary stoo, s:
shall hold their course. milo,
25. to solemnize; to celebrate. -
the queen this day here hall; her parliament, r
but little thinks we shall be of her council. so
he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king, i sa'i.
26. to conserve; not to infringe. •., or *
her husband heard it, and held his peace. numb, xxx 7.
she said, and held her peace: ae neas wo" dryin
unknowing whom the sacred fibyl meant, yo.
27. to manage; to handle intellectually. ion of wit
some in their discourse desire rather commendo o .
in being able to hold all arguments, than of judgment baul,
cerning what is true.
28. to maintain. - -
whereupon they also made engines again
and held them battle a long season.
20. to carry on conjunetively. thos',
* †. i.o. g. against him. *:::
a while discourse they hold.
o. to prosecute; to continue. , " -
3 he o to the land's end, where he ho o: o
wards the west, did at length peaceably p*.*.
straits. -- - s
31. to hold forth. to offer to exhibit; to "...info
christianity came into the world with the goat j n, a •
- d mansits,
of thought and language, as well as 1.fe and i t; so
t s “” “so 8 f
mon,
st their engino,
i sat. vi. 5*
o, os
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1025</div><p class="text">h o l
h o l
frth nothing but piety, charity, and humility, with the belief
of the messiah and of his kingdom. temple.
observe the connection of ideas in the propositions, which
books hold forth and pretend to teach as truths. locke.
my account is so far from interfering with moses, that it
hol's forth a natural interpretation of his sense. //oodward.
32. to hold forth. to protend; to put forward to view.
how joyful and pleasant a thing is it to have a light held us
forth from heaven to direct our steps -
33. to hold in. to restrain; to govern by the bridle.
i have lately sold my nag, and honestly told his greatest
fault, which is, that he became such a lover of liberty that i
could scarce hold him in. swift.
34. ho hold in . to restrain in general. -
these men's hastiness the warier sort of you doth not com-
mend ; ye wish they had held themselves longer in, and not so
dangerously flown abroad. hooker.
35. to hold off. to keep at a distance.
although 'tis fit that cassio have his place;
yet if you please to hold him off a while,
you shall by that perceive him. shakespeare's othello.
the object of fight doth strike upon the popil of the eye
direetly, without any interception ; whereas the cave of the
ear doth hold off the sound a little from the organ.
i am the better acquainted with you for absence, as men
are with themselves for affliction: absence does but hold off a
friend, to make one see him truly. pope to swift.
36. to hold on. to continue 5 to protract; to push forward.
they took barbarosła, holding on his course to africk, who
brought great fear upon the country. - knolles's history.
if the obedience challenged were indeed due, then did our
brethren both begin the quarrel and hold it on. sanderson.
37. to hold out. to extend ; to stretch forth.
the king held out to esther the golden sceptre that was in
his hand. joh. v. 2.
38. to hold out. to offer; to propose.
fortune holds out these to you, as rewards.
39. to hold out. to continue to do or suffer.
he cannot long hold out these pangs,
th’ incesant care and labour of his mind.
40. to holp up. to raise aloft.
i should remember him: does he not hold up his head, as
it were, and strut in his gait? shakespeare.
the hand of the almighty visibly held up, and prepared to
take vengeance. locke.
41. to hold up. to sustain ; to support by influence or con-
trivance.
there is no man at once either excellently good or extreme-
ly evil, but grows either as he holds himself up in virtue, or
lets himself slide to viciousness. sidney.
it followeth, that all which they do in this sort proceedeth
originally from some such agent as knoweth, appointeth, hold-
cheyne.
ben. johnson.
shakspeare.
eth up, and actually frameth the same. hooker.
the time misorder'd doth in common sense
crowd us, and crush us to this monstrous form,
to hold our safety up. shakespeare.
and so success of mischief shall be borne,
and heir from heir shall hold his quarrel up. shakes care.
those princes have held up their sovereignty best, which
have been sparing in those grants. davies on ireland.
then do not strike him dead with a denia!,
but hold him up in life, and cheer his soul
with the faint glimmering of a doubtful hope. addis. cato.
42. to keep from failing; materially.
we have often made one considerably thick piece of marble
take and hold up another, having purposely caused their flat
surfaces to be carefully ground and polished. boyle.
to hold. v. n.
1. to stand; to be right; to be without exception.
to say that simply an argument, taken from man's autho-
rity, doth hold no way, neither affirmatively nor negatively,
is hard. hooker.
this holdeth not in the sea-coasts. bacon.
the lasting of plants is most in those that are largest of
body; as oak, elm, and chesnut, and this holdeth in trees ;
but in herbs it is often contrary. * - bacon.
when the religion formerly received is rent by discords,
and when the holiness of the professors of religion is decayed,
and full of scandal, and withal the times be stupid, ignorant,
and barbarous, you may doubt the springing up of a new se&amp;t;
if then also there should arise any extravagant and strange
spirit, to make himself author thereof; all which points held
when mahomet published his law. bacon.
nothing can be of greater use and defence to the mind than
, the discovering of the colours of good and evil, shewing in
what cases they hold, and in what they deceive. bacon.
where outward force constrains, the sentence holds;
but who constrains me? milton.
none of his solutions will hold by mere mechanicks. more.
this unseen agitation of the minute parts will hold in light
and spirituous liquors. boyle,
vol. i.
bacon. .
6. to stand up for ; to adhere.
the drift of this figure hold good in all the parts of the
creation. - a. estrange.
the reasons given by them against the worship of inages,
will equally hold against the worship of images amongst
christians. stillingfort.
it holds in all operative principles whatsoever, but especially
in such as relate to morality; in which not to proceed, is cer-
tainly to go backward. south.
the proverb holds, that to be wise and love,
is hardly granted to the gods above. drydon's falies.
as if th’ experiment were made to holl
for base production, and reject the gold. dryden.
this remark, i must acknowledge, is not so proper for the
colouring as the design; but it will hold for both.
our author offers no reason ; and when any body does, we
shall see whether it will hold or no. locke.
the rule hold; in land as well as all other commodities. locke.
this seems to hold in most cases. addison.
the analogy holds good, and precisely keeps to the same
properties in the planets and comets. cheyne.
sanctorius's experiment of perspiration, being to the other
se, retion as five to three, does not hold in this country, ex-
cept in the hottest time of sunner. a 'tool on aliments.
in words, as fashions, the same rule will holl;
dryden.
alike fantastick, if too new or old. pope,
2. to continue unbroken or unsubdu'd.
our force by land hath nobly he/s. shak speare.
3. to last ; to endure.
we see, by the peeling of onions, what a holding substance
the skin is.
- bacon.
- never any man was yet so old,
but hop'd his life one winter more might holl. denham.
4. to continue without variation.
we our state -
hill, as you yours, while our obedience hol.o. moston.
he did not hold in this mind long. l'is', ange.
5. to refrain.
his dauntless heart would fain have held
from weeping, but his eyes rebell’d. dryden.
through envy of the devil came death into the world, and
they that do hold of his side do find it. // s.l. ii. 24.
they must, if they hold to their principles, agree that things
had their production always as now they have. hale.
when granada for your uncle held, -
ou was by us restor'd, and he expell’d. dryden.
numbers hold
with the fair freckled king and beard of gold:
so vigorous are his eyes, such rays they cast,
so prominent his eagle's beak is plac'd. dryden's fabi.s.
7. to be dependent on. -
the other two were great princes, though holding of him;
men of giant-like both hugeness and force. sidney.
the mother, if the house holds of the lady, had rather, yea
and will, have her son cunning and bold. aftham. .
the great barons had not only great numbers of knights, *
but even petty barons holding under them. temple.
my crown is absolute, and holds of none. dryden.
8. to derive right.
'tis true, from force the noblest title springs;
i therefore hold from that which first made kings. dydn.
. to maintain an opinion.
men hold and profess without ever having examired. loose.
io. to hold forth. to harangue; to speak in publick; to
set forth publickly. o
a petty conjurer, telling fortunes, held forth in the market-
place. l'e/irange.
11. to hold in. to restrain one’s self.
i am full of the fury of the lord: i am weary with holding
1/1.
jer. vi. i i.
12. to hold in. to continue in luck.
a duke, playing at hazard, held in a great many hands to—
gether. swift.
13. to hold off. to keep at a distance without closing with
offers.
these are interests important enough, and yet we must be
wooed to consider them ; nay, that does not prevail neither,
but with a perverse coyness we hold off. decay of piety.
14. to hol d on. to continue; not to be interrupted.
the trade held on for many years after the bishops became
protestants; and some of their names are still remembered
with infamy, on account of enriching their families by such
sacrilegious alienations. swift.
15. to hold on. to proceed.
he held on, however, 'til he was upon the very point of
breaking. l'eirange.
16. to hold out. to last ; to endure.
before those dews that form manna come upon trees in the
valleys, they disfipate, and cannot hold out. bacon.
as there are mountebanks for the natural body, so are there
mountebanks for the politick body ; men that perhaps have
1 1 k been
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1026</div><p class="text">h o l
h o l
been lucky in two or three experiments, but want the grounds
of science, and therefore cannot hold out. bacon.
truth, fidelity, and justice, are a sure way of thriving:
and will hold out, when all fraudulent arts and devices will
fail. tillotson.
by an extremely exact regimen a consumptive person may
hold out for years, if the symptoms are not violent. arbuthnot.
17. to hold out. not to yield; not to be subdued.
the great master went with his company to a place where
the spaniards, sore charged by achimetes, had much ado to
hold out. knolles’s history.
you think it strange a person, obsequious to those he loves,
should hold out so long against importunity. boyle.
nor could the hardcst ir'n hold out
against his blows. hudibras.
i would cry now, my eyes grow womanish; -
but yet my heart holds out. dryden's spanish fryar.
the citadel of milan has held out formerly, after the con-
quest of the rest of the dutchy. addison on italy.
pronounce your thoughts: are they still fixt
to hold it out, and fight it to the last :
or are your hearts subdu'd at length, and wrought
by time and ill success to a submission ? addison's cata.
as to the holding out against so many alterations of state, it
sometimes proceeds from principles. collier on pride.
18. to hold together. to be joined.
those old gothick castles, made at several times, hold to-
gether only, as it were, by rags and patches. dryden.
19. to hold together. to remain in union.
even outlaws and robbers, who break with all the world
besides, must keep faith amongst themselves, or else they can-
not hold together. locke.
20. to hold up. to support himself.
all the wife sayings which philosophers could muster up,
have helped only to support some few stout and obstinate
minds, which, without the assistance of philosophy, could
have held up pretty well of themselves. tillotson.
21. to hold up. not to be foul weather.
though nice and dark the point appear,
quoth ralph, it may hold up and clear. . hudibras.
22. to hold up. to continue the same speed.
when two start into the world together, the success of the
first seems to press upon the reputation of the latter ; for why
could not he hold up 2 collier of envy.
23. 7% holp with. to adhere to ; to co-operate with.
there is none that holdeth with me in these things but mi-
chael. daniel,
hold has the appearance of an interjection; but is the impe-
rative mood. forbear; stop ; be still.
hold, ho! lieutenant—fir–montano! gentlemen,
have you forgot all sense of place and duty :
the general speaks to you—hold, hold, for shame ! shakes.
hold, hold' are all thy empty wishes such
a good old woman would have said as much. dryden.
ho l.d. m. s. [from the verb.]
i. the act of seizing ; gripe; grasp ; seizure. it is used with
great frequency, both literally and figuratively, both for ma-
nual and intellectual agency. the verbs with which it is
oftenest united, are take, lay, and have.
those bards delivered no certain truth of any thing ; nei-
ther is there any certain hold to be taken of any antiquity.
which is received by tradition. sponsor on ireland.
the wits of the multitude are such, that many things they
cannot lay hold on at once. hooker.
uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of god, and took hold
of it; for the oxen shook it. 2 sam. vi. 6.
this is to give him liberty and power:
rather thou should's lay bold upon him, send him
to deserv’d death, and a just punishment. ben. johnson.
let but them
find courage to lay hold on this occasion. milton.
the devil himself, when let loose upon job, could not
tansport that patient good man beyond his temper, or make
him quit his hold. l’estrange.
he sciz'd the shining bough with griping hold,
and rent away with ease the ling’ring gold. drydon.
the hand is divided into four fingers bending forwards, and
one opposite to them bending backwards, and of greater
strength than any of them singly, which we call the thumb,
o join with them severally or united, whereby it is fitted to
joy hold of objects of any size or quantity. ray on the creation.
yet then, from all my grief, o lord,
thy mercy set me free,
whilst, in the confidence of pray’r,
my soul took hold on thee. addison.
we are strangely backward to lay hold of this safe, this only
method of cure, atterbury
&gt; * * he kept his hold,
nor lost 'till beauty was decay’d and old,
and love was by possession pall'd and cold '•'a-o-o:
2. something to be held; no. - granville.
if a man be upon an high place, with -
o
he is ready to fall. &gt; without rails or gooil,
3. power of keeping. basti,
on your vigour now,
my hold of this new kingdom all depends. -
4. catch ; power of seizing. - mito.
the law hath yet another hold on you.
5. prison; place of custody. you. shaison,
they loy him in hold, because it was not d
to be done with him. 2 of declared what w43
the prisoner to his hold retir’d. hacier.
drd,
they laid hands on them, and put them in holdu tjden,
next day. - *:
(ii,
6. custody.
king richard, he is in the mighty hold
of bolingbroke. shalog.
. power; influence operating on the mind. opiart,
rural recreations abroad, and books at home are the
nocent pleasures of a man who is early wise; i .
tune no more hold of him than of necessity he .* ..
fear is that passion which hath the greatest ove."
and by which god and his laws take the sures ... o
let it consist with an unbeliever's interestand safety o !.
you, and then it will be impossible you can have any holdu ng
him, because there is nothing left to give him a check, o
put in the balance against his profit. so.
8. holp of a ship. all that past which lies between the o:
7
son and the lower deck. hari
now a sea into the hold was got, -
wave upon wave another sea had wrought, dijon
9. a lurking place: as, the hold of a wild beast or deer,
1o. a fortified place; a fort; a safe residence.
it was his policy to leave no hold behind him; but makes
plain and waste. shinjir,
these separated themselves unto david, into the hist, the
wilderness, men of might. chron,
he shall destroy the strong holds. jorimiah,
ho'lder. m.s.. [from hold.]
1. one that holds or gripes any thing in his hand,
the makers and holders of plows are wedded to their own
particular way. mortinir,
2. a tenant; one that holds land under another,
in times past holdings were so plentiful, and holder, so
scarce, as well was the landlord, who could not get one to
be his tenant. carew's survey of crow.l.
hold erfo'rth. m. s. [hold and forth.) an haranguor; one
who speaks in publick.
whence some tub holdersforth have made
in powd'ring tubs the richest trade. hıdıras;
he was confirmed in this opinion upon scing the loor-
forth. aoi.
ho ldf ast. m. s. [held and soft.] any thing which takes
hold ; a catch ; a hook.
the several tecth are furnished with holios' suitable to the
stress that they are put to. ray on the citation,
ho lding. m. s. [from hold.] -
1. tenure ; farm.
ii./dings were so plentiful, and holders so scarce, a wo
was the landlord who could not get a tenant. carow,
2. it sometimes signifies the burthen or chorus of a song, ho".
the holing every man shall beat as loud
as his strong sides can volly.
hoi. e. m. s. [hol, dutch; pole, saxon.]
1. a cavity narrow and long, either person
zontal. so.
the earth had not a hole to hide this deed. **
a loadstone is so disposed, that it shall draw "no." o:
reclined plane, a bullet of steel, which, as it ascends o
the loadstone, may fall down through someo an ho
to the place whence it began to move. isilkins'; o
there are the tops of the mountains, and under * int!
in holes and caverns the air o detained. of miss
2. a perforation; a small interflicial vacuity.
o upon linen that has small hole init: those o
black, men are often deceived in taking hole; for sp
ink; and painters, to represent halo, make use of *.
sakort,
dicular or hoi.
3. a cave; a hollow place.
upon his bloody finger he doth wear short,
a precious ring, that lightens all the hole. .*
. a celi of an animal. - sc upsi
4 a tortoise spends all his days in a * with so
his head. hem as
i have frighted ants with my fingers, and so neo,
far as another hole, stopping all pastogo" o aidso
and it was natural for them to fly into * o o in socio
5. a mean habitation. hole is generally o:
ing of manual works, with some degree of dislik”
when alexander first *. †.
of the great cynick, thus he did loo.
how much more hoppy thou, that art content to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1027</div><p class="text">h o l
h o i,
ne
to live within this little hole, than i -
who after empire, that vain quarry, fly. drydon.
6. some subterfuge or shift. , ainsworth.
7. arm hole. the cavity under the shoulder.
tickling is most in the soles, and under the arm-holes and
sides. bacon.
ho'lidam. m. s. [holy dome.] blessed lady. hanmer.
by my holidam, here comes catharine. shakespeare.
holi ly. adv. [from holy.]
1. piously; with sanctity.
thou would'st be great,
art not without ambition; but without
the illness should attend it: what thou would'st highly,
that would'st thou holiy. shakespeare.
2. inviolably ; without breach.
friendship, a rare thing in princes, more rare between
princes, that so holily was observed to the last of those two ex-
cellent men. sidney.
ho liness. n.s.. [from holy.]
1. sanctity ; piety; religious goodness.
ill it doth beseem your holines;
to separate the husband and the wife. shakespeare.
religion is rent by discords, and the holines, of the profes-
fors is decayed, and full of scandal. bacon.
then in full age, and hoary holiness,
retire, great teacher, to thy promis'd bliss. prior.
we see piety and holiness ridiculed as morose fingularities.
rogers.
2. the state of being hallowed; dedication to religion.
3. the title of the pope.
i here appeal unto the pope,
to bring my whole cause 'fore his holiness. shakspeare,
his holins has told some english gentlemen, that those of
our nation should have the privileges. addison on italy.
holla, interj. [hala, fr.] a word used in calling to any one
at a distance.
list, list / i hear
some far off holla break the silent air. milton.
to holl a. v. n. [from the interjection. this word is now
vitiously written hollo by the best authors: sometimes halloo.]
to cry out loudly.
but i will find him when he lies asleep,
and in his ear i'll holla, mortimer shakespeare.
what halloing and what stir is this to-day ? shakespeare.
ho'll and. m. s. fine linen made in holland.
some for the pride of turkish courts design'd
for folded turbants finest holland bear. dryden,
hollow, adj. [from hole.]
1. excavated ; having a void space within; not solid,
it is fortune's use
to let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
to view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
an age of poverty. shakespeare's merchant of venice.
some search for hollow trees, and fell the woods. dryden.
he frets, he fumes, he stares, he stamps the ground;
the hollow tow’rs with clamours ring around. dryden,
2. noisy, like sound reverberated from a cavity,
the southern wind,
now by his hollow whistling in the leaves,
foretels a tempest.
thence issu’d such a blast and hollow roar,
as threaten’d from the hinge to heave the door. dryden.
3. not faithful; not sound; not what one appears.
who in want a hollow friend doth try,
dire&amp;ly seasons him his enemy. shakespeare's hamlet.
hollow church papists are like the roots of nettles, which
themselves sting not; but bear all the stinging leaves. bacon.
he seem’d
for dignity compos'd, and high exploit;
but all was false and hollow. milton,
hollow hearted. adj. [hollow and heart..] dishonest; in-
sincere; of practice or sentiment differing from profession.
what could be expe&amp;ted from him, but knotty and crooked
shakeshcare.
hollowhearted dealings howel's vocal forest.
the hollow hearted, disaffe&amp;ed,
and close malignants are detected. hudibras.
ho"llow. m. s.
1. cavity; concavity.
i’ve heard myself proclaim’d,
and by the happy hollow of a tree
escap'd the hunt. shakespeare's king lear.
i suppose there is some vault or hollow, or isle, behind the
wall, and some passage to it. bacon's natural history.
against the horse's side his spear
he throws, which trembles with enclosed fear;
whilst from the hollows of his womb proceed
groans, not his own. denham.
himself, as in the hollow of his hand,
holding, obedient to his high command,
the deep abyss. prior.
2. cavern; den; hole. -
who art thou, that lately did's descend
into this gaping hollow of the earth : shakoffeare,
forests grew
upon the barren hollows, high o'ershading -
the haunts of savage beasts. prior.
. pit.
3 a fine genius for gardening thought of forming such an
unfightly hollow into so uncommon and agreeable a scene.
addison.
4. any opening or vacuity.
he touched the hollow of his thigh.
5. passage; canal. " .
the little springs and rills are conveyed through little chan-
nels into the main hollow of the aqueduct. addison on italy.
to hollow. v. a. [from the noun..] to make hollow ; to
cxcavate.
trees, rudely hollow’d, did the waves sustain,
'ere ships in triumph plow'd the watry plain. dryden.
multitudes were employed in the sinking of wells, and the
hollowing of trees. soedjator.
to hollow. v. n. [this is written by neglea cf cymology
for holia. see holt. a.] to shout ; to hoot.
this unseen judge will wait, and in you, ear
gen. xxii. 25.
will hollow rebel, tyrant, murderer. dryden.
i pass for a disaffected person and a murderer, because i co
not hoot and hol'ow, and make a noise. addison.
he with his hounds comes hollowing from the stable,
makes ove with nods, and kneels beneath a table. pope.
ho’llow ly. adv. [from hollow.]
i. with cavities. -
2. unfaithfully ; insincerely ; dishonestly.
o carth, bear witness,
and crown what i profess with kind event,
if i speak true; if hoslowly, invert
what best is boaded me, to mischiefs
you shall arraign your conscience,
and try your penitence, if it be sound,
or hollowly put on. shakespeare's ascosure for mosure.
ho'llown ess. n.s.. [from hollow.]
1. cavity ; state of being hollow.
if you throw a stone or a dart, they give no sound; no more
do bullets, except they happen to be a little hollowed in the
casting, which hollowmes, penneth the air. bacon.
i have seen earth taken up by a strong wind, so that there
remained great empty hollowings, in the place. hałewill.
an heap of sand or fine powder will suffer no hollowns;
within them, though they be dry substances. barnet.
2. deceit ; insincerity ; treachery. -
thy youngest daughter does not love thee least;
nor are those empty hearted, whose low found
reverbs no hollowns. soakespeare’s king lear.
people, young and raw, and soft natured, think it an easy
thing to gain love, and reckon their own friendship a sure
price of any man's: but when experience shall have shewn
them the hardness of most hearts, the hoslovoss of others, and
the baseness and ingratitude of almost all, they will then find
that a friend is the gift of god, and that he only who made
hearts can unite them. south.
hollow roor. m. s. [aollow and root..] a plant. aft; worth.
ho'lly. m. s. [poleyn, saxon.] a plant. -
the leaves are s t about the edges with long, sharp, stiff
prickles: the berries are small, round, and generally of a red
colour, containing four triangular striated seeds in each. of
this tree there are several species; some variegated in the
leaves, some with yellow berries, and some with white. mill.
fairest blossoms drop with every blast;
but the brown beauty will like hillies last. gay.
some to the holy hedge
* nestling repair, and to the thicket some;
some to the rude protection of the thorn. thomson.
hollyhock. m. s. [p lipoc, saxon, commonly called holyoak..]
rosemallow. it is in every respect larger than the common
mallow. miller.
holyocks far exceed poppies for their durableness, and are
shaos. 7.mps.
-
very ornamental. amortin.er.
holly rose. -
~ m. s. plants ainsworth.
ho lly tre e. } s: o sy ov
hol. me. n.s.
1. holme or howme, whether jointly or fingly, comes from the
saxon polme, a river island; or if the place be not such, the
same word signifies also a hill, or mountain. gibson's camden.
2. the ilex; the evergreen oak.
under what tree did'st thou take them companying toge-
ther ? who answered, under a holm tree. sos. 58.
the carver holme, the maple seldom inward found. spens.
ho'locaust. m. s. [cac’ and x2s2.j a burnt sacrifice; a sa-
crifice of which the whole was consumed by fire, and nothing
retained by the offerer. . -
isaac carried the wood for the sacrifice, which being an
holocaus, or burnt offering, to be consumed unto asbes, we
cannot well conceive a burthen for a boy. brown.
let<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5 *
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1028</div><p class="text">h o m
h o m
let the eye behold no evil thing, and it is made a sacrifice;
let the tongue speak no filthy word, and it becomes an obla-
tion; let the hand do no unlawful action, and you tender 1t
a holocat/l. ray an the ureation.
eumenes cut a picce from every part of the victim, and by
this he made it an holocaus', or an entire sacrifice. - brome.
ho log raph. m. s. [cagp and %392.] this word is used in
the scottish law to denote a deed witten altogether by the
granter's own hand. - -
holp. the old preterite and participle passive of help.
his great love, sharp as his spur, hath hop him .
to's home before us. shakespeare.
ho lpen. the old participle passive of help.
in a long trunk the sound is holpen, though both the mouth
and the ear be a handful from the trunk; and somewhat more
hopen when the hearer is near, than when the speaker. bacon.
ho lster. m. s. [heolrten, saxon, a hiding place..] a case for
a horsemian's pittos.
in’s rusty hol/lers put what meat
into his hose he cou’d not get. butler.
holt, whether at the beginning or ending of the name of any
place, signifies that it is or hath been woody, from the saxon
polic, a wood; or sometimes possibly from the saxon pol, i. e.
hollow, especially when the name ends in tun or dun. gibson.
hot.y. adj. ibalo, saxon; hey!gh, dutch, from pal, healthy,
or in a state of salvation.]
1. gocq ; pious ; religious.
see where his grace stands 'tween two clergymen
and see a book of prayer in his hand,
true ornaments to know a holy man. shakesp. rich. iii.
with joy he will embrace you; for he's honourable,
and, doubling that, most holy. shakos. cymbeline.
2. hallowed; consecrated to divine use.
state, holy or unhallow'd, what of that shakespeare.
bare was his hoary head ; one holy hand
held forth his laurel crown, and one his sceptre. drydon.
3. pure ; immaculate.
common sense could tell them, that the good god could
not be pleased with any thing cruel; nor the most holy god
with any thing filthy and unclean. south.
4. sacred.
an evil soul producing holy witness,
is like a villain with a smiling cheek. shak. march. of son.
he has deserv'd it, were it carbuncled
like holy phoebus' car. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
hoty-ghost. m. s. shal; and gase, saxon.] the third per-
son of the adorable trinity.
if strength of persuasion be the light which must guide us,
i ask, how shall any one distinguis, the inspirations of the
holy-ghost 2 locke.
holy-' hursday. n.s. the day on which the ascension of
our saviour is commemorated, ten days before whitsunfide.
hosoy-week. m. s. the week before easter, in which the pas-
fion of our redeemer is commemorated.
ho ly day. m. s. [holy and day.]
1. the day of some ecclesiastical festival.
2. anniversary feast.
this victory was so welcome unto the persians, that in
memorial thereof they kept that day as one of their solomn holy-
days for many years after. anole,’s history.
rome's hoisays you tell, as if a guest
with the old romans you were wont to feast. j/aller.
3. a day of gayety and joy.
what, have i 'scaped love-letters in the holyday time of my
beauty, and am i now a subject for them : shakespeare.
4. a time that comes seldom.
99erage is but a body kind of virtue, to be seldom exer-
cised. dryden.
iomage. n.s. [hommage, french ; homagium, low latin. j
1. service paid and fealty professed to a sovereign or superior lord.
- call my sovereign yours,
and do him homage as obedient fubjects. shakspeare.
the chiefs, in a solemn manner, did their homages and
made their oaths of fidelity to the earl marshal. davies.
2. obeisance; respect paid by external action.
- the gods great nother, when her heav'nly itacc
do homage to her. o denham.
a tuft of daisies on a flow'ry lay
they saw, and thitherward they bent their way;
to this both knights and dames their homage made,
and due obeisance to the daisy paid. dryden.
go, go, with homage yon proud victors meet i
go, lic like dogs beneath your masters' feet. dryden.
7 homage. v. a. strom the noun..] to reverence b
.., "al action; to pay honour to, to profess fealty.
hoo ager. n.s. [*mmager, fr. from homage.] one who
holds by homage of some superior lord. -
thou blushest, antony; and that blood of thine
i: cesar's homager. shakespeare
his subjects, **)tors, are received by the duke of bretigne,
- his honager. bacon's henry vii.
y exter-
5. united to a substantive, it implies force and efficacy.
home. n.s. spam, saxon.)
1. his own house; the private dwelling.
i'm now from home, and out of that -
which shall be needful for your ... on
something like home that is not home is t .." shao.
found in the house of a friend. 9 be desired. is
home is the sacred refuge of our life top,
secur'd from all approaches but a wi.
when hector went to see don,
his virtuous wife, the fair andromache
he found her not at home; for she was on:
toi : have homes, when home they joi.
o a last lodging call their wand'rin, e. y
2. his own o &amp; ring friends, dodo,
how can tyrants safely govern home,
unless abroad they purchase great alliance;
their determination is to return to their home;
trouble you no more. shakesp. who."
with honour to his home let theseus ride j ptnitz,
with love to friend. y d
at home the hateful names of parties cease jin,
and factious souls are weary'd into peace. &gt;
they who pass through a foreign country,
native home, do not usually give up themselvest
of the place.
3. the place of constant residence.
flandria, by plenty made the home of war,
shall weep her crime, and bow to charles restor'd p,
4. home, united to a substantive, signifies domestick, g §
same country. w
let the exportation of home commodities be more in ville
than the importation of foreign.
dr.
jao,
shoor,
dyln,
towards ther
9 the pleast,
attrij,
bao,
hex, e. adv. [from the noun.] h:
1. to one's own habitation.
9ne of adam's children in the mountains lights on a glit.
tering substance; hone he carries it to adam, who find. it to
be hard, to have a bright yellow colour, and exceeding great
weight. lak.
2. to one's own country.
3. close to one's own breast or afflirs.
he that encourages treason lays the foundation of a do.
trine, that will come home to himself. l'erange.
this is a consideration that comes home to ourings. 4.
these considerations, proposed in general terms, you will,
by particular application, bring home to your own concern.
//ake's preparation for deith,
4. to the point designed; to the utmost; closely; fully,
crafty enough either to hide his faults, or never to shew
them, but when they might pay home. - sidhy.
with his prepared sword he charges home
my unprovided body. shałoffeare'. king lear.
a loyal sir
to him thou follow'st : i will pay thy graces
home both in word and deed. shaftare's timoff.
accuse him home and home. shakesheart.
men of age object too much, adventure too little, and sel-
- dom drive business home to the full period; but content them-
selves with a mediocrity of success. - bacon,
that cometh up home to the business, and taketh off the
objection clearly. sandisin,
break through the thick array . …
qf his throng'd legions, and charge home upon him. also
he makes choice of some piece of morality; and, in order
to press this home, he makes less use of reasoning, bolt,
i can only refer the reader to the authors themselves, wo
speak very home to the point. attrius),
poison may be false; l
the home thrust of a friendly sword is sure. o:
i am sorry to give him such home thrusts; for he lays o:
self so open, and uses so little art to avoid them, o:
either do nothing, or expose his weakness. stillings...!.
homebo'rn, adj. [home and born.)
i. native ; natural.
though to be thus elemented, arm
these creatures from homeborn intrinsick harm.
2. domestick; not foreign.
num’rous bands - ps,
with homeborn lyes, or tales from foreign lands.
ho'mebred. adj. [home and bred.]
i. native ; natural. -
god hath taken care to anticipate every man,” o
early into his church, before other competitors, * o [0
or vicious customs of the world, should be able to po inlai.
him. hammond on o
2. not polished by travel; plain; rude; artless; o:
only to me two homebred youths belong.
3. domestick; not foreign. |
but if of danger, which hereby doth dwell,
and homebred evil, ye desire to hear,
i can you tydings tell.
dorof,
iro (9uth,
otr
fai y *this<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1029</div><p class="text">h o n
–
- ... this once happy land, - * * -
... by homebred fury rent, long groan'd. phillips:
ho'mefelt. adj. [home and felt..] inward; private.
yet they in pleasing slumber lull'd the sense,
and in sweet madness robb’d it of itself;
but such a sacred and homefelt delight,
such sober certainty of waking bliss,
i never heard 'till now. milton,
happy next him who to these shades retires,
whom nature charms, and whom the muse inspires,
whom humbler joys of homefelt quiet please,
successive study, exercise, and ease. pope.
ho'melily. adv. [from homely..] rudely; inelegantly.
ho’meliness. m. s. [from homely..] plainness; rudeness;
coarseness. -
homer has opened a great field of raillery to men of more
delicacy than greatness of genius, by the homeliness of some
of his sentiments. addison.
ho'mely. adj. [from home.] plain; homespun ; not elegant;
not beautiful; not fine; coarse; rude. it is used both of
persons and things.
each place handsome without curiosity, and homely without
loathsomeness. sidney.
within this wood, out of a rock did rise
a spring of water, mildly tumbling down;
whereto approached not in any wise
the homely shepherd, nor the ruder clown. spenser.
like rich hangings in an homely house,
so was his will in his old feeble body. shakespeare.
be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift:
riddling confession finds but riddling shrift. shakespeare.
home-keeping youth have ever homely wits. shakespeare:
our stomachs will make what's homely favoury. shakesp.
it is for homely features to keep home ;
they had their name thence. milton.
it is observed by some, that there is none so homely but
loves a looking-glass. south.
their homely fare dispatch'd, the hungry band
invade their trenchers next. dryden.
now strephon daily entertains
his chloe in the homeli's strains. swift.
homely persons, the more they endeavour to adorn them-
selves, the more they expose the defects they want to hide.
- - clarendon.
ho'mely. adv. plainly; coarsely; rudely.
thus like the god his father, homely drest,
he strides into the hall a horrid guest. dryden.
ho’melyn. n.s. a kind of fish. ainsworth.
homema'de. adj. [home and made.] made at home; not
manufactured in foreign parts.
a tax laid on your native product, and homemade commo-
dities, makes them yield less to the first seller. locke.
ho'mer. m. s. a hebrew measure of about three pints.
an homer of barley-seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of
silver. lev. xxvii. 16.
ho'mespun. adj. [home and spun.]
1. spun or wrought at home, not made by regular manufac-
turers.
instead of homespun coifs were seen
good pinners, edg’d with colberteen. swift.
2. not made in foreign countries.
he appeared in a suit of english broad-cloth, very plain,
but rich : every thing he wore was substantial, honest, home-
spun ware. addison.
3. plain ; coarse; rude; homely; inelegant,
they sometimes put on, when they go ashore, long sleeve-
less coats of homespun cotton. sandys's travels.
we say, in our homespun english proverb, he killed two
birds with one stone. dryden.
our homespun authors must forsake the field,
and shakespeare to the soft scarlatti yield. addison.
homespu'n. n.s. a coarse, inelegant, rude, untaught, rustick
man. not in use.
what hempen homespuns have we swaggering here,
so near the cradle of the fairy queen 2 shakespeare.
ho'mest all. } n. s. spam and rebe, saxon.] the place of
ho’mestead. the house.
both house and homestead into seas are borne,
and rocks are from their old foundations torn. dryden.
ho’meward. } adv. [pam and peanb, saxon.] towards
ho'mewards. home; towards the native place ; towards
* the place of residence.
- then urania homeward did arise,
leaving in pain their well-fed hungry eyes. sidney.
my affairs
do even drag me homeward.
since such love's natural station is, may still
my love descend, and journey down the hill,
not panting after growing beauties; so
i shall ebb on with them who homeward go. donne.
look homeward, angel now, and melt with ruth;
ao o ye dolphins, waft the hapless youth ! milton.
ol. i.
shakespeare.
fike a long team of snowy swahs on high,
which clap their wings, and cleave the liquid sky,
which homeward from their wat'ry pastures borne; -
they fing, and asia's lakes their notes return. dryden.
what now remains,
but that once more we tempt the wat'ry plains,
. . and, wand'ring homewards, seek our safety hence. dryden.
homicide. n.s.. [homicide; fr. homicidium, lat.] *
1. murder; manquelling.
the apostles command to abstain from blood: construe this
according to the law of nature, and it will seem, that homicide
only is forbidden; but construe it in reference to the law of
the jews, about which the question was, and it shall easily
appear to have a clean other sense, and a truer, when we ex-
pound it of eating, and not of shedding blood. hooker.
2. destruction. in the following lines it is not proper.
what wonder is't that black detraction thrives 1
the homicide of names is less than lives. dryden.
3. [homicide, fr. homicida, lat..] ... a murderer; a thanslayer.
i’d undertake the death of all the world,
so might i live one hour in your sweet bosom.
—if i thought that, i to: homicide,
these nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
- - - * shakespeare.
hector comes, the homicide, to wield
his conqu'ring arms, with corps to strew the field. dryden.
homici'dal. adj. [from homicide..] murderous; bloody.
the troop forth issuing from the dark recess;
with homicidal rage, the king oppress, pope,
homile"t1c al. adj. [goixnrixo;..] social; conversible.
his life was holy, and when he had leisure for retirements;
severe: his virtues aetive chiefly, and homiletical; not those
lazy sullen ones of the cloyster. atterbury:
ho'mily. m. s. [homilie, french; dataia.] a discourse read
to a congregation.
homilies were a third kind of readings usual in former times;
a most commendable institution, as well then to supply the
casual, as now the necessary defect of sermons. hooker.
what tedious homily of love have you wearied your pa-
rishioners withal, and never cried have patience, good people.
shakespeare's as you like it.
if we survey the homilies of the ancient church, we shall
discern that, upon festival days, the subject of the homily was
constantly the business of the day. hammond's fundamentals.
homogetneal. adj. [homogene, fr. daoysvii;..] having
#3:33;ois.} the same nature or principles; suit-
able to each other.
the means of reduction, by the fire, is but by congrega-
tion of homogeneal parts. bacon,
ice is a similary body, and homogeneous concretion, whose
material is properly water. brown's vulgar errours,
an homogeneous mass of one kind is easily distinguishable
from any other; gold from iron, sulphur from alurh, and so
of the rest. woodward's natural history.
the light, whose rays are all alike refrangible, i call simple,
homogeneal, and similar; and that whose rays are some more
refrangible than others, i call compound, heterogeneal, and
dissimilar. newton,
homoge(nealness. n, s, [from homogeneous, or homogeneal.]
homogene'ity. ; participation of the same principles
homoge’neous ness. or nature; similitude of kind.
the mixtures acquire a greater degree of fluidity and simi-
larity, or homogeneity of parts. arbuthnot on aliments.
upon this supposition of only different diameters, it is im-
possible to account for the homogeneity or similarity of the see
cerned liquors. cheyne.
homogeny; n.s. [oytoszl joint nature. not used.
by the driving back of the principal spirits, which preserve
the consistence of the body, their government is dissolved, and
every part returneth to his nature or homogeny. bacon.
homo logous. adj. [homologue, fr. dacaoyg”.] having the
same manner or proportions.
homo'nymous. adj. [homonyme, fr. guovou.6o.] denomi-
nating different things; equivocal ; ambiguous.
as words signifying the same thing are called synonymous,
so equivocal words, or those which signify several things, are
called homonymous, or ambiguous; and when persons use such
ambiguous words, with a design to deceive, it is called equi-
vocation. watts’s logick.
homo"nymy. n. s. [homonymie, fr. guovuoso...] equivocation 3
ambiguity.
homo'oronous. adj. [cuorevô’.] equable: said of such dis-
tempers as keep a constant tenour of rise, state, and declen-
sion. $2uincy.
hone, n. s. [this word m. casaubon derives from down; ju-
nius from hogsaen, welsh; skinner, who is always rational,
from paen, saxon, a stone; paenan, to stone..] a whetstone
for a rasor. -
a hone and a parer, to pare away grass. tussor.
to hon e. v. n. [pongian, saxon.] to pine ; to long for any
thing.
honest. adj. [honese, fr. hangslus, lat.] - -
1 i l. 1. upright;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1030</div><p class="text">h o n
h o n
. upright; true; fincere.
1. uprignt; what art thou ? d the ki
r fellow, and as poof 43 the king-
—a very hongs hearted fellow, p shakespeare.
- - - he can contri-
an honoff physician leaves his patient, when
bute no further to his health. ... temple.
the way to relieve ourselves from those sophisms, is an
bones, and diligent enquiry into the real nature and causes of
things. watts's lagick.
. chaste.
2 wives may be merry, and yet hones too. shakespeare.
3. just; righteous; giving to every man his due.
tate will subscribe, but fix no certain day,
he's honoff, and as wit comes in, will pay.
ho’n estly. * hangs?..]
1. uprightly ; justly.
prightly ; j f doth make me tremble,
there should those spirits yet breathe, that when they cannot
live honestly, would rather perish basely. ben. johnson.
for some time past all proposals from private persons to ad-
vance the publick service, however honolly, and innocently
tate.
designed, have been called flying in the king's face. swift.
2. with chastity; modeftly.
ho'nesty. m. s. [horingslete, fr. honesias, lat.] justice ;
truth; virtue; purity.
thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.
why, then mine honesly shall be my dower. shakesp.
goodness, as that which makes men prefer their duty and
their promise before their passions or their interest, and is pro-
perly the object of trust, in our language goes rather by the
name of honesty; though what we call an honest man, the ro-
mans called a good man ; and honesly in their language, as
well as in french, rather signifies a composition of those qua-
lities which generally acquire honour and esteem. temple.
ho"nied. adj. [from honey.]
1. covered with honey.
the bee with honied thigh,
that at her flow'ry work doth sing.
2. sweet; luscious.
when he speaks,
the air, a charter'd libertine, is still ;
and the mute wonder lurketh in mens ears,
to steal his sweet and honied sentences.
look now for no enchanting voice, nor fear
the bait of honey'd words; a rougher tongue
draws hitherward. milton.
ho'ney. n.s. [punig, saxon; honig, dutch ; honec, honog,
- german.]
1. a thick, viscous, fluid substance, of a whitish or yellowish
colour, sweet to the taste, soluble in water ; and becoming
vinous on fermentation, inflammable, liquable by a gentle
heat, and of a fragrant smell. of honey, the first and finest
kind is virgin honey, not very firm, and of a fragrant smell :
it is the first produce of the swarm, obtained by draining the
combs without pressing. the second is often almost solid,
procured by pressure: and the worst is the common yellow
honey, extracted by heating the combs, and then pressing
them. in the flowers of plants, by certain glands near the
basis in the petals, is secreted a sweet juice, which the bee,
by means of its proboscis or trunk, sucks up, and discharges
again from the stomach through the mouth into the comb.
the honey deposited in the comb, is destined for the young
offspring; but in hard seasons the bees are reduced to the ne–
cessity of feeding on it themselves. hill's mat. med.
so work the honey bees,
creatures that by a ruling nature teach
the art of order to a peopled kingdom. shakes. hen. v.
- touching his education and first fostering, some affirm,
that he was fed by honey bees. raleigh's history.
in ancient time there was a kind of honey, which, either of
its own nature, or by art, would grow as hard as sugar, and
was not so luscious as ours. bacon.
when the patient is rich, there's no fear of physicians about
him, as thick as wasps to a honey pot. l'esirange.
honey is the most elaborate production of the vegetable
kind, being a most exquisite vegetable sope, resolvent of the
bile, balsamick and pectoral: honey contains no inflammable
spirit, before it has felt the force of fermentation ; for by dis-
tillation it affords nothing that will burn in the fire. afto.
new wine, with honey temper'd milk we bring;
then living waters from the crystal spring. 3.
2. sweetness; lusciousness.
the king hath found
matter against him, that forever mars
the honey of his language.
a honey tongue, a heart of gall,
3 so. . but sorrow’s fall.
- ; "weetness ; a name of tenderness. [ me!:
i' #. you shall be well desir'd in go corculum.]
i...o.o.o. owest,
wi...otho.
g” ought him on purpose for thee, dryden.
milton.
shakespeare.
pope.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
ta ho'ney. v. n., [from the noun.] to talk fondly
nay, but to live j -
in the rank sweat of an incestuous bed,
stew'd in couplion, bonying and making love
over the nasty stv. sha o
ho'ney-bag. n y tho and bag.] *htar', hinh.
• the honey-bag is the stomach, which bees always fill tos
4-
tisfy, and to spare, vomiting up the great
to §: kept against winter. g up the greater *...*
ho’nex-comb. *s. [haney and comb.] the oil. o
which the bee stores her honey. wax in
all these a milk-white honey-comb surround
which in the midst the country banquet crown's d
ho’ney-combe d. adj. [honey and comb.] spoken of. hydr.
ordnance flawed with little cavities by being ill cast piece of
a mariner having discharged his gun, which wn k
combed, and loading it suddenly again,
wiley-
the powder took;
ho'ney-dew. n.s.. [honey and dew.] sweet dew, wiftman.
there is a honey-dew which hangs upon their leaves, and
breeds inse&amp;ts. o:
how honey-dows embalm the fragrant morn, for.
and the fair oak with luscious sweets adorn. gart;
ho’ney-flow er. n.s.. [melanthus, latin.] a plant. -
it hath a perennial root, and the appearance of a shrub
this plant produces large spikes of chocolate-coloured ions.
in may, in each of which is contained a large quantity of
black sweet liquor, from whence it is supposed to . its
ilaine. milir,
honey-gnat, n. s. smellio, latin; honey and gnal.] an in.
se&amp;t. ainsworth:
ho'ney-moon. m. s. shoney and moon.] the first monthasor
marriage, when there is nothing but tenderness and pleasure.
a man should keep his finery for the latter season of mar.
riage, and not begin to dress’till the honey-moon is over. adds.
ho’ney-suckle. m. s. [caprifolium, latin.] woodbine.
it hath a climbing stalk, which twists itself about whats.
ever tree stands near it: the flowers are tubulous and oblong,
consisting of one leaf, which opens towards the top, and is
divided into two lips; the uppermost of which is subdivided
into two, and the lowermost is cut into many segments: the
tube of the flowers is bent, somewhat resembling a huntsman's
horn. they are produced in clusters, and are very sweet.
miller enumerates ten species, of which three grow wild in
our hedges.
bid her steal into the pleached bower,
where honey-suckles, ripen'd by the sun,
forbid the sun to enter; like to favourites,
made proud by princes, that advance their pride
against the power that bred it. shalftart,
watch upon a bank
with ivy canopied, and interwove
with flaunting honeysuckle. milton.
then melfoil beat, and honeysucklet pound;
with these alluring savours strew the ground. dryden.
ho'neyl ess. adj. [from honey..] being without honey.
but for your words, they rob the hybla bees,
and leave them honeyles. shahsart,
honey-wort. m. s. scorinthe, latin.] a plant,
honor ary. adj. [honorarius, latin.]
1. done in honour; made in honour.
there was probably some distinetion made among the o
mans between such honorary arches erected to emo."
those that were raised to them on the account of ***
- - - lish,
which are properly triumphal arches. addison on .
this monument is only honorary; for the ashes of o:
peror lie elsewhere. addison on los.
2. conferring honour without gain. ds, that
the romans abounded with little honorary ro" o
without conferring wealth and riches, gave only *::::
distinetion to the person who received them; . so
ho'nour. m. s. shoneur, french; honor, latin.]
1. dignity ; high rank.
2. reputation; fame.
a man is an ill husband of his honour, that entereth in"
- - asl
any action, the failing wherein may disgrao him most *
the carrying of it through can honour him.
3. the title of a man of rank. not now used.
return unto thy lord, .
bid him not fear the separated councils:
his honour and myself are at the on 3 slaiso
and at the other is my good friend catesby.
4. subject of praise. fath
thou happy father, or;
think that the clearest gods, who mo them o
of man's impossibilitics, have preser. d :*
5. nobleness of mind; scorn of meanness; mag”
now shall i see thy love; what o
be stronger with thee than the namo of wi iii.
—that which upholdeth him, that the up }, o swift
his honour. oh, thine honour, lewi. . o
if by honour is meant any thing distinct fro 'ili<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1031</div><p class="text">h o n
h o o
i
'tis no more than a regard to the censure and esteem of the
world. rogers.
6. reverence; due veneration. to da honour is to treat with
severence,
they take thee for their mother, -
and every day do honour to thy grave. shakespeare:
his grace of canterbury,
who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants.
—ha! 'tis he, indeed! -
is this the honour they do one another ? shakespeare.
this is a duty in the fifth commandment, required towards
our prince and our parent, under the name of honour; a re-
spect, which, in the notion of it, implies a mixture of love
and fear, and, in the object, equally supposes goodness and
power. rogers.
7. chastity. -
be she honour flaw'd,
i have three daughters, the eldest is eleven;
if this prove true, they'll pay for't. shakespeare,
she dwells so securely on the excellency of her honour, that
the folly of my soul dares not present itself: she is too bright
to be looked against. shakespeare.
8. dignity of mien.
two of far nobler shape, erect and tall,
godlike erect with native honour clad,
in naked majesty, seem'd lords of all.
9. glory; boast.
a late eminent person, the honour of his profession for inte-
grity and learning. burnet's theory.
re. publick mark of respect.
he saw his friends, who whelm'd beneath the waves,
their fun'ral honours claim’d, and ask'd their quiet graves.
dryden's aen.
such discourses, on such mournful occasions as these, were
instituted not so much in honour of the dead, as for the use of
the living. j atterbury.
numbers engage their lives and labours, some to heap toge-
ther a little dirt that shall bury them in the end; others to gain
an honour, that, at best, can be celebrated but by an inconsi-
derable part of the world, and is envied and calumniated by
more than 'tis truly given. wake's preparation for death.
11, privileges of rank or birth.
henry the seventh, truly pitying
my father's loss, hike a most royal prince,
restor'd to me my bonours; and, from ruins, .
made my name once more noble. shakespeare.
honours were conferred upon antonine by hadrian in his
infancy. watton's rom. hist.
12. civilities paid.
then here a slave, or if you will a lord,
to do the honours, and to give the word. pope.
13. ornament; decoration.
the fire then shook the honours of his head,
and from his brows damps of oblivion shed. dryden.
14. honour, or on my honour, is a form of protestation used by
the lords in judicial decisions.
my hand to thee, my honour on my promise.
to ho"nour. v. a. [honnorer, french; honoro, latin.]
1. to reverence; to regard with veneration.
he was called our father, and was continually honoured of
all men, as the next person unto the king. efth. xvi. 11.
the poor man is honoured for his skill, and the rich man is
honoured for his riches. ecclus x. 30.
he that is honoured in poverty, how much more in riches :
ecclus x. 31.
how lov'd, how honour’d once, avails thee not. pope.
2. to dignify 5 to raise to greatness.
we nourish 'gainst our senate
the cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
which we ourselves have plow'd for, sow'd and scatter'd,
by mingling them with us, the honour’d number. shakesp.
3. to glorify. -
i will harden pharaoh's heart, that he shall follow after them,
and i will be honoured upon pharaoh, and upon all his host,
that the egyptians may know that i am the lord. ex. xiv.
honour able. adj. [honorable, french.] -
1. illustrious; noble.
who hath taken this counsel against tyre, the crowning
city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the
milton.
shakes.
honourable of the earth 2 isa. xxiii. 8.
2. great ; magnanimous ; generous.
sir, i’ll tell you,
* since i am charg’d in honour, and by him
that i think honourable. shakespeare.
3. conferring honour.
think'st thou it honourable for a nobleman
still to remember wrongs :
then warlike kings, who for their country fought,
and honourable wounds from battle brought. dryden.
many of those persons, who put this honourable task on me,
were more able to perform it themselves.
4. accompanied with tokens of honour.
shakespeare.
dryden,
sith this wretched woman overcome, -
of anguish, rather than of crime hath been,
preserve her cause to her eternal doom;
and in the mean, vouchsafe her honourable tomb. spenser.
5. not to be disgraced.
here's a bohemian tartar tarries the coming down of th
fatwoman:-lether descend, my chambers are honourable. shaft.
6. free from taint; free from reproach.
as he was honourable in all his acts, so in this, that he took
joppe for an haven. 1 mac. xiv. 5.
. methinks i could not die any where so contented as in the
king's company, his cause being just and his quarrel honour-
able. - shakespeare.
7. honest; without intention of deceit. -
the earl sent again to know if they would entertain their
pardon, in case he should come in person, and assure it: they
answered, they did conceive him to be so honourable, that from
himself they would most thankfully embrace it. hayward.
if that thy bent of love be honourable,
thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow. shakesp.
8. equitable.
ho nour ableness. n.s.. [from honourable.] eminence; mag-
nificence ; generosity.
ho nourably. adv. [from honourable.]
1. with tokens of honour.
the rev'rend abbot,
with all his convent, honourably receiv'd him. shafe?care.
2. magnanimously; generously. -
after some six weeks, which the king did honourably inter-
pose, to give space to his brother's intercefficn, he was ar-
raigned of high treason, and condemned. bacon.
3. reputably; with exemption from reproach.
'tis just, ye gods 1 and what i well deserve: -
why did i not more honourably starve dryden.
ho'nou rer. m. s. [from honour.] one that honours; one that
regards with veneration.
i must not omit mr. gay, whose zeal in your concern is
worthy a friend and honourer. pope.
hood, in composition, is derived from the saxon pab, in ger-
man heit, in dutch heid. it denotes quality; character; con-
dition: as, knighthood; childhood; fatherhood. sometimes it is
written after the dutch, as maidenhead. sometimes it is taken
collectively: as, brotherhood, a confraternity; softerhood, a
company of fisters.
hood. n.s. [pob, saxon, probably from pepob, head.]
1. the upper covering of a woman's head.
in velvet, white as snow, the troop was gown'd;
their hoods and sleeves the same. dryden.
2. anything drawn upon the head, and wrapping round it. :
he undertook so to muffle up himself in his hood, that none
should discern him. wotton.
the lacerna came, from being a military habit, to be a
common dress : it had a hoad, which could be separated from
and joined to it. arbuthnot on coins.
3. a covering put over the hawk's eyes, when he is not to fly:
4. an ornamental fold that hangs down the back of a graduate,
to mark his degree.
to hood. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to dress in a hood.
the cobler apron'd, and the parson gown'd,
-
*
* *
the friar hooded, and the monarch crown'd. pope.
2. to blind, as with a hood.
while grace is saying, i'll hood mine eyes *
thus with my hat, and figh, and say, amen. shakespeare,
3. to cover.
an hollow crystal pyramid he takes,
in firmamental waters dipt above;
of it a broad extinguisher he makes,
and hoods the flames that to their quarry strove. dryden:
ho'opman blind. m. s. a play in which the person hooded is
to catch another, and tell the name ; blindman's buff.
what devil was’t,
that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman blind? shakespeare.
to ho'od-wink. v. a. [hood and wink.]
1. to blind with something bound over the eyes. -
they willingly hood-winking themselves from seeing his
faults, he often abused the virtue of courage to defend his foul
vice of injustice. sidney.
we will bind and hood-wink him fo, that he shall suppose
he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries. shakespeare.
then she who hath been hood-wink'd from her birth,
doth first herself within death's mirrour fee. davies.
so have i seen, at christmas sports, one lost, -
and, hood-wink'd, for a man embrace a post. b. johnson.
satan is fain to hood-wink those that start. dec. of piety.
prejudice so dexterously hood-winks men's minds as to keep
them in the dark, with a belief that they are more in the
light. locke.
muft i wed rodogune *
fantastick cruelty of hood-wink'd chance 1
on high, where no hoarse winds or clouds resort,
the hood-wink'd goddess keeps her partial court.
rowe,
garth.
e-
2. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1032</div><p class="text">h o o
h o p
. to cover; to hide. - -
2 be patient, for the prize, i'll bring thee to,
shall hood-wink this *
. to deceive; to impose upon.
3 t. delighted o: which often she had used to her
husband's shame, filling all men's ears, but his, with reproach;
while he, hood-winked with kindness, least of all men knew
who struck him. sidney.
hoof. n.f spor, saxon; hoof, dutch..] the hard horny
substance on the feet of graminivorous animals.
with the hoof, of his horses shall he tread down all thy
shakespeare.
streets. ezek. xxvi. 11.
the bull and ram know the use of their horns as well as the
horse of his hoofs. more.
ho'oped. adj. [from hoof.] furnished with hoofs:
among quadrupeds, the roe-deer is the swiftest; of all the
hoofed, the horse is the most beautiful; of all the clawed, the
lion is the strongest. grew.
hoof-bound. adj. [hoof and bound.] - - -
a horse is said to be hoof-bound when he has a pain in the
fore-feet, occasioned by the dryness and contraction or narrow-
ness of the horn of the quarters, which straitens the quarters
of the heels, and oftentimes makes the horse lame. a hoof-
bound horse has a narrow heel, the sides of which come too
near one another, insomuch that the flesh is kept too tight,
and has not its natural extent. farrier’s dic7.
hook. n.s. [poce, saxon; hoeck, dutch.]
1. anything bent so as to catch hold: as, a shepherd's hook and
t hooks.
roo falling not, for that they had not far enough under-
mined it, they assayed with great hooks and strong ropes to have
pulled it down. knollei.
2. the curvated wire on which the bait is hung for fishes, and
with which the fish is pierced.
like unto golden hooks,
that from the foolish fish their baits do hide. spenser.
my bended hook shall pierce
their slimy jaws. shakespeare.
though divine plato thus of pleasures thought,
they us with books and baits, like fishes, caught. denham.
3. a snare ; a trap.
a shop of all the qualities that man
loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving,
fairness, which strikes the eye.
4. an iron to seize the meat in the caldron.
about the caldron many cooks accoil'd,
with hooks and ladles, as need did require;
the while the viands in the vessel boil’d.
5. a sickle to reap corn.
pease are commonly reaped with a hook at the end of a long
stick. martimer.
6. any instrument to cut or lop with.
not that i'd lop the beauties from his book,
like slashing bentley with his desperate hook. pope.
7. the part of the hinge fixed to the post: whence the proverb,
off the hooks, for in disorder.
my doublet looks,
like him that wears it, quite off o' the hooks. , 'cleaveland.
she was horribly bold, meddling and expensive, easily put
off the hooks, and monstrous hard to be pleased again. l'esir.
while sheridan is off the hooks,
and friend delany at his books.” swift.
8. hook. [in husbandry.] a field sown two years running. ains.
9. hook or crook. one way or other; by any expedient; by
any means direct or oblique. ludicrous.
which he by hook or crook had gather'd,
and for his own inventions father’d. hudibras.
he would bring him by hook or crook into his quarrel. dryd.
to hook. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to catch with a hook.
the huge jack he had caught was served up for the first
dish: upon our fitting down to it, he gave us along account
how he had hooked it, played with it, foiled it, and at length
drew it out upon the bank. addison.
2. to intrap; to insnare.
3. to draw as with a hook.
but she
i can hook to me.
4. to fasten as with an hook.
5. to draw by force or artifice.
..there are many branches of the natural law no way redu-
cible to the two tables, unless hooked in by tedious conse-
quences. norris.
hooked, adj. [from hook.] bent; curvated.
oop signifies eagle or vulture; from whence the epithet
&amp; vpui, for an hooked or aquiline nose. brown.
now thou threaten'st, with unjust decree,
to seize the prize which iso dearly bought:
mean match to thine; for still above the rest,
&amp; ho'd rapacious hands usurp the best. dryden.
*rpillars have claws and feet': the claws are hooked, to
take the better hold in climbin from twi -
- wig to t -
ingon the backs..." ig to twig, and 3.
shakespeare.
fairy queen.
shakespeare's winter's tale.
f
ho'oke dness. n. s. [from hooked. - -
hook. f [ td.] state of being bent like :
hookno'sed. adj..[hook and nos.
rising in o:
i may justly say with the hook-nosed
caesar, % came, saw, and . *::: rome ther,
hoop. n.s. shop, dutch.] off, hinji.
1. anything circular by which somethi -
ao; .# or to. thing else is bound, p.m.
thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friend,
a hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in.”
that the united vessel of their blood”
shall never leak.
j having the aquiline nos:
if i knew shakspeare', henry iv,
what hoop would hold us staunch
o' th' world i would pursue it. &gt; "...o.
a: o what's the matter loat.
-about a of gold, a paltry ring. -
wo }. o: o †. o mirth, of win,
at hoops of iron could my spleen conti, n.
and learned athens to . . †. ! dyd jw,
1. . us tumbling through a lo. po,
2. e whalebone with which women ... ... * *
a farthingale. extend their petticoits;
at coming in you saw her stoop:
the entry brush'd against her hoop. swift
all that hoops are good for is to clean dirty shoes o
keep fellows at distance. 'do
3. any thing circular. 4.
i have seen at rome an antique statue of time, with ,
wheel or hoop of marble in his hand. aio, la
to hoop. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to bind or enclose with hoops.
the three hoop'd pot shall have ten hoops, and i will make
it felony to drink small beer. shahsheart.
the cask for his majesty's shipping were hoped as a wine.
cask, or hooped with iron. ralph,
2. to encircle; to clasp; to surround.
if ever henceforth thou
shalt hoop his body more with thy embraces,
i will devise a death. shakoff. winter'; tal,
i hoop the firmament, and make
this my embrace the zodiack. cleaviland.
that shelly guard, which hoops in the eye, and hides the
greater part of it, might occasion his mistake. grow,
to hoop. v. n. [from wopgan or wupyan, gothick; or husor,
french, derived from the gothick. this word is generally
written whoop, which is more proper, if we deduce it from
the gothick; and hoop, if we derive it from the french.]
to shout ; to make an outcry by way of call or pursuit.
to hoop. v. a.
1. to drive with a shout.
dastard nobles
suffer'd me, by th’ voice of slaves, to be -
hoop'd out of rome. shakstar's criolm,
2. to call by a shout.
ho'oper. n.s.. [from hoop, to inclose with hoops.] a cooper;
one that hoops tubs.
ho'oping-cough. m. s. sor whooping-ough, from bop, "
shout..] a convulsive cough, so called from its moise; the
chincough.
to hoot. v. n. [hwt, welsh; hur, french.]
1. to shout in contempt. h
a number of country folks happened to po o: 0
hollowed and hold after me as at the arrantestcowo o:
matrons and girls shall host at thee no more. p.
2. to cry as an owl.
some keep back d
the clamorous owl, that nightly hot, and wonders.
at our queint sports. - shaist.
to hoot. v. a. to drive with noise and shouti.
we lov’d him; but, like beasts,
our coward nobles gave way to your clusters, shiftoft.
who did hoot him out o' th' city. irls will hot!
the owl of rome, whom boys and girls "*
that were i set up for that wooden god wf
that keeps our gardens, could not fight the i. ho
or the least bird, from muting on my head: into
patridge and his clan may hot me for ach” o
if i fail in any particular of moment. shoul;
hoot, n.s. e. french, from the verb.] clam” shout;
noise. - - %.
its affortion would be entertained with ** o:
ble. glanvili'i of
to hop. v. n. [poppan, saxon; hoppen, dutch.]
1. to jump; to skip lightly.
i would have thee gone..., d
and yet no further than a wanton's bird,
that'lets it hop a little from her hand, . shafifts".
and with a silk thread . 1t *::::" wo
go, hop me over every kenne, no". shakspoo
for you shall hop without my custom, sir. so e:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1033</div><p class="text">h o p
h o p
be kind and courteous to this gentleman,
hop in his walks, and gambol in his eyes. shakespeare.
. the painted birds, companions of the spring,
hopping from spray to spray were heard. dryden.
your ben and fletcher, in their first young flight,
did no volpone, nor no arbaces write; ,
but hopp'd about, and short excursions made
from bough to bough, as if they were afraid. dryden.
why don’t we vindicate ourselves by trial ordeal, and hop
over heated ploughshares blindfold : collier on duelling.
i am highly delighted to see the jay or the thrush hopping
about my walks. spectator.
2. to leap on one leg.
men with heads like dogs, and others with one huge foot
alone, whereupon they did hop from place to place. abbot.
3. to walk lamely, or with one leg less nimble or strong than
the other; to limp ; to halt.
the limping smith observ'd the sadden’d feast,
and hopping here and there, himself a jest,
put in his word.
4. to move ; to play.
softly feel
her feeble pulse, to prove if any drop
of living blood yet in her veins did hop,
hop. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a jump; a light leap.
2. a jump on one leg.
when my wings are on, i can go above a hundred yards at
a hop, step, and jump. addison.
3. a place where meaner people dance. ainsworth.
hop. m. s. shop, dutch ; lupulus, latin.] a plant.
it has a creeping root: the leaves are rough, angular, and
conjugated ; the stalks climb and twist about whatever is near
them ; the flowers are male and female on different plants:
the male flower consists of a calyx divided into five parts, which
surrounds the stamina, but has no petals to the flower: the
female plants have their flowers colle&amp;ted into squamose heads,
which grow in bunches: from each leafy scale is produced an
dryden's homer.
fairy queen.
horned ovary, which becomes a single roundish seed. miller.
if hop yard or orchard ye mind for to have,
for hop poles and crotches in lopping to save. taser.
the planting of hop yards is profitable for the planters, and
consequently for the kingdom. bacon.
beer hath malt first infused in the liquor, and is afterwards
boiled with the hop. bacon.
next to thistles are hop strings, cut after the flowers are ,
gathered. derham.
have the poles without forks, otherwise it will be trouble-
some to part the hop vines and the poles. martimer.
when you water hops, on the top of every hill put dissolved
dung, which will enrich your hop hills. mortimer.
in kent they plant their hop gardens with apple-trees and
cherry-trees between. martimer.
the price of hoeing of hop ground is forty shillings an
acre. amortimer.
hop poles, the largest sort, should be about twenty foot
long, and about nine inches in compass. amortimer.
to hop. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to impregnate with hops.
brew in october, and hop it for long keeping. mortimer.
to increase the milk, diminished by flesh-meat, take malt-
drink not much hopped. arbuthnot on aliments.
hope. m. s. [popa, saxon ; hope, dutch.]
1. expediation of some good; an expectation indulged with
pleasure.
hope is that pleasure in the mind which every one finds in
himself, upon the thought of a profitable future enjoyment of
a thing, which is apt to delight him. locke.
there is hope of a tree, if cut down, that it will sprout
again. job, xiv. 7.
when in heav'n she shall his essence see,
this is her sov’reign good, and perfect bliss ;
her longing, wishings, hopes, all finish’d be ;
- 5*****
her joys are full, her motions rest in this. davies.
sweet hope 1 kind cheat fair fallacy by thee
we are not where or what we be;
but what and where we would be: thus art thou
our absent presence, and our future now. crashaw.
faith is opposed to infidelity, and hope to despair. taylor.
he sought them both, but vish'd his hap might find
eve separate: he wish'd, but not with hope -
of what so seldom chanc'd : when to his wish,
beyond his hope, eve separate he spies. milton.
the trojan dames.
to pallas’ fane in long procession go, -
in hopes to reconcile their heav'nly foe. dryden's virgil.
why not comfort myself with the hope of what may be, as
torment myself with the fear on't l’estrange.
to encourage our hopes, it gives us the highest assurance of
most lasting happiness, in case of obedience. tillotson.
the deceased really lived like one that had his hope in an-
vol. i. - -
other life; a life which he hath now entered upon, having exi,
changed hope for fight, desire for enjoyment. alteriory.
young men look rather to the past age than the present,
and therefore the future may have some hopes of them. swift.
2. confidence in a future event, or in the future conduct of
any person. - - *
it is good, being put to death by men, to look for hope from
god, to be raised up again by him. 2 mac. vii. 14.
blessed is he who is not fallen from his hope in the lord.
- ecclus; xiv. 2.
3. that which gives hope; that on which the hopes are fixed,
as an agent by which something desired may be effected.
i might see from far some forty truncheoneers draw to her
succour, which were the hope of the strand, where she was
quarter'd. shakespeare's henry viii.
4. the object of hope.
thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
and yet brought forth less than a mother's hope; -
to wit, an indigested deform'd lump. shakespeare.
she was his care, his hope, and his delight,
most in his thought, and ever in his fight. dryden.
hope. m. s. any sloping plain between the ridges of moun-
tains. ainsworth.
to hope. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to live in expectation of some good.
hope for good success, according to the efficacy of the
- causes and the instrument; and let the husbandman hope for a
good harvest. taylor's rule of living holy.
my muse, by storms long tosł,
is thrown upon your hospitable coast;
and finds more favour by her ill success,
than she could hope for by her happiness. dryden.
who knows what adverse fortune may befall !
arm well your mind, hope little, and fear all. dryden,
2. to place confidence in another.
he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the
lord. psal. xxxi. 24.
to hope. v. a. to expe&amp;t with desire.
the sun shines hot ; and if we use delay, -
cold-biting winter mars our hop'd for hay. shakespeare.
so stands the thracian herdsman with his spear
full in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear.
ho peful, adj. [hope and full.] - a - -
1. full of qualities which produce hope; promising; likely to
obtain success; likely to come to maturity; likely to gratify
desire, or answer expectation. -
he will advance thee:
i know his noble nature, not to let . " . . . .
thy hopeful service perish. * shakespeare.
you serve a great and gracious master, and these is a most
dryden.
- -
hopeful young prince whom you must not desert, bacon.
what to the old can greater pleasure be, ** –
than hopeful and ingenious youth to see dawham.
they take up a book in their declining years, and grow very
hopeful scholars by that time they are threescore. dison.
2. full of hope ; full of expectation of success. . this sense is
now almost confined to scotland, though it is analogical, and
found in good writers. • . . . .
men of their own natural inclination *posul and strongly
conceited, whatsoever they took in hand. hocker.
i was hopeful the success of your first attempts would en-
courage you to make trial also .# more nice and difficult expc-
riments. - - * - boyle.
whatever ills the friendless orphan bears,
bereav'd of parents in his infant years,
still must the wrong’d telemachus sustain, -
if hopeful of your aid, he hopes in vain. pope,
ho pefully. adv. [from hopeful.]
1. in such manner as to raise hope ; in a promising way.
he left all his female kindred either matched with peers of
the realm actually, or hopefully with earls’ sons and heirs. isott.
they were ready to renew the war, and to prosecute it hope-
fully, to the reduction or suppression of the irish. clarendon.
2. with hope; without despair. this sense is rare. o
from your promising and generous endeavours we may hope-
fully expect a confiderable enlargement of the history of na-
ture. glanville.
ho'pefulness. m. s. [from hopeful..] promise of good; likeli-
hood to succeed.
set down beforehand certain signatures of hopefulness, or
characters, whereby may be timely described what the child
will prove in probability. wotton.
ho'peless. adj. [from hope.]
1. without hope; without pleasing expectation; despairing.
are they indifferent, being used as signs of immoderate
and hopeless lamentation for the dead hocker.
alas! i am a woman, friendless, hopeless / shakespeare.
he watches with greedy hope to find
his wish, and best advantage, us asunder;
hopeless to circumvent us join'd, where each
to other speedy aid might lend at need. milton.
i i i the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1034</div><p class="text">h o r
h o r
the fall'n archangel, envious of our state,
o prevail b en force,
§:§: y op dryden's state of innocence.
hopeles of ransom, and condemnd to lie -
in durance, doom'd a ling'ring death to die. dryden.
2. giving no hope; promifing nothing pleasing.
the hopels word of never to return,
breathe i against thee upon pain of life. shakespeare.
hooper. n.s. (from hope.]. one that has pleasing expectations.
i except all hopers, who turn the scale, because the strong
expectation of a good certain salary will outweigh the loss by
bad rents. - swift.
hospindly. adv. [from hoping.] with hope; with expecta-
tion of good.
one sign of despair is the peremptory contempt of the con-
dition which is the ground of hope; the going 9n not only in
terrours and amazement of conscience, but also boldly, *
ingly, and confidently in wilful habits of fin. hammond.
hoof r. n s. [from hop.] he who hops or jumps.on one
leg. ainsworth.
hoopers. [commonly called scotch hoppers.] a kind of play
in which the actor hops on one leg. -
hopper. n.f. [so ealled because it is always hopping, or in agi-
tation. it is called in french, for the same reason, tremie or
tremue.] -
1. the box or open frame of wood into which the corn is put
to be ground.
the salt of the lake asphaltites shooteth into perfeot cubes.
sometimes they are pyramidal and plain, like the hopper of a
mill. grew.
granivorous birds have the mechanism of a mill: their
maw is the hopper which holds and softens the grain, letting
it drop by degrees into the stomach. arbathnot on aliments.
just at the hopper will i stand,
in my whole life i never saw grist ground,
and mark the clack how justly it will found. betterton.
2. a basket for carrying seed. ainsworth.
ho'ral. adj. [from hara, latin.] relating to the hour.
howe'er reduc’d and plain,
the watch would still a watch remain ;
but if the horal orbit ceases,
the whole stands still, or breaks to pieces. prior.
ho'rary. adj. [horaire, french ; horarius, latin.]
1. relating to an hour.
i'll draw a figure that shall tell you
what you perhaps forgot befell you,
by way of horary inspection,
which some account our worst erection. hudibras.
in his answer to an horary question, as what hour of the
night to set a fox-trap, he has discussed, under the character
of reynard, the manner of surprising all sharpers. tatler.
2. continuing for an hour.
when, from a basket of summer-fruit, god by amos fore-
told the destruction of his people, thereby was declared the
propinquity of their desolation, and that their tranquillity was
of no longer duration than those horary or soon decaying fruits
of summer. brown's vulgar errours.
hord e. m. s. a clan; a migratory crew of people. it is ap-
plied only to the tartars.
of lost mankind, in polish'd slavery sunk,
drove martial horde on horde with dreadful sweep,
and gave the vanquish'd world another form. thomson.
horizon. m. s. [3:32:..] the line that terminates the
view. the horizon is distinguished into sensible and real : the
sensible horizon is the circular line which limits the view ;
the real is that which would bound it, if it could take in the
hemisphere. it is falsely pronounced by shakespeare horizon.
when the morning sun shall raise his car
above the border of this horizon,
we'll forward towards warwick and his mates. shakesp.
she began to cast with herself from what coast this blazing
star should first appear, and at what time it must be upon the
horizon of ireland. bacon.
in his east the glorious lamp was seen,
regent of day; and all th’ horizon round
invested with bright rays. milton.
the morning lark, the messenger of day,
saluted in her song the morning gray;
and soon the sun arose with beams so bright,
that all th’ horizon laugh’d to see the joyous fight. dryden.
when the sea is worked up in a tempest, so that the horizon
on every fide is nothing, but foaming billows and floating
mountains, it is impossible to describe the agreeable horrour
that rises from such a prospect. addison.
hor 1zo ntal. adj. [horizontal, french, from horizon.]
1. near the horizon. -
- as when the sun, new risen,
looks through the horizontal misty air,
shorn of his beams; or from behind the moon,
}o donoclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
on half the nations. milton.
2. parallel to the horizon; on a level.
an obelisk erected, and golden figu -
about it, was brought out of egypt § o kriod
- the problem is reduced to this; what perpendicul b. -
is necessary to place several ranks of rowesi. | a height
to a horizontal line in a given angle a, i. intinel
hor1zo’nt ally. adv. [from horizontal.] in a 3. on coin.
rallel to the horizon. - section pa.
as it will not sink into the bottom, so will it no
above, like lighter bodies; but, being o # o: float
fuperficially, or almost horizontally unto it. tight, lie
the ambient ether is too liquid and e , drown,
horizontally with celerity. mpty to "ro
horn., n.s.. [haurn, gothick; ponn, saxon; or, ently,
3 our n,
1. the hard bodies which grow on the heads of . disco
vorous quadrupeds, and serve them for weapons §samini-
no beast that hath horns hath upper teeth. - b
do?,
zetus rises through the ground,
bending the bull’s tough neck with pain,
that tosses back his horns in vain. alijn
all that process is no more surprising t usm.
horns in .. brutes, or of teeth so . han the eruption of
periods of age. -
2. an instrument of wind-musick made of horn,
the squire 'gam nigher to approach,
and wind his horn under the castle-wall,
that with the noise it shook as it would fall. for, 94.
there's a post come from my master, with his no
good news.
the goddess to her crooked horn
adds all her breath : the rocks and woods around
and mountains, tremble at th' infernal sound. 'dr.
fair ascanius, and his youthful train, juin.
with horns and hounds a hunting match ordain. dryden,
3. the extremity of the waxing or waining moon, as mentioned
by poets.
she bless'd the bed, such fruitfulness conveys,
that ere ten moons had sharpen'd either horn,
card in men at certain
bing,
shaojur.
to crown their bliss, a lovely boy was born. drydin,
the moon
wears awan circle round her blunted horns, thomso.
4. the feelers of a snail. whence the proverb, t. politie
horns, to repress one's ardour.
love's feeling is more soft and sensible,
than are the tender horns of cockled snails. shaftart,
aufidius,
hearing of our marcius's banishment,
thrust forth his horns again into the world,
which were inshell’d when marcius stood for rome,
and durst not once peep out. shafoort,
5. a drinking cup made of horn.
6. antler of a cuckold.
if i have horns to make one mad,
let the proverb go with me, i'll be horn mad. shakstart,
merchants, vent’ring through the main, -
slight pyrates, rocks, and horns for gain. hudibras,
7. horn mad. perhaps mad as a cuckold.
i am glad he went not in himself: if he ho he would have
been horn mad. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
#o. } n.s. a kind offish. ainsworth,
ho'rn be am. m. s. shorn and loem, dutch, for trie, from the
hardness of the timber.] • * *
it hath leaves like the elm or beech-tree. to to: is
very tough and inflexible, and of excellent use. ' f
ho'rs book. n.s. [horn and book.] the first book of chil. its,
covered with horn to keep it unfoiled. lakefort
he teaches boys the hornbook. - sla i.
nothing has been confidered of this kind * of *:
nary road of the hornbook and primer. a sits
to master john the english maid
a hornbook gives of ginger-bread;
and that the child may learn the better, prior,
as he can name, he eats the letter. . -
ho'rned. adj. [from horn.] furnished with horns.
as when two rams, stirr'd with ambitiop" c,
fight for the rule of the rich fleeced flock,
their horn ifronts so fierce on eithers."
do meet, that, with the terrour of the o, or osts,
astonished both stand senseless as a block. als) k.
thither all the borned host resort", doh!",
to graze the ranker mead. - ussl
thou king of horned floods, whose plenteous dryan,
suffices fatness to the fruitful corn. -
horner. n.s.. [from horn.] one that wof
horns. - f the hide made
the skin of a bull's forehead is the po' " gro.
use of by horners, whereupon they shave their * a very
ks in hors, and to
ho'rnet. n.s. spynnette, saxon, from its o, hollow
large strong singing fly, which makes its
trecs, slomco,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1035</div><p class="text">h o r
h o r
silence, in times of suff'ring, is the best ;
tis dangerous to disturb a hornet's nest.
hornets do mischief to trees by breeding in them.
mortimer.
i have often admired how hornets, that gather dry materials
for building their nests, have found a proper matter to glue
their combs. derham's physico-theology.
ho'rn foot. n.s.. [horn and foot.] hoofed.
mad frantick man, that did not inly quake
with hornfoot horses, and brass wheels, jove's storms to
emulate. hakewill on providence.
hor now l. m. s. a kind of horned owl. ainsworth.
hornpipe. m. s. shorn and pipe.] a country dance, danced
commonly to a horn.
a lusty tabrere,
that to thee many a hornpipe play'd,
whereto they dauncen each one with his maid. spensor.
there many a hornpipe he tun'd to his phyllis. raleigh.
let all the quicksilver i' the mine
run to the feet veins, and refine
your firkhum jerkhum to a dance
shall fetch the fiddlers out of france,
to wonder at the hornpipes here
of nottingham and derbyshire. ben. johnson.
florinda danced the derbyshire hornpipe in the presence of
several friends. tatler.
hornston e. n.s. a kind of blue stone. ainsworth.
hornw or k. m. s. a kind of angular fortification.
ho rny. adj. [from horn.]
1. made of horn.
2. resembling horn. .
he thought he by the brook of cherith stood,
and saw the ravens with their horny beaks
food to elijah bringing even and morn. milton.
the horny or pellucid coat of the eye doth not lie in the
same superficies with the white of the eye, but riseth up above
dryden.
its convexity, and is of an hyperbolical figure. ray,
rough are her ears, and broad her horny feet. dryden.
the pineal gland was encompassed with a kind of horny
substance. - addison.
as the serum of the blood is resolvable by a small heat, a
greater heat coagulates it so as to turn it horny, like parch-
ment; but when it is thoroughly putrified, it will no longer
concrete. - arbuthnot on aliments.
3. hard as horn; callous.
tyrrheus, the foster-father of the beast,
then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fist. dryden.
horosgraphy. m. s. [horographie, fr. 382 and yeo.] an
account of the hours.
ho rolod, e. ; m. s. shorologium, latin.] any instrument that
horology. tells the hour: as a clock; a watch; an hour-
lass.
£ he'll watch the horologe a double set,
if drink rock not his cradle. shakespeare.
before the days of jerome there were horologies, that mea-
sured the hours not only by drops of water in glasses, called
clepsydra, but also by sand in glasses, called clepsammia. brown.
horo"metry. m. s. [herometrie, french; 3:2 and pergio.]
the art of measuring hours.
it is no easy wonder how the horometry of antiquity disco-
vered not this artifice. brown's vulgar errours.
ho roscope, n. s... [horosope, french; 3:6axo~62.] the
configuration of the planets at the hour of birth.
how unlikely is it, that the many almost numberless con-
junctions of stars, which occur in the progress of a man's
life, should not match and countervail that one horosiope or
conjunction which is found at his birth drummond.
a proportion of the horoscope unto the seventh house, or op-
posite signs every seventh year, oppresseth living natures. bro.
him born beneath a boding horts ope,
his fire, the blear-ey'd vu" an of a shop,
from mars his forge sent to minerva's school. dryden.
the greek names this the horoscope; -
this governs life, and this marks out cur parts,
our humours, manners, q'alities and arts. creech.
they understood the planets and the zodiack by instinet,
and fell to drawing schemes of their own hors opes in the same
dust they sprung out of. - bentley.
ho’s r ent, adj. [horrens, latin. horrentia pilis agnina.]
pointed outwards ; bristled with points: a word perhaps in-
troduced by milton. -
him a globe
of fiery seraphim incircled round
with bright imbiazonry and barrent arms.
ho'rrible, adj. [horrible, fr. horribilis, lat.]
terrible; shocking; hideous; enormous.
no colour affecteth the eye much with displeasure: there be
fights that are horrible, because they excite the memory of
milton.
dreadful;
things that are odious or fearful. bacon.
a dungeon horrible on all sides round,
as one great furnace flamed. milton.
- - o fight
of terror, foul and ugly to behold,
horrid to think, how horrible to feel ! alon:
eternal happiness and eternal misery, meeting with a per-
suasion that the soul is immortal, are, of all others, the first
the most desireable, and the latter the most horrible to human
apprehension. south.
ho'rrible ness. n.s.. [from horrible.] dreadfulness; hideous-
ness; terribleness; fearfulness.
ho'rribly. adv. [from horrible.]
1. dreadfully; hideously.
what hideous noise was that
horribly loud.
2. to a dreadful degree. - -
the contagion of these ill precedents, both in civility and
virtue, horribly infe&amp;ts children. locke.
ho'rrid. adj. [horridus, lat.]
1. hideous; dreadful; shocking.
give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood,
that we the horrider may seem to those
which chance to find us. shakespeare's cymbeline.
not in the legions
of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd,
milton.
in evils to top macbeth. shakespeare:
horror on them fell, -
and horrid sympathy. milton.
. shocking ; offensive: unpleasing: in women's cant.
already i your tears survey,
already hear the horrid things they say.
. rough ; rugged.
horrid with fern, and intricate with thorn,
few paths of human feet or tracks of beasts were worn.
dryden.
ho'rr idn ess. m. s. [from horrid.] hideousness; enormity.
a bloody designer suborns his instrument to take away
such a man's life, and the confessor represents the horridness of
the fact, and brings him to repentance. hammond.
ho'rrifick. adj. [horrificus, lat.] causing horrour,
his jaws horrifick, arm'd with three-fold fate,
here dwells the direful shark. thomson.
horri’sono u.s. adj. [horrisonus, lat j sounding dreadfully.
d.c.?.
2
pope.
3
ho'rrour. n.s.. [horror, lat. horreur, fr.]
1. terrour mixed with detestation; a passion compounded of
fear and hate, both strong. -
over them sad horrour, with grim hue,
did always soar, beating his iron wings;
and after him owls and night ravens flew,
the hatesul messengers of heavy things.
doubtless all souls have a surviving thought,
therefore of death we think with quiet mind ;
but if we think of being turn'd to nought,
fairy queen.
a trembling horrour in our souls we find. davies,
me damp horrour chill'd
at such bold words, vouch'd with a deed so bold. milton.
deep horrour seizes ev'ry human breast;
their pride is humbled, and their fear confest. dryden.
2. dreadful thoughts.
i have supt full with horrours :
direness, familiar to my slaught’rous thoughts,
cannot once start me. shakespeare's macb, the
3. gloom ; dreariness.
her gloomy presence saddens all the scene,
shades ev'ry flow'r, and darkens ev'ry green;
deepens the murmur of the falling floods, -
and breathes a browner horrour on the woods. pope,
4. [in medicine.) such a shuddering or quivering as precedes
an ague-fit; a sense of shuddering or shrinking. 34incy.
all objects of the senses, which are very offensive, do cause
the spirits to retire ; and, upon their flight, the parts are in
some degree destitute, and so there is induced in them a trepi-
dation and horrour. bacon’s natural history.
horse. m. s. sponr, saxon.]
1. a neighing quadruped, used in war, and draught and car-
isla g.c.
b duncan's horses, the minions of the race,
turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls. shakesp, macbeth.
a horse! a horse ! my kingdom for a horse / shak. r. iii.
we call a little horse, such a one as comes not up to the
size of that idea which we have in our minds to belong ordi-
narily to horses. locke,
2. a constellation.
thy face, bright centaur, autumn's heats retain,
the softer season suiting to the man;
whilst winter's shivering goat afflicts the horse
with frost, and makes him an uneasy course.
3. to take horse; to set out to ride.
i took horse to the lake of constance, which is formed by
the entry of the rhine. addison on italy.
4. it is used in the plural sense, but with a singular termination;
for horses, horsemen, or cavalry.
creech.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
i did
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1036</div><p class="text">h o r.
i did hear
the galloping of horse; who was came by shak. macb.
the imits were appointed, consisting of twenty-five thou-
sand horse and foot, for the repulfing of the opemy at their
landing. bacon's war with spain.
if they had known that all the king's horse were quartered
behind them, their foot might very well have matched away
with their horse. clarendan.
th’arcadian hors: -
with ill success engage the latin force. dryden's afn.
5. something on which any thing is supported: as, a hose to
dry linen on. - - - -
6. a wooden machine which soldiers ride by way of punishment.
it is sometimes called a timber-mare. -
7. joined to another substantive, it fignifies something large or
coarse: as, a hors face, a face of which the features are large
and indelicate.
to hors e. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to mount upon a horse; to furnish with a horse. -
he came out with all his clowns, horsed upon such cart-
jades, and so furnished, as i thought with myself, if that
were thrift, i wisht none of my friends ever to thrive. sidney.
after a great fight there came to the camp of gonsalvo,
the great captain, a gentleman proudly horsed and armed: di-
ego de mendoza asked the great captain, who's this? who
answered, it is st. elmo, who never appears but after the
storm. bacon's apophthegms.
2. to carry one on the back.
3. to ride any thing.
stalls, bulks, windows
are smother'd, leads are fill'd, and ridges hors'd
with variable complexions; all agreeing
in earnestness to see him. shakespeare.
4. to cover a mare.
if you let him out to horse more mares than your own, you
must feed him well. martimer.
ho'r's eback. m. s. [horse and back..] riding posture; the state
of being on a horse.
i've seen the french,
and they can well on horseback. shakspeare.
saw them salute on horseback,
beheld them when they lighted. shakspeare.
alexander fought but one remarkable battle wherein there
were any elephants, and that was with porus, king of india;
in which notwithstanding he was on horseback. brown.
when mannish mevia, that two handed whore,
astride on horseback hunts the tuscan boar. dryd, jav.
if your ramble was on horseback, i am glad of it, on ac-
count of your health. swift to gay.
hors eb e an. n. j. [hors, and bean.] a small bean usually
given to horses.
only the small hors becn is propagated by the plough.
- al/ortimer.
ho'rseblock. m. s. [horse and block.] a block on which they
climb to a horse.
hors e boa. t. n. s. [horse and boat.] a boat used in ferrying
horses.
horse bo y. m. s. [hors and boy..] a boy employed in dressing
horses ; a stableboy.
some hors boys, being awake, discovered them by the fire
in their matches. knolles's history.
ho'rse breaker. n.s.. [hors and break..] one whose employ-
ment it is to tame horses to the saddle.
under sagittarius are born chariot-racers, hors breakers, and
tamers of wild beasts. creech.
horseche's nut. n. s. [hors and chesnut. estulus.] a tree.
it hath digitated or fingered leaves: the flowers, which con-
fist of five leaves, are of an anomalous figure, opening with
two lips; there are male and female upon the same spike :
the female flowers are succeeded by nuts, which grow in green
prickly husks. their whole year's shoot is commonly per-
formed in three weeks time, after which it does no more than
increase in bulk, and become more firm ; and all the latter
part of the summer is occupied in forming and strengthening
the buds for the next year’s shoots. a miller.
z the horsechsnut grows into a goodly standard. mortimer.
hoosteouks.e.r. m. s. [horse and couiser. junius derives it
from hose and coso, an old scotch word, which signifies to
shange; and it should therefore, he thinks, be writ horsecoser.
the word now used in scotland is horsecouper, to denote a
jockey, seller, or rather changer of horses. it may well be
derived from course, as he that sells horses may be supposed to
course or exercise them.]
1. qile that runs horses, or keeps horses for the race.
2. a dealer in horses.
a servant to a horsecursor was thrown off his horse. i/ism.
a. florentine bought a horse for so many crowns, upon
condition to pay half down: the horsecourser comes to him
, not morning for the remainder. l’e/orange.
ho *s*** ab. m. s. a kind of fish. ainsworth.
horsecuscu mber, n: s [horse and cucumber.] a plant.
the horsecucumber is the large green c -
for the table, green out of o: ucumber, and the best
ho'rsedu ng. n.s.. [horse and dung. ortimer,
horses. f f. g.] the “crements of
put it into an ox's horn, and, covered cl -
hot horsedung. &gt; : o#: in
horse emmet. n.s...[horse and emmet.] an of a la owing,
ho'rseflesh. m. s. [horse and flesh.] the fift, *::: kind.
the chinese eat horsflesh at this day, and som .
have colt's flesh baked. &amp; gluttons
an old hungry lion would fain have been dealin, ...
good piece of horsoft/h; but the nag he o 3.
fleet for him. s: [hors. ii.
ho'rsef ly. m. s. [horse and fly.] a fly that sti range,
sucks their blood. fy.] y ings horses, and
horsefoot. n. j. an herb. the same with col -
ho'rsehair... n.s.. [horse and hair.] the hair o: 4s.
his glittoring helm, which terribly was grac'd -
with waving horsehair.
baton.
ho'r's eheel. m. s. an herb. aft:
ho’rs elaugh. m. s. [horse and laugh..] a loud o
laugh.
a horselagh, if you please, at honefly;
a joke on jekyl. pot
ho'r's eleech. m. s. [horse and leech.] ope,
1. a great leech that bites horses.
the horseletch hath two daughters, crying giro, give,
or!
let us to france; like horseleeches, my boys provirli,
the very blood to suck. 'soft-
2. [from leech; signifying a physician.] a farrier. aji.
horself'tter. n.s. [horse and litter.] a cassiggio
poles between two horses, in which the person. lyes
along.
he that before thought he might command the waves of the
sea, was now cast on the ground, and carried in an hors iter.
2 mac. ix. 8.
ho'r's eman. m. s. [horse and man.]
1. cne skilled in riding,
a skilful horseman, and a huntsman bred, drydin,
2. one that serves in wars on horseback.
encounters between horsemen on the one side, and foot on
the other, are seldom with extremity of danger; because as
horsemen can hardly break a battle on foot, so men on foo:
cannot possibly chase horsemen. hayward.
in the early times of the roman commonwealth, a horse-
man received yearly tria milia aris, and a foot-soldier one
mille; that is, more than six-pence a-day to a horseman, and
two-pence a day to a foot soldier. arbuthnot on clini.
3. a rider; a man on horseback.
with descending show’rs of brimstone fir’d,
the wild barbarian in the storm expir'd;
wrapt in devouring flames the horseman rag'd,
and spurr'd the steel in equal flames engagd. also,
a horseman's coat shall hide -
thy taper shape, and comeliness of fide. pir.
horse manship. n.s. [from horseman.] the art of riding;
the art of managing a horse.
he vaulted with such ease into his seat,
as if an angel dropt down from the clouds,
to turn and wind a fiery pegasus, -
and witch the world with noble horsmanship. shaiso,
they please themselves in terms of hunting of hostmoso,
isoso.
his majesty, to shew his horsemanship, to:
three of his subjects. - lift,
peers grew proud, in horsemanship to excel; p#:
newmarket's glory rose, as britain's fell. inforth
ho'rse marten. m. s. a kind of large bec. *::::
horse match. m. s. a bird. also,
horse meat. m. s. [horse and meat..] provonor. the dy
though green peas and beans be eaten soonos, " buson
ones that are used for horsemeat are ripe last. ulo-
ho'rs emint. n.s. a large coarse mint.
ho'r's emuscle. n.s. a large muscle. brecdothin
the great hors muscle, with the fine shell, o but st-
ponds, do not only gape and shut as the oysters do, baton,
move from one place to another. h, rugo
horseplay, n.f. [hors and play.] coars", *
lay. - - - mcs
p #. is too much given to hers play in his raillery, *:
to battle like a dictator from the plough. horses, j
horsepond, n.s. shors, and pond.]. a pon" o: : horses in
horsera’ce. n.s. [hose and race..] a * st
running. - |ca
in * men are curious that to " o:
weight upon the one horse more than upon the o the
trajan, in the fifth year of his tribuneship, * aliso,
eople with a horserace.
ho. ... [horse and rals.] a roo 2c -
biting: a species of scurvygrass. hasrao
rid and
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1037</div><p class="text">h c s :
horseradish is increased by sprouts spreading from the old
roots left in the ground, that are cut or broken off. mortimer.
stomachicks are the cresse acrids, as horseradish and scurvy-
grass, infused in wine, - flyer on the humours.
ho'rs eshoe. n.s.. [horse and shoe.] - * * * *.
1. a plate of iron nailed to the feet of horses.
i was thrown into the thames, and cool'd glowing hot in
that surge, like a hors shoe. shakespeare.
2. an herb. • * * ainsworth.
horses.t.e.a.l.e.r. m. s. [horse and seal ] a thief who takes
away horses. - - - - - . . . . . . .
he is not a pickpurse, nor a hors sealer; but for his verity
in love, i do think him as concave as a covered goblet, or a
worm-eaten nut. * . shakespeare's as you like it.
ho'rs etail. m. s. a plant. -
ho'r's eton gue. m. s. an herb. - - ainsworth.
ho'rseway. m. s. [horse and way.] "a broad way by which
horses may travel. . . . *.
know'st thou the way to dover ? - -
... —both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. shak. k. lear.
hortation. m. s. shortatio, lat.] the aet of exhorting; a
hortatory precept ; advice or encouragement to something.
ho'rtative. m. s. [from hortor, lat.] - exhortation; precept
by which one incites or animates. 1.
. generals commonly in their hortatives put men in mind of
their wives and children. * bacon.
ho rtat or y. adj. [from hartor, lat.] --encouraging ; ani-
mating; advising to any thing : used of precepts, not of per-
sons; a hortatory speech, not a hortatory speaker. -
hort1cultur e. n.s. shortus and cultura, lat..] the art of
cultivating gardens. . . . . . - * * *
ho rotu lan. adj. [hortulanus, lat.] belonging to a garden.
this seventh edition of my hortulan kalendar is yours. -- *
is * * * *
evelyn's kalendar. .
hos a'nna. m. s... [trava.]. an exclamation of praise to god.
. . . ." through the vast of heav'n • * *
it sounded, and the faithful armies rung
hosanna to the highest. milton.
the publick entrance which christ made into jerusalem
was celebrated with the hosannas and acclamations of the peo-
* * * fides's sermons.
ple.
hose. m. s. plur. hoson. [pora, saxon; hosan, welsh ; assan,
erse, offinen, plur. chause, fr.] -
1. breeches. -
guards on wanton cupid’s hos. . . . . shakespeare.
here's an english taylor come hither for stealing out of a
french hose. - - shakespeare.
. these men were bound in their coats, hosen, hats, and
other garments, and cast into the midst of the burning fiery
furnace. dan. iii. 21.
he cross examin'd both our hose,
and plunder'd all we had to lose.
2. stockings; covering for the legs.
he being in love, could not see to garter his hose ; and you,
hudibras.
being in love, cannot see to put on your hose. shakespeare.
will she thy linen wash, or hosen darn,
and knit thee gloves gay's pasłorals.
hoosie r. n.s.. [from hos...] one who sells stockings.
as arrant a cockney as any hosier in cheapside. swift.
ho'spitable. adj. [hospitabilis, lat.] giving entertain-
ment to strangers; kind to strangers.
i'm your host:
with robbers’ hands my hospitable favour
you should not ruffle thus. -- shakespeare.
receive the ship-wreck'd on your friendly shore; -
with hospitable rites relieve the poor. dryden.
hospit ably. adv. [from hospitable.] . with kindness to stran-
gcts.
§ ye thus hospitably live, . - -
and strangers with good cheer receive. * . prior.
the former liveth as piously and hospitally as the other.
hospital. n.s. [hospital, fr. hospitalis, lat.)
1. a place built for the reception of the sick, or support of the
oot.
p they who were so careful to bestow them in a college when
they were young, would be so good as to provide for them in
some hospital when they are old. l/ction.
i am about to build an hospital, which i will endow hand-
somely for twelve old husbandmen. addison.
2. a place for shelter or entertainment. obsolete. -
they spy’d a goodly castle, plac'd
foreby a river in a pleasant dale, .
which chufing for that evening's hospital,
they thither march'd. fairy queen.
hospit ality. m. s. [hospitalite, fr.] the prastice of enter-
taining strangers. - *
the lacedemonians forbidding all access of strangers into
their coasts, are, in that respect, deserved:y blamed, as being
enemies to that hospitality which, for common humanity sake,
all the nations on earth should embrace. hooker.
vol. i.
- 2. the landlord of an inn. . . . . .
swift.
my master is of a churlish disposition, ' ' ' ' "
and little recks to find the way to heav'n
by doing deeds of hospitality: soft. a you like it.
how has this spirit of faction broke all the laws of charity,
neighbourhood, alliance, and hospitality 2 swift.
hospitaller... n.s.. .[hospitallier, french; hostalario, low
latin, from hospital j. one residing in an hospital in order
to receive the poor or stranger. used perhaps peculiarly of the
knights of malta. * - - -
the first they reckon such as were granted to the hospitallers
in titulum beneficii. * * * = aylift's parergon.
ho's pitate. v. a. [hospitar, lat.] to reside under the
roof of another. - -- - , -
that always chuses an empty shell, and this hostate, with
the living animal in the same shell. grew's museum.
host. n. s. [hosie, fr. hospes, hospitis, lat.] -
1. one who gives entertainment to another. -
... homer never entertained either guests or host; with long
speeches, ’till the mouth of liunger be stopped. -&gt;
here, father, take the shadow of this tree
* for your good hoff. . . software'. king lear.
time's like a fashionable hos”, “ .
that slightly shakes his parting guest by th’ hand;
but with his arms out-stretch'd, as he would fly,
grasps in the comer. shakespeare's troilus and crossia.
3. [from hostis, latin.] an army; numbers. assembled for .
war, - * = * - - --
t2
sidney.
let every soldier hew him down a bough, o
and bear’t before him; thereby shall we shadow
the numbers of our host. - shakesheare's macbeth.
then through the fiery pillar, and the cloud, -
god looking forth, will trouble all his loft, .."
and craze your chariot-wheels. - - maor.
; : after these came arm’d, with spear and shield; “.
." an host so great as cover'd all the field. drydon.
4. any great number. ". . . . , -- - -
give to a gracious message - -
an host of tongues; but let ill tidings tell o
themselves, when they be felt. shakes care.
5. [histia, lat. hostie, fr.] the sacrifice
of the mass in the
romish church ; the consecrated wafer. - -
to host. v. n. [from the noun.] * *
1. to take up entertainment; to live, as at an inn.
go, bear it to the centaur, where we boff; * * *
shakespeare.
and stay there, dromio, 'till i come to thee.
2. to encounter in battle.
- strange to us it seem'd * * o:
at first, that angel should with angel war, s
and in fierce hoslings meet. : .
milton.
- new authors of diffension spring from him,
two branches, that in hosting long contend
for sov’reign sway. phillips.
3. to review a body of men; to muster. obsolete.
lords have had the leading of their own followers to the
general hoslings. - spensor on ireland.
hostage. m. s. softage, fr.] one given in pledge for secu-
rity of performance of conditions. -- - -
your hoslages i have, so have you mine;
and we shall talk before we fight. shakespeare.
do this message honourably; -
and if he stand on hostage for his safety, - -
bid him demand what pledge will please him best. shakes.
he that hath wife and children, hath given hoslages to for-
tune; for they are impediments to great enterprises, either of
virtue or mischief. bacon.
they who marry give hostages to the publick, that they will
not attempt the ruin or disturb the peace of it. atterbury.
the romans having seized a great number of hostages, ac-
quainted them with their resolution. arbuthnot on coins.
#:...} of soft, whiti, fr. an in aus.
ho’s telry.
host ess. n.s.. [hostes, fr. from hos.]
1. a female host; a woman that gives entertainment.
fair and noble hostes, . .
we are your guest to-night. shakespeare's macbeth.
ye were beaten out of door,
and rail'd upon the hostes of the house. shakespeare.
be as kind an hostess as you have been to me, and you can
never fail of another husband. - * dryden.
2. a woman that keeps a house of publick entertainment. . .
undistinguished civility is like a whore or a hoffs. temple.
ho’s tess-ship. m. s. [from hostess.] the character of an
hostess. . . *
it is my father's will i should take on me
the hostess-ship o' th' day: you're welcome, firs.
- shakespeare.
hostile. adj. [hostilis, lat..] adverse; opposite; suitable
to an enemy. - - -
he has now at last "
giv'n hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
11 n
• * * * o
of
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1038</div><p class="text">h o t
h o v.
of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
in
that do distribute it. s ,- shakespeare.
- fierce juno's hate, -
added to hostile force, shallurge thy fate: dryden.
hostory. n.f. [hostilite, fr. from hostile.] the practices
of an open enemy; open war ; opposition in war.
neither by treason nor hostility
to seek to put me down, and reign thyself. shakespeare.
hostility being thus suspended with france, preparation was
made for war against scotland. hayward.
what peace can we return,
but, to our pow'r, hostility and hate,
untam'd relustance and revenge - milton,
we have shewed ourselves fair, nay, generous adversaries 5
and have carried on even our hostilities with humanity;
- atterbury.
hostler. m. s. [hosteller, from hostel.] one who has the care
of horses at an inn. -
the cause why they are now to be permitted is want of
convenient inns for lodging travellers on horseback, and
hostlers to tend their horses by the way. spenser on ireland.
ho'stry. n.f. [corrupted from hostelry..] a place where the
horses of guests are kept.
swift rivers are with sudden ice constrain'd,
and studded wheels are on its back sustain'd;
an hostry now for waggons, which before
tall ships of burden on its bosom bore.
hot. adj. [pat, saxon; hat, scottish.]
1. having the power to excite the sense of heat; contrary to
cold; fiery.
what is thy name
thou'lt be afraid to hear it.
-no, though thou call's thyself a hotter name
than any is in hell. shakespeare's macbeth.
the great breezes which the motion of the air in great
circles, such as are under the girdle of the world, produceth,
do refrigerate; and therefore, in those parts, noon is nothing
so hot as about nine in the forenoon. bacon.
hot and cold were in one body fixt;
and soft with hard, and light with heavy mixt. dryden.
black substances do soonest of all others become hot in the
fun's light, and burn; which effe&amp;t may proceed partly from
the multitude of refractions in a little room, and partly from
easy commotion of so very small corpuscles. newton.
dryden's georg.,
2. lustful, lewd.
what hotter hours,
unregister'd in vulgar fame, you have
luxuriously pick'd out. shakespeare.
now the hot blooded gods assist me ! remember, jove, thou
was’t a bull for thy europa. shakespeare.
3. violent; furious; dangerous.
that of carthagena, where the spaniards had warning of
our coming, was one of the hottest services, and most danger-
ous assaults, that hath been known. bacon.
he resolved to storm; but his soldiers declined that hot ser-
vice, and plied it with artillery. clarendon.
to court the cry directs us, when we found
th' assault so hot, as if 'twere only there. idenham.
our army
is now in hot engagement with the moors. dryden.
4. ardent; vehement; precipitate.
come, come, lord mortimer, you are as slow,
as hot lord percy is on fire to go. shakespeare.
nature to youth hot rashness doth dispense,
but with cold prudence age doth recompense. denham.
achilles is impatient, hot, revengeful; aeneas, patient,
considerate, and careful of his people. dryden.
5. eager; keen in desire.
it is no wonder that men, either perplexed in the necessary
affairs of life, or hot in the pursuit of pleasures, should not se-
riously examine their tenets. locke.
he has, quoth ralph, a jointure,
which makes him have so hot a mind to her. hudibras.
6. it is applied likewise to the desire, or sense raising the desire,
or action excited; as, a hot pursuit.
nor law, nor checks of conscience will we hear,
when in hot scent of gain and full career. dryden.
7. piquant; acrid : as, boi as mustard.
*:::::: m. s. a bed of earth made hot by the fermentation
or dung.
the bed we call a hotbed is this: there was taken horsedung,
sld and well rotted; this was laid upon a bank half a fo
high, and supported round about with planks, and upon the
top was cast fifted earth two fingers deep. bacon.
preserve the hotbed as much as possible from rain. evelyn.
hotbra'ised. adj. [hot and brain..] violent; vehement; fu-
rious. cerebrosus.
you shall find 'em either hotbrain'd youth,
o: needy bankrupts. dryden's spanish fryar.
horcocktos. m. s. shautes couille, fr.] a play in which
***rs his eyes, and guenos who strikes him.
“,
the chytindra is certainly not our -
by ... not by ao. *::::: that wi.
as at hotcockles once i laid me down, * and por.
and felt the weighty hand of many a clown
buxoma gave a gentle tap, and i 2
quick .#. and read soft mischief inher eye. g
hoo. adj. [but and head.] wehement, violent; :
one would not make the same person z
ing army and publick liberty; .. o:
coxcomb forward for a scheme of moderation, y a o:
hothouse. n.s.. [hot and house.] rbuthnot,
1. abagnio; a place to sweat and cup in.
now she professes a *% }. is *very ill house too,
2. a brothel. d ow. * measure for measur,
where lately harbour'd many a famous whore
a purging bill, now fix’d upon the door, &gt;
tells you it is a hothouse; so it may,
and still be a whorehouse: th’ are synonyma. b jihs,
ho"tly. adv. [from bot.] johnson,
1. with heat; not coldly.
2. violently ; vehemently. *:
the stag was in the end so hotly pursued, thathe was driven
to make courage of despair.
i do contest
as hotly and as nobly with thy love,
as ever in ambitious strength i did e... . . .
contend against thy valour... , , shai. coilin
the enemy, now at hand, began hotly to skirmishin o
places with the christians. knollei'; history,
though this controversy be revived, and hu; "giated, i
doubt whether it be not a nominal, dispute. boyle,
3. lustfully. o
voracious birds, that hotly bill and breed, ,
and largely drink, because on salt they feed. drydin.
hot mou"thed. adj. [hot and mouth.] headstrong; ungo-
vernable.
i fear my people's faith,
that hatmauth'd beast that bears against the curb,
hard to be broken. dryden's spanish fjar.
hotness. n.s.. [from hot..] heat; violence; fury.
hotchpot. m. s. [hache en poche, french; or hathu on
#:::::::::: pot, french, as camden has it, as being
boiled up in a pot; yet the former corruption is now gent.
rally used.] a mingled hash; a mixture; a confused mass.
such patching maketh littleton's hotchpot of our tongue,
and, in effect, brings the same rather to a babellish confusion
than any one entire language. camden's remains.
a mixture of many disagreeing colours is ever unpleasant
to the eye, and a mixture or hotchpotch of many tastes is un-
pleasant to the taste. bacon'; matural history.
nor limbs, nor bones, nor carcass would remain;
but a mash'd heap, a botchpotch of the slain. dryd, juv.
hotspur. m. s. shot and spur.]
1. a man violent, passionate, precipitate, and heady.
my nephew’s trespass may be well forgot;
it hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood, ..
a harebrain’d hotspur govern'd by a spleen, . shaishart.
wars are begun by hairbrained dissolute captains, parasitical
fawners, unquiet hotspurs, and restless innovators, ho
2. a kind of pea of speedy growth.
of such peas as are planted or sown in gardens, to hiffar
is the speediest of any in growth. mor.
hotspurred. adj. [from hotspur.] wehement; o: }.
to draw mars like a young o: with an effemi-
nate countenance, or venus like that hotspurred harpalice in
virgil, this proceedeth from a senseless judgment. patham,
hove. the preterite of heave. . . so,
hoovel. n.s. [diminutive of pope, house, saxon]
1. a shed open on the fides, and covered overhead.
so likewise a hovel will serve for a roome, . . . tosor
to stacke on the pease, when harvest shall co".
if you make a hovel, thatched, over, some ol
ground, plank the ground over, and it will breed o,
sidhs,
your hay it is mow’d, your corn it is reap',
your toi be full, .# your hovel, heap d. do,
2. a mean habitation; a cottage. . - 1.”
the men clamber up iodivities, dragging their :
with them, where they feed them and milk o: . to
the dairy-work in such sorry hovels and sheds as . creation,
inhabit in during the summer. ray on n howel.
to hovel. v. a. ifrom the noun.j. to shelter in a
and was’t thou fain, f. father, forlorn
to hovel thee with swine and rogues.”... roe lar.
in short and musty straw? - shakespeo cj.
hoven. part. pass. [from heave..] raio swe * o
tom piper hath hoven and puffed up . ' toso,
if cheese be so haven, make cisle to seek creeks, t.
2
---, --- *
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1039</div><p class="text">h o u
to hoover. v. n. [hovio, to hang over, welsh.]
1. to hang in the air over head, without flying off one way or
other.
some fiery devil hovers in the sky,
and pours down mischief. . shak. king john.
ah, my poor princes ! ah, my tender babes |
if yet your gentle souls fly in the air,
and be not fix'd in doom perpetual,
hover about me with your airy wings,
and hear your mother's lamentation.
a hovering mist came swimming o'er his fight,
and seal’d his eyes in everlasting night. dryden.
great flights of birds are hovering about the bridge, and
mettling upon it. addison,
*till as the earthly part decays and falls,
the captive breaks her prison's mould'ring walls;
hovers a-while upon the sad remains,
which now the pile, or sepulchre, contains,
and thence with liberty unbounded flies,
impatient to regain her native skies.
some less refin'd, beneath the moon's pale light,
hover, and catch the shooting stars by night.
2. to stand in suspense or expectation.
the landlord will no longer covenant with him; for that he
daily looketh after change and alteration, and hovereth in ex-
pectation of new worlds. spensor on ireland.
3. to wander about one place.
we see so warlike a prince at the head of so great an army,
hovering on the borders of our confederates. addison.
. the truth and certainty is seen, and the mind fully possesses
itself of it; in the other, it only hovers about it. locke.
hough. m. s. [pox, saxon.]
1. the lower part of the thigh.
blood shall be from the sword unto the belly, and dung of
men unto the camel's hough. 2 esd. xiii. 36.
2. [ hue, fr.] an adz; an hoe. see hoe.
did they really believe that a man, by houghs and an axe,
could cut a god out of a tree ? stillingfleet.
to hough. v. a. [froth the noun 1
1. to hamstring; to disable by cutting the sinews of the ham.
thou shalt hough their horses. josh. ii. 6.
2. to cut up with an hough or hoe.
3. to hawk. this ofthography is uncommon. see to hawk.
neither could we hough or spit from us; much less could
we sneeze or cough. grew.
houlet. n.s. the vulgar name for an owl. the scots and
northern counties still retain it: -
hoult. n.s. [pole, saxon.] a small wood. obsolete.
or as the wind, in hoults and shady greaves,
a murmur makes among the boughs and leaves. fairfax.
| hound. m. s. [punb, saxon; hund, scottish.] a dog used
in the chase.
hounds and greyhounds, mungrels, spaniels, curs,
are cleped all by the name of dogs. shakespeare's macbeth.
jason threw, but fail'd to wound
the boar, and slew an undeserving hound,
and through the dog the dart was nail'd to ground. dryden.
the kind spaniel and the faithful hound,
likest that fox in shape and species found,
pursues the noted path and covets home.
t. hou nd. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to set on the chase.
god is said to harden the heart permissively, but not ope-
ratively nor effe&amp;tively; as he who only lets loose a greyhound
out of the slip, is said to hound him at the hare. bramhall.
2. to hunt; to pursue.
if the wolves had been hounded by tygers, they should have
worried them. i’estrange.
hou ndfish, n. s. a kind of fish. mosela lavis. ainsworth.
hou ndsto'ngue. m. s. [cynoglossum, lat.] a plant. miller.
houndtree. n.s. a kind of tree. cornus. ainsworth.
houp. n.s.. [upupa, lat..] the puet. - ainsworth.
hour. n.s.. [heure, fr. hora, lat.]
1. the twenty-fourth part of a natural day; the space of fixty
minutes.
see the minutes how they run:
how many makes the hour full compleat,
how many hours bring about the day,
how many days will finish up the year,
how many years a mortal man may live.
2. a particular time.
vexation almost stops my breath,
that sunder'd friends greet in the hour of death.
when we can intreat an hour to serve,
we'll spend it in some words upon that business,
if you would grant the time. shakespeare's macbeth.
the conscious wretch must all his arts reveal,
from the first moment of his vital breath,
o
prior:
pope.
prior.
shakespeare.
£hakesp.
to his last hour of unrepenting death. dryden's aen.
3. the time as marked by the clock. *** * *
the hour runs through the roughest day. shakespeare,
shakes). rich. iii.
our neighbour let her floor to a genteel man, who kept
good hours. - - , tatler.
they are as loud any hour of the morning, as our own
countrymen at midnight. addison.
hourglass. n. s. [hour and glass.]
1. a glass filled with sand, which, running through a narrow
hole, marks the time. s -
next morning, known to be a morning better by the hour-
glass than by the day's clearness. - - sidney.
in fickness, the time will seem longer without a clock or
hourglass than with it; for the mind doth value every moment.
* ---&gt; &lt; bacon.
shake not his hourglass, when his hasty sand * :-
is ebbing to the last. ' ' ". dryden's spanish fryar.
2. space of time. a manner of speaking rather affected than
elegant. - or * - “ . . . . . . . . . . . . .
we, within the hourglass of two months, have won one
town, and overthrown great forces in the field. bacon.
hourly, adj. [from hour.] happening or, done every hour;
frequent; often repeated. *** * &gt; . . . . .” -
alcyone ' ' ' ' '
computes how many nights he had been gone,
observes the waining moon with hourly view,
numbers her age, and wishes for a new. dryden.
we must live in hourly expectation of having those troops
recalled, which they now leave with us." swift.
hourly. adv. [from hour.] every hour ; frequently.
she deserves a lord, -
that twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
and hourly call her mistress. shakespeare:
our estate may not endure
hazard so near us, as doth hourly grow
out of his lunacies. shakespeare's hamlet.
they with ceaseless cry | --
surround me, as thou saw'st ; hourly conceiv'd, 4 .
and hourly born, with sorrow infinite ... •
to me!'" . . . . milton's paradis? loss.
great was their strife, which hourly was renew’d, -
*till each with mortal hate his rival view’d. bryden.
ho'u.r plate. n.s.. [hour and plate.] the dial; the plate on
which the hours pointed by the hand of a clock are inscribed.
if eyes could not view the hand, and the characters of the
hourplate, and thereby at a distance see what o'clock it was,
thcir owner could not be much benefited by that acuteness.
locke.
house. m. s. [bur, saxon; huys, dutch; huso, scottish.]
1. a place wherein a man lives; a place of human abode.
sparrows must not build in his house eaves. shakespeare.
houses are built to live in, not to look on ; therefore let use
be preferred before uniformity, except where both may be
had. acon.
in a house the doors are moveable, and the rooms square;
yet the house is neither moveable nor square. watts, .
2. any place of abode. -
the bees with smoke, the doves with noisome stench,
are from their hives and houses driven away. shakespeare.
3. place in which religious or studious persons live in common;
monastery; college.
theodosius arrived at a religious house in the city, where
now constantia resided. -- addison.
4. the manner of living; the table.
he kept a miserable house, but the blame was laid wholly
upon madam. swift.
5. station of a planet in the heavens, astrologically considered.
pure spiritual substances we cannot converse with, therefore
have need of means of communication, which some make to
be the celestial houses: those who are for the celestial houses
worship the planets, as the habitations of intelle&amp;tual sub-
stances that animate them. stillingfleet.
6. family of ancestors; descendants, and kindred; race.
the red rose and the white are on his face,
the fatal colours of our striving houses. shakespeare.
an ignominious ransom and free pardon .
are of two houses ; lawful mercy sure . .
is nothing kin to foul redemption. shakespeare.
by delaying my last fine, upon your grace's accession to the
patrimonies of your house, i may seem to have made a forfei-
ture. * dryden.
a poet is not born in ev'ry race;
two of a house few ages can afford,
one to perform, another to record. dryden's fables.
7. a body of the parliament; the lords or commons colle&amp;tively
considered. -
nor were the crimes objected against him so clear, as to give
convincing satisfaction to the major part of both houses, espe-
cially that of the ords. king charles.
to house. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to harbour; to admit to residence.
palladius wished him to house all the helots: sidney,
upon the north-sea a valley houseth a gentleman, who hath
worn out his former name. carew's survey of cornwall.
slander
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1040</div><p class="text">h o' u
h. o. u
- - * - - - - - -
slander lives upon succession, too 1.
for ever housed where it gets possession. . shaos care.
mere cottagers are but housed beggars. . . . . bacon.
- oh, can your counsel his despair defer,
vv ho now is housed in his sepulchre : sandys.
we find them housing themselves in dens, santh.
in expeciation of such times as these, :
a chapel hos'd 'em, truly ca'!'d of ease. dryden,
2. to shelter; to keep under a roof.
as we house hot country plants to save them, so we may
laus oar own to forward them. bacon's natural history.
house your choicest carnations, or rather set them under a
pent-house, to preserve them in extremity of weather. evelyn.
wit in northern climates will not blow,
except, like orange-trees, ’tis hous’d from snow. pryden.
to hous e. v. n. -
1. to take shelter; to keep abode; to reside. - -
ne suffer it to house there half a day. hulherd's tale.
graze where you will, you shall not house with me. shak.
summers three times eight, save one,
she had told ; alas ! too soon,
after so short time of breath, -
to house with darkness and with death. milton.
2. to have an astrological station in the heavens.
in fear of this, observe the starry signs -
where saturn houses, and where hermes joins.” . dryden.
1 housing in the lion's hateful sign, * . . . . "
bought senates and deserting troops are mine. dryden.
hous eere ah.e.r. m. s. [house and break.] burglar; one who
..makes his way into houses to steal. - - -
all has breakers and sharpers had thief written in their fore-
heads. - - - l’estrange.
hous elrea'king. m. s. shows and break.] burglary.
when he hears of a rogue to be tried for robbing or house-
breaking, he will send the whole paper to the govern-
nicot. - - swift.
hous epog. n.s.. [house and dog..] a mastiff kept to guard the
house. * - -
a very good hous dog, but a dangerous cur to strangers, had
a bell about his neck. l’estrange.
you see the goodness of the master even in the old house-
dog. addison.
hous ehold. m. s. [house and hold.]
1. a family living together.
two hotsholds, both alike in dignity,
in fair verona, where we lay our scene, -
from ancient grudge break to new mutiny. 'aosorare.
a little kingdom is a great hous' old, and a great hotoshold a
little kingdom. bacon's advice to /illiers.
of god observ'd
the one just man alive, by his command,
shall build a wond’rous ark, as thou beheld’s,
to save himself and hotshold from amidst
a world devote to universal wreck. milton.
he has always taken to himself, amongst the sons of men,
a peculiar houshold of his love, which at all times he has che-
rished as a father, and governed as a master: this is the pro-
per hous' old of faith; in the first ages of the world, 'twas
sometimes literally no more than a single hotshold, or some few
families. - spratt.
great crimes must be with greater crimes repaid,
and second funcrals on the former laid;
let the whole hotshold in one ruin fall, -
and may diana's curse o’ertake us all. drydon's falls.
learning's little houshold did embark,
with her world's fruitful system in her sacred ark. swift.
* in his own church he keeps a seat,
says grace before and after meat;
and calls, without affecting airs,
his hotshold twice a-day to prayers. swift.
2. family life; domestick management.
an inventory, thus importing
the several parcels of his plate, his treasure,
rich stuffs, and ornaments of hoshold. shakespeare.
3. it is used in the manner of an adjective, to signify domestick;
belonging to the family. -
cornelius called two of his houshold servants. afts, x. 7.
for nothing lovelier can be found
in woman, than to study hotshold good;
and good works in her husband to promote. milton.
it would be endless to enumerate the oaths among the men,
among the women the neglect of houshold affairs. swift.
householdf.r. m. s. [from household.] master of a family.
. a certain householder planted a vineyard. mat. xxi. 33.
ho *** psi uef. m. s. [household and stuff..] furniture of
. 2 sh house; utensi's convenient for a famiiv. -
in this war that he maketh, he still flicth from his foe, and
lo o the thick woods, waiting for advantages: his cloke.
is his bed, yea and his hosholdstuff. spenser on ireland.
* goat part of the building w ** **** l
o g was consumed, wo
-
the woman had heriest for her b * * **- - - -
housekeep er. m. s. o and keep * l'ois,
1. householder; master of a family. -
to be said an honest man and a good houso, -
fairly as to say a graceful man and a great §. go
if i may credit hosocopers and substantial o
forts of provisions and commodities are risen excess o al!
2. one who lives in plenty; one that exerci ively,
the people are apter to applaud has
raisers. -- --- - - fo
3. one who lives much at home. hon.
how do you both &amp; you are manife -
are you o: here 2 §o whit
4. a woman servant that has care of a
the other maid servants. -
merry folks, who want by chance
a pair to make a country-dance, - -
call the old housekeeper, and get her . . . . . . 1:
to fill a place for want of better, * * * soo
5. a housedog. not in use. - ... so,
distinguish the hotsoeper, the hunter. soft,
house keeping. adj. [horse and keep.] domestick. o
a family. - - so,
his house, for pleasant prospea, largescope, and other,
keeping commodities, challengeth the pre-eminence. o
housekeeping. m.s. hospitality; liberal and floo.
i hear your grace hath sworn out housefooting. so.
his table was one of the last that gave us an o o:
old housekeeping of an english nobleman: anabundano.
which shewed the master's hospitality. n.
house l. m. s. spurl, soxon; from biosol, gothick, as i.
or hosia, dimin. assoola, latin.] the holy euchan. -
to hocs.l.. v. a. [from the noun..] to give or recore the
eucharist. both the noun and verb are obsolete,
lo,
ses hospitan. 7th:
#or, than hos.
- eare'; crolin.
family, and superimens,
ho’c’s e leek. m. s. [house and leek.] a plant. milor.
the acerbs supply their quantity of cruder acids ; as juices
of apples, grapes, the sorrels, and housekek. for.
hous el ess, adj. [from loose.] wanting abode; wanting hi-
bitation. - - . . .
poor naked wretches, - !
how shall your housiles heads and unsed sides,
your loop'd and window’d raggedness, defend you? oft.
this hungry, housels, suffering, dying jesus, fod mory
thousands with five loaves and two fishes. wol.
hous emaid. m. s. [house and maid.]. a maid employed to keep
the house clean. . . ." - " - -
the housemaid may put out the candle against the looking-
glass. - - swift.
housf room. m. s. [house and room.] place in a house,
houseroom, that costs him nothing, he bestows;
yet still we scribble on, though still we lose, dryden.
hous esn a ii.. n. s. a kind of snail. .
housew arming.. n.s. shots, and warm.] a feast or merry-
making upon going into a new house... . .
hous ew i fe. m. s. [house and wife. this is now frequently
written histoise, or hos.]
i. the mistress of a family. - -
you will think it unfit for a good housewift to stir in or "
busy herself about her housewifery. sponsor on irland.
i have room enough, but the kind and hearty housafi
dead. pope to saft,
2. a female ceconomist. bid
fitting is a mantle for a bad man, and so so." g
hots wif it is no less convenient; for some of them, o 3.
wandering women, it is half a wardrobe. sponsor on o
let us fit and mock the good housewif: fortune, o
wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be disposed equal; jwh-
- - farmers in degree,
- - d -
he a good husband, a good housewife she. dro
early housewives leave the bed, dror
when living embers on the hearth are spread. *as
- - - - themselves
the fairest among the daughters of britain shew hijo.
good stateswomen as well as good housewives. s
3. one skilled in female business. . . mother, ''
he was bred up under the tuition of.” tender me o pre-
she made him as good an housewife as herself: he o
serve apricocks, and make jellies.
hous f wif ely. adj [from hotserviso.
coming a housewife. -
housewifely. adv. [from housewift.
of a careful woman. - -
housewifery. ... s. [from he's wife.]
1. domestic or female business; managemen
listics a family." - ... in or (0.
o think it unfit for a good *: o: o:
busy herself about her ho wifery. . . . . fo
he ording a joyo; how or no.
general, praised; for and young "solo
. . . wiferies. . - oredited by
little to: was exported abroad, and o discst jo.
the housewifery of the irish in making it "p. 2. feo
j skilled in the **
j. with the econo"
t becoming th:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1041</div><p class="text">h o w
h o y
o
i
2. female ceconomy. - -
learn good works for necessary uses; for st. paul expresses
the obligation of christian women to good housewifery, and
charitable provisions for their family and neighbourhood. tayl.
hous ing. m. s. [from house.]
1. quantit of inhabited building.
london is supplied with people to increase its inhabitants,
according to the increase of housing. graunt.
2. [from houseaux, heuses, or houses, french.j cloth originally
used to keep off dirt, now added to saddles as ornamental.
housi ng. adj. [from house..] provided for entertainment at
first entrance into a house; housewarming.
his own two hands the holy knot did knit,
that none but death for ever can divide;
his own two hands, for such a turn most fit,
the housing fire did kindle and provide. fairy queen.
houss. m. s. (from hots:aux, or houses, french..] covering of
cloth originally used to keep off dirt, now added to saddles as
ornamental ; housings. this word, though used by dryden,
i do not remember in any other place.
six lions' hides, with thongs together fast,
his upper part defended to his waist;
and where in an ended, the continu'd vest,
spread on his back, the hous, and trappings of a beast. dryd.
how. adv. [pu, saxon; hoe, dutch.]
1. in what manner; to what degree.
how long wit thou refuse to humble thyself before me?
exodus.
how much better is it to get wisdom than gold 2 and to get
understanding, rather to be chosen than silver ? proverbs.
h.w oft is the candle of the wicked put out? and how oft
conseth their destruction upon them job.
o how love i thy law it is my meditation. psalins.
how many children's plaints, and mother's crics |
how many woful widows left to bow
to sad disgrace daniel’s civil war.
consider into how many differing substances it may be ana-
lysed by the fire. boyle.
2. in what manner.
mark'd you not,
how that the guilty kindred of the queen
look'd pale, when they did hear of clarence’ death shak.
prosecute the means of thy deliverance
by ransom, or how else. milton's mgonisłes.
we examine the why and the how of things. l'e//range.
'tis much in our power how to live; but not at all when
or how to die. l'e/orange.
it is pleasant to see how the small territories of this little re-
publick are cultivated to the best advantage. addison an italy.
3. for what reason; from what cause.
how now, my love? why is your cheek so pale
fhow chance the roses there do fade so fast 2 shakespeare.
how is it thou hast found it so quickly gen. xxvii. io.
4. by what means.
men would have the colours of birds feathers, if they
could tell how ; or they will have gay skins instead of gay
clothes. bacon's natural history.
5. in what state.
for how shall i go up to my father ? gen. xliv. 34.
whence am i forc'd, and whither am i born ?
how, and with what reproach shall i return ? dryden's zn.
6. it is used in a sense marking proportion or correspondence.
behold, he put no trust in his servants, how much less in
them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the
dust 2 job, iv. 19.
a great division fell among the nobility, so much the more
dangerous by how much the spirits were more active and high.
hayward.
by how much they would diminish the present extent of
the sea, so much they would impair the fertility, and fountains
and rivers of the earth. bently.
7. it is much used in exclamation.
how are the mighty failed ! sam.
how doth the city fit solitary as a widow ! lam. i. 1.
8. in an affirmative sense, not easily explained; that so it is; that.
thick clouds put us in some hope of land, knowing how
that part of the south-sea was utterly unknown, and might
have islands or continents. bacon.
hoo [how be it..] nevertheless; notwithstanding;
iiow be. yet; however. not now in use.
siker thou speak'st like a lewd lorrel,
of heaven to deemen so,
howbe i am but rude and borrel,
yet nearer ways i know. spensor.
things so ordained are to be kept, howbeit not necessarily,
any longer than 'till there grow some urgent cause to ordain
the contrary. płocker.
there is a knowledge which god hath always revealed
unto them in the works of nature : this they honour and
esteem highly as profound wisdom, howbeit this wisdom saveth
them not. płooker.
there was no army transmitted out of england, howbeit
vol. i.
the, english colonies in ireland did win ground upon the
irish, - davies on ireland.
how bye. [contrasted from how do ye.] in what state is your
health a message of civility.
| now write no letters but of plain business, or plainbow.ry',
to those few i am forced to correspond with. pope.
howe’ver, adv. [how and ever.]
i. in whatsoever manner; in whatsoever degree.
. this ring he holds
in most rich choice; yet in his idle fire,
to buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
howe'er repented of. shakespeare.
to trace the ways j.
of highest agents, deem'd however wise. milton.
2. at all events; happen what will; at least.
our chief end is to be freed from all, if it may be, however
from the greatest evils; and to enjoy, if it may be, all good,
however the chiefest. - tillotson.
3. nevertheless ; notwithstanding; yet.
in your excuse your love does little sly;
you might howe'er have took a fairer wiy. dryden,
its views are bounded on all sides by several ranges of moun-
tains, which are however at so great a distance, that they leave
a wonderful variety of beautiful prospects. addison on italy.
i do not build my reasoning wholly on the case of persect-
tion, however i do not exclude it. atterbury.
few turn their thoughts to examine how those diseases in a
state are bred, that hasten its end; which would, however, be
a very useful enquiry. swift.
4. to some of these meanings this word may be commonly re-
duced, but its power is sometimes almost evanescent.
to how l. v. n. [huglen, dutch ; ululo, latin.]
1. to cry as a wolf or dog.
methought a legion of foul fiends
environ'd me, and hows...! in mine ears
such hideous crics, that with the very noise
i trembling wak'd. shakespeare's richard iii.
if wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,
thou should'it have said, go, porter, turn the key. shakesp.
he found him in a desert land, and in the waste hows.g
wilderness. - deuter. xxxii. io.
as when a sort of wolves infest the night,
with their wild howlings at fair cynthia's light. waller.
hard as his native rocks, cold as his sword,
fierce as the wolves that howl"d around his birth; -
he hates the tyrant, and the suppliant scorns. smith.
2. to utter cries in distress. - - -
therefore will i howl, and cry out for all moab. jar. xlviii.
the damned use that word in hell,"
howlings attend it. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
each new morn -
new widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
strike heaven on the face. shakespeare's macbeth.
i have words
that would be howl"d out in the desart air,
where hearing should not catch them. shakoff. mudah.
the noise grows louder still:
rattling of armour, trumpets, drums and ataballes;
and sometimes peals of shouts that rend the heav'us,
like victory: then groans again, and howlings
like those of vanquish'd men. dryden's spanish fryar.
3. to speak with a belluine cry or tone.
peace, monster, peace! go tell thy horrid tale
to savages, and howl it out in desarts
4. it is used poetically of many noises loud and horrid.
howl. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the cry of a wolf or dog.
murther,
alarm'd by his sentinel the wolf,
whose howl’s his watch. shakespeare's macbeth.
these and the like rumours are no more than the last howl;
of a dog diffected alive. swift.
2. the cry of a human being in horrour. o
she raves, she runs with a distracted pace,
and fills with horrid howls the publick place. dryden's en.
howsoev er. adv. [how and soever.]
1. in what manner soever. , see however.
berosus, who, after moses, was one of the most ancient,
howsoever he hath been since corrupted, doth in the substance
of all agree. raleigh's hylory.
2. although. *
the man doth fear god, howsoeverit seems not in him. shak.
to hox. v. a. [from pox, saxon.] to hough 5 to ham-string.
thou art a coward, -
which hoxes honesty behind, restraining. - -
from course required. shakoff. winter's tal.
lodronius, perceiving the old soldier's meaning, alighted,
phillips.
and with his sword hoxed his horse, saying aloud, this day,
valiant soldiers, shall you have me both your general and fel-
low soldier, fighting on foot as one of yourselves. knolles.
hoy. n.s.. [hou, old french.] a large boat sometimes with
one deck.
11 o he
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1042</div><p class="text">h u e
h u g.
he sent to germany, strange aid to rear;
from whence effoons arrived here three hoy: • *
qf saxons, whom he for his safety employs. firy queen.
to define a barge and hoy, which are between a boot and
a ship, is hard. j/atts’s logick.
hu’bbub. m. s. [i know not the etymology, unless it be from
*p, up, or hobnob.] a tumult; a riot.
people pursued the business with all contempt of the go-
vernment; and in the hubbub of the first day there appeared
nobody of name or reckoning, but the aetors were really of
the dregs of the people. clarendon.
an universal hubbub wild
of stunning sounds, and voices all confus'd,
borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear -
with loudest vehemence. milton's paradis. loft.
why wolves raise a hubbub at her, -
and dogs howl when she shines in water. hudibras.
hvokaback. m. s. a kind of linen on which the figures are
raised.
hu cklebacked. adj. [hocker, german, a bunch, and back.]
crooked in the shoulders.
hocklebone. m. s. [from hucken, dutch, to fit down.] the
hipbone. -
hu'ckste r. "...s...[ho, german, a pedlar; hocksler, a she-
#::::::::: pedlar.]
1. one who sells goods by retail, or in small quantities; a pedlar.
there cannot be a more ignominious trade than the bein
huco!ers to such vile merchandise. government of the tongue.
god deliver the world from such guides, or rather such
hucosers of souls, the very shame of religion. south.
should thy shoe wrench aside, down, down you fall,
and overturn the scolding huo/ler's stasi,
the scolding huo/ler shaft not o'er tho. moan,
but pence expect for nuts and pears o'erthrown. gay.
there should be a confederacy of all servants, to drive
those china huosiers from the doofs. swift.
those huck/lerers or money-jobbers will be found necessary,
if this brass money is made current. swift.
2. a trickish mean fellow.
now the ape wanted his *&amp;^er man. hubbard", tal.
to hu'ckster. v. n. [from the noun..] to deal in petty
bargains.
they must pay a shilling, for changing their piece into fil-
vos, to some huo/loring fellow who follow. that trade. swift.
to hu’ddle. v. a. [probably from hood.]
i. to dress up close so as not to be discovercd; to mobble.
2. to put on carelessly in a hurry.
at twelve she rose with much ado; -
her cloaths were hudd"d on by two. prior.
now all in haste they huddle on
their hoods, their cloaks, and get them gone. swift.
3. to cover up in haste.
4. to perform in a hurry.
have given much *pplication to this poem: this is not al
play huddled up in haste. dryden.
when continu'd rain
the lab’ring husband in his house restrain,
let him forecast his work with timely care,
which else is huddled when the skies are fair.
dryden's virgil.
5. to throw together in confusion.
our adversary, **ing several suppositions together, and
that in doubtful and general terms, makes a medley and con-
fusion. locke.
** hupple. v. n. to come in a crowd or hurry.
glance an eye of pity on his losses,
that have of late so huai. on his back,
enough to press a royal merchant down. shakespeare.
on answered after his blunt and audding manner. bacon.
thyrsis, whose artful strains have oft delay'd
the huddling brook to hear his madrigal,
and sweeten’d “very muskrose of the dale. milton.
heir eyes are more imperfect than others; for they will
on against things, and, *uddling forwards, fall from high
places. brown's pulgar errours.
huddl.e. n.s. [from the verb.] crowd; tumult; confusion;
with obscurity. -
that the aristotelian philosophy is a huddle of words and
terms insignificant, has bo. censure of the wisest. gao,
your carrying busines. in a huddle,
has forc'd our rulers to new-model. hudibras.
nature doth nothing in a huddl. l’estrange.
he understanding sees nothing distinaly in things remote,
and in a huddle. locke.
everal *y.answers were made to my question, which
entertained us 'till bed-time, and filled my mind with a huddle
of ideas.
addison.
hue. n: s [blepe, saxon,
i. colour; or j
- for never in that land
face of fair lady she before did view,
or that "read lyon's look he. in deadly hue. spensor.
to add another hue unto the ra
is wasteful and ridiculous excess. s
flow’rs of all hoc, and without thom hałoff. king jih.
* - the rose,
to whom the angel, with , smile that
inbow,
silo.
celestial rosy red, sovo's proper hue, glow'd
answer'd. x - milton's parado i
your's is much of the camelion h st lyft.
- - - lit’
to change the die with distant view."
2. [huee, french..] a clamour; a legal pursuit. *
-given to the country. it is ooonly joined with o alar
hus and cry, villain, go! assist *; knight, i am. d
fly, run, hue and oys villain, i am und, 3. undone:
immediately comes a hue and c
that had takes a purse upon the road. e
if you should hiss, he swears he'll his as high: jiraig,
ao, like a culprit, join tho cry. §h;
do;
the owe and cry went after jack, to apprehend to:
or alive, wherever he could be found. arbuthnot, john i.
* d'lis,
huer. n. s. shier, french, to cry..] one wh
to call out to others.
they lie hovering upon the coast, and are
balker or huer, who standeth on the cliff-fide, an
discerneth the course of the pilchard. ca
huff. m. / [from have, or *ven, swelled: he is huffida i.
*pers. so in some provinces. still say the breas, j
when it begins to heave or ferment: huff, therefore, may i.
ferment. to be in a &amp;off is then to be in a jormint, as we
now speak.j
i. swell of sudden anger or arrogance.
quoth ralpho, honour's but a word
to swear by, only in a lord;
in others it is but a huff,
to vapour with instead of proof.
his frowns kept multitudes in awe,
before the bluster of whose huff
all bats, as in a storm, flew off. hudibra.
we have the apprehensions of a change to keep ach:
upon us in the very his of our greatness. l'elango.
a spaniard was wonderfully upon the huff about his ex.
traction. l'ehange.
no man goes about to enshare or circumvent anotherina
passion, to lay trains, and give secret blows in a present
huff. south,
2. a wretch swelled with a false opinion of his own value,
as for you, colonel */-cap, we shall try before a dol
magistrate who's the greater plotter. dryden's spanish for.
lewd shallow-brained *off make atheism and contemptof
*igion the sole badge and haracter of wit. south.
7% huff. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to swell; to puff.
in many wild birds the diaphragm may easily behift up
with air, and blown in at the windpipe, grow.
2. to hector; to treat withinsolenco arrogance, or brutality.
the commissioner at magdalen college said to dr. hough,
you must not presume to ous. eachard,
7% huf f. v. n. to bluster; to storm; to bounce; to swell
with indignation or pride.
a hossing, shining, flatt’ring, cringing coward,
a cankerworm of peace, was rais'd above him. otway,
a thief and justice, fool and knave,
ose busines is
directed by a
dfrom these
hidiro.
a *offing officer and slave. huiras,
huffing to cowards, fawning to the brave, s
to knaves a fool, to cred"lous fools a knave. rosamo.
this senseless arrogant conceit of theirs made them ".
the doctrine of repentance, as a thing below o osils".
now what's his end?' o charming go, say! dryden
what, a fifth act to crown his huffing play; . . o
what a small pittance of reason o 1s mixc .
those huffing opinions they are swelled with. *a*-
when fog received john's message, she hoff:4 *:
like the devil. arbuthnot's history of john
huffer... n.s.. [from huff..] a blufferer; a bully.
nor have i hazarded my art
to be expos'd i' th' end to suffer, ihrds,
by such a braggadocio hoffer. - o:
huffish. adj. [from huff.] arrogant; insolent; o,
huo fishly, adv, [from soft.] with arrogant p
with bullying bluster. -
ho. m. s. petulance; o o
72 hug. v. a. spesian, saxon, to hedge, to inclose.
i. to press close in an embrace.
he bewept my fortune, short.
and hugg’d me in his arms. count had
what wo not he do now to hug the so
given him so admirable a serenade s
ev’n in that urn their brother they conses, ress. dry".
and hug it in their arms, and to their boom so would
king xerxes was enamoured upon o cosimplio.
hug and kiss. (1/"
2. to fondle; to treat with tenderness.
i, under fair pretence of friendly .
and well-plac'd words of glozing courtesy, bated
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1043</div><p class="text">h u m
baited with reasons not unplausible,
win me into the easy-hearted man,
and hug him into snares. milton.
we hug deformities, if they bear our names. glanville.
admire yourself,
and, without rival, hug your darling book. roscommon.
though they know that the flatterer knows the falsehood
of his own flatteries, yet they love the impostor, and with
both arms hug the abuse. south.
mark with what joy he bugs the dear discovery' rowe.
3. to hold fast.
age makes us most fondly hug and retain the good things of
life, when we have the least prospect of enjoying them. alterb.
4. to gripe in wrestling.
hu g. m. s. (from the noun.]
1. close embrace.
why these close hugs 2 i owe my shame to him.
2. a particular gripe in wrestling, called a cornish hug.
huge. adj. [hiogh, high, dutch..]
1. vaft; immense.
let the state of the people of god, when they were in the
house of bondage, and their manner of serving god in a
itrange land, be compared with that which canaan and jeru-
salem did afford ; and who secth not what huge difference there
was between them : hooker.
this space of earth is so hage, as that it equalleth in great-
ness not only asia, europe and africa, but america. abbot.
2. very great. -
the mountain huge.
part, huge of bulk |
wallowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait,
tempest the ocean; there leviathan
huges of living creatures, in the deep
stretch'd like a promontory, sleeps or swims,
and seems a moving land.
3. great even to deformity or terribleness.
the patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder. shaksp.
through forests huge, and long unravell'd heaths,
with desolation brown he wanders waste. thomson.
hu'gely. adv. [from huge.]
1. immensely; enormously.
who cries out on pride,
that can therein tax any private party
doth it not flow as hugely as the sea
2. greatly; very much.
i am hugely bent to believe, that whenever you concern
yourselves in our affairs, it is for our good. swift.
hu geness. m. s. [from huge.]
1. enormous bulk; greatness.
2. utmost extent. not in use.
my mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness of your un-
worthy thinking. shakspeare.
hu'ggermugger. m. s. [corrupted perhaps from huger morcker,
or hug in the dark. a sorcker in danish is darkness, whence
our murky. it is written by sir thomas more, hoker moker.
hoker, in chaucer, is pervish, crosgrained, of which maker may
be only a ludicrous reduplication. hooke is likewise in ger-
man a corner, and mosy is in english dark. i know not how
to determine.] secrecy; bye-place.
now hold in higgermugger in their hand,
and all the rest do rob of goods and land.
but if i can but find them out,
where e'er th’ in huggermugger lurk,
i'll make them rue their handy-work. hudibras.
there's a distinetion betwixt what's done openly and bare-
faced, and a thing that's done in huggermugger, under a seal of
secrecy and concealment. - l’e/irange.
hu'gy. adj. [see huge.] vast; great; huge. not in use.
this hugy rock one finger's force apparently will move.
carew's survey of cornwal.
gay.
milton.
milton.
shakespeare.
hubberd's tale.
huke. m. s. [huque, fr.] a cloak.
as we were thus in conference, there came one that seemed
to be a messenger in a rich huce. bacon's new atlantis.
hul.k. m. s. shulcke, dutch ; pulc, saxon.]
1. the body of a ship.
there’s a whole merchant's venture of bourdeaux stuff in
him : you have not seen a hulk better stuffed in the hold. shak.
the custom of giving the colour of the sea to the hulks, sails,
and mariners of their spy-boats, to keep them from being dis-
covered, came from the veneti. arbuthnot.
they argo’s hulk will tax,
and scrape her pitchy sides for wax. swift.
the sooty hulk
steer'd sluggish on. thomson.
2. any thing bulky and unwieldy. this sense is still retained
in scotland: as, a hulk of a fellow.
and harry monmouth's brawn, the hulk fir john,
is prisoner to your son. shakespeare.
to hulk. v. a. to exenterate: as, to hulk a hare. ainsworth.
hull. m. s. [hulgan, gothick, to cover.]
1. the husk or integument of any thing ; the outer covering :
as, the hull of a nut covers the shell. [hule, scottish.]
2. the body of a ship; the hulk. hull and hulk are now con-
founded ; but hulk seems originally to have signified not merely
o or hull, but a whole ship of burden, heavy and
lll k.v.
'ber in their hull, our deadly bullets light,
and through the yielding planks a passage find. dryden.
so many arts hath the divine wisdom put together, only
for the hull and tackle of a thinking creature. grew.
to hull. v. n...[from the noun...] to float; to drive to and
fro upon the water without sails or rudder.
they saw a fight full of piteous strangeness; a ship, or ra-
ther the carcase of the ship, or rather some few bones of the
carcase, halling there, part broken, part burned, and part
drowned. - sidney.
will you hoist sail, fir here lies your way.
-no, good swabber, i am to hull here a little longer.
- shakespeare.
he look'd, and saw the ark hull on the flood. amilton.
people walking down upon the shore, saw somewhat come
hulling toward them. l'e/irange.
hu lly. adj. [from hull.] siliquose; husky. ainsworth.
hu'lver. n.s. holly.
save hulver and thorn, thereof flail for to make. 7 offir.
to hum. v. a. [hommelm, dutch..]
1. to make the noise of bees. -
the humming of bees is an unequal buzzing. bacon.
an airy nation flew,
thick as the humming bees that hunt the golden dew
in summer's heat. dryden.
so weary bees in little cells repose;
but if night-robbers lift the well-stor'd hive,
an humming through their waxen city grows. dryden.
2. to make an inarticulate and buzzing sound.
i think he'll hear me : yet to bite his lip,
and hum at good cominius, much unhearts me. shakes.
upon my honour, fir, i heard a humming,
and that a strange one too, which did awake me.
shakespeare.
the cloudy messenger turns me his back,
and hums; as who should say, you'll rue. shakespeare.
3. to pause in speaking, and supply the interval with an au-
dible emission of breath.
having pump'd up all his wit,
and humm'd upon it, thus he writ. hudibras.
i still acquiest,
and never humm'd and haw'd sedition,
nor snuffled treason. hudibras.
the man lay humming and hawing a good while; but, in
the end, he gave up himself to the physicians, l’e/irange.
4. to make a dull heavy noise. -
the musical accents of the indians, to us, are but inarti-
culate hummings; as are ours to their otherwise tuned organs.
glanville.
still humming on, their drowsy course they keep,
and lash’d so long, like tops, are lash'd asleep. pope.
5. to fing low.
hum half a tune. pope.
6. to applaud. approbation was commonly expressed in pub-
lick assemblies by a hum, about a century ago.
hum. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the noise of bees or insects.
to black hecat's summons
the shard-born beetle, with his drowsy hims,
hath rung night's yawning peal. shakespeare's macbeth.
nor undelightful is the ceaseless hum,
to him who muses through the woods at noon. thomson.
2. a low confused noise, as of bustling crowds at a distance.
from camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
the hum of either army stilly sounds. shakso. hen. v.
tower'd cities please us then,
and the busy hum of men.
one theatre there is of vast resort,
which whilome of requests was call'd the court;
but now the great exchange of news 'tis hight,
and full of hum and buz from noon ’till night.
3. any low dull noise.
who sat the nearest, by the words o'ercome,
slept fast; the distant nodded to the hun,
4. a pause with an inarticulate sound.
these shrugs, these hums and haws,
when you have said she's goodly, come between,
'ere you can say she's honest. shakes. 1/inter’s tole.
your excuses want some grains to make 'em current : hton
and ha will not do the business. dryden's spanish fryar.
5. in hudibras it seems used for ham.
and though his countrymen the huns,
did stew their meat between their hums,
and the horses backs o'er which they straddle,
milton.
jdryden.
pope.
and ev'ry man eat up his saddle. hudo as.
6. an expression of applause. -
you hear a hum in the right place. speciator.
hum. interjec. a found implying doubt and deliberation.
6
let
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1044</div><p class="text">h u m
h u m
let not your ears despise the heaviest sound
that ever yet they heard.
—hum ! i guess at it.
see sir robert—hum !
and never laugh for all my life to come.
hu’man. adj. [humanus, lat. humain, fr.]
1. having the qualities of a man.
it will not be asked whether he be a gentleman born, but
whether he be a human creature? - swift.
2. belonging to man.
the king is but a man as i am : the violet smells to him as
it doth to me; all his senses have but human conditions. shak.
for man to tell how human life began
shakespeare's macbeth.
pope.
is hard; for who himself beginning knew milton.
thee, serpent, subtil'st beast of all the field,
i knew ; but not with human voice indu'd. milton.
intuitive knowledge needs no probation, nor can have any,
this being the highest of all human certainty. locke.
human e. adj. [humaine, fr. j kind ; civil; benevolent ;
good-natured.
love of others, if it be not spent upon a few, doth natu-
rally spread itself towards many, and maketh men become hu-
mane and charitable. - bacon.
envy, malice, covetousness and revenge are abolished: a
new race of virtues and graces, more divine, more moral,
more humane, are planted in their stead. spratt.
huma(nely. adv. [from humane.] kindly ; with good-nature.
if they would yield us the superfluity, while it were whole-
some, we might guess they relieved us humanely. shakespeare.
hu’manist. m. s. [humanisie, fr.] a philologer ; a gramma-
rian: a term used in the schools of scotland.
humanity.. n.s.. [humanite, fr. humanitas, lat.]
1. the nature of man.
look to thyself; reach not beyond humanity. sidney.
a rarer spirit never did steer humanity. shakespeare.
the middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the extre-
mity of both ends. shakespeare.
to preserve the hebrew intire and uncorrupt, there hath
been used the highest caution humanity could invent. brown.
2. humankind; the collective body of mankind.
if he can untie those knots, he is able to teach all humanity,
and will do well to oblige mankind by his informations. glanv.
3. benevolence; tenderness.
all men ought to maintain peace, and the common offices
of humanity and friendship in diversity of opinions. locke.
how few, like thee, enquire the wretched out,
and court the offices of soft humanity 2
like thee reserve their raiment for the naked,
reach out their bread to feed the crying orphan,
or mix their pitying tears with those that weep
4. philology; grammatical studies.
literac.
to hu'man1ze. v. a. [humaniser, fr.] to soften ; to make
susceptive of tenderness or benevolence.
here will i paint the characters of woe,
and here my faithful tears in showers shall flow,
to humanize the flints whereon i tread. /7%tton.
was it the business of magick to humanize our natures with
compassion, forgiveness, and all the instances of the most ex-
tensive charity addison.
hu'mankind. m. s. [human and kind.] the race of man;
mankind.
blest with a taste exact, yet unconfin'd;
a knowledge both of books and humankind.
hu'manly. adv. [from human.]
1. after the notions of men; according to the power of men.
thus the present happy prospect of our affairs, humanly
speaking, may seem to promise. atterbury.
2. kindly ; with good-nature. this is now written humanely.
though learn'd, well bred; and though well bred, sincere;
modestly bold, and humanly severe. pope.
hu’m bird. m. s. [from hum and bird...] the humming bird.
all ages have conceived the wren the least of birds, yet
our own plantations have shewed us one far less; that is, the
rowe.
in scotland, humaniores
pope.
hunbird, not much exceeding a beetle. brown.
hu'mbe. e. adj. [humble, fr. humilis, lat.]
1. not proud ; modest; not arrogant.
and mighty proud to humble weak does yield. spensor.
now we have shewn our power,
let us seem humbler after it is done,
than when it was a-doing.
thy humble servant vows obedience,
and faithful service, 'till the point of death. shak. h. vi.
we should be as humille in our imperfeotions and fins as
christ was in the fulness of the spirit, great wisdom, and
perfect life. taylor's rule of living holy.
you, if an humble husband, may request,
shakesp. coriolanus.
provide and order all things for the best. dryden.
ten thousand trifles light as these,
nor can my rage nor anger move :
she should be him!le, who would please;
and she must suffer, who can love. prior.
2.
2. low; not high ; not great.
th’ example of the heav'nly lark,
thy fellow-poet, cowley, mark 1
above the skies let thy proud musick sound,
thy humble nest build on the ground. cowley.
denied what ev'ry wretch obtains of fate,
an humble roof and an obscure retreat. 17sldon.
ah! prince, hadst thou but known the joys which dwell
with humbler fortunes, thou wouldstcurse thy royalty! rowe.
far humbler titles suit my lost condition. smith.
to hu'mble. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. to make humble; to make submissive; to make to bow
down with humility.
take this purse, thou whom the heaven's plagues
have humbled to all strokes. shakesp. king lear.
the executioner
falls not the axe upon the humbled neck,
but first begs pardon. shakesp. as you like it.
humble yourselves under the mighty hand of god, that he
may exalt you. i pet. v. 6.
hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart. 2 chron.
why do i humble thus myself, and suing
for peace, reap nothing but repulse and hate milton.
let the sinner put away the evil of his doings, and humble
himself by a speedy and sincere repentance : let him return to
god, and then let him be assured that god will return to him.
rogers.
2. to crush; to break; to subdue ; to mortify. o
yearly injoin'd, some say, to undergo
this annual humbling certain number'd days,
to dash their pride and joy, for man seduc’d. milton.
we are pleased, by some implicit kind of revenge, to see
him taken down and humbled in his reputation, who had so
far raised himself above us. addison.
the mistress of the world, the seat of empire,
the nurse of heroes, the delight of gods,
that humbled the proud tyrants of the earth. addis. cato.
men that make a kind of insult upon society, ought to be
humbled as disturbers of the publick tranquillity. freeholder.
fortune not much of humbling me can boast;
though double tax’d, how little have i lost
3. to make to condescend. -
this would not be to condescend to their capacities, when
he humbles himself to speak to them, but to lose his design in
speaking. - locke.
4. to bring down from an height. -
in process of time the highest mountains may be humbled
into valleys; and again, the lowest valleys exalted into moun-
tains. ahaaewill on providince.
hu’meleeee. m. s. [hum and bee. what may be the true ety-
mology of this word, i am in doubt. the humblebee is known
to have no sting. the scotch call a cow without horns an
humble cow ; so that the word seems to signify inermis, wanting
the natural weapons. dr. beattie..] a buzzing wild bee.
the honeybags steal from the humblebees,
and for night tapers crop their waxen thighs. shakespeare.
this puts us in mind once again of the humblebees and the
tinderboxes. atterbury.
humble be e. m. s. an herb. ainsworth.
humble bee eater. m. s. a fly that eats the humblebee. ains.
humble ness. n.s.. [from humble.] humility; absence of pride.
with how true humblenes;
they look’d down to triumph over pride 1 sidney.
i am rather with all subjected humblends to thank her ex-
cellencies, since the duty thereunto gave me rather heart to
save myself, than to receive thanks. sidney.
it was answered by us all, in all possible humblenes; ; but yet
with a countenance, that we knew that he spoke it but mer-
rily. bacon.
pope.
a grain of glory, mixt with humbleness,
cures both a fever and lethargickness. herbert.
hu'meler. m. s. [from humble.] one that humbles or subdues
himself or others.
hu'mblemouthed. adj. [humble and mouth.] mild; meek.
you are meek and humblemouth'd; but your heart
is cramm'd with arrogancy, spleen and pride. shakesfeare.
hu'mble plant. n. s. a species of sensitive plant.
the humbleplant is so called, because, as soon as you touch
it, it prostrates itself on the ground, and in a short time elevates
itself again: it is raised in hotbeds. martim.r.
hu’mbles. m. s. entrails of a deer.
hu'meless. n.s.. [from humble.] humbleness; humility. ob-
solete. -
and with meek humbless, and afflicted mood,
pardon for thee, and grace for me intreat.
hu'mbly. adv. [from humble.]
1. without pride; with humility; modestly ; with timorous
modesty.
speos. r.
they were us’d to bend,
to send their smiles before them to achilles,
to come humbly as they us’d to creep to holy altars.
shakosłcare.
here
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1045</div><p class="text">h u m
h u m
here the tam'd euphrates humbly glides,
and there the rhine submits her swelling tides.
write him down a slave, who, humbly proud,
with presents begs preferments from the crowd.
in midst of dangers, fears, and death,
thy goodness i'll adore; -
and praise thee for thy mercies past,
and humbly hope for more.
2. without height; without elevation.
humdrum. adj. [from hum, drone, or humming drone..] dull;
dronish ; stupid.
shall we, quoth she, stand still humdrum,
and see stout bruin all alone,
by numbers basely overthrown hudibrar.
i was talking with an old humdrum fellow, and, before i
had heard his story out, was called away by business. addison.
to hume'ct. v. a. [humed to, lat. humecter, fr.]
to hume"ctate. } to wet; to moisten.
the nile and niger do not only moisten and contemperate
the air by their exhalations, but refresh and humectate the
earth by their annual inundations. brown.
her rivers are divided into sluices, to humediate the bordering
soil. - howel's vocal forest.
the medicaments are of a cool humedling quality, and not
too much astringent. //iseman's surgery.
humectation. m. s. [humediation, fr. from bumediate.] the
act of wetting ; moistening.
plates of brass, applied to a blow, will keep it down from
swelling : the cause is repercussion, without humolation, or
entrance of any body. bacon's natural history.
that which is concreted by exsiccation, or expression of
humidity, will be resolved by humeciation, as earth and clay.
- brown's vulgar errours.
hu'meral. adj. [humeral, fr. from humerus, lat..] belong-
ing to the shoulder.
the largest crooked needle should be used, with a ligature,
in taking up the humeral arteries in amputation. sharp.
humicubation. n.s.. [humi and cubo, lat.] the aet of
lying on the ground.
fasting and sackcloth, and ashes and tears, and humicuba-
tions, used to be companions of repentance. bramhall.
hu’mid. adj. [humide, fr. humidus, lat..] wet; moist;
watery.
iris there, with humid bow,
waters the odorous banks that blow
flowers of more mingl’d hue
drydon.
dryden.
addison.
than her purpled scarff can shew. milton.
the queen, recover'd, rears her humid eyes,
and first her husband on the poop espies. dryden.
if they slip easily, and are of a fit size to be agitated by
heat, and the heat is big enough to keep them in agitation,
the body is fluid ; and if it be apt to stick to things, it is
humid. - newton's opticks.
humi'dity. n.s.. [humidite, fr. from humid.] that quality
which we call moisture, or the power of wetting other bodies.
it differs very much from fluidity, depending altogether on the
congruity of the component particles of any liquor to the
pores or surfaces of such particular bodies as it is capable of
adhering to. thus quicksilver is not a moist liquor, in re-
spect to our hands or clothes, and many other things it will
not stick to ; but it may be called so in reference to gold, tin,
or lead, to whose surfaces it will presently adhere. and even
water itself, that wets almost every thing, and is the great
ftandard of humidity, is not capable of wetting every thing;
for it stands and runs easily off in globular drops on the leaves
of cabbages, and many other plants; and it will not wet the
feathers of ducks, swans, and other water-fowl. $2hincy.
we'll use this unwholsome humidity, this gross watry pum-
pion. shakespeare.
oblesfing-breeding sun, draw from the earth
rotten humidity: below thy fister's orb
infect the air. shakesp. timon of athens.
young animals have more tender fibres, and more humidity,
than old animals, which have their juices more exalted and
relishing. arbuthnot on diet.
umiliation. m.s. [french.]
1. descent from greatness; act of humility.
the former was an humiliation of deity, the latter an humi-
iiation of manhood; for which cause there followed upon the
latter an exaltation of that which was humbled; for with
power he created the world, but restored it by obedience.
iizoker.
thy humiliation shall exalt
with thee thy manhood also to this throne. milton.
2. mortification, external expression of fin and unworthiness.
john fared poorly, according unto the apparel he wore,
that is, of camel's hair; and the doctrine he preached was
humiliation and repentance. brown's jougar errours.
with tears
watering the ground, and with our sighs the air
frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek.
vol. i. -
milton.
3. abatement of pride. - -
it may serve for a great lesson of humiliation to mankind, to
behold the habits and passions of men trampling over interest,
friendship, honour, and their own personal safety, as well as
that of their country. - swift.
humility. m. s. [humilite, fr.] - -
i. freedom from pride; modesty; not arrogance. -
when we make profession of our faith, we stand; when
we acknowledge our sins, or seek unto god for favour, we
fall down; because the gesture of constancy becometh us best
in the one, in the other the behaviour of humility. płooker.
i do not know that englishman alive,
with whom my soul is any jot at odds, .
more than the infant that is born to-night;
i thank my god for my humility.
shakes. richard iii.
what the height of a king tempteth to revenge, the humi-
lity of a christian teacheth to forgive. . . king charles.
the humility of the style gained them many friends. claren.
there are some that use
humility to serve their pride, and seem
humble upon their way, to be the prouder
at their wish'd journey's end. denham's sophy.
it is an easy matter to extol humility in the midst of honours,
or to begin a fast after dinner. south.
as high turrets, for their airy steep, -
require foundations in proportion deep ;
and lofty cedars as far upwards shoot,
as to the nether heavens they drive the root;
so low did her secure foundation lye,
she was not humble, but humility.
2. act of submisfion. -
with these humilities they satisfied the young king, and by
their bowing and bending avoided the present storm. davies.
hu’mmer. m. s. [from hum.] that which hums; an ap-
plauder. ainsworth.
hu'moral. adj. [from humour.] proceeding from the hu-
mours. - -
this sort of fever is comprehended under continual humoral
fevers. harvey on consumptions.
hu'morist. m. s. [humoristo, italian ; humorisle, fr.]
1. one who conducts himself by his own fancy; one who gra-
tifies his own humour.
the notion of a humorist is one that is greatly pleased, or
greatly displeased, with little things; his actions seldom di-
rected by the reason and nature of things. watts.
this humoris keeps to himself much more than he wants,
dryden.
and gives his superfluities to purchase heaven. addison.
2. one who has odd conceits. -
the wit sinks imperceptibly into an humors. speciator.
3. one who has violent and peculiar pations.
by a wise and timous inquisition the peccant humours and
humorists must be discovered and purged, or cut off: mercy,
in such a case, in a king, is true cruelty. . bacon to williers.
hu'morous. adj. [from humour.]
1. full of grotesque or odd images.
some of the commentators tell us, that marsya was a law-
yer who had lost his cause; others that this passage alludes to
the story of the satire marsyas, who contended with apollo,
which i think is more humorous. addison on italy.
2. capricious; irregular; without any rule but the present
whim.
i am known to be a humorous patrician; said to be some-
thing imperfect, in favouring the first complaint ; hasty and
tinder-like, upon too trivial motion. shakesp. coriolanus.
thou fortune's champion, that do'st never fight
but when her humorous ladyship is by,
to teach thee safety. shakesp. king john.
he's humorous as winter, and as sudden
as flaws congeal’d in the spring of day. shakesp. hen. iv.
o, you awake then : come away,
times be short, are made for play ;
the humorous moon too will not stay :
what doth make you thus delay : -
vast is his courage, boundless is his mind,
rough as a storm, and humorous as the wind. dryden.
he that would learn to pass a just sentence on persons and
things, must take heed of a fanciful temper of mind, and an
humorous conduct in his affairs. izatis's logi, k.
3. pleasant; jocular.
thy humorous vein, thy pleasing folly,
lies all negle&amp;ted, all forgot ;
and pensive, wav'ring, melancholy,
thou dread'st and hop'st thou know'st not what.
hu'morously. adj. [from humorous.]
1. merrily ; jocosely.
a cabinet of medals juvenal calls very humorously, concism
argentum in titulas facies|ue minutas. aujon.
it has been humorously said, that some have fished the very
jakes for papers left there by men of wit. swift.
2. capiciously; whimsically.
we resolve by halves, and unadvisedly ; we resolve rashly,
sillily, or humorously, upon no reasons that will hold. casamy.
- 1 1 p hu'morouss ess.
ben. johnson.
prior.
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1046</div><p class="text">h u n
hvozor ovsness. n.s.. [from humaraus.]
i. fickleness ; capricious levity.
2. jocularity; oddness of conceit.
hu'mor some, adj. [from humour.]
1. peevish; pctuiant.
2. odd; humorous. in this sense it is less used. -
our science cannot be much improved by masquerades,
where the wit of both sexes is altogether taken up in conti-
nuing singular and humors me disguises. swift.
homossom ely. adv. [from hismosome.] peevishly ; petu-
jantly.
• humour. m. s. [humeur, fr. humor, lat.]
1. moisture. • * *
the aqueous humour of the eye will not freeze, which is
very admirable, seeing it hath the perspicuity and fluidity of
common watcr. ray on the creation.
2. the different kind of moisture in man's body, reckoned by
the old physicians to be phlegm, blood, choler, and melan-
choly, which, as they predominated, were supposed to deter-
mine the temper of mind.
believe not these suggestions, which proceed
from anguish of the mind and humours black,
that mingle with thy fancy. .
3. general turn or temper of mind.
as there is no humour, to which impudent poverty cannot
make itself serviceable; so were there enow of those of despe-
rate ambition, who would build their houses upon others
ruin. sidney.
there came a young lord, led with the humour of youth,
which ever thinks that good whose goodness he sees not. sidney.
king james, as he was a prince of great judgment, so he
was a prince of a marvellous pleasant humour: as he was go-
ing through lusen by greenwich, he asked what town it
was ; they said lusen. he asked, a good while after, what
town is this we are now in : they said still it was lusen:
then, said the king, i will be king of lusen.
bacon's apophihegms.
examine how your humour is inclin'd,
and which the ruling passion of your mind. , roscommon.
they, who were acquainted with him, know his humour to
be such, that he would never constrain himself. dryden.
in cases where it is necessary to make examples, it is the
humour of the multitude to forget the crime, and to remember
the punishment, - addison.
good humour only teaches charms to last,
milton.
still makes new conquests, and maintains the past. pope.
4. present disposition.
- it is the curse of kings to be attended
by slaves, that take their humours for a warrant
to break into the blood-house of life. shakespeare.
another thought her nobler humour fed. fairfax.
their humours are not to be won,
but when they are impos'd upon. hudibrar.
tempt not his heavy hand;
but one submissive word which you let fall,
will make him in good humour with us all. dryden.
5. grotesque imagery; jocularity ; merriment.
- in conversation humour is more than wit, easiness more than
knowledge. temple.
6. tendency to disease; morbid disposition.
he denied himself nothing that he had a mind to eat or
drink, which gave him a body full of humours, and made his
fits of the gout frequent and violent. temple.
the child had a humour which was cured by the waters of
glastonbury. - fielding.
7. petulance; peevishness.
is my friend all perfeotion, all virtue and discretion? has
he not humours to be endured, as well as kindnesses to be en-
joyed south.
8. a trick; a prastice.
i like not the humour of lying: he hath wronged me in
some honours: i should have borne the humour'd letter to her.
- shakespeare.
9. caprice ; whim ; predominant inclination.
in private, men are more bold in their own humours; and
in confort, men are more obnoxious to others humours; there-
fore it is good to take both. bacon.
7% hu mov r. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to gratify ; to footh by compliance.
if i had a suit to master shallow, i would humour his men;
if to his men, i would curry with master shallow. shakspeare.
if i were brutus now, and he were cassius,
he should not humour me. shakespeare.
obedience and subjection were never enjoined by god to
humour the passions, susts and vanities of those who are com-
- manded to obey our governours. swift.
you humor me, when i am sick;
why not when i am splenetick pope.
children are fond of something which strikes their fancy
most, and fullen and regardless of every thing else, if they are
not honoured in that fancy. - watts's logick.
2. to fit; to comply with.
to after age thou shalt be writ the man, -
that with smooth air could'st humour best our tongue. mist.
'tis my part to invent, and the musicians to humour that
invention. o dryden's preface to albion.
fountainbleau is situated among rocks and woods, that give
a fine variety of savage prospects: the king has humoured the
genius of the place, and only made use of so much art as is
necessary to regulate nature. addison.
hump. n.s.. [corrupted perhaps from bump. see bux. p.] the
protuberance formed by a crooked back.
these defects were mended by matches; the eyes were
opened in the next generation, and the hump fell. tatler.
hu'mpback. m. s. [hump and back.] crocked back; high
shoulders.
the chief of the family was born with an humpback and
very high nose. tatler.
humpba cked. adj. having a crooked back.
to hunch. v. a. [husch, german.]
i. to strike or punch with the fists.
jack's friends began to hunch and push one another: why
don't you go and cut the poor fellow down arbuthnot.
2. [ hocker, a crooked back, german.] to crook the back.
thy crooked mind within hunch'd out thy back,
and wander'd in thy limbs. dryden.
hu nch ba cked. adj. [hunch and back..] having a crooked
back.
his person deformed to the highest degree, flat-nosed, and
hunchbacked. l'asirange.
but i more fear creon i
to take that hunchback'd monster in my arms,
th’ excrescence of a man. dryd, and lee's oedipus.
the second daughter was peevish, haggard, pale, with saucer-
eyes, a sharp nose, and hunchbacked. arbuthn. hist. of j. bull.
hu'ndred. adj. [buno, punt neb, saxon; hondard, dutch..]
the number consisting of ten multiplied by ten.
a hundred altars in her temple smoke,
a thousand bleeding hearts her pow'r invoke. dryd. an.
many thousands had seen the transactions of our saviour,
and many hundred thousands received an account of them from
the mouths of those who were eye-witnesses. addison.
hu’ndred. m. s.
1. a company, body, or colle&amp;tion confisting of an hundred.
* very few will take this proposition, that god is pleased
with the doing of what he himself commands, for an innate
moral principle : whosoever does so, will have reason to think
hundreds of propositions innate. locke.
lands, taken from the enemy, were divided into centuries
or hundreds, and distributed amongst the soldiers. arbuthnot.
2. a canton or division of a county, perhaps once containing
an hundred manors. [hundredum, low latin; hundreds, old
trench.] -
imposts upon merchants do seldom good to the king's re-
venue; for that that he wins in the hundred, he loseth in the
shire. - bacon.
for justice they had a bench under a tree, where ket sat,
and with him two of every hundred whence their companies
had been raised: here complaints were exhibited. hayward.
hundredth. adj. [punbneonzeogopa, saxon.] the ordinal
of an hundred ; the tenth ten times told.
we shall not need to use the hundredth part of that time,
which themselves bestow in making inve&amp;tives. jhooker.
if this medium is rarer within the sun's body than at its sur-
face, and rarer there than at the hundredth part of an inch from
its body, and rarer there than at the orb of saturn, i see no
reason why the increase of density should stop. newton.
hung. the preterite and part. pass of hang.
a wife so hung with virtues, such a freight,
what mortal shoulders can support | dryden's juvenal.
a room that is richly adorned, and hung round with a great
variety of pictures, strikes the eye at once. watts.
hutnger. m. s. [pungen, saxon; bonger, dutch.]
1. desire of food; the pain felt from fasting.
an uneasy sensation at the stomach for food. when the
stomach is empty, and the fibres in their natural tension, they
draw up so close as to rub against each other, so as to make
that sensation: but when they are distended with food, it is
again removed; unless when a person fasteth so long as for
want of spirits, or nervous fluid, to have those fibres grow too
flaccid to corrugate, and then we say a person has fasted away
his stomach. £uincy.
thou shalt serve thine enemies in hunger and in thirth.
deuter. xxviii. 48.
the sub-acid part of the animal spirits, being cast off by
the lower nerves upon the coats of the stomach, vellicates the
fibres, and thereby produces the sense we call hunger. grew.
something viscous, fat and oily, remaining in the stomach,
destroys the sensation of hunger. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. any violent desire.
the immaterial felicities we expest, do naturally suggest
the necessity of preparing our appetites and hungers for them,
without which heaven can be no heaven to us. decay of piety.
for hunger of my gold i dye, lory on.
to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1047</div><p class="text">h u n
h u r
to hu'nger. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to feel the pain of hunger.
my more having, would be as a sauce -
to make me hunger more. shakespeare's macbeth.
widely they gape, and to the eye they roar,
as if they hunger'd for the food they bore.
2. to defire with great eagerness; to long.
do'st thou so hunger for my empty chair,
that thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours,
before thy hour be ripe o, foolish youth,
- thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee! --
stay but a little. shakspeare's henry iv. p. ii.
- - i content me, *
and from the fling of famine fear no harm,
nor mind it, fed with better thoughts that feed
- me hung’ring more to do my father's will. milton.
hu’ngerb1 r. adj. [hunger and bit..] pained or weak-
hu'nger bitten. } ened with hunger.
his strength shall be hungerbitten.
thyself
bred up in poverty and straits at home;
lost in a desert here, and hungerbit. milton.
{{u'ngerly. adj. [from hunger.] hungry ; in want of nou-
rishment.
cowlj.
job, xviii. 12.
- his beard -
grew thin and hungerly, and seem'd to ask
his sops as he was drinking. shakespeare.
hu'ngerly. adv. with keen appetite.
you have sav'd my longing, and i feed
most hungerly on your fight. shakespeare.
they are all but stomachs, and we all but food;
they eat us hungerly, and, when they’re full,
they belch us. shakespeare.
hu'ngerstar v en. adj. [hunger and starved.] starved with
hunger ; pinched by want of food.
all my followers to th” eager foe -
turn back, and fly like ships before the wind,
or lambs pursu’d by hungerstarved wolves. shakespeare.
go, go, chear up thy hunger/larved men. shakespeare.
as to some holy house th' afflicted came,
th’ hunger/larv'd, the naked, and the lame,
want and diseases, fled before her name. dryden.
hu'ngred. adj. [from hunger.] pinched by want of food.
odours do in a small degree nourish, and we see men an
hungred love to smell hot bread. bacon.
hu’ngrily. adv. [from hungry.] with keen appetite.
thus much to the kind rural gods we owe,
who pity'd suff’ring mortals long ago;
when on harsh acorns hungrily they fed,
and gave 'em nicer palates, better bread.
hu'ngry. adj. [from hunger.]
1. feeling pain from want of food. -
that face of his the hungry cannibals
would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood.
- shakespeare.
by eating before he was hungry, and drinking before he
was dry, he was sure never to eat or drink much at a time.
temple.
they that talk thus may say that a man is always hungry,
but that he does not always feel it; whereas hunger consists in
that very sensation. - locke.
2. not fat; not fruitful; not prolifick; more disposed to draw
from other substances than to impart to them.
cassius has a lean and hungry look. shakespeare.
the more fat water will bear soap best; for the hungry wa-
ter doth kill its undtuous nature. - bacon.
in rushy grounds springs are found at the first and second
spit, and sometimes lower in a hungry gravel. mortimer.
to the great day of retribution our saviour refers us, for
reaping the fruits that we here sow in the most hungry and
barren soil. smalridge's sermons.
hunks. n. s. shunsour, sordid, islandick.] a covetous sordid
wretch ; a miser ; a curmudgeon.
the old hunks was well served, to be tricked out of a whole
hog for the securing of his puddings. l’estrange.
she has a husband, a jealous, covetous, old hunks. dryden.
irus has given all the intimations of being a close hunks,
worth money. addison.
to hunt. v. a. spunzian, saxon, from punb, a dog.]
1. to chase wild animals.
the man that once did sell the lion's skin,
while the beast liv'd, was kill'd in hunting him. shakespeare.
wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion, or fill the appetite of
the young lions : - job, xxxviii. 3).
we should single every criminal out of the herd, and hunt
him down, however formidable and overgrown; and, on the
contrary, shelter and defend virtue. addison.
2. to pursue ; to follow close.
evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him. ps. cxl.
the heart strikes five hundred sort of pulses in an hour,
and is hunted unto such continual palpitations, through anxiety,
that fain would it break. harvey on consumptions,
dryden's juv.
3. to search for. t
. not certainly affirming any thing, but by conferring of
times and monuments, i do hunt out a probability. spenser.
all that is found in books is not rightly deduced from prin-
ciples: such an examen every reader's mind is not forward to
make, especially in those who have given themselves up to a
party, and only hunt for what may favour and support the
tenets of it. - locke.
4. to direct or manage hounds in the chace.
he hunts a pack of dogs better than any, and is famous for
finding hares. addison.
to hunt. v. n.
1. to follow the chase.
when he returns from hunting, - - -
i will not speak with him. shakspeare's king lear.
esau went to the field to hunt for venison. gen. xxvii. 5.
one followed study and knowledge, and another hawking
and hunting. locke.
on the old pagan tombs masks, hunting matches, and bac-
chanals are very common. - addison on italy.
2. to pursue or search. -
very much of kin to this is the hunting after arguments to
make good one side of a question, and wholly to neglect and
refuse those which favour the other side. locke.
hunt. n.s. [from the verb.]
1. a pack of hounds. - -
the common hunt, though from their rage restrain'd
by sov’reign pow'r, her company disdain'd,
grinn'd as they pass'd. dryden’s hind and panther,
2. a chace.
the hunt is up, the morn is bright and gray;
the fields are fragrant, and the woods are green. shakes).
3. pursuit.
i’ve heard myself proclaim'd;
and by the happy hollow of a tree,
escap'd the hunt. -
hu'nter... n.s.. [from hunt.] -
i. one who chases animals for pastime or food.
if those english lords had been good hunters, and reduced
the mountains, boggs, and woods within the limits of forests,
chaces and parks, the forest law would have driven them into
the plains. davies on ireland.
down from a hill the beast that reigns in woods,
first hunter then, pursu'd a gentle brace,
goodliest of all the forest, hart and hind.
another's crimes th’ unhappy hunter bore,
glutting his father's eyes with guiltless gore. dryden's zn.
this was the arms or device of our old roman hunters; a
passage of manilius lets us know the pagan hunters had me-
leager for their patron. . addison on italy.
bold nimrod first the savage chace began,
a mighty hunter, and his game was man. * *
2. a dog that scents game or beasts of prey.
of dogs, the valu'd file
distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
the housekeeper, the hunter. shakespeare's macbeth.
hu'ntinghorn; n.s. shunting and horn.] a bugle; a horn
used to cheer the hounds.
whilst a boy, jack ran from school,
fond of his huntinghorn and pole. prior.
hoo. mos [from hunter.] a woman that follows the
cila cc, - - -
and thou thrice crowned queen of night, survey
with thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
thy huntress’ name, that my full life doth sway.
shall i call
antiquity from the old schools of greece,
to testify the arms of chastity
hence had the huntres, dian her dread bow,
fair silver-shafted queen, for ever chaste.
let old arcadia boast her ample plain,
th’ immortal huntres, and her virgin train;
nor envy windsor. pope.
homer represents diana with her quiver at her shoulder;
but at the same time he describes her as an huntris. broome,
hu'nts man. m. s. shunt and man.]
i. one who delights in the chace.
like as a huntsman, after weary chace,
seeing the game escape from him away,
sits down to rest him. spensor's sonnets.
such game, whilst yet the world was new,
the mighty nimrod did pursue:
what huntsman of our feeble race,
or dogs, dare such a monster chace?
2. the servant whose office it is to manage the chace.
apply this moral rather to the huntsman, that managed the
chace, than to the master. l’esirange.
hu’nts manshi p. m. s. [from huntsman.] the qualifications
of a hunter.
at court your fellows every day
give th’ art of rhiming, huntsmanship, or play.
hu'rdle, m. s. [bypbel, saxon.]
shai's are: king lear.
milton.
pope;
shakesp.
milon.
jvaller.
dzone.
1. a texture<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1048</div><p class="text">h u r
h u r
1. a texture of sticks woven together; a crate.
the fled, the tumbril, hurdles and the flail,
these all must be prepard. dryden's georg.
2. grate on which criminals were dragged to execution.
settle your fine joints 'gainst thursday next,
or i will drag thee on a hurdle thither, shakespeare.
the blacksmith was hanged, drawn, and quartered at ty-
burn; taking pleasure upon the hurdle, to think that he should
be famous in after times. bacon.
hurds. n.s. the refuse of hemp or flax. ainsworth.
72 h url. v. a. [from huorlt, to throw down, islandick; or,
according to skinner, from whirl.]
1. to throw with violence; to drive impetuously.
if heav'ns have any grievous plagues in store,
o, let them keep it ’till thy sins be ripe,
and then hurl down their indignation
on thee. shakespeare's richard iii.
he holds vengeance in his hand, -
to hurl upon their heads that break his law. shakespeare.
i with my nails digg'd stones out of the ground,
to hurl at the beholders of my shame. shakesp. hen. vi.
if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of
wait. - "umb. xxxv. 20.
they use both the right hand and the left in hurling stones.
chron. xii. 2.
ben. johnson.
hurlink and wit,
as madmen stones.
his darling sons,
fhurl’d headlong to partake with us, shall curse
their frail original and faded bliss. milton.
she strikes the lute; but if it sound,
threatens to hurl it on the ground. 7%aller.
- corrupted light of knowledge hurl’d
sin, death, and ignorance, o'er all the world. denham.
young phaeton,
from east to north irregularly hurl’d,
first set himself on fire, and then the world. dryd, jav,
conjure him far to drive the grecian train,
and hurl’d them headlong to their fleet and main. pope.
2. to utter with vehemence. [hurler, french, to make an
howling or hideous noise.] this sense is not in use.
the glad merchant that does view
his ship far come from watry wilderness,
he hurls out vows. spenser.
highly they rag’d against the highest, -
hurling defiance toward the vault of heav'n, milton.
3. to play at a kind of game.
hurling taketh its denomination from throwing of the ball,
and is of two sorts; to goals, and to the country: for hurling
to goals there are fifteen or thirty players, more or less, chosen
out on each side, who strip themselves, and then join hands in
ranks, one against another: out of these ranks they match
themselves by pairs, one embracing another, and so pass away;
every of which couple are to watch one another during this
play. carew's survey of cornwall.
hurl. m.s.. [from the verb.] tumult; riot; commotion.
he in the same hurl murdering such as he thought would
withstand his desire, was chosen king. . knolles.
hu'rlb.a.t. m. s. [hurl and bat.] whirlbat. ainsworth.
hu'rler. m. s. [from hurl.] one that plays at hurling.
the hurlers must hurl man to man, and not two set upon
one man at on ce. - carew's survey of cornwall.
hu’rlwin d. m. s. [hurl and wind.] a whirlwind; a violent
gust. a word not in use. - -
like scatter'd down by howling eurus blown,
by rapid hurlwinds from his mansion thrown. sandys.
hu’rly. }". s. [from the french; hurlubrelu, inconsi-
hurlyburly. $ derately..] tumult; commotion; bustle.
winds take the ruffian billows by the top,
that with the hurly death itself awakes. shakespeare.
poor discontents,
which gape and rub the elbow at the news -
of hurlyburly innovation. shakespeare.
methinks, i see this hurly all on foot. shakespeare.
all places were filled with tumult and hurlybury, every man
measured the danger by his own fear; and such a pitiful cry
was in every place, as in cities presently to be besieged.
knolles's history.
hu’rricane. l n.s. shuracan, spanish; ouragan, french..]. a
#.} violent storm, such as is often experienced in
the western hemisphere.
blow winds, and crack your cheeks;
your cataracts and hurricanoes spout, shakesp. k. lear.
a storm or hurricano, though but the force of air, makes a
flrange havock where it comes. burnet's theory.
a poet who had a great genius for tragedy, made every
man and woman too in his plays stark raging mad: all was
tempestuous and blustering;
together at every word; a mere hurricane from the beginning
to the end. dryd.u.
the ministers of state, who gave us law,
in corners with selected friends withdraw ;
4.
heaven and earth were coming.
there, in deaf murmurs, solemnly are wise,
whisp'ring like winds, ere hurricanes arise.
so, where our wide numidian wastes extend,
sudden th' impetuous hurricanes descend,
wheel through the air, in circling eddies play,
tear up the sands, and sweep whole plains away. adlison.
hu'rrier. m. s. [from hurry..] one that hurries; a disturber.
mars, that horrid hurrier of men. chapman.
to hu'rry. v. a. [penglan, to plunder, saxon : hurs was like-
wise a word used by the old germans in urging their horses
to speed ; but seems the imperative of the verb.] to hatten;
to put into precipitation or confusion; to drive confusedly.
your nobles will not hear you; but are gone
to offer service to your enemy;
and wild amazement hurries up and down
the little number of your doubtful friends.
for whom all this haste
drydo.
shakespeare:
of midnight march, and hurry'd meeting here 2 milton.
impetuous lust hurries him on to satisfy it. south.
that hurry'd o'er
such swarms of english to the neighb'ring shore. dryden.
a man has not time to subdue his passions, establish his soul
in virtue, and come up to the perfection of his nature, before
he is hurried off the stage. addison.
stay these sudden gusts of passion,
that hurry you away. rowe's royal convert.
if a council be called, or a battle fought, you are not
coldly informed, the reader is hurried out of himself by the
poet's imagination. pope's preface to the iliad.
to hurry. v. n. to move on with precipitation.
did you but know what joys your way attend,
you would not hurry to your journey's end. drydon.
hu'rry. n.s.. [from the verb.] tumult; precipitation; com-
in otion.
among all the horrible hurries in england, ireland was then
almost quiet. hayward.
it might have pleased him in the present heat and hurry of
his rage; but must have displeased him infinitely in the sedate
refle&amp;tion. south.
after the violence of the hurry and commotion was over,
the water came to a state somewhat more calm. isoodward.
ambition raises a tumult in the soul, it inflames the mind,
and puts it into a violent hurry of thought. addison.
a long train of coaches and six ran through the heart, one
after another, in a very great hurry. addison.
i do not include the life of those who are in a perpetual hur-
ry of affairs, but of those who are not always engaged. addison.
the pavement sounds with trampling feet,
and the mixt hurry barricades the street, gay's trivia.
hurst. n.s. spynre, sax.]. a grove or thicket of trees. ains.
to hurt. v. a. preter. i hurt; part. pass. i have hurt. [pyne,
wounded, saxon; heurter, to strike, french.j
1. to mischief; to harm.
he that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death.
revelations.
virtue may be assail'd, but never hurt;
surpriz'd by unjust force, but not enthrall’d. milton.
the adonis of the sea is so called, because it is a loving and
innocent fish, that hurts nothing that has life. walton.
2. to wound; to pain by some bodily harm.
my heart is turn'd to stone: i strike it, and it hurts my
hand. shakspeare's othello.
it breeds contempt
for herds to listen, or presume to pry,
when the hurt lion groans within his den, dryden.
3. to damage; to impair. - .
see thou hurt not the oil and wine. revelations.
hurt. n. s. [from the verb.] :
1. harm; mischief. - * -
the hurt thereby is greater than the good. spensor.
i have slain a man to my hurt. ' geness.
i found it stand there uncorreoted, as if there had been no
hurt done. baker on learning-
2. wound or bruise. -
- where is he wounded ? -
—there will be large cicatrices to shew the people: he re-
ceived seven hurts i' th' body. shakespeare's coriolanus.
carter adventured bravely, and received two great horts in
his body. hayward.
the pains of sickness and hurts, hunger, thirst and cold.
all men feel. looke.
in arms and science 'tis the same,
our rival's hurt, create our fame.
prior.
3. injury; wrong. - * - • .
why should damage grow to the hurt of the king? ezra.
hu'rter. m. s. [from hurt.] one that does harm.
hu'rtful. adj. [hurt and full.] mischievous ; pernicious.
secret neglect of our duty is but only our own hurt : one.
man's contempt of the common prayer of the church of god
may be most hurtful unto many. hooker.
the hurtful hazle in thy vineyard shun, -
nor plant it to receive the setting fun. dryden's georgio.
liv rt fully.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1049</div><p class="text">in . - - -
hu'rtfully. adv. [from hurtful..] mischievously; perniciously.
hu'rtfuln ess. m. s. [from hurtful..] mischievousness; per-
niciousness.
to hu'rtle. v. n. [heurter, french; urtare, italian.] to
clash ; to skirmish ; to run against any thing; to jostle; to
meet in shock and encounter. hanmer.
the noise of battle hurtled in the air. shakespeare.
kindness
made him give battle to the lioness,
who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling,
from miserable slumber i awak'd. shakesp. as you like it.
to hu’rtle. v. a. to move with violence or impetuosity.
this is probably the original of hurl. obsolete.
his harmful club he 'gan to hurtle high,
and threaten battle to the fairy knight. fairy queen.
hu'rtleberry. m. s. [hiort bar, danish..] bilberry; bacca
vitis idaeae.
hu'rtless. adj. [from hurt.]
1. innocent; harmless ; innoxious ; doing no harm.
unto her home he oft would go,
where bold and hurtles, many a play he tries,
her parents liking well it should be so;
for simple goodness shined in his eyes. sidney.
she joy'd to make proof of her cruelty
on gentle dame, so hurtles; and so true. fairy queen.
shorter ev'ry gasp he takes,
and vain efforts and hurtles, blows he makes. dryden's an.
2. receiving no hurt.
hu'rtlessly. adv. [from hurtles...] without harm.
your neighbours have found you so hurtlessly strong, that
they thought it better to rest in your friendship than make new
trial of your enmity. sidney.
hu'rtlessn ess. n.s.. [from hurtless.] freedom from any per-
nicious quality.
hu’sband. m. s. [hostband, master, danish, from house and
bonda, runick, a master.]
1. the correlative to wife; a man married to a woman.
thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
thy head, thy sovereign. shakes. taming of the shrew.
why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes again: he
fo takes on yonder with my husband, and so rails against all
married mankind. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
this careful husband had been long away,
whom his chaste wife and little children mourn. dryden.
the contract and ceremony of marriage is the occasion of
the denomination of relation of husband. locke.
2. the male of animals.
ev’n though a snowy ram thou shalt behold,
prefer him not in haste, for husband to thy fold. dryden.
3. an oeconomist; a man that knows and practises the methods
of frugality and profit. its signification is always modified by
some epithet implying bad or good.
edward i. shewed himself a right good husband; owner of
a lordship ill husbanded. davies on ireland.
i was considering the shortness of life, and what ill husbands
we are of so tender a fortune. collier on fame.
4. a tiller of the ground; a farmer.
husband's work is laborious and hard. hubberd's tale.
i heard a great husband say, that it was a common error to
think that chalk helpeth arable grounds, bacon.
in those fields
the painful husband plowing up his ground, ae
shall find all fret with rust, both pikes and shields. hakewill.
if continu’d rain
the lab’ring husband in his house restrain,
let him forecast his work. dryden's georgicks.
to hu’s band. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to supply with an husband.
think you i am no stronger than my sex,
being so father'd and so husbanded? shak. julius casar.
if you shall prove
this ring was ever her’s, you shall as easy
prove that i husbanded her bed in florence,
where yet she never was.
in my right,
by me invested, he compeers the best.
shakespeare.
—that were the most, if he should husband you. shakesp.
2. to manage with frugality. - * .
it will be pastime passing excellent,
if it be husbanded with modesty. shakespeare.
the french, wisely husbanding the possession of a victory,
kept themselves within their trenches. bacon's henry vii.
is thou be master-gunner, spend not all -
that thou can't speak at once; but husband it,
and give men turns of speech. herbert.
3. to till ; to cultivate the ground with proper management.
a farmer cannot husband his ground, if he fits at a great
rent. - bacon.
hu’s bandless. adj. [from husband.] without an husband.
a widow, husbandless, subject to fears;
a woman, naturally born to fears. shakesp. king john.
hu's bandly. aff. [from husband.] frugal ; thrifty.
vol. i.
bare plots full of galls, if ye plow overthwart;
... and compass it then, is a hisbandly part. tosor.
howas. n. / [husband and man.] one who works in
tillage. - -
this davy serves you for good uses; he is your serving:
man, and your husbandman. shakespeare.
the mule being more swift in his labour than the ox, more
ground was allowed to the mule by the husbandman. broome,
hu's bandry. m. s. [from husband.]
1. tillage; manner of cultivating land. . . -
he began with a wild method to run over all the art of
husbandy, especially employing his tongue about well dunging
of a field. sidney.
ask'd if in husbandry he ought did know, -
to plough, to plant, to reap, to sow. hubberd's tale.
husbandry supplieth all things necessary for food. spensor.
peace hath from france too long been chas'd;
and all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
corrupting in its own fertility.
her plenteous womb
expresseth its full tilth and husbandry. shakespeare.
the seeds of virtue may, by the husbandry of christian
counsel, produce better fruit than the strength of self-nature.
- raleigh's history.
husbandry the spaniards wanting in the valleys of mexico,
could not make our wheat bear seed. raleigh.
a family governed with order will fall naturally to the
several trades of husbandry, tillage and pasturage. temple.
let any one consider the difference between an acre of land
sown with wheat, and an acre of the same land lying without
any husbandry upon it, and he will find that the improvement
of labour makes the value. locke.
2. thrift; frugality; parsimony.
there's husbandry in heaven;
the candles are all out. shakespeare's macbeth.
you have already saved several millions to the publick, and
that what we ask is too inconsiderable to break into any rules
of the strictest good husbandry. swift.
3. care of domestick affairs.
lorenzo, i commit into your hands
the husbandry and manage of my house. shakespeare.
hoshimoj. [without etymology..] silence 1 be still no
noise !
the king hath done you wrong; but bush! 'tis so.
- - shakespeare.
there's something else to do; hush and be mute,
or else our spell is marr'd. shakespeare's tempest.
hush. adj. [from the interjection.] still ; silent; quiet.
as we often see, against some storm,
a silence in the heav'ns, the rack stand still,
the bold winds speechless, and the orb below -
as hush as death. shakespeare's hamlet.
to hush. v. n. [from the interjection.] to be still ; to be
silent.
this frown'd, that fawn'd, the third for shame did blush;
another seemed envious or coy; -
another in her teeth did gnaw a rush; -
but at these strangers presence every one did hush. spensor.
to hush. v. a. to still ; to filence; to quiet; to appease.
yet can i not of such tame patience boast,
as to be husht, and nought at all to say.
it was my breath that blew this tempest up,
upon your stubborn usage of the pope;
but since you are a gentle convertite,
my tongue shall hush again this storm of war,
and make fair weather in your blust'ring land. shakespeare.
speak softly;
all's husht as midnight yet. shakespeare's tempest.
my love would speak; my duty hushes me. shakespeare.
when in a bed of straw we shrink together,
and the bleak winds shall whistle round our heads,
wilt thou then talk thus to me? wilt thou then
shakes. henry v.
shakespeare.
bush my cares thus, and shelter me with love otway.
hush'd as midnight silence go;
he will not have your acclamations now. dryden.
her sire at length is kind,
calms ev'ry storm, and hushes ev'ry wind;
prepares his empire for his daughter's ease,
and for his hatching nephews smooths the seas. drydon.
the court was hushed, and a whisper ran. addison.
to hush up. v. a.
mentioned.
this matter is hushed up, and the servants are forbid to talk
of it. - pope.
hu's hmoney, n.f. [hush and money..] a bribe to hinder inscr-
mation ; pay to secure filence.
a dext’rous steward, when his tricks are found,
hushmoney sends to all the neighbours round;
his master, unsuspicious of his pranks,
pays all the cost, and gives the villain thanks. swift.
husk. n. s. [hullsh, dutch, or husoken, from huys...] the
outmost integument of fruits.
- 11 q.
to suppress in silence; to forbid to b:
do<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1050</div><p class="text">h u z
h y d
do but behold yon poor and starved band,
and your fair shew shall suck away their souls, -
leaving them but the shales and husks of men. shakespeare.
most seeds, in their growing, leave their husk or rind about
the root. bacon's natural history.
thy food shall be
the fresh brook mussels, withered roots, and husks
wherein the acotn cradled. shakespeare's tempoff.
fruits of all kinds, in coat
rough, or smooth rind, or bearded husks, or shell
she gathers ; tribute large and on the board
heaps with unsparing hand. milton.
some steep their seeds, and some in cauldrons boil
o'er gentle fires; the exuberant juice to drain,
and swell the flatt’ring husks with fruitful grain.
some when the press
has drain'd the pulpous mass, regale their swine
with the dry refuse; thou, more wise, shalt steep
the husks in water, and again employ
the pond’rous engine. phillips.
barley for ptisan was first steeped in water ’till it swelled;
afterwards dried in the sun, then beat 'till the husk was taken
off, and ground. arbuthnot on coins.
do not content yourselves with mere words, lest you feed
upon husks instead of kernels. - 'atts.
to husk. v. a. [from the noun..] to strip off the outward
integument. .
hu’sked, adj. [from husk..] bearing an husk; covered with a
husk.
hu's ky. adj. [from husk..] abounding in husks; consisting of
husks.
most have found
a husky harvest from the grudging ground. dryden's virgil.
- with timely care
shave the goat's shaggy beard, lest thou too late
in vain should'st seek a strainer, to dispart
. the husky terrene dregs from purer must. phillips.
hu'ssy. m. s...[corrupted from housewife: taken in an ill sense.]
a sorry or bad woman; a worthless wench. it is often used
ludicrously in slight disapprobation.
get you in, busy, go: now will i personate this hopeful
young jade, southern's innocent adultery.
hu’s tings. n. s. [purcing, saxon.] a council; a court held.
to hu’stle. v. a. [perhaps corrupted from hurtle.] to shake
together in confusion.
hu's wife. n. s. [corrupted from housewife.] -
1. a bad manager; a sorry woman. it is common to use hous-
wife in a good, and huswife or husy in a bad sense.
bianca,
a huswife, that, by selling her desires,
buys herself bread and cloth.
2. an oeconomist; a thrifty woman.
why should you want?
the bounteous huswife, nature, on each bush
lays her fulness before you. shakespeare.
to hu'swife. v. a. [from the noun..] to manage with oeco-
nomy and frugality.
but huswifing the little heav'n had lent,
she duly paid a groat for quarter-rent;
and pinch'd her belly, with her daughters two,
to bring the year about with much ado.
hu’swif ery. m. s. [from huswife.]
1. management good or bad.
good huswifery trieth
to rise with the cock;
ill hoswifery lyeth
* "till nine of the clock.
2. management of rural business committed to women.
if cheeses in dairie have argus his eyes,
tell cisley the fault in her huswifery lies. tussor.
hut, n.s. [putte, saxon ; hute, french.] a poor cottage.
our wand'ring saints, in woful state,
to a small cottage came at last,
where dwelt a good old honest yeoman,
who kindly did these saints invite
dryden.
shakspeare'. othello.
dryden.
tuffer.
in his poor hut to pass the night. swift.
sore pierc'd by wintry wind,
how many shrink into the sordid hut
of chearless poverty thomson.
hutch. n.s. [ppaecca, saxon; huche, french..] a corn chest.
the best way to keep them, after they are threshed, is to
dry them well, and keep them in hutches, or close casks. mort,
to huzz. v. n. [from the sound.] to buzz; to murmur.
huzz a. interj. a shout ; a cry of acclamation.
the buzzas of the rabble are the same to a bear that they
are to a prince. - l’estrange.
you keep a parcel of roaring bullies about me day and
night; huzzas and hunting horns never let me cool. arbuth.
all fame is foreign, but of true desert;
plays round the head, but comes not to the heart:
qne self-approving hour whole years outweighs s
of stupid starers and of loud huzzas. pope.
to huzza'. v. n. [from the interjection.] to utter accla-
mation.
a caldron of fat beef, and stoop of ale,
qn the huzzaing mob shall still prevail.
to huzz a. v. a. to receive with acclamation.
he was huzzaed into the court by several thousands of
weavers and clothiers. - addison.
hyacinth. m. s. […w3g&gt;; hyacinthe, fr. hyacinthus, lat...]
1. a flower.
it hath a bulbous root: the leaves are long and narrow : the
stalk is upright and naked, the flowers growing on the upper
part in a spike : the flowers consist each of one leaf, are naked,
tubulose, and cut into six divisions at the brim, which are re-
flexed: the ovary becomes a roundish fruit with three angles,
which is divided into three cells, which are filled with roundish
seeds. - 44iller.
the silken fleece, impurpl’d for the loom,
rival'd the hyacinth in vernal bloom. pope's odyssop.
2. the hyacinth is the same with the lapis lyncurius of the an-
cients. it is a less shewy gem than any of the other red ones.
it is seldom smaller than a seed of hemp, or larger than a
nutmeg. it is found of various degrees of deepness and pale-
ness; but its colour is always a deadish red, with a consi-
derable admixture of yellow; its most usual is that mixed red
and yellow, which we know by the name of flame-colour.
hill on fossils.
hyaci'n thine. adj. [52xiv$wo.] made of hyacinths; re-
sembling hyacinths.
hyades.
hyads.
then sailors quarter'd heav'n, and found a name
for ev'ry fix’d and ev'ry wand'ring star ;
the pleiads, hyads. dryden's georgies.
hyaline. adj. [icoxiv gp.] glassy; crystalline; made glass;
resembling glass.
from heav'n-gate not far, founded in view
on the clear hyaline, the glassy sea. ilton.
hy bridous. adj. [38: ; hybrida, latin.] begotten between
animals of different species.
why such different species should not only mingle together,
but also generate an animal, and yet that that hybridous pro-
duction should not again generate, is to me a mystery. ray.
hydatides. n.s.. [from 326.] little transparent bladders of
water in any part: most common in dropsical persons, from a
distention or rupture of the lympheducts. quincy.
all the water is contained in little bladders, adhering to the
liver and peritoneum, known by the name of hydatides. soiseum.
hydra. m. s. [hydra, latin.] "a monster with many heads
slain by hercules: whence any multiplicity of evils is termed
a hydra.
king's cookery.
{n-f [os;..] a watery constellation.
new rebellions raise
their hydra heads, and the false north displays
her broken league to imp her serpent wings. milton.
more formidable hydra stands within,
whose jaws with iron-teeth severely grin. dryden's min.
subdue
the hydra of the many-headed hissing crew. dryden.
hydragogues. n.s. [386 and 3,0; hydragogue, fr.) such
medicines as occasion the discharge of watery humours, which
is generally the case of the stronger catharticks, because they
shake most forcibly the bowels and their appendages. quincy-
hydrau'lical. q adj. [from hydraulick.] relating to the con-
hydr au'lick. { veyance of water through pipes.
among the engines in which the air is useful, pumps may
be accounted, and other hydraulical engines. derham.
we have employed a virtuoso to make an hydraulick engine.
in which a chymical liquor, resembling blood, is driven
through elastick channels. arbuthnot and pope-
hydrau'licks. m. s. [326, water, and 2vaos, a pipe.]
the science of conveying water through pipes or conduits.
hydroce'le. n.s. [3%zo; hydrocese, fr.]. a watery rupture.
hydr oce phalus. n.s. [$3.26 and zip2a.) a dropsy in the
head.
a hydrocephalus, or dropsy of the head, is only incurable
when the serum is extravasated into the ventricles of the
brain. arbuthnot on diet-
hypro grapher... n. s. [$3.26 and yow; hydrographe, fr.]
one who draws maps of the sea.
it may be drawn from the writings of cur hydrogra-
pher. - - hoyle-
hydrography. m. s. [$3.26 and yezow; hydrographie, fr.]
description of the watery part of the terraqueous glore.
hydrom ancy. n. s. [$3.26 and passiz hydroantic, fr.]
prediction by water.
divination was invented by the persians: there are four
kinds of divination; hydromancy, pyromancy, aerosnancy, and
geomancy. - 'liff's parergon.
hydromel. n.s. [$3.26 and off. ; hydromel, fr. j honey and
water.
hydromel is a drink prepared of honey, being one of the
most pleasant and universal drinks the northern part of europe
affords, as well as one of the most ancient. 41.1 ti ".
in
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1051</div><p class="text">h y m
if i i"
in fevers the aliments prescribed by hippocrates were
ptisans and cream of barley ; hydromel, that is, honey and
water, when there was no tendency to a delirium. arbuthnot.
hydrometer. m. s. [$3.26 and porov.] an instrument to
measure the extent or profundity of water. - -
hydro'me ry. m. s. [of and poro, j the act of mea-
furing the extent of water. -
hydr of ho bia. m. s. […;09:32; hydrophobie, fr.] dread of
water.
among those dismal symptoms that follow the bite of a mad
dog, the hydrophobia or dread of water is the most remarkable.
- - $24inty.
hydroopic al adj. soorize; ; hydropique, fr. from hydrops,
hydro'pick. { lat.]
1. dropsical; diseased with extravasated water.
cantharides heat the watery parts of the body; as urine,
and hydropical water. bacow’s natural hijiory.
the world's whole sap is sunk: .
the general balm th’ hydropick earth hath drunk. donne.
hydropical swellings, if they be pure, are pellucid. wisem.
hydropick wretches by degrees decay, -
growing the more, the more they waste away;
by their own ruins they augmented lye, - - -
with thirst and heat amidst a deluge fry. blackmore.
one sort of remedy he uses in dropsies, the water of the
hydropicks. arbuthnot.
2. resembling dropsy.
some mens hydropick insatiableness learned to thirst the
more, by how much more they drank. king charles.
every lust is a kind of hydropick distemper, and the more
we drink the more we shall thirst. tillotson.
hydrosta tical. adj. [$3.26 and solix;..] relating to
hydrostaticks ; taught by io.
a human body forming in such a fluid, will never be recon-
cilable to this hydrostatical law: there will be always something
lighter beneath, and something heavier above; because bone,
the heaviest in specie, will be ever in the midst. bentley.
hydrosta tically. adv. [from hydroslatival.] according to
hydrostaticks.
the weight of all bodies around the earth is ever propor-
tional to the quantity of their matter: for instance, a pound
weight, examined hydroslatically, doth always contain an equal
quantity of solid mass. bentley.
hydrosta ticks. m. s. [of and solix; ; hydroslatique, fr.]
the science of weighing fluids; weighing bodies in fluids.
hydro'tick, n. s. [towe; hydrotique, fr. purger of water
or phlegm.
he seems to have been the first who divided purges into
hydroticks and purgers of bile. arbuthnot on coins.
hyen. } n. s. shyene, fr. hyaena, lat.] an animal like a
hye"na. wolf, said fabulously to imitate human voices.
i will weep when you are disposed to be merry; i will
laugh like a hyen, when you are inclined to sleep. shakespeare.
a wonder more amazing would we find ;
th’ hyena shews it, of a double kind:
varying the sexes in alternate years,
in one begets, and in another bears. dryden's fables.
the hyena was indeed well joined with the bever, as having
also a bag in those parts, if thereby we understand the hyena
odorata, or civet cat. brown's vulgar errours.
the keen hyena, fellest of the fell. thomson.
hygro'meter... n. s. [763; and poleo hygrometre, fr.] an
instrument to measure the degrees of moisture.
a sponge, perhaps, might be a better hygrometer than the
carth of the river. arbuthnot on air.
hy'groscope. m. s. [76g and axono 5 hygroscope, fr.] an
instrument to shew the moisture and dryness of the air, and
to measure and estimate the quantity of either extreme. quincy.
moisture in the air is discovered by hygroscopes. arbuthnot.
hyla r chic al. adj. [oxn and dex.] presiding over matter.
hym. m. s. a species of dog; unless it is by mistake for lym.
avaunt, you curs
mastiff, greyhound, mungril grim,
hound or spaniel, brache or hym;
or bobtail tike, or trundle tail,
tom will make him weep and wail.
hy’men. m. s. [jonv.]
1. the god of marriage.
2. the virginal membrane.
#::::::::: } n. s. [jovai g'.] a marriage song.
shakesp. king lear.
and heav'nly choirs the hymenean sung, milton.
for her the spouse prepares the bridal ring;
for her white virgins hymeneals sing. pope.
hymene’al.
hymene’an.
the suitors heard, and deem'd the mirthful voice
- a signal of her hymeneal choice. pope's odyssy.
} adj. pertaining to marriage.
hy m.n. m. s. [hymne, fr. juvcp.] an encomiastick song, or
fong of adoration to some superiour being.
as i earst, in praise of mine own dame,
so now in honour of thy mother dear,
an honourable hymn i eke should frame.
speoser.
our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
our bridal flow’rs serve for a buried coarse.
when steel grows
soft as the parasite's silk, let hymns be made
an overture for the wars. sospeare's coriola;us.
there is an hymn sung ; but the subject of it is always the
praises of adam, and noah and abraham, concluding ever
with a thanksgiving for the nativity of our saviour. bacon.
farewel, you happy shades, -
where angels first should prastise hymns, and string
their tuneful harps, when they to heav'n would sing. dryd.
7% hymn. v. a. souvio.] to praise in song; to worship with
hymns. - - * - - *
whose business were to serve their lord .
high up in heav'n, with songs to hymn his throne. milton.
to hymn. v. n. to fing songs of adoration.
they touch'd their golden harps, and hymning prais'd
shao soare,
god and his works. . . - - a4ilton.
he had not left alive this patient saint, .
this anvil of affronts, but sent him hence
to hold a peaceful branch of palm above, . . .
and hymn it in the quire. , dryden's spanish fryar.
hymnick, adj. [flavor.) relating to hymns.
he rounds the air, and breaks the hymnick notes
in birds, heav'ns choristers, organick throats;
which, if they did not die, might seem to be * * .
. . . a tenth rank in the heavenly hierarchy. . . donne.
to hyp. v. a. [barbarously contracted from hypochondriac{..] to
make melancholy; to dispirit. . . . . -
i have been, to the last degree, hypped since i saw you. .
- - -- • * * speciator.
hypall age. m. s. son &amp;aazyn.] a figure by which words
change their cases with each other. , , ~ * * -
hyper. m. s. [a word barbarously curtailed by prior from hy-
percritick.] a hypercritick; one more critical than necessity
requires. prior did not know the meaning of the word.
criticks i read on other men, : -
and hypers upon them again. . . . . ; prior.
hype’rbola. m. s. [hyperbole, fr. unte and 3&amp;aaw,] in geo-
metry, a section of a cone made by a plane, so that the axis of
the section inclines to the opposite leg of the cone, which in the
parabola is parallel to it, and in the ellipsis interse&amp;s it. the
axis of the hyperbolical se&amp;tion will meet also with the opposite
side of the cone, when produced above the vertex. harris.
had the velocities of the several planets been greater or less
than they are, or had their distances from the sun, or the
quantity of the sun's matter, and consequently his attractive
power been greater or less than they are now, with the samc
velocities, they would not have revolved in concentrick circles,
but have moved in hyperbolas very eccentrick. bently.
hyper bole. n.s.. [hyperbole, fr. gree86xi.]. a figure in rhe-
torick by which any thing is increased or diminished beyond
the exact truth: as, he runs faster than lightning. his possessions
are fallen to dust. he was so gaunt, the case of a flagellit was a
mansion for him. shakesp. -
terms unsquar’d,
which, from the tongue of roaring typhon dropt,
would seem hyperboles. shakesp. troilus and croffda.
taffata phrases, silken terms precise,
three pil'd hyperboles, spruce affectation,
figures pedantical, these summer flies,
have blown me full of maggot ostentation. shakespeare.
they were above the hyperboles, that fond poetry bestows
upon its admired objects. glanville.
hyperboles, so daring and so bold,
disdaining bounds, are yet by rules control’d ;
above the clouds, but yet within our fight,
they mount with truth, and make a tow'ring flight, granv.
the common people understand raillery, or at least rheto-
rick, and will not take hyperboles in too literal a fense. swift.
#::::::::::::: adj. [hyperbolique, french ; from hyperbola. }
1. belonging to the hyperbola ; having the nature of an hyper-
bola. -
cancellated in the middle with squares, with triangles be-
fore, and behind with hyperbolick lines. grew's musarum,
the horny or pellucid coat of the eye riseth up, as a hil-
lock, above the convexity of the white of the eye, and is of
an hyperbolical or parabolical figure. ray on the creation.
2. [from hyperbole..] exaggerating or extenuating beyond fact.
it is parabolical, and probably hyperbolical, and therefore
not to be taken in a strict sense. boyle,
hyper bo'lic all y. adv. [from hyperbolical.]
1. in form of an hyperbola.
2. with exaggeration or extenuation.
yet may all be solved, if we take it hyperbolically. b. cw.
scylla is seated upon a narrow mountain, which thrusts
into the sca a steep high rock, and hyperbolically described by
homer as inaccessible. broome's note: on the odyssey.
hyper bo lifor m. adj. [hyperbola and forma ) having the
form, or nearly the form of the hyperboia.
hyper bo’re an. n.s. [/yperboreen, french; hype, boreus, lat.]
northern.
hyper-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 1052</div><p class="text">h y s
hypercr1'tick, n.s.. [hypercritique, fr. ort; and zeirizzt.]
a critick exact or captious beyond use or reason. -
o those hypercriticks in english poetry differ from the opi-
nion of the greek and latin judges, from the italians and
french, and from the general taste of all ages. dryden.
hyper critical. adj. [from hypercritick.j. critical beyond
necessity or use.
we are far from imposing those nice and hypercritical punc-
tilios, which some astrologers oblige our gardeners to. evelyn.
such hypercritical readers will confider my business was to
make a body of refined sayings, only taking care to produce
them in the most natural manner. swift.
hype'roi eter. n. s. [owse and piracy j any thing greater
than the standard requires.
when a man rises beyond fix foot, he is an hypermeter, and
may be admitted into the tall club. addison.
hypersar co’sis. n.s. [sweerozoris, swit and azoxes.] the
growth of fungous or proud e
where the ...?. is was great, i sprinkled it with pre-
cipitate, whereby i more speedily freed the ulcer of its putre-
faction. wiseman.
hyphen. m. s. [spiv.] a note of conjunetion: as vir-tue,
ever-living.
hypno tick. n.s. [savo;..] any medicine that induces sleep.
hypocho'ndres. n.s.. [hypocondre, fr. 3roxeveelow.] the
two regions lying on each side the cartilago ensiformis, and
those of the ribs, and the tip of the breast, which have in one
the liver, and in the other the spleen. uincy.
the blood moving too slowly through the celiack and me-
senterick arteries, produce various complaints in the lower
bowels and hypochondres; from whence such persons are called
hypochondriack. arbuthnot on aliments.
hypochondr1'acal. u adj. [hypocondriaque, fr. from hypo-
hy pochon dr1'ack. } chondres.]
1. melancholy; disordered in the imagination.
socrates laid down his life in attestation of that most fun-
damental truth, the belief of one god; and yet he's not re-
corded either as fool or hypochondriack. decay of piety.
2. producing melancholy; having the nature of melancholy.
cold sweats are many times mortal, and always suspected ;
as in great fears, and hypochondriacal passions, being a relaxa-
tion or forsaking of the spirits. bacon’s natural history.
hypocist., n.s. [oreziri; ; hypocise, fr.]
hypocift is an inspissated juice, confiderably hard and heavy,
of a fine shining black colour, when broken. the stem of
the plant is thick and fleshy; and much thicker at the top
than towards the bottom. the fruits contain a tough glu-
tinous liquor, gathered before they are ripe; the juice is ex-
pressed, then formed into cakes. hill.
hypocrisy... n.s.. [hypocrisie, fr. gregoiris.] diffinulation
with regard to the moral or religious character.
next stood hypocrisy with holy leer,
soft smiling and demurely looking down;
but hid the dagger underneath the gown. dryden's fables.
hypocrisy is much more eligible than open infidelity, and
vice : it wears the livery of religion, and is cautious of giving
scandal; nay, continued disguises are too great a constraint:
men would leave off their vices, rather than undergo the toil
of practising them in private. swift.
hypocrite. n.s. [hypocrite, fr. uwoxeiro.]
1. a dissembler in morality or religion.
he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer: i
dare swear he is no hypocrite, but prays from his heart. shak.
a wise man hateth not the law; but he that is an hypocrite
therein, is as a ship in a storm. ecclus. xxxiii. 3.
fair hypocrite, you seek to cheat in vain;
your silence argues, you ask time to reign. dryden.
the making religion necessary to interest might increase
hypocrisy; but if one in twenty should be brought to true
piety, and nineteen be only hypocrites, the advantage would
still be great. swift.
2. a dissembler.
beware, ye honest: the third circling glass
suffices virtue: but may hypocrites,
who slily speak one thing, another think,
hateful as hell, still pleas'd unwarn'd drink on,
and through intemp'rance grow a while sincere.
hypocr1't1cal.
hypocri"tick. }
reality.
now you are confessing your enormities; i know it by that
hypocritical, down-cast look. dryden's spanish fryar.
philips.
adj. [from hypocrite.] dissembling; in-
sincere; appearing differently from the
whatever virtues may appear in him, they wili be esteemed
an hypocritical imposture on the world ; and in his retired plea-
sures, he will be presumed a libertine. rogers.
let others skrew their hypocritick face. swift.
hypocritically. adv. [from hypocritical.] with dissimula-
tion; without sincerity; falsely.
simeon and levi spake not only falsely, but insidiously, nay
hypocritically, abusing at once their proselytes and their reli-
gion. government of the tongue.
hypog a'strick. adj. [hypogashiquo, fr. jwo and yosis.]
seated in the lower part of the belly.
the swelling we supposed to rise from an effusion of serum
through all the hypogastrick arteries. - wiseman.
hypog e'um. n. s. sovo and yo.] a name which the ancient
archite&amp;ts gave to all the parts of a building that were under
round, as cellars and vaults. harris.
hypostasis. n.s.. [hypostase, fr. jardrzais.]
1. distinct substance.
2. personality. a term used in the doctrine of the holy trinity.
the oneness of our lord jesus christ, referring to the
several hyposases in the one eternal, indivisible, divine nature,
and the eternity of the son's generation, and his co-eternity
and consubstantiality with the father, are assertions equiva-
lent to those comprised in the ancient simple article. hammond.
hypost at1cal. adj. [hypostatique, fr. from hyposłafts.]
1. constitutive; constituent as distinet ingredients.
let our carneades warn men not to subscribe to the grand
doctrine of the chymists, touching their three hypostatical prin-
ciples, ’till they have a little examined it. boyle.
2. personal; distinetly personal.
hypotenu'se. n.s.. [hypotenuse, fr. jwlivarz.] the line that
subtends the right angle of a right-angled triangle ; the sub-
tense.
the square of the hypotenuse in a right-angled triangle, is
equal to the squares of the two other sides. locke.
hypothesis. n.s.. [hypothese, fr. jw83tris.] a supposi-
tion; a system formed upon some principle not proved.
the mind casts and turns itself restlesly from one thing to
another, 'till at length it brings all the ends of a long and va-
rious hypothoff, together ; sees how one part coheres with ano-
ther, and so clears off all the appearing contrarieties that
seemed to lie cross, and make the whole intelligible. south.
with imagin'd sovereignty
lord of his new hypothesis he reigns:
he reigns: how long ’till some usurper rise;
and he too, mighty thoughtful, mighty wise,
studies new lines, and other circles feigns. prior.
hypothetical. u adj. [hypothetique, fr. from hypotheft.] in-
hypothe'tick. : cluding a supposition; conditional.
conditional or hypothetical propositions are those whose parts
are united by the conditional particle if; as, if the sun be
fixed, the earth must move. watts.
hypothetically. adv. [from hypothetical.] upon supposi-
tion ; conditionally. -
the only part liable to imputation is calling her a goddess;
yet this is proposed with modesty and doubt, and hypotheti-
cally. broame's notes to pope's odyssey.
hy rs.t.
hurst. * are all from the saxon pyrre, a wood or grove. gibs.
he rs.t. -
hy'ssop. m. s. [hysope, fr. hysopus, lat..] a verticillate plant.
it hath been a great dispute, whether the hyssop commonly
known is the same which is mentioned in scripture. miller.
the hyssop of solomon cannot be well conceived to be our
common hyssop; for that is not the least of vegetables observed
to grow upon walls; but rather some kind of capillaries,
which only grow upon walls and stony places. brown.
hyste'r1cal. di. shysterique, fr. j w
hyste'rick. ; adj. [hysterique, fr. josexo.)
1. troubled with fits; disordered in the regions of the womb.
in hysłerick women the rarity of symptoms doth oft strike an
astonishment into spectators. harvey on consumptions.
many hyterical women are sensible of wind passing from the
womb. - flyer on the humours.
2. proceeding from disorders in the womb.
parent of vapours, and of female wit,
who gave th’ hyslerick or poetick fit. pope.
this terrible scene made too violent an impression upon a
woman in her condition, and threw her into a strong hy/lerick
fit. . . . . . arbuthnot and pope.
hyste’ricks. m. s. [jrsex3:..] fits of women, supposed to
proceed from disorders in the womb,
</p></div>

alphasectend
