
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 324</div><p class="text">c.
c a b
the third letter of the alphabet, has two sounds;
one like #, as, call, clock, craft, coal, companion, cu-
neiform ; the other as s, as, casar, cessation, cinder.
it sounds like k before a, o, u, or a consonant; and
q like s, before e, i, and y.
cab. n.s.. [sp.] a hebrew measure, containing about three
pints english, or the eighteenth part of the ephah.
caba l. m. s. scabale, fr. nonp, tradition.]
1. the secret science of the hebrew rabbins.
2. a body of men united in some close design. a cabal differs
from a party, as few from many.
she often interposed her royal authority, to break the cabals
which were forming against her first ministers. addison.
3. intrigue; something less than conspiracy.
when each, by curs'd calal of women, strove,
to draw th’ indulgent king to partial love. dryden.
to caba/l. v. n. [cabaler, fr.] to form close intrigues; to
intrigue; to unite in small parties.
his mournful friends, summon'd to take their leaves,
are throng’d about his couch, and fit in council :
what those caballing captains may design,
i must prevent, by being first in action. dryden.
ca'ba list. m. s. [from cabal..] one skilled in the traditions of
the hebrews.
then jove thus spake : with care and pain
we form'd this name, renown'd in rhime,
not thine, immortal neufgermain
cost studious cabalis's more time. swift.
ca balli's rica l. q adj. [from cabal.] something that has an
ca balli's t1c k. { occult meaning.
the letters are cabalitical, and carry more in them than it is
proper for the world to be acquainted with. addison.
he taught him to repeat two caballisick words, in pronoun-
cing of which the whole secret consisted. spcetator,
caba'll er. m. s. [from cabal j he that engages with others
in close designs; an intriguer.
factious and rich, bold at the council board,
but cautious in the ficki, he shunn'd the sword;
a close caballer, and tongue-valiant lord. dryden.
ca ball in e. adj. [caballinus, lat.] belonging to a horse; as,
cal none aloes, or horse aloes.
cabaret. m. s. [french. j a tavern.
suppose this servantpassing by some cabaret, or tennis-court,
where his comrades were drinking or playing, should stay with
them, and drink or play away his money. bra, against hobbes.
cabbage. m. s. [cabus, fr. brassica, lat..] a plant.
the leaves are large, fleshy, and of a glaucous colour; the
flowers consist of four leaves, which are succeeded by long
taper pods, containing several round acrid seeds. the species
are, cabbage. savoy cabbage. broccoli. the cauliflower.
the musk cabbage. branching tree cabbage, from the sea-
coast. colewort. perennial alpine colewort. perfoliated
wild cabbage, &amp;c. miller.
cole, cabbage, and coleworts, are soft and demulcent, with-
out any acidity; the jelly or juice, of red cabbage, baked in an
oven, and mixed with honey, is an excellent pectoral.
arbuthnot on aliments.
to ca bbag e. v. n. to form a head ; as, the plants begin to
cabbage.
to cab.ba.g.e. v. a. [a cant word among taylors.] to steal in
cutting clothes.
your taylor, instead of shreads, cabbages whole yards of
cloth. arbuthnot.
cab.ba.g.e tree. m. s. a species of palm-tree.
it is very common in the caribee islands, where it grows
to a prodigious height. the leaves of this tree envelope each
other, so that those which are inclosed, being deprived of the
air, are blanched; which is the part the inhabitants cut for
plaits for hats, and the young shoots are pickled ; but when-
ever this part is cut out, the trees are destroyed ; nor do they
rise again from the old roots; so that there are very few trees
left remaining near plantations. miller.
ca'bbag e-wor m. m. s. an inse&amp;.
ca bin... n.s.. [cabane, fr. chabin, welch, a cottage.]
1. a small room.
so long in secret cabin there he held
her captive to his sensual desire,
c a b
till that with timely fruit her belly swell'd,
and bore a boy unto a savage fire. spenser.
2. a small chamber in a ship.
give thanks you have lived so long, and make yourself
ready, in your cabin, for the mischance of the hour, if it so
happen. - shakespeare.
men may not expect the use of many cabins, and safety at
once, in the sea service. raleigh.
the chessboard, we say, is in the same place it was, if it
remain in the same part of the cabin, though the ship sails
all the while. locke.
3. a cottage, or small house.
come from marble bow'rs, many times the gay harbour
of anguish,
unto a filly cabin, though weak, yet stronger against woes.
sidney.
neither should that odious custom be allowed, of flaying #
the green surface of the ground, to cover their cabins, or make
up their ditches. swift.
4. a tent, or temporary habitation.
some of green boughs their slender cabins frame,
some lodg’d were tortosa's streets about. fairfax.
to cabin. v. n. [from the noun.] to live in a cabin.
i'll make you feed on berries and on roots,
, and feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,
and cabin in a cave. - shakespeare.
to ca bin. v. a. to confine in a cabin. .
fleance is 'scap'd, i had else been perfed;
as broad and gen'ral as the casing air;
but now i'm cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in,
to saucy doubts and fear. shakespeare.
ca bined. adj. [from cabin..] belonging to a cabin.
the nice morn, on the indian steep,
from her cabin'd loophole peep. milton.
ca/binet. m. s. scabinet, fr.]
1. a closet; a small room.
at both corners of the farther side, let there be two deli-
cate or rich cabinets, daintily paved, richly hanged, glazed
with crystalline glass, and a rich cupola in the midst, and all
other elegancy that may be thought on. bacon.
2. a hut or small house.
hearken awhile in thy green cabinet,
the lawrel song of careful colinct. spensor.
3. a private room in which consultations are held.
you began in the cabinet what you afterwards practised in
the camp. dryden.
4. a set of boxes or drawers for curiosities; a private box.
who sees a soul in such a body set,
might love the treasure for the cabinet. ben. johnson.
ln vain the workman shew'd his wit,
with rings and hinges counterfeit,
to make it seem, in this disguise,
a cabinet to vulgar eyes. swift.
5. any place in which things of value are hidden.
thy breast hath ever been the cabinet,
where i have lock'd my secrets. denham.
we cannot discourse of the secret, but by describing our
duty; but so much duty must needs open a cabinet of mysteries.
taylor.
ca binet-council. n s.
1. a council held in a private manner, with unusual privacy
and confidence.
the doctrine of italy, and practice of france, in some kings
times, hath introduced cabinet-counci's. bacon.
2. a sele&amp;t number of privy counsellors supposed to be particu-
larly trusted. -
from the highest to the lowest it is universally read; from
the cabinet-council to the nursery. - gay to swift.
ca'binet-maker. n.s.. [from ca’inet and make..] one that
makes small nice drawers or boxes.
the root of an old white thorn will make very fine boxes
and combs; so that they would be of great use for the cabinet-
makers, as well as the turners, and others. al/ortimer.
cable. m. s. [call, welch ; calel, dutch..] the great rope of
a ship to which the anchor is fastened.
what though the mast be now blown overboard,
the cable broke, the holding anchor lost,
2. and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 325</div><p class="text">c a d
c a g
and half our sailors swallow'd in the flood,
yet lives our pilot still shakespeare.
the length of the cable is the life of the ship in all extremi-
ties; and the reason is, because it makes so many bendings and
waves, as the ship, riding at that length, is not able to stretch
it 5 and nothing breaks that is not stretched. raleigh.
the cables crack, the sailors fearful cries
ascend; and sable night involves the skies. dryden.
satb u r ns. m. s. small ropes used in ships. dic7.
ca (cao. see chocolatenut.
sa chescorical. uadj. [from cachexy.] having an ill habit of
cach e^ctick. w body; shewing an ill habit.
young and florid blood, rather than vapid and cachedical.
arbuthnot on air.
the crude chyle swims in the blood, and appears as milk in
the blood, of some persons who are cached?ick. floyer.
cache"xy. n.s.. [xzxtasz.] a general word to express a
great variety of symptoms; most commonly it denotes such a
distemperature of the humours, as hinders nutrition, and wea-
kens the vital and animal functions, proceeding from weak-
ness of the fibres, and an abuse of the non-naturals, and often
from severe acute distempers. arbuthnot on diet.
cachinnation. m. s. [cachinnatio, lat.] a loud laughter. d.
ca’ck erel. m. s. a fish, said to make those who eat it laxative.
‘to ca’ckle. v. n. [aaeckelen, dutch.]
r. to make a noise as a goose.
the nightingale, if she should sing by day,
when every goose is cackling, would be thought
no better a musician than the wren. shakespeare.
or rob the roman geese of all their glories,
and save the state, by cackling to the tories. pope.
2. sometimes it is used for the noise of a hen.
the trembling widow, and her daughters twain,
this woful cackling cry, with horrour heard,
of those distracted damsels in the yard. dryden.
3. to laugh; to giggle.
nic. grinned, cackled, and laughed, till he was like to kill
himself, and fell a frisking and dancing about the room.
arbuthnot,
ca’ckle. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the voice of a goose or fowl.
the silver goose before the shining gate
there flew, and, by her cackle, sav'd the state. dryden.
2. to talk idly.
ca’ckler. n.s.. [from cackle.]
i. a fowl that cackles.
2. a teltale; a tatler.
cacochy'mical. q adj. [from cacochymy.] having the humours
cacochy'mick. ; corrupted. -
it will prove very advantageous, if only cacochymick, to clarify
his blood with a laxative. harvey on consumptions.
if the body be cacochymical, the tumours are apt to degene-
rate into very venomous and malignant abscesses. wiseman.
the ancient writers distinguished putrid fevers, by putrefac-
tion of blood, choler, melancholy, and phlegm; and this is to
be explained by an effervescence happening in a particular ca-
cochymical blood. floyer on the humours.
cacochymy. n.s. [xxx0xppoiz.] a depravation of the hu-
mours from a sound state, to what the physicians call by a ge-
neral name of a cacochymy. spots, and discolourations of the
skin, are signs of weak fibres; for the lateral vessels, which
lie out of the road of circulation, let gross humours pass, which
could not, if the vessels had their due degree of stricture.
arbuthnot on aliments.
strong beer, a liquour that attributes the half of its ill qua-
lities to the hops, consisting of an acrimonious firy nature, sets
the blood, upon the least cacochymy, into an orgasmus. harvey.
caco phony. n.s. [xzxopæviz.] a bad sound of words.
these things shall lie by, till you come to carp at them,
and alter rhimes, grammar, triplets and cacophonies of all kinds.
pope to swift.
to cacu'minate. v. a. [cacumino, lat..] to make sharp or
pyramidal. idic7.
cada've rous. adj. [cadaver, lat.] having the appearance
of a dead carcass; having the qualities of a dead carcass.
in vain do they scruple to approach the dead, who livingly
are cadaverous, for fear of any outward pollution whose temper
pollutes themselves. brown's vulgar errours.
the urine, long detained in the bladder, as well as glass,
will grow red, foetid, cadaverous, and alkaline. the case is the
same with the stagnant waters of hydropical persons.
arbuthnot on aliments.
caddis. n.s.. [this word is used in erse for the variegated
cloaths of the highlanders.]
1. a kind of tape or ribbon.
he hath ribbons of all the colours of the rainbow; inkles,
caddses, cambricks, lawns; why, he sings them over as if they
were gods and goddesses. shakespeare.
2. a kind of worm or grub found in a case of straw.
he loves the mayfly, which is bred of the codworm, or
addis ; and these make the trout bold and lusty.
0:
*
4.
i.
jwalton's angler.
wol. i.
cade. n.s.. [it is deduced, by skinner, from cadeler, fr. an old
word, which signifies to breed up tenderly.) tame; soft; de-
licate; as, a cade lamb, a lamb bred at home.
to cade. v. a. [from the noun..] to breed up in softness.
cade. m. s. scadus, lat.] a barrel.
we john cade, so termed of our supposed father.
or
rather of stealing a cade of herrings. shakespeare.
soon as thy liquour from the narrow cells
of close press'd husks is freed, thou must refrain
thy thirsty soul; let none persuade to broach
thy thick, unwholesome, undigested cades. philips.
cade-worm. n.s. the same with caddis,
ca'den ce.
ca'dency. : n.s.. [cadence, fr.]
1. fall; state of sinking; decline.
now was the sun in western cadence low
from noon ; and gentle airs, due at their hours,
to fan the earth, now wak'd. milton.
2. the fall of the voice; sometimes the general modulation of
the voice. -
the sliding, in the close or cadence, hath an agreement with
the figure in rhetorick, which they call praeter expediatum ; for
there is a pleasure even in being deceived.
- bacon.
there be words not made with lungs,
sententious show’rs o' let them fall,
their cadence is rhetorical. crashaw.
3. the flow of verses, or periods.
the words, the versification, and all the other elegancies of
sound, as cadences, and turns of words upon the thought, per-
form exactly the same office both in dramatick and epick poe-
try. - dryden.
the cadency of one line must be a rule to that of the next;
as the sound of the former must slide gently into that which
follows. dryden.
4. the tone or sound. ryaen
hollow rocks retain
the sound of blustring winds, which all night long
had rous’d the sea, now with horse cadence luji
sea-faring men, o'erwatch'd. milton.
he hath a confused remembrance of words since he left the
university; he hath lost half their meaning, and puts them to-
gether with no regard, except to their cadence. swift.
5. in horsemanship.
cadence is an equal measure or proportion, which a horse
observes in all his motions, when he is thoroughly managed.
farrier's dici.
ca' dent. adj. [cadens, lat.] falling down.
cadet. m. s. [cadet, fr. pronounced cade.]
1. the younger brother.
2. the youngest brother.
joseph was the youngest of the twelve, and david the
eleventh son, and the cadet of jesse. brown'; pulgar errours.
3. a voluntier in the army, who serves in expectation of a com.
mission.
ca bew. n.s. a straw worm. see caddis. dic7,
ca'dger. n.s.. [from cadge, or cage, a panier.] a huckster;
one who brings butter, eggs, and poultry, from the country
to market.
c4d1, n.s. a magistrate among the turks, whose office seems
nearly to answer to that of a justice of peace.
cadi’llack. n.s. a sort of pear.
cae'cia.s. n.s. [lat..] a wind from the north east.
now, from the north,
boreas and caecias and argestes loud
and thrascias rend the woods, and seas upturn. milton,
coesa'rean. see cesar1an.
caesura. m. s. [lat..] a figure in poetry, by which a short
syllable after a complete foot is made long.
caftan. n.s. [persick.] a persian or turkish vest or gar-
ment.
cag. m. s. a barrel or wooden vessel, containing four or five
gallons. sometimes keg.
cage. m. s. [cage, fr. from cavea, lat.]
1. an inclosure of twigs or wire, in which birds are kept.
see whether a cage can please a bird or whether a dog
grow not fiercer with tying sidney.
he taught me how to know a man in love; in which cage
of rushes, i am sure, you are not a prisoner. shakspeare.
though slaves, like birds that fing not in a cage,
they lost their genius, and poetick rage;
| homers again and pindars may be found,
and his great actions with their numbers crown'd. waller,
and parrots, imitating human tongue,
and singing birds in filver cages hung;
and ev'ry fragrant flow'r, and od’rous green,
were sorted well, with lumps of amberlaid between. dryd.
a man recurs to our fancy, by remembering his garment,
a beast, bird, or fish, by the cage, or court-yard, or cistern,
wherein it was kept. j%atts on the mind.
the reason why so few marriages are happy, is, because
young ladies spend their time in making nets, not in making
£ages. swift.
3 u. 2. a place<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 326</div><p class="text">c a l.
c a l
2. a place for wild beasts, inclosed with palisadoes.
3. a prison for petty malefactors. . . - -
#2 cage. v. a. [from the noun..] to inclose in a cage.
he swoln, and pamper'd with high fare,
sits down, and shorts, cag'd in his basket-chair.
cai'man. m.s. the american name of a crocodile.
t, cajole. v. a. […geolor, fr.] to flatter; to sooth; to
coax: a low word.
thought be, ’tis no mean part of civil
state-prudence, to cajole the devil. hudibras.
the one affonts him, while the other cajoles and pities him;
takes up his quarrel, shakes his head at it, clasps his hand upon
t
donne.
his breast, and then protests and protests. l'e/h ange.
my tongue that wanted to cajole
i try’d, but not a word wou'd troll. rymer.
cajo'ler. m. s. [from cajole..] a flatterer; a wheedler.
cajo lery. m. s. scajolerie, fr.] flattery.
ca isson. m. s. [french.j
1. a chest of bombs or powder, laid in the enemy's way, to be
fired at their approach.
2. a wooden case in which the piers of bridges are built within
the water.
carriff. n.s. scattoo, ital. a slave; whence it came to signify
a bad man, with some implication of meanness; as knave in
english, and fur in latin; so certainly does slavery desiroy
virtue.
'horv 17: 2:17, 2-oxola, oo, #926. homer.
a slave and a scoundrel are signified by the same words in
many languages.] a mean villain ; a despicable knave : it
often implies a mixture of wickedness and misery.
vile railiff, vassal of dread and despair,
unworthy of the common breathed air;
why livest thou, dead dog, a longer day,
and dost not unto death thyself prepare :
'tis not impossible
but one, the wicked'st caitif on the ground,
may seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute,
as angelo. -
the wretched caitij, all alone,
as he believ'd, began to moan,
and tell his story to himself.
cake... n.s. [cuch, teutonick.]
1. a kind of delicate bread. -
you must be seeing chriftnings i do you look for ale and
cakes here, you rude rascais ? shakespeare.
my case is dough, but i’ll in among the rest,
out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.
the dismal day was come, the priests prepare
their leaven'd cakes, and fillets for my hair. dryden.
2. any thing of a form rather flat than high ; by which it is
sometimes distinguished from a loaf.
there is a cake that groweth upon the side of a dead tree,
that hath gotten no name, but it is large and of a chesnut co-
lour, and hard and pithy. bacon's natural history.
3. concreted matter; coagulated matter.
then when the fleecy skies new cloath the wood,
and cakes of rustling ice come rolling down the flood.
- dryden.
to cake. v. n. [from the noun..] to harden, as dough in the
oweil.
this burning matter, as it sunk very leisurely, had time to
cake together, and form the bottom, which covers the mouth of
that dreadful vault that lies underneath it. addison on italy.
this is that very mab,
that plats the manes of horses in the night,
and cakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs.
he fins'd the wound,
and wash'd away the strings and clotted blood,
that cak'd within.
calaba's h tree.
it hath a flower consisting of one leaf, divided at the brim
into several parts; from whose cup rises the pointal, in the
hinder part of the flower; which afterwards becomes a fleshy
fruit, having an hard shell. they rise to the height of twenty-
five or thirty feet in the west indies, where they grow na-
turally. the shells are used by the negroes for cups, as also
for making instruments of musick, by making a hole in the
shell, and putting in small stones, with which they make a
sort of rattle. miller.
calama'n.co. n.s.. [a word derived, probably by some acci-
dent, from calamancus, lat. which, in the middle ages, signi-
fied a hat..] a kind of woollen stuff.
he was of a bulk and stature larger than ordinary, had a red
coat, flung open to shew a calamanco waistcoat. tatler. v
ca lamine, or lapis calaminaris. n. s. a kind of fosfile bitu-
minous earth, which, being mixed with copper, changes it
into brass.
we must not omit those, which, though not of so much
beauty, yet are of greater use, viz. loadstones, whetstones of
all kinds, limestones, calamine, or lapis calaminaris. locke.
ca lamint. m. s. scalamintha, lat.] the name of a plant.
cala. mitous. adj. [calamitosus, lat.]
spensor.
shakespeare.
hudibras.
shaft.
shakspeare.
addison.
1. miserable ; involved in distress; oppressed with inflicity;
unhappy ; wretched : applied to men.
this is a gracious provision god almighty hath made in fa-
vour of the necessitous and calamitous ; the state of some, in
this life, being so extremely wretched and deplorable, if com-
pared with others. calamy.
2. full of misery; distressful : applied to external circum-
stances. -
what calamitous effects the air of this city wrought upon us
the last year, you may read in my discourse of the plague.
harvey on consumptions.
strict necessity
subdues me, and calamitous constraint |
left on my head both sin and punishment,
however insupportable, be all
devolv’d. assistan.
much rather i shall chuse
to live the poorest in my tribe, than richest,
and be in that calamitous prison left. milton.
in this sad and calamitous condition, deliverance from an op-
pressour would have even revived them. south.
cala m1 rous ness. n.s.. [from catamitous.] misery; distress.
cala mity. m. s. scalamitas, lat.]
1. misfortune ; cause of misery; distress.
another ill accident is drought, and the spindling of the
corn, which with us is rare, but in hotter countries common;
insomuch as the word calamity was first derived from calamus,
when the corn could not get out of the stalk.
2. misery; distress.
this infinite calamity shall cause
to human life, and houshold peace confound.
from adverse shores in safety let her hear
foreign calamity, and distant war; -
of which, great heav'n, let her no portion bear. prior.
ca lamus. n.s. (lat..] a sort;of reed or sweet-scented wood,
mentioned in scripture with the other ingredients of the sacred
perfumes. it is a knotty root, reddish without, and white with-
in, which puts forth long and narrow leaves, and brought
from the indies. the prophets speak of it as a foreign corn-
modity of great value. these sweet reeds have no smell when
they are green, but when they are dry only. their form dif-
fers not from other reeds, and their smell is perceived upon
entering the marshes. ca'izzet.
take thou also unto thee principal spices of pure myrrh, of
sweet cinnamon, and of sweet calamus. exodus, xxx, 23.
cala’s h. n.s. scaleche, fr.] a small carriage of pleasure.
daniel, a sprightly swain, that us’d to slash
the vig'rous steeds, that drew his lord's cala/h. kong.
the ancients used calashes, the figures of several of them be-
ing to be seen on ancient monuments. they are very simple,
light, and drove by the traveller himself. arbuthnot on coins.
calce ated. adj. [cakeatus, lat.] shod; fitted with shoes.
calce do nius. m. s. [lat..] a kind of precious stone.
calcedonius is of the agate kind, and of a misty grey, cloud-
ed with blue, or with purple. h%dward on foss.
to ca'lcinate. see to calcin e.
in hardening, by baking without melting, the heat hath these
degrees; first, it indurateth, then maketh fragile, and, lastly,
it doth calcinate. bacon's natural history.
calcination. m. s. [from calcine; calcination, fr. j such a
management of bodies by fire, as renders them reducible to
powder; wherefore it is called chymical pulverization. this
is the next degree of the power of fire beyond that of fusion =
for when fusion is longer continued, not only the more subtile
particles of the body itself fly off, but the particles of fire like-
wise insinuate themselves in such multitudes, and are so blend-
ed through its whole substance, that the fluidity, first caused by
the fire, can no longer subsist. from this union arises a third
kind of body, which, being very porous and brittle, is easily
reduced to powder; for, the fire having penetrated everywhere
into the pores of the body, the particles are both hindered from
mutual contact, and divided into minute atoms. &amp;ainty.
divers residences of bodies are thrown away, as soon as the
distillation or calcination of the body that yielded them is
ended. boyle.
this may be effected, but not without a calcination, or re-
ducing it by art into a subtile powder. brown's wugar err.
calci'natory.. n.s.. [from calcinate.] a vessel used in calci-
that! oil.
to calcine. v. a. scalciner, fr. from cak, lat.]
1. to burn in the fire to a calx, or friable substance.
cin at ion.
the solids seem to be earth, bound together with some oil;
for if a bone be calcined, so as the least force will crumble it,
being emersed in oil, it will grow firm again.
arbuthnot on aliments.
bacon.
milton.
see cal-
2. to burn up. -
firy disputes that union have calcin'd,
almost as many minds as men we find.
to ca lci'ne. v. n. to become a calx by heat.
this crystal is a pellucid fissile stone, clear as water, and
without colour, enduring a red heat without losing its transpa-
- rency,
denham.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 327</div><p class="text">c a l
c a l
- strong heat, calcining without fusion.
rtney, and, in avery g g newton's opticks,
c alculate. v. a. scalcular, fr. from calculus, lat. a
* fine or bead, used in operations of numbers.]
i }. compute; to reckon; *. he calculates his expences.
o
!. - the situation of the planets at any certain time.
s 2. too. man did calculate my birth, y
o, aitold me, that by water i should die. shakes. hen. vi.
*. why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
why old men, fools, and children calculate, -
o why all those things change from their ordinance? shak.
who were there then in the world, to observe the births of
those first men, and calculate their nativities, as they sprawled
out of ditches? . - bently.
t.just; to projet for any certain end. -
o 3. the reasonableness of religion clearly appears, as it tends
- so directly to the happiness of men, and is, upon all accounts,
olated for our benefit: - tillotson.
! t, ca'lculate. v. o. to make a computation.
to calculation. n.s [from calculate.] -
1. a pracice, or manner of reckoning; the art of numbering.
o cypher, that great friend to calculation; or rather, which
changeth calculation, into easy computation. holder on time.
2. a reckoning; the result of arithmetical operation.
o if then their calculation be true; for so they reckon. hooker.
to: being different from calculations of the ancients, their ob-
ls." servations confirm not ours. brown's wugar errours.
o calculator. m. s. [from calculate.] a computer; a reckoner.
ca'lculatory, adj. [from calculate.] belonging to calcula-
tion.
! catcule, n. s. scalculus, lat.] reckoning; compute: obsolete.
- the general calcule, which was made in the last perambula-
tion, exceeded eight millions. howel's wocal fores?.
}. ca'lculose. - - -
r adj. sfrom calculus, lat.] stony : grittv.
o, ciculous...} “” [ out, j stony ; gritty
too. the volatile salt of urine will coagulate spirits of wine;
** and thus, perhaps, the stones, or calculose concretions in the
*:::: kidney or bladder, may be produced. brown's vulgar errours.
o i have found, by opening the kidneys of a calculous person,
floor that the stone is formed earlier than i have suggested. sharp.
im. ca'lculus. n.s. [latin.] the stone in the bladder.
o caldrun. m. s. [chauldron, fr. from calidus, lat.] a pot; a
o boiler; a kettle.
:mo. in the midst of all
o there placed was a caldron wide and tall, -
o: upon a mighty furnace, burning hot. fairy queen.
some strip the skin, some portion out the spoil;
| the limbs, yet trembling, in the caldrons boil;
f then - some on the fire the reeking entrails broil. dryden’s aen.
sy sim in the late eruptions, this great hollow was like a vast caldron,
on l. filled with glowing and melted matter, which, as it boiled over
h sh: in any part, ran down the fides of the mountain. addison.
tons, caleche. the same with calash. -
cy, c. calef action. n.s.. [from calofacio, lat.]
d of 1. the aet of heating any thing.
- 2. the state of being heated.
th: calef active. adj. [from calofacio, lat.] that which makes
ind, 3 any thing hot; heating,
ro. calefa crory. adj. [from calofacio, lat.] that which heats.
] to to cat.efy. v. n. [calfto, latin.] to grow hot; to be
...: heated.
o, crystal will talsy unto ele&amp;ricity; that is, a power to at-
of . tract straws, or light bodies, and convert the needle, freely
lso placed. brown's wulgar erraurs,
fo to calefy, v. a. to make hot.
to . calendar, n.s. scalendarium, lat.] a register of the year,
too in which the months, and stated times, are marked, as festi-
is: vals and holidays.
jo what hath this day deserv'd? what hath it done,
so that it in golden letter should be set -
:::::: among the high tides, in the calendar? shakesp. k. john.
so e compute from calendars differing from one another; the
o!' compute of the one anticipating that of the other. brown.
or: curs'd be the day when first i did appear;
#. letit be blotted from the calendar,
o lest it pollute the month dryden's fables.
o to calender. v. a. [calendrer, fr. skinner.] to dress
o cloth; to lay the nap of cloth smooth.
ca *nder. m. s. [from the verb.] a hot press; a press in
which clothiers smooth their cloth.
*so ****prer. m. s. [from calender.] the person who calenders.
***p.s. m. s. scalendae, lat. it has no singular.] the first day
so of overy month among the romans.
o *ture. m. s. [from caleo, lat.] a diffemper peculiar to
sailors, in hot climates; wherein they imagine the sea to be
o $on fields, and will throw themselves into it, 3uincy.
and for that lethargy was there no cure,
but to be cast into a calenture. denham.
so so, by a calenture misled,
* mainer with rapture fees,
o on the smooth ocean's azure bed,
so enamell'd fields, and verdant tices;
so
with eager haste, he longs to rove
in that fantastick scene, and thinks
it must be some enchanted grove ;
and in he leaps, and down he sinks. sotos?.
calf. m. s. calves in the plural. [cealp, saxon; als, dutch.]
1. the young of a cow. -
the colt hath about four years of growth; and so the fawn,
and so the calf. bacon’s nat. hisł.
acosta tells us of a fowl in peru, called condore, which
will kill and eat up a whole calf at a time. //ilkins.
ah! blouzelind, i love thee more by half,
• than does their fawns, or cows the new-fallon calf. gay,
2. calves of the lips, mentioned by hosea, signify sacrifices of
praise and prayers, which the captives of babylon addressed to
god, being no longer in a condition to offer sacrifices in his
temple. calmet.
turn to the lord, and say unto him, take away all ini-
quity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves
of our lips. - h sa, xiv. 2.
3. by way of contempt and reproach applied to a human being;
a dolt; a stupid wretch.
when a child haps to be got,
that after proves an ideot;
when folk perceive it thriveth not,
some filly doating brainless calf,
that understands things by the half,
says, that the fairy left the oaf,
and took away the other. drayt. nym.
4. the thick, plump, bulbous part of the leg. [aaff, dutch.]
into her legs i’d have love's issues fall,
and all her calf into a gouty small. sucking.
the calf of that leg blistered. poisoman's surgery.
ca liber. m. s. scalibre, fr.] the bore; the diameter of the
barrel of a gun; the diameter of a bullet.
ca'lice, n.s. scalix, lat..] a cup; a chalice.
there is a natural analogy between the ablution of the body
and the purification of the soul; between eating the holy bread
and drinking the sacred calice, and a participation of the body
and blood of christ. taylor.
ca'lico. m. s. strom calerut in india.] an indian stuff made of
cotton; sometimes stained with gay and beautiful colours.
i wear the hoop petticoat, and am all in calicoes, when the
finest are in silks. - addison's speciator.
ca/lid. adj. [calidus, lat.] hot ; burning ; fervent.
calidity. m. s. [from ca.i.d.] heat.
ice will dissolve in any way of heat; for it will dissolve with
fire, it will colliquate in water, or warm oil; nor doth it only
submit into an actual heat, but not endure the potential cali-
dity of many waters. brown's vulgar erroirs.
ca’li f. q n.s. [khalisa, arab. an heir or successor.] a title as-
cat iph, { sumed by the successors of mahomet anong the sa-
racens, who were vested with absolute power in affairs, both
religious and civil.
ca ligation. m. s. [from caligo, lat. to be dark.] darkness;
cloudiness.
instead of a diminution, or imperfeot vision, in the mole, we
affirm an abolition, or total privation; instead of caligation, or
dimness, we conclude a cecity, or blindness. brown.
cali'ginous, adj. [caliginosus, lat.] obscure; dim; full of
darkness. -
cali'ginousness. m. s. [from caloginous...] darkness; obscu-
rity.
conson. n. s. [xzxtyczpiz.] ... beautiful writing.
this language is incapable of caligraphy. prideaux.
ca'lipers. see callipers.
ca'liv er. m. s. [from caliber.] a handgun; a harquebuse; an
old musket.
come, manage me your caliver. shałoff. henry iv.
ca'lix. m. s. [latin.] a cup; a word used in botany; as, the
calix of a flower.
to calk. v. a. [from calage, fr. hemp, with which leaks are
stopped; or from caele, sax, the keel. skinner.] to stop the
leaks of a ship.
there is a great errour committed in the manner of calking
his majesty's ships; which being done with rotten oakum, is
the cause they are leaky. raleigh's essays.
so here some pick out bullets from the side;
some drive old oakum through each seam and rift;
their left-hand does the calking iron guide,
the rattling mallet with the left they lift. dryden.
ca'lke r. n.s.. [from calk.] the workman that stops the leaks
of a ship. -
the ancients of gebal, and the wise men thereof, were in
thee thy calkers; all the ships of the sea, with their mariners,
were in thee to occupy thy merchandize. ezek. xxvii. 9.
ca'lking. m. s. a term in painting, used where the backfide is
covered with black lead, or red chalk, and the lines traced
through on a waxed plate, wall, or other matter, by passing
lightly over each stroke of the design with a point, which
leaves an impression of the colour on the plate or wall. chamb.
t, call. v.a. [calo, lat. kalder, danish-l
1. to name; to denominate.
i and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 328</div><p class="text">c a l
c a l
and god called the light day, and the darkness he called
night. gen. i. 5.
2. to summon, or invite, to or from any place, thing, or person.
it is often used with local particles; as, up, down, in, out,
onts
*s. not amazed, call all your senses to you, defend my repu-
tation, or bid farewel to your good life for ever. shakesp.
why came not the slave back to me, when i called him
shakesp. king lear.
are you call'd forth from out a world of men,
to slay the innocent? shakesp. richard iii.
lodronius, that famous captain, was called up, and told by
his servants, that the general was fled. knolles's history.
or call up him, that left half told
the story of cambuscan bold. milton.
drunkenness calls off the watchmen from their towers; and
then evils proceed from a loose heart, and an untied tongue.
taylor's holy living.
the soul makes use of her memory, to call to mind what she
is to treat of. duppa's rules to devotion.
such fine employments our whole days divide,
the salutations of the morning tide
call up the sun; those ended, to the hall
we wait the patron, hear the lawyers bawl. dryden.
then, by consent, abstain from further spoils,
call off the dogs, and gather up the spoils. addison.
by the pleasures of the imagination or fancy, i mean such as
arise from visible objects, when we call up their ideas into our
minds by paintings, statues, or descriptions. addison. speciator.
why dost thou call my sorrows up afresh
my father's name brings tears into my eyes. addis. cato.
i am called off from publick dissertations, by a domestick af-
fair of great importance. tatler.
aeschylus has a tragedy, entitled perse, in which the shade
of darius is called up. broome on the odyssey.
the passions call away the thoughts, with incessant impor-
tunity, toward the object that excited them. watts.
3. to convoke ; to summon together.
now call we our high court of parliament. shakesp.
the king being informed of much that had passed that night,
sent to the lord mayor to call a common council immediately.
clarendon.
4. to summon judicially.
the king had sent for the earl to return home, where he
should be called to account for all his miscarriages. clarendon.
once a day, especially in the early years of life and study,
call yourselves to an account, what new ideas, what new pro-
position or truth, you have gained. watts.
5. to summon by command.
in that day did the lord god of hosts call to weeping, and to
mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth.
isaiah, xxii. 12.
6. in the theological sense, to inspire with ardours of piety; or
to summon into the church.
paul a servant of jesus christ, called to be an apostle, sepa-
rated unto the gospel of god. fom. i. 1.
7. to invoke; to appeal to. -
i call god for a record upon my soul, that, to spare you, i
came not as yet unto corinth. 2 cor. i. 23.
8. to appeal to.
when that lord perplexed their counsels and designs, with
inconvenient objections in law, the authority of the lord man-
chester, who had trod the same paths, was still called upon.
clarendon.
9. to proclaim; to publish.
nor ballad-singer, plac'd above the croud,
sings with a note so shrilling, sweet, and loud,
nor parish-clerk, who call, the psalm so clear. gay.
10. to excite ; to put in action ; to bring into view.
he swells with angry pride,
and calls forth all his spots on every side. cowley.
see dionysius homer's thoughts refine,
and call new beauties forth from ev’ry line. pope.
11. to stigmatize with some opprobrious denomination.
deafness unqualifies men for all company, except friends;
whom i can call names, if they do not speak loud enough.
swift to pope.
12. to call back. to revoke; to retract.
he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his
words; but will arise against the house of the evil doers, and
against the help of them that work iniquity. isaiah, xxxi. 2.
13. to call for. to demand; to require; to claim.
madam, his majesty doth call for you,
and for your grace, and you, my noble lord. shakesp.
you see, how men of merit are sought after; the undeserver
may sleep, when the man of action is called for. shakesp.
among them he a spirit of phrensy sent,
who hurt their minds,
and urg'd you on, with mad desire,
to call in haste for their destroyer. milton's agonistes.
for master, or for servant, here to call,
was all alike, where only two were all. dryden's fab.
he commits every fin that his appetite calls for, or perhaps
his constitution or fortune can bear. rogers.
14. to call in. to resume money at interest.
horace describes an old usurer, as so charmed with the plea-
sures of a country life, that, in order to make a purchase, he
called in all his money; but what was the event of it? why, in
a very few days after, he put it out again. addison. speciator.
15. to call in. to resume any thing that is in other hands.
if clipped money be called in all at once, and stopped from
passing by weight, i fear it will stop trade. locke.
neither is anything more cruel and oppressive in the french
government, than their practice of calling in their money, after
they have sunk it very low, and then coining it anew, at a
higher value. swift.
16. to call in. to summon together; to invite.
the heat is past, follow me no farther now;
call in the pow'rs, good cousin, westmoreland. shakoff.
he fears my subjects loyalty,
and now must tall in strangers. denham's sophy.
17. to call over. to read aloud a list or muster-roll.
to call. v. n.
1. to stop without intention of staying. this meaning
probably rose from the custom of denoting one's presen:
at the door by a call; but it is now used with great la-
titude. this sense is well enough preserved by the particles
t or at ; but is forgotten, and the expression made barbarous
4?!,
2. %. make a short visit.
and, as you go, call on my brother quintus,
and pray him, with the tribunes, to come to me. b. johns.
he ordered her to call at his house once a-week, which she
did for some time after, when he heard no more of her. temple.
that i might begin as near the fountain-head as possible, i
first of all called in at st. james's. addison's spectator.
we called in at morge, where there is an artificial port.
addison on italy.
3. to call on. to solicite for a favour, or a debt.
i would be loth to pay him before his day; what need i be so
forward with him, that calls not on me? shakes. henry iv.
4. to call on. to repeat solemnly.
thrice call upon my name, thrice beat your breast,
and hail me thrice to everlasting rest. dryden.
the athenians, when they lost any men at sea, went to the
shores, and, calling thrice on their names, raised a cenotaph,
or empty monument, to their memories. broome on the oas.
5. to call out. to challenge; to summon to fight. -
when their sov’reign's quarrel calls 'em out,
his foes to mortal combat they defy. dryden's wirgil.
6. to call upon. to implore; to pray to.
call upon me in the day of trouble; i will deliver thee, and
thou shalt glorify me. psalm i. 15.
call. n.s.. [from the verb.]
i. a vocal address of summons, or invitation.
but death comes not at call; justice divine
mends not her slowest pace, for pray'rs or cries. milton,
but would you sing, and rival orpheus' strain,
the wond'ring forests soon should dance again:
the moving mountains hear the pow'rful call,
and headlong streams hang list’ning in their fall. pope.
2. requisition authoritative and publick.
it may be feared,whether our nobility would contentedly suf-
fer themselves to be always at the call, and to stand to the sen-
tence of a number of mean persons, hooker's preface.
3. divine vocation; summons to true religion.
yet he at length, time to himself best known,
rememb'ring abraham, by some wond’rous call,
may bring them back repentant and sincere.
4. a summons from heaven; an impulse.
how justly then will impious mortals fall,
whose pride would soar to heav'n without a call? rossm.
those who to empire by dark paths aspire,
still plead a call to what they most desire. drydon.
st. paul himself believed he did well, and that he had a call to
it, when he persecuted the christians, whom he confidently
thought in the wrong: but yet it was he, and not they, who
were mistaken. locke.
5. authority; command.
oh! sir, i wish he were within my call, or your's. denh.
6. a demand; a claim. -
dependence is a perpetual call upon humanity, and a greater
incitement to tenderness and pity, than any other motive what-
soever. addison. spectator.
7. an instrument to call birds.
for those birds or beasts were made from such pipes or calls,
as may express the several tones of those creatures, which are
represented. i/ilkins's mathemat. asagick.
8. calling; vocation; employment.
now, through the land, his cure of souls he stretch'd,
and, like a primitive apostle, preach'd :
still chearful, ever constant to his call;
m.o*on.
by many follow'd, lov’d by most, admir’d by all. dryden,
9. a nomination. 4.
- upon
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 329</div><p class="text">c a l
c a l
o
*.*
§,
o
ion
is, i
als,
in:
|
o,
onto,
and to:
h:#;
own,
still
!.
h
a is to
'c,
!,
athe #.
m hetto
dos
*
is soft |.
lo
airmo
ao
ith so
tuits, wo
soul. lo
ush. ic.
by il, so
(;
upon the sixteenth was held the serjeants feast at ely place,
there being nine serjeants of that call. bacon.
ca. ll.a.t.
ca'll et. } n. s. a trull.
he call'd her whore: a beggar, in his drink,
could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
ca’llin g. n.s.. [from call.]
1. vocation ; profession; trade.
if god has interwoven such a pleasure with our ordinary
calling, how much superiour must that be, which arises from
the survey of a pious life surely, as much as christianity is
nobler than a trade. south.
we find ourselves obliged to go on in honest industry in our
zalings. rogers.
i cannot forbear warning you against endeavouring at wit
in your sermons ; because many of your calling have made
shakesp.
themselves ridiculous by attempting it. swift.
i left no calling for this idle trade,
no duty broke, no father disobey'd. pope.
2. proper station, or employment.
the gauls found the roman senators ready to die with ho-
nour in their callings. swift.
3. class of persons united by the same employment or profession.
it may be a caution to all christian churches and magistrates,
not to impose celibacy on whole callings, and great multitudes
of men or women, who cannot be supposable to have the gift of
continence. hammond.
4. divine vocation; invitation or impulse to the true religion.
give all diligence to make your calling and election sure.
2 peter. i. io.
st. peter was ignorant of the calling of the gentiles.
hasewill on providence.
ca’ll ipers. m. s. [of this word i know not the etymology, nor
does any thing more probable occur, than that, perhaps, the
word is corrupted from clippers, instruments with which any
thing is clipped, inclosed or embraced.] compasses with bowed
fhanks.
calipers measure the distance of any round, cylindrick,
conical body, so that, when workmen use them, they open the
two points to their described width, and turn so much stuff off
the intended place, till the two points of the callipers fit just
over their work. moxon's mechanical exercises.
callo's 1ty. m. s. scalloste, fr.] a kind of swelling without
pain, like that of the skin, by hard labour; and therefore, when
wounds, or the edges of ulcers, grow so, they are said to be
callous. $2hincy.
the surgeon ought to vary the diet of his patient, as he finds
the fibres loosen too much, are too flaccid, and produce fun-
guses, or as they harden and produce callosities; in the first
case, wine and spirituous liquours are useful, in the last hurt-
ful. arbuthnot on diet.
callous. adj. [callus, lat.]
1. indurated; hardened; having the pores shut up.
in progress of time, the ulcers became sinuous and callous,
with induration of the glands. j77s man.
2. hardened ; insensible.
licentiousness has so long passed for sharpness of wit, and
greatness of mind, that the conscience is grown callous, l’eslr.
the wretch is drench'd too deep,
his soul is stupid, and his heart asleep :
fatten’d in vice, so callous and so gross,
he fins, and sees not, senseless of his loss.
ca'llous n ess. n.f. [from callous.]
1. hardness ; induration of the fibres.
the oftner we use the organs of touching, the more of these
feales are formed, and the skin becomes the thicker, and so a
callousness grows upon it. cheyne.
2. insensibility. -
if they let go their hope of everlasting life with willingness,
and entertain final perdition with exultation, ought they not to
be esteemed destitute of common sense, and abandoned to a
callousness and numbness of soul ? bentley.
ca’llow. adj. unfledged ; naked; without feathers.
bursting with kindly rapture, forth disclos'd
their callow young.
then as an eagle, who, with pious care,
was beating widely on the wing for prey,
to her now silent airy does repair,
and finds her callow infants forc'd away. dryden.
how in small flights they know to try their young,
and teach the callow child her parent's song. prior.
ca"llus. n.s. [latin.]
1. an induration of the fibres.
2. the hard substance by which broken bones are united.
calm. adj. [calme, fr. kalm, dutch..]
1. quiet ; serene; not stormy ; not tempestuous: applied to the
elements.
calm was the day, and, through the trembling air,
sweet breathing zephyrus did softly play
a gentle spirit, that lightly did allay
hot titan's beams, which then did glister fair.
so shall the sea be calm unto us.
wol. i.
dryden.
milton.
sponsor.
fanah.
2. undisturbed; unruffled: applied to the passions.
it is no ways congruous, that god should be frightning men
into truth, who were made to be wrought upon by calm evi-
dence, and gentle methods of persuasion. atterbury.
the queen her speech with calm attention hears,
her eyes restrain the silver-streaming tears.
calm. n.s.
1. serenity; stilness; freedom from violent motion: used of
the elements.
it seemeth most agreeable to reason, that the waters rather
flood in a quiet calm, than that they moved with any raging or
pope.
overbearing violence. 1&amp;aleigh.
every pilot
can steer the ship in calois ; but he performs
the skiiful part, can manage it in sorms. denham.
nor god alone in the still calm we find, -
he mounts the storm, and walks upon the wind. pope.
2. o from disturbance; quiet; repose: applied to the pas-
1on s.
great and strange calms usually portend the most violent
sforms ; and therefore, since/orms and calms do always follow
one another, certainly, of the two, it is much more eligible to
have the storm first, and the calm afterwards: since a calm before
a storm is commonly a peace of a man’s own making ; but a
calm after a slorm, a peace of god's. south.
to calm. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to still ; to quiet.
neptune we find busy in the beginning of the aeneis, to calm
the tempest raised by æolus. dryden.
2. to pacify ; to appease.
jesus, whose bare word checked the sea, as much exerts him-
self in silencing the tempests, and calming the intestine storms
within our breasts. decay of piety.
those passions, which seem somewhat calmed, may be entirely
laid asleep, and never more awakened. atterbury.
he will'd to stay,
the sacred rites and hecatombs to pay,
and cahn minerva’s wrath. pope.
ca'lm er. m. s. [from calm..] the person or thing which has
the power of giving quiet.
angling was, after tedious study, a rest to his mind, a cheerer
of his spirits, a diverter of sadness, a calmer of unquiet thoughts,
a moderator of passions, a procurer of contentedness. walton.
ca'i, mly. adv. [from calm.]
1. without storms, or violence; serenely.
in nature, things move violently to their place, and calmly
in their place ; so virtue in ambition is violent, in authority
settled and calm. bacon.
his curled brows
frown on the gentle stream, which calmly flows. denham.
2. without pashons; quietly.
the nymph did like the scene appear,
serenely pleasant, calmly fair;
soft fell her words, as flew the air.
ca1, mn ess. n.s.. [from calml -
1. tranquillity; serenity ; not storminess.
while the steep horrid roughness of the wood
strives with the gentle calmness of the flood.
2. mildness ; freedom from passion.
sir, 'tis fit
you have strong party, or defend yourself
by calmns, or by absence: all's in anger.
i beg the grace,
you would lay by those terrours of your face;
till calmness to your eyes you first restore,
i am afraid, and i can beg no more. dryden.
cat.m.y. adj. [from calm..] calm; peaceful. not used.
and now they nigh approached to the sted,
where as those mermaides dwelt : it was a still
and calmy bay, on the one side sheltered
with the broad shadow of an hoary hill. fairy queen.
caolomel. n.s. [calomelas, a chymical word.] mercury fix
times sublimed.
he repeated lenient purgatives with calcmel, once in three
or four days. jwisman's surgery.
calori. fick, adj. [calorificus, lat.] that which has the qua-
lity of producing heat; heating.
a calorifick principle is either excited within the heated body,
or transferred to it, through any medium, from some other.
silver will grow hotter than the liquour it contains. grew.
calotte. n.s. [french.]
1. a cap or coif, worn as an ecclesiastical ornament in
france.
2. [in archite&amp;ture.] a round cavity or depressure, in form of a
cap or cup, lathed and plaistered, used to diminish the rise or
elevation of a chapel, cabinet, alcove, &amp;c. harris.
caloters. n s. [x,xxgp.] monks of the greek church.
temp'rate as caloyers in their secret cells. madden on boulter.
ca'ltrops. n. s. scoltnaeppe, saxon.]
1. an instrument made with three spikes, so that which way so-
ever it falls to the ground, one of them points upright, to
wound horses feet.
3 x the
prior.
denham.
shakespeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 330</div><p class="text">c a m
c a m
*
the ground about was thick sown with callrops, which very cam e. the preterite of to come.
much incommoded the shoeless moors.
- dr. addison's account of tangiers.
2. a plant common in france, spain, and italy, where it
grows among corn, and is very troublesome ; for the fruit
being armed with strong prickles, run into the feet of the
cattle. this is certainly the plant mentioned in virgil's
georgick, under the name of tribulus. miller.
t. c.alv e. v. n. [from calf.]
1. to bring a calf: spoken of a cow.
when she has calv’d, then set the dam aside,
and for the tender progeny provide. dryden.
2. it is used metaphorically for any act of bringing forth ; and
sometimes of men, by way of reproach.
i would they were barbarians, as they are,
though in rome litter'd ; not romans: as they are not ;
though calved in the porch o' th' capitol. shakespeare.
the grassy clods now calv’d, now half appear'd
the tawny lion, pawing to get free
his hinder parts. - milton.
calves-ss out. [antirrhinum.] a plant. snapdragon.
ca/wille. m. s. [french..] a sort of apple.
to ca lu’mnia's e. v. n. [calumnior, lat.] to accuse falsely ;
to charge without just ground.
beauty, wit, high birth, desert in service,
love, friendship, charity, are subject all
to envious and calumniating time. shakespeare.
he mixes truth with falsehood, and has not forgotten the
rule of calumniating strongly, that something may remain.
dryden's fables, prosace.
do i calumniate 1 thou ungrateful vanoc l—
perfidious prince 1–is it a calumny
to say, that gwendolen betroth'd to yver, ,
was by her father first assur'd to valens :
to calu'mniat e. v. a. to slander.
one trade or art, even those that should be the most liberal,
make it their business to disdain and calumniate another. spratt.
calumnia’tion. m. s. [from calumniate.] that which we call
calumniation, is a malicious and false representation of an ene-
my's words or actions, to an offensive purpose. ayliffe.
calumniator. m. s. [from calumniate.] a forger of accusa-
tion; a slanderer.
he that would live clear of the envy and hatred of potent
calumniators, must lay his finger upon his mouth, and keep his
hand out of the ink pot. l’estrange.
at the same time that virgil was celebrated by gallus, we
know that bavius and moevius were his declared foes and ca-
lumniators. addison.
calu'mnious. adj. [from calumny.] slanderous; falsely re-
proachful.
- virtue itself 'scapes not caluminious strokes. shakes eare.
with calumnious art
of counterfeited truth, thus held their ears. milton.
catlumn.y. m. s. scalumnia, lat.] slander ; false charge;
groundless accusation: with agains, or sometimes upon, before
the person accused.
be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow,
thou shalt not escape calumny. shakespeare.
it is a very hard calumny upon our soil or climate, to affirm,
that so excellent a fruit will not grow here. temple.
calx. m. s. [latin.] any thing that is rendered reducible to
powder by burning.
gold, that is more dense than lead, resists peremptorily all
the dividing power of fire; and will not be reduced into a calx,
or lime, by such operation as reduces lead into it. digby.
ca(lycle. m. s. [calyculus, lat.] a small bud of a plant. die?.
camateu. m. s. [from camachuia, which name is given by the
orientals to the onyx, when, in preparing it, they find another
colour.]
1. a stone with various figures and representations of landskips,
formed by nature.
2. [in painting.] a term used where there is only one colour,
and where the lights and shadows are of gold, wrought on a
golden or azure ground. this kind of work is chiefly used
to represent basso relievos. chambers.
cam ber. m. s. [see cambering..] a term among workmen.
camber, a piece of timber cut arching, so as a weight con-
fiderable being set upon it, it may, in length of time, be in-
duced to a straight. 4/oxon's 44-chanical exercises.
camber in g. m. s. a word mentioned by skinner, as peculiar
to shipbuilders, who say, that a place is cambering, when they
mean arched. [from chambre, french.]
ca'mbrick. m. s. [from cambray, a city in flanders, where it
was principally made.] a kind of fine linen, used for ruffles,
womens sleeves and caps.
he hath ribbons of all the colours of the rainbow ; inkles,
caddises, cambricks, and lawns. shakespeare.
rebecca had, by the use of a looking-glass, and by the fur-
ther use of certain attire, made of cambrick, upon her head, at-
a. philips.
tained to an evil art. tatler.
confed’rate in the cheat, they draw the throng,
and cao brick handkerchiefs reward the song. gay.
till all the pack came up, and ev'ry hound
tore the sad huntsman, grov'ling on the ground. alison.
catmel. m. s. [camelus, lat.j. an animal very common in a-
rabia, judea, and the neighbouring countries. one sort is
large, and full of flesh, and fit to carry burdens of a thousand
pounds weight, having one bunch upon its back. another
have two bunches upon their backs, like a natural saddle, and
are fit either for burdens, or men to ride on. a third kind is
leaner, and of a smaller size, called dromedaries, because of
their swiftness; which are generally used for riding by men of
quality.
camel have large solid feet, but not hard. camel; will
continue ten or twelve days without eating or drinking, .nd
keep water a long time in their stomach, for their refreshment.
cuimet.
patient of thirst and toil,
son of the desart i even the camel feels, -
shot through his wither'd heart, the fiery blast. th:non.
came'top'arp. n.s.. [from camelus and pardis, lat.] an abys-
finian animal, taller than an elephant, but not so thick. he is
so named, because he has a neck and head like a camel; he is
spotted like a pard, but his spots are white upon a red ground.
the italians call him giaraffa. trevaux.
ca'mielot.
ca. m. s. [from camel.]
1. a kind of stuff originally made by a mixture of silk and
camels hair ; it is now made with wool and silk. -
this habit was not of camels skin, nor any course texture
of its hair, but rather some finer weave of camelot, grograin, or
the like; in as much as these stuffs are supposed to be made of
the hair of that animal. brown's wulgar erreurs.
2. hair cloth.
meantime the pastor shears their hoary beards,
and eases, of their hair, the loaden herds:
their camelots warm in tents the soldier hold,
and shield the shiv'ring mariner from cold. dryden.
came ra obscura. [latin.] an optical machine used in
a darkened chamber, so that the light coming only through a
double convex glass, objects exposed to daylight, and opposite
to the glass, are represented inverted upon any white matter
placed in the focus of the glass. aartin.
ca'merade. m. s. [from camera, a chamber, lat.] one that
lodges in the same chamber; a bosom companion. by cor-
ruption we now use comrade. -
camerade with him, and confederates in his design. rymer.
ca'merated. adj. [cameratus, lat..] arched; roofed slopewise.
qameration. n.s.. [cameratio, lat..] a vaulting or arching.
camisa'do. m. s. scamisa, a shirt, ital, camisium, low lat..] an
attack made by soldiers in the dark; on which occasion they
put their shirts outward, to be seen by each other.
they had appointed the same night, whose darkness would
have encreased the fear, to have given a camisade upon the en-
glish. hayward.
ca'misat ed, adj. [from camisa, a shirt.] dressed with the shirt
outward.
camlet. see camelot.
he had on him a gown with wide sleeves, of a kind of water
camlet, of an excellent azure colour. bacon.
cam mock. m. s. scammoc, saxon ; anonis.] an herb; the same
with petty whin, or resharrow.
ca'momile. m. s. [anthemis.] a flower.
camo'ys. adj. [camus, fr.] flat; level; depressed. it is only
used of the nose.
many spaniards, of the race of barbary moors, though after
frequent commixture, have not worn out the camoys nose unto
this day. brown's vulgar erreurs.
camp. m. s. [camp, fr. camp, sax, from campus, lat.) the
order of tents, placed by armies when they keep the field. we
use the phrase to pitch a camp, to encamp.
from camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
the hum of either army stilly sounds. shakespeare.
next, to secure our camp, and naval pow'rs,
raise an embattel'd wall, with lofty tow’rs. pope.
to camp. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to encamp; to lodge in tents, for hostile purposes.
had our great palace the capacity
to camp this host, we would all sup together.
2. to camp; to pitch a camp; to fix tents.
camp-fight. m. s. an old word for combat.
for their trial by camp-fight, the accuser was, with the peril
of his own body, to prove the accused guilty; and, by offering
him his glove organtlet, to challenge him to this trial. hak.
%, ! n. s. [campaigne, french; campania, ital.]
1. a large, open, level trađt of ground, without hills.
in countries thinly inhabited, and especially in vast campa-
mias, there are few cities, besides what grow by the residence
of kings. temple.
those grateful groves, that shade the plain,
where tiber rolls majestick to the main,
and fattens, as he runs, the fair campaign. carth.
7 2. the
shakes?.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 331</div><p class="text">c. a n
2. the time for which any army keeps the field, without enter-
ing into quarters.
this might have hastened his march, which would have
made a fair conclusion of the campaign. clarendon.
an iliad rising out of one campaign. addison.
campanifor m. adj. [of campana, a bell, and/orma, lat.]. a
term used of flowers, which are in the shape of a bell. har.
campanulate. adj. the same with campaniform.
campe's tral. adj. [camposiris, lat.] growing in fields.
the mountain beech is the whitest; but the campestral, or
wild beech, is blacker and more durable. azrtimer.
ca'mphire tree. m. s. scamphora, lat j
there are two sorts of this tree ; one is a native of the isle
of borneo, from which the best camphire is taken, which is
supposed to be a natural exsudation from the tree, produced
in such places where the bark of the tree has been wounded
or cut. the other sort is a native of japan, which dr.
kempfer describes to be a kind of bay, bearing black or pur-
ple berries, and from whence the inhabitants prepare their
camphire, by making a simple decoction of the root and wood
of this tree, cut into small pieces; but this sort of camphire
is, in value, eighty or an hundred times less than the true
bornean camphire. miller.
it is oftener used for the gum of this tree.
ca'mphorate. adj. [from camphora, lat.] impregnated with
camphire.
by shaking the saline and camphorate liquours together, we
easily confounded them into one high coloured liquour. boyle.
ca(mpion. n.s. [lychnis, lat..] a plant.
ca’mus. n.s. [probably from camisa, lat.] a thin dress, men-
tioned by spenser.
and was yelad, for heat of scorching air,
all in silken camus, lilly white,
purfled upon with many a folded plight. fairy queen.
can. m. s. [canne, sax.] a cup ; generally a cup made of me-
tal, or some other matter than earth.
i hate it as an unfill'd can. shakespeare.
one tree, the coco, affordeth stuff for housing, cloathing,
shipping, meat, drink, and can. grew.
his empty can, with ears half worn away,
was hung on high, to boast the triumph of the day. dryden.
to can. v. n. [konnen, dutch. it is sometimes, though rarely, used
alone; but is in constant use as an expression of the potential
mood; as, i can do, thou cans? do, i could do, thou could so do.
it has no other terminations.]
i. to be able; to have power.
in place there is licence to do good and evil, whereof
the latter is a curse; for, in evil, the best condition is not to
will ; the second not to can. bacon.
o, there's the wonder
mecaenas and agrippa, who can most
with caesar, are his foes. dryden.
he can away with no company, whose discourse goes beyond
what claret and dissoluteness inspires. locke.
2. it expresses the potential mood; as, i can do it.
if she can make me blest : she only can :
empire and wealth, and all she brings beside,
are but the train and trappings of her love. dryden.
3. it is distinguished from may, as power from permission ; i can
do it; it is in my power: i may do it; it is allowed me: but,
in poetry, they are confounded.
4. can is used of the person with the verb aciive, where may is
used; of the thing, with the verb passive; as, i can do it; it
may or can be done.
cana‘ille, n. s. [french.] the lowest people; the dregs;
the lees; the offscouring of the people: a french term of re-
proach. t
cana‘l. n. s. scanalis, lat.]
1. a bason of water in a garden.
the walks and long canals reply. pope.
2. any tract or course of water made by art; as the canals in
holland.
3. [in anatomy..] a conduit or passage through which any of the
juices of the body flow.
ca'nal-co al. n.s. a fine kind of coal, dug up in england.
• even our canal-coal nearly equals the foreign jet. woodw.
canali'culate d. adj. [from canaliculatus, lat.] channelled;
made like a pipe or gutter. ** die?.
cana'ry. m. s. [from the canary islands.]
1. wine brought from the canaries; now called sack.
i will to my honest knight falstaff, and drink canary with
him.—i think i shall drink in pipe wine first with him ; i'll
make him dance. shakespeare.
2. an old dance.
to cana'ry. v. a. a cant word, which seems to signify to
dance; to frolick.
master, will you win your love with a french brawl?
how mean'st thou, brawling in french: no, my com-
pleat master; but to jigg off a tune at the tongue's end, ca-
nary to it; with your feet, humour it with turning up your
eyelids. i shaft speare.
canary bird. an excellent singing bird, formerly bred in
o
!
the canaries, and nowhere else, but now bred in several parts
of europe, particularly germany.
of singing birds, they have linnets, goldfinches, ruddocks,
canary birds, blackbirds, thrushes, and divers other. carew.
to cancel. v. a. [canceller, fr. from cancellis nota, e, to mark
with cross lines.]
1. to cross a writing.
2. to efface; to obliterate in general.
now welcome night, thou night so long expeacd,
that long day's labour doth at last defray,
and all my cares which cruel love collected,
has summ'd in one, and cancelled for aye. spenser.
know then, i here forget all former griefs,
cancel all grudge; repeal thee home again, shakespears.
thou whom avenging pow'rs obey,
cancel my debt, too great to pay,
before the sad accounting day. roscommon.
i pass the bills, my lords,
for cancelling your debts. southerne.
cancell. at ep, particip. adj. [from cancel.] cross-barred;
marked with lines crossing each other.
the tail of the castor is almost bald, though the beast is very
hairy; and cancellated, with some resemblance to the scales of
fishes. grew.
cancellation. n.s.. [from cancel.] according to bartolus,
is an expunging or wiping out of the contents of an instrument,
by two lines drawn in the manner of a cross. ayliffe.
ca ncer... n.s. [cancer, lat.]
i. a crabfish.
2. the sign of the summer solstice.
when now no more th' alternate twins are fir’d,
and cancer reddens with the solar blaze,
short is the doubtful empire of the night.
3. a virulent swelling, or sore, not to be cured.
any of these three may degenerate into a schirrus, and that
schirrus into a cancer.
as when a cancer on the body feeds,
and gradual death from limb to limb proceeds;
so does the chilness to each vital part,
spread by degrees, and creeps into the heart. addison.
to cancerate. v. n. [from cancer.] to grow cancerous;
to become a cancer.
but striking his fist upon the point of a nail in the wall, his
hand cancerated, he fell into a fever, and soon after died on’t.
l’estrange.
cance ration. m. s. [from cancerate.] a growing cancerous.
ca'ncerous, adj. [from cancer.] having the virulence and
qualities of a cancer.
how they are to be treated when they are strumous, schir-
rhous, or cancerous, you may see in their proper places.
//iseman.
ca'ncerousness. n.s.. [from cancerous.] the state of being
can cerous.
ca'n crine. adj. [from cancer.] having the qualities of a crab.
ca'ndent. adj. [candens, lat.j hot ; in the highest degree of
heat, next to fusion. - c
if a wire be heated only at one end, according as that end is
cooled upward or downward, it respectively acquires a verti-
city, as we have declared in wires totally candent. brown,
ca'nd1cant. adj. [candicans, lat.] growing white; whitish.
die?o
thomson.
j/isman-
ca'ndid. adj. [candidus, lat.]
1. white. this sense is very rare.
the box receives all black: but, pour'd from thence,
the stones came candid forth, the hue of innocence.
dryden,
2. free from malice; not defirous to find faults; fair; open;
ingenuous.
the import of the discourse will, for the most part, if there
be no designed fallacy, sufficiently lead candid and iatelligent
readers into the true meaning of it. locke.
a candid judge will read each piece of wit,
with the same spirit that its authour writ. pope.
ca’ndidate. m. s. scandidatus, lat.]
1. a competitor; one that solicits, or proposes himself for some-
thing of advancement.
so many candidates there stand for wit,
a place at court is scarce so hard to get. anonymour.
one would be surprised to see so many candidates for glory.
- addison.
2. it has generally for before the thing sought.
what could thus high thy rash ambition raise
art thou, fond youth, a candidate for praise 2
3. sometimes of:
thy firstfruits of poesy were giv'n,
to make thyself a welcome inmate there,
while yet a young probationer,
and candidate of heav'n. dryden.
ca'ndidly. adv. [from candid.] fairly ; without trick; with-
out malice; ingenuously.
we have often defired, they would deal candidy with us;
for if the matter stuck only there, we would propose, that every
pope.
illan
|
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 332</div><p class="text">c a n
c a n
man should swear, that he is a member of the church of ire-
land. swift.
ca'n didness. n.s. [from candid.] ingenuity; openness of
temper; purity of mind. -
it presently sees the guilt of a sinful adion; and, on the
other side, observes the candidness of a man's very principles,
and the fincerity of his intentions. south.
to ca’ndify. v. a. [candisico, lat..] to make white ; to
whiten. dici.
ca'ndle. m. s. [candela, lat.]
1. a light made of wax or tallow, surrounding a wick of flax or
£ottoll.
here burns my candle out, ay, here it dies,
which, while it lasted, gave king henry light. shakesp.
we see that wax candles last longer than tallow candles, be-
cause wax is more firm and hard. bacon's nat. history.
take a child, and, setting a candle before him, you shall find
his pupil to contract very much, to exclude the light, with
the brightness whereof it would otherwise be dazzled. ray.
2. light, or luminary.
by these bless'd candles of the night,
had you been there, i think you would have begg'd
the ring of me, to give the worthy doctor. shakespeare.
ca'ndl e berry tree. see sweet-willow ; of which it is
a species.
can dle hold e.r. m. s. [from candle and hold.]
1. he that holds the candle.
2. he that remotely assists.
- let wantons, light of heart,
tickle the senseless rushes with her heels;
for i am proverb’d with a grandfire phrase,
to be a candeholder, and look on.
ca'ndlelfo ht. n.s.. [from candle and light ]
1. the light of a candle.
in darkness, candlelight may serve to guide men's steps,
which, to use in the day, were madness. plooker.
before the day was done, her work she sped,
and never went by candlelight to bed. dryden's fables.
the boding owl
steals from her private cell by night,
and flies about the candlelight. swift.
such as are adapted to meals, will indifferently serve for din-
ners or suppers, only distinguishing between daylight and
candlelight. swift.
2. the necessary candles for use.
i shall find him coals and candlelight. molineux to locke.
ca’ndlemas. n.s.. [from candle and mass.] the feast of the
purification of the blessed virgin, which was formerly cele-
brated with many lights in churches.
the harvest dinners are held by every wealthy man, or, as
we term it, by every good liver, between michaelmas and can-
dlemas. carew's survey of cornwall.
there is a general tradition in most parts of europe, that
inferreth the coldness of the succeeding winter, upon shining
of the sun upon candlemas day. brown's vulgar errours.
come candlemas nine years ago she dy’d,
and now lies bury’d by the yew-tree side. gay.
ca'ndle stick. n.s.. [from candle and /lick.] the instrument
that holds candles.
the horsemen sit like fixed candles?icks,
with torch-staves in their hands; and their poor jades
lob down their heads. - shakespeare.
these countries were once christian, and members of the
church, and where the golden candlesticks did stand. bacon.
i know a friend, who has converted the essays of a man of
quality, into a kind of fringe for his candle/licks. addison.
ca"ndlestuff. n.s.. [from candle and /luff..] anything of which
candles may be made ; kitchen stuff; grease ; tallow.
by the help of oil, and wax, and other candiosluff, the
flame may continue, and the wick not burn. bacon.
candlewa's ter. m. s. [from candle and waste..] one that
consumes candles ; a spendthrist.
patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
with candlewasters. shakespeare.
ca'n dock. m. s. a weed that grows in rivers.
let the pond lie dry six or twelve months, both to kill the
water weeds, as water-lilies, candacks, reate, and bulrushes,
and also, that as these die for want of water, so grass may
row on the pond's bottom. //alton.
ca’n dou r. n.s. [candor, lat..] sweetness of temper; purity
of mind; openness ; ingenuity; kindness.
he should have so much of a natural candour and sweetness,
mixed with all the improvement of learning, as might convey
knowledge with a sort of gentle insinuation. // atts.
t, ca’ndy. v. a. [probably from candare, a word used in later
times, for to whiten.]
1. to conserve with sugar, in such a manner as that the sugar
lies in flakes, or breaks into spangles.
should the poor be flatter'd
no, let the candy'd tongue lick absurd pomp,
and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee,
where thrist may follow fawning,
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
they have in turky confedions like to candied conserves,
made of sugar and lemons, or sugar and citrons, or sugar and
violets, and some other flowers, and mixture of amber. bacon.
with candy'd plantanes, and the juicy pine,
on choicest melons and sweet grapes they dine.
2. to form into congelations.
will the cold brook,
candied with ice, cawdle thy morning toast,
to cure thy o'er-night's surfeit *
3. to incrust with congelations.
since when those frosts that winter brings,
which candy every green,
renew us like the teeming springs,
and we thus fresh are seen.
7% ca’ndy. v. n. to grow congealed.
ca'ndy lion's foot. [catanance, lat..] a plant.
cane. m. s. [canna, lat.]
1. a kind of strong reed, of which walking staffs are made; a
walking staff.
shall i to please another wine sprung mind
lose all mine own f god hath given me a measure
short of his cane and body: must i find
a pain in that wherein he finds a pleasure? herbert.
the king thrust the captain from him with his cane; where-
upon he took his leave, and went home. harvey.
if the poker be out of the way, or broken, stir the fire with
your master's cane. swift.
2. the plant which yields the sugar. -
this cane or reed grows plentifully both in the east and
west indies. other reeds have their skin hard and dry, and
their pulp void of juice; but the skin of the sugar cane is soft,
and the spongy matter or pith it contains very juicy. it usu-
ally grows four or five feet high, and about half an inch in
diameter. the stem or stalk is divided by knots a foot and
a half a part. at the top it puts forth a number of long
green tufted leaves, from the middle of which arise the flower
and the seed. there are likewise leaves springing out from
each knot; but these usually fall as the cane rises. they
usually plant them in pieces cut a foot and a half below the
top of the flower, and they are ordinarily ripe in ten months,
though sometimes not till fifteen; at which time they are
found quite full of a white succulent marrow, whence is ex-
frcfied the liquour of which sugar is made. when ripe,
they are cut, and carried in bundles to the mills, which con-
sist of three wooden rollers, covered with steel plates.
chambers.
j/aller.
shakespeare:
drayton.
miller.
and the sweet liquour on the cane bestow,
from which prepar'd the luscious sugars flow. blackmore.
3. a lance; a dart made of cane; whence the spanish ingo de
ca/1774.j. - -
abenamar, thy youth these sports has known,
of which thy age is now spectator grown ;
judge-like thou sitt'st, to praise or to arraign,
the flying skirmish of the darted cane.
4. a reed.
food may be afforded to bees, by small canes or troughs
conveyed into their hives. martimer's husbandry.
to cane. v. a. [from the noun..] to beat with a walking
staff.
can1 cu lar. ad. [canicularis, lat.] belonging to the dog-
star; as, ranicular or dog-days.
in regard to different latitudes, unto some the canicular days
are in the winter; as unto such as are under the equinoetial
line; for, unto them, the dog-star ariseth, when the sun is
about the tropick of cancer, which season unto them is winter.
brown's pulgar erreurs.
dryden.
cani'ne. adj. [caninus, lat.]
1. having the properties of a dog.
a kind of women are made up of canine particles: these
are scolds, who imitate the animals out of which they were
taken, always busy and barking, and snarl at every one that
comes in their way. addison.
2. canine hunger, in medicine, is an appetite which cannot be
satisfied.
it may occasion an exorbitant appetite of usual things, which
they will take in such quantities, till they vomit them up like
dogs, from whence it is called canine. arbuthnot.
ca'nister. m. s. [canisłrum, lat.]
1. a small basket. -
white lilies in full canisers they bring,
with all the glories of the purple spring. dryden.
*o vessel in which any thing, such as tea or coffee, is
aid up.
cank er. m. s. scancer, lat. it seems to have the same meaning
and original with cancer, but to be accidentally witten with a
a, when it denotes bad qualities in a less degree; or, canker
might come from chancre, fr. and cancer from the latin.]
1. a worm that preys upon, and destroys fruits.
and loathful idleness he doth detest,
the canker worm of cwery gentle breast. - spensor.
that which the locus: hath left, hath the canker worm eaten.
joel, i. 4s
2. j yet
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 333</div><p class="text">c a n
c a n
yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud
the eating canker dwells; so eating love
inhabits in the finest wits of all. shaos care.
a huffing, shining, flatt'ring, cringing coward,
a canker worm of peace, was rais'd above him. otway.
2. a fly that preys upon fruits.
there be of flies, caterpillars, canker flies, and bear flies.
- //allon's angler.
3. any thing that corrupts or consumes.
it is the canker and ruin of many men's estates, which, in
process of time, breeds a publick poverty. bacon.
sacrilege may prove an eating canker, and a consuming moth,
in the estate that we leave them. alterbury.
no longer live the cankers of my court;
all to your several states with speed resort;
waste in wild riot what your land allows, --
there ply the early feast, and late carouse. pope.
4. a kind of wild worthless rose; the dogrose.
to put down richard, that sweet lovely rose,
and plant this thorn, this canker bolingbroke. shakespeare.
draw a cherry with the leaf, the shaft of a steeple, a single
or canker rose. peacham.
5. an eating or corroding humour.
i am not glad, that such a sore of time
should seek a plaister by a contemn’d revolt,
and health’ inveterate canker of one wound,
by making many. shakos care,
6. corrosion; virulence. - 's
- as with age his body uglier grows,
so his mind with cankers. shakespeare.
7. a disease in trees. dic.
to ca’nk er. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to grow corrupt: implying something venomous and ma-
lignant. -
that cunning archite&amp;t of canker'd guile,
whom princes late displeasure left in bands,
for falsed letters, and suborned wile.
i will lift the down trod mortimer
as high i' th' air as this unthankful king,
as this ingrate and canker'd bolingbroke.
or what the cross dire looking planet smite,
or hurtful worm with canker’d venom bite. milton.
to some new clime, or to thy native sky,
oh! friendless and forsaken virtue, fly:
the indian air is deadly to thee grown;
deceit and canker'd malice rule thy throne. dryden.
let envious jealousy, and canker'd spight
produce my actions to severest light,
and tax my open day, or secret night. prizr.
2. to decay by some corrosive or destructive principle.
silvering will fully and canker more than gilding; which, if
it might be corrected with a little mixture of gold, will be pro-
fitable. bacon.
to can ker. v. a.
1. to corrupt ; to corrode.
restore to god his due in tithe and time :
a tithe purloin'd, cankers the whole estate. herbert.
2. to infect; to pollute.
an honest man will enjoy himself better in a moderate for-
tune, that is gained with honour and reputation, than in an
overgrown estate, that is cankered with the acquisitions of ra-
pine and exaction. addison.
cankerbit. particip. adj. [from canker and bit..] bitten with
an envenomed tooth.
know thy name is lost;
by treason's tooth baregnawn and cankerbit. shakespeare.
ca'nnabine. adj. [cannabinus, lat.] hempen. dic7.
can nibal. m. s. an anthropophagite; a man-eater.
the cannibals themselves eat no man's flesh, of those that die
of themselves, but of such as are slain. bacon.
they were little better than canniha's, who do hunt one
another; and he that hath most strength and swiftness, doth
eat and devour all his fellows. davies on ireland.
it was my hint to speak,
of the cannibals that each other eat;
the anthropophagi.
the captive cannibal, opprest with chains,
yet braves his foes, reviles, provokes, disdains;
of nature fierce, untameable, and proud ;
he bids defiance to the gaping croud ;
and spent at last, and speechless as he lies,
with fiery glances mocks their rage, and dies. granville.
if an eleventh commandment had been given, thou shalt
not eat human flesh; would not these cannibals have esteemed
it more difficult than all the rest ? bently.
can nie ally. adv. [from cannibal..] in the manner of a can-
nibal. - -
before corioli, he scotcht him and notcht him like a carbi-
nado.—had he been cannivally given, he might have bro led,
and eaten him too. shakespeare.
ca’nnipers. n.s. [corrupted from callipers ; which see.]
the square is taken by a pair of cannsters, or two rulers
vol. i.
fairy queen.
shakspeare.
shakosheare.
t
clapped to the side of a tree, measuring the distance betw.ca
them. jortioner's husband, y.
cannon. m. s. scannon, fr. from canoa, lat. a pipe, meaning
a large tube.]
1. a great gun for battery.
2. a gun larger than can be managed by the hand. they are
of so many sizes, that they decrease in the bore from a ball of
forty cight pounds to a bail of five out.ces.
as cannons overcharg’d with double cracks,
so they redoubled strokes upon the foe. shakesh-cro.
he had left all the cannon he had taken; and now he sent all
his great cannon to a garrison. care.”.
the making, or price, of these gunpowder instruments, is
extremely expensive, as may be casily judged by the weight of
their materia's ; a whole cannon weighing commonly eight
thousand pounds; a half cannon, five thousand; 2 culverin,
four thousand five hundred ; a demi culverin, three thou!
sand; which, whether it be in iron or brass, must needs be
very costly. // sons.
cannon-ball. n: s [from cannon, la'', built, and shot...]
cannon-bullet. { the balls which are shot from g! cat
cannon-shot. guns.
he reckons those for wounds that are made by bullets, al-
though it be a cannon-shot. // sonan's surgery.
let a cannon-lullet pass through a room, it must strikeout.
cessively the two sides of the room. - 14.42.
to cannon a.d.e. v. n. [from cannon.] to play the great guins;
to batter or attack with great guns.
both armies cannonaded all the ensuing day. tatler.
to cannona’de. v. a. to fire upon with cannon.
cannoni’er. m. s. [from cannon.] the cngineer that manages
the cannon. -&gt;
give me the cups:
and let the kettle to the trumpets speak,
the trumpets to the cannonier without,
the cannons to the heav'ns, the heav'ns to earth. shake!}.
a third was a most excellent cannonier, whose good skill 4.d
much endamage the forces of the king. howa, s.
cannot. a word compounded of can and not : noting inabi-
lity.
i cannot but believe many a child can tell twenty, long before
he has any idea of infinity at all. loc.
§: m. s. a boat made by cutting the trunk of a tree
ca/noe. w into a hollow vessel.
others made rafts of wood, others devised the boat of one
tree, called the canon, which the gauls, upon the rhone, used
in assisting the transportation of hannibal's army. raleigh.
in a war against semiramis, they had four thousand no-
noxyla, or canoes, of one piece of timber. a lathiot on coins.
catnon. m. s. [x&amp;yoy.] -
i. a rule; a law.
the truth is, they are rules and canons of that law, which is
written in all men's hearts; the church had for ever, no less
than now, stood bound to observe then, whether the apostle
had mentioned them, or no. i looker.
his books are almost the very canon to judge both doctrine
and discipline by. 41004er.
religious canons, civil laws are cruel,
then what should war be 2 shakes eare.
canons in logick are such as these : every part of a dission,
singly taken, must contain less than the whole; and a defini.
tion must be peculiar and proper to the thing defined. izoto.
2. the laws made by ecclesiastical councils.
canon law is that law, which is made and ordained in a ge-
neral council, or provincial synod of the church. oys.jo.
these were looked on as lapsed persons, and great severties
of penance were prescribed then, ty the canons of ancyra.
stilling;...t.
3. the books of holy scripture; or the great rule.
canon also denotes those books of scripture, which are re-
ceived as inspired and canonical, to distinguish them from either
profane, apocryphal, or disputed books. thus we say, that
genesis is part of the sacred canon of the scripture. afte.
4. a dignitary in cathedral churches.
for deans and canons, or prebends, of cathedral churches,
they were of great use in the church ; they were to be of
counsel with the bishop for his revenue, and for his govern-
ment in causes ecclesiastical.
swift much admires the place and air,
and longs to be a canon there.
a canon / that's a place too mean:
no, doctor, you shall be a deari,
two dozen canons round your stall,
and you the tyrant o'er thern all. sicio.
5. canons regular. such as are placed in monasteries. as
-
bacon.
or.
..., e-
6. canons secular. lay canons, who have been, as a mark of .
honour, admitted into some chapters.
7. [among chirurgeons.] an instrument used in sewing up
wounds. 1 ico.
8. a large sort of printing letter, probably so cali d foom being
first used in printing a book of canons ; or pc, haps from its
fzc, and the refore prepely written cao. 27.
3 : can-n<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 334</div><p class="text">c a n
ca’son bit. m. s. that part of the bit let into the horse's
mouth.
a goodly person, and could manage fair,
his stubborn steed with canonbit,
who under him did trample as the air. spenser.
ca'non ess. m. s. [canonisa, low lat.]
there are in popish countries, women they call secular ca-
nonesses, living after the example of secular canons. ayliffe.
cano nic al. adj. [canonicus, low lat.]
1. according to the canon.
2. constituting the canon.
publick readings there are of books and writings, not cano-
mical, whereby the church doth also preach, or openly make
known the doctrine of virtuous conversation. hooker.
no such book was found amongst those canonical scriptures.
raleigh.
3. regular ; stated; fixed by ecclesiastical laws. -
seven times in a day do i praise thee, said david; from this
definite number some ages of the church took their pattern for
their canonical hours. taylor.
4. spiritual ; ecclesiastical; relating to the church. -
york anciently had a metropolitan jurisdiction over all the
bishops of scotland, from whom they had their consecration,
and to whom they swore canonical obedience. ayliffe.
cano's ically. adv. [from canonical.] in a manner agreeable
to the canon.
it is a known story of the friar, who, on a fasting day, bids
his capon be carp, and then very canonically eat it. gov. tongue.
cano'n1calness. n. s. [from canonical.] the quality of being
canonical. -
ca’non 1st. m. s. [from canon.] a man versed in the ecclesias-
tical laws; a professour of the canon law.
john fisher, bishop of rochester, when the king would have
translated him from that poor bishoprick, he refused, saying, he
would not forsake his poor little old wife; thinking of the fif-
teenth canon of the nicene council, and that of the canonisis,
matrimonium inter episcopum &amp; ecclysian ose contraoum, &amp;c.
camden's remains.
of whose strange crimes no canonis can tell,
in what commandment's large contents they dwell. pope.
cano niz ation. m. s. [from canonize.] the act of declaring
any man a saint.
it is very suspicious, that the interests of particular families,
or churches, have too great a sway in canonizations. addison.
to canon 1z e. v. a. [from canon, to put into the canon, or rule
for observing festivals.] to declare any man a saint.
the king, desirous to bring into the house of lancaster ce-
lestial honour, became suitor to pope julius, to canonize king
henry vi. for a saint. bacon.
by those hymns all shall approve
us canoniz'd for love. donne.
they have a pope too, who hath the chief care of religion,
and of canonizing whom he thinks fit, and thence have the ho-
nour of saints. stillingfleet.
ca'non r y. n. s. [srom canon.] an ecclesiastical benefice in
canons hip. ! some cathedral or collegiate church, which has
a prebend, or a stated allowance out of the revenues of such
church, commonly annexed to it. ay iffe.
ca"nopi ed. adj. [from canopy. ] covered with a canopy.
i sat me down to watch upon a bank,
with ivy canopy’d, and interwove
with flaunting honeysuckle. milton.
canopy. m. s. [canopeum, low lat.] a covering of state over
a throne or bed ; a covering spread over the head.
she is there brought unto a paled green,
and placed under a stately canopy,
the warlike feats of both those knights to see. fairy queen.
now spread the night her spangled canopy,
and summon'd every restless . to sleep. fairfax.
nor will the raging fever's fire abate,
with golden canopies, and beds of state. dryden.
t. canopy. v. a. [from the noun..] to cover with a canopy.
the birch, the myrtle, and the bay,
like friends did all embrace;
and their large branches did display, -
to canopy the place. dryden.
can o'rous. adj. [canorus, lat.] musical ; tuneful.
birds that are most camorous, and whose notes we most com-
mend, are of little throats, and short. brown's pulgar errours.
ca.n.t. m. s. [probably from cantus, lat implying the odd tone
of voice used by vagrants; but imagined by some to be cor-
rupted from quaint.]
1. a corrupt dialect used by beggars and vagabonds.
2. a particular form of speaking peculiar to some certain class or
body of men. -
i write not always in the proper terms of navigation, land
service, or in the cant of any profession. dryden.
if we would trace out the original of that flagrant and avow-
ed impiety, which has prevailed among us for some years, we
should find, that it owes its rise to that cant and hypocrisy,
which had taken possession of the people's minds in the times
of the great rebellion. addison's freeholder.
astrologers, with an old paltry cant, and a few pot-hooks
for planets, to amuse the vulgar, have too long been suffered to
abuse the world. swift's predicions for the year 1701.
a few general rules, with a certain cant of words, has some-
times set up an illiterate heavy writer, for a most judicious and
formidable critick. addison's spectator.
3. a whining pretension to goodness, in formal and affceted
tes in s.
of promise prodigal, while pow'r you want,
and preaching in the self denying cant. dryden's aurengz.
4. barbarous jargon.
the affectation of some late authours, to introduce and
multiply cant words, is the most ruinous corruption in any
language. swift.
5. auction.
numbers of these tenants, or their descendants, are now of.
fering to sell their leases by cant, even those which were for
lives. swift.
to cant. v. n. [srom the noun..] to talk in the jargon of
particular professions, or in any kind of formal affected lan-
guage, or with a peculiar and studied tone of voice.
mien cant about materia and forma; hunt chimeras by rules of
art, or dress up ignorance in words of bulk or sound, which
may stop up the mouth of enquiry. glanville.
that uncouth affected garb of speech, or canting language
rather, if i may so call it, which they have of late taken
up, is the signal distinction and characterittical note of that,
which, in that their new language, they call the godly party.
sanaersch.
the busy, subtile serpents of the law,
did first my mind from true obedience draw ;
while i did limits to the king prescribe,
and took for oracles that canting tribe. roscommen.
unskill'd in schemes by planets to foreshow,
like canting rascals, how the wars will go. dryden's juv.
cantata. m. s. [ital.] a song.
canta"tion. n.s.. [from canto, lat.j. the aet of singing.
can ter. m. s. [from cant..] a term of reproach for hypocrites,
who talk formally of religion, without obeying it.
canterbury bells. see belflow er.
can terbury gallop. [in horsemanship.] the hand gallop of
an ambling horse, commonly called a canter; said to be de-
o from the monks riding to canterbury on easy ambling
orses. -
caniha rides. m. s. [latin.] spanish flies; used to raise
blisters.
the flies, cantharides, are bred of a worm, or caterpillar, but
peculiar to certain fruit trees; as are the fig tree, the pine tree,
and the wild brier; all which bear sweet fruit, and fruit that
hath a kind of secret biting or sharpness: for the fig hath a
milk in it, that is sweet and corrosive; the pine apple hath a
kernel that is strong and abstersive. bacon's nat. h/?ory.
c4'nhhus. m. s. [latin.] the corner of the eye. the internal
is called the greater, the external the lesser canthus. quiry.
- - - - ~
a gentlewoman was seized with an inflammation and tu-
mour in the great canthus, or angle of her eye. // serran.
cantici.e. m. s. [from canto, lat...] a song; used generally for
a song in scripture.
this right of estate,in some nations, is yet more fignificantly
expressed by moses in his canticles, in the person of god to the
jews. - bacon's holy soar.
cant1'live rs. n.s. pieces of wood framed into the front or
other sides of an house, to sustain the molding and eaves over
it. moxon's mechanical exercises.
colos. n. s. [cantio, lat.] song, verses. not now in
u le. -
in the eighth eclogue the same person was brought in singing
a cantion of collin's making. spens. kal. gio.
cantle. m. s. [kant, dut, a corner; shantillon, fr. a piece.]
a piece with corners. skinner.
see how this river comes, me crankling in,
and cuts me from the best of all my land,
a huge halfmoon, a monstrous cantle out. shakes). h. iv.
to can tie. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut in pieces.
- for four times talking, if one piece thou take,
that must be cantled, and the judge go snack. dryd, jaw.
ca'ntlet. n. s. [from cantle..] a piece; a fragment.
nor shield, nor armour can their force oppose;
huge cantlets of his buckler strew the ground,
and no defence in his bor'd arms is found. dryden,
ca nto., n. s. [ital.] a book, or section of a poem.
why, what would you do
—make a willow cabbin at your gate,
and call upon my soul within the house;
write loyal cantos of contemned love. shakoff. tw. night.
ca'nton. n.s.
i. a finall parcel or division of land.
only that little canton of land, called the english pale, con-
taining four small shires, did maintain a bordering war with the
irish, and retain the form of english government. davies.
2. a small community, or clan.
the same is the case of rovers by land; such, as yet, are
3 some
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 335</div><p class="text">c a p
c a p
fome cantons in arabia,and some petty kings of the mountains,
adjacent to straits and ways. bacon's holy war.
to ca’n tos. v. a. [from the noun..] to divide into little
pars ... - - - - - -
families shall quit all subjection to him, and canton his em-
pire into less governments for themselves. locke.
it would certainly be for the good of mankind, to have all
the mighty empires and monarchies of the world cantoned out
into petty states and principalities. addison on italy.
the late king of spain, reckoning it an indignity to have his
territories cantoned out into parcels by other princes, during his
own life, and without his consent, rather chose to bequeath the
monarchy entire to a younger son of france. swift.
they canton out to themselves a little province in the intel-
le&amp;tual world, where they fancy the light shines, and all the
rest is in darkness. j/atts on the mind.
-72 ca’n to nize. v. a. [from canton.] to parcel out into small
divisions.
thus was all ireland cantonized among ten persons of the
english nation. davies on ireland.
the whole forest was in a manner cantomized amongst a very
few in number, of whom some had regal rights. howel.
can tred. m. s. the same in wales as an hundred in england.
for cantre, in the british language, signifieth an hundred. cowel.
the king regrants to hin all that province, reserving only the
city of dublin, and the cantreds next adjoining, with the ma-
ritime towns. davies on ireland.
can vass.. [n. s. canevas, fr. cannabis, lat. hemp.]
1. a kind of linen cloth woven for several uses, as sails, paint-
ing cloths, tents.
the master commanded forthwith to set on all the canvas;
they could, and fly homeward. - sidney.
and eke the pens that did his pinions bind,
were like main yards with flying canvas, lin'd. spensor.
their canvas; castles up they quickly rear,
and build a city in an hour's space. fairfax.
where-e'er thy navy spreads her canvas; wings,
homage to thee, and peace to all she brings. jwaller.
with such kind passion hastes the prince to fight,
and spreads his flying canvas; to the sound;
him whom no danger, were he there, could fright;
. now absent, every little noise can wound. dryden.
thou, kneller, long with noble pride,
the foremost of thy art, hast vy'd
with nature in a generous strife,
and touch'd the canvas; into life. - addison.
2. the act of fifting voices, or trying them previously to the
decisive act of voting : [from canvas, as it signifies a sieve.]
there be that can pack cards, and yet cannot play well :
so there are some that are good in canvasses and factions, that
are otherwise weak men. bacon.
to ca'nvass. v. a. [skinner derives it from cannabaser, fr. to
beat hemp ; which being a very laborious employment, it is
used to signify, to search diligently into.]
1. to sift; to examine: from canvass, a straining cloth.
i have made careful search on all hands, and canvased the
matter with all possible diligence. jwoodward.
2. to debate; to discuss.
the curs discovered a raw hide in the bottom of a river,
and laid their heads together how to come at it: they canvassed
the matter one way and t'other, and concluded, that the way to
get it, was to drink their way to it. d'e/?range.
to can v ass. v. n. to solicit; to try votes previously to the
decisive act.
elizabeth being to resolve upon an officer, and being by
some that canvassed for others, put in some doubt of that per-
son she meant to advance, said, she was like one with a lan-
thorn seeking a man. bacon.
this crime of canvasing, or solliciting for church prefer-
ment, is, by the canon law, called simony. ayliffe's parergon.
ca ny. adj. [from cane.]
i. full of canes.
2. consisting of canes.
but in his way lights on the barren plains
of sericana, where chineses drive,
with sails and wind, their cany waggons light. milton.
ca'nzonet. n.s.. [canzonetta, ital.] a little song.
vecchi was most pleasing of all others, for his conceit and
variety, as well his madrigals as canzonets. peacham.
cap. m. s. [cap, welch ; caeppe, sax. cappe, germ. cappe, fr.
cappa, ital, capa, span. kappe, dan, and dutch; caput, a head,
latin.
1. the * that covers the head.
here is the cap your worship did bespeak.-
why, this was moulded on a porringer, -
a velvet dish. shakesp. taming the shrew.
i have ever held my cap off to thy fortune.—
—thou hast serv'd me with much faith.
first, lolling, sloth in woollen cap,
taking her after-dinner nap. swift.
the cap, the whip, the masculine attire,
for which they roughen to the sense. thomson's autumn.
shakespeare.
2. the ensign of the cardinalate. *
henry the fifth did sometimes prophesy,
if once he came to be a cardinal,
he'd make his cap coequal with the crown. -
shakespeare's henry vi.
3. the topmost ; the highest.
thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
4. a reverence made by uncovering the head.
they more and less, came in with cap and knee,
met him in boroughs, cities, villages. soakes). henry iv.
should the want of a cap or a cringe so mortally dicompose
him, as we find afterwards it did. l'e/irange.
5. a vessel made like a cap.
it is observed, that a barrel or cap, whose cavity will contain
eight cubical feet of air, will not serve a diver above a quarter
of an hour. //ilkins.
6. cap of a great gun. a piece of lead laid over the touch-hole,
to preserve the prime.
7. cap of maintenance. one of the regalia carried before the
king at the coronation.
to cap. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to cover on the top.
the bones next the joint are capped with a smooth cartilagi-
nous substance, serving both to strength and motion. derham.
2. to deprive of the cap.
if one, by another occasion, take any thing from another,
as boys sometimes use to cap one another, the same is straight
felony. spenser on ireland.
3. to cap verses. to name alternately verses beginning with a
particular letter; to name in opposition or emulation; to name
alternately in contest. -
where henderson, and th' other masses,
were sent to cap texts, and put cases. hudibrar.
sure it is a pitiful pretence to ingenuity, that can be thus kept
up, there being little need of any other faculty but memory, to
be able to cap texts. government of the tongue.
there is an authour of ours, whom i would desire him to read,
before he ventures at capping characters. atterbury,
cap a p3. } [cap a pie, fr.] from head to foot; all over.
cap a pie.
a figure like your father,
arm'd at all points exactly, cap a pe,
appears before them, and, with solemn march,
goes slow and stately by them. shakesp. hamlet.
there for the two contending knights he sent,
arm'd cap a pie, with rev'rence low they bent. drydon.
a woodlouse,
that folds up itself in itself for a house,
as round as a ball, without head, without tail,
inclos'd cap fipe in a strong coat of mail. swift.
cap-pap h r. a sort of coarse brownish paper. so called from
being formed into a kind of cap to hold commodities.
having, for trial sake, filtred it through cap-paper, there re-
mained in the filtre a powder. boyle.
capab1 lity. m. s. [from capable.] capacity ; the quality of
being capable.
sure he that made us with such large discourse,
looking before, and after gave us not
that capability and godlike reason
to rust in us unus’d.
ca'pable. adj. [capable, fr.]
1. sufficient to contain; sufficiently capacious.
when we consider so much of that space, as is equal to, or
capable to receive a body of any assigned dimensions. locke.
2. endued with powers equal to any particular thing.
to say, that the more capable, or the better deserver, hath
such right to govern, as he may compulsorily bring under the
shakespeare.
less worthy, is idle. bacon.
when you hear any person give his judgment, consider with
yourself whether he be a capable judge. //atts.
3. intelligent; able to understand.
look you, how pale he glares ;
his form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
would make them capable. shakesp. hamlet.
4. intelle&amp;tually capacious ; able to receive.
i am much bound to god, that he hath endued you with one
capable of the best instructions. digby.
5. susceptible.
the soul, immortal substance, to remain,
conscious of joy, and capable of pain. prior.
6. qualified for; without any natural impediment.
there is no man that believes the goodness of god, but must
be inclined to think, that he hath made some things for as long
a duration as they are capable of. tillason.
7. qualified for ; without legal impediment.
of my land,
loyal and natural boy! i'll work the means
to make thee capable. shakes. king lear.
8. it has the particle of before a noun.
what secret springs their eager passions move,
how capable of death for injur'd love dryden's wirgil.
9. hollow. this sense is not now in use.
lean
shakes). timon.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 336</div><p class="text">c a p
c a p
- lean but upon a rush,
the cicatrice, and capable in presiure,
thy palm some moments keeps. shakes. a you like it.
ca’pablen ess. m. s. [from capable.} the quality or state of
being capable; knowledge; underitanding ; power of mind.
capa’cious. adj. [capax, lat.]
1. wide; large ; able to hold much.
beneath th' inceslant weeping of those drains,
i see the rocky siphons stretch'd immense,
the mighty reservoirs of harden’d chalk,
or its compacted clay, capacious found. thomson's autumn.
2. extensive; equal to much knowledge, or great design. .
there are some persons of a good genius, and a capacious
mind, who write and speak very obscurely. //atts.
capa crousn ess. m. s. [from capacious...] the power of hold-
ing or receiving ; largeness.
a concave measure, of known and denominate capacity,
serves to measure the capaciousness of any other vessel. in like
manner, to a given weight, the weight of all other bodies may
be reduced, and so found out. holder on time.
to capa’cit ate. v. a. [from capacity.] to make capable ;
to enable; to qualify.
by this instiuction we may be capacitated to observe those
errou i s. dryden.
these sort of men were sycophants only, and were endued
with arts of life, to capacitate them for the conversation of the
rich and great. ‘l atler.
capa'city. n. s. scapacite, fr.]
1. the power of holding or containing any thing.
had our palace the capacity
to camp this host, we would all sup together. shaksheare.
notwithstanding thy capacity
receiveth as the sea, nought enters there,
of what validity and pitch soe'er,
but falls into abatement and low price. shakesp. tw. night.
for they that most and greatest things embrace,
enlarge thereby their mind's capacity,
as streams enlarg’d, enlarge the channel's space. davies.
space, confidered in length, breadth, and thickness, i think,
may be called capacity. - locae.
2. room; space.
there remained, in the capacity of the exhausted cylinder,
fore of little rooms, or spaces, empty or devoid of air. boyle.
3. the force or power of the mind.
no intelle&amp;tual creature is able, by capacity, to do that
which nature doth without capacity and knowledge. hooker.
in spiritual natures, so much as there is of desire, so much
there is also of capacity to receive. i do not say, there is always
a capacity to receive the very thing they desire; for that may be
impossible. south.
an heroick poem requires the accomplishment of some ex-
traordinary undertaking; which requires the duty of a sol-
dier, and the capacity and prudence of a general.
dryden's juv. dedication.
4. power; ability.
since the world’s wide frame does not include
a cause with such capacities endu'd,
some other cause o'er nature must preside. blackmore.
5. state; condition; character.
a miraculous revolution, reducing many from the head of a
triumphant rebellion, to their old condition of masons, smiths,
and carpenters; that, in this capacity, they might repair what,
as colonels and captains, they had ruined and defaced. south.
you desire my thoughts as a friend, and not as a member of
parliament; they are the same in both capacities. swift.
capa’rison. n.f. [caparazon, a great cloke, span.] a horse-
cloth, or a sort of cover for a horse, which is spread over his
furniture. farrier's dic.
tilting furniture, emblazon'd shields,
impresses quaint, caparisons, and steeds,
bases, and tinsel trappings, gorgeous knights,
at joust, and tournament. parad's loft.
some wore a breastplate, and a light juppon;
their horses cloath'd with rich caparison. dryden's fab.
to caparison. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to dress in caparisons.
the steeds, caparison'd with purple, stand;
with golden trappings, glorious to behold,
and champ betwixt their teeth the foaming gold. dryden.
2. to dress pompously : in a ludicrous sense.
don't you think, though i am caparisoned like a man, i have
a doublet and hose in my disposition : shakesp. as you like it.
cape. n.f. [case, fr. j
1. headland ; promontory.
what from the cape can you discern at sea 2–
—nothing at all; it is a high wrought flood. shakesp. clth.
- the parting sun,
beyond the earth's green cape, and verdant isles,
hesperean sets; my signal to depart. paradise losł.
the romans made war upon the tarentines, and obliged
them by treaty not to sail beyond the cape. arbuthnot.
2. the neck-piece of a cloke.
he was cloathed in a robe of fine black cloth, with wide
sleeves and cape. 1 a 2".
caper. m. s. [from caper, latin, a goat.] a leap; a jump; 4
skip. -
we that are true lovers, run into strange capers; but as all
is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folv.
shakesp. a you like it.
flimrap, the treasurer, is allowed to cut a coffer on the
strait rope, at least an inch higher than any other iord in the
whole empire. swift's galiver’s 7 ravels.
ca'per. m. s. [capparis, lat.] an acid pickse. see cap fr-bus h.
we invent new sauces and pickles, which resemble the
animal ferment in taste and virtue, as mangoes, olives, and ca-
pers. foyer on the humours.
ca per bush. n.s. stapparis, lat.]
the fruit is fleshy, and shaped like a pear. this plant
grows in the south of france, in spain and in italy, upon
old walls and buildings; and the buds of the flowers, before
they are open, are pickied for eating. 44 ler.
7% ca per. v. n. if on the noun.]
1. to dance frolicksomely. o
the truth is, i am only old in judgment; and he that will
cafer with me for a thousand marks, let him lend me the mo.
ney, and have at him. shaftsp. henry iv.
2. to skip for merriment.
our master
cap'ring to eye her. shakes. 7.mo.
his nimble hand’s instinct then taught each it, ing
a cap'ring cheerfulness, and made thern sing
to their own dance. crashazz.
the family tript it about, and caper’d, like hailstones bound-
ing from a marble floor. arbuthnot's joln bal.
3. to dance : spoken in contempt.
the stage would need no force, nor song, nor dance,
nor cap, ring monsieur from active france. kowe.
caperer. m. s. [from caper.] a dancer: in contempt.
the tumbler's gambols some delight afford;
no less the nimble cap, rer on the cod:
but these are still insipid stuff to thee,
coop'd in a ship, and toss'd upon the sea. drydon't yo-
c.#1's. s. m. s. [lat...] a writ of two sorts, one before judgment.
called capias ad respondendum, in an action personal, if the sh:-
riff, upon the first writ of distress, return that he has no effects
in his jurisdiction. the other is a writ of exccution after judg-
ment. cowel.
capilla'ceous. adj. the same with capillary.
cap, ll ament. n.s. [capillamention, lat...] those small threads
or hairs which grow up in the middle of a flower, and adorned
with little herbs at the top, are called capilaments. &amp;#inoy.
ca pill. ary. adj. [from capilius, hair, lat. j
1. resembling hairs; small; minute: applied to plants.
capillary, or capillaceous plants, are such as have no maia
stalk or stem, but grow to the ground, as hairs on the head;
and which bear their seeds in little tufts or protuberances on
the backside of their leaves. ..?uincy.
our common hyssop is not the least of vegetables, nor ot-
served to grow upon walls; but rather, some kind of capilla-
ries, which are very small plants, and only grow upon walls
and stony places. brown's wulgar erzurs.
2. applied to vessels of the body. small; as the ramifications of
the arteries. &amp;ainty.
ten capillary arteries in some parts of the body, as in the
brain, are not equal to one hair; and the smallest lymphatick
vessels arc an hundred times smailer than the smallest capillary
artery. a, buthnot on aliments.
capilla't ros. m. s. [from capilus, lat..] a vessel like a hair;
a small ramification of vesic]s. not used.
nor is the humour contained in smaller veins, or obscurer
capilations, but in a vesicle. brown's wulgar borouri.
capital. ad. [capitalis, lat.]
1. relating to the head.
needs must the serpent now his capital bruise
expect with mortal pain. paradise lo?.
2. criminal in the highest degree, so as to touch life.
edmund, i arrest thee -
on capital treason. shakesp. king lear.
several cases deserve greater punishment than many crimes
that are capital among us. soft.
3. that which affects life.
in capital causes, wherein but one man’s life is in question,
the evidence ought to be clear; much more in a judgment up-
on a war, which is capital to thousands. bacon.
4. chief; principal.
i will, out of that infinite number, reckon but some that are
most capital, and commonly occurrent both in the life and con-
ditions of private men. sponser on ireland.
as to swerve in the least points, is errour; so the capital
enemies thereof god hateth, as his deadly foes, aliens, and,
without repentance, children of endless perdition. hocker.
they do, in themselves, tend to confirm the truth of a
capital article in religion. atteriory.
5. chief; metropolitan.
7 - this
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 337</div><p class="text">c a p
c a p
no t.
the ho
saska.
&amp;.
“. .
s, six.
ois-
upon o
d" for
ico:
*
o
!, “ .
loor
eito.
an o
lso
of
gro-
-
this had been
perhaps thy capital feat, from whence had spread
all generations; and had hither come,
from all the ends of th’ earth, to celebrate
- and reverence thic, their great progenitor. par. loo.
6- appied to letters; large; such as are written at the begin-
i. : :) -s or heads of books.
ur rost considerable actions are always present, like capi-
to letters to an aged and dim eye. waylor's fia'y i.iving.
the first is v. litten in capital letters, without chapters or
ve: ses. grew's coson logia sacra.
capital /?ock. the principal or original stock of a trader, or
ck in pany.
cat i or a. m. s. [from the adjective.]
1. i he upper part of a pillar. -
you see the volute of the ionick, the foliage of the corin-
thian, and the uovali of the dorick, mixed, without any re-
gularity, on the same capital. addison on italy.
2. the chief city of a nation or kingdom.
ca. pit ally. adv. [from capital.] in a capital manner.
ca pitation. n.s. [from caput, the head, lat.) numeration
by heads. -
he suffered for not performing the commandment of god,
concerning capitation ; that, when the people were numbered,
for every head they should pay unto god a shekel. brown.
c.? pite. n.s.. [from caput, capitis, lat.]
a tenure which holdeth immediately of the king, as of his
crown, be it by knight's service or socage, and not as of any
honour, castle, or manour: and therefore it is otherwise called
a tenure, that holdeth merely of the king; because, as the
crown is a corporation and seigniory in gross, as the common
lawyers term it, so the king that possesseth the crown, is, in ac-
count of law, perpetually king, and never in his minority, nor
ever dieth. cowel.
capitular. n.s.. [from capitulum, lat. an ecclesiastical chap-
ter.
i. a lo, of statutes, divided into chapters.
that this practice continued to the time of charlemain, ap-
pears by a constitution in his capitular. taylor.
2. a member of a chapter.
canonists do agree, that the chapter makes decrees and sta-
tutes, which shall bind the chapter itself, and all its members
or capitulars. ayliff's parergon.
to capitulate. v. n. [from capitulum, lat.j
1. to draw up any thing in heads or articles.
percy, northumberland,
the archbishop of york, douglas, and mortimer,
capitulate against us, and are up. shakesp. henry iv.
2. to yield, or surrender up, on certain stipulations.
the king took it for a great indignity, that thieves should
offer to capitulate with him as enemies. hayward.
i still pursued, and, about two o'clock this afternoon, she
thought fit to capitulate. spectator.
capitula'tion. n.s.. [from capitulate.] stipulation; terms ;
conditions. -
it was not a complete conquest, but rather a dedition upon
terms and capitulations, agreed between the conquerour and the
conquered; wherein, usually, the yielding party secured to
themselves their law and religion. hale.
capi'vi tree. m. s. [copaiba, lat.]
this tree grows near a village called ayapel, in the pro-
vince of antiochi, in the spanish west indies, about ten days
journey from carthagena. some of them do not yield any
of the balsam ; those that do, are distinguished by a ridge,
which runs along their trunks. these trees are wounded in
their centre, and they apply vessels to the wounded part, to
receive the balsam. one of these trees will yield five or six
gallons of balsam. miller.
to ca pooch. v. a. i know not distinetly what this word
means; perhaps to strip off the hood.
capoch'd your rabins of the synod,
and snapt the canons with a why not.
ca'po n. m. s. [cap:, lat..] a castrated cock.
in good roast beef my landlord sticks his knise;
the capon fat delights his dainty wife. gay's pasłorals.
caponniere. m. s. [fr. a term in fortification.] a covered
lodgment, of about four or five feet broad, encompasled with a
little parapet of about two feet high, serving to support planks
laden with earth. this lodgment contains fifteen or twenty
soldiers, and is usually placed at the extremity of the counter-
scarp, having little embrasures made in thcan, through which
they fire. iharris.
capot. n.s. [french..] is when one party wins all the tricks
of cards at the game of picquet.
to capoor. v. a. [from the noun..] when one party has won
all the tricks of cards at picquet, he is said to have capotted his
antazonist. - -
capo uch. m. s. [captice, french.] a monk's hood. dic.
capper. m. s. [from cap.] one who makes or sells caps.
capre'o: ate, adj. [from capreolus, a tendril of a vine, lat.]
such plants as turn, wind, and creep along the ground, by
vol. i.
-
hudibras.
means of their tendrils, as gourds, me!ons, and cucurbera,
are termed, in botany, capreolate plants.
caprice. !" s. [caprice, fr. cat richo, span.] freak;
cape/chio fancy; whom ; sudden change of humour.
it is a pleasant spectacle to behold the shifts, windings, and
unexpected caprichios of ditressed nature, who no pursued by a
close and well managed experiment. glanville's soros, prof.
we are not to be guided in the sense of that book, either
by the misreports of some ancients, or the caprioios of one
or two neoterics. grow.
: heav'n's great view is one, and that the whole;
that counterworks each folly and caprice,
that disappoints th' effect of ev'ry vice. - poz,
if there be a single spot more barren, or more distant from
the church, the rector or vicar may be obliged, by the caprice
harris.
or pique of the bishop, to build. swift.
their passions move in lower spheres,
where'er caprice or folly fleers. - swift,
all the various machines and utensils would now and then
play odd pranks and caprices, quite contrary to their proper
structures, and design of the artificers. - bently.
capr scious. adj. [capricieux, fr.] whimsical; fanciful; ha-
moursome. - - - -
capri'ciously, adv. . [from capricious...] whimsically; in a
manner depending wholly upon fancy. -
c apr1'cious n ess. n. s. [from capricious.] the quality of be-
ing led by caprice, humour, whimsicalness. .
a subject ought to suppose, that there are reasons, although
he be not apprised of them; otherwise he must tax his prince
of capriciousness, inconstancy, or ill design. . swift,
ca/pr1 cor n. m. s. [capricornus, lat.] one of the signs of the
zodiack; the winter solstice. -
let the longest night in capricorn be of fifteen hours, the
day consequently must be of nine. notes to creech's esanilius.
caprio'le. m. s. [french. in horsemanship.] caprices are
leaps, such as a horse makes in one and the same place, with-
out advancing forwards, and in such a manner, that when ho
is in the air, and height of his leap, he yerks or strikes out
with his hinder legs, even and near. a capricle is the most
difficult of all the high manage, or raised airs. it is different
from the croupade in this, that the horse does not show his
shoes; and from a balatade, in that he does not yerk out in a
balotade. - farrier's dio.
capst an. m. s. [corruptly called caps?erm ; caho/?an, fr.] a cy-
linder, with levers to wind up any great weight, particularly
to raise the anchors. -
the weighing of anchors by the casslan, is also new.
raleigh's effys.
no more behold thee turn my watch's key,
z as seamen at a cap/fan anchors weigh. swift.
§::::::. } a j. soft, lat.] hollow like a chest.
it ascendeth not directly unto the throat, but ascending first
into a capsulary reception of the breast-bone, it ascendeth again
into the neck. brown's pulgar errours.
3...} adj. [capsula, lat.] inclosed, or in a box.
seeds, such as are corrupted and stale, will swim; and this
agreeth unto the seeds of plants locked up and capsulated in
their husks. brown's wulgar errouri.
the heart lies immured, or capsulated, in a cartilage, which
includes the heart, as the skull doth the brain. derham.
captain. m. s. [capitain, fr. in latin capitaneus; being
one of those who, by tenure in capito, were obliged to bring
soldiers to the war.] -
1. a chief commander.
dismay’d not this
our captains, macbeth and banquo:
shakso. macleth.
2. the chief of any number or body of men.
nashan shall be captain of judah. numbers.
he sent unto him a captain of fifty. - kings.
the captain of the guard gave him victuals. jeremiah.
3. a man skilled in war; as, marlborough was a great captain.
4. the commander of a company in a regiment.
a captain / these villains will make the name of captain as
odious as the word occupy; therefore captains had need look
to it. shakspeare's henry iv.
the grim captain, in a surly tone,
cries out, pack up, ye rascals, and be gone
5. the chief commander of a ship.
the rhodian captain, relying on his knowledge, and the
lightness of his vessel, passed, in open day, through all the
guards. arbuthnot on coin.
6. it was anciently written capitain.
and evermore their cruel capitain
sought with his rascal routs to inclose them round. fairy q,
7. captain general. the general or commander in chief of an
army.
8. captain lieutenant. the commanding officer of the colonel's
troop or company, in every regiment. he commands as
youngest captain.
dryden.
3 z ca'ptainry.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 338</div><p class="text">c a p
captainry. m. s. [from captain.] the power over a certain
district; the chieftainship.
there should be no rewards taken for captainries of counties,
no shares of bishopricks for nominating of bishops. spenser.
ca'ptain ship. n.s.. [from captain, j
1. the condition or post of a chief commander.
therefore so please thee to return with us,
and of our athens, thine and ours, to take
the captainship. shakespeare's timon.
2. the rank, quality, or post of a captain.
the lieutenant of the colonel’s company might well pretend
to the next vacant captainship in the same regiment. j/otton.
3. the chieftainship of a clan, or government of a certain dis-
trict.
to diminish the irish lords, he did abolish their pretended
and usurped captainships. - davies on ireland.
4. skill in the military trade.
capta'tion. n.s.. [from capto, lat.] the practice of catch-
ing favour or applause; courtship; flattery.
i am content my heart should be discovered, without any of
those dresses, or popular captations, which some men use in their
speeches. - king charles.
ca'ption. m. s. [from capio, lat. to take.] the act of taking
any person by a judicial process.
captious. adj. [captieux, fr. captiosus, lat.]
1. given to cavils ; eager to object.
if he shew a forwardness to be reasoning about things, take
care, that nobody check this inclination, or mislead it by cap-
tious or fallacious ways of talking with him. locke.
2. insidious ; ensnaring.
she taught him likewise how to avoid sundry captious and
tempting questions, which were like to be asked of him. bacon.
ca ptiously. adv. [from captizus.] in a captious manner ;
with an inclination to object. o
use your words as captiously as you can, in your arguing on
one side, and apply distinelions on the other. locke.
ca(ptious n ess. n.s.. [from captious.) inclination to find fault;
inclination to object; peevishness.
captiousness is a fault opposite to civility; it often produces
misbecoming and provoking expressions and carriage. locke.
to ca ptivate. v. a. [captiver, fr. captivo, lat.]
1. to take prisoner ; to bring into bondage.
how ill beseeming is it in thy sex,
to triumph like an amazonian trull,
upon their woes, whom fortune captivates? shakoffeare.
thou hast by tyranny these many years
wasted our country, slain our citizens,
and sent our sons and husbands captivate. shakespeare.
he deserves to be a slave, that is content to have the ratio-
nal sovereignty of his soul, and the liberty of his will, so capti-
vated. king charles.
they stand firm, keep out the enemy, truth, that would
captiv4!e or disturb them. - - locke.
2. to charm; to overpower with excellence; to subdue.
wisdom enters the last, and so captivates him with her ap-
pearance, that he gives himself up to her. addison, guardian.
3. to enslave: with to.
they lay a trap for themselves, and captivate their under-
standings to mistake, falsehood and errour. locke.
captivation. m. s. [from captivate.] the aet of taking one
captive.
captive. n. s. [captis, fr. captivus, lat.]
1. one taken in war; a prisoner to an enemy.
you have the captives,
who were the opposites of this day's strife? shakespeare.
this is no other than that forced respect a captive pays to
his conquerour, a slave to his lord. rogers.
free from shame
thy captives: i ensure the penal claim.
2. it is used with to before the captor.
if thou say antony lives, ’tis well,
or friends with caesar, or not captive to him. shakespeare.
my mother, who the royal sceptre sway’d,
was captive to the cruel victor made. dryden.
3. one charmed, or ensnared by beauty or excellence.
my woman's heart
grossly grew captive to his honey words. shakespeare.
ca'pt iv e. adj. [raptivus, lat.] made prisoner in war ; kept
in bondage or confinement, by whatever means.
but fate forbids; the stygian floods oppose,
and with nine circling streams the captive souls inclose.
dryden.
t, ca ptive. v. a. [from the noun. it was used formerly
with the accent on the last syllable, but now it is on the first.]
to take prisoner; to bring into a condition of servitude.
but being all defeated save a few, -
rather than fly, or be captiv'd, herself she flew. spensor.
thou leavest them to hostile sword
of heathen and profane, their carcasses
to dogs and fowls a prey, or else captiv’d. milton.
what further fear of danger can there be
beauty, which captives all things, sets me frce. dryden,
pope's odyssey.
still lay the god: the nymph surpriz'd
yet, mistress of herself, . p &gt;
how she the vagrant might inthral,
and captive him, who captives all. prior.
capt1. vity. m. s. [captivite, fr. captivitas, low lat.]
j. subjection by the fate of war; bondage; servitude to ene-
n) les.
this is the serjeant,
who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
'gainst my captivity.
there in captivity he lets them dwell
the space of seventy years; then brings them back;
shakespeare.
rememb'ring mercy. 44ilton,
. the name of ormond will be more celebrated in os capti.
vity, than in his greatest triumphs. dryden,
2. slavery ; servitude.
for men to be tied, and led by authority, as it were with a
kind of captivity of judgment; and though there be reason to
the contrary, not to listen unto it. hooker,
the apostle tells us, there is a way of bringing every thought
into captivity to the obedience of christ. decay of piety.
when love's well timed, 'tis not a fault to love
the strong, the brave, the virtuous, and the wise,
sink in the soft captivity together. addison.
captor. m. s. [from capio, to take, lat.] he that takes a psi-
soner, or a prize.
capture. m. s. scapture, fr. captura, lat.]
1. the act or practice of taking any thing.
the great sagacity, and many artifices used by birds, in the
investigation and capture of their prey. derham.
2. the thing taken ; a prize.
capusch ed. adj. [from capuce, fr. a hood.] covered over as
with a hood.
they are differently cuculleted and capuched upon the head
and back, and, in the cicada, the eyes are more prominent.
brown's walgar errours.
capuch1'n. m. s. a female garment, consisting of a cloak and
hood, made in imitation of the dress of capuchin monks;
whence its name is derived.
car, char, in the names of places, seem to have relation to
the british caer, a city. gilson's camden.
car. m. s. [car, welch; karre, dut. cnae, sax. carrus, lat.]
1. a small carriage of burden, usually drawn by one horse or two.
when a lady comes in a goach to our shops, it must be fol-
lowed by a car loaded with w. money. swift.
2. in poetical language, any vehicle of dignity or splendour;
a chariot of war, or triumph.
henry is dead, and never shall revive:
upon a wooden coffin we attend,
and death's dishonourable victory,
we with our stately presence glorify,
like captives bound to a triumphant car.
shakespeare.
wilt thou aspire to guide the heav'nly car,
and with thy daring folly burn the world? shakespeare.
and the gilded car of day,
his glowing axle doth allay
in the sleep atlantick stream. milton.
see, where he comes, the darling of the war !
see millions crouding round the gilded car ! prizr.
3. the charles's wain, or bear; a constellation.
ev'ry fixt and ev'ry wand'ring star,
the pleiads, hyads, and the northern car. dryden.
ca'rabine. r. m. s. scarabine, fr. j a small sort of fire-arm,
car bine. { shorter than a fusil, and carrying a ball of twenty-
four in the pound, hung by the light horse at a belt over the
left shoulder. it is a kind of medium between the pistol and
the musket, having its barrel two foot and a half long.
car abin1 e.r. n.s.. [from carabine.] a sort of light horse car-
rying longer carabines than the rest, and used sometimes on
foot. chambers.
car ack. m. s. scaraca, spanish.] a large ship of burden ; the
same with those which are now called galleons.
in which river, the greatest carack of portugal may ride a-
float ten miles within the forts. raleigh.
the bigger whale like some huge carack lay,
which wanteth sea-room with her foes to play. waller.
cara col. e. m. s. scaracole, fr. from caracol, span. a snail.] an
oblique tread, traced out in semi-rounds, changing from one
hand to another, without observing a regular ground. '
when the horse advance to charge in battle, they ride some-
times in caracoles, to amuse the enemy, and put them in doubt,
whether they are about to charge them in the front or in the
flank. farrier's dicf.
to cara cole. v. n. [from the noun..] to move in caracoles.
§::::. } n.s. scarat, fr.]
1. a weight of four grains, with which diamonds are weighed.
2. a manner of expressing the fineness of gold.
a mark, being an ounce troy, is divided into twenty-four
equal parts, called caracis, and each caraci into four grains:
by this weight is distinguished the different fineness of their
gold; for, if to the finest of gold be put two caraci; of alloy,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
7 loth
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 339</div><p class="text">c a r
c a r
both making, when cold, but an ounce, or twenty-four carađs,
then this gold is said to be twenty-two caracis fine. cocker.
thou best of gold, art worst of gold;
other, less fine in carat, is more precious. shakspeare.
caravan. n.s. [caravanne, fr. from the arabick.] a troop
or body of merchants or pilgrims, as they travel in the east.
they set forth
their airy caravan, high over seas
flying, and over lands, with mutual wing
easing their flight. milton's par. loft.
when joseph, and the blessed virgin mother, had lost their
most holy son, they sought him in the retinues of their kin-
dred, and the caravans of the galilaean pilgrims. taylor.
car ava'n's ary. m. s. [from caravan.] a house built in the
eastern countries for the reception of travellers.
the inns which receive the caravans in persia, and the eas-
tern countries, are called by the name of caravansaries. spe?.
the spacious mansion, like a turkish caravamsary, enter-
tains the vagabond with only bare lodging. pope's letters.
ca’ravel. q n.s.. [caravela, span.] a light, round, old fashion-
ca’r v el. { ed ship, with a square poop, formerly used in
spain and portugal.
ca’s away. n.s.. [carum, lat.j a plant; sometimes found
wild in rich moist pastures, especially in holland and lincoln-
shire. the seeds are used in medicine and confectionary. miller.
carbonatdo. m.s.. [carbonnade, fr. from carlo, a coal, lat.]
meat cut across, to be broiled upon the coals.
if i come in his way willingly, let him make a carbonado of
ine. shakespeare.
to carbona'do. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut, or hack.
draw, you rogue, or i'll so carbonado
- your shanks. shakspeare.
ca'rbuncle. m. s. [carbunculus, lat. a little coal.]
1. a jewel shining in the dark, like a lighted coal or candle.
a carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
were not so rich a jewel. shakspeare.
his head
crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes,
with burnish'd neck of verdant gold. milton.
it is believed that a carbuncle does shine in the dark like a
burning coal ; from whence it hath its name. j/ilkins.
carbuncle is a stone of the ruby kind, of a rich blood-red
colour. j/oodward.
2. red spots or pimples breaking out upon the face or body.
it was a pestilent fever, but there followed no carbuncle,
no purple or livid spots, or the like, the mass of the blood not
being tainted. bacon.
red blisters, rising on their paps, appear,
and flaming carbuncles, and noisome sweat. dryden.
ca’rbuncled. adj. [from carbuncle.]
1. set with carbuncles.
an armour all of gold; it was a king's.-
—he has deserv'd it, were it carbuncled
like holy phoebus' car.
2. spotted; deformed with carbuncles.
carbu'ncu lar. adj. [from carbuncle.] belonging to a car-
buncle; red like a carbuncle.
car buscul aotion. m. s. [carbunculatio, lat.] the blasting
shakespeare.
of the young buds of trees or plants, either by excessive heat
or excessive cold. - harris.
ca(rcanet. m. s. [carcan, fr.] a chain or collar of jewels.
say, that i linger'd with you at your shop,
to see the making of her carcanet. shakespeare.
i have seen her beset and bedeckt all over with emeralds and
pearls, and a carcanet about her neck. hakewill on providence.
ca'rcass. m. s. scar quaso, fr.]
1. a dead body of any animal.
to blot the honour of the dead,
and with foul cowardice his carcos shame,
whose living hands immortaliz’d his name. speoser.
where cattle pastur'd late, now scatter'd lies,
with carcases and arms, th’ insanguin’d field,
ideserted. milton.
if a man visits his sick friend, in hope of legacy, he is a vul-
ture, and only waits for the carcass. taylor.
the scaly nations of the sea profound,
like shipwreck'd carcasso, are driv'n aground. dryden.
2. body: in a ludicrous sense.
to-day how many would have given their honours,
to've sav'd their carcases 2 shakespeare.
he that finds himself in any distress, either of carcos; or of
fortune, should deliberate upon the matter, before he prays for
a change. l'e//range.
. the decayed parts of any thing; the ruins; the remains.
3 yed p y e • *
a rotten carcos of a boat, not rigg’d,
nor tackle, sail, nor mast.
shakespeare.
4. the main parts, naked, without completion or ornament; as,
the walls of a house. -
what could be thought a sufficient motive to have had an
eternal carcas of an universe, wherein the materials and posi-
tions of it were cternally laid together ? hale's orig. of mank.
5. [in gunnery.] a kind of bomb usually oblong, consisting of a
* .
shell or case, sometimes of iron, with holes, more commonly of
a coarse strong stuff, pitched over, and girt with iron boops;
filled with combustibles, and thrown from a mortar. harris.
cat cf lage. n. /. [from carcer, lat.] prison fees. djo.
carcino ms. m. s. [from xxoxi, 32, a crab.] a particular
ulcer, called a cancer, very difficult to cure. a disorder like-
wise in the horny coat of the eye, is thus called. $2%incy.
car ciso matous, adj. [from carcinoma.] cancerous; tend-
ing to a cancer.
card. m. s...[carto, fr. charta, lat.]
1. a paper painted with figures, used in games of chance or skill.
a vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide
yet i have fac’d it with a card of ten.
soon as she spreads her hand, th’ aerial guard
descend, and fit on each important card;
first, ariel perch’d upon a matadore. pope;
2. the paper on which the winds are marked under the mari-
ner's needle.
upon his card; and compass firms his eye,
the masters of his long experiment. sponsor.
the very points they blow;
all the quarters that they know,
i' th' shipman's card. shakspeare.
how absolute the knave is we must speak by the card, or
equivocation will undo us. shakespeare.
on life's vast ocean diversely we sail,
reason the card, but passion is the gale. * pope.
3. [kaarde, dutch..] the instrument with which wool is comb-
ed, or comminuted, or broken for spinning.
to card. v. a. [from the noun..] to comb, or comminute
wool with a piece of wood, thick set with crooked wires.
the while their wives do sit
beside them, carding wool.
go, card and spin,
and leave the business of the war to men. dryden.
to card. v. n. to game ; to play much at cards: as, a card-
ing wife.
cardamo'mu.m. m. s. [latin.] a medicinal seed, of the
aromatick kind, contained in pods, and brought from the east
shakespeare,
may's pirgi'.
indies. chambers.
ca'rder. m. s. [from card.].
1. one that cards wool.
the clothiers all have put off -
the spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers. shaft:%eare.
2. one that plays much at cards.
car di’acal. adj. [x2:32, the heart.] cordial; having the
ca r diack. } quality of invigorating the spirits.
ca'rpialgy.. n.s.. [from xzoiz, the heart, and 3.x.yo, pain.]
the heart-burn; a pain supposed to be felt in the heart, but
more properly in the stomach, which sometimes rises all along
from thence up to the cesophagus, occasioned by some acrimo-
n 1011s matter. &amp;timoy,
cardinal. adj. [cardinalis, lat..] principal; thicf.
the divisions of the year in frequent use with astronomers,
according to the cardinal intersections of the zodiack; that is,
the two equinoetials, and both the solstitial points. brown.
his cardinal perfection was industry. clarendon.
car dinal. m. s. one of the chief governours of the romish
church, by whom the pope is elected out of their own number,
which contains six bishops, fifty priests, and fourteen deacons,
who constitute the sacred college, and are chosen by the pope.
a cardinal is so stiled, because serviceable to the apostolick
see, as an axle or hinge on which the whole government of
the church turns; or as they have, from the pope's grant,
the hinge and government of the romish church. a., oft.
you hold a fair assembly;
you are a churchman, or, i’ll tell you, cardinal,
. i should judge now unhappily. shakespeare,
car dinal’s flower. n.s. [rapuntium, lat.] a flower.
the species are, 1. greater rampions, with a crimson
spiked flower, commonly called the scarlet card nai's sover.
2. the blue cardinal's flower. the first sort is greatly prized
for the beauty of its rich crimson flowers, exceeding all flowers
in deepness. 41iller.
car dinalate. q. m. s. [from cardinal.] the office and rank
§:...} of a cardinal.
an ingenious cavalier, hearing that an old friend of his was
advanced to a cardinalate, went to congratulate his eminence
upon his new honour. l'a/trange.
car dma. k.e.r. m. s. [from card and make..] a maker of cards.
am not i christophero sly, by occupation a cardmater 2
shakespeare's yaming of the shrew.
ca'rdmatch. m. s. [from card and match..] a match made
by dipping pieces of card in melted sulphur.
take care, that those may not make the most noise who
have the least to sell; which is very observable in the venders
of cardmatches. 44-yon.
ca r duu.s. see thistle.
care. m. s. [cape, saxon.]
1. solicitude ; anxiety; perturbation of mind; concern.
or, if i would take care, that care should be,
for wit that scorn'd the world, and liv'd like me. dryden.
nor<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 340</div><p class="text">c a r
c a r
nor fullen discontent, nor anxious care,
ev’n though brought thither, could inhabit there. drydon.
raise in your soul the greatest care of fulfilling the divine
will. //ake's preparation for death.
2. caution; often in the phrase to have a care.
well, sweet jack, have a care of thyself. shakes care.
the foolish virgins had taken no care for a further supply,
after the oil, which was at first put into their lamps, was spent,
as the wise had done. tillotson.
begone! the priest expects you at the altar.— ---
but, tyrant, have a care, i come not thither. a. philips.
3. regard; charge; heed in order to protection and preserva-
is on.
if we believe that there is a god, that takes care of us, and
we be careful to please him, this cannot but be a mighty com-
fort to us. tillotson.
4. it is a loose and vague word, implying attention of inclination,
in any degree more or less: it is commonly used in the phrase
to take care.
you come in such a time,
as if propitious fortune took a care
to swell my tide of joys to their full height. dryden.
we take care to flatter ourselves with imaginary scenes and
prospects of future happiness. atterbury.
5. the object of care, of caution, or of love.
o my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows
when that my care could not with-hold thy riots,
what wilt thou do, when riot is thy care * shakespeare.
flush’d were his cheeks, and glowing were his eyes:
is she thy care * is she thy care 2 he cries. dryden.
your safety, more than mine, was then my care:
lest of the guide bereft, the rudder lost,
your ship should run against the rocky coast.
the wily fox,
who lately filch'd the turkey's callow care. gay's trivia.
none taught the trees a nobler race to bear,
or more improv'd the vegetable care.
t, care. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. to te anxious or solicitous ; to be in concern about any
thing. -
§. cared not what pain she put her body to, since the better
part, her mind, was laid under so much agony. sidney.
as the germans, both in language and manners, differed
from the hungarians, so were they always at variance with
them; and therefore much cared not, though they were by him
subdued. knolles's history of the turks.
well, on my terms thou wilt not be my heir ;
if thou car's little, less shall be my care. dryden.
2. to be inclined ; to be disposed : with for before nouns, or
to before verbs.
not caring to observe the wind,
or the new sea cxplore. j/aller.
the remarks are introduced by a compliment to the works
of an authour, who, i am sure, would not care for being praised
at the expence of another's reputation. addison.
having been now acquainted, the two sexes did not care to
part. addison.
great masters in painting never care for drawing people in
the fashion. - speciator.
3. to be affeded with ; to have regard to : with for.
you dote on her that cares not for your love. shakes?.
there was an ape that had twins; she doted upon one of
them, and did not much care for t'other. l’estrange.
where few are rich, few care for it; where many are so,
many desire it. sample.
ca’recraz ed. adj. [from care and craze.] broken with care
and solicitude.
these both put off, a poor petitioner,
a carecraz’d nother of a many children. shakes care.
t. care en. v. a. scariner, fr. from carina, lat.] a term in
the sea language. to lay a vessel on one side, to caulk, stop
up leaks, refit, or trim the other side. - chaoilers.
t, ca re en. v. n. to be in the state of careening.
career. m. s. [carriere, fr.] -
1. the ground on which a race is run ; the length of a course.
dryden.
pope.
they had run themselves too far out of breath, to go back
again the same career. sidney.
2. a course ; a race.
what rein can hold licentious wickedness,
when down the hill he holds his fierce career 2 shałesp.
3. height of speed ; swift motion.
it is related of ceitain indians, that they are able, when a
horse is running in his full career, to stand upright on his back.
js ilkins's mathematical alagick.
practise them now to curb the turning steed,
mocking the foe; now to his rapid speed
to give the rein, and, in the full career,
to draw the certain sword, or send the pointed spear. prior.
4. course of action; uninterrupted procedure. -
shall quips and sentences, and these paper bullets of the brain,
awe a man from the career of his humour * shakespeare.
the heir of a blasted family has rose up, and promised
fair, and yet, at length, a cross event has certainly met and
stopt him in the career of his fortune. south.
knights in knightly deeds should persevere,
and still continue what at first they were;
continue, and proceed in honour's fair career. id, valen.
to career. v. n. [from the noun..] running with swift no-
tl oil.
with eyes, the whee's
of beryl, and careering fires between.
ca’re ful. adj. [from care and full j
1. anxious ; solicitous ; full of concern.
the pitcous maiden carosul, comfortless,
does throw out thrilling shrieks and shrieking crics. stensor.
martha, thou art car ful, and troubled about many things.
luke, x. 41.
az...on.
welcome, thou pleasing slumber;
a while embrace me in thy leaden arms,
and charm my car ful thoughts.
2. provident; diligent: with of or for.
behold, thou has been carsul for us with all this care; what
denham's sejoy.
is to be done for thee * 2 ains.
to cure their mad ambition, they were sent
to rule a distant province, each alone :
what could a careful father more have done * drydoni.
3. watchful; cautious : with of.
it concerns us to be careful of our conversations. ray.
4. subject to perturbations; exposed to troubles; full of anxiety;
full of solicitude.
by him that rais'd me to this careful height,
from that contented hap, which i enjoy'd.
ca re fully. adv. [from car ful.]
1. in a manner that shews care.
envy, how carefully does it look? how meagre and ill-com-
shakosheare,
plexioned - coer.
2. hegdiuliy ; watchfully; vigilantly; attentively.
you come most carefully upon your hour. shakes care.
by considering him so careful, as i did before my attempt, i
have made some faint resemblance of him. pryden.
all of them, therefore, studiously cherished the memory of
their honourable extraction, and carsally preserved the evidences
of it. 4 ortary-
3. providently.
4. cautiously.
caf efu lness. n.s.. [from careful j. vigilance; heedfulness;
caution.
the death of selymus was, with all carefulness, concealed by
ferhates. knolles's history of the taris.
carelesly, adv. isrom care's...] negligently; in attentively;
without care; heedlesly.
there he him found all carelsy display'd,
in secret shadow from the sunny ray.
not content to see,
that others write as carelyy as he. j7%aller.
ca’re lesness. m. s. [from carees;..] heedlessness; inattention;
negligence ; absence of care; manner void of care.
for coriolanus, neither to care whether they love or hate
him, manifests the true knowledge he has in their disposition,
and, out of his noble carelosis, lets them plainly see it.
shakspeare's coriolanas.
who, in the other extreme, only doth
call a rough carelesness good fashion ;
whose cloak his spurs tear, or whom he spits on,
he cares not. - ixcm re.
it makes us to walk warily, and tread sure, for fear of oor
enemics; and that is better, than to be flattered into pride and
carelesness. taylor's rule of living boy.
the ignorance or care'ssics of the servants can hardly lease
fairy qyern.
the master disappointed. yeot.
i who at sometimes spend, at others spare,
divided between carel soft and care. pope.
ca’re i, ess. adj. [from care.j
1. without care; without solicitude; unconcerned; negligent;
in attentive ; heedless ; regardless; thoughtless; neglectsu!;
unheeding ; unthinking; unmindful : with of or a cut.
knowing that if the worst befal them, they shall lose nothing
but themselves; whereof they seem very car, loss. speyer.
nor lose the good advantage of his gracic,
by seeming cold, or careless of his will. shakes care.
a woman the more curious she is about her face, is corn-
monly the more carely; about her house. bon. johnson.
a father, unnaturally care's of his child, sci’s or go, cs him
to another man. loko.
2. cheerful ; undisturbed.
thus wisely careless, innocently gay,
cheerful he play’d. pope.
in my cheerful morn of lose,
when nurs’d by careless solitude i liv'd,
and sung of nature with unceasing joy,
pleas'd have i wander'd through your rough domain. t. m.
. unheeded ; thoughtless; unconsidered.
the freedom of saying as many careles, things as other peo-
ple, without being so severely remarked upon. o:
- 4. n-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 341</div><p class="text">c a r c a r
if i can fast, and please, and cares, my mind with the plea-
sures of worthy speculations, or virtuous practices, let greatness
and malice vex and abridge me, if they can. south.
care'ss. n. s. [from the verb..] an act of endearment; an ex-
pression of tenderness.
he, she knew, would intermix
grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
with conjugal careff's. milton.
there are some men who seem to have brutal minds wrapt
up in human shapes; their very caroses are crude and impor-
tune. l’estrange.
after his successour had publickly owned himself a roman
catholick, he began with his first carses to the church party.
swift.
ca ret. n.s.. [caret, lat. there is wanting.] a note which
shews where something interlined should be read.
ca rgason. m. s. [cargacon, spanish.] a cargo. not used.
my body is a cargason of ill humours. howel's letters.
cargo. m. s. [charge, fr.] the lading of a ship; the merchan-
dise or wares contained and conveyed in a ship.
in the hurry of the shipwreck, simonides was the only man
that appeared unconcerned, notwithstanding that his whole
fortune was at stake in the cargo. l’eshrange.
a ship, whose cargo was no less than a whole world, that
carried the fortune and hopes of all posterity. burnet's theory.
this gentleman was then a young adventurer in the repub-
lick of letters, and just fitted out for the university with a good
cargo of latin and greek. addison.
car scous sumour. [from carica, a fig, lat.] a swelling in the
form of a fig.
ca ries. n. s. [latin.] that rottenness which is peculiar to a
bone. 3aincy.
fistulas of a long continuance, are, for the most part, ac-
companied with ulcerations of the gland, and caris in the
bone. //iseman's surgery.
car io's 1ty. m. s. [from carious.] rotten.
this is too general, taking in all cariosity and ulcers of
the bones. //iseman's surgery.
ca'rious. adj. [cariosus, lat..] rottenness.
i discovered the blood to arise by a carious tooth. ipseman.
car.k. m. s. sceanc, saxon.] care; anxiety; solicitude; con-
cern; heedfulness. this word is now obsolete.
and klaius taking for his youngling cark,
lest greedy eyes to them might challenge lay,
busy with oker did their shoulders mark. sidney.
he down did lay
his heavy head, devoid of careful cark. spensor.
to cark. v. n. [ceancan, saxon.) to be careful; to be so-
licitous; to be anxious. it is now very little used, and always
in an ill sense. -
i do find what a blessing is chanced to my life, from such
muddy abundance of carking agonies, to states which still be
adherent. sidney.
what can be vainer, than to lavish out our lives in the search
of trifles, and to lie carking for the unprofitable goods of this
world 2 l’estrange.
nothing can supersede our own carkings and contrivances
for ourselves, but the assurance that god cares for us.
decay of piety.
carl e. n.s. [ccord, saxon.]
1. a mean, rude, rough, brutal man. we now use churl.
the carle beheld, and saw his guest
would safe depart, for all his subtile sleight. spensor.
answer, thou carle, and judge this riddle right,
i’ll frankly own thee for a cunning wight. gay's pastorals.
the editor was a covetous carle, and would have his pearls
of the highest price. bentley.
2. a kind of hemp.
the fimble to spin and the car! for her seed. tuscr.
ca'rline thistle. [carlina, lat.] a plant. miller.
ca r lings. n. s. [in a ship.] timbers lying fore and aft, along
from one beam to another; on these the ledges rest, on which
the planks of the deck are made fast. harris.
ca'rman. m. s. [from car and man.] a man whose employ-
ment it is to drive cars.
if the strong cane support thy walking hand,
chairmen no longer shall the wall command;
e’m sturdy carmen shall thy nod obey,
and rattling coaches stop to make thee way. gay's trivia.
ca'rm elite. n.s.. [carmelite, fr.] a sort of pear.
carminative. adj. [supposed to be so called, as having vim
carminis, the power of a charm.]
carminatives are such things as dilute and relax at the same
time, because wind occasions a spasm, or convulsion in some
parts. whatever promotes insensible perspiration, is carmina-
tive; for wind is perspirable matter retained in the body.
arbuthnot on aliments,
vol. i.
carn a lity. m. s. [from carnal.]
|t,
* 4. unmoved by ; unconcerned at. carminative and dieuretick - * -
carels of thunder from the clouds that break, a. will damp all passion sympathetick. , swift.
my only omens from your looks i take. granville. carmine, n.s. a bright red or crimson colour, bordering on
!, to care'ss. v. a. scaroser, fr. from carus, lat.] to endear; purple, used by painters in miniature. it is the most valuable
to fondle; to treat with kindness. product of the cochineal mastick, and of an excessive price.
chambers.
ca rnage. n.s.. [carnage, fr. from caro, carni, lat.]
1. slaughter; havock; massacre.
he brought the king's forces upon them rather as to carnage
than to fight, insomuch as without any great loss or danger to
themselves, the greatest part of the seditious were flain.
hayward.
2. heaps of flesh.
such a scent i draw
of carnage, prey innumerable and taste
the savour of death from all things there that live. milton.
his ample maw, with human carnage fill'd
a milky deluge next the giant swill’d. pope.
ca rnal. adj. [carnal, fr. carnalis, low lat.]
1. fleshly ; not spiritual. -
... thou dost justly require us, to submit our understandings to
thine, and deny our carnal reason, in order to thy sacred myste-
rics and commands. ring charles.
from that pretence
spiritual laws by carnal pow'r shall force
on every conscience. milton.
not such in carnal pleasure: for which cause,
among the beasts no meat for thee was found. milton.
a glorious apparition had not doubt,
and carnal fear, that day dim’d adam's eye. milton.
he perceives plainly, that his appetite to spiritual things
abates, in proportion as his sensual appetite is indulged and en-
couraged ; and that carnal desires kill not only the desire, but
even the power of tasting purer delights. atterbury.
2. lustful; lecherous; libidinous.
this carnal cur
preys on the issue of his mother's body. shakespeare.
1. fleshly lust; compliance with carnal desires.
if godly, why do they wallow and sleep in all the carnalitic;
of the world, under pretence of christian liberty south.
2. grossness of mind. - -
he did not institute this way of worship, but because of the
(aroality of their hearts, and the proneness of that people to
idolatry. tilotson.
ca rnally. adv. [from carnal.] according to the flesh; not
spiritually.
where they found men in diet, attire, furniture of house, or
any other way observers of civility and decent order, such they
reproved, as being carnally and earthly minded. ph22.eer.
in the sacrament we do not receive christ carnally, but we
receive him spiritually; and that of itself is a conjugation of
blesfings and spiritual graces. taylor's worthy communicant.
ca'rnalness. n. s. the same with carnality. die?.
carna'tion. n.s.. [carnes, lat.] the name of the natural
flesh colour; from whence perhaps the flower is named; the
name of a flower. -
and lo the wretch whose vile, whose inse&amp;t lust
laid this gay daughter of the spring in dust:
o punish him ' or to th' elysian shades
dismiss my soul, where no carnation fades. pop:
carne’tion. n.s. a precious stone. -
the common carnelion has its name from its flesh colour:
which is, in some of these stones, paler, when it is called the
female carnelion; in others deeper, called the male. woodw.
ca'rneous. adj. [carneus, lat.] fleshy.
in a calf, the umbilical vessels terminate in certain bodies,
divided into a multitude of carneous papillae. . . ray.
to ca/rnify. v. n. [from caro, carnis, lat.] to breed flesh;
to turn nutriment into flesh.
at the same time i think, i deliberate, i purpose, i com-
mand: in inferiour faculties, i walk, i see, i hear, i digest,
i sanguify, i carnisy. hale's origin of mankind.
ca'rnival. n. s. [carnaval, fr.] the feast held in the popish
countries before lent; a time of luxury.
the whole year is but one mad carnival, and we are volup-
tuous not so much upon desire or appetite, as by way of exploit
and bravery. decay of piety.
carni'vorous. adj. [from carnis and voro.] flesh-eating;
that of which flesh is the proper food.
in birds there is no mastication or comminution of the meat
in the mouth ; but in such as are not carnivorous, it is immedi-
ately swallowed into the crop or crow. ray on the creation.
man is by his frame, as well as his appetite, a carnivorous
animal. arbuthnot on aliments:
car no sity. n.s.. [carnosite, fr.] fleshy excrescence.
by this method, and by this course of diet, with sudorificks,
the ulcers are healed, and that carnosity resolved. joseman.
ca'rnous. adj. [from caro, carnis, lat j. fleshy.
the first or outward part is a thick and carnous covering;
like that of a walnut; the second, a dry and flosculous coat,
commonly called mace. brown's pulgar errours.
4. a the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 342</div><p class="text">c a r
c a r
the muscle whereby he is enabled to draw himself toge-
ther, the academists describe to be a distinci carmous muscle, ex-
tended to the ear. ray on the creation.
ca'rob, or st. john's bread... [soliqua, lat. j
a tree very common in spain, and in some parts of italy,
where it produces a great quantity of long, flat, brown-co-
loured pods, which are thick, mealy, and of a sweetish taste.
these pods are eaten by the poorer inhabitants. a4iller.
caroche. n.s. [from carose, fr.] a coach; a carriage of
pleasure. it is used in the comedy of albumazar, but now it is
ob, olete.
ca'rol. m. s. [carola, ital, from choreola, lat.]
1. a song cf joy and exultation.
and let the graces dance unto the rest,
for they can do it best :
the whiles the maidens do their carol sing,
to which the woods shall answer, and their echo ring.
- spenser's epithalamium.
even in the old testament, if you listen to david's harp,
you shall hear as many herse-like airs as carols. bacon.
oppos'd to her, on t'other side advance
the costly feast, the carol, and the dance,
minstrels and musick, poetry and play,
and balls by night, and tournaments by day.
2. a song of devotion.
no night is now with hymn or car:l blest.
they gladly thither haste; and, by a choir
dryden.
shakespeare.
of squadron’d angels, hear his carol sung. milton.
3. a song in general.
the carol they began that hour,
how that a life was but a flower. shakespeare.
to ca'rol. v. m. scarolare, ital.] to sing; to warble ; to sing
in joy and festivity.
hark, how the cheerful birds do chant their lays,
and carol of love's praise. spenser.
this done, she sung, and caroll"d out so clear,
that men and angels might rejoice to hear. dryden.
hov'ring swans their throats releas'd
from native silence, carol sounds harmonious.
to ca'rol. v. a. to praise ; to celebrate in song.
she with precious viol’d liquours heals,
for which the shepherds at their festivals,
carol her goodness loud in rustick lays.
ca'rot i.d. adj. [carotides, lat.] two arteries which arise out
of the ascending trunk of the aorta, near where the subclavian
arteries arise.
the carotid, vertebral, and splenick arteries, are not only
variously contorted, but also here and there dilated, to mo-
derate the motion of the blood. ray on the creation.
ca rousal. n.s. [from carouse. it seems more properly pro-
nounced with the accent upon the second syllable; but dryden
accents it on the first.] a festival.
this game, these carousa's ascanius taught,
and building alba to the latins brought. dryden.
to carouse. v. n. i [carousser, fr. from garaus, all out,
germ.] to drink; to quaff; to drink largely.
he calls for wine: a health, quoth he, as if
h'ad been aboard carousing to his mates
prior.
after a storm. shakespeare.
learn with how little life may be preserved,
in gold and myrrh they need not to carouse. raleigh.
now hats fly off, and youths carouse,
healths first go round, and then the house,
the brides came thick and thick. suckling.
under the shadow of friendly boughs
they sit carctosing, where their liquour grows. j/aller.
to car o' se. v. a. to drink up lavishly.
now my sick fool, roderigo,
whom love hath turn’d almost the wrong side out,
to desdemona hath to night carous'd
potations pottle deep. -
our cheerful guests carouse the sparkling tears
of the rich grape, whilst musick charms their ears. denham.
car o'use. n. s. [foom the verb.]
1. a drinking match.
waste in wild riot what your land allows,
there ply the early feast, and late carouse.
2. a hearty dose of liquour.
he had so many eyes watching over him, as he could not
drink a full carouse of sack; but the state was advertised there-
of within few hours after. - davies on ireland.
please you, we may contrive this afternoon,
and quaff carouses to our mistress' health. shakespeare.
caro'us er. n.s.. [from carouse..] a drinker ; a toper.
the bold carouser, and advent'ring dame,
nor fear the fever, nor refuse the flame;
safe in his skill from all constraint set free,
but conscious shame, remorse, and piety.
carp. m. s. [carpe, fr.] a pond fish.
a friend of mine stored a pond of three or four acres with
carps and tench, hale's origin of mankind,
shakespeare.
pope.
granville.
milton. -
to carp. v. n. [carpo, lat.] to censure; to cavil; to find
fault: with at before the thing or person censured.
tertullian, even often through discontentment, carpeth inju-
riously at them, as though they did it even when they were
free from such meaning. hooker.
this your all licens'd fool
does hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
in rank and not to be endured riots. shakespeare.
no, not a tooth or nail to scratch,
and at my actions carp or catch. herbert.
- when i spoke,
my honest homely words were carp'd and censur’d,
for want of courtly stile. dryden.
ca'rpenter. m. s. [charpentier, fr.] an artificer in wood; a
builder of houses and ships. he is distinguished from a joiner,
as the carpenter performs larger and stronger work.
this work performed with advisement good,
godfrey his carpenters, and men of skill,
in all the camp, sent to an aged wood. fairfax.
in building hiero's great ship, there were three hundred car.
penters employed for a year together. jwilkins.
in burden'd vessels, first with speedy care,
his plenteous stores do season'd timbers send,
thither the brawny carpenters repair,
and, as the surgeons of maim'd ships, attend. dryden,
ca'r pentry. m. s. [from carpenter.] the tride or art of a
carpenter.
it had been more proper for me to have introduced carpentry
before joinery, because necessity did doubtless compel our fore.
fathers to use the conveniency of the first, rather than the ex-
travagancy of the last. moxon's mechanical exercises.
ca'rper. n. s. [from to carp.] a caviller; a censorious man.
i have not these weeds,
by putting on the cunning of a carper.
ca'rpe.t. m. s. [karpet, dutch.]
1. a covering of various colours, spread upon floors or tables.
be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without, carpets laid,
and every thing in order shakespeare.
against the wall, in the middle of the half pace, is a chair
placed before him, with a table and carpet before it.
2. ground variegated with flowers, and level and smooth.
go signify as much, while here we march
upon the grassy carpet of this plain. shakespeare.
the carpet ground shall be with leaves o'erspread,
and boughs shall weave a cov'ring for your head. dryden.
3. anything variegated.
the whole dry land is, for the most part, covered over with
a lovely carpet of green grass, and other herbs. ray.
4. carpet is used, proverbially; for a state of ease and luxury; as,
a carpet night, a knight that has never known the field, and
has recommended himself only at table.
he is knight, dubbed with unhacked rapier, and on carot
consideration. shakespeare.
5. to be on the carpet, [sur le tapis, fr.] is to be the subject of
consideration ; an affair in hand.
to cat pet. v. a. [from the noun..] to spread with carpets,
we found him in a fair chamber, richly hanged and carpeted
under foot, without any degrees to the state; he was set upon 2
low throne, richly adorned, and a rich cloth of state over his
head, of blue sattin embroidered. bacon.
the dry land we find every where naturally carpetra over
with grass, and other agreeable wholesome plants. derb.m.
ca r ping. particip. adj. [from to carp..] captious; censo-
iious,
no carping critick interrupts his praise,
no rival strives, but for a second place.
shakespeare.
granville.
lay aside therefore a caping spirit, and read even an adver-
sary with an honest design to find out his true meaning: do not
snatch at little lapses, and appearances of mistake. j/atts,
ca'rpingly. adv. [from carping.] captiously; censoriously.
we derive out of the latin at second hand by the french,
and make good english, as in these adverbs, carpingy, current-
ly, actively, colourably. camden's remains.
ca'rpmeals. n.s. a kind of coarse cloth made in the north
of england. philip's isorld of iford.
ca rpu.s. n.s. [latin.] the wrist, so named by anatomists,
which is made up of eight little bones, of different figures and
thickness, placed in two ranks, four in each rank. they are
strongly tied together by the liganents which come from the
radius, and by the annulary ligament. $2uincy.
i found one of the bones of the carpus lying loose in the
wound. wiseman's surgery.
ca'rra ck. see car ack.
ca'rra t. see carat.
ca'rra way. see car away.
nay, you shall see mine orchard, where, in an arbour, we
will eat a last year's pippin of my own grafting, with a dish of
carraways, and so forth ; come, cousin, silence, and then to
bed. shakespeare's henry iv.
cat&amp;riage n. s. scariage, fr. baggage; from carry.]
i. the act of carrying or transporting, or bearing any thing.
bacon.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 343</div><p class="text">c a r
w
**
* -
*
o
the unequal agitation of the winds, though material to the
carriage of sounds farther or less way, yet do not confound the
articulation. bacon's natural hisł.
if it seem so strange to move this obelisk for so little space,
what may we think of the curriage of it out of egypt? /pilkins.
2. conquest; acquisition.
solyman resolved to besiege vienna, in good hope, that, by
the carriage away of that, the other cities would, without re-
sistance, be yielded. knolles's history of the turks.
3. vehicle; that in which any thing is carried.
what horse or carriage can take up and bear away all the
loppings of a branchy tree at once 2 watts.
4. the frame upon which cannon is carried.
he commanded the great ordnance to be laid upon carriages,
which before lay bound in great unwieldy timber, with rings
fastened thereto, and could not handsomely be removed to or
fro. knolles's history of the turks.
5. behaviour; personal manners.
before his eyes he did cast a mist, by his own insinuation,
and by the carriage of his youth, that expressed a natural prince-
ly behaviour. bacon's henry vii.
though in my face there's no affeded frown,
nor in my carriage a feign'd niceness shown,
i keep my honour still without a stain. dryden.
let them have ever so learned lectures of breeding, that
which will most influence their carriage, will be the company
they converse with, and the fashion of those about them. locke.
6. conduct; measures; practices.
you may hurt yourself; nay, utterly
grow from the king's acquaintance by this carriage. shak.
he advised the new governour to have so much discretion in
his carriage, that there might be no notice taken in the exercise
of his religion. clarendon.
7. management; manner of transacting. not used.
the manner of carriage of the business, was as if there had
been secret inquisition upon him. bacon's henry vii.
carrier. m. s. (from so carry.]
1. one who carries something.
you must distinguish between the motion of the air, which
is but a vehiculum causae, a carrier of the sounds, and the founds
conveyed. bacon's nat. hisł.
for winds, when homeward they return, will drive
the loaded carriers from their evening hive. dryden.
2. cne whose profession or trade is to carry goods for others.
i have rather made it my choice to transcribe all, than to
venture the loss of my originals by post or carrier.
pierce's letters.
the roads are crouded with carriers, laden with rich manu-
factures. swift.
3. a messenger; one who carries a message.
the welcome news is in the letter found; -
the carrier's not commission'd to expound;
it speaks itself. dryten's religio laici.
the name of a species of pigeons, so called from the reported.
practice of some nations, who send them with letters tied to
their necks, which they carry to the place where they were
bred, however remote.
there are tame and wild pigeons, and of tame there are
croppers, carriers, runts. walton's anglor.
cat&amp;r on. n.s.. [charogne, fr.]
1. the carcase of something not proper for food,
they did eat the dead carrions, and one another soon after ;
insomuch that the very carcases they scraped out of their graves.
spenser on ireland.
it is i,
that, lying by the violet in the sun,
do, as the carrion does, not as the flower.
this foul deed shall smell above the earth,
with carrion men groaning for burial. shakesp. j. caesar.
you'll ask me why i rather chuse to have
a weight of carrion flesh, than to receive
three thousand ducats 2 shakesp. measure for measure.
ravens are seen in flocks where a carrion lies, and wolves
shakespeare.
in herds to run down a deer. temple.
sheep, oxen, horses fall; and heap'd on high,
the diff’ring species in confusion lie,
till, warn’d by frequent ills, the way they found,
to lodge their lothsome car ion under ground. dryden.
criticks, as they are birds of prey, have ever a natural in-
clination to carrion. pope.
2. any flesh so corrupted as not to be fit for food.
not all that pride that makes thee swell,
as big as thou dost blown-up veal;
nor all thy tricks and slights to cheat,
sell all thy carrion for good meat. hudibras.
the wolves will get a breakfast by my death,
yet scarce enough their hunger to supply,
for love has made me carrion ere i die. lryden.
3. a name of reproach for a worthless woman. -
shall we send that foolish carrion, mrs. quickly, to him, and
excuse his throwing into the watcr: shakespeare.
carrion. adj. [from the substantive..] relating to carcase: ;
feeding upon earcases,
match to match i have encounter'd him,
and made a prey for carrion kites and crows,
ev’n of the bonny beasts he lov’d so well. shakesp. h. vi.
the charity of our death-bed visits from one another, is
much at a rate with that of a carrion crow to a sheep; we
smell a carcase. l’estrange.
ca'rrot. n.s. scarote, fr. daucus, lat..] an esculent root.
carrots, though garden roots, yet they do well in the fields
for seed. amortimer.
his spouse orders the sack to be immediately opened, and
greedily pulls out of it half a dozen bunches of carrots. dennis.
carroti ness. n.s. [from carroty.) redness of hair.
ca r roty. adj [from carrot.] spoken of red hair, on account
of its resemblance in colour to carrots.
ca"rrows. m. s. [an irish word.]
the carrows are a kind of people that wander up and down
to gentlemens houses, living only upon cards and dice; who,
though they have little or nothing of their own, yet will they
play for much money. spenser on ireland.
to ca’rry. v. a. [charier, fr. from currus, lat.]
1. to convey from a place; opposed to bring, or convey to a place:
often with a particle, signifying departure; as, away, off.
when he dieth, he shall carry nothing away. ps. xlix. 18.
and devout men carried stephen to his burial. acts, viii. 2.
i mean to carry her away this evening, by the help of these
two soldiers. dryden's spanish fryar.
as in a hive's vimineous dome,
ten thousand bees enjoy their home;
each does her studious ałion vary,
to go and come, to fetch and carry. prior.
they exposed their goods with the price marked, then re-
tired; the merchants came, left the price which they would
give upon the goods, and retired; the seres returning carried
off either their goods or money, as they liked best. arbuthnot.
2. to transport.
they began to carry about in beds those that were sick.
mark, vi. 55.
the species of audibles seem to be carried more manifestly
throu h the air, than the species of visibles. bacon.
where many great ordnance are shot off together, the sound
will be carried, at the least, twenty miles upon the land. bacon.
3. to bear; to have about one. -
do not take out bones like surgeons i have met with, who
carry them about in their pockets. jwiseman's surgery.
4. to take; to have with one.
if the ideas of liberty and volition were carried along with us
in our minds, a great part of the difficulties that perplex men's
thoughts would be easier resolved. locke.
i have listened with my utmost attention for half an hour to
an oratour, without being able to carry away one single sentence
out of a whole sermon. swift.
5. to convey by force.
go, carry sir john falstaff to the fleet; -
take all his company along with him. shakesp. henry iv.
6. to effect any thing.
there are some vain persons, that whatsoever goeth alone,
or moveth upon greater means, if they have never so little
hand in it, they think it is they that carry it. bacon.
oft-times we lose the occasion of carrying a business well
thoroughly by our too mush haste. ben. johnson's discovery.
theie advantages will be of no effect, unless we improve
them to words, in the carrying of our main point. addison.
7. to gain in competition.
and hardly shall i carry out my side, -
her husband being alive. shakesp. king lear.
how many stand for consulships ?—three, they say; but
it is thought of every one coriolanus will carry it. shakesp.
i see not yet how any of these fix reasons can be fairly a-
voided; and yet if any of them hold good, it is enough to
carry the cause. saunderson.
the latter still enjoying his place, and continuing a joint
commissioner of the treasury, still opposed, and commonly car-
ried away every thing against him. clarendon.
8. to gain after resistance.
the count wooes your daughter,
lays down his wanton siege before her beauty;
resolves to carry her; let her consent,
as we'll direct her now, 'tis best to bear it.
what a fortune does the thick lips owe,
if he can carry her thus * shakes). othello.
the town was distressed, and ready for an assault, which, if
it had been given, would have cost much blood; but yet the
town would have been carried in the end. bacon's henry vii.
9. to gain; with it; that is, to prevail. [le porter, fr.]
are you all resolved to give your voices 2
but that's no matter; the greater part carries it. shakes”.
by these, and the like arts, they promised themselves, that
they should easily carry it; so that they entertained the house
all the morning with other debates. clarondon.
shakesp.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

if
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 344</div><p class="text">c a r
*
if the numerousness of a train must carry it, virtue may
go follow astraea, and vice only will be worth the courting.
glanville.
children, who live together, often strive for mastery, whose
wills shall carry it over the rest. locke.
in pleasures and pains, the present is apt to carry it, and those
at a distance have the disadvantage in the comparison. locke.
1o. to bear out; to face through : with it.
if a man carries it off, there is so much money saved ; and
if he be detected, there will be something pleasant in the fro-
lick. l’estrange.
11. to continue external appearance.
my niece is already in the belief that he's mad; we may
carry it thus for our pleasure, and his penance. shakespeare.
12. to manage; to transact.
the senate is generally as numerous as our house of com-
mons; and yet carries its resolutions so privately, that they are
seldom known. addison on italy.
13. to behave ; to conduct: with the reciprocal pronoun.
neglect not also the examples of those that have carried
themselves ill in the same place. bacon.
he attended the king into scotland, where he did carry him-
flf with much singular sweetness and temper. j/otton.
he carried himself so insolently in the house, and out of the
house, to all persons, that he became odious. clarendan.
14. sometimes with it: as, she carries it high.
15. to bring forward; to advance in any progress.
it is not to be imagined how far constancy will carry a man;
however, it is better walking slowly in a rugged way, than to
break a leg and be a cripple. locke.
this plain natural way, without grammar, can carry them to
great elegancy and politeness in their language. locke.
there is no vice which mankind carries to such wild ex-
tremes, as that of avarice. swift.
16. to urge ; to bear forward with some kind of external im-
pulse.
men are strongly carried out to, and hardly took off from
the practice of vice. south.
he that the world, or flesh, or devil, can carry away from
the profession of an obedience to christ, is no son of the faith-
ful abraham. hammond's praciical catechism.
ill nature, passion, and revenge, will carry them too far in
punishing others; and therefore god hath certainly appointed
government to restrain the partiality and violence of *;
- - - ocke.
17. to bear; to have ; to obtain. -
in some vegetables, we see something that carries a kind of
analogy to sense; they contract their leaves against the cold;
they open them to the favourable heat. hale's origin of mank.
18. to exhibit to show ; to display on the outside ; to set to
view. - - - -
* the aspect of every one in the family carries so much satis-
faction, that it appears he knows his happy lot.
19. to imply; to import. - -
it carries too great an imputation of ignorance, lightness or
folly, for men to quit and renounce their former tenets, pre-
sently upon the offer of an argument, which they cannot im-
mediately answer. locke.
20. to contain; to comprise. -
he thought it carried something of argument in it, to prove
that doctrine. watts on the mind.
21. to have annexed; to have anything joined: with the par-
ticle with. -
there was a righteous and a searching law, direetly forbid-
ding such practices; and they knew that it carried with it the
divine stamp. - south.
there are many expressions, which carry with them to my
mind no clear ideas. locke.
the obvious portions of extension, that affect our senses,
carry with them into the mind the idea of finite. locke.
22. to convey or bear any thing united or adhering, by commu-
nication of motion.
we see also manifestly, that sounds are carried with wind:
and therefore sounds will be heard further with the wind than
against the wind. bacon's natural history.
23. to move or continue any thing in a certain dire&amp;tion.
his chimney is carried up through the whole rock, so that
you see the sky through it, notwithstanding the rooms lie very
deep. addison on italy.
24. to push on ideas, arguments, or any thing successive in a
trill n.
manethes, that wrote of the egyptians, hath carried up their
government to an incredible distance. hale's origin of mank.
25. to receive ; to endure: not in use.
some have in readiness so many odd stories, as there is no-
thing but they can wrap it into a tale, to make others carry it
with more pleasure. bacon.
26. to convey by means of something supporting.
carry camomile, or wild thyme, or the green strawberry,
upon sticks, as you do hops upon poles. bacon's nat, hyt.
27. to bear, as trees. 2.
addison.
set them a reasonable depth, and they will carry more shoots
upon the stem. bacon's natural hylory,
28. to fetch and bring, as dogs.
young whelps learn easily to carry; young popinjays learn
quickly to speak. afthan's schoolzaster.
29. to carry off. to kill.
old parr lived to one hundred and fifty-three years of age,
and might have gone further, if the change of air had not car.
ried him off. - temple.
3o. to carry on. to promote; to help forward.
it carries on the same design that is promoted by authours of
a graver turn, and only does it in another manner. addison.
31. to carry on. to continue ; to put forward from one stage
to another. - -
by the administration of grace, begun by our blessed sa-
viour, carried on by his disciples, and to be completed by their
successours to the world's end, all types that darkened this faith,
are enlightened. spratt.
æneas's settlement in italy was carried on through all the
oppositions in his way to it, both by sea and land. aiaison.
32. h3 carry on. to prosecute; not to let cease.
france will not consent to furnish us with money sufficient
to carry on the war. 7.mple,
33. to carry through. to support; to keep from failing, or be-
ing conquered.
that grace will carry us, if we do not wilfully betray our
succours, victoriously through all difficulties. bammond,
to carry. v. n.
i. a hate is said, by hunters, to carry, when she runs on rotten
ground, or on frost, and it sticks to her feet.
2. a horse is said to carry well, when his neck is arched, and he
holds his head high ; but when his neck is short, and ill shaped,
and he lowers his head, he is said to carry low.
ca'rry-tale. n.s.. [from carry and tale.j a talebearer.
some carry-tale, some pleaseman, some slight zany,
told our intents before. shakesp. love's labour loft,
cart. m. s. see car. [craet, craz, sax.]
i. a carriage in general.
the scythians are described by herodotus to lodge always
in carts, and to feed upon the milk of mares. temple.
triptolemus, so sung the nine, *
strew'd plenty from his cart divine. dryden,
2. a wheel-carriage, used commonly for luggage.
now while my friend, just ready to depart,
was packing all his goods in one poor cart,
he stopp'd a little dryden's juvenal.
3. a small carriage with two wheels, used by husbandmen, dis-
tinguished from a waggon, which has four wheels.
alas! what weights are these that load my heart
i am as dull as winter starved sheep,
tir'd as a jade in overloaden cart. so inj,
4. the vehicle in which criminals are carried to execution.
the squire, whose good grace was to open the scene,
now fitted the halter, now travers’d the cart,
and often took leave, but was loth to depart. prior.
to cart., v. a. [from the noun.j. to expose in a cart by way
of punishment.
democritus ne'er laugh’d so loud,
to see bawds carted through the croud.
no woman led a better life:
she to intrigues was elen hard-hearted;
she chuckl’d when a bawd was carted;
and thought the nation ne'er would thrive,
till all the whores were burnt alive. prior.
to cart. v. n. to use carts for carriage.
oxen are not so good for draught, where you have occasion
to cart much, but for winter ploughing. alsorimer.
cart-horse. n.s.. [from cart and horse.] a coarse unwieldy
horse, fit only for the cart.
it was determined, that these sick and wounded soldiers
should be carried upon the cart-horses. knclei.
cart-jade. m. s. [from cart and jade.] a vile horse, fit only
for the cart.
he came out with all his clowns, horsed upon such cart-
jades, so furnished, i thought if that were thrift, i wished none
of my friends or subjects ever to thrive. sidney.
cart-lo ad. m. s. [from cart and load.]
1. a quantity of any thing piled on a cart.
a cart-load of carrots appeared of darker colour, when look-
ed upon where the points were obverted to the eye, than where
judibras.
the sides were so. boyle.
let wood and his accomplices travel about a country with
cart-loads of their ware, and see who will take it. swift.
2. a quantity sufficient to load a cart.
cart-rope. m. s. start and rope.] a strong cord used to fasten
the load on the carriage: proverbially anythick cord.
cart-way. m. s. [from cart and way.] a way through which
a carriage may conveniently travel.
where your woods are large, it is best to have a cart-way
along the middle of them. mortimer's huslandry.
caria blanche. [french. a blank paper; a paper to
be
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 345</div><p class="text">c a s.
o
o:
o
*.
be filled up with such conditions as the person to whom it is
sent thinks proper.
ca'rtel. m. s. [cartel, fr. cartelo, ital.]
1. a writing containing, for the most part, stipulations between
eilennic.s.
as this discord among the sisterhood is likely to engage them
in a long and lingering war, it is the more necessary that there
should be a cartel settled among them. addison's freeholder.
2. anciently any publick paper.
they flatly disavouch
to yield him more obedience, or support;
and as to perjur’d duke of lancaster,
their cartel of defiance, they preser. dan. civil war.
ca(rter. m. s. [from cart.] the man who drives a cait, or
whose trade it is to drive a cart.
let me be no assistant for a state,
but keep a farm, and carters. shakspeare's hamlet.
the divine goodness never fails, provided that, according to
the advice of hercules to the carter, we put our own shoulders
to the work. l’estrange.
carter and host confronted face to face. dryden.
it is the prudence of a carter to put bells upon his horses, to
make them carry their burdens cheerfully. dryden's dufresnoy.
ca’r filage. m. s. [cartilago, lat.] a smooth and solid bo-
dy, softer than a bone, but harder than a gament. in it are
no cavities or cells for containing of marrow; nor is it cover-
ed over with any membrane to make it sensible, as the bones
are. the cartilages have a natural elasticity, by which, if they
are forced from their natural figure or situation, they return to
it of themselves, as soon as that force is taken away. quincy.
canals, by degrees, are abolished, and grow solid; several
of them united, grow a membrane; these membranes further
consolidated, become cartilages, and cartilages bones. arbuthnot.
cartila g1 nfous. q n.s. (from cartilage. j consisting of car-
cartila'ginous. } tilages. -
by what artifice the cartilagineous kind of fishes poise them-
selves, ascend and descend at pleasure, and continue in what
depth of water they list, is as yet unknown. ray.
the larynx gives passage to the breath, and, as the breath
passeth through the rimula, makes a vibration of those cartila-
ginous bodies, which forms that breath into a vocal sound or
voice. holder's elements of speech.
cart.o'on. n.f. [cartone, ital.] a painting or drawing upon
large paper.
it is with a vulgar idea that the world beholds the cartoons of
raphael, and every one feels his share of pleasure and enter-
tainment. watts's logick.
car touch. m. s. [cartouche, fr.]
1. a case of wood three inches thick at the bottom, girt round
with marlin, and holding forty-eight musketballs, and six or
eight iron balls of a pound weight. it is fired out of a hobit
or small mortar, and is proper for defending a pass. harris.
2. a portable box for charges.
cart rage. r. n.s.. [cartouche, fr.] a case of paper or parch-
ca'rtr to g.e. ! ment filled with gunpowder, used for the greater
expedition in charging guns.
our monarch stands in person by,
his new-cast cannons firmness to explore ;
the strength of big-corn'd powder loves to try,
and ball and cartrage sorts for every bore. dryden.
ca'rt rut. n.s.. [from cart and rut; route, a way.] the track
made by a cart wheel.
ca. rtui ary. m.s.. [from charta, paper, lat.] a place where
papers briecords are kept.
ca rtwright. m. s. [from cart and wright.] a maker of carts.
after local names, the most names have been derived from
occupations or profesfions; as, taylor, potter, smith, cart-
wright. - camden's remains.
t, carve. v. a. [ceonpan, sax. kerven, dutch.]
1. to cut wood, or stone, or other matter, into elegant forms.
taking the very refuse, he hath carved it diligently when
he had nothing else to do. jwisdom, xiii. 13.
had democrates really carved mount athos into a statue of
alexander the great, and had the memory of the fact been ob-
literated by some accident,who could afterwards have proved it
impossible, but that it might casually have been bentley,
2. to cut meat at the table.
3. to make any thing by carving or cutting.
- yet fearing idleness, the nurse of ill,
in sculpture exercis'd his happy skill;
and carv'd in iv'ry such a maid so fair,
as nature could not with his art compare,
were she to work.
4. to engrave.
o rosalind these trees shall be my books,
and in their barks my thoughts i'll character;
that every eye, which in this forest looks,
shall see thy virtue witness'd every where.
run, run, orlando, carve on every tree,
the fair, the chaste, the unexpressive she.
5. to distribute; to apportion; to provide at will.
he had been a keeper of his flocks, both from the violence
vol. i.
dryden.
shakesp.
of robbers and his own soldiers; who could easily have carved
themselves their own food. south.
how dares sinful dust and ashes invade the prerogative of pro-
vidence, and carve out to himself the seasons and issues of life
and death * south.
the labourer's share, being seldom more than a bare sub-
sistence, never allows that body of men opportunity to struggle
with the richer, unless when some common and great distress
emboldens them to carve to their wants. locke.
6. to cut ; to hew.
or they will buy his sheep forth of the cote, -
or they will carve the shepherd's throat. speyer's poskral.
brave macbeth, with his brandish’d steel,
like valour's minion, carved out his passage.
to car v e. v. n. .
1. to exercise the trade of a sculptor.
2. to perform at table the office of supplying the company from
the dishes. -
i do mean to make love to ford's wise; i spy entertainment
in her; she discourses, she carves, she gives the leer of invita-
tion. * shakesp. aleroy is...wes of isindsor.
well then, things handsomely were serv’d;
my mistress for the strangers carv'd.
ca'rvel. m. s. a small ship.
- i gave them order, if they found any indians there, to send
in the little fly-boat, or the carvel, into the river; for, with
our great ships, we durst not approach the coast.
ca'r v er. m. s. [from carve.]
1. a sculptor. -
all arts and artists theseus could command,
who sold for hire, or wrought for better fame,
the master painters, and the carvers came.
2. he that cuts up the meat at the table.
meanwhile thy indignation yet to raise,
the carver, dancing round each dish, surveys
with flying knife, and, as his art directs,
with proper gestures ev'ry fowl dissects.
3. he that apportions, or distributes at will.
in this kind, to come in braving arms,
be his own carver, and cut out his way, -
to find out right with wrongs it may not be. shak. r. ii.
we are not the carvers of our own fortunes. l'e/irange,
ca r v ing. m. s. [from carve..] sculpture; figures carved.
they can no more last like the ancients,than excellent carv-
shakspeare.
prior.
raleigh.
dryden.
dryden.
ings in wood, like those in marble and brass. temple.
the lids are ivy, grapes in clusters lurk
beneath the carving of the curious work. dryden's virgil,
caru'n cle. m. s. scaruncula, lat..] a small protuberance of
flesh, either natural or morbid.
caruncles are a sort of loose flesh, arising in the urethra by the
erosion made by virulent acid matter. j/is man.
carta tes. n. s. [from carya, a city taken by the greeks,
caryatides. ! who led away the women captives; and, to
perpetuate their slavery, represented them in buildings as charg-
ed with burdens.] an order of columns or pilasters under the
figures of women, dressed in long robes, serving to support en-
tablatures. - chambers.
casca'de. m. s. scascade, fr. cascata, ital. from cascare, to fall.]
a cataract; a water-fall.
rivers diverted from their native course,
and bound with chains of artificial force,
from large cascades in pleasing tumult roll'd,
or rose through figur’d stone, or breathing gold. prior,
the river teverone, throws itself down a precipice, and
falls by several cascades, from one rock to another, till it
gains the bottom of the valley. addison.
case. m. s. [caise, fr. a box.]
1. something that covers or contains any thing else; a cover-
ing; a box; a sheath.
o cleave, my sides'
heart, once be stronger than thy continent,
crack thy frail case. shakes?. antony and cleopatra.
each thought was visible that roll'd within,
as through a crystal case the figur’d hours are seen. dryden.
other caterpillars produced maggots, that immediately made
themselves up in cases. ray on the creation.
the body is but a case to this vehicle. broome on the oosy.
just then clarissa drew, with tempting grace,
a two-edg’d weapon from her shining case. pope.
2. the outer part of a house or building. -
the case of the holy house is nobly designed, and executed
by great masters. addison on italy.
3. a building unfurnished.
he had a purpose likewise to raise, in the university, a fair
case for books, and to furnish it with choice collections from
all parts of his own charge. //ottom. -
cas e-knife. m. s. [from case and knife.] a large kitchen knife.
the king always acts with a great case knife stuck in his
girdle, which the lady snatches from him in the struggle, and
so defends herself. addison on italy.
case-shot. n. s. [from case and shot..] bullets inclosed in a
case.
4 b in<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 346</div><p class="text">c a s
c a s
in each seven small brass and leather guns, charged with
case-shot. clarendon.
case. n. s. [casus, lat.] -
1. condition with regard to outward circumstances.
unworthy wretch, quoth he, of so great grace,
how dare i think such glory to attain :
these that have it attain'd, were in like case,
quoth he, as wretched, and liv'd in like pain. fairy queen.
question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;
be now a father, and propose a son. shakesp. henry iv.
ome knew the face,
and all had heard the much lamented case. dryden.
these were the circumstances under which the corinthians
then were, and the argument which the apostle advances, is in-
tended to reach their particular case. atterbury.
my youth may be made, as it never fails in executions, a cose
of compassion. pope's prof. to his works.
2. state of things.
he saith, that if there can be found such an inequality be-
tween man and man, as between man and beast, or between
soul and body, it investeth a right of government, which seem-
eth rather an impossible case, than an untrue sentence. bacon.
here was the case; an army of english, wasted and tired
with a long winter's siege, engaged an army of a greater num-
ber than themselves, fresh and in vigour. baconi.
i can but be a slave where-ever i am; so that taken or not
taken, 'tis all a case to me. l’estrange.
they are excellent in order to certain ends; he hath no need
to use them, as the case now stands, being provided for with
the provision of an angel. taylor’s holy living.
your parents did not produce you much into the world,
whereby you have fewer ill impressions; but they failed, as is
geherally the case, in too much neglecling to cultivate your
mind. swift.
3. [in physick..] state of the body; state of the disease.
it was well ; for we had rather met with calms and contrary
winds, than any tempests; for our sick were many, and in very
ill case. bacon.
chalybeate water seems to be a proper remedy in hypochon-
driacal cases. arbuthnot on aliments.
4. history of a disease.
5. the state of facts juridically considered: as, the lawyers cited
many cases in their pleas.
if he be not apt to beat over matters, and to call up one
thing, to prove and illustrate another, let him study the law-
yers cases: so every defect of the mind may have a special re-
ceipt. bacon's essays.
6. in ludicrous language, condition with regard to leanness, or
fat. in case, is lu/ly or fat.
thou liest, most ignorant monster, i am in case to justle a
constable. shakespeare's tempest.
pray have but patience till then, and when i am in little
better case, i'll throw myself in the very mouth of you. l’eslr.
quoth ralph, i should not, if i were
in case for action, now be here.
for if the fire be faint, or out of case,
he will be copy'd in his famish'd race.
the priest was pretty well in case,
and shew’d some humour in his face ;
look'd with an easy careless mien,
a perfect stranger to the spleen.
7. contingence; possible event.
the atheist, in case things should fall out contrary to his be-
lief or expedation, hath made no provision for this case ; if,
contrary to his confidence, it should prove in the issue that
there is a god, the man is lost and undone for ever. tillotson.
8. question relating to particular persons or things.
well do i find each man most wise in his own case. sidney.
it is strange, that the ancient fathers should not appeal to
this judge, in all cases, it being so short and expedite a way for
the ending of controversies. tillotson.
9. representation of any fact or question.
10. the variation of nouns.
the several changes which the noun undergoes in the latin
and greek tongues, in the several numbers, are called cases, and
are designed to express the several views or relations under which
the mind confiders things with regard to one another; and the
variation of the noun for this purpose is called declension.
clark's latin grammar.
11. in case. [in caso, ital.] if it should happen; upon the suppo-
sition that: a form of speech now little used.
for in case it be certain, hard it cannot be for them to shew
us where we shall find it; that we may say these were the or-
ders of the apostles. - hooker.
a sure retreat to his forces, in case they should have an ill
day, or unlucky chance in the field. bacon's henry vii.
this would be the accomplishment of their common felicity,
in case, either by their evil destiny or advice, they suffered not
the occasion to be lost. hayward.
to cas e. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to put in a case or cover.
5
hudibras.
dryden's virgil.
swift.
case ye, case ye; on with your vizours; there's money of
the king's coming down the hill. shakesp. henry iv.
the cry went once for thee,
and still it might, and yet it may again,
if thou would'st not entomb thyself alive,
and cose thy reputation in a tent. shakesp. troil, and cross.
like a fail’n cedar, far diffus’d his train,
cas'd in green scales, the crocodile extends.
2. to cover as a case.
then comes my fit again, i had else been perfeot;
as broad, and gen'ral, as the casing air,
to saucy doubts and fears. shakespeare's macbeth.
3. o: cover on the outside with materials different from the in-
ide. -
“then they began to case their houses with marble. arbuthn.
4. to strip off the covering; to take off the skin.
we'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him.
- shakesp. all's well that ends well.
to case. v. n. to put cases; to contrive representations of
facts: a ludicrous use.
they fell presently to reasoning and casing upon the matter
with him, and laying distinetions before him. l'e/irange.
to case ha'rden. v. a. [from case and harden.] to harden
on the outside.
the manner of caschardening is thus: take cow horn or
hoof, dry it thoroughly in an oven, then beat it to powder;
put about the same quantity of bay salt to it, and mingle them
together vith stale chamberlye, or else white wine vinegar.
lay some of this mixture upon loam, and cover your is on all
over with it; then wrap the loam about all, and lay it upon the
hearth of the forge to dry and harden. put it into the fire,
and blow up the coals to it, till the whole lump have just a
blood-red heat. moxon's mechanical exercises.
ca's emate, n. s. [from cosa armata, ital. casamata, span. a
vault formerly made to separate the platforms of the lower and
upper batteries.] -
1. [in fortification.] a kind of vault or arch of stone-work, in
that part of the flank of a bastion next the curtin, somewhat
retired or drawn back towards the capital of the bastion, serv-
ing, as a battery, to defend the face of the opposite bastien,
and the moat or ditch. chan:bers.
2. the well, with its several subterraneous branches, dug in the
passage of the bastion, till the miner is heard at work, and air
given to the mine. harris.
cost. n. s. [casimento, ital.] a window opening upon
in ges.
why, then may you have a cosment of the great chamber
window, where we play, open, and the moon may shine in
at the casement. shakesp. midsummer night's dream,
here in this world they do much knowledge read,
thomson.
and are the casements which admit most light. davitt,
. they, waken'd with the noise, did fly
from inward room to window eye,
and gently op'ning lid, the casement,
look'd out, but yet with some amazement. hudibrat,
there is as much difference between the clear representa-
tions of the understanding then, and the obscure discoveries
that it makes now, as there is between the prospect of a case-
ment and a key-hole. - south.
ca's eous. adj. [caseus, lat..] resembling cheese; cheesy.
its fibrous parts are from the caseous parts of the chyle.
floyer on humouri,
ca's ern. n.s.. [caserne, fr.] a little room or lodgement erec-
ted between the rampart and the houses of fortified towns, to
serve as apartments or lodgings for the soldiers of the garrison,
with beds, harris,
ca'sewor m. m. s. [from case and worm.] a grub that makes
itself a case.
cadises, or caseworms, are to be found in this nation, in se-
veral distinet counties, and in several little brooks. floyer,
cash. m. s. scaise, fr. a chest.] money; properly ready mo-
ney ; money in the chest, or at hand.
a thief, bent to unhoard the cash
of some rich burgher. paradis: lost.
he is at an end of all his cash, he has both his law and his
daily bread now upon trust. arbuthnot's john bail.
he sent the thief, that stole the cash, away,
and punish'd him that put it in his way. pope.
ca's h-keeper. m. s. [from cash and keep.] a man entrusted with
the money.
dispensator was properly a cash-keeper, or privy-purse.
arbuthnot on coins.
ca's hew nut. n. s. a tree that bears nuts, not with shells,
but husks. miller.
cash.1oe.r. m. s. [from cash..] he that has charge of the money.
if a steward or cashier be suffered to run on, without bring-
ing him to a reckoning, such a sottish forbearance will teach
him to shuffle. south.
a venetian, finding his son's expences grow very high, or-
dered his cashier to let him have no more money than what he
should count when he received it. i.ocee.
- flight
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 347</div><p class="text">to,
c. a s
c a s
o
:
s
.*
', as
o:
o, *
*
*
flight of cashiers, or mobs, he'll never mind;
and knows no losses, while the muse is kind.
to cashl'er. v. a. scaffer, fr. casare, lat.]
1. to discard; to dismiss from a post, or a society, with re-
proach.
does 't not go well ? casio hath beaten thee,
and thou by that small hurt hast cashier'd caffio. , shakesp.
seconds in factions many times prove principals; but many
times also they prove cyphers, and are cashiered. bacon.
if i had omitted what he said, his thoughts and words be-
ing thus coshiered in my hands, he had no longer been lucre-
tius. dryden.
they have already cashiered several of their followers as mu-
tineers. addison's freeholder.
the ruling rogue, who dreads to be cashier’d,
contrives, as he is hated, to be fear'd. swift.
2. it seems, in the following passages, to signify the same as to
annul; to vacate; which is sufficiently agreeable to the de-
rivation.
if we should find a father corrupting his son, or a mother her
daughter, we must charge this upon a peculiar anomaly and
baseness of nature; if the name of nature may be allowed to
that which seems to be utter cashiering of it, and deviation
from, and a contradiction to, the common principles of hu-
manity. south.
some cashier, or at least endeavour to invalidate, all other
arguments, and forbid us to hearken to those proofs, as weak
or fallacious. locke.
cask, n. s. scasque, fr. cadus, lat.]
1. a barrel; a wooden vessel to stop up liquour or provisions.
. the patient turning himself abed, it makes a fluctuating
kind of noise, like the rumbling of water in a cask. harvey.
perhaps to-morrow he may change his wine,
and drink old sparkling alban, or setine,
whose title, and whose age, with mould o'ergrown,
the good old cask for ever keeps unknown. dryden.
2. it has cask in a kind of plural sense, to signify the commodity
or provision of casks.
great inconveniencies grow by the bad cos' being commonly
so ill seasoned and conditioned, as that a great part of the beer
is ever lost and cast away. raleigh.
cask. n. s. scasque, fr. cassis, lat.] a helmet; armour
casque. { for the head : a poetical word.
let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
fall like amazing thunder on the ca, que
of thy pernicious enemy.
and these
sling weighty stones, when from afar they fight;
their casques are cork, a covering thick and light. dryden.
why does he load with darts
his trembling hands, and crush beneath a cask
his winkled brows addison.
ca'sket. n.s.. [a diminutive of caise, a chest, fr. case, cassette.]
a small box or chest for jewels, or things of particular value.
they found him dead, and cast into the streets,
an empty casket, where the jewel, life,
by some damn'd hand was robb'd, and ta'en away. shakesp.
o ignorant poor man what dost thou bear,
lock'd up within the casket of thy breast
what jewels, and what riches hast thou there :
pope.
salopar.
what heav'nly treasure in so weak a chest ? davies.
mine eye hath found that sad sepulchral rock,
that was the casket of heav'n's richest store. milton.
that had by chance pack'd up his choicest treasure
in one dear coffet, and sav'd only that. otway.
this casket india's glowing gems unlocks,
and all arabia breathes from yonder box. pope.
7. ca'sket. v. a. [from the noun..] to put in a casket.
i have writ my letters, casketed my treasure, and given order
for our horses. shakespeare.
cass am una’i r. n. s. an aromatick vegetable, being a species
of galangal, brought from the east, a nervous and stomachick
single. quincy.
to ca ss ate. v. a. scaffer, fr. caffire, low lat.] to vacate;
to invalidate; to make void ; to nullify.
this opinion supersedes and cajates the best medium we
have. ray on the creation.
cass ation. m. s. scasatio, lat.] a making null or void. d.
ca'ss avi. " n.s. a plant. it is cultivated in all the warm
§...; parts of america, where the root, after being
divested of its milky juice, is ground to flour, and then
made into cakes of bread. of this there are two sorts. the
most common has purplish stalks, with the veins and leaves of
a purplish colour ; but the stalks of the other are green, and
the leaves of a lighter green. the last sort is not venomous,
even when the roots are fresh and full of juice; which the
negroes frequently dig up, roast, and eat, like potatoes, with-
out any ill effects. miller.
ca'ss aw are. see cassiow ary.
ca'ssi a. m. s. a sweet spice mentioned by moses, ex. xxx. 24.
as an ingredient in the composition of the holy oil, which
was to be made use of in the consecration of the sacred vessels
of the tabernacle. this aromatick is said to be the bark of a
tree very like cinamon, and grows in the indies without being
cultivated. calmet.
all thy garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and casia. ps, xlv. 8.
ca'ssia, n. j. the name of a tree.
it hath a cylindrical, long, taper, or flat pod, divided into
many cells by transverse diaphragms; in each of which is con-
tained one hard seed, lodged, for the most part, in a clammy
black substance, which is purgative. the flowers have five
leaves, disposed orbicularly. miller.
ca'ssidon y, or stickadre. n.s. [/?oechas, latin.] the name
of a plant.
ca'ssiow ary. m. s. a large bird of prey in the east indies.
i have a clear idea of the relation of dam and chick, between
the two casiowaries in st. james's park. docke.
ca'ssock, n.s.. [coso sue, fr.] a close garment; now gene-
rally that which clergymen wear under their gowns.
half dare not shake the snow from off their cassocks, lest
they shake themselves to pieces. shakespeare,
his scanty salary compelled him to run deep in debt for a
new gown and cajock, and now and then forced him to write
some paper of wit or humour, or preach a sermon for ten shil-
lings, to supply his necessities. swift.
coyoto. n, s. a common weed, otherwise called shepherd's
pouch. * * * -
to cast. v. a. preter. cas'; particip. pass. cast. [after, da-
nish.] this is a word of multifarious and indefinite use.
1. to throw with the hand.
i rather chuse to endure the wounds of those darts, which
envy ca/ieth at novelty, than to go on safely and sleepily in the
easy ways of ancient mistakings. raleigh,
they had compassed in his host, and cast darts at the people
from morning till evening. 1 macc. vii. 80.
then cost thy sword away,
and yield thee to my mercy, or i strike.
2. to throw away, as useless or noxious.
if thy right hand offend thee cut it off, and raft it from
dryden and lee.
thee. matthew,
3. to throw, as from an engine.
slings to cast stones. chron.
4. to scatter by the hand: as, to cost seed.
cast the dust into the brook. deut.
5. to force by violence.
cast them into the red sea. exodus.
cast them into another land. deut.
6. to shed.
nor shall your vine caff her fruit.
7. to throw from a high place.
bear him to the rock tarpeian, and from thence
into de struction cast him. shakespeare's coriolanus.
8. to throw as a net or snare. o
i speak for your own profit, not that i may cast a snare up-
on you. i cor. vii. 35.
9. to drop ; to let fall.
they lot down the boat into the sea, as though they would
have cast anchor. 4:7;, xxvii. 30.
io. to throw dice, or lots.
and joshua cast lots for them in shiloh. josh. xviii. io.
11. to throw, in wrestling.
and i think, being too strong for him, though he took m
legs sometime, yet i made a shift to cost him. shakespeare.
12. to throw, as worth!css or hateful.
his carcase was cost in the way. chron.
his friends contend to embalm his body, his enemies, that
they may cast it to the dogs. pope's essay on homer.
13. to drive by violence of weather.
howbeit we must be cast upon a certain island.
what length of lands, what ocean have you pass'd,
what storms sustain'd, and on what shore been cost 2 dryd.
14. to emit.
this fumes off in the calcination of the stone, and cost, a
sulphureous smell. //oodward.
15. to bring suddenly or unexpectedly.
content themselves with that which was the irremediable
error of former time, or the necessity of the present hath cast
upon them. hooker.
16. to build by throwing up earth; to raise.
and shooting in the earth, coffs up a mount of clay.
speoser's fairy queen.
thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee. luke.
the king of assyria shall not come into this city, nor shoot
an arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank
against it. 2 kings, xix. 32.
at length barbarossa having cast up his trenches, landed
fifty-four pieces of artillery for battery. knolles's history.
earth-worms will come forth, and moles will cost up more,
and fleas bite more, against rain. bacon's natural history.
17. to put into or out of any certain state, with the notion of
descent, or depression : as, the king was cast from his throne.
jesus had heard that john was cast into prison. azatt.
at thy rebuke both the chariot and horse are case into a dead
sleep. psalm lxxvi. 6.
18. to
malachy.
afts.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 348</div><p class="text">c a s
c a s
18. to condemn in a criminal trial.
- but oh, that treacherous breast ! to whom weak you
did trust our counsels, and we both may rue,
having his falsehood found too late, ’twas he
that made me cast you guilty, and you me. donne.
we take up with the most incompetent witnesses, nay, often
suborn our own surmises and jealousies, that we may be sure to
cas the unhappy criminal. government of the tongue.
he could not, in this forlorn case, have made use of the very
last plea of a cast criminal; nor so much as have cried, mercy!
lord, mercy! south.
there then we met; both try’d, and both were cast,
and this irrevocable sentence past. dryden.
19. to overcome or defeat in a law suit. [from coffer, fr.]
the northern men were agreed, and, in effect, all the other,
to cast our london escheatour. camden's remains.
were the case referred to any competent judge, they would
inevitably be cost. decay of piety.
zo. to defeat.
no martial project to surprise,
can ever be attempted twice;
nor cast design serve afterwards,
as gamesters tear their losing cards.
21. to cashier.
you are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in po-
licy than in malice; even so as one would beat his offenceless
dog, to affright an in perious lion. shakespeare.
22. to leave behind in a race.
in short, so swift your judgments turn and wind,
you cast our fleetest wit sa mile behind. dryden.
23. to shed; to let fall ; to lay aside ; to moult; to change for
new
hudibras.
our chariot lost her wheels, their points our spears,
the bird of conquest her chief feather cast. fairfax.
of plants some are green all winter, others cast their leaves.
bacon's natural history.
the costing of the skin is, by the ancients, compared to
the bre...king of the fecundine, or cawl, but not rightly; for
that were to make every casting of the skin a new birth: and
besides, the secundine is but a general cover, not shaped ac-
cording to the parts, but the skin is shaped according to the
parts. the creatures that cast the skin, are the snake, the
viper, the grashopper, the lizard, the silkworm, &amp;c. bacon.
o fertile head, which ev’ry year
could such a crop of wonders bear!
which might it never have been cast,
fach year's growth added to the last,
these lofty branches had supply'd
the earth's bold sons prodigious pride.
the waving harvest bends beneath his blast,
the forest shakes, the groves their honours cast. dryden.
from hence, my lord, and love, i thus conclude,
that though my homely ancestors were rude,
mean as i am, yet may i have the grace
to make you father of a generous race:
and noble then am i, when i begin,
in virtue cloath'd, to ca/? the rags of sin. dryden.
the ladies have been in a kind of moulting season, having
cost great quantities of ribbon and cambrick, and reduced the
jvaller.
human figure to the beautiful globular form. addison.
24. to lay aside, as fit to be used or worn no longer.
so may cast poets write; there's no pretension
to argue loss of wit, from loss of pension. dryden.
he has ever been of opinion, that giving cast clothes to be
worn by valets, has a very ill effect upon little minds. addison.
25. to have abortions ; to bring forth before the time.
thy evs and thy she-goats have not cost their young. gen.
26. to make to preponderate ; to decide by overbalancing; to
ive overweight.
which being inclined, not constrained, contain within
themselves the casting act, and a power to command the con-
clusion. " brown's wulgar errours.
how much interest cas's the balance in cases dubious. south.
life and death are equal in themselves,
that which could cost the balance, is thy falshood. dryden.
not many years ago, it so happened, that a cobler had the
cashing vote for the life of a criminal, which he very graciously
gave on the merc’’ ‘l fide. addison on italy.
suppose you eyes sent equal rays
upon two distant pots of ale,
in this sad state, your doubtful choice
would never have the cosling voice.
27. to compute; to reckon; to calculate.
hearts, tongues, figure, scribes, bards, poets, cannot
think, speak, caff, write, sing, number, ho!
his love to antony. shakespeare.
here is now the smith's note for shoeing and plow-irons.—
let it be cost and paid. shakespeare.
you cast th' event of war, my noble lord,
and summ'd th’ account of chance, before you said,
let us make head. shakespeare.
the best way to represent to life the manifold use of friend-
prior.
ship, is to cost and see how many things there are, which a
man cannot do himself. bacon's essays.
i have lately been costing in my thoughts the several unhap-
pinesses of life, and comparing the infelicities of old age to those
of infancy. addison.
28. to contrive; to plan out.
the cloister facing the south, is covered with vines, and
would have been proper for an orange-house; and had, i doubt
not, been cast for that purpose, if this piece of gardening had
been then in as much vogue as it is now. temple.
29. to judge; to consider in order to judgment.
if thou couldst, doctor, cost,
the water of my land, find her disease,
and purge it to a sound and pristine health, *
i would applaud thee. shakespeare.
peace, brother, be not over exquisite
to cost the fashion of uncertain evils. - milton.
30. to fix the parts in a play.
our parts in the other world will be new cas’, and mankind
will be there ranged in different stations of superiority.
addison.
31. to glance; to direet: applied to the eye or mind.
a losel wandering by the way,
one that to bounty never cast his mind;
ne thought of heav'n ever did affay,
his baser breaft. spensor.
zelmanes's languishing countenance, with crossed arms, and
sometimes cast up eyes, she thought to have an excellent grace.
sidney.
as he past along,
how earnestly he cast his eyes upon me ! shakoff.
begin, auspicious boy, to cast about
thy infant eyes, and, with a smile, thy mother fingle out.
dryden’s wirgil.
far eastward cast thine eye, from whence the sun,
and orient science, at a birth begun. pope's dunciad.
he then led me to the rock, and, placing me on the top of
it, cost thy eyes eastward, said he, and tell me what thou
seesł. addison.
32. to found; to form by running in a mould.
when any such curious work of silver is to be cast, as re-
quires that the impression of hairs, or very slender lines, be
taken off by the metal, it is not enough that the silver be
barely melted, but it must be kept a considerable while in a
strong fusion. boyle.
how to build ships, and dreadful ordnance cast,
instruct the artist. jwaller,
the father's grief restrain'd his art;
he twice essay’d to cast his son in gold,
twice from his hands he dropp'd the forming mould. dryd.
33. to melt metal into figures.
yon' croud, he might refle&amp;t, yon' joyful croud
with restless rage would pull my statue down,
and cast the brass anew to his renown. prior,
this was but as a refiner's fire, to purge out the dross, and
then cost the mass again into a new mould. burnet's theory.
34. to model; to form by rule.
we may take a quarter of a mile for the common measure
of the depth of the sea, if it were cost into a channel of an
equal depth every where. burnet's theory of the earth.
under this influence, derived from mathematical studies,
some have been tempted to cast all their logical, their metaphy.
fical, and their theological and moral learning into this me-
thod. watts's logick.
35. to communicate by refle&amp;tion or emanation.
so bright a splendour, so divine a grace,
the glorious daphnis cas's on his illustrious race. dryden.
we may happen to find a fairer light cast over the same
scriptures, and fee reason to alter our sentiments even in some
points of moment. j/atts on the amind.
36. to yield, or give up, without reserve or condition.
the reason of mankind cannot suggest any solid ground of
satisfaction, but in making god our friend, and in carrying a
conscience so clear, as may encourage us, with confidence, to
cast ourselves upon him. south.
37. to inflict.
the world is apt to cas' great blame on those who have an
indifferency for opinions, especially in religion. locke.
38. to cost aside. to dismiss as useless or inconvenient.
i have bought
golden opinion from all sort of people,
which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
not cost aside so soon. shakoffeare.
39. to cast away. to shipwreck.
sir francis drake, and john thomas, meeting with a storm,
it thrust john thomas upon the islands to the south, where he
was cast away. raleigh's essays.
his father philip had, by like mishap, been like to have been
cast away upon the coast of england.
knolles's hisory of the turki.
with pity mov’d, for others cast away
on rocks of hope and fears. rostommon.
* - but
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 349</div><p class="text">l
c a s
c a s
b.
£, \,
er to:
sents
*::::
}st,
go
(t:
io
o
o:
lo
is,
but now our fears tempestuous grow,
and cash our hopes away;
whilst you, regardless of our woe,
sit careless at a play.
40. to cast away.
no use.
they that want means to nourish children, will abstain from
marriage; or, which is all one, they cost away their bodies
upon rich old women. raleigh's essays.
france, hast thou yet more blood to cost away?
say, shall the current of our right run on 2 shakesp.
ben. johnson.
dorset.
to lavish ; to waste in profusion; to turn to
he might be silent, and not cost away
his sentences in vain.
o marcia, o my sister, still there's hope 1
our father will not cast away a life,
so needful to us all, and to his country.
41. to cost away. to ruin.
it is no impossible thing for states, by an oversight in some
one act or treaty between them and their potent opposites,
utterly to cost away themselves for ever. hooker.
42. to cost ty. to reject or dismiss, with negle&amp;t or hate.
old capulet, and montague, -
have made verona's ancient citizens
casl by their grave beseeming ornaments. shakespeare.
when men, presuming themselves to be the only masters of
right reason, cost by the votes and opinions of the rest of man-
kind, as not worthy of reckoning. locke.
43. to cost down. to deject; to depress the mind.
we're not the first,
who with best meaning, have incurr'd the worst;
for thee, oppressed king, i am caff down ;
myself could else outfrown false fortune's frown. shakesp.
the best way will be to let him see you are much cast down,
and afflicted, for the ill opinion he entertains of you. addison.
44. to cast forth. to emit. w
he shall grow as the lily, and coff forth his roots as leba-
addison's cato.
non. hosea.
45. to cast forth. ... to eject.
i ca/, forth all the household stuff. nehem.
they cast me forth into the sea. jonah.
46. to cost off. to discard; to put away.
the prince will, in the perfectness of time,
cast off his followers. - shakespeare.
cast me not off in the time of old age. psalms.
he led me on to mightiest deeds,
but now hath cast me off, as never known. milton.
how ! not call him father ? i see preferment alters a man
strangely; this may serve me for an use of instruction, to cost
off my father, when i am great. dryden.
i long to clasp that haughty maid,
and bend her stubborn virtue to my passion :
when i have gone thus far, i'd cost her off. addison.
. to caff off. to reject.
47 it o, be iod, that a whole society of men should
publickly and professedly disown, and cast off a rule, which
they could not but be infallibly certain was a law. locke.
48. to cast off. to disburden one's self of.
all conspired in one to cast off their subjection to the crown
of england. spenser's state of ireland.
this maketh them, through an unweariable desire of receiv-
ing instruction, to cast off the care of those very affairs, which
do most concern their estate. hooker, preface.
the true reason why any man is an atheist, is because he is
a wicked man: religion would curb him in his lusts; and
therefore he casis it off, and puts all the scorn upon it he can.
tillotson.
company, in any action, gives credit and countenance to
the agent; and so much as the finner gets of this, so much he
costs off of shame. south.
we see they never fail to exert themselves, and to cost off the
oppression, when they feel the weight of it. addison.
49. to cost off. to leave behind.
away he scours cross the fields, coffs off the dogs, and gains
a wood ; but, pressing through a thicket, the bushes held him
by the horns, till the hounds came in, and plucked him down.
l’e/orange.
50. to cast off. [hunting term.] to let go, or set free: as, to
cast off the dogs.
51. to caff out. to reject; to turn out of doors.
thy brat hath been cost out, like to itself, no father own-
ing it. shakespeare.
52. to cast out. to vent; to speak; with some intimation of
negligence or vehemence.
why dost thou cost out such ungenerous terms
against the lords and sovereigns of the world
53. to cast up. to compute; to calculate.
some writers, in casting up the goods most desirable in life,
a. dison e
--- have given them this rank, health, beauty, and riches. temple.
a man who designs to build, is very exact, as he supposes, in
costing up the cost beforehand; but, generally speaking, he is
mistaken in his account. dryden.
54. to cast up. to vomit.
vol. i. o
- thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him,
that thou provok'st thyself to cost him up 2 shak's care,
their villainy goes against my weak it. mach, and therefore
i must cast it up. shakespeare.
o, that in time rome did not cast
her errours up, this fortune to prevents bon. j.h so t.
thy foolish errour find ;
cost up the poison that infects thy mind. dryd, n.
55. to cost upon. to refer to ; to resign to.
if things were cast upon this issue, that god should never
prevent sin, till man deserved it, the best would in and fin
for ever. south,
to cast. v. m.
1. to contrive; to turn the thoughts.
then closely as he might, he cast to leave
the court, not asking any pass or leave. spenser.
from that day forth, i cast in careful mind,
to seek her out with labour and long time. spenser.
we have three that bend themselves, looking into the expe-
riments of their fellows, and cast about how to draw out of
them things of use and practice for man's life and knowledge.
bacon's new atlantis.
but first he cas's to change his proper shape;
which else might work him danger or delay. milton,
as a fox, with hot pursuit
chas'd through a warren, cast about
to save his credit. hudibrar.
all events, called casual, among inanimate bodies, are me-
chanically produced according to the determinate figures, tex-
tures, and motions of those bodies, which are not conscious of
their own operations, nor contrive and cast about how to bring
such events to pass. bently.
this way and that i cas' to save my friends,
till one resolve my varying counsel ends. pope.
2. to admit of a form, by casting or melting.
it comes at the first fusion into a mass that is immediately
malleable, and will not run thin, so as to cast and mould, un-
less mixed with poorcrore, or cindeis. woodward on fafts.
3. to warp; to grow out of form.
stuff is said to casl or warp, when, by its own drought, or
moisture of the air, or other accident, it alters its flatness and
straightness. moxon's mechanical exercises.
4. to cast about. to contrive; to look for means.
inanimate bodies are not conscious of their own opera-
tions, nor contrive and cost about to bring such events to pass.
bentley's sermons.
cast. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the act of casting or throwing ; a throw.
so when a sort of lusty shepherds throw
the bar by turns, and none the rest outgo
so far, but that the rest are measuring cosis,
their emulation and their pastime lasts.
2. the thing thrown.
yet all these dreadful deeds, this deadly fray,
a cast of dreadful dust will soon allay. dryden's wig.
3. state of any thing cast or thrown.
in his own instance of casting ambs-ace, though it partake
more of contingency than of freedom ; supposing the positure
of the party's hand, who did throw the dice; supposing the
figure of the table, and of the dice themselves; supposing the
measure of force applied, and supposing all other things which
did concur to the production of that ca?, to be the very same
they were, there is no doubt but, in this case, the caff is ne-
cessary. bramhall's answer to hobbes.
plato compares life to a game at tables; there what cast we
shall have is not in our power, but to manage it well, that is.
norris.
waller,
4. manner of throwing.
some harrow their ground over, and sow wheat or rye on
it with a broad cast ; some only with a single cost, and some
with a double. mortimer.
5. the space through which any thing is thrown.
and he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and
kneeled down and prayed. luke.
6. a stroke ; a touch.
we have them all with one voice for giving him a caff of
their court prophecy. south.
another cast of their politicks, was that of endeavouring to
impeach an innocent lady, for her faithful and diligent service
of the queen. swift.
this was a coff of wood's politicks; for his information was
wholly false and groundless. swift.
7. motion of the eye; direction of the eye. *
pity causeth sometimes tears, and a flexion or caff of the
eye side; for pity is but grief in another's behalf; the casl of
the eye is a gesture of aversion, or lothness, to behold the ob-
ject of pity. bacon's natural hisory.
a man shall be sure to have a coff of their eye to warn him
before they give him a cast of their nature to betray him. south.
if any man desires to look on this doctrine of gravity, let
him turn the first cost of his eyes on what we have said of fire.
digby on the soul.
4 c there<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 350</div><p class="text">c a s
c a s
there held in holy passion still,
forget thyself to marble, till,
with a sad leaden downward cost,
thou fix them on the earth as fait. milton.
they are the best epitomes in the world, and let you see,
with one cast of an eye, the substance of above an hundred
pages. addison on ancient medals.
8. he that squints is said popularly to have a cost with his eye.
9. the throw of dice.
were it good,
to set the exact wealth of all our states
all at one cost ; to set so rich a main
on the nice hazard of some doubtful hour shakespeare.
jo, venture from throwing dice; chance from the fall of dice.
when you have brought them to the very last cast, they will
offer to come to you, and submit themselves. spenser on ireland.
with better grace an ancient chief may yield
the long contended honours of the field,
than venture all his fortune at a cost,
and fight, like hannibal, to lose at last. dryden.
will you turn recreant at the last cost 2 dryden.
in the last war, has it not sometimes been an even cast, whe-
ther the army should march this way or that way : south.
1 i. a mould ; a for on.
the whole would have been an heroick poem, but in an-
other cost and figure, than any that ever had been written be-
fore. - prior.
12. a shade; or tendency to any colour.
a flaky mass, grey, with a cast of green, in which the talky
matter makes the greatest part of the mass. j/oodward.
the qualities of blood in a healthy state are to be florid, the
red part congealing, and the serum ought to be without any
greenish cast. arbuthnot on aliments.
13. exterior appearance.
the native hue of resolution
is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought. shakespeare.
new names, new dressings, and the modern cost,
some scenes, some persons alter'd, and outfac'd
the world. sir j. denham.
14. manner ; air; mien.
pretty conceptions, fine metaphors, glittering expressions,
and something of a neat cast of verse, are properly the dress,
gems, or loose ornaments of poetry. pope's letters.
neglect not the little figures and turns on the words, nor
sometimes the very cast of the periods; neither omit or con-
found any rites or customs of antiquity. pope on homer.
15. a flight; a number of hawks dismissed from the fish.
a cast of merlins there was besides, which, flying of a gal-
lant height, would beat the birds that rose, down unto the
bushes, as falcons will do wild fowl over a river. sidney.
16. [ca/a, spanish.) a breed; a race; a species. -
ca's tanet. m. s. [castaneta, sp.] a small shell of ivory, or
hard wood, which dancers rattle in their hands.
if there had been words enow between them, to have ex-
pressed provocation, they had gone together by the ears like a
pair of castants. congreve's i/ay of the horld.
cast aw ay. m. s. [from cast and away.] a person lost, or
abandoned, by providence ; anything thrown away.
neither given any leave to search in particular who are the
heirs of the kingdom of god, who castaways. hooker.
left that by any means, when i have preached to others, i
myself should be a castaway. i cor.
ca's t aw ay. adi. [from the subst.] useless; of no value.
we only prize, pamper, and exalt this vassal and slave of
death, or only remember, at our costaway leisure, the impri-
soned immortal soul. raleigh's history.
ca's t e d. the participle preterite of cast, but improperly, and
found perhaps only in the following passage.
when the mind is quicken'd, out of doubt,
the organs, though defunct and dead before,
break up their drowsy grave, and newly move
with casted slough and fresh legerity. shakespeare.
ca's tellain. m. s. scastellano, span j the captain, governour,
or constable of a castle.
ca's tell a ny. n.s.. [from castle.] the lordship belonging to
a castle; the extent of its land and jurisdiction. phillips.
ca's tellated. adj. [from costle.] lo. within a building,
as a fountain or cistern castellated. dict,
ca’s's er. m. s. [from to cast.]
1. a thrower ; he that casts.
if, with this throw, the strongest coster vye,
still, further still, i bid the discus fly. pope.
2. a calculator ; a man that calculates fortunes.
did any of them set up for a caster of fortunate figures, what
might he not get by his predictions f addison.
to castigate. v. a. sco/ligo, lat.) to chastise; to chas-
ten ; to correct; to punish.
if thou didst put this sour cold habit on,
t
to cosligate thy pride, ’twere well. shaocar,
castigation. n.s. [from ta to/ligate j
w. penance ; discipline, * \
ca's ror. m. s. scastor, lat.]
this hand of yours requires
a sequester from liberty; fasting and prayer,
with ca/ligation, exercise devout.
2. punishment; correction.
their costigations were accompanied with encouragements;
which care was taken, to keep me from looking upon as mere
compliments.
3. emendation; repressive remedy.
the ancients had these conjectures touching these floods and
conflagrations, so as to frame them into an hypothesis for the
castigation of the excesses of generation. hale.
ca's tigatc ry. adj. [from costigate.] punitive, in order to
amendment.
there were other ends of penalties inflicted, either proba-
tory, castigatory, or exemplary. bramhall against hobber.
ca'st ing-net. n. / [from costing and net.] a net to be thrown
into the water; not placed and left. -
shakespeare.
boyle.
casting-nets did rivers bottons sweep. may's pirgil,
castle. m. s. sca/leisum, lat.] -
i. a strong house, fortified against assaults.
the castle of macduff, i will surprise, shakespeare.
2. castles in the air. [chateaux d'espagne, fr.] projects with-
out reality. -
these were but like castles in the air, and in men's fancies,
vainly imagined. raligh's history of the //orld.
castle so ap. m. s. [i suppose corrupted from castile soap.) a
kind of soap.
i have a letter from a soap-boiler, defiring me to write upon
the present duties on castle soap. addison.
cast led. adj. [from castle..] furnished with castles.
the hoises neighing by the wind is blown,
and castled elephants o'erlook the town. dryden.
ca's tleward. m. s. [from castle and ward.]
an imposition laid upon such of the king's subjects, as dwell
within a certain compass of any castle, toward the maintenance
of such as watch and ward the castle. c. wel.
ca'stlin g. n.s.. [from cast.] an abortive.
we should rather rely upon the urine of a costling's bladder,
a resolution of crabs eyes, or a second distillation of urine, as
helmont hath commended. brown's pulgar errours.
ca stor, or chester, are derived from the sax. cearten, a
city, town, or castle; and that from the latin castrum ; the
saxons chufing to fix in such places of strength and figure, as
the romans had before built or fortified. gibson's camden.
i. a beaver. see beaver.
like hunted castors conscious of their store
their waylaid wealth to norway's coast they bring. drydon,
2. a fine hat made of the furr of a beaver.
ca stor and pollux. [in meteorology.] a firy meteor,
which appears sometimes sticking to a part of the ship, in form
of one, two, or even three or four balls. when one is seen
alone, it is called helena, which portends the severest part of
the storm to be yet behind; two are denominated castor and
pollux, and sometimes tyndarides, which portend a cessation
of the storm. chambers,
casto reu.m., n. s. [from castor. in pharmacy.] a liquid
matter inclosed in bags or purses, near the anus of the castor,
falsely taken for his testicles. chambers.
castram etation. m. s. [from castramitor, lat.] the art
or practice of encamping.
to castrate. v. a. s.astro, lat.]
1. to geld.
2. to take away the obscene parts of a writing.
castration. m. s...[from castrate.] the act of gelding.
the largest needle should be used, in taking up the sporma-
tick vessels in castration. sharp's surgery.
§:::::::: n.s. a kind of hawk.
castrensian. adj. [costrens, lat..] belonging to a camp. d.
casual. adj. [casual, fr. from casus, lat.j accidental; ari-
sing from chance; depending upon chance; not certain.
the revenue of ireland, both certain and casual, did not
rise unto ten thousand pounds. davies on ireland,
that which seemeth most casual and subject to fortune, is
yet disposed by the ordinance of god. raleigh's history.
whether found, where casual fire
had wasted woods, on mountain, or in vale
down to the veins of earth. milton.
the commissioners entertained themselves by the fire-fide,
in general and casual discourses. clarendon.
most of our rarities have been found out by casual emergen-
cy, and have been the works of time and chance, rather than of
philosophy. glanville.
the expences of some of them always exceed their certain
annual income ; but seldom their casual supplies. i call them
casual, in compliance with the common form. atterbury.
ca'su all y. adv. [foom casual.] accidentally ; without de-
sign, or set purpose. -
- go, bid my woman
search for a jewel, that too casually,
hath left mine arm. shakes care.
o wool
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 351</div><p class="text">c a t
o
m:
wool new shorn, laid casually upon a vessel of verjuice, had
drunk up the verjuice, though the vessel was without o:
a cool.
i should have acquainted my judge with one advantage, and
which i now casually remember. dryden.
ca'sual ness. n. s. [from casual.] accidentalness.
ca'sualty. n.s.. [from casual.]
1. accident; a thing happening by chance, not design. -
with more patience men endure the losses that befall them
by mere casualty, than the damages which they sustain by injus-
tice. raleigh's essays.
that ogavius caesar should shift his camp that night that it
happened to be took by the enemy, was a mere casualty; yet
it preserved a person, who lived to establish a total alteration of
government in the imperial city of the world. south.
2. chance that produces unnatural death.
builds in the weather on the outward wall,
ev’n in the force and road of casualty. shakespeare.
lt is observed in particular nations, that, within the space of
two or three hundred years, notwithstanding all casualties, the
number of men doubles. burnet's theory.
we find one casualty in our bills, of which, though there be
daily talk, there is little effect. graunt's bills of mortality.
casuist. n.s.. [casuisle, fr. from costs, lat.] one that studies
and settles cases of conscience.
the judgment of any casus, or learned divine, concerning
the state of a man's soul, is not sufficient to give him confl-
dence. - south.
you can scarce see a bench of porters without two or three
casuists in it, that will settle you the rights of princes. addison.
who shall decide, when doctors disagree,
and soundest casuists doubt, like you and me? pope.
gasui'stical. adj. [from casuis!..] relating to cases of con-
science; containing the doctrine relating to cases.
what arguments they have to beguile poor, simple, unstable
souls with, i know not; but surely the practical, casuistical,
that is, the principal, vital part of their religion favours very
little of spirituality. south.
ca's u1st ry. m. s. [from casuis'.] the science of a casuist; the
doctrine of cases of conscience.
this concession would not pass for good casuisory in these
ages. pope's odyssey, notes.
morality, by her false guardians drawn,
chicane in furs, and casuistry in lawn. pope's dunciad.
cat. n.s. [katz, teuton. chat, fr.] a domestick animal that
catches mice, commonly reckoned by naturalists the lowest
order of the leonine species.
'twas you incens'd the rabble:
cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth,
as i can of those mysteries, which heav'n
will not have earth to know. shakesp. coriolanus.
thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd. shakesp. macbeth.
a cat, as she beholds the light, draws the ball of her eye
fmall and long, being covered over with a green skin, and di-
lates it at pleasure. peacham on drawing.
cat. n.s. a sort of ship.
cat in the pan. [imagined by some to be rightly written catipan,
as coming from caripania. an unknown correspondent ima-
gines, very naturally, that it is corrupted from cate in the
1)a??.
p *::: is a cunning which we, in england, call the turning
of the cat in the pan; which is, when that which a man says to
another, he lays it as if another had said it to him. bacon.
cat o’ nine tails. a whip with nine lashes, used for the punish-
ment of crimes.
you dread reformers of an impious age,
you awful cat o' nine tails to the stage,
this once be just, and in our cause engage.
prologue to vanbrugh's fals. friend,
catachresis. n. s. [x21&amp;xenais, abuse.] it is, in rhetorick,
the abuse of a trope, when the words are too far wrested from
their native signification, or when one word is abusively put for
another, for want of the proper word; as, a voice beautiful to
the ear. smith's rhetorick.
cat achre'stic al. adj. [from catachress.] contrary to pro-
per use; forced; far fetched.
a catachro/lical and far derived similitude it holds with men,
that is, in a bifurcation. brown's vulgar errours.
cataclysm. m. s. [x,x],xxxo~p (gp.] a deluge; an inundation;
used generally for the universal deluge.
the opinion that held these cataclysms and empyroses univer-
sal, was such, as held, that it put a total consumination unto
things in this lower world. hale's origin of mankind.
ca't acombs. n.f. [from x212 and xop.3gp, a hollow or cavity.]
subterraneous cavities for the burial of the dead; of which there
are a great number about three miles from rome, supposed to
be the caves and cells where the primitive christians hid and as-
fembled themselves, and where they interred the martyrs, which
are accordingly visited with devotion. but, anciently, the word
catacomb was only understood of the tombs of st. peter and st.
paul. - chambers.
on the side of naples, are the catacombs, which must have
been full of stench, if the dead bodies that lay in them were
left to rot in open nitches. - adison.
catagma rick, adj. [x21zyaz, a frađure.] that which has
the quality of consolidating the parts.
i put on a catagmatick emplaster, and, by the use of a laced
glove, scattered the pituitous swelling, and strengthened it.
//isman's surgery.
catale psis. n.s. [.2.1.xn]. ....] a lighter species of the apo-
plexy, or epilepsy. -
there is a disease called a catalopsis, wherein the patient is
suddenly seized without sense or motion, and remains in th:
same posture in which the disease seizeth him. a but not.
catalogue. m. s. [xocyo.] an enumeration of particu-
lars; a list; a register of things one by one.
in the catalogue ye go for men,
showghes, water rugs, and demy wolves, are cleped
all by the name of dogs. shakespeare's a/w!, th:
make a catalogue of prosperous sacrilegious persons, and i
believe they will be repeated sooner than the alphabet. south.
in the library of manuscripts belonging to st laurence, of .
which there is a printed catalogue; i looked into the virgil
which disputes its antiquity with that of the vatican. alisja.
\ the bright taygete, and the shining bears,
with all the sailors catalogue of stars. addiso's ovid.
cat amo‘untain. m. s. [from cat and mountain..] a fierce ani-
mal, resembling a cat.
the black prince of monomotapa, by whose side were seen
the glaring catamountain, and the quill-darting porcupine.
arbuthnot and pope's mart. scrible, us.
cataphract. n. s. [cataphracia, lat.] a horseman in com-
plete armour.
on each side went armed guards,
both horse and foot before him and behind, `
archers and slingers, cataphracts and spears. milt. agon:4.
cataplas.m. n. s. [xx13. tazouz.] a poultice; a soft and moist
application. -
i bought an unetion of a mountebank,
so mortal, that but dip a knife in it,
where it draws blood, no cataplasin so rare,
colle&amp;ted from all simples that have virtue
under the moon, can save. shakespeare's hamlet.
warm cataplasms discuss, but scalding hot may confirm the
tumour. arbuthnot on aliments.
ca^tapult. n. s. [catapulta, lat.] an engine used anciently
to throw stones.
the balista violently shot great stones and quarrels, as also
the catapults. camden's remains.
catar act. m. s. [x:13.62xla.] a fall of water from on high;
a shoot of water; a cascade.
blow, winds, and crack your cheeks; rage, blow !
you cataracis and hurricanes, spout, -
till you have drench'd our steeples.
what if all -
her stores were open'd, and this firmament
of hell should spout her cataracis of fire 2
impendent horrours milton's par. lo!.
no sooner he, with them of man and beast
sele&amp;t for life, shall in the ark be lodg’d,
and shelter'd round; but all the catarac's
of heav'n set open, on the earth shall pour
rain, day and night. milton's par. loft.
torrents and loud impetuous cataracis,
through roads abrupt, and rude unfashion'd tracts,
run down the lofty mountain's channel’d sides,
and to the vale convey their foaming tides. blackmore.
cat ar act. [in medicine.] a suffusion of the eye, when little
clouds, motes, and flies, seem to float about in the air; when
confirmed, the pupil of the eye is either wholly, or in part,
covered, and shut up with a little thin skin, so that the light
has no admittance. $2uincy.
saladine hath a yellow milk, which hath likewise much acri-
mony; for it cleanseth the eyes: it is good also for cataracis.
- bacon's natural history.
cata(rrh. m. s. [x212;#2, defuo.] a defluxion of a sharp sc-
rum from the glands about the head and thro t, generally occa-
fioned by a diminution of inser sible perspiration, or cold,
wherein what should pass by the skin, ouzes out upon those
glands, and occasions irritations. the causes are, whatsoever
occasions too great a quantity of strum ; whatsoever hinders
shakespeare.
the discharge by urine, and the pores of the skin. .2%incy.
- all fev’rous kinds,
convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs. par. lo?.
neither was the body then subject to die by piecemeal, and
languish under coughs, catarrhs, or consumptions. south.
cata rr hal. q adj. [from catarrh..] relating to a catarrh;
cata'rr hous, : proceeding from a catarrh.
the catarrhal fever requires evacuations. floyer.
old age attended with a glutinous, cold, catarrhous, leuco-
phlegmatick constitution. arbuthnot on diet.
cata’s trophe. n. s. (x.1zolo.]
1. the change or revolution, which produces the conclusion or
final event of a dramatick piece. pat
dt
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 352</div><p class="text">c a t
c a t
i
o,
pat 1–he comes like the catastrophe of the old comedy;”
that philosopher declares for tragedies, whose catastrophes
are unhappy, with relation to the principal characters. dennis.
2. a final event; a conclusion generally unhappy:
here was a mighty revolution, the most horrible and porten-
tous catasirophe that nature ever yet saw ; an elegant and ha-
bitable earth quite shattered. stoodward's nat. hist.
sa'ical. n. s." [from cat and call.] a squeaking instrument,
used in the playhouse to condemn plays.
o a young lady, at the theatre, conceived a passion for a noto-
rious rake that headed a party of catcals. spectator.
three catcals be the bribe
of him, whose chatt’ring shames the monkey tribe. pope.
t, catch. v. a. preter. i catched, or caught; i have catched.
or caught. [ketsen, dutch.]
1. to lay held on with the hand; intimating the suddenness of
the action. -
and when he arose against me, i caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him. 1 sam. xvii. 35.
2. to stop any thing flying; to receive any thing in the passage.
others, to catch the breeze of breathing air,
to tusculum or algido repair. . . addison on italy.
3. to seize any thing by pursuit.
i saw him run after a golded butterfly, and, when he caught
it, he let it go again; and after it again; and over and over he
counes, and up again; and caught it again. shakesp. coriolanus.
4. to stop any thing falling.
a shepherd diverted himself with tossing up eggs, and catch-
ing them again,
5. to ensnare; to intangle in a snare ; to take or hold in a trap.
and they sent unto him certain of the pharisees and of the
herodians, to catch him in his words. mar. xii. 13.
these artificial methods of reasoning are more adapted to
catch and entangle the mind, than to instruct and inform the
understanding. w locke.
6. to receive suddenly.
the curling smoke mounts heavy from the fires,
at length it catches flame, and in a blaze expires. dryden.
but stopp'd for fear, thus violently driv'n,
the sparks should catch his axletree of heav'n. dryden.
7. to fasten suddenly upon ; to seize.
the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and
his head caught hold of the oak. 2 sam. xviii. 19.
would they, like benhadad's embassadours, catch hold of
every amicable expression ? decay of piety.
8. to seize unexpectedly.
to catch something out of his mouth, that they might ac-
cuse him. luke, xi. 54.
9. to seize eagerly.
they have caught up every thing greedily, with that busy
minute curiosity, and unsatisfactory inquisitiveness, which se-
meca calls the disease of the greeks. pope.
i’ve perus'd her well;
beauty and honour in her are so mingled,
that they have caught the king. shakesp. henry viii.
to please; to seize the affections ; to charm.
for lan) young, a novice in the trade,
the fool of love, unpractis'd to persuade,
and wanting the soothing arts that catch the fair,
but, caught myself, lie struggling in the snare.
11. to receive any contagion or disease.
i cannot name the disease, and it is caught
of you that yet are well. shakesp. winter's tale.
those measles,
which we disdain should tetter us, yet seek
the very way to catch them. shakesp. coriolanus.
in sooth i know not why i am so sad:
it wearies me; you say it wearies you;
but how i caught it, found it, or came by it,
i am to learn. shakesp. merchant of venice.
the softest of our pritish ladies expose their necks and arms
to the open air, which the men could not do, without catching
cold, for want of being accustomed to it. addison's guardian.
or call the winds through long arcades to roar,
proud to catch cold at a venetian door.
12. 70 catch at. to endeavour suddenly to lay hold on.
saucy lictors
will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhimers
ballad us out of tune. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
make them catch at all opportunities of subverting the state.
addison's state of the war.
i o.
dryden.
pope.
to catch. v. n. -
1. to be contagious; to spread infection, or mischief.
'tis time to give them physick, their diseases
are grown so catching. shakesp. henry viii.
sickness is catching; oh, were favour so i
your's would i catch, fair hermia, ere i go. shakespeare.
confidering it with all its malignity and catching nature, it
may be enumerated with the worst of epidemicks. harvey.
the palace of deiphobus ascends
in snoaky flames, and catches on his friends. dryden,
does the sedition catch from man to man,
and run among the ranks : addison's cato.
speciator. .
cateche"tically, adv. [from catechetical.]
2. to lay hold suddenly: as, the hook calches.
when the yellow hair in flame should fall,
the catching fire might burn the golden cawl. dyla,
catch. n.s. [from the verb.]
1. seizure; the act of seizing any thing that flies, or hides,
taught by his open eye,
his eye, that ev'n did mark her trodden grass,
that she would fain the catch of strephon fly.
. watch; the posture of seizing.
both of them lay upon the catch for a great action; it is no
wonder therefore, that they were often engaged on one fubjec.
addison on ancient medal.
. an advantage taken; hold laid on, as in haste.
all which notions are but ignorant catches of a few things
which are most obvious to men's observations. bao.
the motion is but a catch of the wit upon a few instances;
as the manner is in the philosophy received.
fate of empires, and the fall of kings,
should turn on flying hours, and catch of moments.
dryden,
sidney.
2
bacon.
4. the aet of taking quickly from another.
several quires, placed one over against another, and taking
the voice by catches anthem-wise, give great pleasure. bacon.
5. a song sung in succession, where one catches it from ano-
ther. w
this is the tune of our catch, plaid by the picture of nobody.
shakspeare's temps,
far be from thence the glutton parasite,
singing his drunken catches all the night.
the meat was serv'd, the bowls were crown'd,
catches were sung, and healths went round.
6. the thing caught ; profit; advantage.
hector shall have a great catch, if he knock out your brains;
he were as good crack a fusty nut with no kernel.
shakesp. troilus and crossida,
7. a snatch; a short interval of action.
it has been writ by catches, with many intervals.
8. a taint; a slight contagion.
we retain a catch of those pretty stories, and our awakened
imagination smiles in the recollection. glanville's scepsis.
9. anything that catches and holds, as a hook.
io. a small swift sailing ship ; often written ketch.
catch er. n. s. [from catch.]
1. he that catches.
2. that in which any thing is caught.
scallops will move so strongly, as ostentimes to leap out of *
the catcher wherein they are caught. grew's musæum.
catch fly. m. s. [from catch and sy..] a plant; a species of o
campion; which see. o
catc hpoll. n. s. [from catch and poll j a serjeant; a bum-
bailiff.
catchpoll, though now it be used as a word of contempt,
yet, in ancient times, it seems to have been used without re-
proach, for such as we now call serjeants of the mace, or any
other that uses to arrest men upon any cause. cowel.
they call all temporal businesses undersheriffries, as if they --
were but matters for undersheriffs and catchpolls; though many
times those undersheriffries do more good than their high spe-
culations. bacon's essays,
dryden jun,
prior,
locke.
another monster,
sullen of aspect, by the vulgar call’d
a catchpoll, whose polluted hands the gods,
with force incredible and magick charms,
erst have endu'd, if he his ample palm
should haply on ill-fated shoulder lay
of debtor. philipi,
ca'tchwor d. m. s. [from catch and word. with printers.]
the word at the corner of the page under the last line, which
is repeated at the top of the next page.
cate. m. s. food; something to be eaten.
read in the singular. see cates.
we'll fee what cates you have,
for soldiers stomachs always serve them well. shakespeare.
cat ech etical. adj. [from x21m2.ew.] consisting of questions
and answers.
socrates introduced a catechetical method of arguing; he
would ask his adversary question upon question, till he con-
vinced him out of his own mouth, that his opinions were
wrong. addison's speciator.
in the way of
this is scarcely
question and answer.
to catechise. v. a. [x1, x2.]
1. to instruct by asking questions, and correołing the answers.
i will catechise the world for him; that is, make questions,
and bid them answer. ! shakspeare's othello.
had those three thousand souls been catechjod by our mo-
dern casuists, we had seen a wide difference. decay of piety.
2. to question; to interrogate; to examine; to try by inter-
rogatories.
why then i suck my teeth, and catechis,
my piked man of countries. shakspeare's king john.
there flies about a strange report,
of some express arriv'd at court;
i’m
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 353</div><p class="text">c a t -
c a t
*
**
*:
.
i'm stopp'd by all the fools i meet, ~ :
and catechis'd in ev'ry street. swift.
ca’tech is er. m. s. [from to catechise.] one who catechizes.
ca’roch is m. n. j. [from x*xo~..] a form of instruction by
means of questions and answers, concerning religion. -
ways of teaching there have been fundry always usual in
god's church; for the first introduction of youth to the know-
ledge of god, the jews even till this day have their “;
60s, co".
ile had no catechism but the creation, needed no study but re-
flection, and read no book but the volume of the world. south.
ca’rechist. n.j. [x,x],xico; ; one whose charge is to instruct
by questions, or to question the uninstructed concerning reli-
to il.
&amp; none of years and knowledge was admitted, who had not
been instructed by the catechis in this foundation, which the
catechist received from the bishop. hammond's fundamentals.
cat ech u'men. m. s. [x,x],x*p, two.] one who is yet in the first
rudiments of christianity; the lowest order of christians in the
primitive church.
the prayers of the church did not begin in st. austin's
time, till the catechumens were dismissed. stillingfleet.
carech u m etn1cal. adj. [from catechumen.] belonging to the
catechumens. dz.
ca’s ego"rica l. adj. [from category..] absolute; adequate ;
positive ; equal to the thing to be expressed.
the king's commissioners desired to know whether the par-
liament’s commissioners did believe, that bishops were unlaw-
ful ? they could never obtain a categorical answer. clarendon.
a single proposition, which is also categorical, may be divided
again into simple and complex. // atts's logick.
ca or ego ric ally. adv. [from categorical.]
1. directly; expressly. -
2. positively; plainly.
i dare affirm, and that categorically, in all parts where-ever
trade is great, and continues so, that trade must be nationally
profitable. - child's discourse of trade.
category. m. s. [xonyots...] a class ; a rank; an order
of ideas ; a predicament. -
the absolute infinitude, in a manner, quite changes the na-
"ture of beings, and exalts them into a different category. cheyne.
cat ena/rian. adj. [from catena, lat..] relating to a chain;
resembling a chain.
in geometry, the catenarian curve is formed by a rope or chain
hanging freely between two points of suspension. harris.
the back is bent after the manner of the catenarian curve,
by which it obtains that curvature that is safest for the included
narrow. - cheyne's philosophical principles.
t, cat enate. v. a. [from catena, lat.] to chain. dict.
catena‘tion. n.s.. [from catena, lat.] link; regular con-
nexion.
this catemation, or conserving union, whenever his plea-
sure shall divide, let go, or separate, they shall fall from their
existence. brown's vulgar errours.
to cater. v. n. [from cates.] to provide food; to buy in
victuals.
he that doth the ravens feed,
yea providently caters for the sparrow,
be comfort to my age. shakespeare's a you like it.
caster. n. s. [from the verb.] provider; colle&amp;tor of provi-
sions, or victuals: misprinted perhaps for caterer.
the oysters dredged in this lyner, find a welcomer accept-
ance, where the taste is cater for the stomach, than those of
the tamar. carew's survey of cornwall.
cater. m. s. [quatre, fr.] the four of cards and dice.
cater cousin. m. s. a corruption of quatre-cousin, from the
ridiculousness of calling cousin or relation to so remote a de-
ree.
g his master and he, saving your worship's reverence, are scarce
tofer-tosols. shakespeare's merchant of penice.
poetry and reason, how come these to be cater-cousins 2
rymer’s tragedies of the last age.
ca't er er. m. s. [from cater.] one employed to select and buy
in provisions for the family; the providore or purveyor.
let no scent offensive the chamber infest ; -
let fancy, not cost, prepare all our dishes;
let the caterer mind the taste of each guest,
and the cook in his dressing comply with their wishes.
ben, fohnson's savern academy.
he made the greedy ravens to be elias's cate ers, and bring
him food. king charles.
seldom shall one see in cities or courts that athletick vigour,
which is seen in poor houses, where nature is their cook, and
necessity their caterer. south.
cater fss, m. s. [from cater.] a woman employed to cater,
or provide victuals. -
imposłor do not charge innocent nature,
as if she would her children should be riotous
with her abundance ihe, good caters,
means her provision only to the good. . milton.
cat frp1’l l.a. r. m. s. [this word skinner and moshew are in-
clined to derive from coatte pelts, a weasel; it seems easily de-
vol. i.
ducible from cates, food, and piller, fr. to rob; the animal that
eats up the fruits of the earth.)
1. a worm which, when it gets wings, is sustained by leaves
and fruits.
the caterpillar breedeth of dew and leaves; for we see in-
finite caterpillars breed upon trees and hedges, by which the
leaves of the trees or hedges are consumed. bacon.
auster is drawn with a pot pouring forth water, with which
descend grasshoppers, caterpillars, and creatures bred by nois-
ture. . . - peacham on drawing.
2. any thing voracious and useless.
caterpi'll ar. m. s. [scorpioidos, lat..] the name of a plant.
a1/ler.
to cate rw aoul. v. n. [from cat.]
1. to make a noise as cats in rutting time.
2. to make any offensive or odious noise.
what a caterwauling do you keep here? if my lady has not
called up her steward malvolio, and bid him turn you out of
doors, never trust me. shakespeare's two/th night.
was no dispute between
the caterwauling brethren : - hudibrar.
cates. m. s. [of uncertain etymology; sanner imagines it may
be corrupted from delicate; which is not likely, because junius
observes, that the dutch have kater in the same sense with our
cater. it has no singular.] viands; food; dish of meat: go-
nerally employed to signify nice and luxurious food. -
the fair acceptance, sir, creates
the entertainment perfect, not the cates. ben. johnson.
o wasteful riot, never well content -
with low priz’d fare; hunger ambitious
of cates by land and sea far fetcht and sent. raleich.
alas, how simple to these cates, &lt;&gt;
was that crude apple, that diverted eve par. losł.
they by th’ alluring odour drawn, in haste
fly to the dulcet cates, and crouding fip
their palatable bane. philips.
with costly cates she stain'd her frugal board,
then with ill-gotten wealth she bought a lord. arbuthnot.
cat fish. m. s. the name of a sea-fish in the west-indies; so
called from its round head and large glaring eyes, by which
they are discovered in hollow rocks. philips.
cath ar pings. m. s. small ropes in a ship, running in little
blocks from one side of the shrouds to the other, near the
deck; they belong only to the main shrouds; and their use is
to force the shrouds tight, for the ease and safety of the masts,
when the ship rolls. harris.
§::::::::". [x2326 rix?..] purging medicines. the
cath artick. s vermicular or peristaltick motion of the guts
continually helps on their contents, from the pylorus to the
rectum ; and every irritation either quickens that motion in its
natural order, or occasions some little inversions in it. in both,
what but slightly adheres to the coats, will be loosened, and
they will be more agitated, and thus rendered more fluid. by
this only it is manifest, how a cathartic hastens and increases the
discharges by stool; but where the force of the stimulus is
great, all the appendages of the bowels, and all the viscera in
the abdomen, will be twiched; by which a great deal will be
drained back into the intestines, and made a part of what they
discharge. &amp;#incy.
quicksilver precipitated either with gold, or without addi-
tion, into a powder, is wont to be strongly enough cathartical,
though the chymists have not proved, that either gold or mer-
cury hath any salt, much less any that is purgative. .
boyle's scoptical chyminry.
lustrations and catharticks of the mind were sought for, and
all endeavour used to calm and regulate the fury of the pas-
sions. - decay of piety.
the piercing causticks ply their spiteful pow'r,
emeticks ranch, and keen catharticks scour. garth.
olato has called mathematical demonstrations the cathart, cos
or purgatives of the soul. 4.dison's speciator.
cath artical nes. n. s. [from cathartical.] purging quality.
cathead. m. s. a kind of fossil.
the nodules with leaves in them, called catheads, seem to
consist of a sort of iron stone, not unlike that which is found
in the rocks near whitehaven in cumberland, where they call
them catscaups. //oodward on fiji.
cathead. m. s. [in a ship.] a piece of timber with two shi-
vers at one end, having a rope and a block, to which is fasten-
ed a great iron hook, to trice up the anchor from the hawse to
the top of the forecastle. sea dics,
cath e d r a l. adj. [from cathedra, lat. a chair of authority;
an episcopal sec.] - - -
1. episcopal; containing the see of a bishop.
a cathedral church is that wherein there are two or more
persons, with a bishop at the head of them, that do make as
it were one body politick.
methought i sat in seat of majesty,
in the cathedral church of westminster.
2. belonging to an episcopal church.
his constant and regular aff:{{{ng at the cathedral service was
never interruptcd by the sharpness of weather. lake.
4 i.) 3, 1 n
-
ajose's far, rgon.
shao. hoy v.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 354</div><p class="text">c a t
c a v
3. in low phrase, antique; venerable; old. this seems to be
the meaning in the following lines.
here aged trees cathedral walks compose,
and mount the hill in venerable rows ;
there the green infants in their beds are laid.
cathe'dral. m. s. the head church of a diocese.
there is nothing in leghorn so extraordinary as the cathe-
dral, which a man may view with pleasure, after he has seen
st. peter’s. addison on italy.
cath e rine pear. see pear.
for streaks of red were mingled there,
such as are on a catherine pear,
the side that’s next the sun. suckling.
catheter. n.s. [x23sroe.] a hollow and somewhat crooked in-
strument, to thrust into the bladder, to assist in bringing away
the urine, when the passage is stopped by a stone or gravel.
a large clyster, suddenly injected, hath frequently forced the
urine out of the bladder; but if it fail, a catheter must help
you. jwiseman's surgery.
catholes. n.s.. [in a ship.] two little holes astern above the
gun-room ports, to bring in a cable or hawser through them to
the capstain, when there is occasion to heave the ship astern.
- sea dic?.
catho'licis m. n. s. [from catholick j. adherence to the catho-
lick church.
catholick. adj. [catholique, fr. xx33xx@”, universal or
eneral. j
1. the church of jesus christ is called catholick, because it ex-
tends throughout the world, and is not limited by time.
2. some truths are said to be catholick, because they are received
by all the faithful.
3. catholick is often set in opposition to heretick or se&amp;lary, and
to schismatick.
4. catholics, or canonical epistles, are seven in number; that of
st. james, two of st. peter, three of st. john, and that of st.
jude. they are called catholick, because they are dire&amp;ted to all
the faithful, and not to any particular church ; and canonical,
because they contain excellent rules of faith and morality.
calmet.
doubtless the success of those your great and catholick endea-
vours will promote the empire of man over nature, and bring
plentiful accession of glory to your nation. glanville's scepsis.
those systems undertake to give an account of the formation
of the universe, by mechanical hypotheses of matter, moved
either uncertainly, or according to some catholick laws. ray.
catholicon. n. s. [from catholick; x2.3%ixow to 2..] an uni-
versal medicine.
preservation against that sin, is the contemplation of the last
judgment. this is indeed a catholicon against all; but we find
it particularly applied by st. paul to judging and despising our
brethren. government of the tongue.
ca^t kins. m. s. [kattekens, dutch. in botany.] an assemblage
of imperfect flowers hanging from trees, in manner of a
rope or cat's tail; serving as male blossoms, or flowers of the
trees, by which they are produced. chambers.
cat like. adj. [from cat and like..] like a cat.
a lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
lay couching head on ground, with catlike watch. shakesp.
ca'tling. m. s.
1. a dismembring knife, used by surgeons. harris.
2. it seems to be used by shakespeare for catgut ; the materials of
fiddle strings.
what musick there will be in him after hector has knocked
out his brains, i know not. but, i am sure, none; unless the
fidler apollo get his sinews to make catlings of shakespeare.
3. the down or moss growing about walnut trees, resembling
the hair of a cat. harris.
catmint. n.s. scataria, lat.] the name of a plant. miller.
cat o'ptrical. adj. [from catoptricks.] relating to catop-
tricks, or vision by reflection.
a catoptrical or dioptrical heat is superiour to any, vitrifying
the hardest substances. arbuthnot on air.
cat optricks. n.s. [x&amp; rolew, a looking glass...] that part of
opticks which treats of vision by refle&amp;tion.
catpipe. m. s. [from cat and pipe.] the same with catcal;
an instrument that makes a squeaking noise.
some songsters can no more sing in any chamber but their
own, than some clerks can read in any book but their own;
put them out of their road once, and they are mere catpipes
and dunces. l'a/irange.
cat's-eye. a stone.
cat's-eye is of a glistering grey, interchanged with a straw
colour. woodward on fossils.
cat's-foot. m. s. an herb; the same with alchoof, or ground-
ivy; which fee.
cat's-head. n. s. a kind of apple.
cat's-head, by some called the go-no-further, is a very large
apple, and a good bearer. mortimer's husbandry.
caorsilver. n.s. a kind of fossile.
catsilver is composed of plates that are generally plain and
parallel, and that are flexible and elastick; and is of three sorts,
the yellow or golden, the white or silvery, and the black.
- - woodward on fossils.
pope.
cats-tail: n, s.
1. a long round substance, that grows in winter upon nut-trees,
pines, &amp;c.
2. a kind of reed which bears a spike like the tail of a cat.
- phillips's world of soard.
catsu.p. m. s. a kind of indian pickle, imitated by pickled
mushrooms.
and, for our home-bred british cheer,
botargo, catsup, and cavier. swift.
cattle. n. s. [a word of very common use, but of doubtful or
unknown etymology. it is derived by skinner, menage, and
spelman,from capitalia, quae ad caput pertinent; personal goods:
in which sense chattels is yet used in our law. alsandeville uses
catele for price.]
1. beasts of pasture; not wild nor domestick.
make poor men's cattle break their necks. shakespeare.
and god made the beast of the earth after his kind, and
cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the
earth after his kind. gen. i. 25.
2. it is used in reproach of human beings.
boys and women are for the most part cattle of this colour.
shakespeare's as you like it.
cavalca'de. m. s. [fr from cavallo, a hoise, ital.] a proces-
sion on horseback.
your cavalcade the fair spectators view,
from their high standings, yet look up to you:
from your brave train each singles out a ray,
and longs to date a conquest from your day. dryden.
how must the heart of the old man rejoice, when he saw
such a numerous cavalcade of his own raising: addison.
cavali b.r. m. s. [cavalier, fr.]
i. a horseman ; a knight.
2. a gay sprightly military man.
for who is he, whose chin is but enrich'd
with one appearing hair, that will not follow
these cull'd and choice drawn cavaliers to france 2
shakspeare's henry viii.
3. the appellation of the party of king charles the first.
each party grows proud of that appellation, which their ad-
versaries at first intend as a reproach: of this sort were the
gueifs and gibelines, huguenots, and cavaliers. swist.
ca v ali’er. adj. [from the substantive.]
1. gay ; sprightly; warlike.
2. generous ; brave.
the people arc naturally not valiant, and not much cavalier.
now it is the nature of cowards to hurt, where they can re-
ceive none. suckling.
3. disdainful; haughty.
cavali'erly. adv. [from cavalier.] haughtily; arrogantly;
disdainfully.
ca valry. m. s. scavalerie, fr.] horse troops; bodies of men
furnished with horses for war.
if a state run most to gentlemen, and the husbandmen and
plowmen be but as their workfolks, you may have a good ca-
valry, but never good stable bands of foot. bacon's henry vii.
their cavalry, in the battle of blenheim, could not sustain
the shock of the british horse. addison on the j/ar.
to cavat e. v. a. [cavo, lat.] to hollow out; to dig into
a hollow.
cava’zio n. n.s.. [from cavo, lat. in archite&amp;ture.] the hol-
lowing or underdigging of the earth for cellarage; allowed to
be the sixth part of the height of the whole building. phillips.
caudebeck. m. s. a sort of light hats, so called from a town
in france where they were first made. philipi.
ca/udle. n.s.. [chaudeau, fr.] a mixture of wine and other
ingredients, given to women in childbed, and sick persons.
ye shall have a hempen caude then, and the help of a hatchet.
shakespeare's henry vi.
he had good broths, caude, and such like; and i believe he
did drink some wine. //ft man's surgery,
to caudle. v. a. [from the noun..] to make cauule; to mix
as caudle.
- will the cold brook,
candied with ice, caude thy morning taste,
'to cure thy o'ernight's surfeit?
cave. n. s. [cave, fr. cavea, lat.]
1. a cavern; a den; a hole entering horizontally under the
ground; a habitation in the earth.
the wrathful skies
gallow the very wand’rers of the dark,
and make them keep their caves.
bid him bring his power
before sun-rising, left his son george fall
into the blind cave of eternal night. shakesp. richard iii.
they did square, and carve, and polish their stone and mar-
ble works, even in the very cave of the quarry. . . . shotton.
through this a cave was dug with vast expence,
the work it seem'd of some suspicious prince.
2. a hollow ; any hollow place. not used.
the object of fight doth strike upon the pupil of the eye di-
rectly ; whereas the cave of the eye doth hold off the sound a
little. bacon’s natural history.
to cave. v. n. [from the noun.] to dwell in a cave.
shakso. timon.
shakso. king lear.
dryden.
such
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 355</div><p class="text">c a v
c. a u
i.
such as we
cave here, haunt here, are outlaws. shakespeare.
ca've ar. m. s. [caveat, lat, let him beware.] intimation of
caution. t
a caveat is an intimation given to some ordinary or ecclesi-
astical judge by the aet of man, notifying to him, that he ought
to beware how he acts in such or such an affair. ayliffe.
the chiefest caveat in reformation must be to keep out the
scots. spenser on ireland.
i am in danger of commencing poet, perhaps laureat; pray
desire mr. rowe to enter a caveat. trumball to pope.
ca’v ern. n. s. [caverna, lat..] a hollow place in the ground.
where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
to mask thy monstrous visage? shakesp. julius casar.
monsters of the foaming deep,
from the deep ooze, and gelid cavern rous'd,
they flounce and tremble in unwieldy joy.
ca’ve rned. adj. [from cavern.]
1. full of caveins; hollow; excavated.
embattled troops, with flowing banners, pass
through flow'ry meads, delighted; nor distrust
the smiling surface; whilst the cavern'd ground
bursts fatal, and involves the hopes of war
thomson.
in firy whirles. philips.
high at his head from out the cavern'd rock,
in living rills a gushing fountain broke. pope's odyssey.
2. inhabiting a cavern.
no bandit fierce, no tyrant mad with pride,
no cavern'd hermit, rest self-satisfy'd. pope.
ca’v e r nous. adj. [from cavern..] full of caverns.
no great damages are done by earthquakes, except only in
those countries which are mountainous, and consequently stony
and cavernous underneath. j/oodward’s nat. history.
ca/esson. m. s. [fr. in horsemanship.] a sort of noseband,
sometimes made of iron, and sometimes of leather or wood;
sometimes flat, and sometimes hollow or twisted; which is
put upon the nose of a horse, to forward the suppling and
breaking of him.
an iron caveson saves and soares the mouths of young horses
when they are broken; for, by the help of it, they are accus-
tomed to obey the hand, and to bend the neck and shoulders,
without hurting their mouths, or spoiling their bars with the
bit. farrier’s dic7.
cauf. m. s. a chest with holes on the top, to keep fish alive in
the water. phillips's iworld of jwords.
caught, particip. pass [from to catch; which see. j
cavi a. r.e. n.s. [the etymology uncertain, unless it come from
garum, lat. sauce, or pickle, made of fish salted.]
the eggs of a sturgeon being salted, and made up into a
mass, were first brought from constantinople by the italians,
and called caviare. grew's musæum.
cavi'er. n.s. a corruption of caviare. see catsu p.
to ca(vil. v. n. [caviller, fr. cavillari, lat..] to raise cap-
tious and frivolous objections.
i'll give thrice so much land
to any well deserving friend;
but, in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
i'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair. shakesp. henry iv.
my lord, you do not well, in o
to cavil in the course of this contract. shakesp. henry vi.
he cavil; first at the poet's insisting so much upon the effects
of achilles's rage. pope's notes on the iliad.
to ca vil. v. a. to receive or treat with objections.
thou didst accept them : wilt thou enjoy the good,
then cavil the conditions? paradise lost.
ca'vil. n.s.. [from the verb.j. false or frivolous objections.
wiser men confider how subject the beit things have been
unto cavil, when wits, possessed with disdain, have set them up
as their mark to shoot at. hooker.
several divines, in order to answer the cavils of those adver-
faries to truth and morality, began to find out farther explana-
tions. swift.
ca will. a rion. ii. s. [from cavil.] the disposition to make
captious objection; the practice of objecting.
i might add so much concerning the large odds between the
case of the eldest churches, in regard of heathens, and ours, in
respect of the church of rome, that very cavilation itself should
be satisfied. hooker.
ca'ville r. m. s. scavillator, lat.] a man fond of making ob-
jcctions; an unfair adversary; a captious disputant.
the candour which horace shews,is that which distinguishes
a critick from a caviller; he declares, that he is not offended at
little faults, which may be imputed to inadvertency.
addison's guardian.
there is, i grant, room still left for a caviller to misrepre-
sent my mean::g. atterbury's prof. to his sermons.
ca'villin gly. adv. [from caviling.] in a cavilling manner.
ca'villous. adj. [from cavil..] unfair in argument ; full of
objections. -
those persons are said to be cavillous and unfaithful advo-
cates, by whose fraud and iniquity justice is destroyed. ayliffe.
c.; w.i.n. ii. s. [french. in the military art..] a natural hollow,
fit to cover a body of troops, and consequently facilitate their
approach to a place. ixic.
cox. n. s. scavitas, latin.] hollowness; hollow; hollow
place. -
the vowels are made by a free passage of breath, vocalized
through the cavity of the mouth; the said cavity being diffe-
rently shaped by the postures of the throat, tongue, and lips.
holder's elements of speech.
there is nothing to be left void in a firm building; even
the cavities ought not to be filled with rubbish, which is of a
perishing kind. dryden's dedication to æneid.
materials packed together with wonderful art in the several
cavities of the scull. addison's speciator.
an instrument with a small cavity, like a small spoon, dipt in
oil, may fetch out the stone. arbuthnot on diet.
if the atmosphere was reduced into water, it would not make
an orb above thirty-two feet deep, which would soon be swal-
lowed up by the cavity of the sea, and the depressed parts of the
earth. bentley.
cauk. m. s. a coarse talky spar. jwoodward.
ca'ukx. adj. [from cauk.]" a white, opaque, cauky spar, shot
or pointed. j/oodward on fossils.
caul. n.s. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. the net in which women inclose their hair; the hinder part
of a woman's cap.
ne spared they to strip her naked all,
then when they had despoil'd her tire and caul,
such as she was, their eyes might her behold. sponsor.
her head with ringlets of her hair is crown'd,
and in a golden caul the curls are bound. dryden's zneid.
2. any kind of small net.
an indian mantle of feathers, and the feathers wrought into
a caul of packthread. grew's musæum.
3. the omentum ; the integument in which the guts are inclosed.
the caul serves for the warming the lower belly, like an
apron or piece of woollen cloth. hence a certain gladiatour,
whose caul galen cut out, was so liable to suffer cold, that he
kept his belly constantly covered with wool. ray.
the beast they then divide, and disunite
the ribs and limbs, observant of the rite:
on these, in double cauls involv’d with art,
the choicest morsels lay. pope's odyssey.
ca'u'll ferous, adj. [from caulis, a stalk, and fero, to bear, lat.]
a term in botany for such plants as have a true stalk, which a
great many have not. -
caulif low er. m. s. [from caulis, lat. the stalk of a plant.]
a species of cabbage.
towards the end of the month, earth up your winter plants
and salad herbs ; and plant forth your cauliflowers and cabbage,
which were sown in august. evelyn's kalendar.
to caul k. see to calk.
to caupo nate. v. n. [caupono, lat.] to keep a victualling-
house; to sell wine or victuals. dict.
cau's able. adj. [from causo, low lat.] that which may be
caused, or effected by a cause.
that may be miraculously effected in one, which is naturally
causable in another. brown's wulgar errours.
cau's al, adj. [causilis, low lat.] relating to causes; imply-
ing or containing causes. -
every motion owning a dependence on prerequired motors,
we can have no true knowledge of any, except we would dis-
tinetly pry into the whole method of causal concatenations.
glanville's scepsis scientifica.
causal propositions are, where two propositions are joined by
causal particles ; as, houses were not built, that they might be
destroyed; rehoboam was unhappy, because he followed evil
counsel. //atts's logick.
causa'lity. m. s. [causalitas, low latin.] the agency of a
cause ; the quality of causing.
as he created all things, so is he beyond and in them all, in
his very essence, as being the soul of their causalities, and the
essential cause of their existences. brown's pulgar erreurs.
by an unadvised transiliency from the effect to the remotest
cause, we observe not the connection, through the interposal of
more immediate causalities. glanville's scepsis.
causally, adv. [from causal.] according to the order or se-
ries of causes.
thus may it more be causaly made out, what hippocrates
affirmeth. brown's wulgar errours.
causation. n.s.. [from cause, low lat.] the aet or power of
causing.
thus doth he sometimes delude us in the conceits of stars
and meteors, besides their allowable aetions, ascribing effects
thereunto of independent causation. brown's sugar errours.
ca usat ive. adj. [a term in grammar.] that expresses a
cause or reason.
causa tor. n.s. [from causo, low lat..] a causer; an authour
of any effect.
demonstratively understanding the simplicity of perfection,
and the invisible condition of the first causator, it was out of
the power of earth, or the arcopagy of hell, to work them from
it. brown's pulgar errours.
2 cause,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 356</div><p class="text">c a' u
ause. m. s. scausa, lat. - * - -
o: ja o *ra. any thing; the efficient.
the wise and learned amongst the very heathens them-
selves, have all acknowledged some first cause, whereupon ori-
ginally the being of all things dependeth ; neither have they
otherwise spoken of that cause, than as an agent, which, know-
ing what and why it worketh, observeth, in working, a most
exadorder or law. hooker.
butterflies, and other flies, revive easily when they seem
dead, being brought to the sun or fire; the cause whereof is the
diffusion of the vital spirit, and the dilating of it by a little
heat. bacon's natural history.
cause is a substance exerting its power into act, to make one
thing begin to be. locke.
2. the reason ; motive to any thing.
the rest shall bear some other fight,
as cause will be obey'd. shakespeare.
so great, so constant, and so general a practice, must needs
have not only a cause, but also a great, a constant, and a gene-
ral cause, every way commensurate to such an effoot. south.
| thus, royal firl to see you landed here,
was cause enough of triumph for a year. dryden.
£neas wond'ring stood: then askd the cause, -
o which to the stream the crouding people draws. dryden.
even he,
- lamenting that there had been cause of enmity, -
will often wish fate had ordain'd you friends. rowe.
3. reason of debate; subject of litigation.
o madness of discourse
that cause sets up with and against thyself!
bifold authority. shas soare.
hear the causes between your brethren,
9usly between every man and his brother,
is with him. deut.
4. side; party; ground or principle of adion or opposition.
- ere to thy cao, and thee, my heart inclin'd,
and judge righte-
and the stranger that
- or love to party had seduc’d my mind. tickell.
to cause. v. a. [from the noun...] to effect as an agent ; to
produce.
never was man whose apprehensions are sober, and by a
pensive inspection advised, it hath found by an irresistile
necessity one everlasting being, all for ever (alsog and all for
ever sustaining. raleigh.
it is necessary in such a chain of causes to ascend to and
terminate in some first, which thould be the original of mo-
tion, and the cause of all other things; but itself be caused
by none. south.
she weeping ask'd, in these her blooming years,
what unforeseen misfortune …'. her care
to loath her life, and languish in desp it dryden's fables.
things that move so swift, as not to affect the sonses dis-
* - tinctly, and so cause not any train of ideas in the mind, are not
perceived to move. - locke.
causelesly. adv. [from cause's...] without cause ; without
reason. -
human laws are not to be broken with scandal, nor at all
without reason ; for he that does it causeles), is a despiser of
the law, and undervalues its authority. taylor's holy living.
cau's eless. adj. [from cause.]
1. having no cause; original in itself.
reach th’ almighty’s sacred throne,
and make his caise's pow'r, the cause of all things, known.
- blackmore's creation.
2. wanting just ground or motive.
yet is my truth yplight,
and love avow'd to other lady late,
that, to remove the fame, i have no might;
to change love can *%, is reproach to waiike knight.
spensor's fair; &amp;#ern.
and me and mine, threats not with war but death;
thus causolos hatred endless is uneath.
*
fairfax.
the causolos dislike, which others have conceived, is no suf-
. * ficient reason for us to forbear in any place. assocker.
. as women yet who apprehend
o - some sudden cause of cal/els, fear,
although that seeming cause take end,
a shaking through their job. they find. j/aller.
alas! my fears are causels, and ungrounded, -
fantastick dreams, and melancholy fumes. denham.
ca user. "...s.. [from **]. he that causes;
which an effect is produced.
his whole **tion stood upon a short narration, what was
the causer of this metamorphosis.
the agent by
- sidney.
is not the ‘a’sor of these timeles, deaths, *
as blameful as the executioner 2 shakes care.
abstinence the a;
- - *tie determines is of no other real value
in religion, than as a ministerial causer of moral effects.
a - rogers.
causey. *s, schauffe, fr. this word, by a false notion
ca’us e way.
of its etymology,
*%) a way raised and paved
t of the ground.
has been lately written caus-
3 * way raised above the rest
ca’ution. m. s. scaution, fr.
3. provision or security against.
to shuppim the lot came forth westward by the caus. -
- i chron. xxvi. 16,
th' other way satan went down,
the causeway to hell-gate.
but that broad causeway will dire&amp; your way,
and you may reach the town by noon of day.
whose causeway parts the vase with shady rows;
whose seats the weary traveller repose.
caustical. adj. [****.] epithets of medica
ca’ustick. { which destroy the texture of the part to
they are applied, and eat it away, or burn it into an
which they do by extreme minuteness, asperity,
of motion, that, like those of fire itself, destro
of the solids, and change what they are appli
substance like burnt flesh; which, in a littiet
*"gent dressing, falls quite off, and leaves a
part.
if extirpation be safe,
cines or escaroticks.
i proposed eradicating by escaroticks, and began with a
caustick stone. j/isman'; surgery.
air too hot, cold and moist, abounding perhaps with as:
tick, attringent, and coagulating particles. arbuthno,
caustick. n.s. a burning application.
it was a tenderness to mankind, that introduced corrosives
and causticks, which are indeeds but artificial fires. temple.
the piercing caustica, ply their spiteful pow'r,
emeticks rooch, and keen catharticks scour.
cautel. n.s. [..autola, lat..] caution; scruple: a
millon,
dodo.
pop.,
ments
which
eschar,
and quantity
y the textus:
ed to, into 4.
ime, with de.
vacuity in the
&amp;ic. -
the best way will be by causical mej.
j/istman's surgery.
garth,
word
disused.
perhaps he loves you now ;
and now no foil of cautes doth besmerch
the virtue of his will. shałos eart,
cautelous. adj. [cauteleux, fr.]
1. cautious; wary 3 provident. not in use.
palladio doth wish, like a ** artisan, that the inward
walls might bear some good share in the burden. //otton.
2. wily; ‘unning; treacherous.
of themselves, for the most part, they are so cautekz and
wily headed, especially being men of so small experience and
practice in law matters, that you would wonder whence they
borrow such subtilties and fly shifts. sfessor on ireland.
your son
will or exceed the common, or be caught
with cautelous baits and practice.
ca'utelously. a.k. [from cautelous.]
1. cunningly; slily; treacherously. not in use.
all pretorian courts, if any of the parties be laid a
der pretence of a retirement, and
*/y get the start and advantage,
things in satu quo prius.
2. cautiously; warily.
the jews, not resolved of the sciatica side of jacob, do
cautelously, in their diet, abstain from both.
cauterization. m. s. [from casterize.] the aet of
flesh with hot irons, or caustic medicaments.
they require, after cauterization, no such bandage, as that
thereby you need to fear interception of the spirits. woman.
7. ca’gre rize. v.a. [*terson, fr.] to burn off, ts.c.
cautery.
for each true word a blister,
becauterizing to the root o' th’
consuming it with speaking.
no marvel though cantharides have such a corrosive and cau-
terizing quality; for there is not one other of the inse&amp;a, but
is bred of a disser matter. bacon's natural hitory,
the design of the **tery is to prevent the canal from c.
fing; but the operators confess, that, in persons cauterized, the
ostrickle down ever after. sharp's surgay.
cautery. h. s. [x&amp;so, uro.]
cattery is either actual or potential; the first is burning by
- - - - - c
a hot iron, and the latter with caustick mcdicines. the actual
cautery is
generally used to stop mortification, by burning the
dead parts to the quick; or to stop the effusion of blood, by
fearing up the vessels.
in heat of fight it will be necessar
*y always ready : for that will sec
a n, ornent.
shak scar.
sleep, un-
the other party doth caute-
yet they will set back al!
bacon's i/ar with cak.
brown.
burning
and each false,
tongue,
shakosheart,
.ohinj.
y to have your actual cau-
are the bleeding arteries in
&amp; eman'. sargely.
cautio, lat.
1. prudence, as it respects danger; forefight; provident care;
wariness against evil.
2. security for.
such conditions, and cautions of the condition, as might as-
sure with as much assur
** as worldly matters bear. so,
the cedar, upon this n. acquest, gave him part of boc-
charia for caution for his disbursements. 1.%tos.
the parliament would yet give his majesty sufficient …ii."
that the war should be prosecuted. - condon,
he that objects "y, crime, ought to give canon by the
mons of sureties, that he will reisevere in the prosecution of
fuch crimes. æyoff. 's parison.
v
8 in
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 357</div><p class="text">c e c
c e l ,
-
!---
o
*::::
wi.
to in
o:
tno,
# to
*t or *
o
o,
o
othu
back
sh &amp;
jaco,
e:
of to
t, to
r-
|so
will
in despite of all the rules and cautions of government, the cecu'riency. n.s.. [cacutio, lat.] tendency to blindness;
most dangerous and mortal of vices will come off. l'estrange.
isionary precept. - -
- ro. the forementioned symptoms affords the best
ason, and rules of diet, by way of prevention. arbuthnot.
t
warning. -
}. wo. v. a. [from the noun..] to warn ; to give no-
0.
ice of a danger. - -
ticc how shall our thought avoid the various snare
owisdom to our caution'd soul declare
the diff'rent shapes thou pleasest to employ,
when bent to hurt, and certain to destroy prior.
you caution'd me against their charms,
but never gave me equal arms. swift.
o - - - -
colosary, adj. [from caution.] given as a pledge, or in
ecurity. -
s 'i am made the cautionary pledge,
the gage and hostage of your keeping it. southerne.
is there no security for the island of britain has the enemy
no cautionary towns and sea-ports, to give us for securing
trade? swift.
courious, adj. [from cautus, lat.] wary; watchful.
becautious of him; for he is sometimes an inconstant lover,
because he hath a great advantage. swift.
ca’utiously, adv. [from cautious.] in an attentive, wary
mannes ; warily.
they know how fickle common lovers are:
their oaths and vows are cautiously believ'd ;
for few there are but have been once deceiv'd. dryden.
ca'utiousness. n. s. [from cautious.] watchfulness; vigi-
lance; circumspection; provident care; prudence with respect
to danger.
i could not but approve their generous constancy and cau-
tions. king charles.
we should always act with great cautiousnes; and circum-
spection, in points where it is not impossible that we may be
deceived. addison.
t. caw. v. n. [taken from the sound..] to cry as the rook,
raven, or crow.
russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
rising and cawing at the gun's report. shakespeare.
a walk of aged elms, so very high, that the rooks and
crows upon the tops seem to be cawing in another region. add.
the rook, who high amid the boughs,
in early spring, his airy city builds,
and ceaseless caws.
t. cease. v. n. [cessor, fr. coso, lat.]
1. to leave off; to stop 5 to give over; to desist: with from
before a noun.
the lives of all, who cease from combat, spare;
thomson's spring.
my brother's be your most peculiar care. dryden.
2. to fail; to be extinet; to pass away.
the poor man shall never cease out of the land. deut.
the soul being removed, the faculties and operations of life,
sense and intellection cease from that moles corporea, and are no
longer in it. hale's origin of mankind.
3. to be at an end.
but now the wonder ceases, since i see
she kept them only, tityrus, for thee. dryden.
4. to rest.
the ministers of christ have ceosod from their labours. spratt.
to cease. v. a. to put a stop to ; to put an end to.
importune him for monies ; be not ceas'd
with flight denial. shakespeare.
you may sooner, by imagination, quicken or slack a motion,
than raise or cease it; as it is easier to make a dog go slower,
than to make him stand still. bacon's natural history.
ceos, then this impious rage. amilton.
but he her fears to cease,
sent down the meek-ey'd peace. milton.
the discord is compleat, nor can they cease
the dire debate, nor yet command the peace. dryden.
crase, m. s. [from the verb.] extinction ; failure: perhaps
for decease.
- the ceas of majesty
dies not alone, but, like a gulph, withdraws
, what's near it, with it. shakespeare.
ce aseless, adj. [from cease.] incessant; perpetual; continual ;
without pause ; without stop; without end.
my guiltless blood must quench the ceaseles, fire,
n which my endless tears were bootless spent. fairfax.
all these, with ceaseles, praise his works behold,
both day and night. milton.
like an oak
that stands secure, though all the winds employ
their ceasels, roar, and only sheds its leaves,
or mast, which the revolving spring restores. philips.
...y. m. s. [calcitas, lat.] blindness; privation of fight.
they are not blind, nor yet distinetly see; there is in them
*:::ity, yet more than a cecutiency; they have fight enough
to discern the light, though not perhaps to distinguish objects
or go brown's pulgar errours,
* l. l.
ce'c
cetpar. m. s. [cedrus, lat.] a tree.
cloudiness of fight.
there is in them no cecity, yet more than a cecution).
brown's pulgar errours.
it is evergreen; the leaves are much narrower than those of
the pine tree, and many of them produced out of one tubercle,
resembling a painter's pencil; it hath male flowers, or katkins,
produced at remote distances from the fruit on the same tree.
the seeds are produced in large cones, squamose and turbinat-
ed. the extension of the branches is very regular in cedar
trees; the ends of the shoots declining, and thereby shewing
their upper surface, which is constantiy cloathed with green
leaves, so regularly as to appear at a distance like a green car-
pet, and, in waving about, make an agreeable prospect. it
is surprising that this tree has not been more cultivated in eng-
land; for it would be a great ornament to barren bleak mour.
tains, even in scotland, where few other trees would grow ; it
being a native of mount libanus, where the snow continues
most part of the year. maundrel, in his travels, says, he
measured one of the largest cedars on mount libanus, and
found it to be twelve yards six inches in circumference, and
sound. at about five or six yards from the ground, it was
divided into five limbs, each of which was equal to a great
tree. the wood of this famous tree is accounted proof against
the putrefaction of animal bodies. the saw dust is thought
to be one of the secrets used by the mountebanks, who pre-
tend to have the embalming mystery. this wood is also said
to yield an oil, which is famous for preserving books and
writings, and the wood is thought by bacon to continue above
a thousand years sound. 44iller,
i must yield my body to the earth:
thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle;
under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
whose top branch overpeer'd jove's spreading tree,
and kept low shrubs from winter's pow'rful wind. shake?:
ce'drine. adj. [cedrinus, lat.] of or belonging to the cedar
tree.
to ceil. v. a. scalo, lat..] to overlay, or cover the inner
roof of a building.
and the greater house he ceiled with fir-tree, which he over-
laid with fine gold. 2 chron.
how will he, from his house ceiled with cedar, be content
with his saviour's lot, not to have where to lay his head
decay of piety.
ce'iling.. n.s.. [from ceil..] the inner roof.
varnish makes ceilings not only shine, but last. bacon.
and now the thicken'd sky
like a dark ceiling stood; down rush'd the rain
impetuous. milton's paradise lost.
so when the sun by day, or moon by night, -
strike on the polish’d brass their trembling light,
the glitt'ring species here and there divide,
alid cast their dubious beams fron side to side:
now on the walls, now on the pavement play,
and to the ceiling flash the glaring day. dryden.
ce landine. schelidoneum, lat. j a plant.
the swallows use celandine, the linnet euphrasia. more.
ce’latur e. m. s. [calatura, lat.] the art of engraving or
cutting in figures.
to cetlebrate. v. a. [celebro, lat.] t
1. to praise; to commend ; to give praise to ; to make famous.
the songs of sion were psalms and pieces of poetry, that
adored or celebrated the supreme being. addison.
i would have him read over the celebrated works of antiqui-
ty, which have stood the test of so many different ages.
addison.
2. to distinguish by solemn rites; to perform solemnly.
he slew all them that were gone to celebrate the sabbath.
2 maccab,
on the feast day, the father cometh forth, after divine ser-
vice, into a large room, where the feast is celebrated. bacon.
3. to mention in a set or solemn manner, whether of joy or
sorrow.
this pause of pow'r, 'tis ireland's hour to mourn;
while england celebrates your safe return. dryden.
celebration. n.s.. [from celebrate.]
1. solemn performance; solemn remembrance.
he laboured to drive sorrow from her, and to hasten the
celebration of their marriage. sidney.
- he shall conceal it, -
while you are willing it shall come to note;
what time we will our celebration keep,
according to my birth. shakespeare:
during the celebration of this . sacrament, you attend ear-
nestly to what is done by the priest. taylor.
2. praise; renown; memorial.
no more shall be added in this place, his memory deserving
a particular celebration, than that his learning, piety and virtue,
have been attained by few. clarena”.
some of the ancients may be thought sometimes to have used
4 e a less
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 358</div><p class="text">c e l
c e n
a less number of letters, by the celebration of those who have
added to their alphabet. holder's elements of speech.
cele'brious. adj. [celeber, lat.] famous ; renowned ; noted.
not in use.
the jews, jerusalem, and the temple, having been always
so celebrious; yet when, after their captivities, they were de-
spoiled of their glory, even then, the assyrians, greeks, and
romans, honoured, with sacrifices, the most high god, whom
that nation worshipped. grew.
cele’br1ously. adv. [from celebrious.] in a famous manner.
cele’brious n ess. n. s. [from celebrious.] renown ; fame.
celebrit y. n.s.. [celebritas, lat.] publick and splendid
transaction.
the manner of her receiving, and the celebrity of the mar-
riage, were performed with great magnificence. bacon.
cele'r1 ack. m. s. a species of parsley ; it is also called tur-
nep rooted celery. -
cele'rity. m. s. [celeritas, lat.] swiftness; speed; velocity.
we very well see in them, who thus plead, a wonderful ce-
le, ity of discourse; for, perceiving at the first but only some
cause of suspicion, and fear left it should be evil, they are
presently, in one and the self-same breath, resolved, that
what beginning soever it had, there is no possibility it should
be good. phooker.
his former custom and practice was ever full of forwardness
and celerity, to make heed against them. lacon.
thus, with imagin'd wings, our swift scene flics,
in motion with no less celerity -
than that of thought. shakespeare.
three things concur to make a percussion great; the bigness,
the density, and the celerity of the body moved. digby.
whatever encreaseth the density of the blood, even without
encreasing its celerity, heats, because a denser body is hotter than
a rarer. arbuthnot on aliments.
ce'lery. n.s. a species of parsley; which see.
celestial. adj. [celestis, lat.]
1. heavenly ; relating to the superiour regions.
there stay, until the twelve celestial signs
have brought about their annual reckoning. shaks?.
the ancients commonly applied celestial descriptions of other
clines to their own. brown's wulgar errours.
2. heavenly; relating to the blessed state.
play that sad note
i nam'd my knell; whilst i fit meditating
on that celestial harmony i go to.
3. heavenly, with respect to excellence. -
canst thou pretend desire, whom zeal inflam'd
shakespeare.
to worship, and a pow'r celestial nam'd : dryden.
telemachus, his bloomy face
glowing celstial sweet, with godlike grace. pope.
cele's r1al. n.s.. [from the adj.] an inhabitant of heaven.
thus affable and mild, the prince precedes,
and to the dome th' unknown celestial leads. pope.
cele's tially. adv. [from celsial.] in a heavenly manner.
to cele's tify. v. a. [from celestis, lat.] to give something
of heavenly nature to any thing. not used.
we should affirm, that all things were in all things, that
heaven were but earth terrestrified, and earth but heaven ce/s.
tified, or that each part above had influence upon its affinity be-
low. brown's pulgar err curs.
ce’ll ack, adj. [xoixso, the belly..] relating to the lower belly.
the blood moving slowly through the celiack and mesente-
rick arteries, produce complaints. arbuthnot on aliments.
ce libacy. m. s. [from calebs, latin.j single life; unmarried
state. -
i can attribute their numbers to nothing but their frequent
marriages ; for they look on celibacy as an accursed state, and
generally are married before twenty. speciator.
by teaching them how to carry themselves in their relations.
of husbands and wives, parents and children, they have, with-
out question, adorned the gospel, glorified god, and benefited
man, much more than they could have done in the devoutest
and striciest celibacy. afterbury.
ce'l1bate. n.s.. [calibatus, lat.] single life.
the males oblige themselves to celibate, and then multipli-
cation is hindered. graunt.
cell. n.s.. [cella, lat.]
1. a small cavity or hollow place.
the brain contains ten thousand cells,
in each some active fancy dwells.
how bees for ever, though a monarch reign,
their sep'rate cells and properties maintain.
2. the cave or little habitation of a religious person.
besides, she did intend confession
at patrick's cell this ev'n ; and there she was not. shakesp.
then did religion in a lazy cell,
in cmpty, airy contemplations dwell.
. a small and close apartment in a prison.
4. any small place of residence; a cottage.
mine eyes he clos'd, but open left the cell
cf fancy, my internal fight. milton's par, loft.
prior.
pope.
denham.
3
for ever in this humble cell
let thce and i together dwell. prizr.
in cottages and lowly cells,
true piety neglected dwells,
till call'd to heav'n, its native seat,
where the good man alone is great. somervise.
5. little bags or bladders, where fluids, or matter of different
sorts are lodged; common both to animals and plants. quincy.
ce’ll a.r. m. s. [cella, lat..] a place underground, where stores
and liquours are reposited.
if this fellow had lived in the time of cato, he would, for his
punishment, have been confined to the bottom of a collar during
his life. peacham on drawing.
ce'llar age. m. s. [from cellar.] the part of the building
which makes the cellars. -
come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarog. shao.
a good ascent makes a house wholesome, and gives oppor-
tunity for cellorage. 4./artimer's hosoy.
cf'll ar1st. n.s. [cellarius, lat.] the butler in a religiosis
house. 12ic.
ce’llula r. adj. [cellula, lat.] consisting of little cells or ca-
vities.
the urine, insinuating itself amongst the neighbouring mus-
cles, and cellular membranes, destroyed four. sharp's surgery.
ce is it ud e. n.s.. [cestuta, lat.] height. die?.
ce ment. m. s. [ccmentam, lat.]
1. the matter with which two bodies are made to cohere; as,
mortar or glue.
your temples burned in their cement, and your fianchises
confined into an augre's bore. sha's are.
there is a cement compounded of flower, whites of eggs, and
stones powdered, that becometh hard as marble. racon.
you may see divers pebbles, and a crust of cein. it or ston-be-
tween them, as hard as the pebbles themselves £a-art.
the foundation was made of rough stone, joined tooether
with a most firm cement; upon this was laid another layer,
consisting of small stones and cement. arbuthnot on coizos.
2. bond of union in friendship.
let not the piece of virtue which is set
betwixt us, as the cement of our love,
to keep it builded, be the ram to batter. shoe 7.
what cement should unite heaven and earth, light and dark-
ness * gozi.e.
look over the whole creation, and you shall see, thet the
band or cement, that holds together all the parts of this great
and glorious fabrick, is gratitude. szoto.
70 cement: v. a. [from the noun..] to unite by means of
something interposed.
but how the fear of us
may cement their divisions, and bind up
the petty difference, we yet not know. shakoshears.
liquid bodies have nothing to cement them; they are all loose
and incoherent, and in a perpetual flux: even an heap of sand,
or fine powder, will suffer no hollowness within them, though
they be dry substances. burnet'. theory of the eart.
love with white lead cements his wings;
white lead was sent us to repair
two brightest, brittlest earthly things,
a lady's face, and china ware. swift.
to cement. v. n. to come into conjunelion; to cohere.
when a wound is recent, and the parts of it are divided by
a sharp instrument, they will, if held in close contact for some
time, reunite by inosculation, and cement like one branch of a
tree ingrafted on another. sharp's surgery.
ceme'n ter. n.s.. [from cement.] a person or thing that unites .
in society.
god having designed man for a sociable creature, furnished
him with language which was to be the great instrument and
cominter of society. lo ae.
cementa'tion, n.s.. [from cement.] the aa of cementing,
or uniting with cement.
cemetery. m. s. [xciolov.] a place where the dead are
reposited. - -
the souls of the dead appear frequently in cemeteries, ani
hover about the places where their bodies are buried, as still
hankering about their old brutal pleasures, and desiring again
to enter the body. aaajan.
cen, and cin, denote kinsfolk; so cinulph is a help to his kin-
dred; cinehelm, a protector of his kinsfolk; cinburg, the je-
fence of his kindred ; cinric, powerful in kindred. gison.
cenatory. adj. [from ceno, to sup, lat..] relating to supper.
the romans washed, were anointed, and wore a ce......y
, garment; and the same was practised by the jews.
brown's /olcar errators.
cen951 tic al. adj. [xog and 3:3-.] living in community.
they have multitudes of religious orders, black and gray,
eremitical and cenobitical, and nuns. - still ofteet.
cf'not aph. n. / [x;,&amp;o and 13:32.] a monument for one
buried elsewhere.
priam, to whom the story was unknown,
as dead, deplor’d his metamorphos'd ion ;
5
a ce-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 359</div><p class="text">c e n
c e n
a cenotaph his name and title kept,
and hector round the tomb with all his brothers wept.
dryden's fables.
the athenians, when they lost any men at sea, raised a ce-
notaph, or empty monument. notes on odsey.
cense. m. s. scensus, lat.] publick rate.
we see what flocas of treasure have flowed into europe by
that action; so that the cense, or rates of christendom, are rais-
ed since ten times, yea twenty times told. bacon.
t. cense. v. a. sanconsor, fr.] to perfume with odours;
contracted from incense.
the salii sing, and cense his altars round
with saban smoke, their heads with poplar bound. dryden.
grineus was near, and cast a furious look
on the side altar, cens'd with sacred smoke,
and bright with flaming fires.
ce'n ser. m. s. [encensoir, fr.]
1. the pan or vessel in which incense is burned.
antoninus gave piety in his money, like a lady with a censor
before an altar. peacham on drawing.
dryden.
- of incense clouds,
fuming from golden censors, hid the mount.
2. a pan in which any thing is burned ; fire-pan.
here's finip, and nip, and cut, and slish, and slush,
like to a censer in a barber’s shop. shakspeare.
ce’nsion. m. s. scensin, lat..] a rate, an assessment.
god intended this cension only for the blessed virgin and her
son, that christ might be born where he should. joseph hall.
ce's so r. n.f. [censor, lat.]
1. an officer of rome, who had the power of correoting man-
ners. -
2. one who is given to censure and exprobation.
ill-natur'd censors of the present age, o
and fond of all the follies of the past. roscommon.
the most severe censor cannot but be pleased with the pro-
digality of his wit, though, at the same time, he could have
wished, that the master of it had been a better manager. dryd.
censo rian. adj. [from censor.] relating to the censor.
as the chancery had the pretorian power for equity, so the
star-chamber had the censorian power for offences under the de-
gree of capital. bacon.
censo'rio us, adj. [from censor.]
1. addicted to censure ; severe ; full of invectives.
do not too many believe no religion to be pure, but what is
intemperately rigid 2 no zeal to be spiritual, but what is censo-
milton.
rious, or vindicative spratt.
o ! let my presence make my travels light,
and potent venus shall exalt my name
above the rumours of censorious fame. prior.
2. sometimes it has of before the object of reproach.
a dogmatical spirit inclines a man to be censorious of his
neighbours. watts on the mind.
3. sometimes on. -
he treated all his inferiours of the clergy with a most sancti-
fied pride ; was rigorously and universally censorious upon all his
brethren of the gown. swift.
censo riously. adv. [from censorious.] in a severe reflecting
man in ci’.
censo'rious n ess. n.s.. [from censorious.] disposition to re-
proach ; habit of reproaching. -
sourness of disposition, and rudeness of behaviour, censori-
ousness and finister interpretation of things, all cross and dis-
tasteful humours, render the conversation of men grievous and
uncasy to one another.
ce'nsors hip. m. s. [from censor.]
1. the office of a censor.
2. the time in which the office of censor is born.
it was brought to rome in the censorship of claudius:
brown's widgar errours.
ce'n's urable. adj. [from censure.] worthy of censure ; blame-
able; culpable.
a small mistake may leave upon the mind the lasting me-
mory of having been taunted for something censurable. locke.
cen sur able ness. m. s. [from censurable.] blameableness;
fitness to be censured. -
ce'nsure. m. s. [censura, latin.]
1. blame; reprimand ; reproach.
enough for half the greatest of these days,
to 'scape my censure, not expect my praise.
2. judgment; opinion.
madam, and you, my sister, will you go
to give your censures in this weighty business?
3. judicial sentence.
to you, lord governour,
remains the censure of this hellish villain. shakespeare.
4. a spiritual punishment inflicted by some ecclesiastical judge.
ayliffe's parergon.
upon the unsuccessfulness of milder medicaments, use that
stronger physick, the censures of the church. hammond.
t. ce/nsur e. v. a. [censurer, fr.]
1. to blame; to brand publickly.
the like censurings and despisings have embittered the spirits,
pope.
shakesp.
tillotson.
and whetted both the tongues and pens of learned men one
against another. sanderson.
2. to condemn by a judicial sentence.
ce'nsu rer. n.s.. [from censure.] he that blames; he that re-
proaches.
we must not stint
our necessary actions, in the fear
to cope malicious censurers. shakesheare's hen. viii.
a statesman, who is posiest of real merit, should look upon
his political censurers with the same neglect, that a good writer
_ regards his criticks. adaison.
cent. m. s. scentum, lat, a hundred.] a hundred ; as, five
per cent, that is, five in the hundred.
centaur. m. s. scentaurus, lat.]
i. a poetical being, supposed to be compounded of a man and a
horse.
down from the waste they are centaurs, though women all
above. shakespeare.
the idea of a centaur has no more falsehood in it, than the
in anne centator. locke.
2. the archer in the zodiack. *
the chearless empire of the sky,
to capricorn, the centaur archer yields. thomson.
ce’ntaury, greater and less. [centaurium.] two plants.
add pounded galls, and roses dry,
and with cecropian thyme strong scented centaury. dryden.
ce'n ten ary. m. s. scentenarius, lat.] the number of a hun-
dred.
in every centenary of years from the creation, some small
abatement should have been made. hakewill on providence.
cente's ima l. m. s. scentesimus, latin.] hundredth; the next
step of progression after decimal in the arithmetick of frac-
tions.
the negle&amp;t of a few centesimals in the side of the cube,
would bring it to an equality with the cube of a foot.
arbuthnot on coins.
centifo'lious, adj. [from centum and folium, lat.] having
an hundred leaves.
centipe de. m. s. [from centum and pes.] a poisonous insect
in the west indies, commonly called by the english forty legs.
cento. m. s. [cent, lat.] a composition formed by joining.
scrapes from other authours.
it is quilted, as it were, out of shreds of divers poets, such as
scholars call a cento. camden's remains.
if any man think the poem a cento, our poet will but have
done the same in jest which boileau did in earnest.
- advertisement to pope's danciad.
ce’ntral. adj. [from centre.] relating to the centre; con-
taining the centre, placed in the centre, or middle.
there is now, and was then, a space or cavity in the central
parts of it; so large as to give reception to that mighty mass
of water. hoodward's natural hytery.
umbricl, a dusky melancholy sprite, -
down to the central carth, his proper scene,
repairs. pope's rape of the look.
ce’ntrally. adv. [from central.] with regard to the centre.
though one of the feet most commonly bears the weight,
yet the whole weight rests centrally upon it. dryden.
centre. m. s. scentrum, lat..] the middle ; that which is
equally distant from all extremities.
the heav'ns themselves, the planets, and this centre,
observe degree, priority, and place. shakespeare.
if we frame an image of a round body all of fire, the flame
proceeding from it, would diffuse itself every way; so that the
source, serving for the centre there, would be round about an
huge sphere of fire and light. digby on bodies.
to centre. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to place on a centre; to fix as on a centre.
one foot he centred, and the other turn'd
round through the vast profundity obscure.
2. to collect to a point.
by thy each look, and thought, and care, ’tis shown,
thy joys are centred all in me alone. prior.
he may take a range all the world over, and draw in all that
wide air and circumference of sin and vice, and centre it in his
own breast. south.
o impudent, regardful of thy own,
whose thoughts are centred on thyself alone !
to centre. v. m.
1. to rest on ; to repose on ; as bodies when they gain an equi-
librium.
where there is no visible truth wherein to centre, errour is
as wide as men's fancies, and may wander to eternity.
decay of piety.
milton.
dryden.
2. to be placed in the midst or centre.
as god in heav'n
is centre, yet extends to all ; so thou,
centring, receiv'st from all those orbs. milton.
3. to be colle&amp;ted to a point.
what hopes you had in diomede, lay down;
our hopes must centre on ourselves alone. dryden.
the common acknowledgments of the body will at length
contro<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 360</div><p class="text">c e r
c e r
‘contre in him, who appears fincerely to aim at the o, be-
nefit. ertury.
it was attested by the visible centring of all the old prophe-
cies in the person of christ, and by the completion of these
prophecies since, which he himself uttered. atterbury.
ce'no rick. adj. [from centre.] placed in the centre,
some that have deeper digg'd in mine than i,
say, where his centrick happiness doth lie. donne.
centraorugal. adj. [from centrum and fugio, lat.] having
the quality acquired by bodies in motion, of receding from the
centre.
they described an hyperbola, by changing the centripetal
into a centrifugal force. cheyne.
centri'petal. adj, [from centrum and peto, lat..] having a
tendency to the center; having gravity.
the direction of the force, whereby the planets revolve in
their orbits, is towards their centres; and this force may be
very properly called attractive, in respect of the central body,
and centripetal, in respect of the revolving body. cheyne.
ce(ntry.
se'ntry.
the thoughtless wits shall frequent forfeits pay,
who gainst the centry's box discharge their tea. gay.
ce’ntuple. adj. [centuplex, lat..] an hundred fold. -
to centu'plicat e. v. a. [centuplicatum, of centum and plio,
lat..] to make a hundred fold; to repeat a hundred times, d.
to centu'riate. v. a. [centurio, lat..] to divide into hun-
dreds.
centur la tor. m. s. [from century.] a name given to his.
torians, who distinguish times by centuries; which is generally
the method of ecclesiastical history.
the centuriators of magdeburg were the first that discovered
this grand imposture. ayliffe's parergon.
centurion. m. s. [centurio, latin.] a military officer among
the romans, who commanded an hundred men.
have an army ready, say you ?—a most royal one. the
centurions, and their charges, distinetly billeted in the enter-
tainment, and to be on foot at an hour's warning. shakoff.
century. n.s.. [centuria, lat.]
1. a hundred; usually employed to specify time: as, the second
century.
the nature of eternity is such, that, though our joys, after
some centuries of years, may seem to have grown older, by
having been enjoyed so many ages, yet will they really still
} see sentinel.
continue new. boyle.
and now time’s whiter series is begun,
which in soft centuries shall smoothly run. dryden.
the lists of bishops are filled with greater numbers than one
would expect ; but the succession was quick in the three first
centuries, because the bishop often ended in the martyr. addison.
2. it is sometimes used simply for a hundred.
romulus, as you may read, did divide the romans into
tribes, and the tribes into centuries or hundreds. spenser.
when with wood leaves and weeds i have stiew'd his grave,
and on it said a century of pray'rs,
such as i can, twice o'er, i’ll weep and sigh. shakoffeare.
ceol. an initial in the names of men, which signifies a ship or
vessel, such as those that the saxons landed in. gibson.
ce(phala lgy. m. s. [xt?&amp;x2xysz.] the headach. dicf.
cf pha. lick. adj. [x:22x}.] that which is medicinal to the
head.
cephalick medicines are all such as attenuate the blood, so as
to make it circulate easily through the capillary vessels of the
brain. arbuthnot on aliments.
i dressed him up with soft folded linen, dipped in a cephalick
balsam. j/seman.
ce ra stes. m. s. [xt{2}^s.] a serpent having horns, or sup-
posed to have them.
scorpion, and asp, and amphisbena dire,
cerasies horn'd, hydrus, and elops drear. milton.
ce rate. m. s. [cera, lat. wax.] a medicine made of wax,
which, with oil, or some softer substance, makes a consistence
softer than a plaister. souincy.
ce rated. adj. [ceratus, lat.] waxed; covered with wax.
to cere. v. a. [from cera, lat. wax.] to wax.
you ought to pierce the skin with a needle, and strong
brown thread cered, about half an inch from the edges of the
lips. - joseman.
ce rebel. m. s. [cerebellum, lat..] part of the brain.
in the head of man, the base of the brain and cerebel, yea, of
the whole skull, is set parallel to the horizon. derham.
ce’re cloth. m. s. [from cere and cloth.] cloth smeared over
with glutinous matter, used to wounds and bruises.
the ancient egyptian mummies were shrowded in a num-
ber of folds of linen, besmeared with gums, in manner of cere-
cloth. bacon.
ce’rement. n. s. [from cera, lat. wax.] cloths dipped in
melted wax, with which dead bodies were infolded when they
were embalmed.
pet me not burst in ignorance, but tell,
why canonized bones, hearsed in earth,
have burst their cerement; 2 shakespeare.
ce remo'nial. adj. [from ceremony.]
1. relating to ceremony, or outward rite; ritual.
what mockery will it be,
to want the bridegroom, when the priest attends,
to speak the ceremonial rites of marriage 2 shakespeare,
we are to carry it from the hand to the heart, to improve a
ceremonial nicety into a substantial duty, and the modes of ci-
vility into the realities of religion. south.
christ did take away that external ceremonial worship that
was among the jews. stillingfitt,
2. formal ; observant of old forms.
oh monstrous, superstitious puritan,
of refin'd manners, yet ceremonial man,
that when thou meet'stone, with enquiring eyes
dost search, and, like a needy broker, prize
the silk and gold he wears. donne,
with dumb pride, and a set formal face,
he moves in the dull ceremonial track,
with jove's embroider'd coat upon his back. dryden.
cere mo'n1al. n.s.. [from ceremony.]
1. outward form; external rite; prescriptive formality.
the only condition that could make it prudent for the cler-
gy, to alter the ceremonial, or any indifferent part, would be a
resolution in the legislature to prevent new sects. swift.
2. the order for rites and forms in the romish church.
cere mo'n1alness. n.s.. [from ceremonial.] the quality of be-
ing ceremonial; over much use of ceremony.
cere mo'nious. adj. [from ceremony.]
1. consisting of outward rites.
under a different ceconomy of religion, god was more ten-
der of the shell and ceremonious part of his worship. south.
2. full of ceremony; awful.
o, the sacrifice,
how ceremoneous, solemn, and unearthly,
it was i' th' offering ! shakespeare,
3. attentive to outward rites, or prescriptive formalities.
you are too senseless obstinate, my lord;
too ceremonious, and traditional. shakespeare.
4. civil; according to the strict rules of civility; formally re-
spectful.
they have a set of ceremonious phrases, that run through all
ranks and degrees among them. addison's guardian.
5. observant of the rules of civility.
then let us take a ceremonious leave,
and loving farewel of our several friends.
6, civil and formal to a fault.
the old caitiff was grown so ceremonious, as he would needs
accompany me some miles in my way. sidney,
ce remo'niously. adv. [from ceremonious.] in a ceremonious
manner; formally ; respectful.
ceremoniously let us prepare
some welcome for the mistress of the house. shakespeare.
ce remo'nious n ess. m. s. [from ceremonicus.] fondness of ce-
remony; the use of too much ceremony.
ce’remony. m. s. [ceremonia, lat.]
1. outward rite; external form in religion.
bring her up to the high altar, that she may
shakespeare.
the sacred ceremonies partake. speoser.
he is superstitious grown of late,
quite from the main opinion he held once
of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies. shakespeare,
disrobe the images,
if you find them deck'd with ceremony. shakspeare.
2. forms of civility.
the sauce to meat is ceremony;
meeting were bare without it. shakespeare.
not to use ceremonies at all, is to teach others not to use them
again, and so diminish respect to himself. bacon.
3. outward forms of state.
what art thou, thou idle ceremony p
what kind of god art thou, that suffer's more
of mortal grief, than do thy worshippers
art thou aught else but place, degree, and form 2 shakoff.
a coarser place,
where pomp and ceremonies enter'd not,
where greatness was shut out, and highness well forgot.
dryden's fables,
ce'rote. n.s. the same with cerate; which sec.
in those which are critical, a cerate of oil of olives, with
white wax, hath hitherto served my purpose. wiseman.
certain, adj. [certus, lat.]
1. sure; indubitable; unquestionable; undoubted; that which
cannot be questioned, or denied.
those things are certain among men, which cannot be de-
nied, without obstinacy and folly. tillotson,
this the mind is equally certain of, whether these ideas
be more or less general. locke.
2. resolved; determined. -
however i with thee have fix’d my lot,
qertain to undergo like doom of death,
consort with thee. milton's par, loft.
3. undoubting; put past doubt, -
this
r
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 361</div><p class="text">c e r
c e t
-
**
o
*/
* is
this form before alcyone present,
to make her certain of the sad event. dryden.
4. unfailing; which always produces the expeded effect.
i have often wished that i knew as certain a remedy for any
other distemper. mead.
5. constant ; never failing to be.
virtue that directs our ways,
through certain dangers to uncertain praise. dryden.
6. regular ; settled; stated.
you shall gather a certain rate.. exodus.
who calls the council, states a certain day,
who forms the phalanx, and who points the way: pope.
the preparation for your supper shews your to:
xotton.
7. in an indefinite sense, some; as, a certain man told me this. -
how bad soever this fashion may justly be accounted, certain
of the same countrymen do pass far beyond it. carew's surv.
some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran
from noise of our own drums. shakespeare.
let there be certain leather bags made of several bignesses,
which, for the matter of them, should be tractable. //ilkins.
ce(rtain ly, adv. [from certain.]
1. indubitably; without question; without doubt.
certainly he that, by those legal means, cannot be secured,
can be much less so by any private attempt. decay of piety.
what precise collection of simple ideas, modesty or fruga-
lity stand for, in another's use, is not so certainly known. locke.
2. without fail.
ce’rtainness. n.s.. [from certain.] the same with certainty.
ce’rtainty. m. s. [from certain.]
1. exemption from doubt.
certainty is the perception of the agreement or disagreement
of our ideas. * locke.
2. exemption from failure : as, the certainty of an event, or of a
remedy.
3. that which is real and fixed.
doubting things go ill, often hurts more
than to be sure they do ; for certainties
or are past remedies, or timely knowing,
the remedy then born.
4. regularity; settled state.
cert e.s. adv. (certes, fr.) certainly; in truth ; in sooth : an
old word.
certes, sir knight, ye’ve been too much to blame,
thus for to blot the honour of the dead,
and with foul cowardice his carcase shame,
whose living hands immortaliz'd his name. spenser.
for, certes, these are people of the island. shakespeare.
certes, our authours are to blame. hudibras.
cert1'f1cat e. m. s. [certificat, low lat. he certifies.]
1. a writing made in any court, to give notice to another court
of any thing done therein. cowel.
2. any testimony. -
a certificate of poverty is as good as a protection. , l'eor.
i can bring certificates, that i behave myself soberly before
company. addison.
to ce’rtify. v. a. [certifier, fr.]
1. to give certain information of.
the english embassadours returned out of flanders from
maximilian, and certified the king, that he was not to hope for
any aid from him. - bacon.
this is designed to certify those things that are confirmed of
god's favour. hammond's fundamentals.
2. it has of before the thing told, after the person told: as, i
certified you of the fact. -
certiora ri. m. s. [latin.] a writ issuing out of the chan-
cery, to call up the records of a cause therein depending, that
justice may be done; upon complaint made by bill, that the
party, who seeks the said writ, hath received hard dealing in
the said court. - cowel.
ce(rtitu de. m. s. [certitudo, lat..] certainty; freedom from
doubt; infallibility of proof.
they thought at first they dream'd ; for 'twas offence
with them, to question certitude of sense. dryden.
there can be no majus and minus in the certitude we have of
things, whether by mathematick demonstration, or any other
way of consequence. grew's cosmologia sacra.
cer v "cal. adj. [cervicalis, lat..] belonging to the neck.
the aorta bending a little upwards, sends forth the cervical
and axillary arteries; the rest turning down again, forms the
descending trunk. cheyne.
§: o: ! adj. [carruleus, lat.] blue ; sky coloured.
it afforded a solution, with, now and then, a light touch of
sky colour, but nothing near so high as the ceruleoustincture of
filver. boyle.
from thee the saphire solid ether takes,
its hue cerulean. - thomson's summer.
cer uli'fick. adj. [from ceruleous.] having the power to pro-
duce a blue colour.
the several species of rays, as the rubifick, cerulifick, and
others are separated one from another. grew.
vol. i. -
shakespeare.
cerumen. m. s. [latin.] the wax or excrement of the
ear.
ce ruse. m. s. [cerusa, lat.] white lead.
a preparation of lead with vinegar, which is of a white co-
lour; whence many other things, resembling it in that parti-
cular, are by chymists called certise, as the ceruse of antimony,
and the like. -
cesa rean. adj. [from caesar.]
the cesarean section is cutting a child out of the womb
either dead or alive, when it cannot otherwise be delivered.
which circumstance, it is said, first gave the name of casar
to the roman family so called. $24incy.
cess. n.f. [probably corrupted from cense; see cense; though
imagined by junius to be derived from safire, to seize.]
1. a levy made upon the inhabitants of a place, rated according
to their property.
the like cess is also charged upon the country sometimes for
victualling the soldiers, when they lie in garrison. spenser.
2. the act of laying rates. -
3. [from coffe, fr.] it seems to have been used by shaftspeare for
bounds, or limits, though it stand for rate, reckoning.
i pr’ythee, ton, beat cutts's saddle, put a few flocks in the
point ; the poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess.
shakesp. henry iv.
to cess. v. a. [from the noun..] to rate; to lay charge on.
we are to consider how inuch land there is in all ulster,
that, according to the quantity thereof, we may cess the said
rent, and allowance issuing thereout. spenser on ireland.
to cess. v. n. to omit a legal duty. see cessor. -
cess ation. m. s. [cessatio, lat. j.
1. a stop ; a rest. -
the day was yearly observed for a festival, by cosition from
&amp;tancy.
labour, and by resorting to church. hayward.
true piety, without cessation tost
by theories, the practick part is lost. denham.
2. vacation, suspension.
there had been a mighty confusion of things, an interrup-
tion and perturbation of the ordinary course, and a cessation
and suspension of the laws of nature. jp'oodward's nat. hisł.
the rising of a parliament is a kind of cessation from po-
liticks. addison's freeholder.
3. end of action ; the state of ceasing to act.
the serum, which is mixed with an alkali, being poured out
to that which is mixed with an acid, raiseth an effervescence; at
the cessation of which, the salts of which the acid was com-
posed, will be regenerated. arbuthnot on aliments.
4. a pause of hostility, without peace.
when the succours of the poor protestants in ireland were
diverted, i was intreated to get them some respite, by a cesa-
tion. king charles,
cessa vit. n.s. [latin.]
a writ that lies upon this general ground, that the person,
against whom it is brought, hath, for two years, omitted to
perform such service, or pay such rent, as he is obliged by his
tenure, and hath not, upon his land or tenement, sufficient
goods or chattels to be distrained. cowel.
cessibility. m. s. [from ceda, cosum, latin.] the quality of
receding, or giving way, without resistance.
if the subject strucken be of a proportionate cossibility, it
seems to dull and deaden the stroke; whereas if the thing struc-
ken be hard, the stroke seems to lose no force, but to work a
greater effect. digby on the soul.
ce'ssible. adj. [from ceda, cesium, lat.] easy to give way.
if the parts of the strucken body be so easily cessible, as with-
out difficulty the stroke can divide them, then it enters into such
a body, till it has spent its force. digby on the soul.
ce'ssion. n.s.. [coffion, fr. cesio, lat.]
1. retreat; the act of giving way.
sound is not produced without some resistance either in the
air or the body percussed; for if there be a mere yielding or co-
son, it produceth no sound. bacon's nat. hisł.
2. resignation; the act of yielding up or quitting to another.
a parity in their council would make and secure the best
peace they can with france, by a cession of flanders to that
crown, in exchange for other provinces. temple.
ce'ssion ary. adj. [from cession.] as, a cessionary bankrupt, one
who has delivered up all his effects.
ce'ssor. n.s.. [from cesso, lat.]
in law, he that ceaseth or negle&amp;teth so long to perform a
duty belonging to him, as that by his cess, or ceiling, he incur-
reth the danger of law, and hath, or may have the writ cessa-
vit brought against him. where it is said the tenant cesseth,
such phrase is to be understood, as if it were said, the tenant
cesseth to do that which he ought, or is bound to do by his
land or tenement. cowel.
ce stu.s. n.s. [latin.] the girdle of venus.
venus, without any ornament but her own beauties, not so
much as her own cesius. addison's spectator.
ceta'ceous. adj. [from cete, whales, lat..] of the whale kind.
such fishes as have lungs or respiration, are not without the
wezzon, as whales and cetaceous animals. brown's vug, err.
4 f he
amartin.
ce'ss ment. m. s. [from cess.] an assessment or tax. dicf.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 362</div><p class="text">c h a
c h a
he hath created variety of these cetaceous fishes, which con-
verse chiefly in the northern seas, whose whole body being en-
compassed round with a copious fat or blubber, it is enabled to
abide the greatest cold of the sea-water. ray on the creation.
c f aut. a note in the scale of musick.
gamut i am, the ground of all accord,
a re, to plead hortensio's passion;
b mi bianca, take him for thy lord, -
- c faut, that loves with all affection. shakespeare.
ch has, in words purely english, or fully naturalized, the found
of sh; a peculiar pronunciation, which it is hard to describe
in words. in some words derived from the french, it has the
found of so, as chaise; and, in some derived from the greek,
the sound of a, as cholerick.
chace. see chase.
chad. m. s. a sort of fish.
of round fish there are brit, sprat, whiting, chad, eels,
congar, millet. carew's survey of cornwall.
t. chafe. v. a. [echauffer, fr.]
1. to warm with rubbing.
they laid him upon some of their garments,and fell to rub
and chose him, till they brought him to recover both breath,
the servant, and warmth, the companion of living. sidney.
at last, recovering heart, he does begin
to rub her temples, and to chase her skin.
soft, and more soft, at ev'ry touch it grew;
like pliant wax, when chasing hands reduce .
the former mass to form, and frame to use.
2. to heat by rage or hurry.
have i not heard the sea, puff'd up with winds,
rage like an angry boar, chased with sweat :
3. to perfume.
lilies more white than snow,
new fall’n from heav'n, with violets mix'd, did grow;
whose scent so chaf"d the neighbour air, that you
would surely swear arabick spices grew.
4. to make angry; to enflame passion.
her intercession chafd him so,
when she for thy repeal was suppliant,
that to close prison he commanded her. shakespeare.
an offer of pardon more chased the rage of those, who were
resolved to live or die together. sir john hayward.
for all that he was inwardly chased with the heat of youth
and indignation, against his own people as well as the rhodi-
ans, he moderated himself betwixt his own rage, and the of—
fence of his soldiers. knolles's history of the turks.
this chaf'd the boar, his nostrils flames expire,
and his red eyeballs roll with living fire.
to ch a fe. v. n.
1. to rage; to frct; to fume; to rave; to boil.
there with he 'gan full terribly to roar,
and chaf"d at that indignity right sore. spensor's hub. tale.
he will not rejoice so much at the abuse of falstaff, as he
will chase at the doctor's marrying my daughter. shakespeare.
be lion mettled, proud, and take no care,
who chases, who frets, or where conspirers are. shaksp.
how did they fume, and stamp, and roar, and chase,
and swear ! not addison himself was safe. pope.
2. to fret against any thing. .
- once upon a raw and gusty day,
the troubled tyber chasing with his shores. shakesp. j. cas.
the murmuring surge,
that on th’ unnumber'd idle pebbles chafts,
cannot be heard so high. shakesh. king lear.
chafe. m. s... [from the verb.] a heat; a rage; a fury; a pas-
sion; a fume; a pett ; a fret ; a storm.
when sir thomas more was speaker of the parliament,
with his wisdom and eloquence, he so crossed a purpose of car-
dinal wolsey's, that the cardinal, in a chase, sent for him to
whitehall. camden's remains.
- at this the knight grew high in chase,
and staring furiously on ralph,
he trembled. hudibras.
cha fe-wax. m. s. an officer belonging to the lord chancellor,
who fits the wax for the sealing of writs. harris.
cha fer. m. s. sceapon, sax. kever, dutch..] an inse&amp;t; a sort
of yellow beetle.
cha fery. m. s. a forge in an iron mill, where the iron is
wrought into complete bars, and brought to perfection. phillips.
chaff. m. s. sceap, sax. kaf, dutch..]
1. the husks of corn that are separated by threshing and win-
nowing.
we shall be winnow'd with so rough a wind,
that ev’n our corn shall seem as light as choff,
fairy queen.
dryden.
sucking.
dryden.
iv.
' and good from bad find no partition. shakesp. henry
pleasure with instruction should be join’d ;
so take the corn, and leave the chaff behind. dryden.
he set before him a sack of wheat, as it had been just thresh-
ed out of the sheaf; he then bid him pick out the chaff from
among the corn, and lay it aside by itself. spectator.
2. it is used for any thing worthless.
t. chaffer. v. n. [kauffin, germ. to buy..] to treat about
a bargain; to haggle ; to bargain,
shakespeare.
nor rode himself to paul's, the publick fir,
to chaffer for preferments with his good,
where bishopricks and finecures are sold. dryosen’s f. lies.
the chaffering with disienters, and dodging about this or
t’other ceremony, is but like opening a few wickets, and leav-
ing them a-jar. swift.
in disputes with chairmen, when your master sends you to
choff r with them, take pity, and tell your master that they will
not take a farthing less. swift.
t. chaffer. v. a. [the active sense is obsolete j
1. to buy.
he chaffer'd chairs in which churchmen were set,
and breach of laws to privy farm did let. speoser,
2. to exchange.
approaching nigh, he never staid to greet,
ne chaffer words, proud courage to provoke. fairy &amp;en.
chafferer. m. s. [from choser.] a buyer; bargainer; put-
chaser.
cha'ffern. m. s. [from eschauffer, fr. to heat..] a vessel for
heating water. dic.
cha ffery. m. s. [from chaffer.] traffick; the pracice of
buying and selling.
the third is, merchandize and chaffery, that is, buying and
selling. spense's state of ireland.
chaffinch. m. s. [from chaff and finch j a bird so called, be.
cause it delights in chaft, and is by some much admired for its
song. philips's j/or/d of j/ord.
the chaffinch, and other small birds, are injurious to some
fruits. aortimer's hussandry.
cha'ffless. adj. [from chaff without chaff.
the love i bear him,
made me to fan you thus; but the gods made you,
unlike all others, choffless. shakespeare's cyrbore,
cha ffw eed. m. s. [gnaphalium, lat..] an herb ; the same with
cudweed; which see.
chaffy. adj. [from chaff like chaff; full of chaff; light.
if the straws be light and choffy, and held at a reasonable dis-
tance, they will not rise unto the middle. brown'; /*gar err.
the most slight and chaffy opinion, if at a great remove
from the present age, contracts a veneration. glanville.
cha's ngd is h. m. s. [from chase and dish j a vessel to make
any thing hot in ; a portable grate for coals.
make proof of the incorporation of silver and tin in equal
quantities, whether it will endure the ordinary fire which be-
longeth to chasingdishes, poincts, and such other filver vessels.
- bacon's physical remains.
chagr1'n. m. s. [chagrine, fr.] ill humour; vexation; fret-
fulness; peevishness. it is pronounced sha reen.
hear me, and touch belinda with chagrin ;
that single act gives half the world the spleen. poz.
i grieve with the old, for so many additional inconvcnion-
cies and chagrins, more than their small remain of life seemed
destined to undergo. pope's lettr,
to chagr1'n. v. a. [chagriner, fr j. to vex; to put out of
temper; to teaze 3 to make uneasy.
chain. m. s. [chaine, fr.]
1. a series of links fastened one within another.
and pharaoh took off his ring, and put it upon joseph's
hand, and put a gold chain about his neck. gen. xii. 42.
2. a bond ; a manacle; a fetter; something with which prison-
ers are bound.
still in constraint your suffring sex remains,
or bound in formal, or in real chains.
3. a line of links with which land is measured,
a surveyour may as soon, with his chain, measure out infi-
nite space, as a philosopher, by the quickest flight of mind,
reach it, or, by thinking, comprehend it. locke.
4. a series linked together; as, of causes, or thoughts; a suc-
cession ; a subordination.
those so mistake the christian religion, as to think it is
only a chain of fatal decrees, to deny all liberty of man's choice
toward good or evil. ihammond.
as there is pieasure in the right exercise of any faculty, so
especially in that of right reasoning; which is still the greater,
by how much the consequences are more clear, and the claims
of them more long. burret's 2%eory of the earth.
to chain. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fasten or bind with a chain.
they repeal daily any wholesome act established against the
rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily to chain up and
restrain the poor. - shakespeare's cori lanus.
the mariners he chained in his own galleys for slaves. antli.
or, march'd i chain'd behind the hostile car,
pope.
the victor's pastime, and the sport of war ! prizr.
they, with joint force oppression chaining, set
imperial justice at the helm. torson.
2. to enslave; to keep in slavery.
the monarch was ador'd, the people chain'd. prior,
this world, 'tis true,
was made for caesar, but for litus too:
and which more bles who chain'd his country, say,
or he, whose virtue figh’d to lose a day
3. to put on a chain,
pope.
o the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 363</div><p class="text">c h a.
c h a
o
l
the admiral seeing the mouth of the haven chained, and the
castles full of ordnance, and strongly manned, durst not attempt
to enter. knolles's history of the laras.
4. to unite.
o warwick, i do bend my knee with thine, -
and in this vow do chain my soul with thine. shakes rare.
cha'1npu mp. m. s. [from chain and pump.] a pump used in
large english vessels, which is double, so that one rises as the
other falls. it yields a great quantity of water, works easily,
and is easily mended, but takes up a great deal of room, and
makes a disagreeable noise. chambers.
it is not long since the striking of the topmast, a wonderful
great ease to great ships both at sea and in harbour, hath been
devised, together with the chainpump, which takes up twice as
much water as the ordinary did ; and we have lately added the
bonnet and the drabble. raleigh's essays.
cha'1ns hot. n.s.. [from chain and shot.j two bullets or half
bullets, fastened together by a chain, which, when they fly
open, cut away whatever is before them. -
in sea fights oftentimes, a buttock, the brawn of the thigh,
and the calf of the leg, are torn off by the chain/bat, and splin-
ters. - j/ijeman's surgery.
cha'1n work. n.s.. [from chain and work.] work with open
spaces like the links of a chain.
nets of chequerwork, and wreaths of chainwork, for the cha-
piters which were upon the tops of the pillars, i kings.
chair. m. s. [chair, fr.] *
i. a moveable seat.
whether thou choose cervantes’ serious air,
or laugh and shake in rab'lais' easy chair,
or praise the court, or magnify mankind,
orthy griev'd country’s copper chains unbind. pope.
if a chair be defined a seat for a single person, with a back
belonging to it, then a stool is a seat for a single person, with-
out a back. watts's logick.
2. a seat of justice, or of authority.
he makes for england, here to claim the crown.—
—ls the chair empty is the sword unsway’d
is the king dead : shakespeare's richard iii.
if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun ;
for chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom, say;
either that's thine, or else thou wert not his. shakesp.
the honour’d gods
keep rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
supply with worthy men. - shakes). coriolanus.
her grace sat down to rest a while,
in a rich chair of state. shakesp. henry viii.
the committee of the commons appointed mr. pym to take
the chair. clarendon.
in this high temple, on a chair of state,
the seat of audience, old latinus fate. dryden's afneid.
3. a vehicle born by men ; a sedan.
think what an equipage thou hast in air,
and view with scorn two pages and a chair. pope.
cha'irman. n s. [from chair and man.]
1. the president of an assembly.
in assemblies generally one person is chosen chairman or mode-
rator, to keep the several speakers to the rules of order. if atts.
2. one whose trade it is to carry a chair.
one elbows him, one justles in the shole,
a rafter breaks his head, or chairman's pole. dryden.
troy chairmen bore the wooden steed,
pregnant with greeks, impatient to be freed;
those bully greeks, who, as the noderns do,
instead of paying chairmen, run them through. swift.
chais e. m. s. [...haise, fr.] a carriage of pleasure drawn by
one horse.
instead of the chariot he might have said the chaise of go-
vernment ; for a chaise is driven by the person that sits in it.
- addison.
chalco grapher. m. s. szzo…?";22.9o, of xxxx(gp, brass,
and y:z:22, to write or engrave.) an engraver in brass;
cha leo graphy. m. s. [x2xx:y:zo x.) engraving in brass.
cha'lder. of a dry english measure of coals, consisting
cha'ld ros. of thirty six budhels heaped up, according to the
cha'ud r on. § sealed bushel kept at guildhall, london. the
chaldron should weigh two thousand pounds. chambers.
cha'lic e. m. s. scalic, sax. calice, fr. caix, lat.]
1. a cup ; a bowl. -
when in your motion you are hot,
and, that he calls for drink, i'll have prepar'd him
a chalice for the nonce. shakspeare.
2. it is generally used for a cup used in acts of worship.
all the church at that time did not think emblematical fi-
gures unlawful ornaments of cups or chalices. stillingfect.
cha'lice d. adj. [from calix, lat, the cup of a flower.j having
a cell or cup : applied by shakespeare to a flower, but now ob-
solete.
hark, hark! the lark at heav'n's gate sings,
and phoebus 'gins arise,
his steeds to water at these springs,
on chali.'d flowers that lies.
7
shakoffeare.
chalk. m. s. scealc; cealer-an, sax. calk, wel-h.]
coak is a white fossile, usually reckoned a stone, but by
some ranked among the boles. it is used in medicine as an ab.
sorbent, and is celebrated for curing the heartburn. coamo, s.
he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalk stones, that are
beaten in funder. /aiah.
coalk is of two sorts; the hard, dry, strong chalk, which is
best for line; and a soft, unctuous chał, which is best for
lands, because it easily dissolves with rain and frost. as timer.
with , ha! i first describe a circle here,
where these ethereal spirits must appear.
7. cha.k. v. a. [foom the noun )
1. to rub with chalk.
the beastly rabble then came down
from all the garrets in the town,
and stalls and shopboards in vast swarms,
with new chalk'd bills and rusty arms. hadaraș.
2. to manure with chalk.
land that is chalked, if it is not well dunged, will receive but
little benefit from a second chalking.
3. to mark or trace out as with chalk.
being not propt by ancestry, whose grace
chalks successours their way. shakesheare.
his own mind chalked out to him the just proportions and
dryden.
..]/oroner.
measures of behaviour to his fellow-creatures. south.
with these helps i might at least have chalted out a way for
, others, to amend my errours in a like design. dryden.
the time falls within the compass here chalked out by na-
ture, very punctually. //codoward's natural history.
chalk-cutt e.r. m. s. [from chalk and cut. j a man that digs
chalk.
shells, by the seamen called chalk eggs, are dug up com-
monly in the chalk-pits, where the chaik-cutters drive a great
trade with them. //codward.
chalk-pit. n.s.. [from chalk and pit.] a pit in which chalk
is dug. see chalk-cut ter.
chalky. adj. [from chalk.]
1. consisting of chalk ; white with chalk.
as far as i could ken the chalky cliffs,
when from thy shore the tempest beats us back,
i stood upon the hatches in the storm. shakeshcare.
w that bellowing beats on dover's chalky cliff. rowe,
2. impregnated with chalk. -
ghaly water towards the top of earth is too fretting. bacon.
to challenge. v. a. [chalenger, fr.]
1. to call another to answer for an offence by combat.
the prince of wales slept forth before the king,
and, nephew, challeng'd you to single fight. shakos.--
2. to call to a contest.
thus form'd for speed, he challences the wind,
and leaves the scythian arrow far behind. dryden.
i challenge any man to make any pretence to power by right
of fatherhood, either intelligible or possible. lake.
3. to accuse. -
many of them be such losels and scatterlings, as that they
cannot easily by any sheriff be gotten, when they are chai-
lenged for any such fact. sponser on ireland,
where the grac'd person of our banquo present,
whom i may rather challenge for unkindness. shafe?.
4. [in law.] to object to the impartiality of any one. [see the
noun.]
though only twelve are sworn, yet twenty-four are to be
returned, to supply the defects or want of appearance of those
that are challenged off, or make default. hale,
. to claim as due.
that divine order, whereby the pre eminence of chiefest
acceptation is by the best things worthily challenged. hooker,
which of you, shall we say, doth love us most 2
that we our largest bounty may extend,
where nature doth with merit challenge.
and so much duty as my mother shew'd
to you, preferring you before her father ;
so much i challenge, that i may profess
due to the moor, my lord. shakespeare.
had you not been their father, these white flakes
did challenge pity of them. * shakes eare,
so when a tyger sucks the bullock's blood,
a famish'd lion, issuing from the wood, -
roars loudly fierce, and challenges the food. dryden.
hast thou yet drawn o'er young juba
that still would recommend thee more to caesar, "
and challenge better terms. aldison.
6. to call any one to the performance of conditions.
i will now challenge you of your promise, to give me certain
rules as to the principles of blazonry. peacha” on drawing.
cha' lie ng e. m. s. [from the verb...]
i. a summons to combat. *
* i never in my life
shakes care,
did hear a challenge urg'd more modestly. shakespeare.
2. a demand of something as due.
taking for his younglings, -
lest greedy eyes to them might chall.”ge lay,
busy with oker did the shoulders mask. sidney.
there<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 364</div><p class="text">c h a
c. h. a
there must be no challenge of superiority, or discounte-
rancing of freedom. collier of friendship.
3. [in jaw.] . an exception taken either against persons or
things; persons, as in assize to the jurours, or any one or more
of them, by the prisoner at the bar. challenge made to the
jurours, is either made to the array, or to the polls: challenge
made to the array is, when the whole number is excepted
against, as partially empannelled : challenge to or by the poll,
is when some one or more are excepted against, as not indif-
ferent : challenge to the jurours is divided into challenge princi-
pal, and challenge for cause: challenge principal is that which
the law allows without cause alleged, or farther examination;
as a prisoner at the bar, arraigned upon felony, may peremp-
torily challenge to the number of twenty, one after another,
of the jury empannelled upon him, alleging no cause. cowel.
you are mine enemy, i make my challenge,
you shall not be my judge.
cha'llenger. m. s. [from challenge.]
1. one that defies or summons another to combat.
young man, have you challenged charles the wrestler —
shakespeare,
no, fair princess; he is the general challenger. shakesp.
death was denounc'd ;
he took the summons, void of fear,
and unconcernedly cast his eyes around, -
as if to find and dare the griefly challenger. dryden.
2. one that claims superiority.
whose worth
stood challenger on mount of all the age,
for her perfections. shakespeare.
3. a claimant; one that requires something as of right.
earnest challengers there are of trial, by some publick dis-
putation. hooker.
chaly leate. adj. [from chaly's, lat. steel j impregnated
with iron or steel; having the qualities of steel.
the diet ought to strengthen the solids, allowing spices and
wine, and the use of chalybeate waters. a buthnot on diet.
chama de. m. s. [french.) the beat of the drum which
declares a surrender.
several french battalions made a shew of resistance; but,
upon our preparing to fill up a little fosse, in order to attack
ti,em, they beat the chamade, and sent us charte blanche.
addison.
cha'mber. m. s. [chambre, fr. camera, lat. siamir, welch )
i. an apartment in a house; generally used for those appropriat-
ed to lodging.
bid them come forth, and hear me,
or at their chamber door i'll beat the drum,
till it cry sleep to death. shakespeare.
when we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two,
of his own chamber. shakespeare.
a natural cave in a rock may have something not much un-
like to parlours or chambers. bentley.
2. any retired room.
the dark caves of death, and chambers of the grave. prior.
3. any cavity or hollow.
petit has, from an examination of the figure of the eye, ar-
gued against the possibility of a film's existence in the poste-
riour chamber. sharp.
4. a court of justice.
in the imperial chamber this vulgar answer is not admitted,
viz. i do not believe it, as the matter is propounded and al-
leged. ayliffe's parergon.
5. the lower part of a gun where the charge is lodged.
t. a species of great gun.
names given them, as cannons, demi-cannons, chambers, ar-
quebuse, musket, &amp;c. camden's remains.
7. the cavity where the powder is lodged in a mine.
to chamber. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to be wanton ; to intrigue.
let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drun-
kenness, not in chambering and wantonness. rom.
2. to reside as in the chamber.
the best blood chamber'd in his bosom. shakespeare.
chamberer. m. s. [from chamber.] a man of intrigue.
i have not those soft parts of conversation,
that chamberers have. shakespeare.
chamberfellow. n.s.. [from chamber and follow.] one that
lics in the same chamber.
it is my fortune to have a chambefellow, with whom i agree
very well in many sentiments. spectator.
cha'mber lain. m. s. [from chamber.]
1. lord great chamberlain of england is the sixth officer of the
crown ; a considerable part of his function is at a coronation;
to him belongs the provision of every thing in the house of
lords; he disposes of the sword of state; under him are the
gentleman usher of the black rod, yeomen ushers, and door-
keepers. to this office the duke of ancaster makes an he-
reditary claim. chambers.
2. lord chamberlain of the houshold has the oversight of all offi-
cers belonging to the king's chambers, except the precinet of
the bedchamber. chambers.
humbly complaining to her deity,
got my lord chamberlain his liberty. shakespeare.
he was made lord steward, that the staff of chamberlain might
be put into the hands of his brother. clarendon.
a patriot is a fool in every age,
whom all lord chamberlains allow the stage.
3. a servant who has the care of the chambers.
- think'st thou,
that the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlains
will put thy shirt on warm 2 shakespeare.
when duncan is asleep, his two chamberlains
we will with wine and wastel convince. shakespeare.
he serv'd at first aemilia's chamberlain. dryden's fables.
4. a receiver of rents and revenues; as, chamberlain of the ex-
chequer, of chester, of the city of london, chambers.
chamberlainship. m. s. [from chamberlain..] the office of
a chamberlain.
cha m ber maid. m. s. [from chamber and maid.] a maid whose
business is to dress a lady, and wait in her chamber.
men will not hiss,
the chambermaid was named ciss. ben. johnson.
some course country wench, almost decay’d,
trudges to town, and first turns chambermaid. pope.
when he doubted whether a word were intelligible or no,
he used to consult one of his lady's chambermaids. swift.
if these nurses ever presume to entertain the girls with the
common follies practised by chambermaids among us, they are
publickly whipped. swift.
to cha'mblet. v. a. [from camelot. see camelor.] to
vary; to variegate.
some have the veins more varied and chambleted; as oak,
whereof wainscot is made. bacon's natural history.
chambrel of a horse. the joint or bending of the upper part
of the hinder leg. farrier's dia.
chame'leon. n.s. [xzooxsww.]
the chameleon has four feet, and on each foot three claws.
its tail is long; with this, as well as with its feet, it fastens
itself to the branches of trees. its tail is flat, its nose long,
in an obtuse point; its back is sharp, its skin plaited, and
jagged like a saw from the neck to the last joint of the tail,
and upon its head it has something like a comb; like a fish,
it has no neck. some have asserted, that it lives only upon
air; but it bas been observed to feed on flies, catched with its
tongue, which is about ten inches long, and three thick;
made of white flesh, round, but flat at the end ; or hollow
and open, resembling an elephant's trunk. it also shrinks,
and grows longer. this animal is said to assume the colour
of those things to which it is applied ; but our modern ob-
servers assure us, that its natural colour, when at rest and in
the shade, is a bluish grey; though some are yellow, and
others green, but both of a smaller kind. when it is ex-
posed to the sun, the grey changes into a darker grey, inclin-
ing to a dun colour, and its parts, which have least of the
light upon them, are changed into spots of different colours.
the grain of its skin, when the light doth not shine upon it,
is like cloth mixed with many colours. sometimes when it
is handled, it seems speckled with dark spots, inclining to
green. if it be put upon a black hat, it appears to be of a
violet colour; and sometimes if it be wrapped up in linen,
it is white; but it changes colour only in some parts of the
body. calmet.
a chameleon is a creature about the bigness of an ordinary
lizard; his head unproportionably big, and his eyes great; he
moveth his head without writhing of his neck, which is inflex-
ble, as a hog doth ; his back crooked, his skin spotted with
little tumours, less eminent nearer the belly; his tail slender
and long; on each foot he hath five fingers, three on the out-
side, and two on the inside; his tongue of a marvellous length
in respect of his body, and hollow at the end, which he will
launch out to prey upon flies; of colour green, and of a dusky
yellow, brighter and whiter towards the belly; yet spotted with
blue, white, and red. bacon's natural history.
i can add colours ev'n to the chameleon;
change shapes with proteus, for advantage. shakoff.
one part devours the other, and leaves not so much as a
mouthful of that popular air, which the chameleons gasp after.
decay of piety.
the thin chameleon, fed with air, receives
pope.
the colour of the thing to which he cleaves. dryden.
as the chameleon, which is known
to have no colours of his own,
but borrows from his neighbour's hue
his white, or black, his green, or blue. p, for.
to cha'mfer. v. a. [chambrer, fr.] to channel; to make
furrows or gutters upon a column.
chamf er. q n.s.. [from to chamfer.] a small surrow or gut-
cha mfret. { ter on a column.
chamlet. m. s. [see camelot.] stuff made originally of
camel's hair.
to make a chamlet, draw five lines, waved overthwart, if
your diapering confist of a double line. peacham on drawing.
2 cha mois.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 365</div><p class="text">c h a
c h a
o
o
cha'mois. m. s. [chamois, fr.] an animal of the goat kind,
whose skin is made into soft leather, called among us shammy.
• these are the beasts which you shall eat; the ox, the sheep,
and wild ox, and the chamois. - deut.
cha/mom1l e. m. s. [x,xuzio.7xow.] an odoriferous plant."
cool violets, and orpine growing still,
embathed balm, and cheerful galingale,
fresh costmary, and breathful chamomile,
dull poppy, and drink quick’ning setuale. spenser.
for though the chamomile, the more it is trodden on the fas-
ter it grows; yet youth, the more it is wasted, the sooner it
wears. shakespeare.
posset drink with chamomile flowers. floyer on the humours.
to champ. v. a. [champayer, fr. j
1. to bite with a frequent action of the teeth.
coffee and opium are taken down, tobacco but in smoke, and
betel is but champed in the mouth with a little lime. bacon.
the fiend reply'd not, overcome with rage;
but, like a proud steed rein'd, went haughty on,
champing his iron curb. milton's paradise loft,
at his command,
the steeds caparison'd with purple stand,
and champ betwixt their teeth the foaming gold.
2. to devour, with violent action of the teeth.
a tobacco pipe happened to break in my mouth, and the
pieces left such a delicious roughness on my tongue, that i
champed up the remaining part. spectator.
to champ. v. n. to perform frequently the action of biting.
muttering and champing, as though his cud had troubled him,
he gave occasion to musidoris to come near him. sidney.
they began to repent of that they had done, and irefully to
champ upon the bit they had taken into their mouths. hooker.
his jaws did not answer equally to one another; but by his
frequent motion and champing with them, it was evident they
were neither luxated nor fractured. joseman.
champaign. m. s. [campagne, fr.] a flat open country.
in the abuses of the customs, meseems, you have a fair cham-
paign laid open to you, in which you may at large stretch out
your discourse. spenser's state of ireland.
of all these bounds,
with shadowy forests and with champaigns rich'd,
we make thee lady. shakespeare.
if two bordering princes have their territory meeting on an
open champaign, the more mighty will continually seek occasion
to extend his limits unto the further border thereof. raleigh.
| sir john norris maintained a retreat without disarray, by the
fpace of some miles, part of the way champaign, unto the city
of gaunt, with less loss of men than the enemy. bacon.
from his side two rivers flow’d,
th’ one winding, th’ other straight, and left between
fair champaign, with less rivers interven'd. -
cha'mpert.ors. n.s.. [from champerty. in law.] such as move
dryden.
suits, or cause them to be moved, either by their own or others .
procurement, and pursue, at their proper costs, to have part of
the land in contest, or part of the gains.
any man in his suit while depending, upon condition to have
part of the thing when it is recovered. cowel.
champi'gnon. n.s. [champignon, fr.] a kind of mushroom.
he viler friends with doubtful mushrooms treats,
secure for you, himself champignons eats. dryden.
it has the resemblance of a large champignon before it is open-
ed, branching out into a large round knob. jwoodward.
champion. n.s.. [champion, fr. campio, low lat.]
1. a man who undertakes a cause in single combat.
in many armies, the matter should be tried by duel be-
tween two champions. - -
for hot, cold, moist, and dry, four champions fierce,
strive here for mast'ry, and to battle bring
their embryon atoms. milton's paradise loft.
o light of trojans, and support of troy,
thy father's champion, and thy country's joy | dryden.
at length the adverse admirals appear,
the two bold champions of each country's right. dryden.
2. a hero; a stout warriour; one bold in contest.
a stouter champion never handled sword. shakespeare.
this makes you incapable of conviction, and they applaud
themselves as zealous champions for truth, when indeed they
are contending for errour. locke.
3. in law.
in our common law, champion is taken no less for him that
trieth the combat in his own case, than for him that fighteth
in the case of another. - - - cowel.
to champion. v. a. [from the noun..] to challenge to the
combat. -
. the seed of banquo, kings
rather than so, come fate, into the list,
and champion me to th’ utterance. shakspeare.
chance. n.s. [chance, fr.]
1. fortune ; the cause of fortuitous events.
as th' unthought accident is guilty
of what we wildly do, so we profess o
vol. i.
milton.
cowel.
champerty. m. s. [champart, fr. in law.] a maintenance of .
chanceful. adj. [chance and full.] hazardous. out of use.
bacon. .
ourselves to be the slaves of chance, and flies
of every wind that blows. shakoffears.
the only man, of all that chance could bring
to meet my arms, was worth the conquering. drydon.
- chance is but a mere name, and really nothing in itself; a
conception of our minds, and only a compendious way of speak-
ing, whereby we would express, that such effects as are com-
monly attributed to chance, were verily produced by their true
and proper causes, but without their design to produce them.
* bentley.
2. fortune; the act of fortune; what fortune may bring: applied
to persons.
these things are commonly not observed, but left to take
their chance. bacon's essays.
3. accident; casual occurrence; fortuitous event.
to say a thing is a chance or casualty, as it relates to second
causes, is not profaneness, but a great truth; as signifying no
more, than that there are some events besides the knowledge
and power of second agents. south.
the beauty i beheld, has struck me dead;
unknowingly she strikes, and kills by chance;
poison is in her eyes, and death in ev'ry glance.
all nature is but art, unknown to thee;
all chance direction, which thou canst not see. poe.
4. event; success; luck: applied to things.
now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
drydon.
be like our warranted quarrel ! shakespeare.
5. misfortune; unlucky accident.
you were us’d
to say, extremity was the trier of spirits,
that common chances common men could bear. . shakes.
6. possibility of any occurrence.
a chance, but chance may lead, where i may meet
some wand'ring spirit of heav'n, by fountain side,
or in thick shade retir’d. milton's paradis: los”.
then your ladyship might have a chance to escape this ad-
dress. swift.
chance. adj. [it is seldom used but in composition.] happen-
ing by chance.
now should they part, malicious tongues would say,
they met like chance companions on the way. dryden.
i would not take the gift,
which, like a toy dropt from the hands of fortune,
lay for the next chance comer. dryden.
to chance. v. n. [from the noun..] to happen; to fall out;
to fortune.
think what a chance thou chances on ; but think;
thou hast thy mistress still. - shakespeare.
how chance thou art not with the prince thy brother
shakespeare.
ay, casca, tell us what hath chanc'd to-day,
that caesar looks so sad. shakespeare.
he chanced upon divers of the turks victuallers, whom he
easily took. knolles's history of the turks.
i chose the safer sea, and chanc'd to find
a river's mouth impervious to the wind. pope's odsey.
myself would offer you to accompan
in this adventurous chanceful jeopardy.
spenser.
- chance-medley. m. s. [from chance and medley.] in law.
the casual slaughter of a man, not altogether without the
fault of the slayer, when ignorance or negligence is joined
with the chance; as if a man lop trees by an highway fide, by
which many usually travel, and cast down a bough, not giving
warning to take heed thereof, by which bough one passing by is
slain: in this case he offends, because he gave no warning, that
the party might have taken heed to himself. cowel.
if such an one should have the ill hap, at any time, to strike
a man dead with a smart saying, it ought, in all reason and con-
science, to be judged but a chance medley. - south.
cha'nce able. adj. [from chance..] accidental.
the trial thereof was cut off by the chanceable coming thither
of the king of iberia. - sidney.
cha'ncel. m. s. [from cancelli, lat. lettices, with which the
chancel was inclosed.] the castern part of the church, in
which the altar is placed.
whether it be allowable or no, that the minister should say
service in the chancel, hooker:
the chancel of this church is vaulted with a single stone of
four feet in thickness, and an hundred and fourteen in circum-
ference. addison on italy.
cha'ncellor. n. s. scancellarius, lat. chancellier, fr. from can-
cellare, literas vel scriptum linea per medium duffa damnare, and
seemeth of itself likewise to be derived a cancellis, which fig-
nify all one with x+yxxides, a lettice; that is, a thing made
of wood or iron bars, laid crossways one over another, so
that a man may see through them in and out. it may be
thought that judgment seats were compassed in with bars, to
defend the judges and other officers from the press of the mul-
titude, and yet not to hinder any man's view.
2uastus regni tibi cancellarius angli,
primus soliciti mente petendus erit.
4 g file
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 366</div><p class="text">c h a
hic eff, qui regni leges cancellat iniguas,
et mandata pii principis acqua facit.
verses of nigel do soot-kre to the bishop of ely, chan-
- cellor to richard i.] -
1. the highest judge of the law.
cancellarius, at the first, signified the registers or actuaries in
court; grapharios, soil. qui conscribendis 3 excipiendis judicum
actis dant operam. but this name is greatly advanced, and not
only in other kingdoms but in this, is given to him that is the
chief judge in causes of property; for the chancellor hath power
to moderate and temper the written law, and subjecteth him-
self only to the law of nature and conscience. cowel.
turn out, you rogue, how like a beast you lie:
go, buckle to the law: is this an hour
to stretch your limbs: you'll ne'er be chancellor. dryden jun.
aristides was a person of the strictest justice, and best ac-
quainted with the laws, as well as forms of their government;
so that he was in a manner chancellor of athens. swift.
2. chancellor in the ecclesiastical court. a bishop's lawyer;
a man trained up in the civil and canon law, to direct the bi-
shops in matters of judgment, relating as well to criminal as to
civil affairs in the church. ayliff’s parergon.
3. chancellor of a cathedral. a dignitary, whose office it is
to superintend the regular exercise of devotion.
4. chancellor of the exchequer. an officer who sits in that
court, and in the exchequer chamber. he has power, with
others, to compound for forfeitures on penal statutes, bonds
and recognizances entered into by the king. he has great
authority in managing the royal revenue, and in matters of
first fruits. the court of equity is in the exchequer chamber,
and is held before the lord treasurer, chancelor, and barons, as
that of common law before the barons only. cowel. chamb.
5. chancellor of an university. the principal magistrate,
who, at oxford, holds his office during life, but, at cam-
bridge, he may be eleeed every three years.
6. chancellor of the order of the garter, and other military
orders, is an officer who seals the commissions and mandates of
the chapter and assembly of the knights, keeps the register of
their deliberations, and delivers their acts under the seal of the
order. - chambers.
cha'ncellors hip. m. s. the office of chancellor.
the sunday after more gave up his chancellorship of england,
he came himself to his wife's pew, and used the usual words
of his gentleman-usher, madam, my lord is gone. camden.
cha'nc ery. n.{ [from chancellor; probably chancellery; then
shortened.] the court of equity and conscience, moderating
the rigour of other courts, that are tied to the letter of the
law; whereof the lord chancellor of england is the chief
judge, or the lord keeper of the great seal. cowel.
the contumacy and contempt of the party must be signified
in the court of lo, by the bishops letters under the seal
episcopal. ayliffe's parergon.
chatncre. m. s. [chancre, fr.] an ulcer usually arising from
venereal maladies.
it is possible he was not well cured, and would have relapsed
with a chancre. wiseman.
cha'n crous. adj. [from chancre.] having the qualities of a
chancre ; ulcerous.
you may think i am too strict in giving so many internals
in the cure of so small an ulcer as a chancre, or rather a chan-
crous callus. wiseman.
chandeli‘er. m. s. [chandelicr; fr.] a branch for candles.
cha'ndler. m. s. [chandelier, fr.] an artisan whose trade it is
to make candles, or a person who sells them.
the sack that thou hast drunken me, would have bought
me lights as good cheap at the dearest chandlers in europe.
shakespeare.
but whether black or lighter dies are worn,
the chandler's basket, on his shoulder born,
with tallow spots thy coat. gay.
chanfrin. m. s. sold french.] the forepart of the head of
a horse, which extends from under the ears, along the interval
between the eyebrows, down to his nose. farrier's dic7.
to change. v. a. [changer, fr. cambia, lat.]
1. to put one thing in the place of another.
he that cannot look into his own estate, had need choose
well whom he employeth, and change them often ; for new are
more timorous, and less subtile. bacon's essays.
2. to quit any thing for the sake of another: with for before the
thing taken or received.
persons grown up in the belief of any religion, cannot change
that for another, without applying their understanding duly to
consider and compare both. south.
the french and we still change; but here's the curse,
they change for better, and we change for worse. dryden.
3. to give and take reciprocally: with the particle with before
the person to whom we give, and from whom we take.
to secure thy content, look upon those thousands, with
whom thou wouldst not, for any interest, change thy fortune
and condition. taylor's rule of living holy.
4. to alter; to make other than it was.
thou shalt not see me blush,
nor change my countenance for this arrest;
a heart unspotted is not easily daunted. shakespeare.
whatsoever is brought upon thee, take chearfully, and be
patient when thou art changed to a low estate. ecclus.
for the elements were changed in themselves by a kind of
harmony, like as in a psaltery notes change the name of the
tune, and yet are always sounds. wisdom.
5. to mend the disposition or mind.
i would she were in heaven, so she could
intreat some pow'r to change this currish jew. shakes.
6. to discount a larger piece of money into several smaller.
a shopkeeper might be able to change a guinea, or a moi-
dore, when a customer comes for a crown's worth of goods.
- swift.
7. to change a horse, or to change hand, is to turn or bear the
horse's head from one hand to the other, from the left to the
right, or from the right to the left. farrier's dio.
to change. v. n.
1. to undergo change; to suffer alteration: as, his fortune may
soon change, though he is now so secure.
one julia, that his changing thought forgot,
would better fit his chamber. shakespeare.
2. to change, as the moon; to begin a new monthly revolution.
i am weary of this moon; would he would change. shałon.
change. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. an alteration of the state of anything.
since i saw you last,
there is a change upon you. shakespeare.
2. a succession of one thing in the place of another.
o wond’rous changes of a fatal scene,
still varying to the last ! dryden.
nothing can cure this part of ill breeding, but change and
*: of company, and that of persons above us. docke.
.mpires by various turns shall rise and set;
while thy abandon'd tribes shall only know
a diff'rent master, and a change of time.
hear how timotheus' various lays surprize,
and bid alternate passions fall and rise
while, at each change, the son of libyan jove
now burns with glory, and then melts with love. pope.
3. the time of the moon in which it begins a new monthly re-
volution.
take seeds or roots, and set some of them immediately after
the change, and others of the same kind immediately after the
full. bacon's natural history.
4. novelty; a state different from the former.
the hearts
of all his people shall revolt from him,
and kiss the lips of unacquainted change. shakespeare.
our fathers did, for change, to france repair,
and they, for change, will try our english air. dryden.
5. [in ringing.] an alteration of the order in which a set of
bells is sounded.
four bells admit twenty-four changes in ringing, and five
bells one hundred and twenty. holder's elements of speech.
easy it may be to contrive new postures, and ring other
changes upon the same bells. norris,
6. that which makes a variety; that which may be used for an-
other of the same kind.
i will now put forth a riddle unto you; if you can find it
out, then i will give you thirty sheets, and thirty change of
garments. judges.
7. small money, which may be given for larger pieces.
wood buys up our old halfpence, and from thence the pre-
sent want of change arises ; but supposing not one farthing of
change in the nation, five and twenty thousand pounds would
be sufficient. swift.
8. change for exchange; a place where persons meet to traffick
and transact mercantile affairs.
the bar, the bench, the change, the schools and pulpits
are full of quacks, jugglers and plagiaries. l’estrange.
cha'ngeable. adj. [from change.]
1. subject to change; fickle; inconstant.
a steady mind will admit steady methods and counsels; there
is no measure to be taken of a changeable humour. l’estrange.
as i am a man, i must be changeable; and sometimes the
gravest of us all are so, even upon ridiculous accidents. dryd.
2. posfible to be changed. -
the fibrous or vascular parts of vegetables seem scarce
changeable in the alimentary duct. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. having the quality of exhibiting different appearances.
now the taylor make thy doublet of changeable taffata; for
thy mind is a very opal. shakespeare.
cha'ngeableness. n.s.. [from changeable.]
1. inconstancy; fickleness.
at length he betrothed himself to one worthy to be liked, if
any worthiness might excuse so unworthy a changeablenes. sidn.
there is no temper of mind more unmanly than that change-
ablenes, with which we are too justly branded by all our neigh-
bours. adaison's freeholder.
4. 2. sus-
prior.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 367</div><p class="text">c h a
*.
o
to:
o
to
*
c h a
2. susceptibility of change. -
if how long they are to continue in force, be no where ex-
pressed, then have we no light to direct our judgment concern-
ing the changeablenos; or immutability of them, but considering
the nature and quality of such laws. hooker.
cha'ngeably. adv [from changeable.] inconstantly.
cha'ngefu l. adj. [from change and full.] full of change;
inconstant ; uncertain; mutable; subject to variation; fickle.
unfound plots, and changeful orders, are daily devised for
her good, yet never effectually prosecuted. spenser.
britain, changeful as a child at play,
now calls in princes, and now turns away. pope.
changeling. m. s. [from change; the word arises from an odd
superstitious opinion, that the fairies seal away children, and
put others that are ugly and stupid in their places.]
2. a child left or taken in the place of another.
and her base elfin breed there for thee left:
such men do changelings call, so chang'd by fairies theft.
spenser's fairy queen.
she, as her attendant, hath
a lovely boy stol'n from an indian king;
she never had so sweet a changeling.
2. an idiot; a fool ; a natural.
changelings and fools of heav'n, and thence shut out,
shakspeare.
wildly we roam in discontent about. dryden.
would any one be a changeling, because he is less deter-
mined by wise considerations than a wise man locke.
3. one apt to change ; a waverer.
offickle changelings and poor discontents
that gape and rub the elbow at the news
of hurly-burly innovation.
'twas not long
before from world to world they swung;
as they had turn’d from side to side,
and as they changelings liv'd, they died. hudibras.
4. anything changed and put in the place of another: in ludi-
crous specch.
i folded the writ up in form of the other,
| subscrib'd it, gave the impression, plac'd it safely,
the changeling never known. shakespeare.
cha'nger. m. s. [from change.] one that is employed in
changing or discounting money; ongo.
cha'nnel. m. s. scanal, fr. canalis, lat.]
1. the hollow bed of running waters.
it is not so easy, now that things are grown into an habit,
and have their certain course, to change the channel, and turn
their streams another way. spenser's state of ireland,
draw them to tyber's bank, and weep your tears
into the channel, till the lowest stream
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
so th’ injur'd sea, which, from her wonted course,
to gain some acres, avarice did force;
if the new banks, neglected once, decay,
no longer will from her old channel stay. waller.
had not the said strata been dislocated, some of them elevat-
ed, and others depressed, there would have been no cavity or
channel to give reception to the water of the sea. woodward.
the tops of mountains and hills will be continually washed
down by the rains, and the channels of rivers abraded by the
streams. bentley.
2. any cavity drawn longways.
complaint and hot desires, the lover's hell,
and scalding tears, that wore a channel where they fell.
dryden's fables.
. a strait or narrow sea, between two countries: as the british
channel between britain and france; st. george's channel be-
tween britain and ireland.
4. a gutter or furrow of a pillar. -
to cha’nnel. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut any thing in
channels.
no more shall trenching war channel her fields,
nor bruise her flowrets with the armed hoofs -
of hostile paces. shakespeare.
the body of this column is perpetually chanuelled, like a
thick plaited gown. otton's archite&amp;ure.
torrents, and loud impetuous cataracts,
roll down the lofty mountain's channel'd fides,
and to the vale convey their foaming tides.
to chant. v. a. [chanter, fr.]
1. to fing. -
wherein the chearful birds of sundry kind
do chant sweet musick. fairy queen.
2. to celebrate by song.
the poets chant it in the theatres, the shepherds in the
mountains. bramhall.
3. to fing in the cathedral service.
t. chant. v. n. to fing; to make melody with the voice.
they chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to them-
selves instruments of musick. amos, vi. 7.
heav'n heard his song, and hasten’d his relief;
and chang'd to snowy plumes his hoary hair,
and wing'd his flight, to chant aloft in air. pryden.
blackmore.
chant. n.s.. [from the verb.] song; melody.
a pleasant grove,
- with chant of tuneful birds resounding loud. milton.
cha'nter. n. s. [from chant..] a finger; a songster.
you curious chanters of the wood,
that warble forth dame nature's lays. j/otton.
jove's etherial lays, resistless fire,
the chanter's soul, and raptur'd song inspire,
instinet divine! nor blame severe his choice,
warbling the grecian woes with harp and voice. pope.
cha'ntic leer. m. s. [from chanter and clair, fr j. the name
given to the cock, from the clearness and loudness of his crow.
and chearful chanticle, r, with his note shrill,
had warned once, that phoebus' firy car
in haste was climbing up the eastern hill. spenser.
hark, hark, i hear
the strain of strutting chanticleer.
stay, the chearful chanticleer -
tells you that the time is near. ben. johnson.
these verses were mentioned by chaucer, in the description
of the sudden stir, and panical fear, when chanticleer the cock
was carried away by reynard the fox. camden's remains,
within this homestead liv'd without a peer,
for crowing loud, the noble chanticleer. dryden's fables,
cha'ntress. m. s. [from chant..] a woman finger.
sweet bird, that shun'st the noise of folly,
most musical, most melancholy,
. thee, chantres of the woods among, -
i woo to hearthy even-song. milton,
cha'ntry. m. s. [from chant.] - *
chantry is a church or chapel endowed with lands, or other
yearly revenue, for the maintenance of one or more priests,
daily to sing mass for the souls of the donors, and such others
as they appoint. cowel.
now go with me, and with this holy man,
into the chantry by ;
and, underneath that consecrated roof,
plight me the full assurance of your faith.
chaos. n.s.. [chaos, lat. x26'.]
1. the mass of matter supposed to be in confusion before it was
divided by the creation into its proper classes and elements.
the whole universe would have been a confused chaos, with-
out beauty or order. bentley.
2. confusion ; irregular mixture.
had i followed the worst, i could not have brought church
and state to such a chaos of confusions, as some have done.
- king charles.
their reason sleeps, but mimick fancy wakes,
supplies her parts, and wild ideas takes -
from words and things, ill sorted, and misjoin'd, , ,
the anarchy of thought, and chaos of the mind. dryden.
3. any thing where the parts are undistinguished.
we shall have nothing but darkness and a chaos within,
whatever order and light there be in things without us. locke.
pleas'd with a work, where nothing's just or fit,
one glaring chaos and wild heap of wit. pope.
chao(tick. adj. [from chaos.] resembling chaos; confused.
when the terraqueous globe was in a chaotick state, and the
earthy particles subsided, then those several beds were, in all
probability, reposited in the earth. derham.
to chap. v. a. [kappen, dutch, to cut. this word seems ori-
ginally the same with chop; nor were they probably distin-
guished at first, otherwise than by accident; but they have now
a meaning something different, though referable to the same
original sense.] to break into hiatus, or gapings.
it weakened more and more the arch of the earth, drying it
immoderately, and chapping it in sundry places. }.
then would unbalanc'd heat licentious reign,
crack the dry hill, and chap the russet plain. blackmore.
chap, n.s.. [from the verb.] a cleft; an aperture; an open-
ing ; a gaping; a chink.
what moisture the heat of the summer sucks out of the
earth, it is repaid in the rains of the next winter; and what
chaps are made in it, are filled up again. burnet's theory.
chap. n.s. [this is not often used, except by anatomists, in the
ngular.] the upper or under part of a beast's mouth.
froth fills his chaps, he sends a grunting sound,
and part he churns, and part befoams the ground. dryden.
the nether chap in the male skeleton is half an inch broader
than in the female. grew's moseum.
chape. m. s. [chappe, fr.]
1. the catch of anything by which it is held in its place; as the
hook of a scabbard by which it sticks in the belt; the point
by which a buckle is held to the back strap.
this is monsieur parolles, that had the whole theory of the
war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in the chape of his
dagger. shakespeare.
2. a brass or filver tip or case, that strengthens the end of the
scabbard of a sword. • philips's world of word.
cha'pel. m. s. [capella, lat.]
a chapel is of two sorts, either adjoining to a church, as a
parcel of the same, which men of worth build, or else fr.
ronn
shakspeare.
shakspeare.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 368</div><p class="text">from the mother church, where the parish is wide, and is com-
monly called a chapel of ease, because it is built for the ease of
one or more parishioners, that dwell too far from the church,
and is served by some inferiour curate, provided for at the
charge of the rector, or of such as have benefit by it, as the
composition or custom is. cowel.
she went in among those few trees, so closed in the tops to-
gether, as they might seem a little chapel. sidney.
will you dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go
with you to your chapel? shakespeare.
where truth erecteth her church, he helps errour to rear
up a chapel hard by: * howel.
a chapel will i build with large endowment. drydon.
a free chapel is such as is founded by the king of england.
ayliffe's parergon.
cha'peless. adj. [from chape.] wanting a chape.
an old rusty sword, with a broken hilt, and chapels, with
two broken points. shakespeare.
chape'llan.y. m. s. [from chapel.] -
a chapellany is usually said to be that which does not subsist
of itself, but is built and founded within some other church,
and is dependent thereon. ayliffe's parergon.
cha'pelry. n.s.. [from chapel.] the jurisdiction or bounds of
a chapel.
cha'peron. m. s. [french.] a kind of hood or cap worn
by the knights of the garter in their habits.
i will omit the honourable habiliments, as robes of state,
parliament robes, chaperons, and caps of state. camden.
cha'pfaln. adj. [from chap and faln.] having the mouth
shrunk.
a chapfaln beaver loosely hanging by
the cloven helm. - dryden.
cha'piter. n.f. [chapiteau, fr.] the upper part or capital of
a pillar. -
*. overlaid their chapiters and their fillets with gold. exod.
cha plain. m. s. scapellanus, latin.]
1. he that performs divine service in a chapel, and attends the
king, or other person, for the instruction of him and his fa-
mily, to read prayers, and preach. cowel.
wishing me to permit -
john de la court, my chaplain, a choice hour,
to hear from him a matter of some moment. shakesp.
chaplain, away ! thy priesthood saves thy life. shakesp.
2. one that officiates in domestick worship.
a chief governour can never fail of some worthless illiterate
chaplain, fond of a title and precedence. swift.
cha'plain ship. n.s.. [from chaplain.]
i. the office or business of a chaplain.
2. the possession or revenue of a chapel.
cha pless, adj. [from chap.] without any flesh about the
mouth,
now chaples, and knocked about the muzzard with a sex-
ton's spade. shakespeare.
shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
with reeky shanks and yellow chaples, bones.
cha'plet. n.s. [chapelet, #.
1. a garland or wreath to be worn about the head.
upon old hyems’ chin, and icy crown,
an od’rous chaplet of sweet summer's buds,
is, as in mockery, set.
i strangely long to know,
whether they nobler chaplets wear,
those that their mistress’ scorn did bear,
or those that were us'd kindly.
all the quire was grac'd
with chaplets green, upon their foreheads plac'd. dryden.
the winding ivy chaplet to invade,
and folded fern, that your fair forehead shade. dryden.
they made an humble chaplet for the king. swift.
2. a string of beads used in the romish church for keeping an
account of the number rehearsed of pater-nosters and ave-ma-
rias. a different sort of chaplets is also used by the mahome-
tans, -
3. [in architeoture.] a little moulding carved into round beads,
pearls, or olives.
4. "[in horsemanship.] a couple of stirrup leathers, mounted
each of them with a stirrup, and joining at top in a sort of lea-
ther buckle, which is called the head of the chaplet, by which
they are fastened to the pummel of a saddle, after they have
been adjusted to the length and bearing of the rider.
o farrier’s dic7.
-
shakesp.
shakspeare.
suckling.
5. a tuft of feathers on the peacock's head.
cha'pman. m. s. sceapman, sax.] a cheapner; one that of-
fers as a purchaser.
fair diomede, you do as chapmen do,
dispraise the thing that you intend to buy. shakespeare.
yet have they seen the maps, and bought 'em too,
and understand 'em as most chapmen do. ben. johnson.
there was a colle&amp;tion of certain rare manuscripts, exqui-
sitely written in arabick; these were upon sale to the jesuits at
antwerp, liquourish chapmen of such wares, watton.
- 5
*
c h 'a
he dressed two, and carried them to samos, as the likeliest
place for a chapman. l’e/orange.
their chapmen they betray,
their shops are dens, the buyer is their prey.
chaps. n. s. [from chap.]
1. the mouth of a beast of prey.
so on the downs we see
a hasten’d hare from greedy greyhound go,
and past all hope, his chaps to frustrate so. sidney.
open your mouth; you cannot tell who's your friend;
open your chaps again. shakespeare.
their whelps at home expe&amp;t the promis'd food,
and long to temper their dry chaps in blood.
2. it is used in contempt for the mouth of a man.
chapt. }particip. tas [from to chap.]
dryden.
dryden.
cha(ppe d.
like a table upon which you may run your finger without
rubs, and your nail cannot find a joint; not horrid, rough,
wrinkled, gaping, or chapt. ben. johnson.
cooling ointment made, o
which on their sun-burnt cheeks and their chapt skins they
laid. dryden’s fable;
cha'pter. m. s. [chapitre, fr. from capitulum, lat.] -
1. a division of a book.
the first book we divide into three se&amp;tions; whereof the
first is these three chapters. burnet's theory.
if these mighty men at chapter and verse, can produce then
no scripture to overthrow our church ceremonies, i will under-
take to produce scripture enough to warrant them. south.
2. from hence comes the proverbial phrase, to the end of the chap-
ter; throughout ; to the end.
money does all things; for it gives and it takes away, it
makes honest men and knaves, fools and philosophers; and so
forward, mutatis mutanais, to the end of the chapter, l’e/?range.
3. chapter, from capitulum, signifieth, in our common law, as in
the canon law, whence it is borrowed, an assembly of the clergy
of a cathedral or collegiate church. cowel.
the abbot takes the advice and consent of his chapter, before
he enters on any matters of importance. addison on may.
4. the place where delinquents receive discipline and correotion.
ayliffe's parergom.
5. a decretal epistle. a liffe's parergon.
6. chapter-house; the place in which assemblies of the chergy
are held.
though the canonical constitution does not strictly require it
to be made in the cathedral, yet it matters not where it be made,
either in the choir or chapter-house. ayliffo's parergon.
chaptr el. m. s. [probably from chapiter.] the capitals of pil-
lars, or pillasters, which support arches, commonly called im-
ofts.
p let the keystone break without the arch, so much as you
project over the jaums with the chaptrels. amoxon.
char. m. s. [of uncertain derivation.] a fish found only in
winander meer in lancashire.
to char. v. a. [see char coal.] to burn wood to a black
cinder. - - -
spraywood, in charring, parts into various cracks. j/aca'w.
char. m. s. [ cynne, work, sax. lye. it is derived by skinner,
either from charge, fr. business, or canc, sax. care, or keeren,
dutch, to sweep.] work done by the day; a single job or
task. -
a meer woman, and commanded
by such poor passion, as the maid that milks,
and does the meanest chars.
she, harvest done, to char work did aspire; -
meat, drink, and twopence, were her daily hire. dryden
to char. v., n. [from the noun..] to work at others houses
by the day, without being a hired servant. -
char-wo man. m. s. [from char and woman.] a woman hired
accidently for odd work, or single days. -
get three or four char-women to attend you consantly in the
kitchen, whom you pay only with the broken meat, a few
coals, and all the cinders. swift.
cha'racter, n.s.. [charaffer, lat. x2:2xt?:..] *
1. a mark; a stamp ; a representation. *
in outward also her resembling less
his image, who made both ; and less expressing
shakespeare.
o
the characier of that dominion giv'n r
o'er other creatures. paradis? off.
2. a letter used in writing or printing.
but his neat cookery g
he cut our roots in characiers. shałoszert,
the purpose is perspicuous even as substance, *
whose grossness little characiers sum up. shakesheart,
it were much to be wished, that there were throughout th:
world but one sort of character for each letter, to express it ti
the eye; and that exactly proportioned to the natural alphabe
formed in the mouth. holder's elements of speech
3. the hand or manner of writing.
i found the letter thrown in at the casement of my closet.-
you know the characier to be your brother's. shakespear,
4, 4
*
s
!
!
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 369</div><p class="text">c h a
c h a
;
:
o
so
o to
§ it t
hubt
jud
set-
*rt
4. a representation of any man as to his personal qualities.
- each drew fair characters, yet none
of these they feign'd, excels their own. denham.
homer has excelled all the heroick poets that ever wrote, in
the multitude and variety of his characters; every god that is
idmitted into his poem, acts a part which would have been
suitable to no other deity. adaison.
an account of any thing as good or bad.
this subterraneous passage is much mended, since seneca
ave so bad a charađer of it. addison on italy.
6. the person with his assemblage of qualities; a personage.
in a tragedy, or epick poem,the hero of the piece must be ad-
vanced foremost to the view of the reader or spectator; he must
outshine the rest of all the characters ; he must appear the
rince of them, like the sun in the copernican system, encom-
passed with the less noble planets. dryden.
7. personal qualitics; particular constitution of the mind.
nothing so true as what you once let fall,
most women have no characiers at all. pope.
8. adventitious qualities impressed by a post or office.
the chief honour of the magistrate consists in maintaining
the dignity of his characier by suitable actions. atterbury.
t, char act er. v. a. [from the noun..] to inscribe; to en-
rave. it seems to have had the accent formerly on the second
iyllable.
these few precepts in thy memory
see thou charađer. shakspeare.
shew me one scar charac'er'd on thy skin, shakspeare.
o rosalind these trees shall be my books,
and in their barks my thoughts i'll characier. sha&amp;searc-
the pleasing poison
the visage quite transforms of him that drinks,
and th’inglorious likeness of a beast
fixes instead, unmoulding reasons mintage,
characier'd in the face. milton.
charact eri'stical. nadj. [from characlerize.] that which
charact eri's tick. } constitutes the character, or marks the
peculiar properties of any person or thing.
there are several others that i take to have been likewise
such, to which yet i have not ventured to prefix that chargele-
ristick distinction. jwoodward on fossils.
the shining quality of an epick hero, his magnanimity, his
constancy, his patience, his piety, or whatever characieri/sical
virtue his poet gives him, raises our admiration. dryden.
charact eri'sticalness. m. s. [from characieristical j the
quality of being peculiar to a character; marking a character.
charact eri's tick. m. s. that which constitutes the charac-
ter; that which distinguishes any thing or person from
others.
this vast invention exerts itself in homer, in a manner su-
periour to that of any poet; it is the great and peculiar cha-
racierislick which distinguishes him from all others. pope.
charact eri'stick of a logarithm. the same with the index
or exponent. -
t. char act erize. v. a. [from charađer.]
1. to give a character or an account of the personal qualitics of
5-
any man. - -
it is some commendation, that we have avoided publickly to
charađerize any person, without long experience. swift.
2. to engrave, or imprint.
they may be called anticipations, prenotions, or sentiments
characterized and engraven in the soul, born with it, and grow-
ing up with it. - hale's origin of mankind.
3. to mark with a particular stamp or token.
there are faces not only individual, but gentilitious and na-
tional; european, asiatick, chinese, african, and grecian
faces are characlerized. arbuthnot on air.
cha'ract er less. adj. [from characier.] without a character.
when water drops have worn the stones of troy,
and blind oblivion swallowed cities up,
and mighty states characterloss are grated,
to dusty nothing. shakespeare.
cha'racter y. n.s.. [from characier.] impression; mark; dis-
tinetion: accented anciently on the second syllable.
fairies use flowers for their characiery. shakespeare.
all my engagements i will construe to thee,
all the characiery of my sad brows. shakespeare.
cha rcoal. n.s.. [imagined by skinner to be derived from char,
business; but, by mr. lye, from to chark, to burn..] coal made
by burning wood under turf. it is used in preparing metals.
seacoal lasts longer than charcoal; and charcoal of roots, be-
ing coaled into great pieces, lasts longer than ordinary char-
coal. bacon's natural hijo'ory.
love is a fire that burns and sparkles,
in men as nat'rally as in charcoal,
which sooty chymists stop in holes,
when out of wood they extract coals. hudibras.
is there, who, lock'd from ink and paper, scrawls
with desp'rate charcoal round his darken'd walls pope.
chard. m. s. [charde, fr.]
1. chards of artichokes are the leaves of fair artichoke plants,
o yo up all over but the top, in straw, during the
ol. 1.
autumn and winter; this makes them grow white, on so-
some of their bitterness. ors.
2. chards of bect, are plants of white beet trans, lanted, pr dus-
ing great tops, which, in the midst, have a large who, thick,
downy, and cotton-like main shoot, which is the true.” .
... sorrow.er.
to charge. v. a. [...'arger, fr. ca, care, ital. from car, a ,
lat.]
1. to entrust ; to commission for a certain purpose : it has to
before the thing entrusted.
and the captain of the guard charged joseph wit, them, 2nd
he served them. gono,...
what you have charged me with, that i have done. s.....
2. to impute as a debt: with on before the debtor.
my father's, mother's, brother’s death, i pardon :
that's somewhat sure ; a mighty sum of murder,
of innocent and kindred blood struck cff,
my prayers and penance shall discount for these,
and beg of heav'n to charge the bill on me. dry len,
3. to impute : with on before the person to whom any tasi is
imputed. ~
no more accuse thy pen, but charge the cine
on native sloth, and negligence of time. i’ry'em.
it is easy to account for the difficulties he choge, on the per-
patetick doctrine. locłe.
it is not barely the ploughman's pains, the reaper's and
thresher's toil, and the baker's sweat, is to be counted into the
bread we eat; the plough, mill, oven, or any other utensils,
must all be charged on the account of labour. loc, e.
perverse mankind whose wills, created frce,
charge all their woes on absolute decree;
all to the dooming gods their guilt translate,
and follies are miscall'd the crimes of fate. pope.
we charge that upon necesity, which was really desircd and
chosen. jo atts's logi, k.
4. to inpute to, as cost, or hazard.
he was so great an encourager of commerce, that he charg’d
himself with all the sea risk of such vesic's as carried corn to
rome in winter. a buthnot on coins.
5. to impose as a task: it has with before the thing imposed.
the gospel chargoth us with piety towards god, and justice
and charity to men, and temperance and chaft, y in reference
to ourselves. - 2 isoson.
6. to accuse; to censure.
speaking thus to you, i am so far from charging you as guilty
in this matter, that i can sincerely say, i believe the exhorta-
tion wholly needless. łpase's proparationfor death.
7. to accuse : it has with before the crime.
and his angels he charged with folly. job.
8. to challenge.
the priest shall charge her by an oath. numbers.
thou can't not, cardinal, devise a name
so slight, unworthy, and ridiculous,
to charge me to an answer as the pope.
9. to command; to enjoin.
i may not suffer you to visit them;
the king hath strictly charg'd the contrary. shoshcare.
why jost thou turn thy face i charge thee, answer
s}.} score.
to what i shall enquire. pryden.
i charge thee, stand,
and tell thy name and business in the land. dryden.
io. to fall upon ; to attack.
with his prepared sword he charges home
my unprovided body, lanc'd my arm.
the grecians rally, and their pow'rs unite;
with fury charge us, and renew the fight. dryden.
ii. to burden; to load.
here’s the smell of blood still ; all the perfumes of arabia
will not sweeten this little hand. oh! oh! oh! what a
figh is there the heart is sorely charged. shakespeare.
when often urg'd, unwilling to be great,
your country calls you from your lov’d retreat,
and sends to senates, charg’d with common care,
which none more shuns, and none can better bear. drydon.
meat swallowed down for pleasure and greediness, only
s.:*. !care.
charges the stomach, or fumes into the brain. temple.
a fault in the ordinary method of education, is the charging
of childrens memories with rules and precepts. locke.
the brics with weighty crimes was charged,
on which the pleader much enlarg’d. swift.
12. to cover with something adventitious.
it is pity the obelisks in rome had not been charged with se-
veral parts of the egyptian histories, instead of hieroglyphicks.
zoison an italy.
13. to fix, as for fight. obsolete.
he rode up and down, gallantly mounted, and charged and
discharged his lance. knoles's hol. of the turks.
14. to load a gun with powder and bullets.
to charge. v. n. to make an onset.
like your heroes of antiquity, he charges in iron, and seems
to despise all ornament, but intrinsick merit. grantise.
charge. m. s. [from the verb.] -
4 h 1. care;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 370</div><p class="text">c h a
c h a
1. care; custody; trust to defend.
a hard division, when the harmless sheep -
must leave their lambs to hungry wolves in charge. fairfax.
he enquired manythings, as well concerning the princes
which had the charge of the city, whether they were in hope to
defend the same. knolles's history of the turks.
2. precept ; mandate; command.
saul might even lawfully have offered to god those reserved
spoils, had not the lord, in that particular case, given special
charge to the contrary. hooker.
it is not for nothing, that st. paul giveth charge to beware of
philosophy; that is to say, such knowledge as men by natural
reason attain unto. hooker.
one of the turks laid down letters upon a stone, saying,
that in them was contained that they had in charge. knolles.
the leaders having charge from you to stand,
will not go off until they hear you speak.
he, who requires
from us no other service than to keep
this one, this easy charge, of all the trees
in paradise, that bear delicious fruit
so various, not to taste that only tree
of knowledge, planted by the tree of life.
. commission; trust conferred ; office.
if large possessions, pompous titles, honourable charges, and
profitable commissions, could have made this proud man happy,
shakespeare.
milton.
there would have been nothing wanting. l’estrange.
go first the master of thy herds to find,
true to his charge a loyal swain and kind. pope.
4. it had anciently sometimes over before the thing committed to
trust.
i gave my brother charge over jerusalem; for he was a faith-
ful man, and feared god above many. nehemiah.
5. it has of before the subject of command or trust.
hast thou eaten of the tree,
iwhereof i gave thee charge thou should'st not eat? milton.
6. it has upon before the person charged.
he loves god with all his heart, that is, with that degree of
love, which is the highest point of our duty, and of god's
charge upon us. taylor's rule of living holy.
7. accusation; imputation.
we need not lay new matter to his charge:
beating your officers, cursing yourselves. shakespeare.
these very men are continually reproaching the clergy, and
laying to their charge the pride, the avarice, the luxury, the
ignorance, and superstition of popish times. swift.
8. the person or thing entrusted to the care or management of
another.
why hast thou, satan, broke the bounds prescrib'd
to thy transgressions, and disturb’d the charge
of others ? milton's paradise loft.
more had he said, but, fearful of her stay,
the starry guardian drove his charge away,
to some fresh pasture. dryden.
our guardian angel saw them where they sate
above the palace of our slumb'ring king;
he figh'd, abandoning his charge to fate. dryden.
this part should be the governour's principal care; that an
habitual gracefulness and politeness, in all his carriage, may be
fettled in his charge, as much as may be, before he goes out of
bis hands. locke.
9. an exhortation of a judge to a jury; or bishop to his clergy.
the bishop has recommended this authour in his charge to
the clergy. dryden.
io. expence ; cost. -
being long fince made weary with the huge charge, which
you have laid upon us, and with the strong endurance of so
many complaints. spenser on ireland.
their charge was always born by the queen, and duly paid
out of the exchequer. bacon's advice to williers.
witness this army of such mass and charge,
led by a delicate and tender prince. shakespeare.
he liv'd as kings retire, though more at large,
from publick business, yet of equal charge. dryden.
11. it is, in later times, commonly used in the plural, charges.
a man ought warily to begin charges, which, once begun,
will continue. bacon's essays.
ne'er put yourself to charges, to complain
of wrong, which heretofore you did sustain. dryden.
the last pope was at considerable charges, to make a little
kind of harbour in this place. addison on italy.
12. onset.
and giving a charge upon their enemies, like lions, they slew
eleven thousand footmen, and sixteen hundred horsemen, and
put all the others to flight. 2 macc.
honourable retreats are no ways inferiour to brave charges;
as having less of fortune, more of discipline, and as much of
valour. bacon's war with spain.
13. the signal to fall upon enemies.
our author seems to sound a charge, and begins like the
clangour of a trun, pet. o dryden,
14. the posture of a weapon fitted for the attack or combat.
their neighing coursers, daring of the spur,
their armed staves in charge, their beavers down. shais).
15. a load, or burthen. -
asses of great charge.
16. what any thing can bear. -
take of aqua-fortis two ounces, of quick-silver two
drachms, for that charge the aqua-fortis will bear, the dis-
solution will not bear a flint as big as a nutmeg. bacon.
17. the quantity of powder and ball put into a gun.
18. among farriers.
charge is a preparation, or a sort of ointment, of the consis.
tence of a thick deco&amp;tion, which is applied to the shoulder-
splaits, inflammations, and sprains of horses.
a charge is of a middle nature, between an ointment and
a plaister, or between a plaister and a cataplasm. farr. diff.
19. in heraldry.
the charge is that which is born upon the colour, except it
be a coat divided only by partition. peacham.
cha'rgeable. ad;. [from charge.]
1. expensive ; costly.
divers bulwarks were demolished upon the sea coasts, in
peace chargeable, and little serviceable in war. hayward.
neither did we eat any man's bread for nought, but wrought
with labour and travel night and day, that we might not be
chargeable to any of you. 2 thes,
there was another accident of the same nature on the sici-
lian side, much more pleasant, but less chargeable; for it cost
nothing but wit. j/otton.
considering the chargeable methods of their education, their
numerous issue, and small income, it is next to a miracle, that
no more of their children should want. atterbury.
2. imputable, as a debt or crime: with on.
nothing can be a reasonable ground of despising a man, but
some fault or other chargeable upon him. south.
3. subject to charge or accusation; accusable: followed by with.
your papers would be chargeable with something worse than
indelicacy; they would be immoral. spediator,
chargeable ness. n. s. [from chargeable.] expence; cost;
costliness.
that which most deters me from such trials, is not their
chargeablens, but their unsatisfactoriness, though they should
succeed. boyle.
cha rgeably. adv. [from chargeable.] expensively; at great
cost.
he procured it not with his money, but by his wisdom; not
chargeably bought by him, but liberally given by others by his
incans. astham.
cha'rgeful. adj. [charge and full.] expensive, costly. not
in use.
here’s the note
how much your chain weighs to the utmost carot,
the fineness of the gold, the chargeful fashion.
charger. m. s. [from charge.] a large dish.
all the tributes land and sea affords,
heap'd in great chargers, load our sumptuous boards.
lenham.
this golden charger, snatch'd from burning troy,
anchises did in sacrifice employ. dryden’s afneid.
ev’n lamb himself, at the most solemn feast,
might have some chargers not exactly dress'd. king,
nor dare they close their eyes,
void of a bulky charger near their lips,
with which in often interrupted sleep,
their frying blood compels to irrigate
shakosh.
their dry furr'd tongues. philips,
cha rily. adv. [from chary..] warily; frugally.
what paper do you take up so charily. shakespeare.
costs. n. s. [from chary, j. caution; nicety; scrupulous-
in cls.
i will consent to act any villainy against him, that may not
fully the chariness of our honesty. shakespeare.
chariot. n.s. scar-rhod, welch, a wheeled car; for it is
- ho the britons fought in such; charriot, fr. carretta,
ital.
1. a wheel carriage of pleasure, or state; a vehicle for men ra-
ther than wares.
thy grand captain antony
shall set thee on triumphant chariots, and
put garlands on thy head.
2. a car in which men of arms were anciently placed.
he skims the liquid plains,
high on his chariot, and with loosen’d reins,
majestick moves along. dryden's antid,
3. a lighter kind of coach with only front seats.
to chariot, v. a. [from the noun..] to convey in a chariot.
this word is rarely used.
an angel all in flames ascended
as in a firy column charioting
his godlike presence. milton's moonj?es.
chariote er. m. s. [from chariot..] he that drives the chariot.
it is used only in speaking of military chariots, and those in
the ancient publick games.
the
shakespeare.
shaft offeart.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 371</div><p class="text">c h a
c h a
re,
o:
o:
o
the gasping charioteer beneath the wheel
of his own car.
‘i he burning chariot, and the chariateer,
in bright bootes and his wane appear. addison on italy.
show us the youthful handsome charioteer,
firin in his feat, and running his career. prior,
c: a r1 or race: * / [from charit and race..] a sport anci-
&amp;ntly used, where chariots were driven for the prize, as now
horses run.
there is a wonderful vigour and spirit in the description of
the horse and chariotrace. addison.
cha'ritable: adj. [charitable, fr. from charite.]
i • kind in giving alms; liberal to the poor.
he that hinders a cha. itable person from giving alms to a
poor man, is tied to testituticn, if he hindered him by fraud
or violence. taylor's holy living.
shortly thou wilt behold me poor, and kneeling
before thy charitable door for bread. rowe.
how shall we then with, that it might be allowed us to live
over our lives again, in order to fill every minute of them with
dryden's fables.
charitable offices ! atterbury.
health to himself, and to his infants bread
the lab’rer bears: what his hard heart denies,
his charitable vanity supplics. pope.
2. kind in judging of others; disposed to tenderness; benevo-
ent.
i how had you been my friends else? why have you that cha-
, itable title from thousands, did you not chiefly belong to my
heart : shakesp. timon.
of a politick sermon that had no divinity, the king said to
bishop andrews, call you this a sermon f the bishop answer-
ed; by a charitable construction it may be a sermon. bacon.
cha'ritably. adv. [from charity.]
1. kindly ; liberally ; with inclination to help the poor.
2. benevolently; without malignity.
nothing will more enable us to bear our cross patiently, in-
juries charitably, and the labour of religion comfortably. taylor.
'tis best sometimes your censure to restrain,
and charitably let the dull be vain.
cha'rity. m. s. [charite, fr. charitas, lat.]
1. tenderness; kindness; love.
by thee,
founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure,
relations dear, and all the charitics -
of father, son, and brother, first were known. milton.
2. goodwill; benevolence; disposition to think well of others.
my errours, i hope, are only those of charity to mankind,
and such as my own charity has caused me to commit, that of
others may more easily excuse. dryden.
3. the theological virtue of universal love.
concerning charity, the final object whereof is that incom-
prehensible beauty which shineth in the countenance of christ,
the son of the living god. hooker.
peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.—
—urge neither charity nor shame to me;
uncharitably with me have you dealt.
only add
deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add faith 3
add virtue, patience, temperance, add love,
by name to come cali’d charity, the soul
of all the rest. milton.
faith believes the revelations of god; hope expects his pro-
pope.
shakespeare.
mises; charity loves his excellencies and mercies. taylor.
but lasting charity's more ample sway,
nor bound by time, nor subject to decay,
in happy triumph shall for ever live. prior.
charity, or a love of god, which works by a love of our
neighbour, is greater than faith or hope. atterbury.
4. liberality to the poor. -
the heathen poet, in commending the charity of dido to
the trojans, spoke like a christian. dryden.
5. alms; relief given to the poor.
we must incline to the king; i will look for him, and pri-
vily relieve him; go you and maintain talk with the duke, that
my charity be not of him perceived. shakespeare.
the ant did well to reprove the grasshopper for her slothful-
ness; but she did ill then to refuse her a charity in her distress.
- l'esirange.
i never had the confidence to beg a charity. dryden.
to chark. v. a. to burn to a black cinder, as wood is burn-
cd to make charcoal.
excess, either with an apoplexy, knocks a man on the head,
or, with a fever, like fire in a strong-water shop, burns him
down to the ground; or if it flames not out, charks him to a
coal. grew's cosmologia sacra.
charlatan. m. s. [charlatan, fr. ciarlatano, ital, from tiar-
lure, to chatter.] a quack; a mountebank; an empirick.
- saltimbanchoes, quacksalvers, and charlatans, deceive them
in lower degrees. brown's wulgar errours.
for charlatans can do no good,
until they're mounted in a crowd. hudibras.
charlata’nic al. adj. [from charlatan.] quackish; igno-
rant.
a cowardly soldier, and a charlatanical doctor, are the prin-
cipal subjects of comedy. cowley.
cha'rlatanry. n.s.. [from charlatan.] wheedling; deceit;
cheating with fair words.
cowas. m. s. the northern constellation, called the
car.
there are seven stars in ursa minor, and in charles's-wain,
or plauftrum of ursa major, seven. brown's pulgar errours.
charlock. m. s. a weed growing among the corn with a yel-
low flower. it is a species of mithridate mustard.
charm. n.s.. [charme, fr. carmen, latin.]
1. words, or philtres, or characters, imagined to have some oc-
cult or unintelligible power.
i never knew a woman so dote upon a man; surely i think
you have charms. not i, i ailure thee; setting the attrac-
tion of my good parts aside, i have no other charms. shakoff.
there have been used, cither barbarous words, of no sense,
left they should disturb the imagination, or words of similitude,
that may second and feed the imagination: and this was ever
as well in heathen charms, as in charms of later times. bacon.
alcyone he names amidst his pray'rs,
names as a charm against the waves and wind,
most in his mouth, and ever in his mind. dryden.
antaeus could, by magick charms,
recover strength, whene'er he fell. swift.
2. something of power to subdue opposition, and gain the affec-
tions; something that can please irresistibly.
well sounding verses are the charm we use,
heroick thoughts and virtue to infuse. roscommon.
nor ever hope the queen of love
will e'er thy fav'rite's charms improve. prior,
to fam'd apelles, when young amnon brought
the darling idol of his captive heart;
and the pleas'd nymph with kind attention sat,
to have her charms recorded by his art.
but what avail her jo stores,
her blooming mountains and her sunny shores,
with all the gifts that heaven and earth impart,
the smiles of nature, and the charms of art,
while proud oppression in her vallies reigns,
and tyranny usurps her happy plains : addison.
to charm. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fortify with charms against evil.
let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests,
i bear a charmed life, which must not yield
to one of woman born. shakespeare.
2. to make powerful by charms.
3. to summon by incantation.
upon my knees
i charm you by my once commended beauty,
by all your vows of love, and that great vow
which did incorporate and make us one. shakespeare.
4. to subdue by some secret power; to amaze; to overpower.
l, in mine own woe charm’d,
could not find death, where i did hear him groan ;
nor feel him where he struck. shakespeare,
musick the fiercest grief can charm. pope.
5. to subdue the mind by pleasure.
'tis your graces
that from my mutest conscience to my tongue,
charms this report out. shakespeare.
amoret! my lovely foe,
tell me where thy strength does lie:
where the pow'r that charms us so,
in thy soul, or in thy eye * waller.
charm by accepting, by submitting sway. pope.
chloe thus the soul alarm’d,
aw'd without sense, and without beauty charm'd.
charmed. adj. enchanted.
arcadia was the charmed circle, where all his spirits for ever
should be enchanted. sidney.
we implore thy powerful hand,
to undo the charmed band
of true virgin here distressed.
cha'r.m.e.r. m. s. [from charm.]
1. one that has the power of charms, or enchantments.
that handkerchief
did an egyptian to my mother give;
she was a charmer, and could almost read
the thoughts of people.
the passion you pretended,
was only to obtain ;
but when the charm is ended,
the charmer you disdain.
2. word of endearment among lovers.
cha'rming. particip, adj. [from charm.] pleasing in the highest
degree.
for ever all goodness will be charming, for ever all wicked-
ness will be most odious. spratt.
- o charm-
pope.
milton,
shaloshcare.
dryden.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 372</div><p class="text">c a
's--" * 3.
^ ' ' ' ' ' '...a in the first op'ning page,
o cos in to gro on an age. dryden.
(, ; , , , , , . . . adv. troo, coa, ming...] in such a manner as to
ji or exceeting!y.
soc died w y charmingly, and discovered as fine a set of
teeth as ever eye be...eld. addison.
char m n gn ess. n.s.. [from charming.] the power of pleas-
1 : * {r.
cha'rn e 1... adj. [clarnel, fr.] containing flesh, or carcases.
| such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp
oft found in charnel vaults. and sepulchres,
ling’ring and fitting by a new-made grave. milton.
cha r n e l house. n. /. [charnier, fr. from caro, carnis, latin.]
the place under churches where the bones of the dead are re-
posited. . -
if charnel-houses and our graves must send
those, that we bury, back; our monuments
shall be the maws of kites. shakespeare.
when they were in those charnel-houses, every one was plac-
ed in order, and a black pillar or coffin set by him. taylor.
chart. m. s. [cha, ta, lar. j a delineation or map of coasts,
for the use of sailors. it is distinguished from a map, by repre-
sening only the coasts.
the portuguese, when they had doubled the cape of good-
hope, found skilful plates, using astronomical instruments,
geographical charts, and compasies. arbuthnot.
chart | r. m. s. [charta, latin.]
1. a clarter is a written evidence of things done between man
and man. charters are divided into charters of the king, and
chart, rs of private persons. charters of the king are those,
v.hereby the king passeth any grant to any person or more, or
to any tody poistick: as a charter of excmption, that no man
shall be empatinelled on a jury; charter of pardon, whereby
a man is forgiven a sclony, or other offence. cowel.
2. any writing bestowing privileges or rights.
if you deny it, let the danger light
upon your charter, and your city's freedom. shakespeare,
it is not to be wondered, that the great charter whereby god
bestowed the whole earth upon adam, and confirmed it unto
the sons of noah, being as brief in word as large in effect, hath
bred much quarrel of interpretation. raleigh's essays.
here was that charter seal’d, wherein the crown
all marks of arbitrary power lays down. denham.
. she shakes the rubbish from her mounting brow,
and seems to have renew’d her charter’s date,
which heav'n will to the death of time allow. dryden.
god renewed this charter of man's sovereignty over the crea-
tures. south.
3. privilege; immunity; exemption.
i must have liberty,
withal as large a charter as the wind,
to blow on whom i please; for so fools have;
and they that are most gauled with my folly,
they most must laugh.
my mother,
who has a charter to extol her blood,
when she does praise me, grieves me. shakespeare.
chartep-party. m. s. [chartre partie, fr.] a paper relating
to a contract, cf which each party has a copy.
charter-parties, or contracts, made even upon the high sea,
touching things that are not in their own nature maritime, be-
long not to the admiral's jurisdiction. hale.
charter f d. adj. [from charter.] invested with privileges by
charter ; privileged. -
when he speaks,
the air, a charter'd libertine, is still. shakespeare.
chary. adj. [from care.] careful; cautious; wary; frugal.
over his kindred he held a wary and chary care, which boun-
tifully was expresled, when occasion so required.
carew's survey of cornwall.
the charies' maid is prodigal enough,
shakespeare.
if she unmask her beauty to the moon. shakespeare.
to chase. v. a. [chaser, fr.]
i. to hunt.
it shall be as the chased roe. isaiah.
mine enemies chased me sore like a bird. lament.
2. to pursue as an enemy.
and abimelech chased him, and he fled before him.
one of you shall chose a thousand.
3. to drive away.
he that chaseth away his mother, is a son that causeth
shame. proverbs.
4. to follow as a thing desirable.
5. to drive. -
thus chased by their brother's endless malice, from prince
to prince, and from place to place, they, for their safety, fled
at last to the city of bisennis. knolles's hist, of the turks.
when the following morn had chas'd away
the flying stars, and light restor'd the day.
to chase ametals. see to enchase.
-chas e. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. hunting; as, the pleasures of the chase,
jud.
deut.
dryden,
2. pursuit of any thing as game.
whilst he was hasi'ning, in the chase, it seems,
of this fair couple, meets he on the way
the father of this seeming lady. shakespeare.
there is no chose more pleasant, methinks, than to drive a
, thought, by good conduct, from one end of the world to an-
other, and never to lose fight of it till it fall into eternity.
burnet's theory of the earth.
3. fitness to be hunted, appropriation to chose or sport.
concerning the beasts of chase, whereof the buck is the
first, he is called the first year a fawn. shakespeare.
a maid i am, and of thy virgin train;
oh! let me still that spotless name retain,
frequent the forests, thy chaste will obey,
and only make the beasts of chose my prey. dryden.
4. pursuit of an enemy, or of something noxious.
the admiral, with such ships only as could suddenly be put
in readiness, made forth with them, and such as came daily
in, we set upon them, and gave them chase. bacon.
he fallied out upon them with certain troops of horsemen,
with such violence, that he overthrew them, and, havin
them in chase, did speedy execution. knolles's hsi.
they seek that joy, which us’d to glow,
expanded on the hero's face;
when the thick squadrons prest the foe,
and william led the glorious chase. prior.
5. pursuit of something as desirable.
yet this mad chase of fame, by few pursu'd,
has drawn destruction on the multitude. dryden's jav.
6. the game hunted.
she, seeing the towering of her pursued chose, went circling
about, rising so with the less sense of rising. sidney.
hold, warwick | seek thee out some other chos,
for i myself must put this deer to death. shakespeare.
honour's the noblest chose; pursue that game,
and recompence the loss of love with fame. granville.
7. open ground stored with such beasts as are hunted.
a receptacle for deer and game, of a middle nature between
a forest and a park ; being commonly less than a forest, and not
endued with so many liberties; and yet of a larger compass,
and stored with greater diversity of game than a park. a chase
differs from a forest in this, because it may be in the hands of
a subject, which a forest, in its proper nature, cannot; and from
a park, in that it is not inclosed, and hath not only a larger
compass, and more store of game, but likewise more keepers
and overseers. cowel.
he and his lady both are at the lodge,
upon the northside of this pleasant chase. shakspeare.
8. the chase of a gun, is the whole bore or length of a piece,
taken withinside. chambers.
chas e-gun. m. s. [from chose and gun.] guns in the forepart
of the ship, fired upon those that are pursued.
mean time the belgians tack upon our rear,
and raking chase-guns through our stern they send. dryden.
cha's er. m. s. [from chase.]
1. hunter; pursuer; driver.
then began
a stop i' th' chaser, a retire; anon
a rout, confusion thick. shakspeare.
so fast he flies, that his reviewing eye
has lost the chasers, and his ear the cry. denham.
stretch'd on the lawn, his second hope survey,
at once the chaser, and at once the prey.
lo, rufus tugging at the deadly dart,
bleeds in the forest like a wounded hart
2. an enchaser.
chasm. m. s. [xo~p.2.]
1. a breach unclosed; a cleft; a gap; an opening:
in all that visible corporeal world, we see no chasms or gaps.
locke.
the water of this orb communicates with that of the ocean,
by means of certain hiatuses or chasins passing betwixt it and the
bottom of the ocean. j/ccdward.
the ground adust her riv'n mouth disparts,
horrible chasm / profound.
2. a place unfilled ; a vacuity.
some lazy ages, lost in ease,
no action leave to busy chronicles;
such, whose supine felicity but makes,
in story chasins, in epochas mistakes.
cha sselas. n. s. [french..] a sort of grape.
chaste. adj. [chaffe, fr. casus, lat.]
1. pure from all commerce of sexes; as, a chase virgin.
diana chosoe, and hebe fair. prior.
2. with respect to language; pure; uncorrupt; not mixed with
barbarous phrases.
3. free from obscenity.
among words which signify the same principal ideas, some
are clean and decent, others unclean; some chase, others ob-
scene. watts's logick.
4. true to the marriage bed.
love your children, be discreet, chase, keepers at home. titus.
i cha ste-
pope.
philips.
dryden.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 373</div><p class="text">c h a
c h e
ste-tree, n. s. [vitex, lat.]
cas. tree will so to be eight or ten feet high, and pro-
duce spikes of flowers at the extremity of every strong shoot
in autumn. o miller.
t, cha's ten. v. a. schoosier, fr. castigo, lat.] to correct;
to punish; to mortity. -
chosen thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul
spare for his crying. proverbs.
i follow thee, safe guide the path
thou lead'st me; and to the hand of heav'n submit,
however thos”ning. milton's paradise loft.
some feel the rod,
and own, like us, the father's chasi'ning hand. rowe.
from our lost pursuit she wills to hide
her close decrees, and chaslen human pride. prior.
t. chasti'se. v. a. [castigo, lat. anciently accented on the
first syllable, now on the last.]
1. to punish ; to correct by punishment; to afflict for faults.
my breast i’ll burst with straining of my courage,
but i will chasise this high-minded strumpet. shakespeare.
i am glad to see the vanity or envy of the canting chymists
thus discovered and chasised. boyle.
seldom is the world affrighted or chasised with signs or
prodigies, earthquakes or inundations, famines or plagues
grew's cosmologia sacra.
like you, commission'd to chasise and bless,
he must avenge the world, and give it peace. prior.
2. to reduce to order, or obedience; to repress; to restrain;
to a w.c. -
hie thee hither,
that i may pour my spirits in thine ear,
and chasise, with the valour of my tongue,
all that impedes thee. shakespeare.
know, sir, that i
will not wait pinion'd at your master's court,
nor once be cha/lis'd with the sober eye
of dull o&amp;tavia. shakespeare.
- the gay social sense - -
by decency chasis'd, thomson.
chast1's ement. n. s. [chasliment, fr.] correotion; punish-
ment: commonly, though not always, used of domestick or
parental punishment. n
shall i so much dishonour my fair stars, - -
on equal terms to give him chastisement * shakespeare.
he held the chastisement of one which molested the see of
rome, pleasing to god. raleigh's essays.
for seven years what can a child be guilty of, but lying, or
ill-natur'd tricks; the repeated commission of which shall
bring him to the chastisement of the rod. locke.
he receives a fit of fickness as the kind chaftisement and dis-
t cipline of his heavenly father, to wean his affections from the
world. bentleys
cha'stity. n.f. [cassitas, lat.]
1. purity of the body. - -
who can be bound by any solemn vow,
to force a spotless virgin's chastity o shakespeare.
chaffity is either abstinence or continence: abstinence is that
of virgins or widows; continence of married persons: chaste
marriages are honourable and pleasing to god. taylor.
ev’n here where frozen chaslity retires,
love finds an altar for forbidden fires. pope.
2. freedom from obscenity. -
- there is not chaffity enough in language, -
without offence to utter them. shakesp. much ado.
3. freedom from bad mixture of any kind; purity of language,
opposed to barbarisms.
chast1's er. n.s.. [from chasise.] the person that chastises;
a punisher; a correotor.
cha'stly, adv. [from chase.] without incontinence; pure-
ly ; without contamination.
you should not pass here: no, though it were as virtuous to
lie as to live chaffely. shakespeare.
make first a song of joy and love,
which choslely flame in royal eyes. wotton.
succession of a long descent,
which choslely in the channels ran,
and from our demi-gods began.
cha'stness. n.s.. [from chosle.j chastity; purity.
to shat, v. n. [from caqueter, fr. skinner; perhaps from a-
that, purchase or cheapening, on account of the prate naturally
produced in a bargain; or only, as it is most likely, contracted
from thatter.] to prate; to talk idly; to prattle; to cackle;
to chatter ; to converse at ease.
thus chatten the people in their steads,
dryden.
ylike as a monster of many heads. spensor.
because that i familiarly sometimes,
pouse you for my fool, and chat with you,
o: your sauciness will jest upon my love. shakespeare.
o the shepherd's on the lawn
o sat simply chatting in a rustick row. milton,
ith much good-will the motion was embrac'd,
o to that a while on their adventures pass'd. dryden.
vol. i,
to chat. v. a. to talk of. not in use, unless ludicrously,
all tongues speak of him, and the bleared fights
are spectacled to see him. your prattling nurse
into a rapture lets her baby cry,
while she chats him. shake?care.
chat. n.s.. [from the verb.] idle talk; prate; slight or neg-
ligent tattle. -
lords that can prate
as amply and unnecessarily,
as this gonzalo, i myself would make
a chough of as deep chat. shakespeare.
the time between before the fire they sat,
and shorten’d the delay by pleasing chat. dryden.
the least is good, far greater than the tickling of his pa-
late with a glass of wine, or the idle chat of a soaking club.
locłe.
snuff, or the fan, supplies each pause of chat,
with singing, laughing, ogling, and all that. pope.
chat. n.s. the keys of trees are called chats; as, ash chats.
cha tellan y. n.s. schatelenie, fr.] the district under the
dominion of a castle. -
here are about twenty towns and forts of great importance,
with their chatellanies and dependencies. dryden.
chattel. n.s. [see cattle.] any moveable possession: a
term now scarce used but in forms of law.
nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
i will be master of what is mine own;
. she is my goods, my chattels. shakespeare.
honour's a lease for lives to come,
and cannot be extended from
the legal tenant: ’tis a chattle
not to be forfeited in battle. hudibras,
to chatter. v. n. [caqueter, fr.]
1. to make a noise as a pie, or other unharmonious bird.
nightingales seldom sing, the pie still chattereth. sidney.
so doth the cuckow, when the mavis fings,
begin his witless note apace to chatter. spensor.
there was a crow sat chattering upon the back of a sheep;
well, sirrah, says the sheep, you durst not have done this to a
dog. l'a/irange.
your birds of knowledge, that in dusky air
chatter futurity. dryden.
2. to make a noise by collision of the teeth.
stood theodore surpriz'd in deadly fright,
with chatt’ring teeth, and bristling hair upright. dryden.
dip but your toes into cold water,
their correspondent teeth will chatter. prior."
3. to talk idly or carelesly.
suffer no hour to pass away in a lazy idleness, an imperti-
nent chattering, or useless trifles. j/atts's logick.
chatter. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. noise like that of a pie or monkey.
the mimick ape began his chatter,
how evil tongues his life bespatter. swift.
2. idle prate.
chatterer. n.s.. [from chatter.] an idle talker; a prattler.
chat wood. m. s. little sticks ; fuel.
cha've nder. m. s. [chevsne, fr.] the chub; a fish.
these are a choice bait for the chub, or chavender, or indeed
any great fish. walton's angler.
chaumonte'lle. m. s. [french..] a sort of pear.
to chaw. v. a. [kawen, germ.] to champ, between the
teeth; to masticate; to chew.
i home returning, fraught with foul despight,
and chawing vengeance all the way i went.
spenser's fairy queen,
they come to us, but us love draws;
he swallows us, and never chaws;
he is the tyrant pike, and we the fry. - donne.
whether he found any use of chawing little sponges, dipt in
oil, in his mouth, when he was perfectly under water, and at
a distance from his engine. boyle.
the man who laught but once to see an ass
mumbling to make the cross-grain'd thistles pass,
might laugh again, to see a jury chaw
the prickles of unpalatable law. dryden.
chaw. n.s.. [from the verb.] the chap; the upper or under
part of a beast's mouth.
i will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy chaws, and
will bring thee forth and all thine army. ezekiel.
cha'wdron. m. s. entrails.
add thereto a tyger's chawdron,
for the ingredients of our cauldron. shakespeare.
cheap. adj. [ceapan, sax. koopen, dutch, to buy.]
1. to be had at a low rate; purchased for a small price.
where there are a great many sellers to a few buyers, there
the thing to be sold will be cheap. on the other side, raise up
a great many buyers for a few sellers, and the same thing will
immediately turn dear. locke.
2. of small value; easy to be had ; not respected.
the goodness, that is cheap in beauty, makes beauty brief
in goodness. shakespeare.
4 i had
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 374</div><p class="text">c h e
c h e
had i so lavish of my presence been,
so common hackney'd in the eyes of men,
so stale and cheap to vulgar company. shakespeare.
he that is too much in any thing, so that he giveth another
occasion of society, maketh himself cheap. . . bacon.
may your fick fame still languish till it die,
and you grow cheap in every subject's eye. dryden.
the titles of distinetion, which belong to us, are turned
into terms of derision, and every way is taken by profane men,
towards rendering us cheap and contemptible. atterbury.
cheap. m. s. scheping is an old word for market; whence east-
cheap, cheapside..] market; purchase; bargain: as good cheap;
[a bon marche, fr.]
the same wine which we pay so dear for now a *; in
that good world was very good cheap. idney.
it is many a man's case to tire himself out with hunting
after that abroad, which he carries about him all the while,
and may have it better cheap at home. l’estrange.
some few insulting cowards, who love to vapour good cheap,
may trample on those who give least refistance. decay of piety.
to che apen. v. a. sceapan, sax. to buy.]
1. to attempt to purchase; to bid for any thing; to ask the
price of any commodity.
rich she shall be, that's certain; wise, or i'll none; virtu-
ous, or i'll never cheapen her. shakespeare.
the first he cheapened was a jupiter, which would have come
at a very easy rate. l’estrange.
she slipt sometimes to mrs. thody's,
to cheapen tea. prior.
to shops in crouds the daggled females fly,
pretend to cheapen goods, but nothing buy. swift.
2. to lessen value.
my hopes pursue a brighter diadem,
can any brighter than the roman be 2
i find my profer'd love has cheapen'd me. dryden.
che'aply. adv. [from cheap.] at a small price; at a low rate.
by these i see
so great a day as this is cheaply bought. shakespeare.
blood, rapines, massacres, were cheaply bought,
so mighty recompence your beauty brought.
cheapness. n.s.. [from cheap..] lowness of price.
ancient statutes incite merchant strangers to bring in com-
modities; having for end cheapnes. bacon.
the discredit which is grown upon ireland, has been the
great discouragement to other nations to transplant themselves
hither, and prevailed farther than all the invitations which
the cheapness and plenty of the country has made them. temple.
chear. see cheer.
to cheat. v. a. [of uncertain derivation; probably from
acheter, fr. to purchase, alluding to the tricks used in making
bargains. see the noun.]
1. to defraud; to impose upon; to trick. it is used commonly.
of low cunning.
it is a dangerous commerce, where an honest man is sure at
first of being cheated; and he recovers not his losses, but by
learning to cheat others. dryden.
there are people who find that the most effe&amp;tual way to
cheat the people, is always to pretend to infallible cures. tillot.
2. it has of before the thing taken away by fraud.
1 that am curtail'd by this fair proportion,
cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
shakespe
dryden.
deform’d, unfinish’d. are,
cheat. n.s.. [from the verb. some think abbreviated from
escheat, because many fraudulent measures being taken by the
lords of manours in procuring escheats, cheat the abridgment
was brought to convey a bad meaning.] -
1, a fraud; a trick; an imposture.
the pretence of publick good is a cheat that will ever pass,
though so abused by ill men, that i wonder the good do not
grow ashamed to use it. temple.
emp'rick politicians use deceit,
hide what they give, and cure but by a cheat. dryden.
when i consider life, ’tis all a cheat;
yet, fool'd with hope, men favour the deceit.
trust on, and think to-morrow will repay;
to-morrow's falser than the former day;
lyes worse; and while it says, we shall be blest,
with some new joys cuts .# what we possest.
2. a person guilty of fraud.
idisfimulation can be no further useful than it is concealed;
dryden.
for as much as no man will trust a known cheat. south.
like that notorious cheat, vast sums i give,
only that you may keep me while i live. dryden.
che'ater. n.s.. [from theat..] one that practises fraud.
i will be cheater to them both, and they shall be exchequers
to me. [it is here for escheater.] shakespeare.
they say this town is full of couzenage,
as nimble jugglers that deceive the eye;
disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,
and many such like libertines of fin. shakespeare.
he is no swaggerer, hostess; a tame cheater i' faith.-
cheater, call you him : i will bar no honest man my house,
nor no cheater. shakespeare.
all sorts of injurious persons, the sacrilegious, the detainers
of tithes, cheaters of mens inheritances, false witnesses and ac-
cusers. taylor's rule of living holy.
to check. v. a. [from the french echers, chess; from whence
we use, at that game, the term checkmate, when we stop our
adversary from carrying on his play any farther j
1. to repress; to curb.
reserve thy state; with better judgment check
this hideous rashness. shakespeare.
fames may be sown and raised, they may be spread and
multiplied, they may be checked and laid dead. bacon.
i hate when vice can bolt her arguments,
and virtue has no tongue to check her pride. milton.
he who sat at a table, richly and deliciously furnished, but
with a sword hanging over his head by one fingle thread or
hair, surely had enough to check his appetite. south.
2. to reprove ; to chide.
richard, with his eye brimful of tears,
then check’d and rated by northumberland,
did speak these words, now prov’d a prophecy. shakes.
his fault is much, and the good king his master
will check him for’t. shakoffeare.
3. to compare a bank note or other bill, with the correspon-
dent paper.
4. to controul by a counter reckoning.
to check, v. n.
1. to stop; to make a stop : with at. -
with what wing the stanyel checks at it. shakespeare.
he must observe their mood on whom he jests,
the quality of the persons, and the time;
and, like the haggard, check at every feather
that comes before his eye. shakespeare.
the mind, oncejaded by an attempt above its power, either
is disabled for the fo, or else checks at any vigorous under-
taking ever after. locke.
2. to clash; to interfere.
if love check with business, it troubleth men's fortunes. bacca.
3. to strike with repression.
i'll avoid his presence;
it checks too strong upon me. dryden.
check. m. s. [from the verb.] -
1. repressure; stop 5 rebuff; sudden restraint.
rebellion in this land shall kose his sway,
meeting the check of such another day. shakes.
we see also, that kings that have been fortunate conquerors
in their first years, must have some check or arrest in their for-
tunes. - bacon’s essays.
god hath of late years manifested himself in a very dreadful
manner, as if it were on purpose to give a check to this insolent
impiety. tillotson.
it was this viceroy's zeal, which gave a remarkable check to
the first progress of christianity. addison's freeholder.
god put it into the heart of one of our princes, to give a
check to that sacrilege, which had been but too much winked
at. - atterbury.
the great struggle with passions is in the first check. rogers.
2. restraint; curb, government; continued restraint.
they who come to maintain their own breach of faith, the
check of their consciences much breaketh their spirit. hayw.
the impetuosity of the new officer's nature needed some
restraint and check, for some time, to his immoderate pretences
and appetite of power. clarendon.
some free from rhyme or reason, rule or check, -
break priscian's head, and pegasus's neck. pope.
while such men are in trust, who have no check from with-
in, nor any views but towards their interest. swift.
3. a reproof; a slight.
oh! this life
is nobler than attending for a cheek. shakespeare.
i do know, the state,
however this may gall him with some check,
cannot with safety cast him. shakespeare.
4. a dislike ; a sudden disgust; something that stops the pro-
ress.
§ say i should wed her, would not my wise subjects
take check, and think it strange perhaps revolt: dryden.
5. in falconry, when a hawk forsakes her proper game to follow
rooks, pies, or other birds that cross her flight. chambers.
a young woman is a hawk upon her wings ; and if she be
handsome, she is the more subject to go out on check. suckling.
when whistled from the fist,
some falcon stoops at what her eye design'd,
and with her eagerness, the quary miss'd,
streight flies at check, and clips it down the wind. dryden.
6. the person checking; the cause of restraint; a stop. . .
he was unhappily too much used as a check upon the lord
coventry. - clarendon.
a satyrical poet is the check of the laymen on bad priests.
dryden's falles, prefact.
7. any
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 375</div><p class="text">c h e
c h e
o
on or interruption.
7. ao .. have . natural production by several checks or
stops, or, as they are usually called, articulations of the breath
or voice. holder's elements of speech.
8. the correspondent cipher of a bank hill.
. a term used in the gaine of chess, when one party obliges the
other either to move or guard his king.
io. clerk of the check, in the king's houshold, has the check
and controuhment of the yeomen of the guard, and all the
ushers belonging to the royal family.
11. clerk of the check, in the king’s navy at plymouth, is also
the name of an officer invested with like powers. chambers.
to che"cker. ; v. a. [from echecs, chess, fr. j. to variegate or
t, cheqy er. § diversify, in the manner of a chess-board, with
alternate colours, or with darker and brighter parts.
the grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
check’ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light. shakesp.
the green leaves quiver with the cooling wind,
and make a checquer'd shadow on the ground. shdesp.
as the snake roll'd in the slow'ry bank,
with shining checker'd slough doth sting a child,
that for the beauty thinks it excellent.
the wealthy spring yet never bore
that sweet, nor dainty flower,
that damask'd not the checker'd floor
of cynthia's summer bower.
many a youth and many a maid,
dancing in the checker'd shade. - milton.
in the chess-board, the use of each chess-man is determined
only within that thequeredpiece of wood. locke.
in our present condition, which is a middle state, our minds
are, as it were, chequered with truth and falsehood. addison.
the ocean intermixing with the land, so as to checker it in-
to earth and water. woodward’s natural history.
here waving groves a checker'd scene display,
and part admit, and part exclude the day. pope.
che cker. r work varied alternately as to its colours or
§::::::…; materials.
nets of checker-work and wreaths of chain-work for the cha-
piters which were upon the top of the pillars. i kings.
che'ckmate. m. s. [echec et mat, fr.] the movement on the
chess-board, that kills the opposite men, or hinders them from
moving. -
love they him called, that gave me the checkmate,
but better might they have behote him hate. spenser.
che"ckroll. n. s. [from check and roll.] a roll or book, con-
taining the names of such as are attendants on, and in pay to
great personages, as their houshold servants. it is otherwise
called the chequer-roll. cowel.
not daring to extend this law further than to the king's ser-
vants in checkroll, left it should have been too harsh to the gen-
tlemen of the kingdom. bacon's henry vii.
cheek. n.s.. [ceac, saxon.] o
1. the side of the face below the eye.
and now and then an ample tear trill'd down
her delicate cheek. shakespeare.
her beauty hangs upon the cheek of night,
like a rich jewel in an aethiop's ear. shakespeare.
i shall survey and spy
death in thy cheeks, and darkness in thy eye.
daughter of the rose, whose cheeks unite
the diff'ring titles of the red and white,
who heaven's alternate beauty well display
the blush of morning and the milky way. dryden.
2. a general name among mechanicks for almost all those pieces
of their machines and instruments that are double, and perfectly
alike. chambers.
che'ekbone. n.s.. [from cheek and bone.] -
i cut the tumour, and felt the slug: it lay partly under the
osjugale, or cheekbone. wiseman.
che'ektooth. n.s.. [from cheek and tooth.] the hinder tooth
or tusk.
he hath the cheekteeth of a great lion. j-el.
chee r. n.s.. [chere, fr. entertainment; cara, sp, the counte-
nance. it seems to have, in english, some relation to both
these senses.] -
1. entertainment; provisions served at a feast,
but though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
better cheer you may have, but not with better heart. shak.
his will was never determined to any pursuit of good cheer,
shakespeare,
drayton.
donne.
poignant sauces, and delicious wines. locke.
2. invitation to gaiety.
you do not give the cheer; the feast is sold
that is not often vouched, while 'tis making
'tis given with welcome. shakespeare.
3. gaiety; jollity.
i have not that alacrity of spirit,
nor cheer of mind, that #: wont to have. shakesp.
4 air of the countenance.
right faithful true he was in deed and word,
but of his cheer did seem too solemn sad.
nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad. spenser.
which publick death, receiv'd wih such a cheer,
as not a figh, a look, a shrink be: oys
the leaf felt touch of a degenerous fear,
gave life to envy, to his courage praise. danies.
he ended ; and his words their drooping cheer
enlighten'd, and their languish’d hope reviv'd. 4.ilton.
at length appear
her grisly brethren stretch’d upon the bier:
pale at the sudden fight, she chang'd her cheer. dryot.
5. *::::::: temper of mind in general ; for we read of heavy
coco".
then were they all of good cheer, and they also took some
meat. assis.
to cheer. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to incite ; to encourage; to inspirit.
he complained that he was betrayed : yet, for all that, was
nothing discouraged, but cheered up the footmen. jonales.
he cheer'd the dogs to follow her who fled,
and vow’d revenge on her devoted head. dryden's filler.
2. to comfort; to console.
i died, ere i could lend thee aid;
but cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismay’d. shakes.
displeas'd at what, not suffering, they had seen,
they went to cheer the faction of the green. dryden.
3. to gladden.
hark! a glad voice the lonely desert cheers;
prepare the way, a god, a god appears. pope's mosiah.
the sacred sun, above the waters rais'd,
thro' heaven's eternal brazen portals blaz'd,
and wide o'er earth diffus’d his cheering ray. pope.
to cheer. v. n. to grow gay or gladsome,
at fight of thee my gloomy soul cheers up ;
my hopes revive, and gladness dawns within me.
z. philips.
che'erer. n.s.. [from to cheer.] gladner; giver of gaiety.
- to thee alone be praise,
from whom our joy descends,
thou cheerer of our days. j’ottom.
angling was, after tedious study, a rest to his mind, a cheerer
of his spirits, a diverter of sadness, a calmer of unquiet
thoughts. j/alton's angler.
saffron is the safest and most simple cordial, the greatest re-
viver of the heart, and cheerer of the spirits. temple.
- prime cheerer, light,
of all material beings first and best.
che erful. adj. [from cheer and full.]
1. gay; full of life; full of mirth.
- the cheerful birds of fundry kind
do chaunt sweet musick to delight his mind. fairy 24ern.
2. having an appearance of gaiety.
a merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance; but by sorrow
of the heart the spirit is broken. proverbs.
cheerfully. adv. [from cheerful..] without dejcotion; with
willingness; with gaiety.
pluck up thy spirits, look cheerfully upon me. shakes.
to their known stations cheerfully they go. dryden.
doctrine is that which must prepare men for discipline ;
and men never go on so cheerfully, as when they see where
thomson's summer,
they go. south.
may the man
that cheerfully recounts the female's praise,
find equal love, and love's untainted sweets
enjoy with honour. philips.
che'erfulness. m. s. [from cheerful.]
1. freedom from dejection; alacrity.
barbarosla using this exceeding cheersusnes; and forwardness
of his soldiers, weighed up the fourteen gallies he had sunk.
knolles's history of the turks.
with what resolution and cheerfulness, with what courage
and patience did vast numbers of all sorts of people, in the
first ages of christianity, encounter all the rage and malice of
the world, and embrace torments and death tillotson.
2. freedom from gloominess.
i marvelled to see her receive my commandments with
fighs, and yet do them with cheerfulness. sidney.
che erless. adj. [from cheer.] without gaiety, comfort, or
gladness.
for since mine eye your joyous fight did miss,
my cheerful day is turn'd to cheerls, night. fairy queen.
on a bank, beside a willow,
heav'n her cov'ring, earth her pillow,
sad amynta sigh’d alone,
from the cheerles, dawn of morning
till the dews of night returning.
che’erly. adj. [from cheer.]
1. gay ; cheerful.
they are useful to mankind, in affording them convenient
situations of houses and villages, reflecting the benign and
cherishing sun beams, and so rendering their habitations both
more comfortable and more cheerly in winter. ray on creation.
2. not gloomy; not dejected.
che'erly. adv. [from cheer.] cheerfully.
bryden -
under
3 -
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 376</div><p class="text">c h e
c h e
under heavy arms the youth of rome
their long laborious marches overcome ;
cheerly their tedious travels undergo. dryden's virgil.
in god’s name, cheerly on, courageous friends,
to reap the harvest of perpetual peace,
by this one bloody trial of sharp war. shakespeare,
oft listening how the hounds and horn
cheerly rouse the slumb'ring morn. milton.
che ery. adj. [from cheer.] gay ; sprightly ; having the
power to make gay : a ludicrous word.
come, let us hie, and quaff a cheery bowl ;
let cider new wash sorrow from thy soul. gay's pastorals.
cheese. n.s.. [caseus, lat. cyre, saxon.] ... a kind of food
made by pressing the curd of coagulated milk, and suffering
the mass to dry.
i will rather trust a fleming with my butter, the welchman
with my cheese, than my wife with herself. shakespeare.
che'esecake. m. s. [from cheese and cake.] a cake made of
soft curds, sugar and butter.
effeminate he sat, and quiet; *
strange product of a cheesecake diet. prior.
where many a man at variance with his wife,
with soft'ning mead and cheesecake ends the strife. king.
che'es e mong er. m. s. [from cheese and monger.] one who
deals in cheese.
a true owl of london,
that gives out he is undone,
being a chestmonger,
by trusting. ben. johnson.
che"es epr ess. n.s.. [from cheese and press.] the press in
which the curds are pressed.
the cleanly chees pres; she could never turn,
her aukward fist did ne'er employ the churn. gay's paso.
che'ese v at. n.s.. [from cheese and vat..] the wooden case in
which the curds are confined when they are pressed into cheese.
his sense occasions the careless rustick to judge the sun no
bigger than a cheesevat. glanville.
che'es y. adj. [from cheese.] having the nature or form of
cheese.
acids mixed with them precipitate a topbaceous chalky
matter, but not a cheesy substance. arbuthnot on aliments.
chely. m. s. schela, lat..] the claw of a shell fish.
it happeneth often, i confess, that a lobster hath the chely,
or great claw, of one side longer than the other. brown.
chemistry. see chymistry.
che"quer. see che cker.
to cherish. v. a. scherir, fr.] to support and forward
with encouragement, help, and protection; to shelter; to nurse
up.
whenever buckingham doth turn his hate
upon your grace, and not with duteous love
doth cherish you and yours, god punish me
with hate in those where i expect most love. shakesp.
i would i were thy bird.
- - sweet, so would i;
but i should kill thee with too much cherishing. shakesp.
what doth cherish weeds but gentle air : shakespeare.
magistrates have always thought themselves concerned to
cherish religion, and to maintain in the minds of men the be-
lief of a god and another life. tillotson.
but old god saturn, which doth all devour,
doth charish her, and still augments her might. davies.
he that knowingly commits an ill, has the upbraidings of
his own conscience; those who act by error, have its cherish-
ings and encouragements to animate them. decay of piety.
che'r's her... n. s. [from cherish.] an encourager ; a sup-
porter.
one of their greatest praises it is to be the maintainers
and cherishers of a regular devotion, a reverend worship, a
true and decent piety. spratt.
cheris hment. n.s.. [from cheriff.] encouragement; sup-
port; comfort. it is now obsolete.
the one lives, her age’s ornament,
that with rich bounty and dear cherishment,
supports the praise of noble poesie. spens. tears of muses.
- (rry. m. s. -
go's m. s. }[aris, fr. cerasus, lat.]
the species are; 1. the common red or garden cherry.
2. large spanish cherry. 3. the red heart cherry. 4. the
white heart cherry. 5. the bleeding heart cherry... 6. the
black heart cherry. 7. the may cherry. 8. the black
cherry, or mazard. 9. the archduke cherry. , 10. the
yellow spanish cherry. 11. the flanders cluster cherry.
12. the carnation cherry. 13. the large black cherry.
14. the bird cherry, 15. the red bird or cornish cherry.
16. the largest double flowered cherry, 17. the double
flowered cherry. 18. the common wild cherry. 19. the
wild northern £ng; cherry, with late ripe fruit. 20. the
shock or perfumed cherry. 21. the cherrytree with striped
leaves. and many other sorts of cherries; as the amber
cherry, lukeward, corone, gascoigne, and the morello,
which is chiefly planted for preserving. -
this fruit was brought out of pontus at the time of the
mithridatick victory, by lucullus, in the year of rome 680:
and was brought into britain about 120 years afterward.
which was ann. dom. 55; and was soon after spread through
most parts of europe. miller.
some ask but a pin, a nut, a cherry stone; but she, more
covetous, would have a chain. shakespeare
july i would have drawn in a jacket of light-yellow ea.
ing cherries, with his face and bosom sun burnt. peacha,
a little spark of life, which, in its first appearance, might
be inclosed in the hollow of a cherry stone. hale
cherry. adj. [from the substantive..] resembling a o
in colour.
herry l shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
a cherry lip, a passing pleasing tongue. shake
che'rry-bay. see *:::. g tong offears.
che'rryeheeked. adj. [from cherry and cheek.] having ruddy
cheeks. -
i warrant them cherrycheek’d country girls. congreve.
cherryeit. m. s. [from cherry and pit.] a child's play, in
which they throw cherry stones into a small hole.
what man, 'tis not for gravity to play at cherrypit. shat.
chersone'se. n. s. [x;provna.o.] a peninsula; a tract of
land almost surrounded by the sea, but joined to the continent
by a narrow neck or isthmus.
chert. n.s.. [from quartz, germ.] a kind of flint.
flint is most commonly found in form of nodules; but 'tis
sometimes found in thin stratae, when 'tis called chert, isaadu.
cherub. m. s. sin"&gt; plur. eoinni) it is sometimes written
in the plural, improperly, cherubims.] . a celestial spirit,
which, in the hierarchy, is placed next in order to the se.
raphim. all the several descriptions which the scripture
gives us of cherubin, differ from one another; as they are
described in the shapes of men, eagles, oxen, lions, and
in a composition of all these figures put together. the
hieroglyphical representations in the embroidery upon the cur-
tains of the tabernacle, were called by moses, exod. xxvi. 1.
cherubim of cunning work. calmet.
the roof o' th' chamber
with gold cherubims is fretted. shakespeare.
heav'n's cherubin hors'd,
upon the sightless coursers of the air,
shall blow the horrid deed in ev'ry eye,
that tears shall drown the wind.
some cherub finishes what you begun,
and to a miracle improves a tune. prior.
cheru'bick, adj. [from cherub.] angelick; relating to the
cherubim.
shakespeare.
thy words
attentive, and with more delighted ear,
divine instructor i have heard, than when
cherubick songs by night from neighb'ring hills
aerial musick send. milton's paradise loft,
and on the east side of the garden place,
cherubick watch. milton's paradise loft.
che'rubin. adj. [from cherub.] angelical.
this fell whore of thine,
hath in her more destruction than thy sword,
for all her cherubin look. shakespeare.
che'rvil. n.s. [charophyllum, lat.] an umbelliferous plant.
miller.
to che'rup. v. n. [from cheer; perhaps from cheer up; cor-
rupted to cherip.] to chirp 5 to use a cheerful voice.
the birds
frame to thy song their cheerful cheriting;
or hold their peace for shame of thy sweet lays. , spensir.
che'slip. n.s. a small vermin, that lies under stones or
tiles. skinner,
chess. m. s. [echec, fr.] a nice and abstruse game, in which
two sets of men are moved in opposition to each other.
this game the persian magi did invent,
the force of eastern wisdom to express;
from thence to busy europeans sent,
and styl'd by modern lombards pensive ches.
so have i seen a king on ches,
(his rooks and knights withdrawn,
his queen and bishops in distress)
shifting about, grow less and less,
with here and there a pawn.
che'ss-apple. m. s. a species of wild service.
che'ss-board. n.s.. [from ches; and board.] the board or
table on which the game of chess is plaid.
and cards are dealt, and chessboards brought,
to ease the pain of coward thought. prior,
che'ss-man. m. s. [from ches, and man.] a puppet for chess.
a company of chosomen, standing on the same squares of the
chessboard where we left them : we say, they are all in the
same place, or unmoved. locke.
denham,
dryden.
che'ss-player. m. s. [from thes, and player.] a gamester at
chess. , w
thus like a skilful ches player, he draws out his men, and
makes his pawns of use to his greater persons. dryden.
- che'ssom.
o
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 377</div><p class="text">c h i
se
l
3.
o:
o
-
che'ssom. n.s. mellow earth. - - - -
the tender chosom and mellow earth is the best, being mere
mould, between the two extremes of clay and sand; especially
if it be not loomy and binding. bacon's nat. hist.
chest. n.s.. [cyre, sax. cista, lat.] -
1. a box of wood or other materials, in which things are laid up.
he will seek there, on my word: neither press, cheft, trunk,
well, vault, but he hath an abstract for the remembrance of
such places. shakespeare.
but more have been by avarice opprest,
and heaps of money crowded in the cheft. dryden.
2. a chest of drawers.
drawers.
3. the trunk of the body, or cavity from the shoulders to the
belly.
so as have round faces, or broad chefts, or shoulders,
have seldom or never long necks. brown.
he describes another by the largeness of his cheft, and
breadth of his shoulders. pope's notes on the iliad.
t. chest. v. a. [from the noun..] to reposite in a chest ;
to hoard.
chest-found ering.. n.s. a disease in horses. it comes near
to a pleurisy, or peripneumony, in a human body. far. dici.
cheost ed. adj. [from cheft.] having a chest; as, broad-
chested, narrow-chested.
che's ter. see castor.
orror. : n. s. schosłaigne, fr. casianea, lat.]
1. the tree hath katkins, which are placed at remote distances
from the fruit, on the same tree. the outer coat of the
fruit is very rough, and has two or three nuts included in
each husk or covering. this tree was formerly in greater
plenty, as may be proved by the old buildings in london,
which were, for the most part, of this timber ; which is
equal in value to the best oak, and, for many purposes, far
exceeds it, particularly for making vessels for liquors ; it hay-
ing a property, when once thoroughly seasoned, to maintain
its bulk constantly, and is not subject to shrink or swell, like
other timber. miller.
2. the fruit of the chestnut tree.
a woman's tongue,
that gives not half so great a blow to th’ ear,
as will a chestnut in a farmer's fire. shakespeare.
october has a basket of services, medlars and chestnuts, and
fruits that ripen at the latter time. peacham on drawing.
3. the name of a brown colour.
his hair is of a good colour.
an excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only
colour. shakespeare.
merab's long hair was glossy chestnut brown. cowley.
che’s to n. m. s. a species of plum.
chevalier. n.s.. [chevalier, fr.] a knight; a gallant
ftrong man.
renowned talbot doth expe&amp;t my aid ;
and i am lowted by a traitor villain,
and cannot help the noble chevalier. shakespeare.
chewa'ux de frise. m. s. [fr. the singular cheval de frise
is seldom used.] the friesland horse, which is a piece of
timber, larger or smaller, and traversed with wooden spikes,
pointed with iron, five or six feet, long; used in defending a
passage, stopping a breach, or making a retrenchment to stop
the cavalry. it is also called a turnpike, or tourniquet. chamb.
che’ven. m.s.. [chevesne, fr.] a river fish; the same with chub.
cheveril. n.s. (cheverau, fr.] a kid; kidleather. obsolete.
a sentence is but a cheveril glove to a good wit: how quickly
the wrongside may be turned outward. shakespeare.
which gifts the capacity
of your soft cheveril conscience would receive,
if you might please to stretch it. shakespeare.
o, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
narrow to an ell broad. shakespeare.
che wisance. n.s.. [chevisance, fr.] enterprize; atchieve-
ment. a word now not in use.
fortune, the foe of famous chevisance,
seldom, said guyon, yields to virtue aid. spenser.
chevron. n.s. [french.] one of the honourable ordina-
ries in heraldry. it represents two rafters of a house, set up
as they ought to stand. harris.
t. chew. v. a. sceopyan, sax. fauwen, dutch. it is very
frequently pronounced chaw, and perhaps properly.]
1. to grind with the teeth; to masticate.
if little faults, proceeding on distemper,
shall not be wink'd at, how shall we stretch our eye,
when capital crimes, chew'd, swallow'd, and digested,
appear before us shakespeare.
pacing through the forest,
a case with moveable boxes or
chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy. shakesp.
this pious cheat, that never suck'd the blood,
nor chew'd the flesh of lambs. dryden's fables.
the vales
descending gently, where the lowing herd
chews verd’rous pasture, philips.
vol. i.
by thouins, solid aliment is divided into small parts: in a
human body, there is no other instrument to perform this
action but the teeth. by the action of chewing, the spittle
and mucus are squeezed from the glands, and mixed with the
aliment; which action, if it be long continued, will turn the
aliment into a sort of chyle. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. to meditate ; or ruminate in the thoughts.
while the fierce monk does at his trial stand,
he chews revenge, abjuring his offence:
guile in his tongue, and murder in his hand,
he stabs his judge, to prove his innocence.
prior.
3. to taste without swallowing.
heav'n's in my mouth,
as if i did but only chew its name. shakespeare.
some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and
some few to be chewed and digested : that is, some books are
to be read only in parts; others to be read, but not curiously;
and some few to be read wholly, with attention.
to chew. v. n. to champ upon; to ruminate.
i will with patience hear, and find a time; -
*till then, my noble friend, chew upon this. shakesp.
inculcate the doctrine of disobedience, and then leave the
multitude to chew upon't. l'estrange.
old politicians chew on wisdom past,
pope.
bacon.
and blunder on in business to the last.
chica ne. m. s. [chicane, fr. derived by menage from the
spanish word chico, little.]
1. the art of protracting a contest by petty objection and ar-
tifice. -
the general part of the civil law concerns not the chicane
of private cases, but the affairs and intercourse of civilized
nations, grounded upon the principles of reason. locke.
his attornies have hardly one trick left; they are at an end
of all their chicane. arbuthnot's history of john bull.
2. artifice in general. this sense is only in familiar language.
unwilling then in arms to meet,
he strove to lengthen the campaign,
and save his forces by chicane. prior.
to chica'ne. v. n. [chicaner, fr.] to prolong a contest by
tricks.
chica’ner. m. s. [chicaneur, fr.] a petty sophister; a trifling
disputant ; a wrangler.
this is the way to distinguish the two most different things
i know, a logical chicaner from a man of reason. locke.
chica'nery. n.s. [chicanerie, fr.] sophistry; mean arts of
wrangle.
his anger caused him to destroy the greatest part of these
reports ; and only to preserve, such as discovered most of the
chicanery and futility of the practice. arbuthnot.
chiches. n.s. see chickpeas. 1–
ch1'chling vetch. m. s. [lathyrus, lat.] in germany they
are cultivated, and eaten as peas, though neither so tender
nor well tasted. miller.
chick. n.s. , 7 scicen, sax. riecken, dutch. chicken is, i
ch1'cken. #/.3 believe, the old plural of chick, though now
used as a singular noun.]
i. the young of a bird, particularly of a hen, or small bird.
all my pretty ones
what, all my poly chickens, and their dam, -
at one fell swoop ! shakespeare.
for when the shell is broke, out comes a chick. davies.
while it is a chick, and hath no spurs, nor cannot hurt, nor
hath seen the motion, yet he readily practiseth it. hale.
ev’n fince she was a se’en-night old, they say,
was chaste and humble to her dying day;
nor chick, nor hen, was known to disobey. dryd. fables.
having the notion that one laid the egg out of which the
other was hatched, i have a clear idea of the relation of dam
and chick. lacke.
on rainy days alone i dine,
upon a chick and pint of wine :
on rainy days i dine alone,
and pick my chicken to the bone.
2. a word of tenderness.
my ariel, chick,
this is thy charge.
3. a term for a young girl.
then, chloe, still go on to prate
of thirty-six and thirty-eight;
pursue your trade of scandal-picking,
your hints, that stella is no chicken. swift.
ch1'ckenhearted. adj. [from chicken and heart.] cowardsy;
timorous ; fearful.
now we set up for tilting in the pit,
where 'tis agreed by bullies, chickenhearted,
to fright the ladies first, and then be parted. prol. to sp. fr.
the ch1'ckenpox. n.s. an exanthematous distemper, so called
from its being of no very great danger.
ch1'ckling. n.s.. [from chick.] a small chicken.
ch1'ckpeas. n.s.. [from chick and pea.] a kind of degenerate
pea. - miller.
ch1'ckw eed. n. s. [chick and weed. j. the name of a plant.
4 k. green
swift,
shakespeare.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 378</div><p class="text">c h 1
green mint, or chickweed, are of good use, in all the hard
fwellings of the breast, occasioned by milk. wiseman.
t. chide. v. a. preter. chid or chode, part, chid or chidden.
[ciban, sax.] - - -
1. to reprove; to cheek; to correot with words: applied to
persons. -
chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
when you perceive his blood inclin'd to mirth. ... shakes?.
and fly like chidden mercury from jove. shakespeare:
those, that do teach your babes,
do it with gentle means, and easy tasks;
he might have chid me so: for, in good faith,
i am a child to chiding. shakespeare.
scylla wept,
and chid her barking waves into attention. milton.
above the waves as neptune shew'd his face,
to chide the winds, and save the trojan race. waller.
you look, as if yon stern philosopher -
had just now chid you. addison.
if any woman of better fashion in the parish happened to
be absent from church, they were sure of a visit from him, to
chide and to dine with her. swift.
2. to drive with reproof.
margaret my queen, and clifford too,
have chid me from the battle. shakespeare.
3. to blame; to reproach: applied to things.
winds murmur'd through the leaves your long delay,
and fountains, o'er the pebbles, chid your stay. dryden.
i chid the folly of my thoughtless haste;
for, the work perfected, the joy was past. prior.
7% chide. v. n.
1. to clamour; to scold. -
what had he to do to chide at me? shakespeare.
next morn, betimes, the bride was missing:
the mother scream’d, the father chid,
where can this idle wench be hid
2. to quarrel with.
the business of the state does him offence,
and he does chide with you.
3. to make a noise.
my duty,
as doth a rock against the chiding flood,
should the approach of this wild river break,
and stand unshaken yours. shakespeare.
|ch1'der. n.s.. [from chide.]. a rebuker; a reprover.
not her that chides, sir, at any hand, i pray.—
i love no chiders, sir. shakespeare.
chief. adj. so the head, fr.] -
1. principal; most eminent; above the rest in any respect.
these were the chief of the officers that were over solo-
mon's works. 1 kings.
the hand of the princes and rulers hath been chief in this
swift.
shakespeare.
trespass. ezra.
your country, chief in arms, abroad defend ;
at home, with morals, arts, and laws amend. pope.
2. eminent; extraordinary.
a froward man soweth strife, and a whisperer separateth
chief friends. proverbs.
3. capital; of the first order; that to which other parts are
inferior, or subordinate.
i came to have a good general view of the apostle's main
purpose in writing the epistle, and the chief branches of his
discourse wherein he prosecuted it. locke.
4. it is used by some writers with a superlative termination;
but, i think, improperly : the comparative chiefer is never
found.
we beseech you, bend you to remain
here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
our chiefs' courtier, cousin, and our son. shakespeare.
doeg an edomite, the chiefs of the herdmen. i sam.
he sometimes denied admission to the chiefs' officers of
the army. clarendon.
chief. n.s.. [from the adjective.]
1. a military commander ; a leader of armies; a captain.
is pain to them
less pain, less to be fled or thou than they
less hardy to endure ? couragious chief!
the first in flight from pain. milton's paradis. loft.
after or before were never known
such chief; ; as each an army seem'd alone.
a wit’s a feather, and a chief a rod;
an honest man’s the noblest work of god.
a prudent chief not always must display
his pow'rs in equal ranks, and fair array;
but with th' occasion and the place comply,
conceal his force, nay seem sometimes to fly.
2. in chief, in law. in capite, by personal service.
all sums demandable, either for licence of alienation to be
made of lands holden in chief, or for the pardon of any such
alienation already made without licence, have been stayed in
the way to the hanaper, bacon.
dryden.
pope.
pope.
i shall be proud to hold my dependance on you in chof, as
i do part of my small fortune in wiltshire. do
3. in speiser it seems to signify somewhat like atchievement.
mark of distinetion. 2.
where be the nosegays that she dight for thee?
the coloured chaplets wrought with a chief,
the knottish rush-rings, and gilt rosemary. stensor
4. in heraldry. -
the chief is so called of the french word chof, the head
br upper part: this possesses the upper third part of the escut.
, cheon. peacham on drawing
chi'efdom. n.s.. [from chief.] sovereignty. not in use.”
zephyrus being in love with chloris, and coveting her to
wife, gave her for a dowry the chiefdom and sovereignty of all
flowers and green herbs. speos kal gls.
ch1'efless, adj. [from chief.] wanting a head; being with...t
a leader.
and chieftes, armies doz'd out the campaign,
- and navits yawn'd for orders on the main. pope.
chi'efly. adv. [from chief.] principally; eminently; more
than common.
any man who will consider the nature of an epic poem,
what a lions it describes, and what persons they are his,
whom it informs, will find it a work full of difficulty. dyii.
those parts of the kingdom, where the number and estates
of the dissenters chiefly lay. swift,
ch1’e frie. m. s. [from chi's j a small rent paid to the lord
paramount.
they shall be well able to live upon those lands, to yield
her majesty reasonable chiefrie, and also give a competent
maintenance unto the garrisons. spens, r's ireland.
would the reserved rent at this day be any more than a
small chifrie? - swift.
ch1’eftan. n.s.. [from chief, n. s. captain.]
1. a leader; a commander.
that forc'd their chieftain, for his safety’s sake,
(their chieftain humber named was aright).
unto the mighty stream him to betake,
where he an end of battle and of life did make. fairy &amp;#.
2. the head of a clan.
it broke, and absolutely subdued all the lords and chieftains
of the irishry. davies on ireland.
chie’vance. n. s. sprobably from achevance, fr. purchase.]
traffick, in which money is extorted; as discount. now
obsolete. - -
there were good laws against usury, the haslard use of
money; and against unlawful chievantes and exchanges, which
is bastard usury. bacon.
chilblai n. m. s. [from chill, cold, and blain; so that tem-
ple seems mistaken in his etymology, or has written it wrong
to serve a purpose..] sores made by frost.
i remembered the cure of childblanes when i was a boy,
(which may be called the children's gout) by burning at the
fire. temple,
child. n.s. in the plural children. [cilb, sax.]
1. an infant, or very young person.
in age, to wish for youth is full as vain,
as for a youth to turn a child again. denham,
we should no more be kinder to one child than to another,
than we are tender of one eye more than of the other. l'esir.
the young lad must not be ventured abroad at eight or ten,
for fear of what may happen to the tender child; though he
then runs ten times less risque than at sixteen. locke.
the stroke of death is nothing: children endure it, and
the greatest cowards find it no pain. jwake.
2. one in the line of filiation, opposed to the parent.
where children have been exposed, or taken away young,
and afterwards have approached to their parents presence, the
parents, though they have not known them, have had a secret
joy, or other alteration thereupon. bacon's nat. hist.
i shall see
the winged vengeance overtake such children. shakes care.
so unexhausted her perfeotions were,
that for more children, she had more to spare. dryden.
he in a fruitful wife's embraces old,
a long increase of children's children told. addison.
3. the descendants of a man, how remote soever, are called
children; as the children of edom, the children of israel.
+. in the language of scripture.
one weak in knowledge. isaiah. i cor.
such as are young in grace. 1 john.
such as are humble and docile. matthew,
the children of light, the children of darkness; who follow
light, who remain in darkness.
the eleet, the blessed, are also called the children of god.
how is he numbered among the children of god, and his
lot is among the saints' it isdom.
in the new testament, believers are commonly called chil-
dren of god.
ye are all the children of god, by faith in jesus christ.
gal. iii. 26. calmet.
5 - 4. a
s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 379</div><p class="text">c h i
c h is
hat]
it,
as 2.
ing:
i.
3. a girl child. not on use: s
mercy on's, a boarne, a very pretty bearne!
a boy, or child, i wonder! shakespeare.
6. any thing, the product or effect of another.
macduff, this noble passion,
child of integrity, hath from my soul
wip'd the black scruple's.
7. to be with ch1, p. to be pregnant.
if it must stand still, let wives with child
pray that their burthen may not fall this day, - - -
left that their hopes prodigiously be croft. shakspeare.
t, child...w.. n. [from the noun...] to bring children.
the spring, the summer,
the childing autumn, angry winter change
their wonted liveries. shakespeare.
as to childing women, young vigorous people, after irregu-
larities of diet, in such it begins with hashiorrhages. arbuthnot.
chi'ld be aring, participial substantive. [foom child and bear.]
the act of bearing children. -
to thee,
pains only in childbearing were foretold,. .
and, bringing forth, soon recompens'd with joy,
shakespeare.
fruit of thy womb. milton's paradis loft.
the timorous and irresolute sylvia has demurred 'till she is
past childbearing. addison.
c#1'ldbed. n.j. [from child and bed.] the state of a woman
bringing a child, or being in labour. -
the funerals of prince arthur, and of queen elizabeth,
who died in childhed in the tower. bacon.
pure, as when wash’d from spot of childbed stain. par. rog.
yet these, tho’ poor, the pain of childbed bear. dryden.
let no one be actually married, 'till she hath the childbed
pillows. - - speciator.
women in childbed are in the case of persons wounded.
arbuthnot on diet.
c#1'ldbirth. n.s.. [from child and birth.] travail; labour;
the time of bringing forth; the aet of bringing forth.
the mother of pyrocles, after her childbirth, died. sidney.
a kernel void of any taste, but not so of virtue, especially
for women travailing in childbirth. carew's survey.
in the whole sex of women, god hath decreed the sharpest
pains of childbirth; to shew, that there is no state exempt from
sorrow. taylor's holy living.
he to his wife, before the time assign'd
for childbirth came, thus bluntly spoke his mind. dryden,
chribed. adj. [from child..] furnished with a child.
how light and portable my pain seems now,
when that which makes me bend, makes the king bow;
he childed as i father'd. shakespeare.
ch1'lper mas day. [from child and mass.]
the day of the week, throughout the year, answering to
the day on which the feast of the holy innocents is solemnized,
which weak and superstitious persons think an unlucky
day.
or, talk of hares, or such uncouth things, proves as omi-
nous to the fisherman, as the beginning of a voyage on the
day when childermas day fell, doth to the mariner. carew.
ch1'ldhood. n.s. (from child, cilbhab, sax.]
1. the state of children; or, the time in which we are chil-
dren: it includes infancy, but is continued to puberty.
- now i have stain'd the childhood of our joy
with blood, remov’d but little from our own. shakoff.
the sons of lords and gentlemen should be trained up in
learning from their childhoods. spenser on ireland.
seldom have i ceas'd to eye
thy infancy, thy childhood, and thy youth. milton.
the same authority that the actions of a man have with us
in our childhood, the same, in every period of life, has the
praetice of all whom we regard as our superiours. rogers.
2. the time of life between infancy and puberty.
infancy and childhood demand thin, copious, nourishing ali-
ment. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. the properties of a child.
their love in early infancy began,
and rose as childhood ripen'd into man. dryden.
ch1'ldish. adj. [from child.]
1. having the qualities of a child; trifling; ignorant; simple.
learning hath its infancy, when it is but beginning and al-
most childish: then its youth, when it is luxuriant and juve-
nile. bacon's essays,
2. becoming only children; trifling; puerile.
musidorus being elder by three or four years, there was
taken away the occasion of childish contentions. sidney.
the lion's whelps she saw how he did bear,
and lull in rugged arms withouten childish fear. spensor.
when i was yet a child, no childish play
to me was pleasing ; all my mind was set
serious to learn and know. paradise regained.
the fathers looked on the worship of images as the most
silly and childish thing in the world. stillingsleet.
one that hath newly learn'd to speak and go,
loves childish plays. roscommon.
they have spoiled the walls with childs, sentences, that
consist often in a jingle of words. addison on italy.
by conversation the childish humours of their younger days
might be worn out. arbuthnol's hji. off. bull.
c#11 dishly. adv. [from child's...] in a childish trifling way;
like a child.
together with his fame their infamy was spread, who had
so rashly and childishly ejected him. hooker.
some men are of excellent judgment in their own profes-
... sons, but childishly unskilful in anything besides. hayward.
chi’ldish ness. n.s.. [from childish...]
1. puerility; triflingness. -
the actions of childishnes, and unfashionable carriage,
time and age will of itself be sure to reform. locke.
nothing in the world could give a truer idea of the super-
stition, credulity, and child/hness of the roman catholick
religion. addison o -
2. harmlessness. yon on *
speak thou, boy;
perhaps thy childishness will move him more -
- than can our reasons, shakosheare.
ch1 ldl ess. adj. [from child.] without children; without
offspring. -
as thy sword hath made women childs, so shall thy mo-
ther be childlys, among women. i samue'.
a man shall see the noblest works and foundations have
proceeded from childless men; which have sought to express
the images of their minds, where those of their bodies have
failed : so the care of posterity is most in them that have no
posterity. bacon's essays.
childles; thou art, childles, remain : so death
shall be deceiv'd his glut. - milton's paradis, loft.
she can give the reason why one died childly. speci.
ch1'ldlike, adj. [from child and like..] becoming or beseem-
ing a child. -
who can owe no less than childlike obedience to her that
hath more than motherly care. płocker.
i thought the remnant of mine age
should have been cherish’d by her childlike duty. shakespeare.
chiliad. m. s. [from xxix;..] a thousand; a collection or
fum containing a thousand. - -
we make cycles and periods of years; as decads, centuries,
... chiliad, for the use of computation in history. holder.
co n.j. [from xixia..] a figure of a thousand
1ccs.
in a man, who speaks of a chiliaedron, or a body of a
thousand fides, the idea of the figure may be very confused,
though that of the number be very distinet. locke.
chil. f active. adj. [from chile.] that which makes chile.
whether this be not effected by some way of corrosion,
rather than any proper digestion, chilifactive mutation, or
alimental conversion. brown's pulgar errours,
chilifa’ctory. adj. [from chile.] that which has the qua-
lity of making chile.
we should rather rely upon a chilisa?ory menstruum, or
digestive preparation drawn from species or individuals, whose
stomachs peculiarly dissolve lapideous bodies. brown.
chilification. n s, [from chile.] the act of making chile.
nor will we affirm that iron is indigested in the stomach
of the ostriche 3 but we suspect this effect to proceed not
from any liquid reduction, or tendence to chylification, by the
power of natural heat. brown's /ugar errours.
chill. adj. [cele, sax.] -
1. cold; that which is cold to the touch.
and all my plants i save from nightly ill,
of noisom winds, and blasting vapours chill. amilton.
2. cold ; having the sensation of cold ; shivering with cold.
my heart, and my chill veins, freeze with despair. rowe.
3. dull; not warm ; not forward : as, a chill reception.
a. depressed; dejected; discouraged.
chill. n.s. [from the adjective..] chilness; cold.
i very well know one to have a sort of chill about his prae-
cordia and head. derham's physico-theology.
to chill. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. to make cold. -
age has not yet
so shrunk my finews, or so chill'd my veins,
but conscious virtue in my breast remains. dryden.
heat burns his rise, frost chills his setting beams,
and vex the world with opposite extremes. creech.
each changing season does its poison bring ;
rheums chill the winter, agues blast the spring. prior.
now no more the drum
provokes to arms; or trumpet's clangor shrill
affrights the wives, or chills the virgin's blood. philips.
2. to depress; to deject; to discourage. o
every thought on god chills the gaiety of his spirits, and
awakens terrors, which he cannot bear. rogers.
3. to blast with cold.
the fruits perish on the ground,
or soon decay, by snows immodorate chill’d, -
by winds are blasted, or by lightning ki!,'d. ila more.
- ch1'l-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 380</div><p class="text">c h i
c h i
chi'illness. n.s.. [from chilly..] a sensation of shivering cold.
if the patient survives three days, the acuteness of the pain
abates, and a chilliness or shivering affects the body. arbuth.
ch1'lly. adj. [from chill.] somewhat cold.
a chilly sweat bedevs
my shudd'ring limbs. philips.
chi’ll ness. n.s.. [from chill j . coldness; want of warmth.
if you come out of the sun suddenly into a shade, there
followeth a chilness or shivering in all the body. bacon.
this, while he thinks, he lifts aloft his dart,
a gen’rous chilns; seizes ev'ry part, , , ,
the veins pour back the blood, and fortify the heart. dryd.
chimb. n.s. [#ime, dut..] the end of a barrel or tub.
chime. m. s. [the original of this word is doubtful... junius
and minshew suppose it corrupted from cimbal; skinner from
gamme, or gamut ; henshaw from chiamare, to call, because .
the chime calls to church. perhaps it is only softened from
chirme, or churme, an old word for the sound of many voices,
or instruments making a noise together.]
1. the consonant or harmonick sound of many correspondent
instruments.
hang our shaggy thighs with bells;
that, as we do strike a tune,
in our dance, shall make a chime.
the sound
of instruments, that made melodious chime,
was heard, of harp and organ. milton's paradise lost.
love virtue, she alone is free;
she can teach you how to climb
higher than the sphery chime.
2. the correspondence of sound.
love first invented verse, and forth'd the rhime,
the motion measur’d, harmoniz'd the chime. dryden.
3. the sound of bells, not rung by ropes, but struck with
hammers. in this sense it is always used in the plural, chimes.
we have heard the chimes at midnight. shakespeare.
4. the correspondence of proportion or relation.
the conceptions of things are placed in their several de-
grees of similitude; as in several proportions, one to another:
in which harmonious chimes, the voice of reason is often
drowned. grew's cosmol.
to chime. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to sound in harmony or consonance.
to make the rough recital aptly chime,
or bring the sum of gallia's loss to rhine,
'tis mighty hard.
2. to correspond in relation or proportion.
father and son, husband and wife, and such other corre-
lative terms, do belong one to another; and, through
custom, do readily chime, and answer one another, in people's
memories. . locke.
3. to agree; to fall in with.
he not only sat quietly and heard his father railed at, but
often chimed in with the discourse. arbuth. hist, of j. bull.
4. to suit with 3, to agree.
any seot, whose reasonings, interpretation, and language,
i have been used to, will, of course, make all chime that
way; and make another, and perhaps the genuine meaning of
ben. johnson.
milton.
prior.
the author, seem harsh, strange and uncouch to me. locke.
5. to jingle; to clatter.
but with the meaner tribe i'm forc’d to chime,
and, wanting strength to rise, descend to rhime. smith.
to chime. v. a.
1. to move, or strike, or cause to sound hramonically, or with
just consonancy.
with lifted arms they order ev'ry blow,
and chime their sounding hammers in a row :
with labour’d anvils a.tna groans below.
2. to strike a bell with a hammer.
chime’ra. m. s. [chimaera, lat..] a vain and wild fancy,
as remote from reality as the existence of the poetical chimera,
a monster feigned to have the head of a lion, the belly of a
goat, and the tail of a dragon.
in short, the force of dreams is of a piece, -
chimeras all; and more absurd, or less. dryden's fables.
no body joins the voice of a sheep with the shape of a
horse, to be the complex ideas of any real substances, unless
he has a mind to fill his head with chimeras, and his discourse
with unintelligible words. locke.
chime’rica l. adj. [from chimera.] imaginary; fanciful;
wildly, vainly, or fantastically conceived; fantastick.
notwithstanding the fineness of this allegory may attone
for it in some measure, i cannot think that persons of such a
chimerical existence are proper actors in an epic poem. speciat.
chime’r1c all y. adv. [from chimerical.] vainly ; wildly ;
fantastically. -
ch1'm in ag e. m. s. [from chimin, an old law word for a road.]
a toll for passage through a forest. cowel.
chi(mney. n.s.. [cheminee, french.]
1. the passage through which the smoke ascends from the fire
in the house.
chimnies, with scorn, rejecting smoke.
dryd. georg.
swift.
2. the turret raised above the roof of the house,
ance of the smoke. •
the night has been unruly: where we lay,
for convey-
our chimnies were blown down. shakespeare.
3. the fireplace.
the chimney
is south the chamber; and the chimneypiece,
chaste dian bathing. shakespeare,
the fire which the chaldeans worshipped for a god, i.
crept into every man's chimney. raleigh's hiff.
low offices, which some neighbours hardly think it worth
stirring from their chimney fides to obtain, swift on sac. toft.
chimney-cor ner. n. s [from chimney and corner.] the
fireside; the seat on each end of the firegrate; usually noted
in proverbial language for being the place of idlers.
yet some old men
tell stories of you in their chimney-corner. denham,
chi’mney piece. n. s. [from chimney and piece.] the orna-
mental piece of wood, or stone, that is set round the fireplace,
polish and brighten the marble hearths and chimneypiece,
with a clout dipt in grease. swift.
ch1'mneysweeper. m. s. [from thimney and sweeper.].
1. one whose trade it is to clean foul chimnies of soot.
to look like her, are chimneysweepers black:
and since her time are colliers counted bright. shakoff.
the little chimneysweeper skulks along,
and marks with sooty stains the heedless throng. -
even lying, ned the chimneysweeper of savoy, and tom
the portugal dustman, put in their claims. arbuthnot,
2. it is used proverbially for one of a mean and vile occupation.
golden lads and girls, all must,
as chimneysweepers, come to dust. shakespeare.
chin. m. s. [cinne, sax, kinn, germ.] the part of the face
beneath the under lip.
but all the words i could get of her, was wrying her waist,
and thrusting out her chin. sidney.
with his amazonian chin he drove
the bristled lips before him. shakespeare.
he rais'd his hardy head, which sunk again,
and, sinking on his bosom, knock'd his chin. dryden.
china. m. s. [from china, the country where it is made.]
china ware; porcelain ; a species of vessels made in china,
dimly transparent, partaking of the qualities of earth and
glass, they are made by mingling two kinds of earth, of
which one easily vitrifies; the other resists a very strong heat:
when the vitrifiable earth is melted into glass, they are com-
pletely burnt. -
spleen, vapours, or small-pox, above them all,
and mistress of herself, tho’ china fall. pope.
after supper, carry your plate and china together in the same
basket. swift.
ch1'na-orange. m. s. [from china and orange.] the sweet
orange; brought originally from china.
not many §. has the china orange been propagated in
portugal and spain. mortimer's husbandry.
china’. root. n.s.. [from china and root.] a medicinal root,
brought originally from china. -
ch1'ncou gh. m. s. [perhaps more properly kincough, from
kincken, to pant, dut. and cough..] a violent and convulsive
cough, to which children are subject.
i have observed a chincough, complicated with an inter-
mitting fever. foyer on the humours.
chine. n.s. (eschine, fr. schiena, ital. spina, lat. cein, arm.]
1. the part of the back, in which the spine or backbone is
found. -
she strake him such a blow upon his chine, that she opened
all his body. sidney.
he presents her with the tusky head,
and chine, with rising bristles roughly spread. dryden.
2. a piece of the back of an animal.
cut out the burly boned clown in chines of beef ere thou
sleep. shakespeare.
he had killed eight fat hogs for this season, and he had dealt
about his chines very liberally amongst his neighbours. spei.
to chine. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut into chines.
he that in his line did chine the long rib'd apennine. dry.
chink, m. s. scinan, to gape, sax.] a small aperture long-
wise ; an opening or gap between the parts of any thing.
pyramus and thisby did talk through the chink of a wall.
shakesp. midsummer night's dream.
plagues, also have been raised by anointing the chinks of
doors, and the like. bacon's nat. hiff.
though birds have no epiglottis, yet they so contract the
chink of their larinx, as to prevent the admission of wet or
dry indigested. brown's vulgar errours.
other inventions, false and absurd, that are like so many
chinks and holes to discover the rottenness of the whole fa-
brick. south.
in vain she search'd each cranny of the house,
each gaping think, impervious to a mouse. swift.
to chink. v. a. [derived by skinner from the sound.] to
shake so as to make a sound, -
he
6.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 381</div><p class="text">c h i
c h i
o
in th:
s.
the
opig.
: ho
id:
o
hio.
th to:
to-
t, to
j.”
its:
ise chin's his purse, and takes his seat of state:
with ready quills the dedicators wait. pope's dunciad.
7, chin k. v. n. to found by striking each other.
lord strutt's mo:ey shines as bright, and chinks as well, as
'squire south's. arbuthnot's his of j. bull.
when not a guinea cho'd on martin’s boards,
and atwill's self was drain’d of all his hoards. swift.
ch1'nky. adj. [from think.] full of holes; gaping; opening
into narrow clefts.
but plaster thou the chimay hives with clay. .
grimalkin, to domestick vermin sworn
an everlasting foe, with watchful eye
lies nightly brooding o'er a chioy gap,
pretending her fell claws, to thoughtless mice
sure ruin. philips's poems.
chints. m. s. cloach of cotton made in india, and printed
- with colours.
let a charming chints, and brussels lace,
wrap my cold limbs, and shade my lifeless face. pope.
ch, opp 1 ne. m. s. [from chapin, span.] a high shoe, formerly
worn y ladies. -
your ladyship is nearer heaven than when i saw you last,
by the altitude of a chippine. shakespeare.
the woman was a giantess, and yet walked always in
chieppines. cowley.
chip, cheap, chipping, in the names of places, imply a
market; from the sax. cyppan ceapan, to buy. gibson.
t. chip. v. a. [probably corrupted from chop.] to cut into
small pieces; to diminish, by cutting away a little at a
tiones
dryd. wirg.
his mangled myrmidons
noseless, handless, hackt and chipt come to him,
crying on hector. shak. trail, and cross.
to return to our statue in the block of marble, we see it
fometimes only begun to be clipped; sometimes rough hewn,
and just sketched into an human figure. alison's spect.
the critick strikes out all that is not just;
and 'tis ev'n so the butler chips his crust. king.
industry -
taught him to chip the wood, and hew the stone. thoms.
chip. m. s. [from the verb.] -
3. a small piece taken off by a cutting instrument.
cucumbers do extremely affect reoisture, and over-drink
themselves, which chaff or chips forbiddeth. bacon.
that chip made iron swim, not by natural power. taylor.
the straw was laid below ; -
of thips and serewood was the second row. dryd. fables.
2. a small piece, however made.
the thanganese lies in the vein in lumps wrecked, in an ir-
regular manner, among clay, spar, and chips of stone. isoodw.
chipping. m. s. [from 7% chip.] a fragment cut off.
they dung their land with the chippings of a sort of soft
ftone. - martimer’s husbandry.
the chippings and filings of these jewels, could they be pre-
served, are of more value than the whole mass of ordinary
authours. felton on the clafficks.
chira'grica l. adj. schiragra, lat.] having the gout in
the hand; subject to the gout in the hand. -
chiragrical persons do suffer in the finger as well as in the rest,
and sometimes first of all. brown's wu'gar errours.
chiroog rapher. m. s. so, the hand, and yp:%2, to write.]
he that exercises or professes the art or business of writing.
thus passeth it from this office to the chirographer's, to be
engrossed. bacon's office of alienation.
chiroog raphis t. n. s. [see chiroc rapher...] this word
is used in the following passage, i think improperly, for one
that tells fortunes, by examining the hand: the true word is
chirosophift, or chiromancer,
let the phisiognomists examine his features; let the chiro-
graphifts behold his palm ; but, above all, let us consult for
the calculation of his nativity. arbuth, and pope.
chiro'graphy, n. s. [see chirog rapher..] the art of
writing. -
chiro'mance r. m. s. [see chif ox: a ncy.] one that fore-
tells future events by inspecting the hand.
the middle sort, who have not much to spare,
to chiromancers’ cheaper art repair,
who clap the pretty palm, to make the lines more fair.
drydon's juvenal.
ch1'roman cy, n. s. [xsie, the hand, and polis, a prophet.]
the art of foretelling the events of life, by inspecting the
hand.
there is not much considerable in that doctrine of chiro-
many that spots in the top of the nails, do signify things
past; in the middle, things present; and at the bottom, events
to conne. brown's sugar errours.
to chirp. v. n. [perhaps contracled from cheer up. the
dutch have circken.] to make a cheerful noise; as birds,
when they call without singing.
she chirping ran, he peeping flew away,
*till hard by them both he and she did stay.
sidney.
vol. i.
carne he right now to sing a raven's note;
and thinks he, that the chirping of a wron
can chase away the first conceived found.
no chirping lark the welkin sheen invokes.
the careful hen
calls all her clipping family around. thomson's soring.
70 chirp. v. a. ii his seems apparently corfu, ted lion
cheer up...] to make cheerful. -
let no sober bigot here think it a sin,
to push on the chirping and moderate bottle. joyson.
sir balaam now, he lives like other folks;
he takes his chirping pint, he cracks his jokes. poe.
chirp. m. s. [from the verb...] the voice of birds or insects.
winds over us whisper'd, flocks by us did bleat,
and chirp went the gr, shopper under our feet. soedjator.
ch1'rper. n. s. [from chirp. j. one that chirps; one that is
chearful.
to chirr.e. v. m. sceoilan, sa ' ) see churme. to coo
as a pigeon. - junius.
chirurgeon. m. s. [x:isovo’, from zoo, the hand, and
scyov, work.] one that cures ailments, isot by internal me-
dicines, but outward applications. it is now generally pro-
nounced, and by many written, surgeon.
when a man's wounds cease to smart, only because he has
lost his feeling, they are nevertheless mortal, for his not seeing
his need of a chirurgeon. szoh’s sermons.
chiru’rgery. m. s. [from chirurgeon.] the art of curing by
external applications. this is called sorgery. 2.
gynecia having skill in chirurgery, an art in those days
much esteemed. sidney.
nature could do nothing in her case without the help of
chirurgery, in drying up the luxurious flesh, and making way
to pull out the rotten bones. - //yiman.
ch1ru'rgical.
chiru'rg ick.
1. having qualities useful in outward applications to hurts.
as to the chirurgical or physical virtues of wax, it is
reckoned a mean between hot and cold. a sortin.r.
2. relating to the manual part of healing.
. manual in general, consisting in operations of the hand.
this sense, though the first, according to etymology, is now
scarce found.
the chirurgical or manual part doth refer to the making in-
struments, and exercising particular experiments. if itkins.
chi’sel. n.s.. [ciseau, fr. of scism, lat..] an instrument
with which wood of stone is pared away.
what fine chisel
could ever yet cut breath : let no man mock me,
for i will kiss her. shakosheare.
there is such a feeming softness in the limbs, as if not a
chisel had hewed them out of stone, but a pencil had drawn
and stroaked them in oil. ?? often’s archite.o. re.
imperfect shapes: in marble such are feen,
when the rude chisel does the man begin. dryden.
to ch1's el. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut with a chise!.
chit. m. s. [according to dr. hickes, fron kind, germ. child;
perhaps from chico, little, span.
1. a child; a baby. generally used of young persons in con-
tempt.
these will appear such chits in story,
*twill turn all politicks to jest. anzorous.
2. the shoot of corn from the end of the grain. a cant term
with malts!ers. -
barley, couched four days, wiil begin to shew the cost or
sprit at the root-end. . a sortimer’s hofhardry.
3. a freckle. [from chick-pease..] in this sense it is seldom used.
‘īo chit. v. m. [from the noun.j to sprout; to shoot at the
end of the grain : cant. -
i have known barley chit in seven hours after, it had been
thrown forth. morimer’s hosody.
ch1'tchair. m. s. [corrupted by reduplication from that...]
prattle; idle prate; idle talk. a word only used in ludicrous
conversation.
i am a member of a female society, who call ourselves the
chitchat club. soedjator.
ch1’rter lings. m. s. without singular. [from shyterings,
dut. afishew ; from kutten, germ. skinner. j the guts;
the bowels. skinner.
ch1't ty. adj. [from chit.] childish ; like a baby.
chi’v al rous. adj. [from chivalry.) relating to chivalry,
or errant knighthood; knightly ; warlike 5 adventurous ;
daring. a word now out of use.
and noble minds of yore allied were
- in brave pursuit of chivalrous emprise. fairy queen.
chi'valry. m. s. schevalerie, fr. knighthood, from cheva', a
horse; as eques in latin. j
1. knighthood; a military dignity.
there be now, for martial encouragement, some degrees
and orders of chivalry; which, nevertheless, are conferred
promiscuously upon scidiers and no soldiers. , bacon's effys.
2. the qualifications of a knight ; as valour; dexterity in arms.
4 l. thou
* -
shosecre.
gy's poyi.
{a}. see chirurgeon.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 382</div><p class="text">c h o
c h o
thou has slain
the slow'r of europe for his chivalry. shakspeare.
i may speak it to my shame,
i have a truant been to chivalry. shakespeare.
3. the general system of knighthood.
solemnly he wore, -
that by the faith which knights to knighthood bore,
and whate'er else to chivalry belongs, -
he would not cease 'till he reveng'd their wrongs. dryden.
4. an adventure; an exploit. not now in use.
they four doing acts thore dangerous, though less famous,
because they were but private chivaries. sidney.
5. the body or order of knights.
and by his light
did all the chivalry of england move
to do brave acts.
6. in law.
orvilium militare, of the french, chevalier; a tenure of
land by knights service. there is no land but is holden me-
diately or immediately of the crown, by, some service or
other; and therefore are all our freeholds, that are to us and
our heirs, called fuda, fees, as proceeding from the benefit of
the king. as the king gave to the nobles large possessions for
this or that rent and scrwice, so they parcelled out their lands,
forceeived for rents and services as they thought good; and
those services are by littleton divided into chivalry and socage:
the one is martial and military; the other, clownish and
rustick. chivalry, therefore, is a tenure of service, whereby
the tenant is bound to perform some noble or military office
unto his lord, and is of two sorts; either regal, that is, such
as may hold only of the king; or such as may also hold of a
common person as well as of the king. that which may
hold only of the king is properly called sergeantry, and is again
divided into grand or petit, i. e. great or small. chivalry that
may hold of a common person, as well as of the king, is
called scutagium. cowel.
7. it ought properly to be written chevalry. it is a word not
much used, but in old poems or romances.
chi’ves. n.s.. [cive, fr. skinner.]
1. the threads or filaments rising in flowers, with seeds at the
end.
the masculine or prolifick seed contained in the chives, or
apices of the flamina. ray on the creation.
2. a species of small onion. skinner.
chloro's is. n.s.. [from x2.4x32, green.] the green-sickness.
to cho a k. see chok e.
cho'colate. m. s. [chocolate, span.]
1. the nut of the cacao tree.
the tree hath a rose flower, of a great number of petals,
from whose empalement arises the pointal, being a tube cut
into many parts, which becomes a fruit shaped somewhat like
a cucumber, and deeply furrowed, in which are contained
several secos, collected into an oblong heap, and slit down,
somewhat like almonds. it is a native of america, and is
found in great plenty in several places between the tropicks,
and grows wild. sce coco a. 4/iller.
2. the cake or mass, made by grinding the kernel of the cacao-
nut with other substances, to be dissolved in hot water.
the spaniards were the first who brought chocolate into
use in europe, to promote the consumption of their cacao-
nuts, achiot, and other drugs, which their west indies fur-
nish, and which enter the composition of chocolate. chambers.
3. the liquor, made by a solution of chocolate in hot water.
chocolate is certainly much the best of these three exotick
liquors; its oil seems to be both rich, alimentary, and ano-
dyne. arbuthnot on aliments.
in fumes of burning chocolate shall glow,
and tremble at the sea that froths below ! pope.
cho'cclate-house. m. s. [chocolate and house..] a house where
company is entertained with chocolate.
ever since that time, lisander has been twice a day at the
chocolate-house. tatler.
chode. [the old preterite, from chide.] see chide.
and jacob was wroth, and chode with laban. gen.
choice. n. s. [choix, french.]
1. the act of choosing; determination between different things
proposed; election.
if you oblige me suddenly to chuse,
t he choice is made; for i must both refuse. dryden.
sost elocution doth thy style renown,
qentle or sharp, according to thy choice,
to laugh at follies, or to lash at vice dryden’s per
2. the power of choosing: election. yaen's ors.
- choice there is not, unless the thing which we take to be so
* * ***, that we might have refused it. if fire consume
the stable, it chooseth not so to do, because the nature thereof
is such that it can do no other. hooker.
there's no liberty like the freedom of having it at my own
choice, whether i will live to the world, or to myself. l'esr.
"9 alk of compelling a man to be good, is a contraffic.
tion ; for where o is force, there can be no choice. where-
shakespeare.
as all moral goodness consisteth in the eleetive act of the un-
derstanding will. grow's cosmol.
whether he will remove his contemplation from one idea
to another, is many times in his choice.
3. care in choosing; curiosity of distinction.
julius caesar did write a collection of apophthegms: it is pit
his book is lost; for i imagine they were colle&amp;ted with judg.
ment and choice. bacon's apophthegn,
4. the thing chosen; the thing taken or approved, in preference
to others.
your choice is not so rich in birth as beauty:
lotte.
that you might well enjoy her. shakespear,
take to thee, from among the cherubim,
thy choice of flaming warriors. milton's par, loft.
now mars, she said, let fame exalt her voice;
nor let thy conquests only be her choice. prior,
5. the best part of any thing, that is more properly the objea
of choice.
the choice and flower of all things profitable in other books,
the psalms do both more briefly contain, and more movingly
also express. hooker.
thou art a mighty prince: in the choice of our sepulchres
bury thy dead. gens.
their riders, the flow'r and choice
of many provinces, from bound to bound. milton.
6. several things proposed at once, as objects of judgment and
election.
a braver choice of dauntless spirits,
did never float upon the swelling tide. shakespeare,
7. to make choice of. to choose; to take from severalthings
proposed.
wisdom, of what herself approves, makes choice,
nor is led captive by the common voice. denham,
choice. adj. [chais, french.]
1. select; of extraordinary value.
after having set before the king the choices of wines and
fruits, he told him the best part of his entertainment was to
coit1c. guardian.
thus in a sea of folly toss'd,
my choices hours of life are lost. swift.
2. chary; frugal; careful. used of persons.
he that is choice of his time, will also be choice of his com-
pany, and choice of his actions. taylor's holy living.
cho'iceless. adj. [from choice..] without the power of
choosing; without right of choice; not free.
neither the weight of the matter, of which the cylinder is
made, nor the round voluble form of it, are any more im-
putable to that dead choicels, creature, than the first motion of
it; and, therefore, it cannot be a fit resemblance to shew the
reconcileableness of fate with choice. hammond.
choice ly. adv. [from choice.]
1. curiously; with exact choice.
a band of men,
colle&amp;ted choicely from each county some. shakesheart,
2. valuably; excellently.
it is certain it is choicely good. walton's anglor.
choicen ess. m. s. [from choice.] nicety; particular value.
carry into the shade such auriculas, seedlings or plants, as
are for their choicens; reserved in pots. evelyn's kalendar.
choir. m. s. [chorus, latin.]
1. an assembly or band of fingers.
they now assist the choir,
of angels, who their songs admire. waller,
2. the singers in divine worship.
the choir,
with all the choicest musick of the kingdom,
together sung te deum. shakespeare.
3. o: part of the church where the choiristers or fingers are
placed.
the lords and ladies, having brought the queen
to a prepar’d place in the choir, fell off
at distance from her.
to choke. v. a. [aceocan, sax. from ceoca, the cheek or
mouth. according to minshow, from on ; from whence, pro-
bably, the spanish, ahogar.]
1. to suffocate; to kill by stopping the passage of respiration,
but when to my good lord i prove untrue,
i'll choke myself.
while you thunder'd clouds of dust did choke
contending troops. waller,
2. to stop up ; to obstruct; to block up a passige.
men troop'd up to the king's capacious court,
whose porticos were cho'd with the resort. chapm.
they are at a continual expence to cleanse the ports, and
keep them from being choked up, by the help of several en-
gines. addison on italy.
while prayers and tears his destin’d progress stay, -
and crowds of mourners choke their sov’reign's way. tickell.
3. to hinder by obstruction, or confinement.
as two spent swimmers, that do cling together,
and choke their art. shakespear.
she
shakosheart.
shakespeari,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 383</div><p class="text">o
†-
§ -
o:
list.
-
o
. she canhot lose her perfeot pow'r to see, - -
tho' mists and clouds do choke her window-light. davies.
it seemeth the fire is so choked, as not to be able to remove
the stone. bacon's natural history.
you must make the mould big enough to contain the whole
fruit, when it is grown to the greatest; for else you will choke
the speading of the fruit. bacon's natural history.
the fire, which chok'd in ashes lay,
a load too heavy for his soul to move,
was upward blown below, and brush'd away by love. dryd.
4. to suppress.
and yet we ventur'd ; for the gain propos'd
chok'd the respect of likely peril fear'd.
confess thee freely of thy fin:
, for to deny each article with oath,
cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
that i do groan withal.
5. to overpower.
and that which fell among thorns are they, which, when
they have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares, and
riches, and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to per-
feotion. luke.
no fruitful crop the fickly fields return;
but oats and darnel choke the rising corn.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
dryden's post.
choke. n.s.. [from the verb.] the filamentous or capillary
part of an artichoke. a cant word.
choke-pear. m. s. [from choke and pear.]
1. a rough, harsh, unpalatable pear.
3. any aspersion or sarcasm, by which another is put to filence.
a low term.
pardon me for going so low as to talk of giving choke-
ars. clarissa.
a cho’ker. m. s. [from choke.]
1. one that chokes or suffocates another.
2. one that puts another to silence.
3. any thing that cannot be answered.
chooke-weed. m. s. servangina.] a plant.
chosky. adj. [from choke.] that which has the power of
suffocation.
chotagogues. n.s. [xaxgp, bile.] medicines which have
the power of purging bile or choler.
chotler. m. s. scholera, lat. from x0x7.]
1. the bile.
marcilius ficinus increases these proportions, adding two
more of pure choler. j/otton on education.
there would be a main defe&amp;t, if such a feeding animal,
and so subject unto diseases from bilious causes, should want a
proper conveyance for choler. brown's vulgar errours.
2. the humour, which, by its super-abundance, is supposed to
produce irascibility.
it engenders choler, planteth anger;
and better 'twere that both of us did fast,
since, of ourselves, ourselves are cholerick,
than feed it with such over-roasted flesh. shakespeare.
3. anger; rage.
put him to choler straight: he hath been used
ever to conquer, and to have his word
of contradiction. shakespeare.
he, methinks, is no great scholar,
who can mistake desire for choler. prior.
cho'lerick. adj. [cholericus, latin.]
1. abounding with choler.
our two great poets being so different in their tempers, the
one cholerick and sanguine, the other phlegmatick and melan-
cholick. dryden.
2. angry; irascible: of persons.
bull, in the main, was an honest plain-dealing fellow,
chalerick, bold, and of a very unconstant temper. arbuthnot.
3. angry; offensive: of words or actions.
there came in chalerick haste towards me about seven or
eight knights. sidney.
becanus threatneth all that read him, using his confident,
or rather cholerick speech. raleigh's hist. of the world.
cho'lerickness. n.s.. [from cholerick.] anger; irascibility;
eevishness.
to choose. v. a. i chose, i have chosen or chose. [choisir,
fr. ceoran, sax. higson, germ.]
1. to take by way of preference of several things offered; not
to reject.
did i choose him out of all the tribes of israel to be my
priest. 1 sam, ii. 28.
i may neither choose whom i would, nor refuse whom i
dislike. shakespeare.
if he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket, you
should refuse tp perform your father's will, if you should re-
fuse to accept him. shakespeare.
2. to take ; not to refuse. f
let us choose to us judgment; let us know among ourselves
what is good. job.
the will has still so much freedom left as to enable it to
those any act in its kind good; as also to refuse any act in its
kind evil. south's sermons.
3. to seled; to pick out of a number. . -
how much less shall i answer him, and chose cut my words
to reason with him * ob.
4. to elect for eternal happiness; to predestinate to life. a
term of theologians.
to choose. v. n. to have the power of choice between disa
ferent things. it is generally joined with a negative, and
signifies must necessarily be.
without the influence of the deity supporting things, their
utter annihilation could not choose but follow. hooker.
knaves abroad,
who having by their own importunate suit,
convinced or supplied them, they cannot chose
but they must blab. - shakosheare,
when a favourite shall be raised upon the foundation of
merit, then can he not choose but prosper. bacon.
threw down a golden apple in her way;
for all her haste, she could not choose but stay. dryden.
those who are persuaded that they shall continue for ever,
cannot choose but aspire after a happiness commensurate to their
duration. tillotson.
chooser. m. s. [from choose..] he that has the power or office
of choosing; eleetor.
come all into this nut, quoth she 3
come closely in, be rul’d by me;
each one may here a chooser be,
for room you need not wrestle. drayton.
in all things to deal with other men, as if i might be my
own chooser. hammond's pract. catechism.
this generality is not sufficient to make a good chooser,
without a more particular contraction of his judgment. isott.
to chop. v. a. [kappen, dut. couper, french.]
1. to cut with a quick blow.
what shall we do, if we perceive
lord hastings will not yield to our complots 2
chop off his head, man. shakespeare.
within these three days his head is to be chopt off. shałop.
and where the cleaver chops the heifer's spoil,
thy breathing nostril hold. gay's trivia.
2. to devour eagerly: with up.
you are for making a hasty meal, and for chopping up your
entertainment, like an hungry clown. dryden.
upon the opening of his mouth he drops his breakfast,
which the fox presently chopp'd up. l’estrange.
3. to mince; to cut into small pieces.
they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for
the pot. icah.
some grannaries are made with clay, mixed with hair,
chopped straw, mulch, and such like. mortimer’s husbandry.
by dividing of them into chapters and verses, they are fo
thopped and minced, and stand so broken and divided, that the
common people take the verses usually for different aphorisms.
locke.
4. to break into chinks.
i remember the cow's dugs, that her pretty chopt hands had
milked. shukspeare.
to chop. v. n.
1. to do any thing with a quick and unexpected motion, like
that of a blow : as we say, the wind chops about, that is,
changes suddenly. *
if the body repercussing be ne:r, and yet not so near as to
make a concurrent echoe, it choppeth with you upon the
sudden. bacon's natural history.
2. to catch with the mouth.
out of greediness to get both, he chops at the shadow, and
loses the substance. l'e/irange.
3. to light or happen upon a thing suddenly : with upon.
to chop. v. a. sceapan, sax. koopen, dut. to buy.]
1. to purchase generally by way of truck 3 to give one thing
for another.
the chopping of bargains, when a man buys, not to hold,
but to sell again, grindeth upon the seller and the buyer. bac.
2. to put one thing in the place of another.
sets up communities and senses,
to chop and change intelligencies. hudibras.
affirm the trigons chopp'd and chang'd,
the watry with the fiery rang'd. hudibrar.
we go on chopping and changing our friends, as well as our
horses. l’e/irange.
3. to bandy; to altercate; to return one thing or word for
another.
let not the council at the bar chop with the judge, nor wind
himself into the handling of the cause a new, after the judge
hath declared his sentence. bacon.
you'll never leave off your chopping of logick, 'till your
skin is turned over your ears for prating. l'astrange.
chop. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. a piece chopped off. see chip.
sir william capel compounded for sixteen hundred pounds,
yet empson would have cut another chop out of him, if the
king had not died. bacon.
2. a small piece of meat, commonly of mutton. o
id<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 384</div><p class="text">c h o
c h r
old cross condemns all persons to be fops,
that can't regale themselves with mutton chops. king's cook.
3. a crack, or cleft.
- - - filli
water will make wood to swell ; as we see in the z.
chop-house. m. / [chop and house..] a mean house of enter-
of the chops of bowls, by laying them in water.
tainment, where provision ready dressed is sold.
i lost my place at the chop-house, where every man o
publick a mess of broth, or chop of meat, in silence.
cho pin. n s. [french.]
i. a french liquid measure, containing nearly a pint of win-
chester. -
2. a term used in scotland for a quart, of wine measure.
cho?ping, participial adj. [in this sense, of o o,
imagined by skinner to signify
*/, from car, sax. by others to mean a child that would
perhaps a greedy, hungry child,
mology. ] an epithet frequently applicd to insants,
of judicrous commendation :
bring money at a market.
likely to live. -
both jack freeman and ned wild,
would own the fair and chopping child. fenton.
chopping-block. n.s. [** and block.] a log of wood, on
which any thing is laid to be cut in pieces.
the strait smooth elms are good for axel-trees, boards,
chooping-blocks. as stor's hosanary.
chor ping-knife. n.s. sop and knife.] a knife with which
cooks mince their meat.
here comes dametas, with a sword by his side, a forrest-
bill on his neck, and a choping-knis under his girdle. sidney.
choppy, adj. [from chop.j'ful of holes, clefts, or cracks.
you seem to understand ne,
by each at once her choppy finger laying
upon her skinny lips. shakes?care.
chops, n, s, without a singular. [corrupted probably from
chaps, which see.]
1. the mouth of a beast.
so soon as my chops begin to walk, yours must be walking
too, for coalpany. l'e/orange.
2. the mouth of a man, used in contempt.
he ne'er shook hands, nor bid far...] to him,
'till he unseam'd him from the nape to th’ chops. soft.
3. the mouth of anything in familiar language; as of a river;
of a smith's vice.
cho'ral, a j. [from chorus, lat.]
i. belonging to or composing a choir or concert.
all founds on fret by firing or golden wire
temper’d sof, tunings intermix’d with voice,
choral or union.
milton.
choral symphonies. a4ilton,
2. singing in a choir.
and choral seraphs sung the second day. amhars?.
chord. m. s. [chorda, lat...] when it signifies a rope or string
in general, it is written cord: when its primitive ignification
is preserved, the h is retained.] -
1. the string of a musical instrument.
who mov’d
their stops and chord, was seen ;
instinet thro’ all proportions,
fled and pursu'd transverse tie
2. [in geometry.] a right line,
arch of a circle.
7% ch or d. v. a. [from the noun..] to furnish with strings
or chords; to string.
what passion annot musick raise and quell ?
when jubal struck the chara. shell,
his list'ning brethren stood aroud.
chorde'e. w.j. [from jorda, lat..] a contraction
fro-num,
cho'rios. m. s. [xosso, to contain..] the outward membrane
that enwraps the foetus.
chq rister. m. s. [from chorus.]
1. a finger in cathedrals; usually a finger of the lower order;
a singing boy.
* a singer in a concert. this sense
fined to poetry.
and let the roaring organs loudly play
the praises of the lord in lively notes;
the whiles, with hollow throats,
the chari/iers the joyous anthem fing.
his volant touch
low and high,
resonant fugue. a/#ton.
which joins the two ends of any
dryden.
of the
is, for the most part, con-
spenser.
he new-born phoenix i. his way;
9f airy dorisers animos train
attend his progress. - dryden.
* he musical voices and accents of the aerial chor:fters.
æay on the creation.
a region, and 76%2, to
as regions or countries.
rook apher..] descrip-
* *ntries; laying down the boun-
chor o'grapher. n: s [from xo,
describe.] he that decoles particul
choroo ra'phical. adj. [see cho
tive of particular regions
daries of countries.
i have added a ch
paradise.
chorog r *"phically. adv.
*
**sraphical description of this terrestrial
o's hyłory of to so...
[from thorographical.j in a cho,
rographical manner; according to the rule of
in a manner descriptive of particular regions.
choro graphy, n.s. [see chonographer.] the art of
practice of describing particular regions, or laying down the
limits and boundaries of particular provinces. it is less i.
its object than geography, and greater than topography,
cho'rus. n.s. [chorus, latin.] -
i. a number of singers; a concert.
the grecian tragedy was at first nothing but a chorus of
fingers; afterwards one actor was introduced. drydon
never did a more full and unspotted chorus of human o'
tures join together in a hymn of devotion.
f praise so just let every voice be join'd,
and fill the gen'ral chorus of mankini po,
2. the persons who are supposed to behold what passes in i.
acts of a tragedy, and sing their sentiments between the acts,
for supply,
admit me chorus to this history.
3. the song between the acts of a tragedy.
4. verses of a song in which the company join the finger,
chose. [the preter tense, and sometimes the participle passive,
from 7% choose.] -
our sovereign here above the res. might fland,
chorogo, }
crea.
oftn,
short,
and here be chose again to rule the land. dryden,
cho's en. [the participie posive, from 7% chos.]
if king lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
with some few bands of chosen soldiers, -
i'll undertake to land them on our coast. shakosheart,
chou gh. n-s, sceo, sax, chaucas, fr.] a bird whics, frequents
the rocks by the sea side, like a jackdaw, but bigger. hammer,
in birds, kites and kestles have a resemblance with hawks,
crows with ravens, daws and choughs. bacon's nat. hj.
to crows the like impartial grace affords,
and thoughs and daws, and such republick birds. drydon,
choule. m. s. [commonly pronounced and written jowl.] the
crop of a bird.
the choule or crop, *"horing unto the lower side of the bill,
and so descending by the throat, is a bag or schel.
brown's pulgar errors,
7% chouse. v. a. [the original of this word is inj, doubted
by skinner, who tries to disco from the french goser, to
laugh at ; or jono'er, to wheedle; and from the teutonick
*oso, to prattle. it is perhaps a fortuitous and cant word,
without etymology.]
* to cheat; to tick"; to impose upon.
freedom and zeal haveo you o'er and o'er;
pray give us leave to bubble you once more.
drydin,
to london they came, filly people to chouse,
their lands and their faces unknown. swift,
2. it has of before the thing taken away by fraud.
when geese and puien are seduc’d,
and sows of sucking pigs are cood. hodoraj,
4 chouse. n.s.. [from the yorb. this word is derivoj by
*/aw from haus, or ‘’iao, a messenger of the tuß
*****, who, says he, is little better than a so:/.]
1. a bubble; a tool; a man fit to be cheated.
a sottish choose,
who, when a thief has robb'd his house,
applies himself to cunning men.
hadira.
2. a trick or sham. -
7% chowter. v. m. to grumble or mutter like a foward
child. philipi.
chr is m. m. s. [xesozz, an ointment.] unguent; or o
it is only applied to sacred ceremonies. -
one act never to be *poated, is not the thing that christ,
eternal pricsthood, denoted especially by his unction or chrism,
refers to. ammond's praß. catechs.
chr1 sons. n.s. [sce chrism.] a child that dis within a
month after its birth. so called from the chrisom-cloth, a
cloth anointed with holy unguent, which the children an-
ciently wore till they wese christened. -
when the convulsions were but few, the number of chrism;
and infants was greater. graunt's bils of mortality.
7% chri's ren. o: iohn renian, sax.]
1. to baptize; to initiate into christianity by water.
2. to name; to denominate. " -
where such evils as these reign, chriften the thing what you
will, it can be no better than a mock millenium, barnet.
chr 1st endom. "../. [from chris; and dom.] the collec-
tive body of christianity; the regions of which the inhabitants
profess the christian religion. -
what hath been done, the parts of chriften&amp;m most af.
flicted can best testify.
havior.
an older and a better soldier, none
that chrclendon gives out. - - - s}a}start.
d his computation is universally. received over all christon-
27/2. -
a solder on time.
costening. . /. [from the verb.] the ceremony of the
first initiation into christianity. -- *
the queen
minster, about
christening,
was with great solemnity crowned at west-
two years after the marriage; like an old
that had staid long for godfathers.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
3 we
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 385</div><p class="text">c h u
aso,
erive
e t.
so
we shall insert the causes, why the account of chriftenings
hath been neglected more than that of burials. graunt.
the day of the christening being come, the house was filled
with gossips. arbuthnot and pope.
christian. m. s. [christianus, lat.] a professor of the
religion of christ.
we christians have certainly the best and the holiest, the
wisest and most reasonable religion in the world. tillotson.
chri's tian. a.j. professing the religion of christ.
i'll not be made a soft and dull-ey’d fool,
to shake the head, relent, and figh, and yield
to chriftian intercessors. - shakespeare.
christian-nam e. m. s. the name given at the font, distinet
from the gentilitious name, or surname.
chri's tianis m. m. s. schristianismus, lat.]
1. the christian religion.
2. the nations professing christianity.
christia’nity.. n.s. [chretiente, french..] the religion of
, christians.
god doth will that couples, which are married, both infi-
dels, if either party be converted into christianity, this should
not make separation. - hooker.
every one, who lives in the habitual prastice of any volun-
tary fin, cuts himself off from christianity. joldison.
t. chri'stian1ze. v. a. [from christian.] to make christian ;
to convert to christianity.
the principles of platonick philosophy, as it is now chris-
tianized. dryden.
chr1's tianly. adv. [from christian.] like a christian; as be-
comes one who professes the holy religion of christ.
chri's tmas. n.f. [from christ and vass.] the day on which
the nativity of our blessed saviour is celebrated, by the parti-
cular service of the church.
a chr1st mas-box. m. s. [from christmas and box.] a box in
which little presents are collected at christmas. -
when time comes round, a christmas-box they bear,
and one day makes them rich for all the year. gay's trivia.
chrisr mas-flow er. m. s. hellebore. -
christ's-thor n. m. s. [so called, as skinner fancies, because
the thorns have some likeness to a cross.] a plant.
it hath long sharp spines: the flower has five leaves, in form
of a rose: out of the flower-cup, which is divided into several
segments, rises the pointal, which becomes a fruit, shaped like
a bonnet, having a shell almost globular, which is divided
into three cells, in each of which is contained a roundish
seed. this is by many persons supposed to be the plant from
which our saviour's crown of thorns was composed. miller.
chromatick, adj. [x:39.2, colour.] -
1. relating to colour. -
i am now come to the third part of painting, which is called
the chromatick, or colouring. dryden's dufresnoy.
2. relating to a certain species of antient musick, now unknown.
it was observed he never touched his lyre in such a truly
chromatick and enharmonick manner. arbuth. and pope.
3::::::::: łaj. [from xevos, time.] -
a chronical distemper is of length ; as dropsies, asthmas,
and the like. - quincy.
of diseases some are chronical, and of long duration ; as,
quartane agues, scurvy, wherein we defer the cure unto more
advantageous seasons. brown's wulgar errours,
the lady's use of these excellencies is to divert the old man,
when he is out of the pangs of a chronical distemper. spe.7.
chronicle. n.s.. [chronique, fr. from xpavo, time.]
1. a register or account of events in order of time.
no more yet of this ;
for 'tis a chronicle of day by day,
not a relation for a breakfast.
2. a history.
you lean too confidently on those irish chronicles, which
are most fabulous and forged. spenser on ireland.
if from the field i should return once more,
i and my sword will earn my chronicle. shak. ant. and cleop.
i’m traduc’d by tongues, which neither knows
my faculties nor person, yet will be
the chronicles of my doing. shakespeare.
i give up to historians the generals and heroes which crowd
their annals, together with those which you are to produce
for the british chronicle. dryden.
to chr o'n1c1.e. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to record in chronicle, or history.
this to rehearse, should rather be to chronicle times than
shałespeare.
to search into reformation of abuses in that realm. spenser.
2. to register; to record.
for now the devil, that told me i did well,
says that this deed is chronicled in hell. shakespeare.
love is your master; for he masters you:
and he that is so yoked by a fool,
methinks, should not be chronicled for wise. shakespeare.
i shall be the jest of the town; nay, in two days i expect to
be chronicled in ditty, and sung in woeful ballad. cong.
coo'nucler. n.f. [from chronicle.]
vol. i.
i. a writer of chronicles; a recorder of events in order of time.
here gathering chroniclers, and by them stand
giddy fantastick poets of each land. dzone.
2. a historian; one that keeps up the memory of things past.
i do herein rely upon these pards, or irish chronic r. spots.
this custom was held by the druids and bards of out asi-
tient britons, and of latter times by the irish chronicle, s,
called rimers. raleigh's hist. of the so a sl.
chro nog ram, n.s. [xe4.co, time, and y:z:22, to write.j an
inscription including the date of any action.
of this kind the following is an example:
gloria lausque deo, seglor/41 in secsia sunto.
a chronogrammatical verse, which includes not only this
year 1660, but numerical letters enough to reach above a
thousand years further, until the year 2867. howel.
chronogrammatica l. adj. [from chronogram.] belonging
to a chronogram. see the last example. -&gt;
chr onogra’mmatist. m. s. [from chronogram.] a writer of
chronograms.
there are foreign universities, where, as you praise a man
in england for being an excellent philosopher or poet, it is an
ordinary character to be a great chronogrammatist. addison.
chrono log er, n. s. [xo~3o, time, and x•yo, doctrine.] he
that studies or explains the science of computing past time, or
of ranging past events according to their proper years.
chronologers differ among themselves about most great epo-
chas. holder on time.
chronological. adj. [from chronology.] relating to the
doctrine of time.
thus much touching the chronological account of some times
and things past, without confining myself to the exactness of
years. hale's origin of alankind.
chronologically, adv. [from chronological.] in a chrono-
logical manner; according to the laws or rules of chronology ,
according to the exact series of time. c
chrono lo gist. n.s. [see chronologe r.] one that studies
or explains time; one that ranges past events according to the
order of time; a chronologer. -
according to these chronologifts, the prophecy of the rabin
that the world should last but six thousand years, has been long
disproved. brown's pulgar errours.
- all that learned noise and dust of the chronologift is wholly
to be avoided. - locke on education.
chronology. n.s. [x;evô", time, and a67gp, doctrine.] the
science of computing and adjusting the periods of time; as
the revolution of the sun and moon; and of computing time
past, and referring each event to the proper year.
and the measure of the year not being so perfectly known
to the ancients, rendered it very difficult for them to transmit
a true chronology to succeeding ages. holder on hime.
where i allude to the customs of the greeks, i believe i
may be justified by the strictest chronology; though a poet is
not obliged to the rules that confine an historian. prior.
4 shrono'meter. m.s...[x;629 and wirgov.] an instrument
for the exact mensuration of time. - -
according to observation made with a pendulum chronome-
ter, a bullet, at its first discharge, flies five hundred and ten
yards in five half seconds. derham.
chry’s alis. n.s. [from xo~32, gold, because of the golden
colour in the nymphae of some insects.] a term used by some
naturalists for aurelia, or the first apparent change of the mag-
got of any species of inse&amp;s. chambers.
chry'soli te. m. s. [xo~&amp;p, gold, and a.332, a stone..] a
precious stone of a dusky green, with a cast of yellow.
- hoodward.
such another world,
of one intire and perfeot chrysolite,
i’d not have sold her for. shakspeare.
if metal, part seem’d gold, part silver clear:
if stone, carbuncle most, or chrysolite. milton's par. loft.
chryso pra sus... n.s...[xo~3o, gold, and prasinus, green.) a
precious stone of a yellow colour, approaching to green.
the ninth a topaz, the tenth a chrysoprasus. rev.
chub. n.s.. [from cop, a great head, skinner.] a river fish.
the chevin. -
the chub is in prime from midmay to candlemas, but best
in winter. he is full of small bones: he eats waterish; not
firm, but limp and tasteless: nevertheless, he may be so dressed
as to make him very good meat. //alton's angler.
chu’bbed, adj. [from chub.] big-headed like a chub.
to chuck. v. n. [a word probably formed in imitation of
the sound that it expresses; or perhaps corrupted from chick.]
to make a noise like a hen, when she calls her chickens.
to chuck. v. a. -
1. to call as a hen calls her young.
then crowing, clapp'd his wings, th’ appointed call,
to chuck his wives together in the ball. dryden's fab’s.
2. to give a gentle blow under the chin, so as to make the
mouth strike together.
come, chuck the infant under the chin, force a smile, and
cry, ah, the boy takes after his mother’s relations.
chuck, n. s. [from the o
4 i 1. the
conor ove.
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 386</div><p class="text">c h u
c h u
- ice of a hen. -
i . to...: of four or five times, that people use to
temple.
hickens when they call them. . . -
*. corrupted from chicken or chick.
2. come, your promise.—what promise, chuck? shakesp.
3. a sudden small noise.
~ - ... n.s.. [chuck and farthing.]. a play, at
co, o a chuck into the hole beneath.
- ey at chuck-farthing, shuffle-cap, and all:
o: lost his money z, history of john bull.
to cockle. v. p. so dut..] to laugh vehemently;
oh convulsively.
to lo. ji to my old father tell?
'twill make him chuckle thou'rt bestow'd so well. dryden.
she to intrigues was e'en hard-hearted ; -
she chuck!'d when a bawd was carted. prior.
t, chu'ckle. v. a. [from chuck.]
1. to call as a hen.
i am not far from the women's apartment, i am sure; and
if these birds are within distance, here's that will chucose 'em
together. dryden.
2. to cocker; to fondle. -
your confessor, that parcel of holy guts and garbidge ; he
must chuckle you, and moan you, dryden's spanish fryar.
cover. n.s."[probably from to chew.] an old word, as it
seems, for forced meat. - -
as for chuets, which are likewise minced meat, instead of
butter and fat, it were good to moisten them partly with
cream, or almond or pistacho milk. bacon's nat. hist.
chuff. n.s. [a word of uncertain derivation; perhaps co-
rupted from chuh, or derived from #ws, welsh, a stock.] a
coarse, fat-headed, blunt clown.
hangye, gorbellied knaves, are you undone no, ye fat
chuffs, i would your store were here. shakespeare.
a less generous chuff than this in the fable, would have
hugged his bags to the last. l'estrange.
chu’s fily. adv. [from cluffy.] surily ; stomachfully... ...
john answered chuffly. clarisa.
chu'ff, n ess. n.s. [from chuff..] clownishness; surliness.
chu’ffy. adj. [from chuff.] blunt; surly ; fat.
chum. n.f. [chom, armorick, to live together.] a chamber
fellow ; a term used in the universities.
chum p. n.s. a thick heavy piece of wood, less than a block.
when one is battered, they can quickly, of a chump of
wood, accommodate themselves with another. aloxon.
church. m. s. [cince, sax. xue-xxx...]
1. the collective body of christians, usually termed the catho-
lick church.
the church being a supernatural society, doth differ from
natural societies in this ; that the persons unto whom we asso-
ciate ourselves in the one, are men, simply confidered as men;
but they to whom we be joined in the other, are god, angels,
and holy men. - hooker.
2. the body of christians adhering to one particular opinion,
or form of worship.
the church is a religious assembly, or the large fair building
where they meet; and sometimes the same word means a
synod of bishops, or of presbyters; and in some places it is
the pope and a general council. watts's logick.
3. the place which christians consecrate to the worship of
god.
it comprehends the whole church, viz. the name or body
of the church, together with the chancel which is even in-
cluded under the word church. ayliffe's parergon.
that churches were consecrated unto none but the lord
only, the very general name chiefly doth sufficiently shew :
church doth signify no other thing than the lord's house.
hooker.
tho' you unty the winds, and let them fight
against the churches. shakespeare.
4. it is used frequently in conjunetion with other words; as
church-member, the member of a church ; church-power, spi-
ritual or ecclesiastical authority.
to church. v. a. [from the noun..] to perform with any
one the office of returning thanks in the church, after any
signal deliverance, as from the danger of childbirth.
church-ale, n. s. [from church and ale.] a wake, or feast,
commemoratory of the dedication of the church.
for the church-ale, two young men of the parish are yearly
chosen to be wardens, who make collection among the parish-
ioners of what provision it pleaseth them to bestow. carew.
church-attire. m. s. the habit in which men officiate at
divine service.
these and such like were their discourses, touching that
thurch-attire, which with us for the most part is used in pub-
lick prayer. hooker.
church-author1ty. m. s: ecclesiastical power; spiritual
jurisdiction. *
in this point of church-authority, i have fifted all the little
scraps alleged. atterbury.
church-burial. n.s. burial according to the rites of the
church. 3
the bishop has the care of seeing that all christians, after
their deaths, be not denied church-burial, according to the
usage and custom of the place. ayliff's parro,
church-founder. n.s. he that builds or endows a chure."
whether emperors or bishops, in those days were ch.
founders, the solemn dedication of churches they thought ilot
to be a work in itself either vain or superstitious. hocker
chur chman. n.s. [church and man.] -
1. an ecclesiastick; a clergyman; one that ministers in sacred
things.
if any thing be offered to you touching the church and
churchmen, or church-government, rely not only upon your-
self. baron.
a very difficult work to do, to reform and reduce a chur.
into order, that had been so long neglected, and that was s,
ill filled by many weak and more wilful churchmen. carma.
patience in want, and poverty of mind,
these marks of church and churchmen he design'd,
and living taught, and dying lest behind. dryden's fałki,
2. an adherent to the church of england.
church-war dens. n.s. [see warden.] officers yearly
chosen, by the consent of the minister and parishioners, a.
cording to the custom of each place, to look to the church,
church-yard, and such things as belong to both; and to ob.
serve the behaviour of the parishioners, for such faults as ap-
pertain to the jurisdiction or censure of the ecclesiastical court.
they are a kind of corporation, enabled by law to sue for any
thing belonging to their church, or poor of their parish. cowd.
there should likewise church-wardens, of the graves men
in the parish, be appointed, as they be here in england.
spensar,
our church wardens pers,
feast on the silver, and give us the farthings. gay.
churchyard. n.s. the ground adjoining to the church,
in which the dead are buried; a cemetery.
i am almost afraid to stand alone
here in the churchyard, yet i will adventure. shakespeare.
in churchyards, where they bury much, the earth wiss con-
sume the corps in far shorter time than other earth will. bacon,
no place so sacred from such fops is barr'd;
nor is paul's church more safe than paul's churchyard. pope.
churl. m. s. sceorl, sax. carl, in german, is strong, rusticks
being always observed to be strong bodied.]
i. a rustick ; a countryman; a labourer.
he holdeth himself a gentleman, and scorneth to work or
use any hard labour, which he saith is the life of a peasant or
churl. spenser's state of ireland.
one of the baser sort, which they call churls, being re-
proved for his oath, answered confidently, that his lord com.
manded him. spenser's state of ireland.
churl, upon thy eyes i throw
all the pow'r this charm doth owe. shakestart,
from this light cause th’ infernal maid prepares
the country churls to mischief, hate, and wars. dryden,
2. a rude, surly, ill-bred man. -
a churl’s courtesy rarely comes, but either for gain or
falshood. sidney.
3. a miser; a niggard; a selfish or greedy wretch.
poison, i see, hath been his timeless end
o churs, drink all, and leave no friendly drop
to help me after |
chu'rl is h. adj. [from churl.]
1. rude ; brutal; harsh ; austere; sour; merciless; unkind;
uncivil.
a sea of melting pear!, which some call tears,
those at her father's churlish feet she tender'd. shakespeare.
the interruption of their churlift drums
cuts off more circumstance; they are at hand
to parly, or to fight. shakosheart.
a lion in love with a lass, desired her father's consent. the
answer was churlish enough, he'd never marry his daughter to
shakespeare.
a brute. l’estrange.
he the pursuit of churlish beasts,
preferr'd to sleeping on her breasts. jwaller.
2. selfish; avaritious.
the man was churlish and evil in his doings. 1 sam.
this sullen churlish thief -
had all his mind plac'd upon mully's beef. king.
3. [of things.] unpliant; cross-grained; unmanageable; harsh;
not yielding.
if there be emission of spirit, the body of the metal will he
hard and churlish. bacon's nat. hisł.
the cornish were become, like metal often fired and
quenched, churlish, and that would sooner break than bow.
bacon's henry vii.
in the hundreds of essex they have a very churlish blue
clay. mortimer's husbando.
4. vexatious; obstructive.
will you again unknit
this churlish knot of all abhorred war? shakstart:
spain found the war so churlish and longsome, as they found
they should consume themselves in an endless war. s:
prea
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 387</div><p class="text">c. h. y
c i m
spreads a path clear as the day,
where no charish rub says nay. crashaw.
chu'rlishly. adv. [from hurlish.] rudely; brutally.
to the cak, now regnant, the olive did churlishly put over
the son for a reward of the service of his fire. howel.
churlish ness. m. s. [from churlish; cynlircherre, saxon.]
brutality; ruggedness of manner.
bette is the churishness of a man than a courteous woman.
ecclus, xlii. 14.
in the chur lishns of fortune, a poor honest man suffers in
this world. l’estrange.
chur me. n.s.. [more properly chirm, from the saxon cynme,
a clamour or noise; as to chirre is to coo as a turtle..] a
confused sound; a noise. -
he was conveyed to the tower with the churme of a
thousand taunts and reproaches. . bacon.
a churn. n.s. (properly cher n, from kern, dut, censne, sax.]
the vessel in which the butter is, by long and violent agita-
tion, coagulated and separated from the erous parts of the
milk. • ‘’t -
heraukward fist did ne'er employ the churn. gay's pasł.
t. churn. v. a. [kernen, dutch..] - . . . . .
1. to agitate or shake any thing by a violent motion. ,
perchance he spoke not ; but
like a full acorn'd boar, a churning on,
cried oh. -- shakespeare.
froth fills his chaps, he sends a grunting sound,
and part he churns, and part befoams the ground. dryden.
churn’d in his teeth, the foamy venom rose. addison.
the mechanism of nature, in converting our aliment, con-
sists in mixing with it animal juices, and, in the action of the
solid parts, charning them together. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. to make butter by agitating the milk. -
the churning of milk bringeth forth butter. proverbs.
you may try the force of imagination, upon, staying the
coming of butter after the churning. bacon's nat. hisł.
chu'rrwor:1. n.s. [from cynnan, sax.] an insect that turns
about nombly; called also a fancricket. skinner. philips.
to chu's e. see-tô choose." -
chy la'ceous. adj. [from chyle..] belonging to chyle; con-
fitting of chyle. . . . -- -
when the spirits of the chyle have half fermented the chy-
laceous mass, it has the state of drink, not ripened by fermen-
tation. ** * * * * . . floyer on the humours.
chyle. m. s. [xoxgp.j. the white juice formed in the stomach
by digestion of the aliment, and afterwards changed into
blood. -
this powerful ferment, mingling with the parts,
the leven'd mass to milky chyle converts. blackmore.
the chyle cannot pass through the smallest vessels. arbuth.
chylifa'ction. m. s. [from chyle.] the act or process of
making chyle in the body. . . - - -
drinking excessively during the time of chylosacion, stops
perspiration. - * arbuthnot on aliments.
chy lif a^ctive. adj. [from chylus and facio, to make, lat.]
having the power of making chyle. -
chylopoetick, adj. [x?&amp;p, and ratio.] having the power,
or the office, of forming chyle. -
according to the force of the chylopoetick organs, more or
less chyle may be extracted from the same food. arbuthnot.
chy lous. adj. [from chyle..] consisting of chyle; partaking
of chyle. -
m. is the chylous part of an animal, already prepared.
arbuthnot.
* .
chymical.
chy'mick.
1. made by chymistry.
i'm tir'd with waiting for this chymick gold,
which fools us young, and beggars us when old. dryden.
the medicines are ranged in boxes, according to their na-
tures, whether chymical or galenical preparations. watts.
2. relating to chymistry. -
methinks already, from this chymick flame,
łaj. [chymicus, latin.]
i see a city of more precious mold. dryden.
with chymick art exalts the min’ral pow'rs,
and draws the aromatick souls of flow’rs. pope.
chymic. m. s. a chymist. obsolete.
the ancients observing in that material a kind of metallical
nature, seem to have resolved it into nobler use : an art now
utterly lost, or perchance kept up by a few chymics, wotton.
chy'mic ally. adv. [from chymical.] in a chymical manner.
chymist. n.s. [see chym1st ry..] a professor of chy-
mistry; a philosopher by fire.
he starving chymis, in his golden views
supremely blest. pope's essay on man.
chy'mistry. n.s. [derived by some from xuzgo, juice, or
2:34, to melt; by others from an oriental word, kema, black.
according to the supposed etymology, it is written with
or e.
y kor whereby sensible bodies contained in vessels, or
capable of being contained therein, are so changed, by means
of certain instruments, and principally fire, that their several
powers and virtues are thereby discovered, with a view to
philosophy, or medicine. bzerlaave.
operations of chymistry fall short of vital force: no chynist-
can make milk or blood of grass. a buthnot on aliments.
ciba'rious: adj. [citarius, lat. from cibus, food.] relating to
food; useful for food; edible.
c1 bol. n.s.. [ciboule, fr.] a small sort of onion used in sal-
lads. this word is common in the scotch dialect; but the
1 is not pronounced.
ciboules, or scallions, are a kind of degenerate onions. mort.
ci’catrice. - - -
c!'catrix. { n. s. [citatrix, latin.]
i. the scar remaining after a wound.
one captain spurio with his cicatrice, an emblem of war,
here on his finister cheek. . shakespeare.
2. a mark; an impression: so used by shakespeare less properly.
- - lean but upon a rush
the cicatrice and capable impressure
thy palm some moment keeps. shakespeare.
cicat ri's ant. n.s.. [from cicatrice..] an application that in-
duces a cicatrice.
cicatri's iv e. adj. [from cicatrice.] having the qualities pro-
per to induce a cicatrice.
cic atriza'tion. m. s. [from cicatrice.]
1. the act of healing the wound. o
a vein bursted, or corroded in the lungs, is looked upon to
be for the most part incurable, because of the motion and
coughing of the lungs, tearing the gap wider, and hindering
the conglutination and cicatrization of the vein. harvey.
2. the state of being healed, or skinned over.
the first stage of healing or the discharge of matter is call-
ed digestion; the second, or the filling up with flesh, incar-
nation; and the last or skinning over cicatrization.
sharp's surgery.
to c1'cat rize. v. a. [from cicatrix.]
1. to apply such medicines to wounds, or ulcers, as heal and
skin them over. &amp;tincy.
2. to heal and induce the skin over a sore.
we incarned, and in a few days cicatrized it with a smooth
cicatrix. joseman on tumours.
c1'cely. n.s.. [myrrhis...] a sort of herb.
cichor asceous. adj. [from cichorium, lat.] having the qua-
lities of succory. -
diureticks evacuate the salt serum; as all acid diureticks,
and the testaceous and bitter cichoraceous plants. floyer.
cich-pease. [cicer.] a plant.
to ci'curate. v. a. [cicuro, lat.] to tame; to reclaim
from wildness; to make tame and trađtable.
poisons may yet retain some portion of their natures; yet
are so refracted, cicurated, and subdued, as not to make good
their destructive malignities. brown's pulgar errours.
cicu ration. m. s. [from cicurate.] the aet of taming or
reclaiming from wildness.
this holds not only in domestick and mansuete birds; for
then it might be the effect of cicuration or institution; but in
the wild. ray on the creation,
cit) er. m. s. [cidre, fr. sidra, ital. scera, lat. gizitz, "boy]
1. all kind of strong liquors, except wine. this sense is now
wholly obsolete.
2. liquor made of the juice of fruits pressed.
we had also drink, wholesome and good wine of the
grape, a kind of cider made of a fruit of that country; a won-
derful pleasing and refreshing drink. bacon.
3. the juice of apples expressed and fermented. this is now
the sense.
- to the utmost bounds of this
wide universe silurian cider born, -
shall please all tastes, and triumph o'er the vine. philips.
ci'der1st. m. s. [from cider.] a maker of cider.
when the cideriffs have taken care for the best fruit, and
ordered them after the best manner they could, yet hath their
cider generally proved pale, sharp, and ill tasted. mortimer.
c1'derkin. n.s.. [from cider.]
- a low word used for the liquor made of the murk or gross
matter of apples, after the cider is pressed out, and a conve-
nient quantity of boiled water added to it; the whole infusin
for about forty-eight hours. philips's i/orld of iłzrd.
ciderkin is made for common drinking, and supplies the
place of small beer. mortimer.
cieling. m. s. see ceiling.
cierge, n.s. [french..] a candle carried in processions.
ci'll ary. adj. [cilium, lat.] belonging to the eyelids.
the ciliary processes, or rather the ligaments, observed in
the inside of the sclerotick tunicles of the eye, do serve instead
of a muscle, by the contraction, to alter the figure of the
eye. ray on . creation.
cili'cious. adj. [from cilicium, hair-cloth, lat.] made of
hair.
a garment of camel's hair; that is, made of some texture
of that hair, a coarse garment, a cilicious or sackcloth habit,
suitable to the austerity of his life. brown's vulgar errours.
cima'r. see simar. -
cime liarch.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 388</div><p class="text">c i n
c i r.
cime'liarcii. n.s. [from zooxazoxy;..] the chief keeper of
plate, vestments, and things of value belonging to a church ;
a church-warden. - * dic7.
c1'meter. m. s. scimitarra, span. and portug., from chimeteir,
turkish. bluteau's portuguese dielionary. a sort of sword
used by the turks; short ; heavy ; and recurvated, or bent
backward. this word is sometimes erroneously spelt scimitar,
and joymeter; as in the following examples.
by this scimitar,
that slew the sophy and a persian prince,
that won three fields of sultan solyman.
our armours now may rust, our idle symiters
shakespeare.
hang by our sides for ornament, not use. dryden.
c1'ncture. m. s. [cineiura, latin.]
1. something worn round the body.
now happy he, whose cloak and cineïure
hold out this tempest. - - - - shakespeare.
columbus found th’ american, so girt -
with feather'd cine?ure, naked else, and wild. milton.
he binds the sacred cineture round his breast. pope.
2. an inclosure.
the court and prison being within the cinelure of one wall.
bacon's henry vii.
3. [in architecture.] a ring or list at the top and bottom of the
shaft of a column; separating the shaft at one end from the
base, at the other from the capital. it is supposed to be in
imitation of the girths or ferrils anciently used, to strengthen
and preserve the primitive wood-columns. chambers.
ci'nder. n.s. sceindre, fr. from cineres, latin.]
1. a massignited and quenched, without being reduced to ashes.
i should make very forges of my cheeks,
that would to cinders burn up modesty, ~e -- *
did but i speak thy deeds ! shakspeare.
there is in smiths cinders, by some adhesion of iron, some-
times to be found a magnetical operation. brown.
so snow on aetna does unmelted lie, -
whose rolling flames and scatter'd cinders fly. j/aller.
2. a hot coal that has ceased to flame. -
if from adown the hopeful chops
the fat upon a cinder drops,
to stinking smoke it turns the flame. - swift.
a woman
cinder-wench. r. n. s. scinder and woman.]
cinder-woman. ; whose trade is to rake in heaps of ashes for
cinders. . .
'tis under so much nasty rubbish laid, -
to find it out's the cinder-woman's trade. effy on satire,
she had above five hundred suits of fine cloaths, and yet
went abroad like a cinder-wench. arbuth. hist. of j. bull.
in the black form of cinder-wench she came,
when love, the hour, the place had banish’d shame. gay.
cineration. m. s. [from cineres, lat..] the reduction of
any thing by fire to ashes. a term of chymistry.
cineritious, adj. [cinericius, lat..] having the form or state
of ashes. -
the nerves arise from the glands of the cineritious part of
the brain, and are terminated in all parts of the body. cheyne.
cine rulent. adj. [from cineres, lat.] full of ashes. dict.
c1'ngle. m. s. [from cingulum, lat..] a girth for a horse. die?.
c1'nnabar. n.j. [cinnabaris, latin.] cinnabar is native or
factitious : the factitious cinnabar is called vermilion.
cinnabar is the ore out of which quicksilver is drawn, and
consists partly of a mercurial, and partly of a sulphureo-
ochreous matter. //oodward’s met. fossils.
the particles of mercury uniting with the particles of sul-
phur, compose cinnabar. newton's opt.
cinnabar of antimony, is made of mercury, sulphur, and
crude antimony. o
c1'nnamon. m. s. [cinnamomum, lat.] the fragrant bark
of a low tree in the island of ceylon. its leaves resemble those
of the olive, both as to substance and colour. the fruit re-
sembles an acorn or olive, and has neither the smell nor taste
of the bark. when boiled in water, it yields an oil, which,
as it cools and hardens, becomes as firm and white as tallow;
the smell of which is agreeable in candles. the cinnamon
of the ancients was different from ours. chambers.
let araby extol her happy coast,
her cinnamon and sweet amonum boast. dryden's fables.
cinnam on j/ater is made by distilling the bark, first infused in
barley water, in spirit of wine or white wine. chambers.
cinque. m. s. [fr.] a five. it is used in games alone; but is
often compounded with other words.
coroit. m. s. [cinque feuille, fr.] a kind of five leaved
clow cr. -
cinque-pace. m. s. [cinque pas, fr.] a kind of grave dance.
wooing, wedding, and repenting is a scotch jig, a mea-
sure, and a cinque pace. the first suit is hot and haity, like a
scotch jig, and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly and
modest, as a measure, full of state and gravity; and then
comes repentance, and, with his bad legs, falls into the cinque
pace faster and faster, 'til he sinks into his grave. shakespeare.
cinque-pokt.s. m. s. [cinque ports, fr.]
those havens that lie towards france, and therefore have
been thought by our kings to be such as ought most vigilant
to be observed against invasion. in which respect, the o
where o are have a special governour or keeper, calley u
his office lord warden of the cinque ports; and divers privi
leges granted to them, as a particular jurisdiction, their wo.
den, having the authority of an admiral among them, ini
sending out, writs in his own name. the cinque port, an
dover, sandwich, rye, hastings, winchelsea, rumney, *
hithe ; some of which, as the number exceeds five, must
either be added to the first institution by some later grant.
accounted as appendants to some of the rest. ** co
they, that bear -
the cloth of state above her, are four barons
of the cinque ports.
cinque-spott ed. adj. having five spots. .
on her left breast
a mole, cinque spotted, like the crimson drops
i' th' bottom of a cowslip. --
cison. m. s. [sion, or scion, french..] . . . .
i. a sprout; a shoot from a plant. -
we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal
stings, our unbitted lusts; whereof. i take this that you call
love, to be a se&amp;t or cion. shakespear.
the stately caledonian oak, newly settled in his triumphant
throne, begint with cions of his own royal stem. howel,
2. the shoot engrafted or inserted on a stock. -
the cion over-ruleth the stock; and the stock is but passive,
and giveth aliment, but no motion to the graft. bacon.
cither. m. s. [chifre, fr. zifra, ital, cifra, low lat, from
an oriental root.] - ."
1. an arithmetical chara&amp;ter, by which some number is noted;
a figure. -
2. an arithmetical mark, which, standing for nothing itself, in-
creases the value of the other figures. - - -
mine were the very cipher of a funetion,
to find the faults, whose fine stands in record,
and let go by the actor. . . shakespeare.
if the people be somewhat in the election, you cannot
make them nulls or ciphers in the privation or translation. bac.
as, in accounts, ciphers and figures pass for real sums, so
names pass for things. - south.
3. an intertexture of letters engraved usually on boxes or plate.
troy flam'd in burnish'd gold; and o'er the throne,
shakesar,
shakosari,
arms and the man in golden ciphers shone. pope.
some mingling flir the melted tar, and some
so on the new-shorn vagrant's heaving side,
to stamp the master's cipher, ready stand. thomson,
4. a character in general. * - - -
in succeeding times this wisdom began to be written in
ciphers and characters, and letters bearing the form of crea-
tures. raleigh's history of the world.
5. a secret or occult manner of writing, or the key to it.
this book, as long liv'd as the elements,
in cipher writ, or new-made idioms. donne.
he was pleased to command me to stay at london, to send
and receive all his letters; and i was furnished with mine
several ciphers, in order to it. denham,
7% ones. v. n. [from the noun..] to practise arithme-
tick. - -
you have been bred to business; you can cipher: i wonder
you never used your pen and ink. arbuthnot.
to cipher. v. a. to write in occult characters.
he frequented sermons, and penned notes: his notes he
ciphered with greek chara&amp;ters. hayward.
to c1 rcinate. v. a. [circino, lat.] to make a circle; to
compass round, or turn round. bailey.
cir cin aotion. n.s.. [circinatio, lat.] an orbicular motion;
a turning round ; a measuring with the compasses. bailey.
cit.c.l.e. m. s. [circulus, latin.]
1. a line continued 'till it ends where it begun, having all its
parts equidistant from a common center.
any thing, that moves round about in a circle, in less time
than our ideas are wont to succeed one another in our minds,
is not perceived to move; but seems to be a perfect intire circle
of that matter, or colour, and not a part of a circle in mo-
tion. - o locke.
by a circle i understand not here perfeoł geometrical circle,
but an orbicular figure, whose length is equal to its breadth;
and which as to sense may seem circular. newt. opt.
then a deeper still,
in circle following circle, gathers round
to close the face of things.
2. the space included in a circular line.
3. a round body : an orb.
it is he that fitteth upon the circle of the earth.
4. compass; inclosure. -
a great magician,
obscured in the circle of the forest.
5. an assembly surrounding the principal person.
to have a box where eunuchs fing,
and, foremost in the circle, eye a king.
6. a company; an assembly.
thomson's summer.
isaiah.
shakespeare.
pope's horace.
i will
§
o
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 389</div><p class="text">c i r.
c e r
&amp;
he wrot
rm of
f the
o it,
don, .
t-
o
i will call over to him the whole circle of beauties that are
disposed among the boxes. addison.
ever since that time, lisander visits in every circle. tatler.
7. any series ending as it begins, and perpetually repeated.
there be fruit-trees in hot countries, which have blossoms
and young fruit, and young fruit and ripe fruit, almost all the
year, succeeding one another; but this circle of ripening can-
not be but in succulent plants, and hot countries. bacon.
thus in a circle runs the peasant's pain,
and the year rolls within itself again. dryden's wirg.
8. an inconclusive form of argument, in which the foregoing
proposition is proved by the following, and the following pro-
position inferred from the foregoing.
that heavy bodies descend by gravity; and again, that
gravity is a quality whereby an heavy body descends, is an im-
pertinent circle, and teacheth nothing. glanville's scepsis.
that fallacy called a circle, is when one of the premises in
a syllogism is questioned and opposed, and we intend to prove
it by the conclusion, j/atts's logick.
9. circumlocution ; indire&amp;t form of words.
has he given the lye
in circle or oblique, or semicircle,
or direct parallel? you must challenge him. flet. q. of cor.
jo. circles of the german empire. such provinces and prin-
cipalities as have a right to be present at diets. they are in
number ten. trevoux.
to c1'rcle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to move round any thing.
the lords that were appointed to circle the hill, had some
days before planted themselves in places convenient.
another cynthia her new journey runs,
and other planets circle other suns.
2. to inclose; to surround.
what stern ungentle hands
have lopp'd and hew'd, and made thy body bare
of her two branches, those sweet ornaments,
whose circling shadows kings have sought to sleep in shak.
while these fond arms, thus circling you, may prove
bacon.
pope's dunciad.
more heavy chains than those of hopeless love. prior.
unseen, he glided thro’ the joyous crowd,
with darkness circled, and an ambient cloud. pope.
3. to circle in. to confine; to keep together.
we term those things dry which have a consistence within
themselves, and which, to enjoy a determinate figure, do not
require the stop or hindrance of another body to limit and
circle them in. digly on bodies.
to ci'rcle. v. m. to move circularly; to end where it begins.
the well fraught bowl
circles incessant; whilst the humble cell
with quavering laugh, and rural jests resounds. philips.
now the circling years disclose
the day predestin'd to reward his woes. pope's odyss.
c1'rcled. adj. [from circle.] having the form of a circle; round.
th’ inconstant moon,
that monthly changes in her circled orb. shakes care.
c1'rclet. m. s. [from circle.] a circle; an orb: properly a
little circle.
then take repast, 'till hesperus display'd
his golden circlet in the western shade. pope's odyss.
c1'rcling. participial adj. [from to circle.] having the form
of a circle; circular; round.
round he surveys, and well might, where he stood
so high above the circling canopy
of night's extended shade. milton's paradise loft,
ci'rcuit. m. s. [circuit, fr. circuitus, latin.]
1. the aet of moving round any thing.
there are four moons also perpetually rolling round the
planet jupiter, and carried along with him in his periodical
circuit round the sun. watts on the mind.
2. the space inclosed in a circle.
he led me up
a woody mountain, whose high top was plain
a circuit wide inclos'd. milton’s paradis. loft.
3. space; extent; measured by travelling round.
he attributeth unto it smallness, in respect of circuit.
- - hooker.
the lake of bolsena is reckoned one and twenty miles in
circuit. aidison on italy.
4. a ring; a diadem; that by which any thing is incircled.
and this fell tempest shall not cease to rage,
until the golden circuit on my head
do calm the fury of this mad-brain'd flaw.
5. the visitations of the judges for holding affiscs.
the circuits, in former times, went but round about the
pale; as the circuit of the cynosura about the pole. davies.
6. the tract of country visited by the judges.
7. long deduction of reason.
up into the watch tower get,
and see all things despoil'd of fallacies;
thou shalt not peep thro' lettices of eyes,
nor hear thro' labyrinths of ears, nor learn
by circuit or colle&amp;tions to discern.
vol. i.
shakes care.
donne.
ciecuit of 4:ion. [in law.]is a longer course of proceedong to
recover the thing sued for than is needful. cowel.
to c1. rcuit. v. n. [from the noun..] to move circularly.
pining with equinoetial heat, unless
the cordial cup perpetual motion keep,
quick circuiting. - philips.
cir cutte‘er. m. s. [from circuit..] one that travels a circuit.
like your fellow circuiteer the sun: you travel the round of
the earth, and behold all the iniquities under the heavens, pope.
cir cu iotion. m. s. [circuitio, lat.]
1. the act of going round anything.
2. compass; maze of argument. -
to apprehend by what degrees they lean to things in show,
though not indeed repugnant one to another, requireth nore
sharpness of wit, more intricate circuitions of discourse, and
depth of judgment, than common ability doth yield. hooker.
c1r cul a.r. adj. [circularis, latin.]
1. round, like a circle; circumscribed by a circle.
the frame thereof seem'd partly circular,
and part triangular. fairy queen.
he first inclos'd for lists a level ground; . -
the form was circular. dryden's fables.
nero's port, composed of huge moles running round it,
in a kind of circular figure. addison on italy.
2. successive in order; always returning.
from whence th’ innumerable race of things,
. by circular successive order springs.
3. vulgar; mean ; circumforaneous.
had virgil been a circular poet, and closely adhered to
history, how could the romans have had dido dennis.
4. ending in itself, used of a paralegism, where the second pro-
position at once proves the first, and is proved by it.
one of cartes's first principles of reasoning, after he had
doubted of every thing, seems to be too circular, to safely
build upon; for he is for proving the being of god from the
truth of our faculties, and the truth of our faculties from the
being of a god. baker's reflect. on learning.
5. cir c ular letter. a letter direeted to several persons, who
have the same interest in some common affair; as in the con-
vocation of assemblies.
6. cir cul ar lines. such strait lines as are divided from the
divisions made in the arch of a circle; as the lines of fines,
tangents, and secants on the plain scale and sector.
7. circula r sailing, is that performed on the arch of a great
circle.
cir cu la'rity.. n.s.. [from circular.] a circular form.
the heavens have no diversity or difference, but a simpli-
city of parts, and equiformity in motion, continually succeed-
ing each other; so that, from what point focyer we compute,
the account will be common unto the whole circularity. brown.
c1'rcu larly. adj. [from circular.]
1. in form of a circle. -
the internal form of it consists of several regions, in-
volving one another like orbs about the same centre, or of
the several elements cast circularly about each other. burnet.
2. with a circular motion.
trade, which, like blood, should circularly flow,
stopp'd in their channels, found its freedom lost. dryden.
every body moved circularly about any center, recedes, or
endeavours to recede, from that centre of its motion. ray.
to ci'rcu late. v. m. [from circulus.]
1. to move in a circle; to run round; to return to the place
whence it departed in a constant course.
if our lives motions theirs must imitate, .
our knowledge, like our blood, must circulate. denham.
nature is a perpetual motion; and the work of the uni-
verse circulates without any interval or repos:. l'e/irange.
2. to be dispersed. -
as the mints of calumny are perpetually at work, a great
number of curious inventions issued out from time to time,
grow current among the party, and circulate through the
whole kingdom. - addison.
to c1'rculate. v. a. to put about. -
in the civil wars, the money, spent on both sides was cir-
culated at home; no publick debts contracted. swift.
c1r cul aotion, n.s.. [from circulate.]
1. motion in a circle; a course in which the motion tends to
the point from which it began.
what more obvious, one would think, than the circulation
of the blood, unknown 'till the last age burnet's theory.
as much blood passeth through the lungs as through all the
rest of the body: the circulation is quickcr; and heat greater,
and their texture extremely delicate. a but not on aliments.
2. a series in which the same order is always observed, and
things always return to the same state. -
as for the sins of peace, thou hast brought upon us the
miseries of war; so for the fins of war, thou feest fit to
deny us the blesfing of peace, and to keep us in a circulation
of miseries. k. charles.
god, by the ordinary rule of nature, permits this continual
circulation of human things. swift on modern education.
3. a reciprocal into meaning.
4.
rossommon.
when<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 390</div><p class="text">* c i r.
c i r.
when the apostle saith of the jews, that they crucified the
lord of glory; and when the son of man, being on earth,
affirmeth that the son of man was in heaven at the same
instant, there is in these two speeches that mutual circulation
before-mentioned. hooker.
c1'rcul arory. m. s. [from circulate.] a chymical vessel, in
which that which rises from the vessel on the fire, is collected
and cooled in another fixed upon it, and falls down again.
circulator y. adj. [from circulate.] circulatory letters are
the same with c1r cul ar letters.
circu m.a. mbiency. m. s. [from circumambient.] the aet of
encompasling.
ice receiveth its figure according unto the surface it con-
creteth, or the circumambieny which conformeth it. brown.
circumamb ent. adj. [circum and ambio, latin.] sur-
rounding; encompassing ; inclosing.
the circumambient coldness towards the sides of the vessel,
like the second region, cooling and condensing of it. wilkins.
to c1r cu ma(mbula 1 e. v. n. [from circuin and ambulo, lat.]
to walk round about. dict.
t. circumcise. v. a. [circumcido, latin.] to cut the
prepuce or foreskin, according to the law given to the jews.
they came to circumcise the child. luke.
one is alarmed at the industry of the whigs, in aiming to
strengthen their routed party by a reinforcement from the cir-
cumcised. swift's examiner.
c1r curaci's icn. m. s. [from circumcise.] the rite or act of
cutting off the foreskin.
they left a race behind
like to themselves, distinguishable scarce
from gentiles, but by circumcision vain. milton.
to circumduct. v. a. scircumduco, lat..] to contra-
vene; to nullify: a term of civil law.
a&amp;ts of judicature may be cancelled and circumdueled by the
will and direction of the judge; as also by the consent of the
parties litigant, before the judge has pronounced, and given
sentence. ayliffe's parergon.
cir cum du’cticn. n.s.. [from circumduc7.]
1. nullification; cancellation. -
the citation may be circumducted, though the defendant
should not appear; and the defendant must be cited, as a cir-
cuma'votion requires. ayliffe's parergon.
2. a leading about.
by long circumduoion perhaps any truth may be derived from
any other truth. hooker.
circu'mference. n.s. [circumferentia, latin.]
1. the periphery; the line including and surrounding anything.
- extend thus far thy bounds, -
this be thy just circumference, o world ! milton.
because the hero is the center of the main action, all the
lines from the circumference tend to him alone. dryden.
fire, moved nimbly in the circumference of a circle, makes
the whole circumference appear like a circle of fire. newton.
2. the space inclosed in a circle.
so was his will
pronounc'd among the gods, and by an oath,
that shook heav'n's whole circumference, confirm'd. milton.
he first inclos'd for lists a level ground,
the whole circumference a mile around.
. the external part of an orbicular body.
the bubble, being looked on by the light of the clouds
refle&amp;ied from it, seemed red at its apparent circumference. if
the clouds were viewed through it, the colour at its circum-
forence would be blue. newton's opticks.
4. an orb ; a circle; anything circular or orbicular.
his pond’rous shield, large and round,
behind him cast; the broad circumference
hung on his shoulders like the moon. milton.
to c1 r cu'mference. v. a. [from the noun..] to include in
a circular space. not proper.
nor is the vigour of this great body included only in itself,
or circumferenced by its surface; but diffused at indeterminate
distances. brown's wugar errours.
cir cu mferentor. m. s. [from circumfero, lat. to carry about.]
an instrument used in surveying, for measuring angles, con-
fifting of a brass circle, an index with sights, and a com-
pass, and mounted on a staff, with a ball and socket. chamb.
c1r cu mfi.ex. m. s. [circumflexus, lat..] an accent used to
regulate the pronunciation of syllables, including or partici-
pating the acute and grave.
the circumflex keeps the voice in a middle tune, and there-
fore in the latin is compounded of both the other. holder.
cir cu'mfluence. m. s. [from circumfluent.] an inclosure of
waters.
circu'mfluent. adj. [circumfluens, lat..] flowing round
any thing.
dryden's fables.
i rule the paphian race,
whose bounds the deep circumsfuent waves embrace,
a duteous people, and industrious isle. pope's odyss.
circu'mfluous. adj. [circumstuus, lat.] - environing with
waters,
he the world
built on circumflucus waters calm, in wide
crystalline ocean. a silton's parad's l.,
}. son girt with circumfluous tides. pope', oft
circum for aneous. adj. [circumforaneus, lat..] wander.
from house to house. as a circumforaneous fidler; one th:
plays at doors.
to circumfu'se. v. a. [circumfusus, lat.] to pour round;
to spread every way. &gt;
men see better, when their eyes are against the sun, or
candle, if they put their hand before their eye. the glassing
sun, or candle, weakens the eye; whereas the light circum.
fused, is enough for the perception. bacon's nat. history.
his army, circumfus’d on either wing. alion.
earth, with her nether ocean circumfus'd,
their pleasant dwelling house. milton.
this nymph the god cephisus had abus'd,
with all his winding waters circumfus’d. adosin's ovid.
circum fu's ile. adj. [circum and fusilis, lat..] that which
may be poured or spread round any thing.
artist divine, whose skilful hands infold
the victim's horn with circumfusile gold. pope's ods.
cir cux1fu's lon. m. s. [from circumsuse.] the act of sprej-
ing round; the state of being poured round.
to circu'mgyrate. v. a. [circum and gyrus, lat.] to
roll round.
all the glands of the body be congeries of various
sorts of vessels, curled, circumgyrated, and complicated to-
gether. ray on creation. i
circumgyration. m. s. [from circumgyrate.] the act of s
running round. |
the sun turns round his own axis in twenty-five days,
from his first being put into such a circumgyration. cheyne.
circumjaces t. adj. [circuisiacens, lat..] lying round any
thing ; bordering on every side.
cir cum is rion. m. s. [from circumco, circumitum, latin.] o
the aet of going round. dici. |
cir cu mligation. m. s. [circumligo, latin.]
1. the act of binding round. :
2. the bond with which any thing is encompassed. o
cir cum locution. m. s. [circumlocutio, latin.] :
1. a circuit or compass of words; periphrasis. o
virgil, studying brevity, could bring these words into a o
narrow compass, which a translator cannot render without -
circumlocutions. dryden,
i much prefer the plain billingsgate way of calling names,
because it would save abundance of time, lost by circumlo-
cution. swift.
2. the use of indire&amp;t expressions.
these people are not to be dealt withal, but by a train of
mystery and circumlocution. l’estrangi.
circummu'red. adj. [circum and murus, lat.] walled round;
encompassed with a wail.
he bath a garden circummur'd with bricks. shafsirar.
cir cum navigable. adj. [ from circumnavigate. i that
which may be sailed round.
the being of antipodes, the habitableness of the torril
zone, and the rendering the whole terraqueous globe circum-
navigable. ray on the creation.
to cir cum na’v igate. v. a. [circum and naviga, lat..] to
sail round. -
cir cu mnavigation. n.s.. [from circumnavigate.] the ast
of sailing round.
what he says concerning the circumnavigation of africa,
from the straits of gibraltar to the red sea, is very remark-
able. arbuthnot on coins.
cir cum n avi ga tor. n.s. one that sails round.
cir cum plication. n.s. [circumplico, lat...]
1. the act of enwrapping on every side.
2. the state of being enwrapped.
circ u m po l.a.r. adj. [from circum and polar..] stars near the
north pole, which move round it, and never set in the
northern latitudes, are said to be circumpolar stars.
cir cum position. n.s.. [from circum and position.] the a&amp;
of placing any thing circularly.
now is your season for circumposition, by tiles or baskets of
earth. - evelyn's kalendar.
circumra'sion. m. s. . [ circumraso, latin. j . the act of
shaving or paring round. dic.
circumrotation. m. s. [circum and reto, lat.]
1. the act of whirling round with a motion like that of a
wheel. circumvolution ; circumgyration.
2. the state of being whirled round.
to circumscri/b.e. v. a. [circum and scribo, latin.]
1. to inclose in certain lines or boundaries.
2. to bound; to limit; to confine.
- the good andronicus,
with honour and with fortune is return'd :
from whence he circumscribed with his sword,
and brought to yoke th' enemies of rome. shaft care.
therefore must his choice be orcorsoril'd
unto
- _----------
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 391</div><p class="text">c i r
c i r
r:}; --
do no
"no
sung's
by .."
7 a to
le:
unto the voice and yielding of that body,
whereof he's head.
he form'd the pow'rs of heav'n
such as he pleas'd, and circumscrib'd their being ! milton.
the action great, yet circumscrib'd by time;
the words not forc'd, but sliding into rhime. dryden.
the external circumstances which do accompany mens acts,
are those which do circumscribe and limit them. stillings.et.
you are above
the little forms which circumscribe your sex. southern.
circumscr1'ption. n. s. [circumscriptio, latin.]
1. determination of particular form or magnitude.
in the circumscription of many leaves, flowers, fruits and
seeds, nature affects a regular figure. ray on the creation.
2. limitation; boundary ; contraction; confinement.
i would not my unhoused free condition,
put into circumscription and confine. shakes eare.
circumscriptive. adj. [from circumscribe..] inclosing the
superficies; marking the form or limits on the outside.
stones regular, are distinguished by their external forms:
such as is circumscriptive, or depending upon the whole stone,
as in the eagle-stone, is properly called the figure. grew.
circumspect. adj. [circumspecium, lat..] cautious; atten-
tive to everything; watchful on all sides.
none are for me,
that look into me with consid’rate eyes. *-
high-reaching buckingham grows circumspeci. shakespeare.
men of their own nature circumspeci and slow, but at the
shakespeare.
time discountenanced and discontent. haywood.
the judicious doctor had been very watchful and circum-
spect, to keep himself from being imposed upon. boyle.
circumspection. n.s.. [from circumspe:2.] watchfulness on
every side; cautious; general attention.
observe the sudden growth of wickedness, from want of
care and circumspediion in the first impressions. clarendou.
so saying, his proud step he scornful turn'd,
but with sly circumspe&amp;tion. milton's paradis loft.
circumspective. adj. [circumspicio, circumspecium, latin.]
looking round every way; attentive ; vigilant; cautious.
no less alike the politick and wise,
all sly slow things, with circumspeciive eyes. pope.
circumspectively, adv. [from circumspective..] cautiously;
vigilantly; attentively; with watchfulness every way; watch-
fully.
coverrerox. adv. [from circumspect.] with watchful-
ness every way; cautiously; watchfully; vigilantly.
their authority weighs more with me than the concurrent
suffrages of a thousand eyes, who never examined the thing
so carefully and circumspe&amp;tly. ray on the creation.
c1'rcumspect ness... m. s. [from circumsped.] caution; vigi-
lance; watchfulness on every side.
travel forces circumspecins on those abroad, who at home
are nursed in security. //otton.
ci'rcumstance. n.s.. [circumstantia, latin.]
1. something appendant or relative to a fact: the same to a
moral action as accident to a natural substance.
when men are ingenious in picking out circums/ances of
contempt, they do kindle their anger much. bacon's essays.
our confessing or concealing persecuted truths, vary and
change their very nature, according to different circumsiances
of time, place and persons. south.
2. the adjuncts of a fact, which make it more or less crimi-
nal; or make an accusation more or less probable.
of these supposed crimes give me leave,
by circumstance, but to acquit myself. shakespeare.
3. accident; something adventitious, which may be taken away
without the annihilation of the principal thing considered.
sense outside knows, the soul thro' all things sees:
sense, circumstance; she doth the substance view. davies.
4. incident; event: generally of a minute or subordinate kind.
he defended carlisle with very remarkable circumstances of
courage, industry, and patience. clarendon.
the sculptor had in his thoughts the conquerors weeping
for new worlds, or the like circumstance in history. addison.
the poet has gathered those circumstances which most ter-
rify the imagination, and which really happen in the raging of
a tempest. addison's spectator.
5. condition; state of affairs. it is frequently used with respect
to wealth or poverty; as good or ill circumstances.
none but a virtuous man can hope well in all circum-
fances. bacon.
we ought not to conclude, that if there be rational inha-
bitants in any of the planets, they must therefore have human
nature, or be involved in the circumstances of our world. bentley.
when men are easy in their circumstances, they are natural-
ly enemies to innovations. addison's freeholder.
to ci'rcumst ance. v. a. [from the noun..] to place in
particular situation, or relation to the things.
to worthiest things,
virtue, art, beauty, fortune, now i see,
rareness or use, not nature, value brings,
and such as they are circumstanc'd, they be, donne,
c1'rcux1st ant. adj. [circury?ans, lat.] surrounding; en-
vironing.
its beams fly to visit the remotest parts cf the world, and it
gives motion to all circum/lant bodies. digby on the soul.
c1r cu msta's tial. ad. [circumstantialis, low lat.]
i. accidental ; not essential.
this fierce abridgment
hath to it circumstantial branches, which
distinetion would be rich in. shakes care,
this jurisdiction in the essentials of it, is as old as christia-
nity; and those circumstantial additions of secular encourage-
ment, christian princes thought necessary. south.
who would not prefer a cligion that differs from our own
in the crewstantials, before one that differs from it in the
essentials : addison's freeholder,
2. incidental ; happening by chance; casual.
virtue's but anguish, when 'tis several,
by occasion wak'd, and circum?antial. donne.
.3. full of small events; particular ; detailed.
he had been provoked by men's tedious and circumstantial
recitals of their affairs, or by their multiplic questions about
his own. prior's dedication,
circumstantiality. m. s. [from circumsa tal.] the ap-
pendage of circumstances; the state of any thing as modified
by circumstances.
circu mstantially. adv. [from circum?antial.]
1. accordingly to circumstance; not essentially; accidentally.
of the fancy and intelle&amp;t, the powers are only circin -
stantially different. glanville's scots.
2. minutely ; exactly; in every circumstance or particular.
lucian agrees with homer in every point circury'antidy.
brozone.
to cir cu msta’ntiat e. v. a. ssrom circum/?anc..]
1. to place in particular circumstances; to invest with parti-
cular accidents or adjuncts. -
if the act were otherwise circumstantiated, it might will
that freely, which now it wills freely. bramhall,
2. to place in a particular condition, as with regard to power
or wealth.
a number infinitely superior, and the best circums?antiated
imaginable, are for the succession of hanover. wift.
to circumvallate. v. a. [circumvallo, lat.] to in-
close round with trenches or fortifications.
circumv allation. m. s. [from circumvallate, lat.]
1. the art or act of casting up fortifications round a place.
when the czar first acquainted himself with mathematical
learning, he practised all the rules of circumvallation and con-
travallation at the siege of a town in livonia. i/atts.
2. the fortification or trench thrown up round a place besieged.
this gave respite to finish those stupendious circumvalaions
and barricadoes, reared up by sea and land. howel.
cir cum ve"crio n. m. s. [circumvecio, latin.]
1. the act of carrying round.
2. the state of being carried round.
to circumve"nt. v. a. [circumvenia, lat..] to deceive;
to cheat; to impose upon ; to delude.
he fearing to be betrayed, or circumvented by his cruel bro-
ther, fled to barbarosla. knolles's history of the turks.
as his malice is vigilant, he resteth not to circumvent the
sons of the first deceived. brown's pulgar errours.
should man
fall circumvented thus by fraud.
obstinately bent
to die undaunted, and to circumvent. dryden,
circum v ent ion. m. s. [from circumvent.]
1. fraud; imposture; cheat; delusion.
the inequality of the match between him and the subtlest
of us, would quickly appear by a fatal circumvention: there
must be a wisdom from above to over-reach this hellish
wisdom. - o south.
if he is in the city, he must avoid haranguing against
circumvention in commerce. collier of popularity.
2. prevention; pre-occupation. this sense is now out of use.
whatever hath been thought on in this state,
that could be brought to bodily act, ere rome
had circumvention. shakes care.
to c1r cum v est. v. a. [circumvestio, lat.] to cover found
with a garment.
who on this base the earth did'st firmly found,
and mad'st the deep to circumvo/l it round. j7%fton.
cir cu mvol. ation. m. s. [from circumvalo, lat..] the act of
flying round.
to cir cu mvolve. v. a. [circumvolvo, lat.] to roll round;
to put into a circular motion.
could solid orbs be accommodated to phoenomena, yet to
ascribe each sphere an intelligence to circumvolve it, were un-
philosophical.
c1r cum volution. m. s. [circumvolutus, lat j
1. the aet of rolling round.
2. the state of being rolled round.
the twisting of the guts is really either a corcom:solution, or
insertion of one part of the gut within the other. aft o:
i - 3. 1 he
alled-
--- i.e.
so
j .
f to-
o:-
---
4-
-*
*
*
s
milton's paradis loft.
glanville's scopsis. -
f<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 392</div><p class="text">c i t
c i v
. the thing rolled round another. - -
3 o: the obliquity or closeness of these circumvolutions;
the nearer they are, the higher my be the instrument. wilk.
circus. un s. scircus latin.] an open space or area for
c1'rque. } sports, with seats round for the spectators.
a pleasant valley, like one of those circuses, which, in gre ...
cities' somewhere, doth give a pleasant spectacle of running
horses. sidney.
the one was about the cirque of flora, the other upon the
tar, eian mountain. stillingsleet.
see the cirque falls' th' unpillar'd temple nods;
streets pav'd with heroes, tyber choak'd with gods. pope.
cist. m. s. sci/ia, latin. j a case; a tegument; commonly
used in medicinal language for the coat or inclosure of a
turnour.
ci's red. adj. [from ci/?..] inclosed in a cist, or bag.
c1's tern. n.f. [cisterna, latin.]
1. a receptacle of water for domestick uses.
'tis not the rain that waters the whole earth, but that
which falls into his own cistern, that must relieve him. south.
2. a reservoir; an inclosed fountain.
had no part as kindly staid behind,
in the wide ci/ierns of the lakes confin'd;
did not the springs and rivers drench the land,
our globe would grow a wilderness of sand.
3. any receptacle or repository of water.
so halt my egypt were submerg'd, and made
a cistern for scal’d snakes. shakespeare.
but there's no bottom; none -
in my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters,
your matrons and your maids, could not fill up
the cislern of my lust. shakespeare.
cistus. n.s. [lat..] the name of a plant. the same with
rockrose.
cit. n.s. [contracted from citizen.] an inhabitant of a city,
in an ill sense. a pert low townsman; a pragmatical trader.
we bring you now to show what different things,
the cits or clowns are from the courts of kings. johnson.
study your race, or the soil of your family will dwindle
into cits or squires, or run up into wits or madmen. tatler.
barnard, thou art a cit, with all thy worth ;
but bug and d–l, their honours, and so forth. pope.
c1't a del. m. s. ucitadelle, french..] a fortress; a castle, or
place of arms in a city.
as he came to the crown by unjust means, as unjustly he
kept it; by force of stranger soldiers in citade's, the nests of
tyranny and murderers of liberty. sidney.
i'll to my charge, the citadel, repair. drydon.
cital. m. s. [from cite.]
1. reproof; impeachment.
he made a blushing cital of himself,
and chid his truant youth.
2. summons; citation; call into a court.
3. quotation ; citation.
citation. m. s. [citatio, latin.]
1. the calling a person before the judge, for the sake of
trying the cause of action commenced against him.
aliff's parergon.
2. quotation; the adduction of any passage from another au-
thor ; or of another man's words.
3. the passage or words quoted; a quotation.
the letter-writer cannot read these citations without blush-
blackmore.
shakespeare.
ing, after the charge he hath advanced. atterbury.
view the principles in their own authors, and not in the
citations of those who would confute them. j/atts.
4. enumeration ; mention.
these causes effect a consumption, endemick to this island:
there remains a citation of such as may produce it in any
country. harvey on consumptions.
citat or y. adj. [from to cite.] having the power or form
of citation:
if a judge cite one to a place, to which he cannot come
with safety, he may freely appeal, though an appeal be inhi-
bited in the letters citatory. ayliffe's parergon.
to cite. v. a. [cito, latin.]
1. to summon to answer in a court.
he held a late court, to which
she oft” was cited by them; but appear'd not. shakespeare.
forthwith the cited dead
of all past ages, to the general doom
shall hasten. milion.
this power of citing, and dragging the defendant into court,
was taken away. ayliffe's parergon.
2. to enjoin; to call upon another authoritatively; to direct ;
to summon.
i speak to you, sir thurio;
for valentine, i need not cite him to it.
this sad experience cites me to reveal,
and what i dictate is from what i feel. prizr.
3. to quote. ~
demonstrations in scripture may not otherwise be shewed
than by citing them out of the scripture. 110.ker.
shakspeare.
that passage of plato, which i cited before. bacon
in banishment he wrote those verses, which i cite from to
letter.
citer. m. s. [from cite.] dryden,
1. one who cites into a court.
2. one who quotes ; a quoter. -
i must desire the citer henceforward to inform us of his
editions too. - atterbur,
cite'ss. n.s. [from cit..] a city woman. a word peculia: t
dryden.
cits and citesses raise a joyful strain;
'tis a good omen to begin a reign. drydon
c1'thern. n.s.. [cithara, latin.] a kind of harp; a miss.
instrument.
at what time the heathen had profaned it, even in th:
was it dedicated with songs and citherns, and harps and cym.
bals, mo
citize n. m. s. [civis, lat. citoyen, french.] --
1. a freeman of a city ; not a foreigner; not a slave.
all inhabitants within these walls are not properly citizen,
but only such as are called freemen. raleigh's hjo.
2. a townsman; a man of trade; not a gentleman.
when he speaks not like a citizen,
you find him like a soldier. shakosheart,
3. an inhabitant ; a dweller in any place.
far from noisy rome, secure, he lives;
and one more citizen to sibyl gives. dryden,
citize n. adj. [this is only in shakespeare.] having the
qualities of a citizen ; as cowardice, meanness.
so sick i am not, yet i am not well;
but not so citizen a wanton, as
to seem to die ere sick. shakespears.
citrine. adj. [citrinus, lat.] lemon coloured; of a dark
yellow. -
the butterfly, papilio major, has its wings painted with
citrine and black, both in long streaks and spots. grew.
by citrine urine of a thicker consistence, the saltness of
phlegm is known. floyer on the humours.
citrine. m. s. [from citrinus, latin.]
a species of crystal of an extremely pure, clear, and fine
texture, generally free from flaws and blemishes. it is ever
found in a long and slender column, irregularly hexangular,
and terminated by an hexangular pyramid. it is from one to
four or five inches in length. this stone is very plentiful in
the west indies. our jewellers have learned to call it citrine;
and cut stones for rings out of it, which are mistaken for
topazes. hill on fiji.
citron-tree. n.s.. [from citrus, latin.]
it hath broad stiff leaves, like those of the laurel. the
flowers consist of many leaves, expanded like a rose. the
pistol becomes an oblong, thick, fleshy fruit, very full of
juice. genoa is the great nursery for these trees. one sort,
with a pointed fruit, is in so great esteem, that the fingle
fruits are sold at florence for two shillings each. millir,
may the sun
with citron groves adorn a distant soil. alison.
citron-water. m. s. aqua vitae, distilled with the rind of
cits ons.
like citron-waters matrons cheeks inflame. pope.
citrul. m. s. the same with pumpion, so named from its
ellow colour.
city. m. s. [cite, french, civitas, latin.]
1. a large collection of houses and inhabitants.
men seek safety from number better united, and from walls
and fortifications; the use whereof is to make the few a match
for the many, this is the original of cities. temple,
city, in a strict sense, means the houses inclosed within the
walls: in a larger sense, it reaches to all the suburbs. watts.
2. [in the english law. j a town corporate, that hath a bi-
shop and a cathedral church. cowel,
3. the inhabitants of a certain city, as distinguished from other
subjects. -
what is the city but the people?
—true, the people are the city. shakstart,
i do suspect i have done some offence,
that seems disgracious in the city's cye. - shakestart.
c1't y. adj.
1. relating to the city.
his enforcement of the city wives, * shak's eart.
- he, i accuse,
the city ports by this hath enter’d. slakoffeart.
2. resembling the manners of the citizens.
make not a city feast of it, to let the meat cool cre we can
agree upon the first cut. shakespeare.
c1 v et. m. s. [civette, fr. 2iletta, arabic, signifying scent.) a
perfume from the civet cat.
the civet, or civet cat, is a little animal, not unlike our
cat. it is a native of the indies, peru, brafii, guinea. the
perfume is formed like a kind of grease, in a bag under its
tail, between the anus and pudendum. it is gathered from
* to time, and abounds in proportion as the animal is
fed. tretoux.
- 8 cover
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 393</div><p class="text">c i v
- - - ser birth than tar; the very uncleanly flux
civet is of a ba &gt; y shakspeare.
of a cat. trefactions and excrements do yield excellent
some pu avet and musk, and, as some think, amber-
as - bacon's natural history.
goals. adj [civicus, latin.] relating to civil honours or
co.: not military. -
p"woh equal rays immortal tully shone:
behind, rome's genius waits with civick crowns,
and the great father of his country owns. pope.
civil. adj. [civilis, latin.]
1. relating to the community; political; relating to the city or
odours;
ment. - - -
t". gave them laws of civil regimen, and would not per-
mit their commonweal to be governed by any other lo
his own, part such as appertain
*iliustice; part, religious rites
o #. ; part, relig - milton's paradis ioff.
lot there is another unity, which would be most advan-
tageous to our country; and that is your endeavour after a
oi, 3. political union in the whole nation. - spratt.
2. relating to any man as a member of a community.
boak not your promise, unless it be unlawful or impossible;
either out of your natural, or out of your civil power. taylor.
not in anarchy; not wild; not without rule or government.
3. for rudest minds with harmony were caught,
and civil life . the muses taught.
eign ; inteit inc.
- no. war, god of his mercy defend us, as that which
is most desperate of all others. - bacon to williers.
not ecclesiastical ; as, the ecclesiastical courts are controlled
- ivil.
6 oil, as, a person banished or outlawed is said to
suffer civil, though not natural death: - -
7. not military; as, the civil magistrate's authority is obstructed
by war. - - - - - - -
8. not criminal ; as, this is a civil process, not a criminal pro-
secution.
9. civilised; not barbarous. - - -
england was very rude and barbarous; for it is but even
the other day since england grew civil. spenser on ireland.
io. complaisant; civilised ; gentle; well bred; elegant of man-
ners; not rude ; not brutal; not coarse.
i heard a mermaid, on a dolphin's back,
uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath,
that the rude sea grew civil at her song. shakespeare.
he was civil and well natured, never refusing to teach
foscommon.
another. dryden's dufresnoy.
and fall these sayings from that gentle tongue, -
where civil speech and soft persuasion hung prior.
11. grave; sober; not gay or shewy.
thus night oft see me in thy pale career, ...
*till civil suited morn appear. - milton's poems.
12. relating to the ancient consular or imperial government;
ivil law.
as2 “s, woman had it, but a civil doctor. shakespeare.
civili an. n.s. (£ivilis, lat.) one that professes the know-
ledge of the old roman law, and of general equity. - -
the professors of that law, called civilians, because the civil
law is their guide, should not be discountenanced nor dis-
couraged. bacon’s advice to williers.
a depending kingdom is a term of art, unknown to all
ancient civilians, and writers upon government. . . . swift.
civilis aotion, n. s. [from civil..] . a law, act of justice, or
judgment; which renders a criminal process civil; which is
performed by turning an information into an inquest, or the
contrary. harris.
civ i’lity. n. s. [from civil.] - - - -
1. freedom from barbarity; the state of being civilised.
the english were at first as stout and warlike a people as
ever the irish; and yet are now brought unto that civility,
that no nation excelleth them in all goodly conversation, and
all the studies of knowledge and humanity." ... spensor.
divers great monarchies have risen from barbarism to civil
lity, and fallen again to ruin. davies on ireland.
wheresoe'er her conquering eagles fled, &gt;
arts, learning, and civility were spread. denham's poems.
2. politeness; complaisance; elegance of behaviour.
art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy distress;
or else a rude despiser of good manners,
that in civility thou seem'st so empty shakespeare.
he, by his great civility and affability, wrought very much
upon the people. - - clarendon.
i should be kept from a publication, did not what your civi-
lity calls a request, your greatness, command. . south.
we, in point of civility, yield to others in our own
houses. swift.
3. rule of decency; prastice of politeness. . -
love taught him shame; and shame, with love at strife,
soon taught the sweet civilities of life. dryden.
vol. i.
7. covilize. v. a. [from civil..] to reclaim from savage-
ness and brutality; to instruct in the arts of regular life.
we send the graces and the muses forth,
to civilize and to instruct the north. jo all, r.
musæus first, then orpheus civilize
mankind, and gave the world their deities. denham.
amongst those who are counted the civilizd part of man-
kind, this original law of nature still takes place. . locłe.
osiris, or bacchus, is reported to have civilized the indians,
and reigned amongst them fifty-two years. arbuthnot.
civilizer. m. s. [from civiliz.] he that reclaims others from
a wild and savage life; he that teaches the rules and customs
of civility.
the civilizers 1—the disturbers, say :-
the robbers, the corrupters of mankind philip's britan.
civ ii ly, adv. [from civil]
1. in a manner relating to government, or to the rights or cha-
raeter of a member of a community; not naturally.
men that are civil lead their lives after one common law ;
for that a multitude should, without harmony, concur in the
doing of one thing; for this is civilly to live; or should ma-
nage community of life, it is not posible. h:2::cr.
2. not criminally.
that accusation, which is publick, is either civily com-
menced for the private satisfaction of the party injured; or
else criminally, that is, for some publick punishment. ayliffe.
3. politely; complaitantly; gently; without rudeness; without
brutality.
i will deal civily with his poems: nothing ill is to be spoken
of the dead. dryden's presace to his fables.
i would have had almeria and osmyn parted civily; as if
it was not proper for lovers to do so. colier of the stage.
he thought them folks that lost their way,
and ask'd them civily to stay.
4. without gay or gaudy colours.
the chambers were handsome and cheerful, and furnished
civilly. bacon's new atlantis.
cize. m. s. sperhaps from incisa, lat. shaped or cut to a certain
magnitude.] the quantity of any thing, with regard to its
external form; often written size.
if no motion can alter bodies, that is, reduce them to some
other cize or figure, then there is none of itself to give them
the cize and figure which they have. grew's cosmol.
clack. m. s. [klatschen, germ. to rattle; to make a noise.]
1. anything that makes a lasting and importunate noise; gene-
rally used, in contempt, for the tongue.
but still his tongue ran on,
and with its everlasting clack,
set all mens ears upon the rack, -
fancy flows in, and muse flies high;
he knows not when my clack will lie. prior.
2. the clack of a mill. a bell that rings when more corn
is required to be put in.
says john, just at the hopper will i stand,
and mark the clack how justly it will sound. betterton.
to clack. v. n. [from the foun.]
1. to make a chinking noise.
2. to let the tongue run. - -
to clack., v. a. as to clack wool, is to cut off the sheep's
mark, which makes it to weigh less, and so yield the sess
custom to the king. cowel.
clad. part. pret. [this participle, which is now referred to
clothe, seems originally to have belonged to cloden, or some
such word, like alcedon, dutch..] clothed; invested; garbed.
so oft in feasts with costly changes clad,
to crammed maws a spratt new stomach brings. sidney.
, prior,
hudibras.
he had clad himself with a new garment. 1 kings,
beyond -
the flow'ry dale of sibma, clad with vine. milton,
their prayers clad
with incense, where the golden altar fum'd
by their great intercessor. milton.
but virtue too, as well as vice, is clad
in flesh and blood. }/aller.
to her the weeping heav'ns become serene; -
for her the ground is clad in cheerful green. dryden.
the courtiers were all most magnificently clad. swift.
to claim. v. a. [clamer, french..] to demand of right; to
require authoritatively; not to beg or accept as favour, but to
exact as due.
if only one man hath a divine right to obedience, no body
can claim that obedience but he that can shew his right. lock.
we must know how the first ruler, from whom any one
claims, came by his authority, before we can know who has a
right to succeed him in it. locke.
poets have undoubted right to claim,
if not the greatest, the most lasting name. congreve.
claim. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. a demand of any thing, as due.
you, in the right of lady blanch your wife, -
may then make all the claim that arthur did. shakespeare,
4 o forsworn<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 394</div><p class="text">c l a
c l a
forsworn thyself! the traitor's odious name
i first return, and then disprove thy claim: dryden,
will he not, therefore, of the two evils chuse the least,
by submitting to a master, who hath no immediate claim upon
him, rather than to another, who hath already revived several
claims upon him : - oft.
2. a title to any privilege or possession in the hands of another.
either ther: must have been but one sovereign over them
all, or else every father of a family had been as good a prince,
and had as good a claim to royalty as these. . locke.
*"... of anything that is in the possession of another,
or at the least out of his own: as claim by charter, claim by
descent. - cowel.
4. the phrases are commonly to make claim, or to lay claim.
the king of prussia lays in his claim for neuf-chatel, as he
did for the principality of orange. . . . . addison on italy.
if god, by positive grant, gave dominion to any man; pri-
mogeniture can lay no claim to it, unless god ordained. locke.
cla’iniable, adj. [from claim...] that which may be demand-
ed as due. -
cla'im ant. n.s. [from claim..] he that demands anything
as unjustly detained by another:
a claimea. m. s. [from claim..] . he that makes a demand ;
he that requires any thing, as unjustly with-held from him.
clair-obscu re. m. s. see clare-obsct, r.e.
t, clamber. v. n. [probably corrupted from climb : as
climber, clamber.] to climb with difficulty; as with both
hands and feet.
the kitchen malkin pins
her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
camboring the walls to eye him. shakosheare.
when you hear the drum,
clamber not you up to the casements then. shakes care.
the men there do not without some difficulty clamber up
the acclivities, dragging their kine with them. ray.
they were forced to clamber over so many rocks, and to
tread upon the brink of so many precipices, that they were
very often in danger of their lives. addison's freeholder.
to clamm. v. a. [in some provinces, to cleam, from clao-
mian, sax. to glew together.] to clog with any glutinous
imatter.
a swarm of wasps got into a honey-pot, and there they
cloyed and clammed themselves, ’till there was no getting out
again. l’estrange.
the sprigs were all dawbed with lime, and the birds
clammed and taken. l’estrange.
cla(mminess. n. s. [from clammy.] viscofity; viscidity;
tenacity ; ropiness.
a greasy pipkin will spoil the clammines of the glew. mix.
cla'mmy. adj. [from clamm.] viscous; glutinous; tenacious ;
adhesive; ropy.
bodies clammy and cleaving, have an appetite, at once, to
follow another body, and to hold to themselves. bacon.
neither the brain nor spirits can conserve motion: the for-
mer is of such a clammy consistence, it can no more retain it
than a quagmire. glanville's scepsis.
aghast he wak'd, and, starting from his bed,
cold sweats, in clammy drcps, his limbs o'er spread. dryden.
joyful thou’lt see
the clammy surface all o'er strown with tribes
of greedy infects. philips.
there is an unetuous clammy vapour that arises from the
stum of grapes, when they lic mashed together in the vat,
which puts out a light, when dipped into it. addison on italy.
the continuance of the fever, clammy sweats, paleness,
and at last a total cessation of pain, are signs of a gangrene
and approaching death. arbuthnot on diet.
cla'morous, adj. [from clamour.] vociferous; noisy; tur-
bulent; loud.
it is no sufficient argument to say, that, in urging these
ceremonies, none are so clamorous as papists, and they whom
papists suborn. hooker.
he kiss'd her lips
with such a clamorous smack, that at the parting
all the church eccho'd. shakespeare.
at my birth -
the goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
were strangely clam’rous in the frighted fields. shakespeare.
with the clam’rous report of war,
thus will i drown your exclamations.
then various elements against thee join'd,
in one more various animal combin'd,
and fram'd the clam’rous race of busy human kind. pope.
a pamphlet that will settle the wavering, instruct the igno-
rant, and inflame the clamorous. swift.
cla(mour. m. s. [clamor, latin.]
i. outcry; noise; exclamation; vociferation.
revoke thy doom,
so whilst i can vent clamour from my throat,
i'll tell thee, thou do's evil.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
to clap. v. a. [clappan, sax. altpen, dutch.]
the people grew then exorbitant in their clamour, for
justice. kin -
j the maid &amp; chand,
shall weep the fury of my love decay’d;
and weeping follow me, as thou do'st now,
with idle clamours of a broken vow. pri.
2. it is used sometimes, but less fitly, of inanimate things. ic),
here the loud arno's boist'rous clamours cease, &gt;
that with submissive murmurs glides in peace. adds:
to cla mour. v. n. [from the noun.] **--
1. to make outcries; to exclaim ; to vociferate; to roar in
turbulence.
the obscure bird clamour'd the live-long night, shai."
let them not come in multitudes, or in a tributio.
manner; for that is to clamour counsels, not to inform them,
- - bacon's effo,
2. in shakespeare it seems to mean actively, to stop from
noise. -
clanour your tongues, and not a word more. shaissaro,
clamp. m. s. [clamp, french.] -
1. a piece of wood joined to another, as an addition of
strength.
2. a quantity of bricks.
to burn a clamp of brick of fixteen thousand, they allow
seven ton of coals. 442ntimer's hislando,
to clamp. v. a. [from the noun.] j
when a piece of board is fitted with the grain to the end
of another piece of board cross the grain, the first board is
clamped. thus the ends of tables are commonly camped to
preserve them from warping. aloxon's 44-ch. exercise,
clan. 's [probably of scottish original; alaan, in the high-
lands, signifies children.]
1. a family; a race.
they around the flag
of each his faction, in their several clans,
swarm populous, unnumbered. milton,
milton was the poetical son of spenser, and mr. waller of
fairfax; for we have our lineal descents and clans as well as
other families. dryden.
2. a body or se&amp;t of persons, in a sense of contempt.
partridge and the rest of his clan may hoot me for a cheat,
if i fail in any single particular. swift.
cla'ncular. adj. [clancularius, latin.] clandestine; secret;
private ; concealed; obscure; hidden.
let us withdraw all supplies from our lusts, and not by any
secret reserved affection give them clancular aids to maintain
their rebellion. decay of pity.
clandestine. adj. [...lands?inus, lat..] secret; hidden;
private ; in an ill sense.
tho' nitrous tempests, and clandesline death,
fill'd the deep caves, and num'rous vaults beneath.
blacimiri,
clande's tinely. adv. [from clandsline.] scoretly; private.
ly ; in private ; in secret.
there have been two printed papers clandstinely spread
about, whereof no man is able to trace the original. swift,
clang. m. s. [clangor, lat..] a sharp, shrill noise.
with such a horrid clang
as on mount sinai rang,
while the red fire and smould’ring clouds out brake. milion,
an island, salt and bare,
the haunt of seals and orcs, and sea-mews clong. milton,
what clangs were heard in german skies afar,
of arms and armies rushing to the war ! dryden,
guns, and trumpets clang, and solemn sound
of drums, o'ercame their groans. philipi.
to clang. v. n. [clango, lat.] to clatter; to make a loud
shrill noise. -
have i not in a pitched battle heard
loud larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets clang? shao,
the libyans clad in armour, lead -
the dance; and clanging swords and shields they beat. prior,
to clang. v. a. to strike together with a noise.
the fierce curetes trod tumultuous
their mystick dance, and clang'd their sounding arms; ,
industrious with the warlike din to quell -
thy infant cries. prior,
cla'ngour. m. s. [clangor, lat..] a loud shrill sound.
in death he cried,
like to a dismal clangour heard from far,
warwick, revenge my death. shakoftart.
with joy they view the waving ensigns fly,
and hear the trumpet’s clangour pierce the sky. dryden,
cla'ngous, adj. [from clang.j making a clang.
we do not observe the cranes, and birds of long necks,
have any musical, but harsh and clangous throats. brown.
clank. n.s...[from clang.] a loud, thrill, sharp noise, made
by the collision of hard and sonorous bodies.
they were joined by the melodious clank of marrow-bone
and clever. spilator.
}
i. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 395</div><p class="text">c l a
c l a
1. to strike together with a quick motion, so as to make a noise
ision.
by the collisio following the fliers,
- m he enters; who, upon the sudden
yo o: gates. 3. shakespeare.
o shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of
his place. s iti - ld ing, cl 3.
have you never teen a citizen, in a cold morning, clas ping
his sides and walking before his shop : dryden.
is fiorowing clapp'd his wings, th’ appointed call
to chuck his wives together in the hall. dryden's falles.
each poet of the air her glory fings,
andround him the pleas'd audience clap their wings. dryd.
h. hadjust time to get in and clap to the door, to avoid the
blow. . . locke on education.
in flow'ry wreathes the royal virgin drest
his bending horns, and kindly clapt his breast. addison.
glad of a quarrel, straight i clap the door,
sir, let me see your works and you no more. pope.
2. to add one thing to another, implying the idea of something
hasty, unexpected, or sudden.
they cap mouth to mouth, wing to wing, and leg to leg;
and so, after * sweet singing, fall down into lakes. carew.
this pink is one of cupid's carriers: clap on more sails;
pursue. shakespeare.
smooth temptations, like the sun, make a maiden lay by
her veil and robe which persecution, like the northern wind,
made her hold fast, and clap close about her. taylor.
if a man be highly commended, we think him sufficiently
lesioned, if we clap fin, or folly, or infirmity into his account.
taylor's rule of living holy.
razor-makers generally clap a small bar of venice steel be-
tween two small bars of flemish steel. moxon's mech. exer.
the man clapt his fingers one day to his mouth, and blew
upon them. l’estrange.
his shield thrown by, to mitigate the smart,
he clasp'd his hand upon the wounded part. dryden.
if you leave some space empty for the air, then clap your
hand upon the mouth of the vessel, and the fishes will contend
to get uppermost in the water. ray on the creation.
it would be as absurd as to say, he clapped spurs to his horse
at st. james's, and galloped away to the hague. addison.
by having their minds yet in their perfect freedom and in-
differency, they pursue truth the better, having no biass yet
clapped on to mislead them. locke.
i have observed a certain chearfulness in as bad a system of
features as ever was clapped together, which hath appeared
lovely. addison's speciator.
let all her ways be unconfin'd,
and clap your padlock on her mind. prior.
socrates or alexander might have a fool's coat clapt upon
them, and perhaps neither wisdom nor majesty would secure
them from a sneer. watts on the mind.
3. to do anything with a sudden hasty motion, or unexpectedly.
we were dead asleep,
and, how we know not, all clapt under hatches. shakesp.
he was no sooner entered into the town, but a scambling
soldier clapt hold of his bridle, which he thought was in a
begging or in a drunken fashion. wotton's life of buck.
so much from the rest of his countrymen, and indeed from
his whole species, that his friends would have clapped him into
bedlam, and have begged his estate. spectator.
have you observ’d a sitting hare,
list’ning and fearful of the storm
of horns and hounds, clap back her ear ! prior.
we will take our remedy at law, and clap an action upon
you for old debts. arbuthnot's history of john bull.
4. to celebrate or praise by clapping the hands; to applaud.
i have often heard the stationer wishing for those hands to
take off his melancholy bargain, which clapped its performance
on the stage, dedication to dryden's spanish fryar.
5. to infect with a venereal poison. (see the noun.]
if the patient hath been clapt, it will be the more difficult
to cure him the second time, and worse the third. j/seman.
let men and manners ev'ry dish adapt;
who’d force his pepper where his guests are clapto king.
6. 72 clap up. to complete suddenly, without much pre-
caution. - -
no longer than we well could wash our hands,
to clap this royal bargain up of peace. shakespeare.
was ever match clapt up so suddenly shakespeare.
a peace may be clapped up with that suddenness, that the
forces, which are now in motion, may *:::::::) fall upon
his skirts. howel's wocal forest.
7. to clap up. to imprison with little formality or delay.
being presented to the emperor for his admirable beauty,
he was known, and the prince clapt him up as his inveigler.
sandys.
to clap. v. m.
1. to move nimbly with a noise.
every door flew open
to admit my entrance; and then clapt behind me,
to bar my going back.
a whis wind rose, that, with a violent blast,
shook all the dome: the doors around me clapt.
2. to enter with alacrity and briskness upon any thing.
come, a song.
–shall we clap into't roundly, without saying we are hoarse?
shao's care.
dryden.
dryden.
3. to strike the hands together in applause.
all the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap
if they hold, when their ladies bid 'em cap.
clap. n.s. [from the verb.]
1. a loud noise made by sudden collision.
give the door such a clap as you go out, as will shake the
whole room, and make every thing rattle in it.
2. a sudden or unexpected act or motion.
it is monstrous to me, that the south sea should pay half
their debts at one clap. swift's letters.
3. an explosion of thunder.
there shall be horrible claps of thunder, and flashes of
lightning, voices and earthquakes. h. kovi. 2; pr29.4.
the clap is past, and now the skies are clear. dryden', juv.
4. an act of applause.
the actors, in the midst of an innocent old play, are of:en
słass care.
swift.
startled in the midst of unexpected claps or hisses. adaison.
5. a sudden or unexpected misfortune. obsolete.
6. a venereal infection. [from clapoir, fr.]
time, that at last matures a clap to pox. pope.
7. [with falconers.] the nether part of the beak of a hawk.
cla pper. m. s. [from clap.]
1. one who claps with his hands; an applauder.
2. the tongue of a bell.
he hath a heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue is the
clapper; for what his heart thinks, his tongue speak. shakesp.
i saw a young lady fall down the other day, and she mush
resembled an overturned bell without a clapper. addison.
3. the cla pper of a mill. a piece of wood shaking the
hopper.
to clapper clow. v. a. [from clap and claw.] to tongue-
beat ; to scold.
they are clapperclawing one another, i'll look on.
shakespeare.
they've always been at daggers-drawing,
and one another clapperclawing. hudibras.
cla'renceux, or cla’rencieux. m.s. the second king at
arms: so named from the dutchy of clarence.
clare-obsco r.e. m. s. [from clarus, bright, and obsurus, lat.]
light and shade in painting.
as masters in the clare-obscure,
with various light your eyes allure;
a flaming yellow here they spread,
draw off in blue, or charge in red;
yet from these colours, oddly mix’d,
your sight upon the whole is fix’d. prizr.
claret. m. s. [clairet, fr.] french wine, of a clear pale-
red colour.
red and white wine are in a trice confounded into claret.
boyle.
the claret smooth, red as the lips we press
in sparkling fancy, while we drain the bowl.
cla'ricord. n.s.. [from clarus and chorda, latin.]
a musical instrument in form of a spinette, but more ancient.
it has forty-nine or fifty keys, and seventy strings. chambers.
clarification. m. s...[from clariff.] the act of making
any thing clear from impurities.
liquors are, many of them, at the first, thick and trou-
bled; as muste, and wort: to know the means of accelerating
clarification, we must know the causes of clarification. bacon.
t. cla'rify. v. a. [clarifier, french.]
1. to purify or clear any liquor; to separate from feculences or
impurities.
the apothecaries clarify their syrups by whites of eggs,
beaten with the juices which they would clarify; which whites
of eggs gather all the dregs and grosser parts of the juice to
them ; and after, the syrup being set on the fire, the whites of
eggs themselves harden, and are taken forth. bacon.
2. to brighten; to illuminate. this sense is rare.
the will was then ductile and pliant to all the motions of
right reason: it met the dictates of a clarifted understanding
half way. scutb.
the christian religion is the only means that god has sanc-
tified, to set fallen man upon his legs again, to clarify his rea-
son, and to rectify his will. south.
to cla rify. v. n. to clear up, to grow bright.
whosoever hath his mind fraught with many thoughts,
his wits and understanding do clarify and break up in the dis-
coursing with another ; he marshalleth his thoughts more or-
derly, he seeth how they look when they are turned into
words. bacon's essays.
cla'rion. m. s. [clarin, spanish, from clarus, loud, lat.] a
trumpet; a wind instrument of war.
thomson.
and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 396</div><p class="text">c l a
c l a
and after, to his palace he them brings,
with shams, and trumpets, and with clarions sweet;
and all the way the joyous people sings.
then strait commands, that at the warlike sound
of trumpets loud, and clarions, be uprear'd -
the mighty standard. milton's paradise lost.
let fuller notes th’ applauding world amaze,
and the loud clarion labour in your praise. pope.
cla'rity.. n.s. [clarte, french ; claritas, latin.] brightness ;
splendour. - - - -
a light by abundant clarity invisible; an understanding
which itself can only comprehend. sir walter raleigh.
man was not only deceivabie in his o; but the an-
els of light in all their clarity. brown's wulgar errours.
sea r y. m. s. sherminium, lat.] an herb.
cla plants {{ have circled o, do all abound with moisture.
the weakest kind of curling is roughness: as in clary and
burr. bacon's natural history.
t, clash. v. n. [akson, dut. to make a noise.] -
1. to make a noise by mutual collision ; to strike one against
another. -
three times, as of the clashing sound
of arms, we heard. denham.
those few that should happen to clash, might rebound after
the collision. - - - - ... bently.
how many candles may send out their light, without closh-
ing upon one another; which argues the smallness of the
parts of light, and the largeness of the interttices between
particles of air and other bodies. - - - cheyne.
2. to act with opposite power, or contrary direaion. -
neither was there any queen-mother who might clash with
his counsellors for authority. - bacon.
those that are not convinced what help this is to magis-
tracy, would find it, if they should chance to clash. south.
3- to contradict ; to oppose. - - -
wherever there are men, there will be clashing sometime
or other; and a knock, or a contest, spoils all. l'e/irange.
the absurdity in this instance is obvious ; and yet every
* time that clashing metaphors are put together, this fault is com-
mitted. - spectator.
t, clash. v. a. to strike one thing against another, so as to
produce a noise. -
the nodding statue closh'd his arms,
and with a sullen sound and feeble cry,
half sunk, and half pronounced the word of victory. dryd.
clash. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a noisy collision of two bodies.
spensor.
the clash of arms and voice of men we hear. denham.
he nobly seiz'd thee in the dire alarms
of war and slaughter and the closh of arms. pope.
2. opposition; contradiction. -
then from the clashes between popes and kings,
debate, like sparks from flint's collision, springs. denham.
in the very next line he reconciles the fathers and scripture,
and shews there is no clash betwixt them. alterbury.
a clasp. m. s. scheste, dutch..]
1. a hook to hold anything close; as a book, or garment.
the scorpion's claws here grasp a wide extent,
and here the crabs in lesler clasps are bent. addison.
he took me aside, opening the clasps of the parchment
cover. arbuthnot and pope.
2. an embrace, in contempt.
your fair daughter,
transported with no worse nor better guard,
but with a knave of hire, a gondalier,
to the gross clasps of a lascivious moor.
t. clasp. v. a [from the noun.]
1. to shut with a clasp.
sermons are the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and do
open the scriptures; which being but read, remain, in com-
shakespeare.
parison, still clasped. . . . - hooker.
there caxton slept, with wynkin at his side,
one clasp'd in wood, and one in strong cow-hide. pope.
2. to catch and hold by twining.
direct
the clashing ivy where to climb. milton's paradise loft.
3. to hold with the hands extended ; to inclose between the
hands.
occasion turneth the handle of the bottle first to be re-
ceived, and after the belly, which is hard to clasp. bacon.
4. to embrace.
thou art a slave, whom fortune's tender arm
with favour never claspt, but bred a dog. shakesp.
thy suppliant
i beg, and clasp thy knees. milton's paradise loft.
- he stoop'd below
the flying spear, and shunn'd the promis'd blow ;
then creeping, clasp'd the heroes knees, and pray’d. dryd.
now, now he clasps her to his panting breast; -
now he devours her with his eager eyes. smith.
5. to inclose. -
boys, with women's voices,
to class. v. a.
strive to speak big, and clasp their female joints,
in stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown. shakespeare.
cla's per. m. s. [from clasp.] the te:drels or threads of
creeping plants, by which they cling to other things for
support.
the tendrels or clasfers of plants are given only to such
species as have weak and infirm stalks. ray on the creation.
cla's pknife. n.s. [from clasp and knife.] a knife which fold,
into the handle.
class. n.s.. [from classis, latin.]
1. a rank or order of persons.
segrais has distinguished the readers of poetry, according to
their capacity of judging, into three classes. dryden.
2. a number of boys learning the same lesson at the school.
we shall be seized away from this lower class in the school
of knowledge, and our conversation shall be with angels and
illuminated spirits. //atts on the mind.
3. a set of beings or things ; a number ranged in distribution,
under some common denomination.
among this herd of politicians, any one set make a very
considerable class of men. addison's pre-holder.
whate'er of mongrel, no one clos; admits
a wit with dunces, and a dunce with wits. pope.
[from the noun..] to range according to
some stated method of distribution; to range according to
different ranks. -
i considered that by the closing and methodizing such pas.
sages, i might instruct the reader. arbuthnot on coins.
§o { adj. [classicus, latin j
1. relating to antique authors; relating to literature.
poetick fields encompass me around,
and still i seem to tread on classick ground. addison.
with them the genius of classick learning dwelleth, and
from then it is derived. felton on the classicks.
2. of the first order or rank.
from this standard the value of the roman weights and
coins are deduced: in the settling of which i have followed
mr. greaves, who may be justly reckoned a classical author on
this subject. arbuthnot on coins.
classick. n.s.. [classicus, lat j an author of the first rank:
usually taken for ancient authors.
the classicks of an age that heard of none.
classis. n.s. [latin.] order; sort; body.
he had declared his opinion of that classis of men, and did
all he could to hinder their growth. clarendon.
to clatter. v. n. [clarnunge, a rattle, saxon.]
pope.
1. to make a noise by knocking two sonorous bodies frequently
together.
now the sprightly trumpet, from afar,
had rouz'd the neighing steeds to scour the fields,
while the fierce riders clatter'd on their shields.
2. to utter a noise by being struck together.
all that night was heard an unwonted clattering of weapons,
and of men running to and fro. knolles's hislory.
down sunk the monster-bulk, and press'd the ground;
his arms and clattering shield on the vast body sound. dryd.
their clattering arms with the fierce shocks resound,
helmets and broken launces spread the ground. granville.
3. to talk fast and idly.
here is a great deal of good matter
lost for lack of telling;
now, siker, i see thou do'st but clatter;
herm may come of melling. spensor.
all those airy speculations, which bettered not men's man-
ners, were only a noise and clattering of words. decay of piety.
to clatter. v a.
1. to strike any thing so as to make it sound and rattle.
i only with an oaken staff will meet thee,
and raise such outcries on thy catter'd iron,
dryden.
that thou oft' shalt wish th; self at gath. milton.
when all the bees are gone to settle,
you catter still your brazen kettle. swift.
2. to dispute, jar, or clamour. martin. a low word.
a cla’tt er. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a rattling noise made by the frequent and quick collision of
sonorous bodies. a clatter is a clash often repeated with great
quickness, and seems to convey the idea of a sound sharper
and shriller than rattle. [see the verb.]
i have seen a monkey overthrow all the dishes and plates in
a kitchen, merely for the pleasure of seeing them tumble, and
hearing the clatter they made in their fall. swift.
2. it is used for any tumultuous and confused noise.
by this great clatter, one of greatest note
seems bruited. slakespeare.
grow to be short,
throw by your clatter,
and handle the matter. ben. joh son.
o rourk's jolly boys
ne'er dreamt of the matter,
'till rous’d by the noise,
and musical claster. swift.
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 397</div><p class="text">c l e
go
t
****
-
into :
it to c#,
it to
p.
's', or:
co.
|
-
* ----
is:
fw:
t;', o
joit,
yumi.
elor.
. gr
the jumbling particles of matter,
in chaos make not such a clatter. - swift.
clav at ed. adj. [clavatus, lat.] knobbed; set with knobs.
these appear plainly to have been clavated spikes of some
kind of echinus ovarius. woodward on fossils.
cla'udent. adj. [claudens, lat..] shutting; inclosing; con-
fining. dicf.
to clatidicate. v. n. [claudico, latin.] to halt; to
limp. dic7.
claudication. n. s. [from claudicate.] the aet or habit of
halting. dici.
clave. [the preterite of cleave..] see cle ave. * o
clavellated, adj. [clavellatus, low latin.] made with
burnt tartar. a chymical term. . chambers.
air, transmitted through clavellated ashes into an exhausted
receiver, loses weight as it passes through them. arbuthnot.
cla’ver. n.s.. [clapen pync, sax.] this is now universally
written clover, though not so properly. see clov er.
clavicle. n.s.. [clavicula, lat.] the collar bone.
some quadrupeds can bring their fore feet unto their
mouths; as most that have clavicles, or collar bones. brown.
a girl was brought with angry wheals down her neck,
towards the clavicle. j/iseman's surgery.
clause. n. s. so latin.]
1. a sentence; a single part of a discourse; a subdivision of a
larger sentence ; so much of a sentence as is to be construed
together.
god may be glorified by obedience, and obeyed by per-
formance of his will, although no special clause or sentence of
scripture be in every such action set before men's eyes to war-
rant it. hooker.
2. an article, or particular stipulation.
the clause is untrue concerning the bishop. hooker.
when, after his death, they were sent both to jews and
gentiles, we find not this clause in their commission. south.
cl aoust ral. adj. [from clausirum, lat..] relating to a cloy-
ster, or religious house.
cauftral priors are such as preside over monasteries, next
to the abbot or chief governour in such religious houses. ayliffe.
claus ure. m. s. [clausura, lat.] confinement; the act of
ihutting; the state of being shut.
in some monasteries the severity of the clausure is hard to
be born. geddes.
a claw. m. s. [clapan, saxon.]
1. the foot of a beast or bird, armed with sharp nails; or the
pincers or holders of a shell-fish.
i saw her range abroad to seek her food,
to embrue her teeth and claws with lukewarm blood. spens.
what's justice to a man, or laws,
that never comes within their claws 2 hudibras.
he softens the harsh rigour of the laws,
blunts their keen edge, and grinds their harpy claws. garth.
2. sometimes a hand, in contempt.
to claw. v. a. [clapan, saxon.]
1. to tear with nails or claws.
look, if the wither'd elder hath not his poll claw'd like
a parrot. shakespeare.
2. to pull, as with the nails.
i am afraid we shall not easily claw off that name. south.
3. to tear or scratch in general.
but we must claw ourselves with shameful
and heathen stripes, by their example. hudibras.
they for their own opinions stand fast,
only to have them claw'd and canvast. hudibras.
4. to scratch or tickle.
i must laugh when i am merry, and claw no man in his
humour. shakes care.
5. to flatter: an obsolete sense. see clawback.
6. to claw off, or away. to scold; to rail at.
you thank the place where you found money; but the jade
fortune is to be clawed away for’t, if you should lose it. l’esir.
clawback. m. s. [from claw and back..] a flatterer; a syco-
phant; a wheedler. the pope's clawbacks. jewel.
clawed. adj. [from claw.] furnished or armed with claws.
among quadrupeds, of all the clawed, the lion is the
strongest. grew's cosmol.
clay. n.s.. [clai, welsh ; #ley, dutch.]
1. unetuous and tenacious earth, such as will mould into a cer-
tain form.
clays are earths firmly coherent, weighty and compact,
stiff, viscid, and ductile to a great degree, while moist; smooth
to the touch, not easily breaking between the fingers, nor
readily diffusible in water; and, when mixed, not readily sub-
siding from it. hill on fossils.
deep acheron,
whose troubled eddies, thick with ooze and clay,
are whiri'd aloft. dryden.
expose the clay to the rain, to drain it from salts, that the
bricks may be more durable. woodward on fossils.
the sun, which softens wax, will harden clay. watts.
, slover is the best way of improving clays, where manure
is o mortimer’s husbandry.
ol. i. -
2. [in poetry.] earth in general; the terrestrial element.
why should our clay,
over our spirits so much sway ? - donne.
to clay. v. a. [from the noun..] to cover with clay; to
manure with clay.
this manuring lasts fifty years: then the ground must be
clayed again. mortimer's husbandry.
clay-cold. adj. [clay and cold.] lifeless; cold as the unani-
mated earth.
iwash’d his clay-cold corse with holy drops,
and saw him laid in hallow'd ground. rowe.
clay-pit. n.s. [clay and pit.] a pit where clay is dug.
'twas found in a clay-pit. j/oodward on fossils.
clayes. n.s.. [claye, fr. in fortification.] wattles made with
stakes interwove with osiers, to cover lodgments. chambers.
cla'yey. adj. [from clay.] consisting of clay; abounding with
claw.
some in a lax or sandy, some a heavy or clayey soil. derham.
cla'yish. adj. [from clay.] partaking of the nature of clays
containing particles of clay.
small beer proves an unwholsome drink; perhaps, by being
brewed with a thick, muddish, and clayish water, which th:
brewers covet, , harvey on consumptions.
cla'ymarl. n.s.. [clay and marl.] a whitish, smooth, chalky
clav.
claymarl resembles clay, and is near a-kin to it; but is
more fat, and sometimes mixed with chalk-stones.
mortimer's husbandry.
clean. adj..[glan, welsh; clasne, saxon.]
1. free from dirt or filth; as, clean water.
both his hands, most filthy feculent,
above the water were on high extent,
and fain'd to wash themselves incessantly;
yet nothing cleaner were for such intent,
but rather fouler. fairy queen.
they make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter,
but within they are full of extortion and excess. 44atthew.
he that hath clean hands and a pure heart. psalms.
create in me a clean heart, o god. psalms.
2. free from moral impurity; chaste; innocent; guiltless.
3. elegant ; neat; not unwieldy; not encumbered with any
thing useless or disproportioned.
he timber and wood are in some trees more clean, in some
more knotty. bacon's nat. hist.
yet thy waist is strait and clean,
as cupid's shaft, or hermes' rod. waller.
4. not foul with any loathsome disease ; not leprous.
if the plague be somewhat dark, and spread not in the skin,
the priest shall pronounce him clean. leviticus.
5. dextrous ; not bungling; feat: as, a clean trick; a clean leap ;
a clean boxer.
clean. adv.
1. quite ; perfectly; fully; completely. this sense is now
little used.
their actions have been clean contrary unto those before
mentioned. hooker.
being seated, and domestick broils
clean overblown. shakeshcare.
a philosopher, pressed with the same objection, shapes an
answer clean contrary. hakewill on providence.
2. without miscarriage; in a dexterous manner.
pope came off clean with homer, but they say -
broome went before, and kindly swept the way. henley.
to clean. v. a. [from the adjective.] to free from dirt or
filth. -
their tribes adjusted, clean'd their vig'rous wings,
and many a circle, many a short essay,
wheel’d round and round. thomson.
cle’anlily. adv. [from cleanly.] in a cleanly manner.
cle anliness. n. s. [from cleanly.] -
1. freedom from dirt or filth.
i shall speak nothing of the extent of this city, the cleanly-
ness of its streets, nor the beauties of its piazza. addison.
2. neatness of dress; purity; the quality contrary to negligence
and nastiness.
the mistress thought it either not to deserve, or not to need
any exquisite decking, having no adorning but cleanlines. sidn.
from whence the tender skin assumes
a sweetness above all perfumes;
from whence a cleanliness remains, -
incapable of outward stains. swift.
such cleanlines from head to heel;
no humours gross, or frowzy steams,
no noisome whiffs, or sweaty streams. swift.
cle’anly. adj. [from clean.] -
1. free from dirtiness ; careful to avoid filth ; pure in the
person.
next that shall mountain 'sparagus be laid,
pull'd by some plain but cleanly country maid. dryden.
an ant is a very chanly inse&amp;t, and throws out of her nest
all the small remains of the corn on which she feeds. addison.
2. that which makes cleanliness.
4 p in<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 398</div><p class="text">c l e
in our fantastick climes, the fair -
with cleanly powder dry their hair. prior.
; innocent; immaculate. - - -
- "#. o nature meets few more ...; o
- - trials.
and cleanly joys, than those that derive from success %lanville.
. nice; addressful; artful.
4 no. his fine handling and his cleanly play,
all those royal signs had stole away. spenser.
we can secure ourselves a retreat by some cleanly evasion.
l’estrange's fables.
cle'anly. adv. [from clean.] elegantly; neatly; without nasti-
ess. -
il if i do grow great, i'll leave sack, and live cleanly as a
nobleman should. shakespeare's henry iv.
cle ann ess. n.s.. [from clean.]
1. neatness; freedom from filth.
2. easy exactness; justness; natural, unlaboured correaness.
he shewed no strength in shaking of his staff; but the fine
cleanness of bearing it was delightful. sidney.
he minded only the clearness of his satyr, and the channess
of expression. dryden's juvenal.
3. purity ; innocence. - - - -
the cleanns and purity of one's mind is never better
proved than in discovering its own faults at first view. pope.
72 cle anse. v. a. sclonrian, saxon.] -
1. to free from filth or dirt, by washing or rubbing.
clearse the pale corps with a religious hand, -
from the polluting weed and common sand. prior.
2. to purify from guilt.
the blueness of a wound cleans th away cwil.
not all her od’rous tears can cleans her crime,
the plant alone deforms the happy clime. dryden.
3. to free from noxious humours by purgation.
can'st thou not minister to a mind diseas'd,
and with some sweet oblivious antidote,
conse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous fluff
which weighs upon the heart? shakespeare.
this oil, combined with its own silt and sugar, makes it
saponaceous and cleasing, by which quality it often helps di-
gestion, and excites appetite. 4 outonot on aliments.
4. to free from leprosy.
shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those
things which moses commanded. 4/ara, i. 44.
5. to scour; to rid of all offensive things.
this river the jews proffered the pope to cleanse, so the
might have what they found. alajon on italy.
a cleans e.r. m. s. [clampere, sax.] that which has the
quality of evacuating any foul humours; or digesting a sore;
a detergent.
if there happens an imposthume, honey, and even honey
of roses, taken inwardly, is a good cleanser. arbuthnot.
clear. adj. [clair, fr. aaer, dut. clarus, latin.]
1. bright; transpicuous; peliucid : transparent ; luminous;
without opacity or cloudiness; not nebulous ; not opacous ;
not dark.
the stream is so transparent, pure and ckar,
that had the self enamoor'd youth gaz'd here,
he but the bottom, not his face had seen.
2. perspicacious; sharp.
michael from adam's cyes the film remov’d,
which that false fruit that promis'd clearer fight
had bred. 4/ilton's parads, loft.
a tun about was ev'ry pillar there;
a polish'd mirrour shone not half so clear. dryden's fables.
3. cheerful; not clouded with care or anger.
sternly he pronounc'd
the rigid interdiction, which resounds
yet dreadful in mine car, though in my choice,
proverbs.
denham.
not to incur; but soon his car aspect
return'd, and gracious purpose thus renew'd. milton.
4. free from clouds; serene.
i will darken the earth in a clar day. amos.
and the clear sun on his wide watery glass,
gaz'd hot. 44ilton's parads: lo/?.
5. without mixture; pure ; unmingled.
6. perspicuous; not obscure; not hard to be understood; not
ambiguous.
. we pretend to give a clear account how thunder and
lightning is produced.
temple.
many men reason exceeding clear and rightly, who know
not how to make a syllogism. locke.
7. indisputable; evident; undeniable.
remain'd to our almighty foe
clear victory; to our part loss, and rout
through all th’ empyrean. milton's paradis: los.
8. apparent; "onifest : not hid; not dark. ise los!
the hemisphere of earth in clearest ken,
stretch'd out to th’ amplest reach of prosped lay. milton.
unto god, who understandeth all their secret cogitations,
they are clear and manifest. hooker.
the pleasure of right reasoning is still the greater, by how
much the consequences are more clear, and the chains of them
more long. burnet's theory,
9. quick to understand; prompt; acute.
mother of science, now i feel thy power
within me clear, not only to discern
things in their causes, but to trace the ways,
of highest agents, deem'd however wise. milton,
10. unspotted; guiltless ; irreproachable.
duncan has been so clear in his great office. sha
think that the clears gods, who make them hon
of mens impossibilities, have preserv'd thee. shakoshear,
repentance so altereth and changeth a man through i.
mercy of god, be he never so defiled, that it maketh him
pure and clear. //higs.
tho' the peripatetick philosophy has been most eminent in
its way, yet other sects have not been wholly clear of it. i.i.
statesman, yet friend to truth, in soul sincere,
in action faithful, and in honour clear.
ii. unprepossessed; not preoccupied ; impartial.
leucippe, of whom one look, in **karjudgment, would
have been more acceptable than all her kindness, so prodigally
bestowed.
12. free from distress, prosecution, or imputed guilt.
the cruel corp'ral whisper'd in my ear,
five pounds, if rightly tist, would set me clear. gay.
13. free from deductions of incumbrances. -
hope, if the success happens to fail, is oar gains, as long
as it lasts. collier against donii.
whatever a foreigner, who purchases and here, gives for
it, is so much every farthing clar gain to the nation; for that
money comes clear in, without carrying out any thing for
it. lok.
*offear,
ours
pope.
i of en wish'd that i had clear,
for life, six hundred pounds a-year. swift.
14. unincumbered; without let or hindrance; vacant; unob-
structed.
if he be so far beyond his health,
methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
and make a clear way to the gods. shakespeare.
a post boy winding his horn at us, my companion gave
him two or three curses, and left the way clear for him. alison.
a clear stage is left for jupiter to display his omnipotence,
and turn the fate of armies alone. pope's essay on homer.
15. out of debt.
10. unintangled; at a sise distance from any danger or enemy.
finding ourselves too slow of fail, we put on a compelled
volour, and in the grapple i boarded them.'on the instant they
got clear of our ship. shakespear.
it requires care for a man with a double design to keep
ckar of clashing with his own reasonings. l’e/orange,
17. canorous; founding distinetly, plainly; articulately.
i much approved of my friend's insisting upon the qualifica.
tions of a good aspect and a clear voice. addisin,
hark! the numbers soft and clear,
gently steal upon the ear,
now louder and yet louder rise,
and fill with spreading sounds the skies. post,
18. free : guiltless : with from.
i am coar from the blood of this woman. susan,
none is so fit to correct their faults, as he who is ckar from
any in his own writings. dydin,
19. sometimes with of.
the air is clearer of gross and damp exhalations, tomok,
20. used of persons. distinguishing; judicious; intelligible:
this is scarcely used but in conversitio.
clear. adv.
i. plainly; not obscurely.
now clear i understand
what of my fleddiest thoughts have search'd in vain, asil,
2. clean ; quite; completely. a low word.
he put his mouth to her ear, and, under pretext of a whis-
per, bit it clear off. 1. effrange,
co. m. s. a term used by builders for the inside of a house;
the space within from wali to wall.
72 clear. v. a. [from the adjective. i -
1. to make bright, by removing opacous bodies; to brighten,
your eyes that seem so clear,
yet are but dim, shall pc sectly be then -
open'd and clear’d. a silton's paradis. loft.
like boreas in his race, when rushing forth,
he sweeps the skies, and &amp;ar, the cloudy north. dryden.
a favoury dish, a homely treat,
where all is plain, where is is neat,
clear up the cloudy foreheads of the great. dryden,
2. to free from obscurity, peoplexity, or ambiguity. ----
to clear up the several parts of this theory, i was willing
to lay aside a great many other speculations. burnet's theory.
when, in the knot of th: play, no other way is left for the
discovery, then let a god descend, and clear the business to the
audience. dryden,
by mystical terms and ambiguous phrases, he darkens yo:
he should c car up. boy'z.
many
sidney,
l,
* * * * *
o,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 399</div><p class="text">c l e
o,
*-
o
•
oira,
of
*-
o::.
i.
s
many knotty points there are,
which all discuss, but few can clear. prior.
3. to purge from the imputation of guilt; to justify; to vindi-
cate; to defend: often with from before the thing.
somerset was much cleared by the death of those who were
executed, to make him appear faulty. sir john hayward.
to clear the deity from the imputation of tyranny, injus-
tice, and dissimulation, which none do throw upon god with
more presumption than those who are the patrons of absolute
necessity, is both comely and christian. bramh, against hobbes.
to clear herself,
for sending him no aid, she came from egypt. dryden.
i will appeal to the reader, and am sure he will clear me
from partiality. dryden's fables.
how ! wouldst thou clear rebellion ? addison.
before you pray, clear your soul from all those fins, which
you know to be displeasing to god. wake's prepar. for death,
4. to cleanse: with of, or from.
my hands are of your colour; but i shame
to wear a heart so white:
a little water clears us of this deed.
5. to remove any incumbrance, or embarrassment.
a man digging in the ground did meet with a door, having
a wall on each hand of it; from which having cleared the
earth, he forced open the door. //ilkins.
this one mighty sum has clear'd the debt. dryden.
a statue lies hid in a block of marble; and the art of the
statuary only clears away the superfluous matter, and removes
the rubbish. addison's spectator.
multitudes will furnish a double proportion towards the
clearing of that expence. addison's freeholder.
6. to free from any thing offensive or noxious.
to clear the palace from the foe, succeed
the weary living, and revenge the dead. dryden.
it should be the skill and art of the teacher to clear their
heads of all other thoughts, whilst they are learning of any
thing. locke on education.
augustus, to establish the dominion of the seas, rigged out
a powerful navy to clear it of the pirates of malta. arbuthnot.
7. to clarify; as, to clear liquors.
8. to gain without deduction.
he clears but two hundred thousand crowns a year, after
having defrayed all the charges of working the salt. addison.
9. to confer judgment or knowledge.
our common prints would clear up their understandings,
and animate their minds with virtue. addison's speciator.
10. to clear a ship, at the custom-house, is to obtain the
liberty of sailing, or of selling a cargo, by satisfying the
customs. -
to cle ar. v. n.
1. to grow bright; to recover transparency.
so foul a sky clears not without a storm.
2. sometimes with up. -
the mist, that hung about my mind, clears up. addison.
take heart, nor of the laws of fate complain;
tho' now 'tis cloudy, 'twill clear up again. norris.
advise him to stay ’till the weather clears up, for you are
afraid there will be rain. swift's direaions to the groom.
3. to be disengaged from incumbrances, distress, or entangle-
incints.
he that clears at once, will relapse; for, finding himself out
of straits, he will revert to his customs: but he that cleareth
by degrees, induceth a habit of frugality, and gaineth as well
upon his mind as upon his estate. bacon's essays.
cle’ar ance. n.s.. [from clear.] a certificate that a ship has
been cleared at the customhouse.
cle’arer. n. s. [from clear.] brightener; purifier; enlightener.
gold is a wonderful clearer of the understanding: it dissi-
pates every doubt and scruple in an instant. addison,
cle'arly. adv. [from clear.]
1. brightly; luminously.
mysteries of grace and salvation, which were but darkly dis-
closed unto them, have unto us more clearly shined. hooker.
2. plainly ; evidently; without obscurity or ambiguity.
christianity first clearly proved this noble and important
truth to the world. rogers.
3. with discernment; acutely; without embarrassment, or per-
plexity of mind.
there is almost no man but sees clearlier and sharper the
vices in a speaker than the virtues. ben. johnson.
4. without entanglement, or distraction of affairs.
he that doth not divide, will never enter into busi-
ness; and he that divideth too much, will never come out of
it clearly. bacon's essays.
5. without by-ends; without finister views; honestly.
when you are examining these matters, do not take into
consideration any sensual or worldly interest; but deal clearly
and impartially with yourselves. tillason.
6. without deduction or cost.
7. without reserve; without evasion; without subterfuge.
by a certain day they should clearly relinquish unto the
king all their lands and possessions. davies on ireland.
clear ness. n.s. [from clear.] 3
shakespeare.
shak's care.
1. transparency; brightness.
it may be, percolation doth not only cause clearnes, and
splendour, but sweetness of favour. bacon's natural hi/ory.
glass in the furnace grows to a greater magnitude, and re-
fines to a greater clearness, only as the breath within is more
powerful, and the heat more intense.
2. splendour; lustre.
love, more clear than yourself, with the clearnes, lays
a night of sorrow upon me.
3. distinciness; perspicuity.
if he chances to think right, he does not know how to
convey his thoughts to another with clearness and perspicuity.
addison's spediator.
bacon:
sidney.
4. sincerity, honesty; plain dealing.
when the case required dissimulation, if they used it, the
former opinion spread abroad of their good faith and clearness
of dealing, made them almost invisible.
5. freedom from imputation.
i require a clearness. shakespeare's macbeth.
clears1'ghted. adj. [clear and sght.] perspicuous; discern-
ing ; judicious.
clearsighted reason, wisdom's judgment leads;
and sense, her vassal, in her footsteps treads. denham.
to cle'ar starch. v. a. [from clear and starch..] to stiffen
with starch.
he took his present lodging at the mansion-house of a tay-
lor's widow, who washes, and can clear//arch his bands. addis.
to cleave. v. m. pret. i clave. [cleopan, sax. kloven, dutch..]
1. to adhere; to stick; to hold to.
the clarifying of liquors by adhesion, is effected when
some cleaving body is mixed with the liquors, whereby the
grosser part sticks to that cleaving body. bacon's nat. history.
water, in small quantity, cleaveth to any thing that is
solid. bacon's natural history.
when the dust groweth into hardness, and the clods cleave
fast together. job:
the thin camelion, fed with air, receives -
the colour of the thing to which he cleaves. dryden.
2. to unite aptly; to fit.
new honours come upon him,
like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould,
but with the aid of use. shakespeare.
3. to unite in concord and interest; to adhere.
the apostles did conform the christians, according to the
pattern of the jews, and made them cleave the better. hooker.
the men of judah clave unto their king. sam.
if you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,
it shall make honour for you. shakespeare.
the people would revolt, if they saw any of the french
nation to cleave unto. knolles's hyłory of the turks.
4. to be concomitant to ; to be united with.
we cannot imagine, that, in breeding or begetting faith,
his grace doth cleave to the one, and forsake the other. hooker.
to cleave. v. a. preterite, i clove, i clave, 1 cloft; part, pass.
cloven, or cleft. [cleopan, sax. kloven, dutch.]
1. to divide with violence ; to split; to part forcibly into
!eces. -
p and at their passing cleave th’ assyrian flood. milton.
the fountains of it are said to have been cloven, or burst
bacon.
open. burnet's theory of the earth.
the blessed minister his wings display'd,
and, like a shooting star, he clost the night. dryden.
rais'd on her dusky wings, she cleaves the skies. dryden.
whom with such force he struck, he fell'd him down,
and cloft the circle of his golden crown. dryden.
or had the fun
ele&amp;ted to the earth a nearer seat,
his beams had cleft the hill, the valley dry'd. blackmore.
where whole brigades one champion's arms o'erthrow,
and cleave a giant at a random blow. tickell.
not half so swift the trembling doves can fly,
when the fierce eagle cleaves the liquid sky. pope.
2. to divide ; to part naturally.
and every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws. deut.
to cle a v e. v. n.
1. to part asunder.
wars 'twixt you twain, would be
as if the world should cleave, and that slain men
should solder up the rift.
the ground clave asunder that was under them. numb.
he cut the cleaving sky,
and in a moment vanish’d from her eye.
2. to suffer division.
it cleaves with a glossy polite substance, not plane, but with
some little unevenness. newton's opt.
a cle'av e.r. m. s. [from cleave.]
1. a butcher's instrument to cut animals into joints.
you, gentlemen, keep a parcel of roaring bullies about me
day and night, with huzzas and hunting-horns, and ringing
pope's odyssey.
the changes on butchers cleavers. - arbuthnot.
though arm'd with all thy cleavers, knives, -
and axes made to hew down lives. hudibras.
shakespeare's ant. and cop.
2. a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 400</div><p class="text">c l e
c l i
-2. a weed. improperly written cliver-
clees. n.s. the two parts of the foot of beasts which are
loven-footed. skinner. it is a country word, and probably
orrupted from claws.
c: * [from clef, key, fr.] in musick, a mark at the
beginning of the lines of a song, which shews the tone or
key in which the piece is to begin; , , chambers.
cleft. part, pass [from cleave.] divided; parted asunder.
fat, with incense strew'd,
on the clost wood. milton's par. loff.
i never did on cleft parnassus dream,
nor taste the sacred heliconian stream. dryden.
cleft. n.s. (from cleave.]
i. a space made by the separation of parts; a crack; a crevise,
the cascades secm to break through the cleft; and cracks of
rocks. addison's guardian.
the extremity of this cape has a long cleft in it, which
was enlarged and cut into shape by agrippa, who made this
the great port for the roman fleet. addison on italy.
he .. of it, being more gross and ponderous, does not
move far; but lodges in the closis, craggs, and fides of the
rocks, near the bottoms of them. j/oodward.
2. in farriery.
clifts appear on the bought of the pasterns, and are caused
by a sharp and malignant humour, which frets the skin; and
it is accompanied with pain, and a noisom stench. farr. did.
his horse it is the heralds weft ;
no, 'tis a mare, and hath a cleft. b. johnson.
to cle'forg raft. v. a. [cleft and graft.] to engraft by
cleaving the stock of a tree, and inserting a branch. -
filberts may be cleftgrafted on the common nut. martimer.
cle’mency. m. s. [elemence, fr. clementia, lat.]
1. mercy; remission of severity; willingness to spare; tender-
ness in punishing.
i have stated the true notion of clemency, mercy, compas-
son, good-nature, humanity, or whatever else it may be
called, so far as is consistent with wisdom. addison.
2. mildness; softness,
then in the cemency of upward air,
we'll scour our spots, and the dire thunder scar. dryden.
clement. adj. [clemens, latin.] mild; gentle; merciful;
kind; tender; compassionate.
you are more clement than vile men,
who of their broken debtors take a third,
letting them thrive again on the abatement. shakespeare.
cle nc h. see clinch.
‘i a clf pf. v a [cly plan, saxon.] to call. obsolete.
three crabbed months had sowr'd themselves to death,
ere i could make thee open thy white hand,
and clope thyself my love. shakespeare.
clergy.. n. j. [clerge, fr. clerus, lat. xx":35, greek.] the
body of men set apart by due ordination for the service of
god.
we hold that god's clergy are a state which hath been,
and will be as long as there is a church upon earth, necessary,
by the plain word of god himself; a state whereunto the rest
of god's people must be subject, as touching things that ap-
pertain to their soul's health. hooker.
the convocation give a greater sum,
than ever, at one time, the clergy yet
!)id to his predecessors part withal. shakespeare.
cle r gyman. m. s. [clergy and man.]. a man in holy orders;
a man set apart for ministration of holy things; not a laick.
how i have sped among the clergymen,
the sums i have colle&amp;ted shall express. shakespeare.
it seems to be in the power of a reasonable clergyman to
make the most ignorant man comprehend his duty. swift.
cle'rical, adj. [clericus, lat.] relating to the clergy: as, a
clerical man; a man in orders. -
in clericals the keys are lined, and in colleges they use to
hine the table-men. bacon's nat. history.
unless we may more properly read clarichords.
a clerk. n.f. [cienic, sax. clericus, latin.]
1. a clergyman.
all persons were stiled clerks that served in the church of
christ, whether they were bishops, priests, or deacons. ayliffe.
2. a scholar; a man of letters.
they might talk of book learning what they would; but,
for his part, he never saw more unfeaty fellows than great
clerks were. sidney.
the greatest clerks being not alwa
than the wifest men.
3. a man employed under another as a writer.
my lord bassanio gave his ring away
wnto the judge; and then the boy, his clerk,
that took some pains in writing, he begg'd mine. shakesp.
- my friend was in doubt whether he should not exert the
jo"ico uson such a vagrant; but not having his clerk with him,
who is a necessary counsellor, he let the thought drop. addis.
4. a foy, writer in publick offices: an officer of various kinds.
r ake a just view, how many may remark
who's now a lord, his grand fire was a clerk.
ys the honestest, any more
south.
granville,
it may seem difficult to make out the bills of fate for the
suppers of vitellius. i question not but an expert clerk of .
kitchen can do it. arbuthnot
5. the layman who reads the responses to the congregation in
the church, to direet the rest.
cle'rkship. m. s. [from clerk.]
1. scholarship.
2. the office of a clerk of any kind.
he sold the clerkship of his parish, when it became vacant,
swift's miscellani.
cleve.) in composition, at the beginning or end of the
clif. ; proper name of a place, denotes it to be fituated on
clive. ) the side of a rock or hill; as cleveland, clifton,
stancliff.
cle ver, adj. [of no certain etymology.]
1. dextrous; skilful.
it was the cleverer mockery of the two. l'estrange.
i read dyer's letter more for the stile than the news. the
man has a clever pen, it must be owned. addison's freeholder.
2. just ; fit; proper; commodious.
i can't but think 'twould sound more clever,
to me, and to my heirs for ever.
3. well-shaped; handsome.
she called him gundy-guts, and he called her lousy peg,
tho' the girl was a tight clever wench as any was. arith.
4. this is a low word, scarcely ever used but in burlesque or
conversation ; and applied to any thing a man likes, without
a settled meaning.
clev erly. adv. [from clever.] dextrously; fitly; hand-
somely.
these would inveigle rats with th' scent,
and sometimes catch them with a snap,
as cleverly as th’ ablest trap. hudibras.
a rogue upon the highway may have as strong an arm, and
take off a man's head as cleverly as the executioner. south.
clev erness. m. s. [from clever.] dexterity; skill; accom-
plishment.
clew. n. s. solype, sax. houwen, dutch.]
1. thread wound upon a bottom; a ball of thread.
eftsoons untwitting his deceitful clew;
he'gan to weave a web of wicked guile. spensor.
while guided by some clew of heav'nly thread,
the perplex’d labyrinth we backward tread. rosommon.
they see small clews draw vastest weights along,
not in their bulk but in their order strong. dryden.
2. a guide; a direction : because men direct themselves by a
clew of thread in a labyrinth.
this alphabet must be your own clew to guide you. holder.
is there no way, no thought, no team of light?
no clew to guide me thro' this gloomy maze,
to clear my honour, yet preserve my faith ? smith.
the reader knows not how to transport his thoughts over
to the next particular, for want of some clew, or conne&amp;in
idea, to lay hold of. watts's logist.
3. clew of the sail of a ship, is the lower corner of it, which
reaches down to that earing where the tackles and sheets are
fastencil. harris.
to clew. v. a. [foom clew, a sea-term.]
to clew the sails, is to raise them, in order to be furled,
which is done by a rope fastened to the clew of a sail, called
the clew-garuct. harris.
to click. v. n. [cliken, dut, cliqueter, french; or perhaps
the diminutive of clack.] to make a sharp, small, successive
noise. -
the solemn death-watch click'd, the hour she dy'd;
and shilling crickets in the chimney cry’d. gay,
cli cker. m. s. [from click.] a low word for the servant of a
salesman, who stands at the door to invite customers.
click e.t. n.s.. [from click.] the knocker of a door. skinner.
cli'ent. m. s. [...iens, latin.]
1. one who applies to an advocate for counsel and defence.
there is due from the judge to the advocate some commen-
dation, where causes are well handled; or that upholds in the
client the icputation of his counsel. bacon's essays.
advocates must deal plainly with their clients, and tell the
true state of their case. taylor's rule of living holy.
2. it may be perhaps sometimes used for a dependant in a more
general sense, as it was used among the romans.
i do think they are your friends and clients,
and fearful to disturb you. ben. johnson.
cl1 ented particip. adj. [from client j supplied with clients.
this due occasion of discouragement, the worst condi-
tioned and least cliented petivoguers, do yet, under the sweet
bait of revenge, convert to a more plentiful prosecution of
actions. carew's survey of cornwall.
clien t e l e. m. s. scientela, lat.] the condition or office of
a client. a word scarcely used.
there's varus holds good quarters with him;
and, under the pretext of clientele,
ben. johnson.
pope.
will be admitted.
clio norsli. p. m. s. [from client.] the condition of a client;
patronage aid clientship among the romans always,"
scended :
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 401</div><p class="text">c l i
h.a.
*
long,
to:
..?. "
s l.
it, w.
ot,
** -
) es:
solo
co
-i.
fended: the plebeian houses had recourse to the patrician line
which had formerly protected them. dryden.
cliff. m. / [clivus, lat. clip, clior, saxon.]
1. a steep rock; a rock, according to skinner, broken and
craggy. [rupes.]
the leucadians did use to precipitate a man from a high
diff into the sea. bacon's nat. history.
mountaineers, that from severus came,
and from the craggy cliffs of tetrica. dryden,
where-ever 'tis so found scattered upon the shores, there is
it as constantly found lodged in the cliff; thereabouts. woodw.
2. the name of a character in musick. properly clef.
clift. n.s. the same with cliff. now disused.
down he tumbled, like an aged tree,
high growing on the top of rocky clist. spensor.
climacter. m. s. [xxpaxloe.] a certain space of time, or
progression of years, which is supposed to end in a critical
and dangerous time.
elder times, settling their conceits upon climaelers, differ
from ope another. brown's wulgar errours.
clim act e'rick. }*. [from climaeter.] containing a cer-
clim act e. rical. $ tain number of years, at the end of which
some great change is supposed to befal the body.
certain observable years are supposed to be attended with
some considerable change in the body; as the seventh year;
the twenty-first, made up of three times seven ; the forty-
ninth, made up of seven times seven; the sixty-third, being
nine times seven; and the eighty-first, which is nine times
nine: which two last are called the grand climaelericks.
the numbers seven and nine, multiplied into themselves,
do make up fixty-three, commonly esteemed the great climac-
terical of our lives. brown's vulgar errours.
your lordship being now arrived at your great climacterique,
yet give no proof of the least decay of your excellent judg-
ment and comprehension. dryden.
my mother is something better, tho’, at her advanced age,
every day is a climaderick. - pope.
cli'mate. m. s. [xxioz.]
1. a space upon the surface of the earth, measured from the
equator to the polar circles; in each of which spaces the long-
est day is half an hour longer than in that nearer to the equa-
tor. from the polar circles to the poles climates are mea-
sured by the increase of a month.
2. in the common and popular sense, a region, or tract of land,
differing from another by the temperature of the air.
betwixt th' extremes, two happier climates hold
the temper that partakes of hot and cold. dryden.
on what new happy climate are we thrown dryden.
this talent of moving the passions cannot be of any great
use in the northern climates. swift.
t. cli'mate. v. n. to inhabit. a word only in shakespeare.
the blessed gods
purge all infection from our air, whilst you
do climate here. shakespeare.
cli'mature. m. s. the same with climate. not in use.
such harbingers preceding still the fates,
have heav'n and earth together demonstrated
unto our climatures and countrymen. shakespeare.
cli'max. m. s. [xxiv.2%.]. gradation; ascent : a figure in rhe-
torick, by which the sentence rises gradually; as cicero says
to catiline, thou do'st nothing, movest nothing, thinkest
nothing; but i hear it, i see it, and perfectly understand it.
choice between one excellency and another is difficult;
and yet the conclusion, by a due climax, is evermore the
best. dryden's juv. dedication.
some radiant richmond every age has grac'd,
still rising in a climax, 'till the last,
surpassing all, is not to be surpast. granville.
to climb. v. n, pret, clomb or climbed; part, clamb or climbed.
it is pronounced like clime. [climan, sax. klimmen, dutch.
to ascend up any place; to mount by means of some hold or
footing. it implies labour and difficulty, and successive efforts.
you tempt the fury of my three attendants,
lean famine, quartering steel, and climbing fire. shakesp.
when shall i come to th’ top of that same hill 2–
—you do climb up it now. look, how we labour. shakesp. .
jonathan climbed up upon his hands, and upon his feet. 1 sam.
as a thief
into the window climbs, or o'er the tiles,
so clomb the first grand thief into god’s fold. . . . milton.
thou, sun l of this great world both eye and soul,
acknowledge him thy greater; sound his praise
in thy eternal course, both when thou climbs,
and when high noon hast gain'd, and when thou fall'st.
milton's paradise lost.
no rebel titan’s sacrilegious crime, -
by heaping hills on hills, can thither climb.
black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day.
what controuling cause
makes waters, in contempt of nature's laws,
climb up, and gain th'aspiring mountain's height : blackm.
to clim b. v. a. to ascend; to mount.
vol. i. -
- roscommon.
dryden.
is’t not enough to break into my garden,
climbing my walls, in spight of me the owner * shakes?.
thy arms pursue
paths of renown, and climb ascents of fame. prior.
forlorn he must, and persecuted fly; -
climb the steep mountain, in the cavern lie, prior.
cli'mber. m. s. [from climb.]
i • o: that mounts or scales any place or thing; a mounter;
a slics,
i wait not at the lawyer's gates,
ne shoulder climbers down the stairs.
lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
whereto the climber upward turns his face.
2. a plant that creeps upon other supports.
ivy, briony, honey-suckles, and other climbers, must be
dug up. martimer.
3. the name of a particular herb.
the seeds are gathered into a little head, ending in a kind
of rough plume; whence it is called by the country people
old man's beard. miller.
to cl1 mber. v. n. [from clamber.] to mount with effort;
to climb.
in scaling the youngest to pluck off his becke,
beware how ye climber for breaking your neck. tissor.
clim e. m. s. [contracted from climate, and therefore properly
poetical.] climate; region ; tract of earth.
he can spread thy name o'er land and seas,
hatever clime the sun's bright circle warms. milton.
they apply the celestial description of other climes unto
their own. brown's vulgar er, ours.
of beauty sing, her shining progress view,
carew's survey,
shakespeare.
from clime to clime the dazzling light pursue. granville.
we shall meet
in happier climes, and on a safer shore. addison.
health to vigorous bodies, or fruitful seasons, in temperate
climes, are common and familiar blesfings. atterbury:
to clinch. v. a. [clyniga, sax, to knock, junius. clingo,
in festus, to encompass, minshew.]
1. to hold in the hand with the fingers bent over it.
simois rowls the bodies and the shields
of heroes, whose dismember'd hands yet bear
the dart aloft, and clinch the pointed spear.
2. to contract or double the fingers.
their tallest trees are about seven feet high, the tops
whereof i could but just reach with my fist clinched. swift.
3. to bend the point of a nail in the other side. -
4. to confirm; to fix: as, to clinch an argument.
clinch. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. a word used in a double meaning; a pun ; an ambiguity;
a duplicity of meaning, with an identity of expression. how
it obtains this meaning is difficult to find. a nail caught on
the other side, and doubled, is a nail clinched : a word taken in
a different meaning, and doubled in sense, is likewise a clinch.
such as they are, i hope they will prove, without a clinch,
dryden.
luciferous; searching after the nature of light. boyle.
pure clinches the suburbian muse affords,
and panton waging harmless war with words. dryden.
here one poor word a hundred clinches makes. pope.
2. that part of the cable which is fastened to the ring of the
anchor. -
cli'ncher. n.f. [from clinch..] a cramp; a holdfast; a piece
of iron bent down to fasten planks.
the wimbles for the work, calypso found; -
with those he pierc'd 'em, and with clinchers bound. pope.
to cling. v. m. pret. i clung; part. i have clung. [klynger,
danish.]
1. to hang upon by twining round; to stick to; to hold fast
upon. - -
- the broil long doubtful stood;
as two spent swimmers that do cling together,
and choak their art. shakespeare.
the fontanel in his neck was descried by the clinging of
his hair to the plaister. wiseman's surgery.
when they united and together clung,
when undistinguish’d in one heap they hung. blackmore.
see in the circle, next eliza plac'd,
two babes of love, close clinging to her waist. pope.
that they may the closer cling,
take your blue ribbon for a string. swift.
2. to adhere as followers, or friends.
most popular consul he is grown, methinks:
how the rout cling to him ben. johnson's catiline.
3. to dry up; to consume; to waste; to pine away. [leclun-
3en oneop, a withered tree.]
if thou speak'st false,
upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,
*till famine cling thee. shakespeare's macleth.
cli'ngy. adj. [from cling.] apt to cling; adhesive.
cli'nical. v adj. [xxiv.2, to lie down.] those that keep their
cli'nick. beds; those that are sick, past hopes of recovery.
a clinical lecture is a discourse upon a disease, made by the
bed of the patient.
4 q. a<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
ic-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 402</div><p class="text">c l o
c l o
o
a clinical convert, one that is converted on his death-bed.
this word occurs often in the works of taylor.
t, clink. v. a. [perhaps softened from clank, or corrupted
from click.] to strike so as to make a small sharp noise.
five years! a long lease for the clinking of pewter. shakesp.
t, clink. v. n. to utter a small, sharp, interrupted noise.
the sever'd bars,
submissive, clink against your brazen portals. prior.
underneath th' umbrella's oily shed, -
safe thro’ the wet on clinking pattens tread. gay's trivia.
clink. n.s.. [from the verb.] -
1. a sharp successive noise; a knocking.
i heard the clink and fall of swords. shakespeare.
"2. it seems in spenser to have some unusual sense. i believe the
knocker of a door. -
tho' creeping close, behind the wicket's clink,
privily he peeped out thro' a chink. - , spensor.
clinquant: adj. [fr.) dressed in embroidery, in spangles,
false glitter, tinsel finery.
to-day the french,
all clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
shone down the english.
t, clip. v. a. [clippan, saxon.]
1. to embrace, by throwing the arms round; to hug; to en-
fold in the arms.
he, that before shunn'd her, to shun such harms, ...
now runs and takes her in his clipping arms. sidney.
here i clip
the anvil of my sword, and do contest
hotly, and nobly, with thy love.
o nation, that thou couldst remove
that neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about. shakesp.
enter the city, clip your wives; your friends,
tell them your feats. shakespeare.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
the jades
that drag the tragick melancholy night,
who with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings,
- clip dead mens graves. shakespeare.
the male resteth on the back of the female, clipping and
embracing her with his legs about the neck and body. , ray.
2. to cut with sheers. [klipper, danish; klippen, dutch ; ap-
parently from the same radical sense, fince sheers cut by in-
closing and embracing.] - - -
your sheers come too late to clip the bird's wings, that al-
ready is flown away. sidney.
then let him, that my love shall blame,
or clip love's wings, or quench love's flame. suckling.
he clips hope's wings, whose airy bliss
much higher than fruitionis. denham.
but love had clipp'd his wings, and cut him short,
confin'd within the purlieus of his court. dryden's fables.
if mankind had had wings, as perhaps some extravagant
atheist may think us deficient in that, all the world must have
consented to clip them. bentley.
by this lock, this sacred lock, i swear,
which never more shall join its parted hair,
clipp'd from the lovely head, where late it grew. pope.
he spent every day ten hours dozing, clipping papers, or
darning his stockings. swift.
3. sometimes with off. -
we should then have as much feeling upon the clipping off
a hair, as the cutting of a nerve. bentley's sermons.
4. it is particularly used of those who diminish coin, by paring
the edges. - - -
this design of new coinage, is just of the nature of
clipping. locke.
5. to curtail; to cut short.
all my reports go with the modest truth,
nor more, nor clipt, but so. shakespeare.
mrs. mayoress clipp'd the king's english. addison.
even in london, they clip their words after one manner
about the court, another in the city, and a third in the sub-
urbs. swift.
6. to confine; to hold; to contain.
where is he living, clipt-in with the sea,
who calls me pupil:
t, clip. v. n. a phrase in falconry.
some falcon stoops at what her eye design'd,
and with her eagerness the quarry miss'd,
streight flies at check, and clips it down the wind. dryden.
cli'pper. m. s. [from clip.] one that debases coin by cutting.
it is no english treason to cut
french crowns, and to-morrow the king
himself will be a clipper. shakespeare.
no coins pleased some medallists more than those which
had passed through the hands of an old roman clipper. addis.
shakespeare,
clipping. m. s. [from clip.] the part cut or clipped off.
beings purely material, without sense or thought, as the
clippings of our beards, and parings of our nails. docke.
cli’v er. m. s. an herb. more properly written cleaver.
it grows wild, the seeds sticking to the clothes of such as
pass by them. it is sometimes used in medicine. miller,
a cloak, n.s. [lach, saxon.]
1. the outer garment, with which the rest are covered.
- you may bear it,
under a cloke that is of any length. shakespeare,
their clokes were cloath of filver, mix'd with gold. doi
all arguments will be as little able to prevail, as the wind
did with the traveller to part with his cloak, which he held only
the faster. locke.
nimbly he rose, and cast his garment down ;
that instant in his cloak i wrapt me round. pope's ods.
2. a concealment; a cover.
not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness. peter.
to cloak. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to cover with a cloak.
2. to hide; to conceal.
most heavenly fair, in deed and view,
she by creation was, ’till she did fall;
thenceforth she sought for helps to cloak her crimes withal,
spenser.
clos akbag. m. s. [from cloak and bag..] a portmanteau, a
bag in which clothes are carried.
why do'st thou converse with that trunk of humours, that
stuffed cloakbag of guts shakespeare,
i have already fit
('tis in my cloakbag) doublet, hat, hose, all
that answer to them. shakespeare.
clock. m. s. [clocc, welsh, from clich, a bell, welsh and
armorick; cloche, french.]
1. the instrument which, by a series of mechanical move-
ments, tells the hour by a hole upon a bell.
if a man be in sickness or pain, the time will seem longer
without a clock or hour-glass than with it. bacon.
the picture of jerome usually described at his study, is
with a clock hanging by. brown's vulgar errouri,
i told the clocks, and watch'd the wasting light. dryden.
2. it is an usual expresfion to say, what is it of the clock, for
what hour is it * or ten o'clock, for the tenth hour.
what is’t o'clock #
upon the stroke of four. shakespeare.
macicaus set forward about ten o'clock in the night. knolles.
about nine of the clock at night the king marched out of
the north-port. clarendon.
3. the clock of a stocking ; the flowers or inverted work about
the ankle.
his flockings with filver clocks were ravished from him. swift.
4. an insect; a sort of beetle. * dia.
clockmaker. n.s.. [clock and maker.] an artificer whose pro-
fession is to make clocks.
this inequality has been diligently observed by several of
our ingenious clockmakers, and equations been made and used
by them. derham.
clockwork... n.s.. [clock and work.] movements by weights
or springs, like those of a clock.
so if unprejudic'd you scan
the goings of this clockwork, man;
you find a hundred movements made
by fine devices in his head:
but 'tis the stomach's solid stroke,
that tells this being, what's o'clock. prior.
within this hollow was vulcan's shop, full of fire and
clockwork. addison.
you look like a puppet moved by clockwork. arbuthnot.
clod. n.s.. [club, sax. a little hillock; klotte, dutch.]
1. a lump of earth or clay; such a body of earth as cleaves or
hangs together.
he earth that casteth up from the plough a great clad, is
not so good as that which casteth up a smaller clad. bacon.
i'll cut up, as plows
do barren lands, and strike together flints
and clods, th’ ungrateful senate and the people. b. johnson.
who smooths with harrows, or who pounds with rakes
the crumbling clods. dryden.
2. a turf; the ground.
byzantians boast, that on the clod,
where once their sultan's horse has trod,
grows neither grass, nor shrub, nor tree. swift.
3. any thing concreted together in a cluster.
fishermen who make holes in the ice to dip up fish with
their nets, light on swallows congealed in clods of a slimy
substance, and carrying them home to their stoves, the
warmth restoreth them to life and flight. carew.
4. a lump, a mass of metal. *
one at the forge
labouring, two massy clods of iron and brass
had melted. milton.
5. any thing vile, base, and earthy; as the body of man, com-
pared to his soul. - -
and ye high heavens, the temple of the gods,
in which a thousand torches, flaming bright,
do burn, that to us wretched earthly cloas,
ln dreadful darkness, lend desired light. spensor.
the spirit of man,
which god inspir'd, cannot together perish
with this corporeal clad. milton's paradis, loft.
how
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 403</div><p class="text">c l o
o
\!.
o
ol 4; o wo
it, h; o
wn; *
y
hy,
***
o, ,
full it
t
as
do!
ths:
so.
:
* -
; : *
*
; ho
.*
pot
# * *
to
:
o
pro-
how the purer spirit is united to this clad, is a knot too
hard for our degraded intelle&amp;ts to untie. glanville.
in moral reflections there must be heat as well as dry rea-
son, to inspire this cold clod of clay, which we carry about
with us. burnet's theory.
6. a dull, gross, stupid fellow ; a dolt.
the vulgar ! a scarce animated clod,
ne'er pleas'd with aught above 'em. dryden.
to clod. v. n. [from the noun..] to gather into concre-
tions; to coagulate: for this we sometimes use clot.
let us go find the body, and from the stream,
with lavers pure, and cleansing herbs, wash off
the clodded gore. milton.
to clod. v. a. [from the noun..] to pelt with clods.
clo’ddy. adj. [from clod.]
1. consisting of earth or clods; earthy; muddy; miry; mean;
gross ; base.
the glorious sun,
turning, with splendour of his precious cye,
the meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold.
2. full of clods unbroken.
these lands they sow always under furrow about michael-
mas, and leave it as cloddy as they can. mortimer's husbandry.
cloodpate. n.s.. [clod and pate.] a stupid fellow ; a dolt; a
thickskull.
clo dp at ed. adj. [from dodpate.] stupid; dull; doltish ;
thoughtless.
my clodpated relations spoiled the greatest genius in the
world, when they bred me a mechanick. arbuthnot.
cloon poll. n.s.. [from clod and poll.] a thickscull; a dolt; a
blockhead.
this letter being so excellently ignorant, he will find that
it comes from a clodpoll. " shakespeare.
to clog. v. a. [it is imagined by skinner to come from log;
by casaubon derived from xxi-g’, a dog's collar, being thought
to be first hung upon fierce dogs.]
1. to load with something that may hinder motion; to en-
cumber with shackles; to impede, by fastening to the neck or
leg a heavy piece of wood or iron.
if you find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot
of a flea, i'll eat the rest of the anatomy. shakespeare.
let a man wean himself from these worldly impediments,
that here clog his soul's flight. digby on the soul.
the wings of birds were clog'd with ice and snow. dryden.
fleshly lusts do debase men's minds, and clog their spirits,
make them gross and foul, listless and unactive. tillotson.
gums and pomatums shall his flight restrain,
- while clogg’d he beats his silken wings in vain. pope.
2. to hinder; to obstruct.
the gutter'd rocks and congregated sands,
traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel. shakespeare.
his majesty's ships were over-pestered and clogged with
great ordnance, whereof there is superfluity. raleigh.
3. to load; to burthen ; to embarrass.
since thou hast far to go, bear not along
shakespeare.
the clogging buryen of a guilty soul. shakespeare.
- you’ll sue the time
that clogs me with this answer. shakespeare.
- they lanc'd a vein, and watch'd returning breath;
it came, but clogg’d with symptoms of his death. dryden,
all the commodities are clogged with impositions. addison.
4. in the following passage it is improper, for its meaning al-
ways includes hindrance.
clocks and jacks, though the screws and teeth of the
wheels and nuts be never so smooth, yet, if they be not oiled,
will hardly move ; though you clog them with never so much
weight. ray on the creation.
to clo g. v. n.
1. to coalesce; to adhere. in this sense, perhaps, only cor-
ruptly used for clod or clot.
move it sometimes with a broom, that the seeds clog not
together. evelyn.
2. to be encumbered or impeded by some extrinsick matter.
in working through the bone, the teeth of the saw will
begin to clog. sharp's surgery.
clog. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. a load; a weight; any incumbrance hung upon any animal
or thing to hinder motion.
i'm glad at soul i have no other child; .
for thy escape would teach me tyranny,
to hang clogs on them.
i did but prompt the age to quit their clogs.
by the known rules of ancient liberty. asilt. par. reg.
as a dog committed close,
for some offence, by chance breaks loose,
and quits his clog; but all in vain, -
he still draws after him his chain. hudibras.
2. an incumbrance; a hindrance ; an obstruction ; an impe-
diment.
weariness of the flesh is an heavy clog to the will. hooker.
they're our clogs, not their own: if a man be
chain'd to a galley, yet the galley's free. idonne.
shakespeare.
*-
their prince made no other step than rejecting the pope's
supremacy, as a clog upon his own power and passions. swift.
slavery is, of all things, the greatest clog and obstacle to
speculation. swift,
3. a kind of additional shoe worn by women, to keep thom
from wet.
4. a wooden shoe.
in france the peasantry goes barefoot; and the middle sort,
throughout all that kingdom, makes use of wooden clos.
w harvey on consumptio s
clogginess, m. s. [from cloggy.] the state # too.
cloggy. adj. [from clog.] that which has the pow; of
clogging up.
by additaments of some such nature, some grosser and
jo . are retained; or else much subtilized, and other-
w11e altered. boyle's history of fir *
clo'ister. m. s. [clas, welsh; d.o. o %: &amp;
klooster, dut. claustro, ital. cloisire, fr. clau/irum, lat.]
1. a religious retirement; a monastery; a nunnery.
nor in a secret cloisier doth he keep
these virgin spirits, until their marriage-day.
some solitary cloister will i choose,
and there with holy virgins live immur’d. dryden.
how could he have the leisure and retiredness of the closer,
to perform those acts of devotion ? atterbury.
2. a peristyle ; a piazza.
to clo'1st er. v. a. [from the noun..] to shut up in a reli-
gious house ; to confine ; to immure; to shut up from the
world. -
cloister thee in some religious house. shakespeare.
they have by commandment, though in form of courtesy,
cliffered us within these walls for three days. bacon.
it was of the king's first acts to cloisier the queen dowager
in the nunnery of bermondsey. bacon.
nature affords plenty of beauties, that no man need com-
plain if the deformed are cloistered up. rymer’s tragedies.
cloistera. adj. [from cloister.] solitary; retired; religi-
ously recluse.
upon this ground many cloisteral men of great learning and
devotion, prefer contemplation before a&amp;ion. walton's angler.
cloistered, participial adj. [from cloisier.] o
1. solitary; inhabiting cloisters.
ere the bat hath flown
his cloister'd flight, there shall be done
a deed of dreadful note. shakespeare's macbeth.
2. built with peristyles or piazzas.
the greeks and romans had commonly two cloisiered open
courts, one serving for the women's fide, and the other for
the men. wotton's archite/iure.
cloist ress... m. s. [from cloister.] a nun; a lady who has
vowed religious retirement.
like a cloistres, she will veiled walk,
and water once a day her chamber round
with eye-offending brine.
cloke. n.s. see cloak.
clomb. [pret, of to climb.]
ask to what end they comb that tedious height. spensor.
to cloom. v. a. [corrupted from cleam, clasmian, sax. which
is still used in some provinces.] to close or shut with glu-
tinous or viscous matter.
rear the hive enough to let them in, and cloom up the
skirts, all but the door. mortimer's husbandry.
to close. v. a. [closa, armorick; kluys, dutch; clos, fr.
clausus, latin.]
1. to shut; to lay together.
sleep instantly fell on me, call’d
by nature as in aid, and clas'd mine eyes. mill. par. loft.
when the sad wife has clos'd her husband's eyes;
lies the pale corps, not yet intirely dead prior,
i soon shall visit hector, and the shades
of my great ancestors. cephisa, thou
davies.
shakespeare.
wilt lend a hand to close thy mistress' eyes. philips.
2. to conclude; to end; to finish.
one frugal supper did our studies close. dryden,
i close this with my earnest desires that you will seriously
consider your estate. jwake's preparationfor death.
edward and henry, now the boast of fame;
and virtuous alfred, a more sacred name;
after a life of generous toils endur'd,
closs'd their long glories with a sigh, to find
th’ unwilling gratitude of base mankind.
3. to inclose; to confine; to reposite.
every one
according to the gift which bounteous nature
hath in him clos’d. shakespeare,
4. to join ; to unite fractures ; to consolidate fissures.
the armourers accomplishing the knights,
with busy hammers closing rivets up. shakespeare.
there being no winter yet to close up and unite its parts,
and restore the earth to its former compactness. burnet.
as soon as any publick rupture happens, it is immediatel
pope's hor,
closed up by moderation and good offices, addison on italy:
all
4
*- *
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 404</div><p class="text">c l o
c l. o.
all the traces drawn there are immediately closed up, as
though you wrote them with your finger on the surface of a
river. watts on the mind.
to close. v. n.
1. to coalesce; to join its own parts together. -
they, and all that appertained to them, went down alive
into the pit, and the earth closed upon them. numb. xvi. 33.
in plants you may try the force of imagination upon the
lighter motions; as upon their closing and opening. baton.
2. to close upon. to agree upon ; to join in.
the jealousy of such a design in us, would induce france
and holland to close upon some measures between them to our
disadvantage.
3. to close with. to come to an agreement with 5 to
to close in oil. comply with 5 to unite with.
intire cowardice makes thee wrong this virtuous gentle-
woman, to close with us. . shakesp. henry iv.
it would become me better, than to close
in terms of friendship with thine enemies. shak. jul. cas:
there was no such delect in man's understanding, but that
it would close with the evidence. south.
he took the time when richard was depos'd,
and high and low with happy harry clos’d. dryden.
pride is so unsociable a vice, that there is no closing with
it. collier of friendship.
this spirit, poured upon iron, lets go the water: the acid
spirit is more attracted by the fixed body, and lets go the water,
to close with the fixed body. newton's opticks.
such a proof as would have been closed with certainly at
the first, shall be set aside easily afterwards. atterbury.
these governours bent all their thoughts and applications
to close in with the people, now the stronger party. swift.
4. to close with. to grapple with in wrestling.
close. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. anything shut, without outlet.
the admirable effe&amp;ts of this distillation in close, which is
like the wombs and matrices of living creatures. bacon.
2. a small field inclosed.
i have a tree, which grows here in my close,
that mine own use invites me to cut down,
and shortly must i fell it. shakespeare.
certain hedgers dividing a close, chanced upon a great
cheft. carew's survey of cornwal.
3. the manner of shutting: in this and the following sense it
is pronounced as cloze.
the doors of plank were ; their close exquisite,
kept with a double key. chapman.
4. the time of shutting up.
in the close of night,
philomel begins her heav'nly lay. dryden.
5. a grapple in wrestling.
the king went of purpose into the north, laying an open
side unto perkin, to make him come to the close, and so to trip
up his heels, having made sure in kent beforehand. bacon.
both fill'd with dust, but starting up, the third close they
had made,
had not achilles' self stood up.
6. pause ; cessation ; rest.
the air, such pleasure loth to lose,
with thousand eccho's still prolongs each hero £e
ilton.
chapman.
at ev'ry close she made, th’ attending throng
reply'd, and bore the burden of the song. dryden's fables.
7. a conclusion or end.
speedy death, -
milton.
the close of all my miseries, and the balm.
thro' syria, persia, greece she goes ;
and takes the romans in the close. prior.
close. adj. [from the verb.]
1. shut fast; so as to leave no part open ; as, a close box; a close
house.
we suppose this bag to be tied close about, towards the
window. wilkins.
2. having no vent; without inlet; secret; private ; not to be
seen through.
nor could his acts too close a vizard wear,
to 'scape their eyes whom guilt had taught to fear. dryden.
3. confined; stagnant; without ventilation.
if the rooms be low roofed, or full of windows and doors,
the one maketh the air close, and not fresh ; and the other
maketh it exceeding unequal. bacon's nat. history.
4. compact; solid; dense; without interstices or vacuities.
the inward substance of the earth is of itself an uniform
mass, close and compact. burnet's theory.
the golden globe being put into a press, which was driven
by the extreme force of skrews, the water made itself way
thro’ the pores of that very close metal. locke.
5. viscous; glutinous; not volatile.
this oil, which nourishes the lamp, is supposed of so close
and tenacious a substance, that it may slowly evaporate.
//ilkins.
6. concise; brief; compressed; without exuberance or digression.
temple. ,
you lay your thoughts so close together, that were they
closer they would be crouded, and even a due connection
would be wanting. dryden's juven,
where the original is close, no version can reach it in the
same compass. dryden.
read these instructive leaves, in which conspire
fresnoy’s close art and dryden's native fire. pope.
7. joined without any intervening distance or space, whether
of time or place.
was i a man bred great as rome herself, -
equal to all her titles i that could stand
close up with atlas, and sustain her name
as strong as he doth heav'n ben. johnson.
we must lay aside that lazy and fallacious method of cen-
suring by the lump, and must bring things close to the test of
true or false. burnet's theory.
plant the spring crocus's close to a wall. mortimer.
where'er my name i find ;
some dire misfortune follows close behind. pope.
8. approaching nearly; joined one to another.
now sit we close about this taper here,
and call in question our necessities. shakespeare.
9. narrow; as, a close alley.
10. admitting small distance.
short crooked swords in closer fight they wear. dryden,
11. undiscovered ; without any token by which one may be
found.
close observe him for the sake of mockery. close, in the
name of jesting ! lie you there. shakespeare,
12. hidden; secret; not revealed.
a close intent at last to shew me grace. spensor.
some spagyrists, that keep their best things close, will do
more to vindicate their art, or oppose their antagonists, than
to gratify the curious, or benefit mankind. boyle.
13. having the quality of secrecy; trusty.
constant you are,
but yet a woman; and for secresy, *
no lady closer. shakespeare.
14. having an appearance of concealment; cloudy; fly.
that close aspect of his,
does shew the mood of a much troubled breast. shakesp.
15. without wandering; without deviation; attentive.
i discovered no way to keep our thoughts close to their busi-
ness, but by frequent attention getting the habit of atten-
tion. locke.
16. full to the point; home.
i am engaging in a large dispute, where the arguments are
not like to reach close on either side. dryden.
17. retired; solitary. -
he kept himself close because of saul. chronicles.
18. secluded from communication; as, a close prisoner.
19. applied to the weather, dark, cloudy, not clear.
close. adv. it has the same meanings with closely, and is not
always easily distinguished from the adjective.
1. nearly ; densely; secretly.
he his sleep
disturb’d not, waiting close th’ apoach of morn. milton.
behind her ic, -
close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
on his purple horse, milton.
2. it is used sometimes adverbially by itself; but more fre-
quently in composition. as,
close-banded. adj. in close order; thick ranged; or secretly
leagued, which seems rather the meaning in this passage.
nor in the house, with chamber ambushes
close-banded, durst attack me.
close-bodied. adj. made to fit the body exactly.
if any clergy shall appear in any close-bodied coat, they shall
be suspended. - ayliffe's parergon.
close-handed. adj. covetous.
galba was very close-handed: i have not read much of his
liberalities. arbuthnot on coins.
close-pent, adj. shut close; without vent.
then in some close-pent room it crept along,
milton.
and, smould'ring as it went, in silence fed. dryden.
clo's ely. adv. [from close.]
1. without inlet or outlet.
putting the mixture into a crucible closely luted. boyle.
2. without much space intervening; nearly.
follow fluellen closely at the heels. shakespeare.
3. attentively.
if we look more closely, we shall find
most have the seeds of judgment in their mind. pope.
4. secretly ; slily.
a spaniard, riding on the bay, sent some closey into the
village, in the dark of the night. carew's surv. of cornwal.
5. without deviation.
i hope i have translated closely enough, and given them the
same turn of verse which they had in the original. dryden.
clo's eness. n.s.. [from close.]
1. the state of being shut ; or the quality of ada.itting to be
shut without inlet or outlet. i
n
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 405</div><p class="text">c l o
c l o
o:
in drums, the closines; round about that preserveth the
found, maketh the noise come forth of the drum-hole more
. on if you should strike upon the like skin extended in
the open air. - bacon's nat. hisł.
2 narrowness; straitness. -
want of air, or ventilation: -
i took my leave, being half stifled by the closenes, o o:
wift,
oriano solidity. - - - -
4. how could particles, so widely dispersed, combine into that
disons of texture ? . . . bentley.
the haste of the spirit to put forth, and the closeness 9f the
bark cause prickles in boughs. bacon's natural history.
recluseness; solitude; retirement.
5 *. neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
todosines, and the bettering of my mind.
recy; privacy-
6. so #. £ote: he was constant and just, but not open.
such was his enquiry, and such his closeness, as they stood
in the light towards him, and he stood in the dark towards
them. bacon's henry vii.
ajourney of much adventure had been not communicated
with any of his majesty's counsellors, being carried with great
closins, liker a business of love than state. //otton.
we rise not against the piercing judgment of augustus,
northe extreme caution or closeness of tiberius. bacon's essoys.
this prince was so very reserved, that he would impart his
secrets to no body: whereupon this closeness did a little perish
his understanding. collier of friendship.
7. covetousness; fly avarice.
irus judged, that while he could keep his poverty a secret,
he should not fel it: he improved this thought into an af-
folation of closins, and covetousness. addison's spect,
8. connection; dependance.
the actions and proceedings of wise men run in greater
disons; and coherence with one another, than thus to drive at
a casual issue, brought under no forecast or design. south,
closer. n.s. [from close..] a finisher; a concluder.
closestool. n.f. [close and stool.] a chamber implement.
a pestle for his truncheon, led the van;
and his high helmet was a close-stool pan. garth.
closet. n.s.. [from close.]
1. a small room of privacy and retirement.
the taper burneth in your closet.
he would make a step into his closet, and after a short
prayer he was gone. //otton.
2. a private repository of curiosities and valuable things.
he should have made himself a key, wherewith to open the
dist of minerva, where those fair treasures are to be found
in all abundance. dryden's dufresnoy.
he furnishes her closet first, and fills
the crowded shelves with rarities of shells. dryd. falls.
t. clo's et. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to shut up, or conceal in a closet.
the heat
of thy great love once spread, as in an urn,
doth closet up itself. herbert,
2. to take into a closet for a secret interview.
about this time began the project of closeting, where the
principal gentlemen of the kingdom were privately catechised
shakespeare.
by his majesty. swift.
closh. n. j. a distemper in the feet of cattle; called also the
founder. dich.
cio'sure. n.s.. [from close.]
1. the act of shutting up.
the chink was carefully closed up : upon which closure
there appeared not any change. boyle's spring of the air.
2. that by which any thing is closed or shut.
i admire your sending your last to me quite open, without
a seal, wafer, or any closure whatever. pope to swift.
3. the parts inclosing; inclosure. -
o thou bloody prison 1
within the guilty closure of thy walls
richard the second here was hack'd to death. shakoff.
4. conclusion; end. not in use.
we'll hand in hand all headlong cast us down,
and make a mutual closure of our house. shakespeare.
clot, n.s. [probably, at first, the same with clod; but now
always applied to different uses; or rather klotte, dutch,
a mass.] concretion ; coagulation ; grume.
the white of an egg, with spirit of wine, doth bake the
“gginto clots, as if it began to poch. bacon.
the opening itself was stopt with a clot of grumous blood.
jwiseman's surgery.
t. clot. v. n. [from the noun, or from klotteren, dutch.]
* to form clots, or clods; to hang together.
o huge unwieldy bones, lasting remains
, so of that gigantick race; which as he breaks -
the clotted glebe, the plowman haply finds. philips.
o * to concrete; to coagulate; to gather into concretions: as,
*:d milk, dotted blood.
ol. i.
3. to become gross.
cl9th... n.s. plural cloths or clothes. [clao, saxon.]
i. anything woven for dress or covering, whether of animal
shakespeare. -
here mangled limbs, here brains and gore,
:* - ? ---
lie clotted. philips.
or vegetable substance.
a costly cloth of gold. drayton.
the spaniards buy their linen cloths in that kingdom, swift.
2. the piece of linen spread upon a table.
nor let, like nevius, every error pass,
the musly wine, foul cloth, of greasy glass. pope.
3. the canvass on which pictures are delinoated.
i answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have
studied your questions. shakespeare
who fears a sentence, or an old man's saw, - -
shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe. shakespeare
this idea, which we may call the goddess of paintino and
of sculpture, descends upon the marble and the cloth, and be.
comes the original of these arts. dryden.
4. any texture put to a particular use.
the king stood up under his cloth of state, took the sword
from the protector, and dubbed the lord mayor of london
knight. - sir j. hayward.
i'll make the very green cloth to look blue. b. johnson.
5. dress; raiment.
i'll ne'er distrust my god for cloath and bread
while lilies flourish, and the raven's fed. &amp;uarles.
6. cloth taken absolutely, commonly means a texture of wool.
7. in the plural. dress; habit; garment; vesture; west-
ments. including whatever covering is worn on the body.
in this sense always clothes. pronounced cli's. -
he with him brought pryene, rich array'd
in claribellac's clothes. spensor.
take up these clothes here quickly: carry them to the
laundress in datchet-mead. shakespeare.
strength grows more from the warmth of exercises than of
cloaths. took.
8. the covering of a bed.
gazing on her midnight foes,
she turn'd each way her frighted head,
then funk it deep beneath the clothes. prior.
to cior h.e. v. a. pret. i clothed, or clad; particip. i have
clothed, or clad. [from cloth.]
1. to invest with garments; to cover with dress, from cold and
injuries.
an inhabitant of nova zembla having lived in denmark,
where he was clothed, took the first opportunity of making his
escape into nakedness. addison's freeholder.
the britons in caesar's time painted their bodies, and
clothod themselves with the skins of beasts. swift.
with superior boon may your rich soil
exuberant nature's better blessings pour
o'er every land, the naked nations clothe,
and be th' exhaustless granary of a world. thomson.
2. to adorn with dress.
we clothe and adorn our bodies: indeed, too much time
we bestow upon that. our souls also are to be clothed with
holy habits, and adorned with good works. ray on creation.
embroider'd purple clothes the golden beds. pope's statius.
3. to invest, as with clothes.
i put on righteousness, and it clothed me. job.
hast thou clothed his neck with thunder? job.
i will also clothe her priests with salvation. psalms.
if thou beest he , but o how fall'n how chang'd
from him, who in the happy realms of light,
cloth'd with transcendent brightness, did'st outshine
myriads though bright ! milton.
they leave the shady realms of night,
and, cloth'd in bodies, breathe your upper light. dryden.
let both use the clearest language in which they can clothe
their thoughts. j/atts on the mind.
4. to furnish or provide with clothes,
drousiness shall clothe a man with rags, proverbs.
to clothe. v. n. to wear cloaths.
care no more to clothe and eat. shakespeare's cymbeline.
clo"thier. m. s. [from cloth.] a maker of cloth.
the clothiers all, not able to maintain
the many to them 'longing, have put off
the spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers. shak. hen. viii.
his commissioners should cause clothiers to take wool, pay-
ing only two parts of the price. hayward.
they shall only spoil the clothier's wool, and beggar the
present spinners, at best. graunt's bills of mortality.
cloot hing.. n.s.. [from to clothe..] dress; vesture; garments.
thy bosom might receive my yielded spright,
and thine with it, in heav'n's pure clothing drest,
through clearest skies might take united flight. fir ow.x.
your bread and clothing, and every necessary of life, en-
tirely depend upon it. , swift.
clotfishe'arer. n.s. [from cloth and shear.] one who
trims the cloth, and levels the nap.
4 r my<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

1-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 406</div><p class="text">c l o
c l o
my father is a poor man, and by
co, l. m. s. [from clot and poll.]
thick{k - kh d.
1. so ; . there? call the clotpoll back. shakos.
- in scorn.
2. ho. j cloten's clotpoll down the stream,
v to his mother. shakespeare's cymbeline.
to jo o 77. ... dutch..] to concrete; to
- ather into lumps.
coagulate; to #. dragg'd the tombling sire,
slidoring thro' clotter'd blood and holy mire. dryd. æn.
clorry, adj. [from clot.j full of clods; concreted; full of
incret! ons. - - -
“... matter expedorated is thin, and mixt with thick,
clotr, bluish streaks. harvey on consumptions.
where land is clotty, and a shower of rain soaks through,
you may make use of a roll to break it. martimer.
a cioud. m. s. [the derivation is not known. migshow
derives it from claudo, to shut; somner from clad; casaubon
from 2xxo;, darkness; skinner from aladde, dutch, a spot.]
1. the dark colle&amp;tion of vapours in the air.
now are the clouds that lower'd upon our house,
in the deep bosom of the ocean buried. ... shakesp. rich. iii.
as a mist is a multitude of small but solid globules, which
therefore descend; so a vapour, and therefore a watry cloud,
is nothing else but a congeries of very small and concave glo-
bules, which therefore ascend, to that height in which
they are of equal weight with the air, where they remain
fuspended, 'till, by some motion in the air, being broken, they
descend in solid drops; either small, as in a mist, or bigger,
when many of them run together, as in rain. grew's cosmol.
cloud, are the greatest and most considerable of all the
meteors, as furnishing water and plenty to the earth. they
consist of very small drops of water, and are elevated a good
distance above the surface of the earth; for a cloud is nothing
but a mist flying high in the air, as a mist is nothing but a
cloud here below. locke.
how vapours, turn'd to clouds, obscure the sky;
and clouds, dissolv'd, the thirsty ground supply. roscommon.
the dawn is overcast, the morning low’rs,
and heavily in cloud, brings on the day. addison.
2. the veins, marks, or stains in stones, or other bodies.
3. any state of obscurity or darkness.
tho' poets may of inspiration boast,
his occupation a cloth-
hakewill on providence.
their rage, ill govern'd, in the clouds is lost. jvaller.
how can i see the brave and young,
fall in the cloud of war, and fall unsung addison.
4. any thing that spreads wide; as a croud, a multitude.
the objection comes to no more than this, that amongst a
cloud of witnesses, there was one of no very good reputa-
tion. atterbury.
to cloud. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to darken with clouds; to cover with clouds; to obscure.
2. to make of sullen and gloomy appearance.
be not dishearten’d then, nor cloud those looks,
that wont to be more chearful and serene. milton.
what sullen fury clouds his scornful brow? pope.
3. to obscure ; to make less evident.
if men would not exhale vapours to cloud and darken the
clearest truths, no man could miss his way to heaven for want
of light. decay of piety.
4. to variegate with dark veins.
the handle smooth and plain,
made of the clouded olive's easy grain. pope.
to clou d. v. n. to grow cloudy; to grow dark with clouds.
clo'udberry. n.s. [from cloud and berry; chamaemorus.] the
name of a plant, called also knotberry. miller.
clo ud capt. adj. [from cloud and cap.] topped with clouds;
touching the clouds.
the cloudcapt towers, the gorgeous palaces,
the solemn temples, the great globe itself,
yea, all which it inherits, shall dissolve. shakespeare.
clou dcompe'lling. adj. [a word formed in imitation of
voyitorns, il understood.]. an epithet of jupiter,by whom
clouds were supposed to be colle&amp;led.
health to both kings, attended with a roar
of cannons, eccho'd from th’ affrighted shore;
with loud resemblance of his thunder, prove
bacchus the seed of cloudcompelling jove. jwaller.
supplicating move
thy just complaint to cloudcompelling jove.
clou dily. adv. [from cloudy.]
1. with clouds; darkly.
2. obscurely; not perspicuously.
some had rather have good discipline delivered plainly, by
way of precepts, than cloudily enwrapped in allegories. spenser.
he was commanded to write so cloudly by cornutus. doyd.
closu diness. m. s. [from cloudy.]
1. the state of being covered with clouds; darkness.
you have such a february face,
so full of frost, of storm and cloudiness.
dryden.
shakespeare.
the situation of this island exposes it to a continual cloud
heft, which in the summer renders *. cooler, and in us
winter warm. arvey an cons -
2. want of brightness. y 'sumptions,
i saw a cloudy hungarian diamond made clearer b
a cold liquor; wherein, he affirmed, that upon keeping it
longer, the stone would lose more of its cloudines. boyle
cloudless. adj. [from cloud.] without clouds; clear; in.
clouded ; bright; luminous ; lightsome; pure; undan.
ened.
this partridge soon shall view in clouds; skies,
when next he looks thro' galilaeo's eyes. pope
how many such there must be in the vast extent of so
a naked eye in a cloudloss night may give us some fi.
glimpse. cheyne,
cloudy. adj. [from cloud.]
1. covered with clouds; obscured with clouds; consisting of
clouds.
as moses entered into the tabernacle, the cludy pillards.
scended, and stood at the door. exodus,
2. dark; obscure ; not intelligible.
if you content yourself frequently with words instead of
ideas, or with cloudy and confused notions of things, howim.
penetrable will that darkness be? watts on the mind.
3. gloomy of look; not open, nor cheerful.
so my storm-beaten heart likewise is cheer'd
with that sun-shine, when cloudy looks are clear'd. spensir.
witness my son, now in the shade of death,
whose bright outshining beams thy cloudy wrath
hath in eternal darkness folded up. shakespears.
4. marked with spots or veins.
5. not bright, wanting lustre.
i saw a cloudy diamond. boyle.
clove. n.s.. [the preterite of cleave..] see to cleave.
gyon's angry blade so fierce did play
on th' other's helmet, which as titan shone,
that quite it clove his plumed crest in tway. fairy queen.
clove. m. s. [clou, fr. a nail, from the similitude of a clove
to a nail.]
1. a valuable spice brought from ternate in the east indies.
it is the fruit or seed of a very large tree.
clove seems to be the rudiment or beginning of a fruit
growing upon clove-trees. brown's vulgar errours.
2. some of the parts into which garlick separates, when the
outer skin is torn off. [in this sense it is derived from clove,
the preterite of cleave.]
'tis mortal fin an onion to devour;
each clove of garlick is a sacred pow'r, tate's juven,
clove-gilly flower. n.s.. [from its smelling like cloves.]
this genus may be divided into three classes: 1. the
clove-gillyflower, or carnation. 2. the pink. 3. the sweet
william. the carnation, or clove-gillyflower, are diffin-
guished into four classes. the first, called flakes, having two
colours only, and their stripes large, going quite through the
leaves. the second, called bizars, have flowers striped, or
variegated with three or four different colours. the third are
piquettes: these flowers have always a white ground, and
are spotted with scarlet, red, purple, or other colours. the
fourth are called painted ladies: these have their petals of a
red or purple colour on the upper side, and are white under-
neath. of each of these classes there are numerous varieties,
the true clove-gillyflower has been long in use for making a
cordial syrup. there are two or three varieties commonly
brought to the markets, which differ greatly in goodness;
some having very little scent, when compared with the true
sort. miller.
cloven. part. pret. [from cleave..] see to cleave.
there is aufidius, list you what work he makes
y lying in
among your cloven army. shakespeare,
now, heap'd high,
the cloven oaks and lofty pines do lie. waller,
a chap-fallen beaver, loosely hanging by
the cloven helm, and arch of victory. dryden.
cloven-foot ed. }*. [cloven and foot, or hoof.] having the
clove n-hoofed. § foot divided into two parts; not a round
hoof; bisulcous.
there are the bisulcous or cloven-hooft; as camels and bea-
vers. brown's wulgar errouri.
the cloven footed fiend is banish'd from us. dryden.
great variety of water fowl, both whole and cloven footed,
frequent the waters. ray on the creation.
§:... }n. s. [more properly claver, clapen, sax.]
1. a species of trefoil. -
the even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
the freckled cowslip, burnet, and green cover. shaloff.
nature shall provide
green grass and fatt'ning clover for their fare. dryden.
clover improves land, by the great quantity of cattle, it
maintains. mortimer's husband').
my blouzelinda is the blithest lass,
than primrose sweeter, or the clover graft. %
2. if
r
*:::
o
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 407</div><p class="text">c l o
s
f {e
d ck.
iro,
af.
emir
*:::
t:
2. to ove in clove r, is to live luxuriously; clover being ex-
tremely delicious and fattening to cattle.
well, laureat, was the night in clover spent ogle.
clover ed. adj. [from clover.] covered with clover.
locks thick-nibbling thro' the clover'd vale. thomson.
clough n.f. [clough, saxon.] the cleft of a hill; a cliff.
in composition a hilly place.
clough. n.s.. [in commerce..] . an allowance of two pounds
in every hundred weight for the turn of the scale, that the
commodity may hold out weight when sold by retail.
a clout. n.f. [clut, saxon.]
1. a cloth for any mean use.
his garment, nought but many ragged clouts,
with thorns together pinn'd, and patched was.
spenser.
a clout upon that head,
where late the diadem stood. shakespeare.
in pow'r of spittle and a clout,
when-e'er he please to blot it out. swift.
2. a patch on a shoe or coat.
3. anciently, the mark of white cloth at which archers shot.
he drew a good bow: he shot a fine shoot: he would have
clapt in the clout at twelve score. shakespeare.
a. an iron plate to keep an axle-tree from wearing.
t. clout. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to patch; to mend coarsely,
i thought he slept, and put
my clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
answer'd my steps too loud. shakespeare.
the dull swain
treads on it daily with his clouted shoon. milton.
2. to cover with a cloth.
milk some unhappy ewe,
whose clouted leg her hurt doth shew.
3. to join awkwardly or coarsely together:
many sentences of one meaning clouted up together. ascham.
clo'uted. participial adj. congealed ; coagulated: corruptly
used for clotted.
i've seen her skim the clouted cream,
and press from spongy curds the milky stream. gay.
clo’uterly. adj. [probably by corruption from louterly. ]
clumsy; awkward: as, a clouterly fellow.
the single wheel plough is a very clouterly sort.
mortimer's husbandry.
clown. m. s. [imagined by skinner and junius to be con-
tracted from colonus. it seems rather a saxon word, corrupted
from lown; loen, dut. a word nearly of the same import.]
1. a rustick; a country fellow ; a churl.
he came with all his clowns, horst upon cart-jades.
the clowns, a boist'rous, rude, ungovern'd crew,
spenser.
sidney.
with furious haste to the loud summons flew. dryden.
2. a coarse ill-bred man.
in youth a coxcomb, and in age a clown. speaator.
a country squire, represented with no other vice but that
of being a clown, and having the provincial accent. ... swist.
clown ery. m. s. [from clown.] ill-breeding; churlishness;
rudeness; brutality.
the fool's conceit had both clownery and ill-nature, l'esir.
clow nish. adj. [from clown.]
1. consisting of rusticks or clowns.
young silvia beats her breast, and cries aloud
for succour from the clownish neighbourhood. dryden,
2. coarse; rough ; rugged.
but with his clownish hands their tender wings
he brusheth oft. spenser's fairy queen.
3. uncivil; ill-bred; ill-mannered.
what if we essay’d to steal
the clownish fool out of your father's court shakespeare.
4. clumsy; ungainly.
with a grave look, in this odd equipage,
the clownish mimick traverses the stage. prior.
cloow nishly. adv. [from clownish..] coarsely; rudely ;
brutally.
clow nish ness. n.s.. [from clownish.]
1. rusticity; coarseness; unpolished rudeness.
even his dorick diale&amp;t has an incomparable sweetness in
its clownishness. dryden,
if the boy should not make legs very gracefully, a dancing
master will cure that defe&amp;t, and wipe off that plainness which
the a-la-mode people call clownishness. locke.
2. incivility; brutality.
clown's musta rd. n.s. an herb. dic7.
to cloy. v. a. [enclouer, fr.] to nail up; to stop up.
1. to satiate; to sate; to fill beyond defire; to surfeit ; to fill
to loathing.
the length of those speeches had not cloyed pyrocles, though
he were very impatient of long deliberations. sidney.
the very creed of athanasius, and that sacred hymn of
glory, are reckoned as superfluities, which we must in any case
pare away, lest we cly god with too much service. }.
who can cloy the hungry edge of appetite,
by bare imagination of a fea shakespeare.
continually varying the same sense, and taking up what he
had more than enough inculcated before, he sometimes dio,
his readers instead of satisfying them. dryden,
whose little store her well taught mind does please,
nor pinch'd with want, nor cloy'd with wanton ease. roscom.
intemperance in eating and drinking, instead of delighting
and satisfying nature, doth but load and cloy it. tilotson.
settle, cloy'd with custard and with praise,
is gather'd to the dull of ancient days. pope.
2. it seems to have, in the following passage, another sense:
perhaps to strike the beak together.
his royal bird
prunes the immortal wing, and clay; his beak,
as when his god is pleas'd. shakespeare.
3. to nail up guns, by striking a spike into the touch-hole.
cloy less, adj. [from cloy..] that of which too much cannot
be had ; that which cannot cause satiety.
epicurean cooks
sharpen with cloyles, sauce his appetite. shakespeare,
clo'y ment. n.s.. [from cloy..] satiety; repletion beyond ap-
petite.
alas! their love may be call'd appetite:
no motion of the liver, but the palate,
that suffers surfeit, cloyment, and revolt.
club. m. s. [.clwppa, welsh; kluppel, dutch.]
1. a heavy stick; a staff intended for offence.
he strove his combred club to quit
out of the earth. off. fairy queen.
as he pulled off his helmet, a butcher slew him with the
shakespeare.
stroak of a club. hayward.
arm'd with a knotty club another came. dryden.
2. the name of one of the suits of cards.
the clubs black tyrant first her victim died, -
spite of his haughty mien and barb'rous pride. pope.
3. [from cleopan, to divide. skinner.] the shot or divi-
dend of a reckoning, paid by the company in just pro-
portions.
a fuddling couple sold ale: their humour was to drink
drunk, upon their own liquor: they laid down their club, and
this they called forcing a trade. l’estrange.
4. an assembly of good fellows, meeting under certain con-
ditions.
what right has any man to meet in factious clubs to vilify
the government? dryden's medal. dedication.
5. concurrence; contribution; joint charge.
he's bound to vouch them for his own,
tho' got b” implicite generation,
and general club of all the nation.
to club. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to contribute to a common expence in settled proportions.
2. to join to one effect; to contribute separate powers to one
end.
*till grosser atoms, tumbling in the stream
of fancy, madly met, and club'd into a dream. dryden.
every part of the body seems to club and contribute to the
seed, else why should parents, born blind or deaf, sometimes
jhudibras.
generate children with the same imperfections 2 ray.
let sugar, wine, and cream together club,
to make that gentle viand, syllabub. king.
the owl, the raven, and the bat,
club'd for a feather to his hat. swift.
to club. v. a. to pay to a common reckoning.
plums and direetors, shylock and his wife,
will club their testers now to take your life. pope.
fibres being distinet, and impregnated by distinet spirits,
how should they club their particular informations into a com-
mon idea collier on thought.
clubhe'aded. adj. [club and head.] having a thick head.
small clubheaded anterinae. derham.
clubla'w. n. s. [club and law.] regulation by force; the
law of arms.
the enemies of our happy establishment seem to have re-
course to the laudable method of clublaw, when they find all
other means for enforcing the absurdity of their opinions to
be ineffectual. addison's freeholder.
clubro'o m. n.s.. [club and room.] the room in which a club
or company assembles. -
these ladies resolved to give the pictures of their deceased
husbands to the clubroom. addison's spectator.
to cluck. v. n. [cloccian, welsh; clochat, armorick; cloccan,
saxon; flocken, dutch..] to call chickens; as a hen.
she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
has cluck'd thee to the wars. shakespeare's coriolanus.
ducklings, though hatched by a hen, if she brings them to
a river, in they go, though the hen clucks and calls to keep
them out. ray on the creation.
clump. n.s.. [formed from lump.]
1. a shapeless piece of wood, or other matter, nearly equal in
its dimensions.
2. a cluster of trees; a tuft of trees or shrubs: anciently a plump.
clumps. n. s. a numbscull. skinner.
clu'msily. adv. [from clumsy..]. awkwardly; without readi-
ness; without nimbleness; without grace, h
c
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 408</div><p class="text">c l u
c o a
- - - ray on creation.
he walks very clumsy and ridiculously...o.o. -
o "... humour is clumsy and natio.
co n. s [from clumsy..] awkwardness; ungainli-
ness; want of readiness, nimblenes, or dexterity, d
the drudging part of life is chiefly owing to clumsines an
- e, which either wants proper tools, or skill to use
o 2 collier on fame.
'misy, ad;. [this word, omitted in the other etymolo-
co, so by baily from lampsch, dutch, stupid.
in english, dump, clump, lumpish, clumpish, clumpishly, clumsily,
clumsy. j awkward; heavy artless ; unhandy; without
dexterity, readiness or grace. it is used either of persons or
actions, or things. -
the matter juaile and sequacious, apt to be moulded into
such shapes and machines, even by glas") fingers. ray.
but thou in clumsy verse, unlick'd, unpointed,
haft shamefully defy'd.
that clumsy outside of a porter, -
how could it thus conceal a courties . swift.
clusc. the preterite and participle of cling.
clusc. adj. [clungu, sax.] wasted with leanness ; shrunk
up with cold. -
t, oloc. v. n. [clingan, sax.] to dry as wood does, when
it is laid up after it is cut. see to cling.
cluster. m. s. scorten, sax. kisier, dutch.] -
1. a bunch; a number of things of the same kind growing or
joined together. - - -
grapes will continue fresh and moist all winter, if you
hang them cousier by clusior in the roof of a warm room. bacon.
a swelling knot is rais'd ; +
whence, in short space, itself the closer shows,
and from earth's moisture, mixt with sun beams, grows.
denham.
the saline corpuscles of one liquor do variously act upon
the tinging corpuscles of another, so as to make many of them
associate into a cluster, whereby two transparent liquors may
dryden.
compose a coloured one. newton.
an elon was near, to whose embraces led,
the curling vine her swelling clusters spread. pope.
2. a number of animals gathered together.
as bees
pour forth their populous youth about the hive
in closers. a sistan's paradise lost.
there with their clasping fect together clung,
and a long clufter from the laurel hung. dryden,
3. a body of people collected: used in contempt.
we lov’d him; but like beasts
and coward nobles, gave way to your coffers,
who did hoot him out o' th' city. shakespeare.
my friend took his station among a clufter of mob, who
were making themselves merry with their betters. addison.
to clu's ter. v. n. [from the noun..] to grow in bunches;
to gather into bunches, to congregate.
forth flourish'd thick the clustering vine. milton.
grcat father bacchus to my song repair;
for clustering grapes are thy peculiar care. dryden.
or from the forest, falls the clusler’d snow,
myriads of gems. thomson's iwinter.
to clu'st er. v. a. to colle&amp;t any thing into bodies.
cluster grape. n.s. [from cluster and grape.]
the small black grape is by some called the currant, or
cluster-grape; which i reckon the forwardest of the black
sort. martimer's husbandry.
clu's tfry. adj. [from closer.] growing in clusters.
to clutch. v. a. (of uncertain etymology.]
1. to hold in the hand; to gripe; to grasp.
is this a dagger i see before me,
the handle tow’rd my hand come, let me clutch thee. sh.
they,
like moles within us, heave and cast about;
and, 'till they foot and clutch their prey,
they never cool.
2. to comprize; to grasp.
a man may set the poles together in his head, and clutch
the whole globe at one intellectual grasp. collier on thought.
3. ". contract; to double the hand, so as to seize and hold
d -
not that i have the power to clutch my hand,
when his fair angels would salute my palm. soak. k. john.
clutch. n. s. [from the verb.] y p j
1. the gripe; grasp ; seizure.
2. gonerally, in the plural, the paws, the talons,
it was the hard fortune of a cock to fall into the clutches of
a cat. . . l’e/irange.
3. hands, in a sense of rapacity and cruelty.
your greedy slav'ring to devour,
before 'twas in your clutches pow'r,
set up the covenant on crutches,
'gainst those who have us in their clutches. hudibras.
! must have great leisure, and little care of myself, if i ever
more come near the clutches of such a giant. stillingfect.
herbert.
hudibras.
a clutter. m. s. [see clatter.] a noise; a buffle,
a busy tumult; a hurry; a clamour. a low word. -
he saw what a clutter there was with huge, over-grown
pots, pans, and spits. l'erange
the fav’rite child that just begins to prattle, ge,
is very humorsome, and makes great clutter,
*till he has windows on his bread and butter. kinr
prithee, tim, why all this clutter? &amp;-
why ever in these raging fits? £wift
to clustrer. v. n. [from the noun..] to make a noise, o
bustle.
a cly'ster. m. s. [xxv, *c.] an injection into the anus.
if nature relieves by a diarrhoea, without sinking the
strength of the patient, it is not to be stopt, but promo
gently by emollient cysters. - arbuthnot
to coace’rvate. v. a. [coacervo, latin.] to heap o
together. p
the collocation of the spirits in bodies, whether the spirits
be coacervate or diffused. bacon's nat. ha,
coace r v aotion. n. s. [from coacervate.] the act of i:
ing, or state of being heaped together.
the fixing of it is the equal spreading of the tangible parts
and the close coacervation of them. bacon's nat. hjo.
coach. m. s. [coche, fr. kotozy, among the hungarians, by
whom this vehicle is said to have been invented. minshaw.]
a carriage of pleasure, or state, distinguished from a chario:
by having seats fronting each other.
basilius attended for her in a coach, to carry her abroad to
see some sports. sidney.
a better would you fix *
then give humility a coach and six. pope,
suppose that last week my coach was within an inch of over-
turning in a smooth even way, and drawn by very gentle
horses. swift.
to coach. v. a. [from the noun.]. to carry in a coach.
the needy poet sticks to all he meets,
coach'd, carted, trod upon ; now loose, now fast,
and carry'd off in some dog's tail at last. pope.
coach-box. m. s. [coach and box.] the seat on which the
driver of the coach sits. -
her father had two coachmen: when one was in the coach-
box, if the coach swung but the least to one side, she used
to shriek. arbuthnot's history of j. bull.
coach-h ire. m. s. money paid for the use of a hired coach.
you exclaim as loud as those that praise,
for scraps and coach-hire, a young noble's plays. dryden,
my expences in coach-hire make no small article. speciator,
coach-house. n.s.. [coach and house.] the house in which the
coach is kept from the weather.
let him lie in the stable or the coach-house. swift,
coach-maker. m. s. [coach and maker.] the artificer whose
trade is to make coaches.
her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,
made by the joyner, squirrel, or old grub,
time out of mind, the fairies coach-makers. shaisor,
take care of your wheels: get a new sett bought, and
probably the coach-maker will consider you. swift.
coach-man. m. s. [ coach and man. j. the driver of a
coach.
thy nags, the leanncst things alive,
so very hard thou lov'st to drive;
i heard thy anxious coachman say,
it cost thee more in whips than hay. prior.
she commanded her trembling coachman to drive her chariot
near the body of her king. south,
to coact. v. n. [from con and adī.] to act together; to
act in concert. not used.
but if i tell how these two did coa'7,
shall i not lie in publishing a truth? shalofftart,
coaction. m. s. [coacius, lat..] compulsion; force, either
restraining or impelling.
it had the passions in perfeot subjeclion; and though it;
command over them was persuasive and political, yet it had
the force of coa/?ion, and despotical. south,
coactive. adj. [from coad.]
• 1. having the force of restraining or impelling; compulsory;
restrictive.
the levitical priests in the old law, never arrogated unto
themselves any temporal or coachive power. raleigh.
2. acting in concurrence. obsolete.
imagination,
with what's unreal thou coachive art. shoshcare.
coadju'ment. n.s. [from con and adjumentum, latin.j. m.
tual assistance. - dia.
z - - -
coadjust ant. n. s. [from con and adjuto.] helping; co-
operating.
thracius coadjutant, and the roar
of fierce euroclydon. philips,
coadju'tor. on. s. [from con and adjutor, latin.] -
1. a fellow-helper; an assistant; an associate; one engaged in
the assistance of another.
i should not succeed in a project, whereof i have *:::
2 int
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 409</div><p class="text">c o a
i.
:
s
o
o
-
* --
--
&amp;
hint from my predecessors the poets, or their seconds or coad-
jutors the criticks. * - dryden.
away the friendly coadjutor flies. garth's dispensary.
a gownman of a different make,
whom pallas, once vanessa's tutor,
had fix'd on for her coadjutor. swift.
2. [in the canon law.] one who is empowered or appointed to
perform the duties of another.
a bishop that is unprofitable to his diocese ought to be de-
posed, and no coadjutor assigned him. ayliffe.
coadju’v ancy. m. s... [from con and adjuvo, lat.] help; con-
current help ; contribution of help ; co-operation.
crystal is a mineral body, in the difference of stones, made
of a lentous percolation of earth, drawn from the most pure
and limpid juice thereof, owing to the coldness of the earth
some concurrence, and coadjuvancy, but not immediate deter-
mination and efficiency. brown's pulgar errours.
coadunition. m. s. [from con, ad, unitio, lat.] the con-
junction of different substances into one mass.
bodies seem to have an intrinsick principle of, or corrup-
tion from, the roadunition of particles endued with contrary
qualities. hale's origin of mankind.
to coagmetnt. v. a. [from con and agmen, lat.] to
congregate or heap together. i have only found the participle
in use.
had the world been coagmented from that supposed fortuitous
jumble, this hypothesis had been tolerable. glanville.
côacmentation. n.s.. [from coagment.] colle&amp;tion, or coa-
cervation into one mass ; union; conjunction.
the third part rests in the well joining, cementing,
and coagmentation of words, when it is smooth, gentle, and
sweet. ben. johnson.
coa'gulable. adj. [from coagulate.] that which is capable
of concretion.
stones that are rich in vitriol, being often drenched with
rain-water, the liquor will then extract a fine and transparent
substance, coagulable into vitriol. boyle.
to coa"gulate. v. a. [coagulo, lat.] to force into con-
cretions; as, by the affusion of some other substance, to turn
milk.
roasted in wrath and fire,
and thus o'ersized with coagulate gore. shakespeare.
vivification ever consisteth in spirits attenuate, which the
cold doth congeal and coagulate. bacon's nat. history.
bitumen is found in lumps, or coagulated masses, in some
fprings. woodward's natural history.
the milk in the stomach of calves, which is coagulated by
the runnet, is again dissolved and rendered fluid by the gall in
the duodenum. arbuthnot.
to coa'gulate. v. n. to run into concretions, or conge-
lations.
spirit of wine commixed with milk, a third part spirit of
wine, and two parts milk, coagulateth little, but mingleth ;
and the spirit swims not above. bacon.
about the third part of the oil olive, which was driven over
into the receiver, did there coagulate into a whitish body, al-
most like butter. boyle.
coagulation. n.s.. [from coagulate.]
1. concretion; congelation; the act of coagulating; the state
of being coagulated.
2. the body formed by coagulation.
as the substance of coagulations is not merely saline, no-
thing dissolves them but what penetrates and relaxes at the
same time. arbuthnot.
coa'gulative. adj. [from coagulate.] that which has the
power of causing concretion, or coagulation.
to manifest the coagulative power, we have sometimes in a
minute arrested the fluidity of new milk, and turned it into a
curdled substance, only by dexterously mingling with it a few
drops of good oil of vitriol. boyle.
coagulator. m. s. [from coagulate.] that which causes
coagulation. -
coagulators of the humours are those things which expel
the most fluid parts, as in the case of incrassating, or thick-
ening; and by those things which suck up some of the fluid
parts, as absorbents. arbuthnot.
coal. m. s. [col, sax. £ol, germ. kole, dut. kul, danish.]
1. the common fossil fewel. -
coal is a black, sulphurous, inflammatory matter, dug out
of the earth, serving for fewel, common in europe, though
the english coal is of most repute. one species of pit-coal is
called cannel, or canole coal, which is found in the northern
counties; hard, glossy and light, apt to cleave into thin flakes,
and, when kindled, yields a continual blaze 'till it be burnt
out. chambers.
coals are solid, dry, opake, inflammable substances, found
in large strata, splitting horizontally more easily than in any
other direction; of a glossy hue, soft and friable, not fusible,
but easily inflammable, and leaving a large residuum of ashes.
- hill on fossils.
but age, enforc'd, falls by her own consent;
as coals to ashes, when the spirit's spent,
vol. i.
denham.
we shall meet with the same mineral lodged in coal, that
elsewhere we found in marle. woodward's nat. history,
2. the cinder of scorched wood; charcoal.
whatsoever doth so alter a body, as it returneth not again
to that it was, may be called alteratio major ; as when cheese
is made of curds, or coal of wood, or bricks of earth. bacon,
3. fire; anything inflatned orighited,
you are no surer, no;
than is the coal of fire upon the ice;
or hailstones in the sun. shakespeare.
you have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me.
- - shakespeare.
the rage of jealousy then fir’d his soul,
and his face kindled like a burning coal,
to coa l. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to burn wood to charcoal.
add the tinner's care and cost, in buying the wood for this
service, felling, framing, and piling it to be burnt; in fetch-
ing the same when it is coaled, through such far, foul, and
cumbersome ways. carew's survey of cornwall.
charcoal of roots, coaled into great pieces, lasts longer than
ordinary charcoal.
2. to delineate with a coal.
marvailing, he coaled out rhimes upon the wall, near to
the picture. - - camden.
coal-black, adj. [coal and black.] black in the highest de-
gree 5 of the colour of a coal.
as burning ætna, from his boiling stew,
doth belch out flames, and rocks in pieces broke,
and ragged ribs of mountains molten new,
enwrapt in coal-black clouds and filthy smoak. fairy queen.
ethiopians and negroes become coal-black from fuliginous
dryden.
bacon.
eflorescencies, and complectional tinctures. brown.
coal-black his colour, but like jet it shone;
his legs and flowing tail were white alone. dryden.
cox. m. s. [coal and box.] a box to carry coals to the
tc.
leave a pail of dirty water, a coal-box, a bottle, a broom,
and such other unsightly things. swift.
coal-fish. n.s.. [aselius niger.] a species of beardless gadus.
coal-m ine. m. s. [coal and mine.] a mine in which coals are
dug; a coal-pit.
springs injure land, that flow from coal-mines. mortimer,
coal-pit. n. / [from coal and pit.] a pit made in the earth,
generally to a great depth, for digging coals.
a leaf of the polypody kind, found in the sinking of a
coalpit. //oodward.
coal-stone. n. s. [coal and stone..] a sort of cannel coal.
see coal.
coal-stone flames easily, and burns freely; but holds and en-
dures the fire much longer than coal. jwoodward.
coal-work. n.s.. [coal and work.] a coalery; a place where
coals are found.
there is a vast treasure in the old english, from whence
authors may draw constant supplies; as our officers make their
surest remits from the coal-works and the mines. felton.
co'aler y. n.s.. [from coal.] a place where coals are dug.
two fine stalactitae were found hanging from a black stone,
at a deserted vault in benwell coalery. woodward.
to coalesce. v. n. [coalesco, latin.]
1. to unite in masses by a spontaneous approximation to each
other. -
when vapours are raised, they hinder not the transparency
of the air, being divided into parts too small to cause any re-
fle&amp;tion in their superficies; but when they begin to coalese,
and constitute globules, those globules become of a convenient
size to refle&amp;t some colours.
2. to grow together; to join.
coale'scence. m. s. [from coaleste.] the aet of coalescing;
concretion; union. -
coalition. m. s. [from coalesco, coalitum, latin.] union in one
mass or body; conjunction of separate parts in one whole.
the world's a mass of heterogeneous consistencies, and every
part thereof a coalition of distinguishable varieties. glanville.
in the first coalition of a people, their prospect is not great:
they provide laws for their present exigence. hale.
'tis necessary that these squandered atoms should convene
and unite into great masses: without such a coalition the chaos
newton.
must have reigned to all eternity. bentley.
co’aly. adj. [from coal.]. containing coal.
or coaly tine, or ancient hallow'd dee. milton;
coaptation. m. s. [from con and apto, lat.] the adjust-
ment of parts to each other.
in a clock the hand is moved upon the dial, the bell is
ftruck, and the other actions belonging to the engine are per-
formed by virtue of the size, shape, bigness, and coaptation of
the several parts. boyle.
the same method makes both prose and verse beautiful,
which consists in the judicious coaptation and ranging of the
words. broome.
#. &amp;ote. ; v. a. [coarelo, latin.]
4 s 1. to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 410</div><p class="text">c o a
c o b
1. to straighten; to confine into a narrow compass.
the wind finding the room in the form of a trunk, and
coardiated therein, forced the stones of the window like pellets,
clean through it. bacon.
2. to contract power; to restrain.
if a man coardis himself to the extremity of an act, he must
blame and impute it to himself, that he has thus coareied or
straightened himself so far. ayliffe.
coarcta’tion. n.s.. [from coare.]
1. confinement; restraint to a narrow space.
the greatest winds, if they have no coardiation, or blow
not hollow, give an interiour sound. bacon.
2. contraction of any space.
straighten the artery never so much, provided the sides of
of it do not meet, the vessel will continue to beat below, or
beyond the coarelation. ray.
3. restraint of liberty.
ele&amp;tion is opposed not only to coaction, but also to co-
arelation, or determination to one. bramhall.
coarse. adj.
1. not refined ; not separated from movie or baser parts.
i fee
of what coarse metal ye are molded. shakespeare.
2. not soft or fine: used of cloath, of which the threads are
large.
3. rude; uncivil; rough of manners.
4. gross; not delicate.
'tis not the coarser tye of human law
that binds their peace.
5. inelegant; rude; unpolished.
praise of virgil is against myself, for presuming to copy,
in my coarse english, his beautiful expressions. dryden.
6. not nicely expert; unfinished by art or education.
practical rules may be useful to such as are remote from
advice, and to coarse practitioners, which they are obliged to
make use of. arbuthnot.
7. mean; not nice; not elegant; vile.
ill consort, and a coarse perfume,
disgrace the delicacy of a feast.
a coarse and useless dunghill weed,
thomson.
roscommon.
fix’d to one spot, to rot just as it grows. otway.
from this coarse mixture of terrestrial parts,
desire and fear by turns possess their hearts. dryden.
co’arsely. adv. [from coarse.] -
1. without fineness; without refinement.
2. meanly; not elegantly.
john came neither eating nor drinking, but fared coarsely
and poorly, according to the apparel he wore. brown.
3. rudely; not civilly.
the good cannot be too much honoured, nor the bad too
coarsely used. dryden.
4. inelegantly.
be pleased to accept the rudiments of virgil's poetry,
coarsely translated; but which yet retains some beauties of the
author. dryden.
co’ars en ess. n.s.. [from coarse.]
1. impurity; unrefined state.
first know the materials whereof the glass is made ; then
consider what the reason is of the coarsenes; or dearness.
bacon's essays.
2. roughress; want of fineness.
. grossness; want of delicacy. -
friends (pardon the coarsenes of the illustration) as dogs in
couples, should be of the same size. l'estrange.
4. roughness; rudeness of manners.
a base wild olive he remains;
the shrub the coarsenes of the clown retains. garth.
5. meanness; want of nicety.
consider the penuriousness of the hollanders, the coarsenes;
of their food and raiment, and their little indulgences of plea-
sure. addison on the war.
coast. n.s.. [coffe, fr. costa, latin.]
1. the edge or margin of the land next the sea; the shore.
it is not used for the banks of less waters.
he sees in english ships the holland coast. dryden.
2. it seems to be taken by newton for side, like the french coffe.
it was likewise so used by bacon. -
the south-east is found to be better for ripening of trees
than the south-west; though the south-west be the hottest
coast. bacon.
some kind of virtue, lodged in some sides of the crystal,
inclines and bends the rays towards the coast, of unusual re-
fraction; otherwise the rays would not be refracted towards
that coast rather than any other coast, both at their incidence
and at their emergence, so as to emerge by a contrary situa-
tion of the coast. newton's opt.
3. the coast is clear. . a proverbial expression. the danger
is over; the enemies have marched off.
going out, and seeing that the coast was clear, zelmane
dismissed musidorus. sidney.
the royal spy, when now the coast was clear,
sought not the garden, but retir'd unseen. drydon,
to coast, v. m. [from the noun..] to sail close by the coast;
to sail within fight of land. -
put steer my vessel with a steady hand,
and coast along the shore in fight of land. dryden's wirgil.
the antients coased only in their navigation, seldom taking
the open sea. - arbuthnot on coins.
to coas t. v. a. to sail by ; to sail near to.
nearchus, the admiral of alexander, not knowing the
compass, was fain to coo/? that shore. brown's wug. errours.
the greatest entertainment we found in coasling it, were
the several prospects of woods, vineyards, meadows, and corn-
fields which lie on the borders of it. addison on italy.
co'ast er. m. s. [from coast.] he that sails timorously near
the shore.
in our small skiff we must not launch too far;
we here but coasters, not discov’rers are.
coat. n.s.. [cotte, fr. cotta, italian.]
1. the upper garment. -
he was armed with a coat of mail, and the weight of the
coat was five thousand shekels of brass. i sam.
the coat of many colours they brought to their father, and
said, this have we found: know now whether it be thy son's
coat or in o. genesis,
2. petticoat; the habit of a boy in his infancy; the lower part
of a woman’s dress.
a friend's younger son, a child in coats, was not easily
brought to his book. locke.
3. the habit or vesture, as demonstrative of the office.
for his intermeddling with arms, he is the more excuseable,
because many of his coat, in those times, are not only martial
directors, but commanders. howel's pocal forest.
men of his coat should be minding their pray'rs,
and not among ladies, to give themselves airs. swift.
4. the hair or fur of a beast; the covering of any animal.
he clad
their nakedness with skins of beasts; or slain,
or, as the snake, with youthful coat repaid;
and thought not much to clothe his enemies. milton.
give your horse some powder of brimstone in his oats, and
it will make his coat lie fine. mortimer's husbandry.
you have given us milk
in luscious streams, and lent us your own coat
against the winter's cold. thomson's spring.
5. any tegument; tunick; or covering.
the eye is defended with four coats or skins. peacham.
the optick nerves have their medullary parts terminating
in the brain, their teguments terminating in the coats of the
eye. derham's physico-theology.
amber is a nodule, invested with a coat, called rock-amber.
joaodward on fossils.
6. that on which the ensigns armorial are portrayed. -
the herald of love's mighty king,
in whose coat armour richly are display'd
all sorts of flowers the which on earth do spring. spensor.
cropp'd are the flower de-luces in your arms;
of england's coat one half is cut away. shakesp. hen. vi.
at each trumpet was a banner bound,
which, waving in the wind, display’d at large
their master's coat of arms and knightly charge. dryden.
to coat. v. a. [from the noun..] to cover; to invest; to
overspread: as, to coat a retort; to coat a ceiling. "
to coax. v. a. to wheedle; to flatter; to humour. a
low word.
the nurse had changed her note; she was muzzling and
coaxing the child; that’s a good dear, says she. l’estrange.
i coax! i wheedle i’m above it. farquhar's recr. officer.
coaxe r. m. s. [from the verb.] a wheedler; a flatterer.
cob. a word often used in the composition of low terms;
corrupted from cop, sax. kopf, germ. the head or top.
cob. m. s. -
1. a sort of sea-fowl; called also sea-cob. philips.
2. in some provinces, and probably in old language, a spider ;
whence cobweb.
co'balt. m. s. a marcaste frequent in saxony.
cobalt is plentifully impregnated with arsenick; contains
copper and some silver. being sublimed, the flores are of a blue
colour: these german mineralists call zaffir. woodward.
cobalt is a dense, compact, and ponderous mineral, very
bright and shining, and much resembling some of the anti-
monial ores. it is found in germany, saxony, bohemia, and
england; but ours is a poor kind. from cobalt are pro-
duced the three sorts of arsenick, white, yellow, and red; as
also zaffre and smalt. hill on fossils.
to co'bble. v. a. [kobler, danish.]
1. to mend any thing coarsely: used generally of shoes.
if you be out, sir, i can mend you.--why, sir, cobble
oll. shakesp. julius caesar.
they'll fit by th’ fire, and presume to know
what's done i' th' capitol; making parties strong,
and feeble such as stand not in their liking,
below their cobbled shoes. shake? coriolanus.
many underlayers, when they could not live upon
3 - their
dryden.
.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 411</div><p class="text">c o c - *
c o c
..}.
is it, ,
#.
"so to
o
p.
; kot
: £iff
so-so
rock.
rati:
their trade, have raised themselves from cobbling to flux-
ing. l’estrange.
2. to do or make any thing clumsily, or unhandily.
reject the nauseous praises of the times;
give thy base poets back their cobbled rhimes. dryden,
believe not that the whole universe is mere bungling and
blundering, nothing effected for any purpose or design, but all
ill favouredly cobbled and jumbled together. bently.
co’bbler. m. s. [from cobble.]
1. a mender of old shoes.
not many years ago it happened that a cobbler had the
casting vote for the life of a criminal. addison on italy.
2. a clumsy workman in general. -
what trade are you?—
truly, fir, in respect of a fine workman, i am but, as you
would say, a cobbler. shakespeare's julius casar.
3. in a kind of proverbial sense, any mean person.
think you the great prerogative to enjoy
of doing ill, by virtue of that race;
as if what we esteem in cobblers base,
would the high family of brutus grace? dryd. juv.
copiron s. m. s. [cob and iron..] irons with a knob at the
upper end.
the implements of the kitchen; as spits, ranges, cabirons,
and pots. bacon's phys. rem.
cobi's hop. m. s. [con and bishop.] a coadjutant bishop.
valerius, advanced in years, and a grecian by birth, not
qualified to preach in the latin tongue, made use of austin as
a cabishop, for the benefit of the church of hippo. ayliffe.
co'bnut. n.f. [cob and nut..] a boy's game; the conquering
nut.
co'ssw an. n.s.. [cob, head ; and swan.] the head or leading
swan. -
i’m not taken
with a cobswan, or a high-mounting bull,
as foolish leda and europa were. ben. johnson's catiline.
co'bw eb. m. s. [kopweb, dutch.]
1. the web or net of a spider: from cob, a spider.
the luckless clarion,
with violent swift flight, forth carried
into the cursed cobweb, which his foe
had framed for his final overthrow. spenser.
is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, and
cobwebs swept shakesp. taming z. the shrew.
the spider in the house of a burgher, fell presently to her
net-work of drawing cobwebs up and down. l’estrange.
2. any snare, or trap; implying insidiousness and weakness.
for he a rope of sand could twist,
as tough as learned sorbonist;
and weave fine cobwebs fit for scull
that's empty, when the moon is full. hudibras.
chronology at best is but a cobweb law, and he broke
through it with his weight. dryden.
laws are like cobwebs, which may catch small flies; but
let wasps and hornets break through. swift.
co'co a. m. s. see cacao.
cocci'ferous. adj. [from x0xxas, and fero, lat.] all plants or
trees are so called that have berries. &amp;uincy.
cochineal. n.s. [cochinilla, span, a woodlouse..] . .
an inse&amp;t gathered upon the opuntia, and dried; from
which a beautiful red colour is extracted. hill.
cooch leary. adj. [from cochlea, lat. a screw.] screwform ;
in the form of a screw.
that at st. dennis, near paris, hath wreathy spires, and
cochleary turnings about it, which agreeth with the description
of the unicorn's horn in aelian. brown's wulgar errours.
coochle ated. adj. [from cochlea, lat.] of a screwed or tur-
binated form.
two pieces of stone, struck forth of the cavity of the
umbilici of shells, of the same sort with the foregoing : they
are of a cochleated figure. woodward on fossils.
cock. n.s.. [cocc, saxon; coq, french.]
1. the male to the hen; a domestick fowl, remarkable for his
gallantry, pride, and courage.
cocks have great combs and spurs; hens, little or none.
o bacon's natural history.
true cocks o' th' game,
that never ask for what, or whom, they fight;
but turn 'em out, and shew 'em but a foe,
cry liberty, and that's a cause of quarrel.
the careful hen
calls all her chirping family around,
fed and defended by the fearless cock.
2. the male of any small birds.
calves and philosophers, tygers and statesmen, cock spar-
rows and coquets, exactly resemble one another in the for-
mation of the pineal gland. arbuthnot and pope.
3. the weathercock, that shews the direaion of the wind by
turning.
you cataracts and hurricanoes spout,
'till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks / sh.
dryden.
thomson's spring.
4. a spout to let out water at will, by turning the stop. the
handle had probably a cock on the top. things that were
contrived to turn seem anciently to have had that form, what-
ever was the reason. -
when every room
hath blaz'd with lights, and bray'd with minstrelsy,
i have retir'd me to a wasteful cock,
and set mine eyes at flow. shakespeare.
it were good there were a little cock made in the beily of
the upper glass. bacon's natural history.
thus the small jett, which hasty hands unlock,
spirts in the gard’ner's eyes who turns the cock.
5. the notch of an arrow.
6. the part of the lock of a gun that strikes with the flint.
[from cocca, ital, the notch of an arrow. skinner. perhaps
from the action, like that of a cock pecking; but it was,
i think, so called when it had not its present form.]
with hasty rage he snatch'd
his gunshot, that in holsters watch'd,
and bending cock, he levell'd full
against th’ outside of talgol's skull. hudibras.
a seven-shot gun carries powder and bullets for seven
charges and discharges. under the breech of the barrel is one
box for the powder; a little before the lock another for the
bullets; behind the cock a charger, which carries the powder
from the box to a funnel at the further end of the lock. grew.
7. a conquerour; a leader; a governing man.
sir andrew is the cock of the club fince he left us. addison.
my schoolmaster call’d me a dunce and a fool;
pope.
but at cuffs i was always the cock of the school. swift.
8. cockcrowing; a note of the time in a morning.
we were carousing till the second cock. shakesp.
he begins at curfew, and goes 'till the first cock. shakesp.
9. a cockboat; a small boat.
they take view of all sized cocks, barges, and fisherboats
hovering on the coast. carew's survey of cornwall.
the fishermen that walk upon the beach,
appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
diminish'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy,
almost too small for fight.
10. a small heap of hay. [properly cop.]
as soon as the dew is off the ground spread the hay again,
and turn it, that it may wither on the other side: then handle
it, and, if you find it dry, make it up into cocks. martimer.
11. the form of a hat. [from the comb of the cock.]
you see many a smart rhetorician turning his hat in his
hands, moulding it into several different cocks. addison.
12. the style or gnomon of a dial. chambers.
13. the needle of a balance. - -
14. cock on the hoop. triumphant; exulting.
now i am a frisker, all men on me look;
what should i do but set cock on the hoop 8
you'll make a mutiny among my guests
shai-sheart.
camden's rem.
* *
you will set cock a hoop / shakespeare.
, for hudibras, who thought h’ had won -
the field, as certain as a gun,
and having routed the whole troop, *
with victory was cock a hoop. hudibras.
to cock. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to set erect; to hold bolt upright, as a cock holds his head.
this is that muscle which performs the motion so often
mentioned by the latin poets, when they talk of a-man's
cocking his nose, or playing the rhinoceros. addison.
our lightfoot barks, and cocks his ears;
o'er yonder stile see lubberkin appears.
dick would cock his nose in scorn,
but tom was kind and loving. swift.
2. to set up the hat with an air of petulance and pertness.
dick, who thus long had passive sat,
here strok'd his chin and cock'd his hat. prior.
an alert young fellow cock'd his hat upon a friend of his
who entered. addison's speciator.
3. to mould the form of the hat.
4. to fix the cock of a gun ready for a discharge.
some of them holding up their pistols cocked, near the door
of the house, which they kept open. dryden ded. æn.
5. to raise hay in small heaps.
sike mirth in may is meetest for to make,
or summer shade, under the cocked hay. spenser's pastorals.
to cock. v. n.
1. to strut; to hold up the head, and look big, or menacing,
or pert. *
sir fopling is a fool so nicely writ,
the ladies would mistake him for a wit;
and when he fings, talks loud, and cocks, would cry,
i vow, methinks, he's pretty company. dryden.
every one cocks and struts upon it, and pretends to over-
look us. addison's guardian.
2. to train or use fighting cocks.
cries out gainst cocking, since he cannot bet. b. johnson.
cock, in compositicn, fignifies small or little.
gay's pastorals.
cocka'dr.
w<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 412</div><p class="text">c o c
c o c
ope. n.s.. [from cock.] a ribband worn in the hat.
soisso. # cock and arren, sax. a serpent.]
a serpent supposed to rise from a cock's egg: ices. sh
they will kill one another by the look, like cockatrices. sh.
this was the end of this little cockatro of a king, that
was able to destroy those that did not espy him first. bacon.
this cockatrice is soonest crushed in the shell; but, if it
grows, it turns to a spot and a dragon. taylor.
my wife ! 'tis she, the very cockatrice / congreve.
cockboat. n.s. scock and boat.j a small boat belonging to
2. ". invincible armada, which having not fired a cottage
of ours at land, nor taking a cockboat of ours at sea, wandered
through the wilderness of the northern (eas. - bacon.
dia they think it less dishonour to god to be like a brute,
or a plant, or a cockboat, than to be like a. man? stillingfleet.
cockbroath. n.s. broath made by boiling a cook.
diet upon spoon-meats; as veal or toolroath: prepared
with french barley. harvey on consumptions.
cockcrow, no. n.s.. [cock and crow.] the time at which
cocks crow; the morning.
ye know not when the master of the house cometh; at
even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the %.
ing. aro.
t, &amp;cker. v. a. [coqueliner, french.] to cade; to fondle ;
to indulge. - -
most children's constitutions are spoiled by cockering and
tenderness. locke on education.
he that will give his son sugar-plums to make him learn,
does but authorize his love of pleasure, and rocker up that pro-
pensity which he ought to subdue. docke on education.
bred a fondling and an heiress;
dress'd like any lady may’ress,
cocker'd by the servants round, -
- was too good to touch the ground. swift.
cocker. n.f. [from cock.j one who follows the sport of
cockfighting.
cockerel. n.s.. [from cock.] a young cock.
which of them first begins to crow –
the old cock —the cockerel. shakespeare.
what wilt thou be, young cockerel, when thy spurs
are grown to sharpness : dryden.
cocker. n.s. [of uncertain derivation.] -- -
a seal belonging to the king's customhouse : likewise a
scroll of parchment, sealed and delivered by the officers of
the customhouse to merchants, as a warrant that their mer-
chandize is entered. cowel.
the greatest profit did arise by the cocket of hides; for wool
and woolfells were ever of little value in this kingdom. davies.
cockfigh r. n.s. [cock and fight.] a battle or match of
cocks.
in cockfights, to make one cock more hardy, and the other
more cowardly. bacon's natural history.
at the seasons of football and cockfighting, these little re-
publicks reassume their national hatred to each other. addison.
co’ckhorse. adj. [cock and horse.] on horseback; trium-
phant; exulting.
alma, they strenuously maintain,
sits cockhorse on her throne the brain. prior.
co'ckle. m. s. [coquille, french.]
1. a small testaceous fish.
it is a cockle, or a walnut-shell. shakespeare.
we may, i think, from the make of an oyster, or cockle,
reasonably conclude, that it has not so many, nor so quick
senses, as a man. locke.
three common cockle shells, out of gravel pits. woodward.
2. a little or young cock. obsolete.
they bearen the crag so stiff and so state,
as cockle on his dunghill crowing crank. spensor's paso.
cockle-sta irs. m. s. winding or spiral stairs. chambers.
cockle. n. s. [coccel, saxon; lalium, zizania.] a weed that
grows in corn. the same with corn-rose; a species of
pop py.
in soothing them we nourish, 'gainst our senate,
the cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition. shakespeare.
good seed degenerates, and oft’ obeys
the soil's disease, and into cockle strays. donne.
7osocklf. v. a. [from cockle.] to contract into wrinkles
like the shell of a cockle.
, show’rs soon drench the camblet's cockledgrain. gay.
cockled... adj. [from cockle.] shelled; or perhaps cochleate,
turbinated.
love's feeling is more soft and sensible,
z than are the tender horns of cociled snails. shakespeare.
cocktoft, n.s.. [cock and loft.] the room over the garret,
in which fowls are supposed to roost, unless it be rather coro
rupted from coplast, the cop or top of the house.
if the lowest floors already burn,
cocosts and garrets soon will take their turn. dryd, juv.
my garrets, or rather my cocklofts indeed, are very indiffe-
rently furnished; but they are rooms to lay iumber in. swift.
6
-
co'ckmaster, n. s. [cock and master.] one that breeds game
cocks.
a cockmaster bought a partridge, and turned it amon
9 the
fighting cocks. %.
cockmatch. m. s. [cock and match..] cockfight for a prize."
at the same time that the heads of parties preserve toward,
one another an outward shew of good breeding, their tools
will not so much as mingle at a cockmatch. addison
though quail-fighting is what is most taken notice of, fl.
had doubtless cockmatches also. arbuthnot and pop.
cockney, n.s.. [a word of which the original is much c.
troverted. the french use an expression, pais de cocaign,
for a country of dainties. &gt;
paris estpour un riche un pais de cocaigne, boika
of this word they are not able to settle the original. it or
pears, whatever was its first ground, to be very ancient,
mentioned in an old normanno-saxon poem:
far in see by west spayng,
is a lond yhoze cocayng. -
on which dr. hickes has this remark:
nunc cquin, coquine. quae olim apud gallas otio, gulz &amp;
ventri deditos, ignavum, ignavam, desidiosum, desidiosan, jog-
nem significabant. hinc urbanos utpote a rusticis laboribuod
vitam sedentariam, &amp; defidiosam avocatos pagani nostriolim
cosaignes, quod nunc scribitur cockneys, vocabant. et potta
hic noster in monachos &amp; moniales, ut segne genus homi-
num, qui desidiae dediti, ventri indulgebant, &amp; coquinae ama-
tores erant, malevolentislime invehitur, monasteria &amp; mo.
nasticam vitam in descriptione terrae cockaineae, parabolice per-
stringens.]
1. a native of london, by way of contempt.
so the cockney did to the eels, when she put them i' th' pasty
alive. shakesp. king lear.
for who is such a cockney in his heart,
proud of the plenty of the southern part,
to scorn that union, by which we ma
boast’twas his countryman that writ this play dorst.
the cockney, travelling into the country, is surprized at
many common practices of rural affairs. watts.
2. any effeminate, ignorant, low, mean, despicable citizen.
i am afraid this great lubber, the world will prove a cockney.
shakesp. twelfth night.
being
cockpit. n.s.. [cock and pot.]
1. the area where cocks fight.
can this cockpit hold
the vasty field of france shakespeare,
and now have i gained the cockpit of the western world,
and academy of arms, for many years. howel's vocal fores,
2. a place on the lower deck of a man of war, where are sub-
divisions for the purser, the surgeon, and his mates. harri,
cock’sco mb, n.s. [cock and comb.] a plant.
cock's he ad. m. s. a plant, named also sainfoin. miller,
cockshut. n. s. [from cock and shut..] . the close of the even-
ing, at which time poultry go to roost.
surrey and himself,
much about cockshut time, from troop to troop,
went through the army. shakespear.
cocks pur. m. s. [cock and spur.] virginian hawthorn. a
species of medlar. miller.
co'cks ure. adv. [from cock and sure.] confidently certain;
without fear or diffidence. a word of contempt.
we steal, as in a castle, cocłsure. shakoff tart,
i thought myself cocłsure of his horse, which he readily
promised me. pope'. letters,
cocks w ain. n.s.. [cogrpainz, saxon.] the officer who
has the command of the cockboat. corruptly coxon.
cockweed. m. s. [from cock and weed.] the name of a plant,
called also dittander, or pepperwort.
coco a. m. s. [cacaotal, span. and therefore more properly
written cacao.]
a species of palm-tree, cultivated in the east and west
indies. the bark of the nut is made into cordage, and the
shell into drinking bowls. the kernel affords them a
wholesome food, and the milk contained in the shell a cool-
ing liquor. the leaves are used for thatching their houses,
and are wrought into baskets. milo.
the cacao or chocolate nut is a fruit of an oblong figuro, 3
composed of a thin but hard and woody coat or skin, of a dark
blackish colour; and of a dry kernel, filling up its whole
cavity, fleshy, dry, firm, and fattish to the touch, of a dusky
colour, an agreeable smell, and a pleasant and peculiar taste,
it was unknown to us 'till the discovery of america, the
tree is of the thickness of a man’s leg, and but a few feet in
height; its bark rough, and full of tubercles; and its leaves
fix or eight inches long, half as much in breadth, and point”
at the ends. the flowers are succeeded by the fruit, which
is large and oblong, resembling a cucumber, five, six, or
eight inches in length, and three or four in thickness, who
fully ripe, of a purple colour. within the cavity of this fruit
are lodged the cocoanuts, usually about thirty in numbo,
hill', mat, medic.
amid'<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 413</div><p class="text">c o e
c o e
* 1 (kłon.
oft \;
shio
wfair
sikah
wher: a
ts, i.
s
of to:
so.
§:
awto
l
amid' those orchards of the sun,
give me to drain the cocoa's milky bowl, -
and from the palm to draw its freshening wine. them 0/1.
co’ctile. adj. [codilis, lat] made by baking, as a brick.
o, ion, n.s. [coffio, lat.] the act of boiling.
co *}. disease is sometimes attended with expectoration from
the lungs, and that is taken off by a coction and resolution of
... foetish matter, or terminates in suppurations or a gan-
t arbuthnot on diet.
grene.
cod. }. s: [osillus.] a sea fish.
§". [cobbe, saxon.] any case or husk in which seeds
aft lodged. &gt;
thy corn thou there may st safely sow,
where in full cod; last year rich pease did grow. may.
they let pease lie in small heaps as they are reaped, 'till
they find the hawm and cod dry. martimer's husbandry.
t, cod. v. h. [from the noun..] to inclose in a cod.
all codded grain being a destroyer of weeds, an improver
of land, and a preparer of it for other crops. mortimer.
codders. n.s.. [from cod.] gatherers of pease. dici.
cops. n.s. sodex, latin.]
i- a book.
2. a book of the civil law.
we find in the theodosian and justinian code the interest
of trade very well provided for. arbuthnot on coins.
indentures, cov'nants, articles they draw,
large as the fields themselves; and larger far
than civil codes with all their glosses are. pope's sat.
cospicil. n.s.. [codicillus, latin.] an appendage to a will.
the man suspects his lady's crying,
was but to gain him to appoint her,
by codicil, a larger jointure. prior.
codi'ile. n.s.. [codille, fr. cadillo, span.] a term at ombre,
when the game is won.
she sees, and trembles at th' approaching ill,
just in the jaws of ruin, and codille. pope's rape of the lock.
to co'dle. v. a. [coquo, cociulo, lat. skinner.] to parboil;
to soften by the heat of water.
copling. m. s. [from to codle.] an apple, generally codled,
to be mixed with milk. -
in july come gilliflowers of all varieties, early pears and
plums in fruit, gennitings and codings. bacon's essays.
their entertainment at the height,
in cream and codings rev'ling with delight. king's cookery.
he let it lie all winter in a gravel walk, south of a codling
hedge, mortimer's husbandry.
a codling, ere it went his lip in,
wou'd strait become a golden pippin. swift.
coe'fficacy. n. s. [con and efficacia, lat.] the power of
several things acting together to produce an effect.
we cannot in general infer the efficacy of those stars, or
cofficacy particular in medications. brown's wulgar errours.
coefficiency. n.s.. [con and efficio, latin.] co-operation;
the state of acting together to some single end. -
the managing and carrying on of this work, by the spirits
instrumental coefficiency, requires, that they be kept together,
without distinetion or dissipation. glanville's scepsis.
coefficient. n.s.. [con and officiens, latin.]
1. that which unites its action with the action of another.
2. [in algebra.] such numbers, or given quantities, that are put
before letters, or unknown quantities, into which letters they
are supposed to be multiplied, and so do make a rectangle, or
product with the letters; as 4 a, b x, c xx ; where 4 is the co-
efficient of 4 a ; b of by, and c of c xx. chambers.
3. in fluxions.
the coefficient of any generating term (in fluxions) is the
quantity arising by the division of that term, by the generated
o: so quantity. chambers.
- coollack passion. [xoixsz, the belly..] a diarrhoea, or flux, that
#: arises from the indigestion or putrefaction of food in the sto-
go mach and bowels, whereby the aliment comes away little
† : altered from what it was when eaten, or changed like cor-
£o rupted stinking flesh. quincy.
o coemption. n.s.. [coemptio, lat..] the aet of buying up the
o whole quantity of any thing.
o monopolies and coemption of wares for resale, where they
of- are not restrained, are great means to enrich. bacon's essays.
; : *qgal. adj. [from con and equalis, lat..] equal; being of
o the same rank or dignity with another.
o: henry the fifth did sometime prophecy,
so if once he came to be a cardinal,
* he'll make his cap coequal with the crown.
o - shakespeare's henry. vi.
so $ooga lity.. n.s.. [from coequal.] the state of being equal.
* to coe’rce. v. a. [coerceo, latin.] to restrain; to keep
o in order by force.
o punishments are manifold, that they may coerce this profli-
o gate sort. ayliffe's parergon.
* *cible. adj. [from coerce.]
o 1. that may be restrained.
o 2. .* to be restrained.
ol. 1.
cok'acion. n.s. (from coerce..] penal restraint; check.
the coercion or execution of the sentence in ecclesiastical
courts, is only by excommunication of the person contuma-
cious. hale's common law.
government has coercion and animadversion upon such as
neglect their duty; without which coercive power, all govern-
ment is toothless and precarious. south.
coe rcive. adj. [from coerce.] -
1. that which has the power of laying restraint.
all things on the surface spread, are bound
by their coercive vigour to the ground ! blackmore.
2. that which has the authority of restraining by punishment.
for ministers to seek that themselves might have coercive
power over the church, would have been hardly construed.
hooker, preface.
the virtues of a general, or a king, are prudence, coun-
sel, active fortitude, coercive power, awful command, and the
exercise of magnanimity, as well as justice. dryden.
coesse's tial. adj. [con and essentia, latin.] participating
of the same essence.
the lord our god is but one god, in which indivisible
unity we adore the father, as being altogether of himself; we
glorify that consubstantial word which is the son; we bless
and magnify that coeffential spirit eternally proceeding from
both, which is the holy ghost. hooker.
coessentia lity. n.s.. [from coesential.] participation of
the same essence.
coeta'neous. adj. [con and atas, latin.] of the same age
with another : with to.
eve was old as adam, and cain their son coetaneous unto
both. brown's pulgar errours.
every fault hath penal effe&amp;ts, coetaneous to the aet. gov.
through the body every member sustains another; and all
are coetaneous, because none can subsist alone. bentley's serm.
coe ternal. adj. [con and eternus, lat.] equally eternal
with another. -
or of the eternal coeternal beam | milton's par. loff.
coete'rnally. adv. [from coeternal.] in a state of equal
eternity with another.
arius had dishonoured his coeternally begotten son. hooker.
coet e r nity.. n.s.. [from coeternal.] having existence from
eternity equal with another eternal being.
the eternity of the son's generation, and his coeternity and
consubstantiality with the father, when he came down from
heaven, and was incarnate. hammond's fund.
coe'val. adj. [coarvus, latin.]
1. of the same age.
even his teeth and white, like a young flock,
coeval, and new shorn, from the clear brook
recent. prior.
2. of the same age with another: followed by with.
this religion cannot pretend to be coeval with man. hale.
the monthly revolutions of the moon, or the diurnal of
the earth upon its own axis, by the very hypothesis are coeval
with the former. - bentley.
silence i coeval with eternity; -
thou wert, ere nature first began to be:
'twas one vast nothing all, and all slept fast in thee! pope.
. sometimes by to.
although we had no monuments of religion ancienter than
idolatry, we have no reason to conclude, that idolatrous reli-
gion was coeval to mankind. hale's origin of mankind.
coe’val. m. s. [from the adjective..] a contemporary ; but
properly one not only living at the same time, but of the same
time of life.
as it were not enough to have outdone all your coeval; in
wit, you will excel them in good nature. pope.
coe’vous. adj. [coacvus, lat.] of the same age.
then it should not have been the first, as supposing some
other thing coevous to it. south.
to coexi'st. v. n. [con and exisło, latin.]
i. to exist at the same time.
the three stars that coexist in heavenly constellations, are a
multitude of stars. hale's origin of mankind.
of substances no one has any clear idea, farther than of
certain simple ideas coexisting together. locke.
2. followed by with.
it is sufficient that we have the idea of the length of any
regular periodical appearances, which we can in our minds
apply to duration, with which the motion or appearance ne-
ver coexisted. locke.
coex1'sten.cf. n. s. [from coexist.]
1. having existence at the same time with another: with to.
locke, who in the preceding lines has coexisted with, has
here coexistence to.
the measuring of any duration, some motion, depends
not on the real coexistence of that thing to that motion, or any
other periods of revolution. locke.
2. more commonly followed by with:
we can demonstrate the being of god's eternal ideas, and
their coexistence with him. grew's cosmol.
coexist ent. adj. [from coexist.]
4 t i. having<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
1-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 414</div><p class="text">c o f.
c o g
1. having existence at the same time with another : with to. .
to the measuring the duration of any thing by time, it is
not requisite that that thing should be coexisłent to the motion
we measure by, or any other periodical revolution. locke.
2. sometimes with.
this proves no antecedent necessity, but coexissent with the
act. bramh. answer to hobbes.
time is taken for so much of duration as is coexissent with
the motions of the great bodies of the universe. locke.
all that one point is either future or past, and no parts
are coexistent or contemporary with it. bentley.
t. coextend. v. a. [con and extendo, latin.] to extend to
the same space or duration with another.
every motion is, in some sort, coextended with the body
moved. grew's cosmol.
coexte’ssion. m. s. [from coextend j the aet or state of ex-
tending to the same space or duration with another.
though it be a spirit, i find it is no inconvenience to have
some analogy, at least of coextension, with my body. hale.
coffee. n.s. [it is originally arabick, pronounced cahou
by the turks, and cahua, by the arabs.] the tree is a spe-
cies of arabick joslamine. -
it is found to succeed as well in the caribbee islands as in
their native place of growth : but whether the coffee produced
in the west indies will prove as good as that from mocha in
arabia felix, time will discover. a1/ler.
coffee denotes a drink prepared from the berries, very
familiar in europe for these eighty years, and among the
turks for one hundred and fifty. thevenot, the traveller,
was the first who brought it into france ; and a greek ser-
vant, called pasqua, brought into england by mr. daniel
edwards, a turky merchant, in 1652, to make his coffee,
first set up the profession of coffeeman, and introduced the
drink among us. charlbers.
they have in turky a drink called coffee, made of a berry
of the same name, as black as soot, and of a strong scent,
but not aromatical; which they take, beaten into powder,
in water, as hot as they can drink it. this drink comforteth
the brain and heart, and helpeth digestion. bacon.
o to part her time ’twixt reading and bohea,
or o'er cold coffee trifle with the spoon. pope.
co’f fee house. m. s. [coffee and house..] a house of entertain-
ment where coffee is sold, and the guests are supplicq with
news papers.
at ten, from coffeehouse or play,
returning, finishes the day.
it is a point they do not concern themselves about, farther
than perhaps as a subject in a coffeehouse. sw:/?.
coof feeman. m. s. [coffee and man.] one that keeps a coffee-
house.
consider your enemies the lacedemonians; did ever you
hear that they preferred a coffeeman to agesilaus : addison.
co'ffee pot. n. s. [coffee and pot.] the covered pot in which
coffee is boiled. - -
co'ffer. m. s. scorne, saxon.]
1. a chest generally for keeping money.
- two iron coffirs hung on either side,
with precious metal full as they could hold.
the lining of his coffers shall make coats
to deck our soldiers for these irish wars. shakso. rich. ii.
if you destroy your governour that is wealthy, you must
chuse another, who will fill his coffers out of what is left.
l'asirange.
fairy queen.
2. treasure.
he would discharge it without any burthen to the queen's
coffirs, for honour sake. bacon's advice to williers.
3. [in architecture.] a square depressure in each interval be-
tween the modillions of the corinthian cornice, usually filled
with some enrichment. chambers.
4. [in fortification.) a hollow lodgment across a dry moat,
from six to seven foot deep, and from sixteen to eighteen
broad; the upper part being made of pieces of timber, raised
two foot above the level of the moat; which little elevation
has hurdles laden with earth for its covering, and serves as a
parapet with embrasures. chambers.
to co f fer. v. a. [from the noun..] to treasure up in chests.
treasure, as a war might draw forth, so a peace succeed-
ing might coffer up. bacon's henry vii.
cof ferer of the king's housho'd. n. s. a principal officer of
his majesty's court, next under the comptroller, that, in the
comptinghouse and elsewhere, hath a special oversight of other
cfficers of the houshold, for their good demeanour in their
offices. - cowel.
coffin. m. s. scoffn, french.]
i. the box or chest in which dead bodies are put into the
ground. it is used both of wood and other matter.
he went as if he had been the coffin that carried himself to
his sepulchre. sidney.
not a flower sweet
on my black coffin let there be strown.
one fate they have,
the ship their coffin, and the sea their grave.
sh. twelfth night.
//aller.
p, or.
the joiner is fitting screws to your coffin.
2. a mould of paste for a pye.
of the paste a coffin will i rear,
and make two pasties of your shameful heads,
3. a paper case, in form of a cone, used by grocers.
4. in farriery.
co f fin of a hors, is the whole hoof of the foot above the
coronet, including the coffin bone. the coffin bone is a small
spongy bone, inclosed in thc midst of the hoof, and possessing
the whole form of the foot. parrier's dii.
to co'ffin. v. a. [from the noun j. to inclose in a coffin.
would'st thou have laugh'd, had i come coffin’d home,
that weep'st to see me triumph : shaftsp. corizianus.
let me lie
in prison, and here be coffin'd, when i die. donjic.
cof finmaker. m. s. [coffin and maker.] one whose trade is
to make coffins.
where will be your sextons, coffmakers and plummers?
7atler.
7% cog. v. a. [a word of uncertain original, derived by skin-
mer from coqueliner, french.]
1. to flatter; to wheedle; to sooth by adulatory speeches,
i’ll mountebank their loves,
cog their hearts from them, and come home belov’d
of all the trades in rome. shakes?. coriolant.
2. to cog a die. to secure it, so as to dire&amp;t its fall; to falsify.
but then my study was to cog the dice,
and dextrously to throw the lucky fice. dryden's pers: sat.
for guineas in other men's breeches,
shafts.
your gamesters will palm and will cog. swift.
ye gallants of newgate, whose fingers are nice
in diving in pockets, or cogging of dice. swift.
3. to obtrude by falsehood.
the outcry is, that i abuse his demonstration by a falsifica-
tion, by cogging in the word. tilotson, preface.
have cogged in the word to serve my turn. stillingfieet.
fustian tragedies, or insipid comedies, have, by concerted
applauses, been cogged upon the town for masterpieces. dennis.
to cog. v. m. to lie; to wheedle.
now stealeth he, now will he crave -
and now will he cosen and cog. tussor.
mrs. ford, i cannot cog; i cannot prate, mrs. ford: now
shall i sin in my wish. shakesp. merry hives of i/indsor.
cog... m. s. the tooth of a wheel, by which it ads upon
another wheel.
to cog. v. a. [from the noun..] to fix cogs in a wheel.
co. gency. n.s.. [from cogent.j force; strength ; power of
compelling ; conviction. -
maxims and axioms, principles of science, because they are
self-evident, have been supposed innate; although nobody ever
shewed the foundation of their clearness and cogency. locke.
cogent. adj. [cogens, latin.] forcible; resistless; con-
vincing ; powerful; having the power to compel conviction.
such is the cogent ‘orce of nature. prior.
they have contrived methods of deceit, one repugnant to
another, to evade, if possible, this most cogent proof of a
1)eity. bently.
co gently. adv. [from cogent.] with refiftless force; forcibly;
so as to force conviction. -
they forbid us to hearken to those proofs, as weak or sal-
lacious, which our own existence, and the sensible parts of the
universe, offer fo clearly and cogently to our thoughts. zocke.
co gger. m. s. [from 70 cog.] a flatterer; a wheedler.
cogg leston e. m. s. [cuogolo, ital.] a little stone; a small
pebble. skinner.
, co gitable. adj. [from cogito, latin.] that which may be
thought on ; what may be the subject of thought.
7% co'gitate. v. n. [cogito, lat..] to think.
cogitation. m. s. [cogitatio, latin.]
1. thought; the act of thinking.
having their cogitations darkened, and being strangers from
the life of god, from the ignorance which is in them. hooker.
a picture puts me in mind of a friend : the intention of
the mind in seeing, is carried to the object represented, which
is no more than simple cogitation, or apprehension of the per-
son. stilling fleet.
this descartes proves, that brutes have no cogitation, be-
cause they could never be brought to fignify their thoughts by
any artificial signs. ray on the creation.
these powers of cogitation, and volition and sensation, are
neither inherent in matter as such, nor acquirable to matter by
any motion and modification of it. bently.
2. purpose ; refle&amp;tion previous to action.
the king, perceiving that his desires were internperate, and
his cogitations vast and irregular, began not to brook him well.
bacon's henry vii.
3. meditation ; contemplation; mental speculation.
on some great charge employ'd
he seem’d, or fixt in cogitation deep. milton's parady, lo?.
co'gitative, adj. [from cogito, latin.]
1. having the power of thought and reflection. -
if these powers of cogitation and sensation are neither inhe-
icint
di£7.
s
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 415</div><p class="text">c o h
c o h
rent in matter, nor acquirable to matter, they procced from
some cogitative substance, which we gall spirit and soul. bently.
2, given to thought and deep meditation.
the carl had the closer and more reserved countenance,
, being by nature more cogitative. // atton.
cog's arios. m. s. [cognatio, latin.]
1. kindred ; descent from the same original. -
two vices i shall mention, as being of near cognation to in-
gratitude, pride and hard-heartedness, or want of com-
passion. - - south.
let the criticks tell me what certain sense they could put
upon either of these four words, by their mere cognation with
each other. //atts on the 41ind.
2. relation ; participation of the same nature.
he induceth us to ascribe effects unto causes of no cog-
nation. brown's wu'gar erroirs.
cogs is e. e. m. s. [in law.] he to whom a fine in lands or
tenements is acknowledged. cowel.
co'gnisou r. m. s. [in law.] is he that passeth or acknow-
ledgeth a fine in lands or tenements to another. cowel.
cogni'tion. m. s. [cognitio, latin.] knowledge; complete
conviction. -
i will not be myself nor have cognition
of what i feel: i am all patience. sh. troil. and croffida.
god, as he created all things, so is he beyond and in them
all, not only in power, as under his subjection, or in his pre-
sence, as in his cognition ; but in their very essence, as in the
soul of their casualties. brown's wulgar errours.
coog nitive. adj. [from cognitus, latin.] having the power
of knowing.
unless the understanding employ and exercise its cognitive
or apprehensive power about these terms, there can be no
actual apprehension of them. south’s sermons.
coc niza ble. adj. [cognoisable, french.]
1. that falls under judicial notice.
2. liable to be tried, judged, or examined.
some are merely of ecclesiastical cognizance, others of a
mixed nature, such as are cognizable both in the ecclesiastical
and secular courts. ayliff's parergon.
coog n1zance. n.s.. [connoisance, french.] - -
1. judicial notice ; trial ; judicial authority. s
it is worth the while, however, to confider how we may
discountenance and prevent those evils which the law can take
no cognizance of. l’e/range.
happiness or misery, in converse with others, depends upon
things which human laws can take no cognizance of. south.
the moral crime is completed, there are only circumstances
wanting to work it up for the cognizance of the law. addison.
2. a badge, by which any one is known.
and at the king's going away the earl's servants stood, in a
seemly manner, in their livery coats, with cognizances, ranged
on both sides, and made the king a bow. bacon’s henry vii.
these were the proper cognizances and coat-arms of the
tribes. brown's vulgar errours.
cogno’minal. adj. [cognomen, latin.] having the same
name. -
nor do those animals more resemble the creatures on earth,
than they on earth the constellations which pass under animal
names in heaven; nor the dogfish at sea much more make
out the dog of the land, than his cognominal or namesake in the
heavens. brown's wulgar errours.
cog nomination. n.s.. [cognomen, latin.]
1. a surname ; the name of a family.
2. a name added from any accident or quality.
pompey deserved the name great : alexander, of the same
cognomination, was generalissimo of greece. brown.
cognoscence. m. s. [cognosco, latin.] knowledge; the
state or act of knowing. dizz.
cog no'scible. adj. [cognosco, latin.] that may be known ;
being the object of knowledge.
the same that is said for the redundance of matters intelli-
gible and cognoscible in things natural, may be applied to things
artificial. hale's origin of mankind.
to coha'bit. v. m. [cohabito, latin.]
1. to dwell with another in the same place.
the philistines were worsted by the captivated ark, which
foraged their country more than a conquering army : they
were not able to cohabit with that holy thing. south.
2. to live together as husband and wife.
he knew her not to be his own wife, and yet had a design
to cohabit with her as such. fiddes's sermons.
coh a bitant. n.s.. [from cohabit...] an inhabitant of the
same place.
the oppressed indians protest against that heaven where
the spaniards are to be their cohabitants. decay of picty.
co habitation. m. s. [from cohabit.] -
1. the aet or state of inhabiting the same place with another.
2. the state of living together as married persons. -
which defect, though it could not evacuate a marriage after
cohabitation, and actual consumination, yet it was enough to
make void a contract. bacon’s honry vii.
monsieur brumars, at one hundred and two years, died for
love of his wise, who was ninety-two at her death, after
seventy years cohabitation. tatler.
colie's r. m. s. [coheres, lat..] one of several among whom
an inheritance is divided.
married persons, and widows and virgins, are all coheirs in
the inheritance of jesus, if they live within the laws of their
estate. taylor's holy living.
coheir ess. n. s. [from coheir.] a woman who has an equal
share of an inheritance with other women.
to cohe’re. v. n. [cohaereo, latin.]
1. to stick together; to hold fast one to another, as parts of
the same mass.
two pieces of marble, having their surface exactly plain,
polite, and applied to each other in such a manner as to inter-
cept the air, do cohere firmly together as one. i?’,odward.
we find that the force, whereby bodies cohere, is very much
greater when they come to immediate conta&amp;t, than when
they are at ever so small a finite distance. cheyne's phil. prin.
none want a place for all their center found,
hung to the goddess, and coher'd around;
not closer, orb in orb conglob'd, are seen
the buzzing bees about their dusky queen. pope's dunciad.
2. to be well connected; to follow regularly in the order of
discourse. -
3. to suit; to fit ; to be fitted to.
had time coher'd with place, or place with wishing, shaks.
4. to agree.
to: ! n. s. [cohaerentia, latin.]
1. that state of bodies in which their parts are joined toge-
ther, from what cause soever it proceeds, so that they resist
divulsion and separation; nor can be separated by the same
force by which they might be simply moved, or being only
laid upon one another, might be parted again. &amp;#incy.
the pressure of the air will not explain, nor can be a cause
of the coherence of the particles of air themselves. lotke.
matter is either fluid or solid; words that may comprehend
the middle degrees between extreme fixedness and coherency,
and the most rapid intestine motion. bentley.
2. connection ; dependency; the relation of parts or things one
to another.
it shall be no trouble to find each controversy's resting
place, and the coherence it hath with things, either on which
it dependeth, or which depend on it. hooker, preface.
why between sermons and faith should there be ordinarily
that coherence, which causes have with their usual effects?
hooker.
3. the texture of a discourse, by which one part follows another
regularly and naturally.
4. consistency in reasoning, or relating, so that one part of the
discourse does not destroy or contradict the rest.
coherence of discourse, and a direct tendency of all the parts
of it to the argument in hand, are most eminently to be found
in him. locke's preface to st. paul's epistles.
cohe’rent. adj. [coharrens, latin.]
1. sticking together, so as to resist separation.
by coagulating and diluting, that is, making their parts
more or less coherent. arbuthnot on aliments,
where all must full, or not coherent be ;
and all that rises, rise in due degree. pope's essay on man.
2. connected; united.
the mind proceeds from the knowledge it stands possessed
of already, to what which lies next and is coherent to it, and
so on to what it aims at. locke.
3. suitable to something else; regularly adapted.
instruct my daughter,
that time and place, with this deceit so lawful,
may prove coherent. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
4. consistent; not contradictory to itself.
a coherent thinker, and a strict reasoner, is not to be made
at once by a set of rules. //atts's logick.
coh ession. m. s. [from cohere.]
1. the act of sticking together.
hard particles, heaped together, touch in a few points, and
must be separable by less force than breaks a solid particle,
whose parts touch in all the space between them, without any
pores or interstices to weaken their cohsion. nowton's opt.
solids and fluids differ in the degree of cohesion, which,
being increased, turns a fluid into a solid. arbuth. on aiments.
2. the state of union or inseparability.
what cause of their cohesion can you find
what props support, what chains the fabrick bind? bla, am.
3. connection ; dependence.
in their tender years, ideas that have no natural cohesion,
come to be united in their heads. locke.
cofie's iv e. adj. [from cohere.] that has the power of slick-
ing to another, and of resisting separation.
coh e's i v en ess. m. s. [from cohesive.] the quality of being
cohesive; the quality of resisting separation.
to co b 1 bit. v. a. [cchibco, lat..] to retirain ; to hinder. dic.
to cothobate. v. a. to pour the distilled liquor upon
the remaining matter, and distil it again. ,
the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 416</div><p class="text">c o i
c o i
the juices of an animal body are, as it were, cohebated,
being excreted and admitted again into the blood with the
fresh aliment. arbuthnot on aliments.
coho ba’rios. m. s. [from cohobate.] a returning any distilled
liquor again upon what it was drawn from, or upon fresh in-
gredients of the same kind, to have it the more impregnated
with their virtues. &amp;uincy.
c hobation is the pouring the liquor distilled from any thing
back upon the remaining matter, and distilling it again. locke.
this oil, dulcified by cohobation with an aromatized spirit,
is of use to restore the digestive faculty. grew's musæum.
co. hort. n.f. [cohors, latin.]
1. a troop of soldiers in the roman armies, containing about
five hundred foot.
the romans levied as many cohorts, companies, and en-
signs from hence as from any of their provinces. camden.
2. [in poetical language.] a body of warriours.
- th' arch-angelic pow'r prepar'd
for swift descent; with him the cohort bright
of watchful cherubim. milton's paradise loft.
here churchill, not so prompt
to vaunt as fight, his hardy cohorts join'd
with eugene. philips's blenheim.
cohort ation. n f. [cohortatio, latin.] encouragement by
words; incitement. i)i&amp;#.
cqif. m. s...[coffe, french, from cofa, for cucufa, low
latin.] the head-dress; a lady's cap; the serjeant's
cap.
the judges of the four circuits in wales, although they
are not of the first magnitude, nor need be of the degree of
the coif, yet are they confiderable. bacon's advice to williers.
no less a man than a brother of the coif began his suit, be-
fore he had been a twelvemonth at the temple. addis. speci.
instead of home-spun coif; were seen,
good pinners edg’d with colbertine. swift.
coife d. adj. [from coif.] wearing a coif.
co. 1 ffure. m. s. [coeffire, french..] head-dress.
i am pleasid with the coff, now in fashion, and think it
shews the good sense of the valuable part of the sex. addison.
coign e. n.s. [an irish term, as it seems.]
fitz thomas of desmond began that extortion of coigne
and livery, and pay; that is, he and his army took horse-
meat and man's meat, and money, at pleasure. davies on irel.
coign.e. m. s. [french.]
1. a corner.
no jutting frieze,
buttrice, nor coigne of vantage, but this bird
hath made his pendant bed. shakespeare's macbeth.
see you yond coin o' th' capitol, yond'corner stone? shakesp.
2. a wooden wedge used by printers.
to coil. v. a. [cueilir, french..] to gather into a narrow
compass; as to coil a rope, to wind it in a ring.
the lurking particles of air so expanding themselves, must
necessarily plump out the fides of the bladder, and so keep
them turgid, until the pressure of the air, that at first coiled
them, be re-admitted to do the same thing again. boyle.
coil. m. s. skalleren, germ.]
1. tumult; turmoil; bustle; stir; hurry; confusion.
who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
would not infect his reason 2 shakesp. tempest.
you, mistress, all this coil is 'long of you. shakespeare.
in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
when we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
must give us pause. shakespeare's hamlet.
2. a rope wound into a ring.
coin. n.f. [coigne, french, j a corner; any thing standing out
angularly; a square brick cut diagonally ; called often quain,
or quint.
coin. n.f. [by some imagined to come from cuneus, a wedge,
because metal is cut in wedges to be coined.]
1. money stamped with a legal impression.
he gave dametas a good sum of gold in ready coin, which
menalcas had bequeathed. sidney.
- you have made
your holy hat be stamp'd on the king's coin. shak. h. viii.
i cannot tell how the poets will succeed in the explication
of coins, to which they are generally very great strangers. addis.
she now contracts her vast design,
and all her triumphs shrink into a coin. pope.
2, payment of any kind.
the loss of present advantage to flesh and blood, is repaid
in a nobler coin. hammond's fundamentals.
‘to coin. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to mint or stamp metals for money.
they cannot touch me for coining. i am the king. shakesp.
2. to make or invent.
my lungs
coin words’till their decay, against those measles,
which we disdain should tetter us. shakesp. coriolarus.
3. to make or forge any thing, in an ill sense.
never coin a formal lye on't,
to make the knight o'ercome the giant. hudibra,
those motives induced virgil to coin his fable. dryan.
some tale, some new pretence, he daily coin'd,
to sooth his sister, and delude her mind. dryd wirz,
a term is coined to make the conveyance easy. 4tterbury,
co'inac e. m. s. [from coin.] f
1. the art or practice of coining money. -
the care of the coinage was committed to the inferior ma-
gistrates; and i don't find that they had a publick trial as
we solemnly practise in this country. arbuthnot,
2. coin ; money; stamped and legitimated metal.
this is conceived to be a coinage of some jews, in deri.
sion of christians, who first began that portrait. brown.
moor was forced to leave off coining, by the great crowds
of people continually offering to return his coinage upon
him. swift.
3. the charges of coining money. -
4. new production; invention.
unnecessary coinage, as well as unnecessary revival of words,
runs into affectation ; a fault to be avoided on either hand.
dryden's juv. dad.
5. forgery; invention.
this is the very coinage of your brain;
this bodiless creation ecstacy
is very cunning in.
to coinci’de. v. n. [coincido, latin.]
1. to fall upon the same point; to meet in the same point.
lf the equator and ecliptick had coincided, it would have
rendered the annual revolution of the earth useless. cheyne.
2. to concur; to be consistent with,
the rules of right judgment, and of good ratiocination,
often coincide with each other. //atts's logick.
col'nciden ce. m. s. [from coincide.]
1. the state of several bodies, or lines, falling upon the same
point.
an universal equilibrium, arising from the coincidence of in-
finite centers, can never be naturally acquired. bentles.
2. concurrence; consistency; tendency of many things to the
same end; occurrence of many things at the same time.
the very concurrence and coincidence of so many evidences
that contribute to the proof, carries a great weight. hall,
3. it is followed by with.
the coincidence of the planes of this rotation with one
another, and with the plane of the ecliptick, is very near the
truth. cheyne's phil. prin,
col'ncip e.n.t. adj. [from coincide.]
1. falling upon the same point.
these circles i viewed through a prism; and as i went from
them, they came nearer and nearer together, and at length
became coincident. newt. up!,
2. concurrent ; consistent; equivalent: followed by with,
christianity teaches nothing but what is perfectly suitable
to and coincident with the ruling principles of a virtuous and
well inclined man. south.
these words of our apostle are exactly coincident with that
controverted passage in his discourse to the athenians. bently.
col nd1c a“rio n. m. s. [from con and indico, latin.j many
symptoms betokening the same cause.
co. in e r. n. / [from coin.]
1. a maker of money; a minter; a stamper of coin.
my father was i know not where
when i was stampt: some coiner with his tools
made me a counterfeit. shakespeare's cymboline,
it is easy to find designs that never entered into the thoughts
of the sculptor or the coiner. addison on model.
there are only two patents referred to, both less advan-
tageous to the coiner than this of wood. swift.
2. a counterfeiter of the king's stamp; a maker of base money.
3. an inventor. *
dionysius, a greek coiner of etymologies, is commended
by athenaeus. camden's remains.
to cojo'1n. v. n. [conjungo, lat j to join with another in
the same office.
thou may’st cojoin with something, and thou dost...
and that beyond commission. shakesp. twelfth nith,
co'istril. n.s. a coward ; a runaway: corrupted from forth
a mean or degenerate hawk.
he's a coward and a coisoril, that will not drink to my
niece. shakespeare's twelfth night,
shakespeare's hamla.
they never put in practice a thing so necessary, as coined coit. m. s. skate, a die, dutch.] a thing thrown at a certain
money is. peacham of antiquities. mark. see qyout. -- -
tenants cannot coin rent just at quarter-day, but must ga- the time they wear out at coits, kayles, or the like idle
ther it by degrees, locke. exercises. carew's survey of cornwall.
can we be sure that this medal was really coined by an arti- coition. on. s. scoitio, latin.]
ficer, or is but a product of the soil from whence it was 1. copulation; the act of generation.
taken bentley. i cannot but admire that philosophers should imagine frog;
7 tu
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 417</div><p class="text">c o l
to fall from the clouds, considering how openly they act their
cition, produce spawn, tadpoles and frogs. ray on creation.
he is not made productive of his kind, but by coition with
a female. grew's cosmol.
2. the act by which two bodies come together.
by gilbertus this motion is termed coition, not made by any
faculty attractive of one, but a syndrome and concourse of
cach. brown's vulgar errours.
coke. n.s. [perhaps from coquo, skinner.]. fewel made by
burning pit-coal under earth, and quenching the cinders; as
charcoal is made with wood. it is frequently used in drying
malt.
cooland er. m. s. scolo, to strain, lat.] a fieve either of hair,
twigs or metal, through which a mixture to be separated is
poured, and which retains the thicker parts; a strainer.
- take a thick woven osier colander,
through which the pressed wines are strained clear. may.
all the viscera of the body are but as so many colanders to
separate several juices from the blood. ray on the creation.
the brains from nose and mouth, and either ear,
came issuing forth, as through a colander
the curdled milk. dryden.
cola’tion. m. s. [from colo, lat.] the art of filtering or
straining. -
cool arure. n. s. [from colo, latin.]
1. the act of straining ; filtration.
2. the matter strained.
coolbertine. m. s. a kind of lace worn by women.
go, hang out an old frisoneer gorget, with a yard of yel-
low collertine again. congreve's way of the world.
diff'rence rose between
mechlin, the queen of lace, and colbertine.
coolcot h.a.r. m. s. a term in chymistry.
colcothar is the dry substance which remains after distilla-
tion, but commonly the caput mortuum of vitriol. quincy.
colcothar, or vitriol burnt, though unto a redness, contain-
ing the fixed salt, will make good ink. brown.
cold. adj. [colo, saxon ; kalt, german.]
1. not hot; not warm ; gelid; wanting warmth; being with-
out heat.
the diet in the state of manhood ought to be solid; and
their chief drink water cold, because in such a state it has its
own natural spirit. arbuthnot on aliments.
the aggregated soil
death, with his mace petrifick, cold, and dry,
as with a trident, smote.
2. causing sense of cold.
bids us seek
some better shroud, some better warmth, to cherish
our limbs benuinm’d, ere this diurnal star
leave cold the night, how we his gather'd beams
reflected, may with matter sere foment.
3. chill; shivering; having sense of cold.
o noble english, that could entertain,
with half their force, the full power of france;
and let another half stand laughing by, ,
. . . all out of work, and cola for action. shakes. henry v.
4. having cold qualities; not volatile ; not acrid,
cold plants have a quicker perception of the heat of the
fun than the hot herbs; as a cold hand will sooner find a little
waraith than an hot. bacon's natural hisłory.
5. indifference ; frigid, wanting passion ; wanting zeal; with-
out concern; unactive; unconcerned; wanting ardour.
there sprung up one kind of men, with whose zeal and
forwardness the rest being compared, were thought to be mar-
wellous cold and dull. hooker's preface.
infinite shall be made cold in religion, by your example,
that never were hurt by reading books. ascham.
temp'rately proceed to what you would
thus violently redress. sir, these cold ways,
that seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous. shakesp.
new dated letters these,
their cold intent, tenour and substance thus;
here doth he wish his person, and his power,
the which he could not levy. shakesp. henry iv.
we should not, when the blood was cold, have threatned
our prisoners with the sword. shakespeare's cymbeline.
to see a world in flames, and an host of angels in the
clouds, one must be much of a stoick to be a cold and uncon-
cerned spectator. burnet's preface to the theory of the earth.
no drum or trumpet needs
t” inspire the coward, or to warm the cold,
2%ung.
milton.
milton.
his voice, his sole appearance, makes them bold. dryden.
o, thou hast touch'd me with thy sacred theme,
and my cold heart is kindled at thy flame. rowe.
a man must be of a very cold or degenerate temper, whose
heart doth not burn within him in the midst of praise and ado-
ration. addison's freeholder.
6. unaffecting; unable to move the passions.
what a deal of cold business doth a man mispend the better
part of life in in scattering compliments, tendering visits,
o feasts and plays. * ben. johnson.
ol. 1.
the rabble are pleased at the first entry of a disguise; but
the jest grows cold even with them too, when it comes on in
a second scene. addison on italy.
7. reserved ; coy; not affectionate; not cordial; not friendly.
let his knights have colder looks
among you. shakespeare's king lear.
the commissioners grew more reserved and colder towards
each other. clarendon.
8. chaste; not heated by vitious appetite.
ou may
convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,
and yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink:
we've willing dames enough. shakespeare's macbeth.
9. not welcome not received with kindness or warmth of
affection.
my master's suit will be but cold,
since she respects my mistress' love. sh. two gent. of perona.
10. not hasty; not violent.
11. not affecting the scent strongly.
she made it good
at the hedge corner, in the coldest fault.
12. not having the scent strongly affected.
smell this business with a sense as cold
as is a dead man's nose. shakespeare's winter's tale.
cold. n.s.. [from the adjective.] -
1. the cause of the sensation of cold; the privation of heat;
the frigorifick power.
fair lined slippers for the cold. shakespeare.
heat and cold are nature's two hands, whereby she chiefly
worketh: and heat we have in readiness, in respect of the fire;
but for cold we must stay ’till it cometh, or seek it in deep
caves, or high mountains; and when all is done, we cannot
obtain it in any great degree. bacon's natural history.
shakespeare.
the sun
had first his precept so to move, so shine,
as might affect the earth with cold and heat
scarce tolerable, and from the north to call
decrepit winter, from the south to bring
solstitial summer's heat. milton.
2. the sensation of cold; coldness; chilness.
when she saw her lord prepar'd to part,
a deadly cold ran shiv'ring to her heart. dryden's fables,
3. a disease caused by cold; the obstruction of perspiration.
what disease hast thou ?
a whorson cold, fir; a cough.
let no ungentle cold destroy
all taste we have of heav'nly joy. roscommon.
those rains, so covering the earth, might providentially
contribute to the disruption of it, by stopping all the pores,
and all evaporation, which would make the vapours within
struggle violently, as we get a fever by a cold. burnet.
co'ldly. adv. [from cold.] -
i. without heat. *
2. without concern ; indifferently ; negligently ; without
warmth of temper or expression.
what england says, say briefly, gentle lord;
we coldly pause for thee. shakespeare's king john.
swift seem'd to wonder what he meant,
nor would believe my lord had sent;
so never offer'd once to stir,
but coldly said, your servant, fir.
cool dness. n.s.. [from cold.]
1. want of heat; power of causing the sensation of cold.
he relates the excessive coldness of the water they met with
in summer in that icy region, where they were forced to
winter. boyle's experiments.
such was the discord, which did first disperse
form, order, beauty through the universe;
while driness moisture, coldness heat resists,
all that we have, and that we are subsists. denham.
2. unconcern; frigidity of temper; want of zeal; negligence;
disregard. .
divisions of religion are not only the farthest spread, be-
cause in religion all men presume themselves interested; but
they are also, for the most part, hotlier prosecuted: for as
much as coldness, which, in other contentions, may be thought
to proceed from moderation, is not in these so favourably
construed. hooker's dedicat.
if upon reading admired passages in authors, he finds a cold-
nes, and indifference in his thoughts, he ought to conclude,
that he himself wants the faculty of discovering them. add.
it betrayed itself in a sort of indifference and carelessness in
all her actions, and coldness to her best friends. arbuthnot.
3. coyness; want of kindness; want of passion.
unhappy youth ! how will thy coldnes; raise
tempests and storms in his afflicted bosom.
let ev'ry tongue its various censures chuse,
absolve with coldness, or with spite accuse.
4. cbastity; exemption from vehement desire.
the silver stream her virgin coldness keeps,
for ever murmurs, and for ever weeps.
pope's jwindsor fores?.
f is: co
shakespeare's henry iv.
swift.
addis. cato.
prior.
- 4 u
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 418</div><p class="text">c o l
c o l
cole. m. s. [cap!, saxon.] a general name for all sorts of
cabbage.
cool ested. n. s. [from cale and seed.] cabbage seed. ...
where land is rank, it is not good to sow wheat after a
fallow; but colofeed or barley, and then wheat. amortimer.
cole worr. m. f. [cappyrt, sax.] a species of cabbage.
the decoction of caleworts is also commended to bathe
thcm. wiseman of an erysipelas.
she took the coleworts, which her husband got
from his own ground (a small well-water'd spot);
she strip'd the stalks of all their leaves; the best
she cull'd, and then with handy care she dress'd. dryden.
how turnips hide their swelling heads below,
and how the closing coleworts upwards grow. gay.
cool ic k. m. s. scalicus, latin.]
it firictly is a disorder of the colon; but loosely, any disor-
der of the stomach or bowels that is attended with pain.
there are four sorts: 1. a bilious colick, which proceeds from
an abundance of acrimony or choler irritating the bowels, so
as to occasion continual gripes, and generally with a looseness;
and this is best managed with lenitives and emoliients. 2. a
flatulent czlick, which is pain in the bowels from flatus’s and
wind, which distend them into unequal and unnatural capaci-
ties; and this is managed with carminatives and moderate
openers. 3. an hysterical click, which arises from disorders
of the womb, and is communicated by consent of parts to
the bowels; and is to be treated with the ordinary hystericks.
4. a nervous colick, which is from convulsive spasms and con-
tortions of the guts themselves, from some disorders of the
spirits, or nervous fluid, in their component fibres; whereby
their capacities are in many places streightcried, and sometimes
so as to occasion obstinate obstructions: this is best remedied
by brisk catharticks, joined with opiates and emollient dilu-
ters. there is also a species of this disłemper which is com-
monly called the stone click, by consent of parts, from the
irritation of the stone or gravel in the bladder or kidneys;
and this is most commonly to be treated by nephriticks and
oily diurcticks, and is greatly assisted with the carminative
turpentine clysters. quircy.
colicks of infants proceed from acidity, and the air in the
aliment expanding itself, while the aliment ferments. arbuth.
co'lick. adj. a siecting the bowels. -
intestine flone, and ulcer, calick pangs. . a silion.
to co lla(p's e. v. n. [collabor, collapsus, latin.] to fall to-
gether; to close so as that one side touches the other.
in consumptions and atrophy the liquids are exhausted, and
the sides of the canals collapse; therefore the attrition is in-
creased, and consequently the heat. a buthnot on diet.
coll a psion. m. s. [from collapse.] -
1. the act of closing or collapsing.
2. the state of vessels closed.
co'llar. m. s. [collare, latin.]
1. a ring of metal put round the neck.
that's nothing, fīys the dog, but the fretting of my collar:
nay, says the wolf, if there be a collar in the case, i know
better things than to sell my liberty. l'iyirange.
- ten brace and more of greyhounds, - -
with golden muzzles all their mouths were bound,
and collars of the same their neck surround. dryden's fab.
2. the part of the harness that is fastened about the horse's neck.
- her waggon-spokes made of long spinners legs,
the traces of the smallest spider's web,
the collars of the moonshine's watry beams.
3. the part of the dress that surrounds the neck.
4. to slip the colla r. to get free ; to escape; to disentangle
himself from any engagement or difficulty. o
when as the ape him heard so much to talk
of labour, that did from his liking baulk,
he would have slipt the collar handsomely. hubberd's tale.
5. a co lar of brawn, is the quantity bound up in one
arcel. • . . .
co-rose. m. s. [from collar and bone..] the clavicle; the
bones on each side of the neck. -
a page riding behind the coach, fell down, bruised his face,
and broke his right collarhone. //istman's surgery.
to coll ar. v. a. [from the noun.] .
1. to seize by the collar; to take by the throat.
2. to col lar beef, or other meat; to roll it up, and bind it
hard and close with a string or collar.
to colla’s e. v. a. [confero collatum, latin.]
1. to compare one thing of the same kind with another.
knowledge will be ever a wandering and indigested thing,
if it be but a commixture of a few notions that are at hand
and occur, and not excited from a sufficient number of instances,
and those well collated. bacon's natural hisory.
they could not relinquish their judaism, and embrace
christianity, without considering, weighing, and collating both
religions. - south.
2. to collate books; to examine if nothing be wanting.
. to be show, to confer. w
the significance of the sacrament disposes the spirit of the
shakespeare.
receiver to admit the grace of the spirit of god, there con-
signed, exhibited and collated. taylor's com.
4. with to. to place in an ecclesiastical benefice.
he thrust out the invader, and collated amsdorf to the bene.
fice: luther performed the consecration. atterbury,
if a patron shall neglect to present unto a benefice, void
above six months, the bishop may collate thereunto. aylift.
collater al. adj. [con and latus, latin.]
1. side to side. -
in his bright radiance and collateral light
muft i be comforted, not in his sphere. shakespeare,
thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose,
of high collateral glory. milton's paradise loft,
2. running parallel.
3. diffused on either fide.
but man by number is to manifest
his fingle imperfeotion; and beget
like of his like, his image multiply'd ;
in unity defe&amp;tive, which requires
collateral love, and dearest amity. , milton's parads: loft.
4. in genealogy, those that stand in equal relation to some com.
mon ancestor.
the estate and inheritance of a person dying intestate, is,
by right of devolution, according to the civil law, given to
such as are allied to him ex latere, commonly stiled collateral,
if there be no ascendants or descendants surviving at the time
of his death. ayliffe's parergon,
5. not direct; not immediate.
they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me,
if by direct or by collateral hand
they find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give -
- to you in satisfaction. shakespeare.
6. concurrent. - -
all the force of the motive lies within itself: it receives no
collateral strength from external confiderations. atterbury.
co. later ally. adv. [from collateral.]
1. side by side.
these pullies may be multiplied according to fundry dif.
ferent situations, not only when they are subordinate, but also
when they are placed collaterally. //ilkins.
2. indirectly. o . . . .
by afforting the scripture to be the canon of our faith, i
have created two enemies: the papists more direetly, because
they have kept the scripture from us; and the fanaticks more
co laterally, because they have assumed what amounts to an
infallibility in the private spirit. dryden.
3. in collateral relation.
collation. m. s. scollatio, latin.]
1. the act of conferring or bestowing; gift.
neither are we to give thanks alone for the first collation of
these benefits, but also for their preservation. ray on the creat.
2. comparison of one copy, or one thing of the same kind, with
another.
in the disquisition of truth, a ready fancy is of great use;
provided that collation doth its office. grew's cosmol.
i return you your milton, which, upon collation, i find to
be revised and augmented in several places. pope.
3. in law.
collation is the bestowing of a benefice, by the bishop that
hath it in his own gift or patronage; and differs from institu-
tion in this, that institution into a benefice is performed by
the bishop at the presentation of another who is patron, or
hath the patron's right for the time. - cowel.
bishops should be placed by collation of the king under his
letters patent, without any precedent eleetion or confirmation
ensuing. hayward.
4. a repast; a treat less than a feast. -
coll ati'tious. adj. [collatitius, lat.] done by the contri-
bution of many. - die?.
collator. n.s.. [from collate.]
1. one that compares copies, or manuscripts.
to read the titles they give an editor, or collator of a manu-
script, you would take him for the glory of letters. adaison.
2. one who presents to an ecclesiastical benefice.
a mandatory cannot interrupt an ordinary collator, 'till a
month is expired from the day of presentation. ayliffe.
to col. laud. v. a. [collaudo, lat..] to join in praising. die?.
cot,league. m. s. [collega, lat.] a partner in office or
employment. anciently accented on the last syllable.
easy it might be seen that i intend -
mercy colleague with justice, sending thee. milton.
the regents, upon demise of the crown, would keep the
peace without colleagues. swift.
to colle ague. v. a. [from the noun..] to unite with.
colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
he hath not fail'd to pester us with message,
importing the surrender of those lands. shakesp. hamlet.
7% collect. v. a. [colligo collegium, latin.] *
1. to gather together ; to bring into one place. *
'i is memory alone that enriches the mind, by preserving
what our labour and industry daily collect. £7 atts.
c.
2. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 419</div><p class="text">c o l
c o l
o
.
o
:
* - - * - .*
2. to draw many units, or numbers, into one sum. -
let a man collect into one sum as great a number as he
pleases, this multitude, how great sever, lesions not one jot
the power of adding to it. locke.
3. to gain by observation, - - -
the reverent care i bear unto my lord,
made me colle: these dangers in the duke. shac. hen. vi.
4. to infer as a consequence; to gather from premises.
how great the force of erroneous persuasion is, we may
collea from our saviour's premonition to his disciples. dec. pict.
they conclude they can have no idea of infinite space, be-
cause they can have no idea of infinite matter ; which conse-
quence, i conceive, is very ill collected. looke.
5. to collect himself. to recover from surprise ; to gain
command over his thoughts; to assemble his sentiments.
be collected;
no more amazement.
affrighted much,
i did in time colleci myself, and thought
this was so, and no slumber. shakoff. iowter's tale.
prosperity unexpected often maketh men careless and re-
miss; whereas they who receive a wound, become more
11 - hayward.
shakespeare's tons off.
vigilant and colle&amp;fed.
as when of old some orator renown'd
in athens or free rome, where eloquence
flourish'd, since mute, to some great cause address'd,
stood in himself colle&amp;ed, while each part,
motion, each act won audience, ere the tongue
sometimes in height began, as no dela
of preface breaking through his zeal of right. milton.
collect. m. s. [colle&amp;ia, low lat.] a short comprehensive
prayer, used at the sacrament; any short prayer.
then let your devotion be humbly to say over proper
colles?s. taylor's guide to devotion.
collect a(neous. adj. [collecianeus, lat.] gathered up to-
gether; colle&amp;ted; notes compiled from various books. -
collectedly, adv. [from collected.] gathered in one view at
once. -
the whole evolution of ages from everlasting to everlast-
ing is so collectedly, and presentifickly represented to god. more.
collectible. adj. [from collec/.] that which may be ga-
thered from the premises by just consequence.
whether thereby be meant euphrates, is not colleci!!e from
the following words. brown's soular en rours.
collection. m. s. [from colled?..]
1. the aet of gathering together.
2. an assemblage ; the things gathered.
no perjured knight desires to quit thy arms,
fairest collection of thy sex's charms. prizr.
the gallery is hung with a collection of pictures. addison.
3. the aet of deducing consequences; ratiocination; discourse.
this sense is now scarce in use.
if once we descend unto probable collec7ions, we are then in
the territory where free and arbitrary determinations, the ter.
ritory where human laws take place. hooker.
thou shalt not peep thro’ lettices of eyes,
nor hear thro' labyrinths of ears, nor learn
by circuit or colletions to discern. donne.
4. a corollary ; a conse&amp;lary deduced from premises; de-
duction; consequence. * - - - -
it should be a weak colle&amp;ion, if whereas we say, that when
christ had overcome the sharpness of death, he then opened
the kingdom of heaven to all believers; a thing in such sort
affirmed with circumstances, were taken as insinuating an op-
posite denial before that circumstance be accomplished. hooker.
this label ” - -
is so from sense in hardness, that i can
make no colle&amp;tion of it. shak's care’s cymbeline.
when she, from sundry arts, one skill doth draw ;
gath'ring from divers fights, one act of war; -
from many cases like, one rule of law :
these her collections, not the senses are. davies.
collect i"rious. adj. [collecitius, lat.] gathered up.
collective. adj. [from collect, collectif, french, l
1. gathered into one mass; aggregated; accumulative.
a body collective, it containeth a huge multitude. hooker.
the three forms of government differ only by the civil ad-
ministration being in the hands of one or two, called kings,
in a senate called the nobles, or in the poople collecive or re-
presentative, who may be called the commons. strift.
the difference between a compound and a collecive idea
is, that a compound idea unites things of a different kind ;
but a colle&amp;sive idea, things of the same. //atts's logick.
2. employed in deducing consequences; argumentative.
antiquity left many falsities, controulable not only by criti-
cal and collestive reason, but contrary observations. brown.
3. [in grammar.] a collective noun is a word which expresses
a multitude, though itself be singular; as a company; an
aroly. -
collectively. adv. [from coile?ive..] in a general mass ; in
a body not singly ; not * by individuals; in the ag-
gregate; accumulatively; taken together; in a state of coo:-
bination or union.
although we cannot be free from all fin colorocły, in such
fort that no part thereof shall be found in us, yet distributive-
ly all great actual offences, as they offer themselves one by one,
both may and ought to be by all means avoided. hooker.
singly and apart many of them are subject to exception, yet
cale fively they make up a good moral evidence. ilale.
the other part of the water was condensed at the surface
of the earth, and sent forth call ovely into standing springs
and rivers. //oodward's natural history.
collector. n.s.. [color, latin.]
1. a gatherer; he that collects scattered things together.
2. a compiler, one that gathers scattered pieces into one book.
the grandfather might be the first collector of them into a
body. hale's common law of england.
volumes, without the colle:or's own reflections. addison.
the best english historian, when his stile grows antiquated,
will be only considered as a tedious relator of facts, and per-
haps consulted to furnish materials for some future collegior.
- swift.
3. a tax-gatherer; a man employed in levying duties, or
tributes.
a great part of this treasure is now embezzled, lavished,
and feasted away by colle&amp;or;, and other officers. temple.
the commissions of the revenue are disposed of, and the
co'le?ars are appointed by the commissioners. swift.
colle gatary. m. s. [from con and legatum, a legacy, latin j
in the civil law, a person to whom is left a legacy in common
with one or more other persons. chambers.
co’llege. n s. [collegium, latin.]
i. o community; a number of persons living by some common
iul cs.
on barbed steeds they rode in proud array,
thick as the college of the bees in may.
2. a society of men set apart for iearning or religion.
. he is return'd with his opinions,
gathered from all the famous colleges
almost in christendom. shaoffeare's henry viii.
i would the college of the cardinals
would chuse him pope, and carry him to rome. shakesp.
this order or society is sometimes called solomon's house,
and sometimes the college of the six days work. bacon.
3. the house in which the collegians reside.
huldah the prophetess dwelt in jerusalem in the college. kings.
4. a college in foreign universities is a lecture read in publick.
col le"gia l. adj. [from college.] relating to a college; pos-
sessed by a college.
colt eogi an. m.j. [from college.] an inhabitant of a college;
a member of a college.
coll. e. giate. adj. [collegiatus, low latin.]
1. containing a college; instituted after the manner of a college.
i wish that yourselves did well consider how opposite cer-
tain of your positions are unto the state of collegiate societies,
whereon the two universities consist.” hooker, prof.
2. a collegiate church, was such as was built at a convenient
distance from the cathedral church, wherein a number of
presbyters were settled, and lived together in one congre-
gation. aliffe's parergon.
coll eogi ate, n.s.. [from college.] a member of a college;
a man bred in a college; an university man.
these are a kind of empiricks in poetry, who have got a
receipt to please; and no collegiate like them, for purging the
passions. rymer.
co'll et. m. s. [fr. from collum, lat. the neck.]
1. anciently something that went about the neck: sometimes
the neck.
2. that part of a ring in which the stone is set.
3. a term used by turners.
to colli'de. v. a. [collido, lat..] to strike against each
other; to beat, to dash, to knock together.
scintillations are not the accension of air upon collision,
but inflammable efluencies from the bodies colliaed. brown.
co'llier. m. s. [from coal.]
1. a digger of coals; one that works in the coal pits.
2. a coal-merchant ; a dealer in coals.
- i knew a nobleman a great grasier, a great timberman, a
great collier, and a great landman. bacon.
'3. a ship that carries coals.
co lliery. m. s. [from collier.]
1. the place where coals are dug.
2. the coal trade.
coolti flow er. n. s. ss of braska: ; from cap!. sax. cabbage,
and flower; properly cauliflower.] a species of cabbage.
collig aotion. m. s. scoligatio, lat..] a binding together.
these the midwife contriveth into a knot, whence that
tortuosity or nodosity, in the navel, occasioned by the coliga-
tion of vessels. brown's polgar errators.
coll. ima's ion. m. s. [from collimo, lat..] the act of airning
at a mark; aim. dia.
collin eation, n. s. [collineo, lat j the act of aiming.
colli-
dryden,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 420</div><p class="text">c o l
c o l
co'lliqu able, adj. [from colliquate.] easily dissolved; liable
to be melted,
the tender consistence renders it the more colliquable and
consumptive. harvey on consumptions.
colli'quament. n.s [from colliquate.] the substance to
which any thing is reduced by being melted.
co'lliqua nt. adj. [from colliquate.] that which has the
power of melting or dissolving.
to co'lliquate. v. a. [colliqueo, latin.] to melt; to
dissolve; to turn from solid to fluid.
the fire melted the glass, that made a great shew, after
what was colliquated had been removed from the fire. boyle.
the fat of the kidneys is apt to be coliquated through a
great heat from within, and an ardent colliquative fever.
harvey on consumptions.
to colliquate. v. n. to melt, to be dissolved.
ice will dissolve in fire, and colliquate in water or warm oils,
brown's vulgar errours.
coll:109 aotion. n s. [colliquatio, latin.]
1. the act of melting.
glass may be made by the bare colliquation of the salt and
earth remaining in the ashes of a burnt plant. boyle.
from them proceed rarefaction, colliquation, conco&amp;tion, ma-
turation, and most effects of nature. bacon's nat. history.
2. such a temperament or disposition of the animal fluids as pro-
ceeds from a lax compages, and wherein they flow off through
the secretory glands, faster than they ought. &amp;uincy.
any kind of universal diminution and colliquation of the
body. harvey on consumptions.
colli'qgative. adj. [from colliquate.] meiting; dissolvent.
a colliquative fever is such as is attended with a diarrhoea,
or sweats, from too lax a contexture of the fluids. &amp;uincy.
it is a consequent of a burning colliquative fever, whereby
the humours, fat, and flesh of the body are melted. harvey.
colliqu ef action. m. s. [calliquefucio, latin.] the act of
o together ; reduction to one mass by fluxion in the
ic,
after the incorporation of metals by simple colliquefaciion,
for the better discovering of the nature, and consents and dis-
sents of metals, it would be tried by incorporating of their
dissolutions. bacon's physical remarks.
colli's ios. n.s.. [from collisi, latin.]
1. the aet of striking two bodies together.
or by collision of two bodies grind,
the air attrite to fire. milton's paradis, lost.
the flint and the steel you may move apart as long as you
please; but it is the hitting and collision of them that must
make them strike fire. bentley.
2. the state of being struck together; a clash.
then from the clashes between popes and kings,
debate, like sparks from flint's collision, springs. denham.
the devil sometimes borrowed file from the altar to con-
sume the votaries; and by the mutual collision of well-meant
zeal, set even orthodox christians in a flame. decay of piety.
to co llccate. v. a. [collaco, latin.] to place ; to
station.
if you desire to superinduce any virtue upon a person, take
the creature in which that virtue is most eminent: of that
creature take the parts wherein that virtue is collocate. bacon.
collccation. m. s. scollocatio, latin.]
1. the act of placing ; disposition.
2. the state of being placed.
in the collocation of the spirits in bodies, the callocation is
equal or unequal ; and the spirits coacervate or diffused. bac.
col. locus tios. m. s. [collectitio, latin.] conference ; conver-
sation.
to col. loscue. v. n. [probably from colloquor, latin.] to
wheedle; to flatter; to please with kind words. a low
word.
co'llop. m. s. [it is derived by minshew from coal and op, a
rasher broiled upon the coals; a carbonade.]
i. a small slice of meat.
sweetbread and collaps were with skewers prick’d
about the sides. dryden's fables.
a cook perhaps has mighty things profess'd ;
then sent up but two dishes nicely drest:
what signifies scotch collaps to a feast:
2. a piece of any animal.
the lion is upon his death-bed: not an enemy that does
not apply for a collop of him. l’estrange.
3. in burlesque language, a child.
come, fir page,
look on me with your welkin eye, sweet villain,
most dear'st, my collop. shakespeare's winter's tale.
thou art a collop of my flesh,
and for thy fake i have shed many a tear. shakesp. hen. vi.
collo gui al, adj. [from colloquy..] whatever relates to com-
mon conversation.
colloquy. m. s. (colloquium, latin.] conference; conversa-
tion ; alternate discourse ; talk.
king's cookery.
4.
my earthly by his heav'nly over-power'd,
in that celestial colloquy sublime,
as with an object that excels the sense,
dazzled, and spent, sunk down. milton's parad; łoft.
in retirement make frequent colloquies, or short discours ags
between god and thy own soul. - to.
collow. n.s. [more properly tolly, from coal.]
collow is the word by which they denote black grime of
burnt coals, or wood. woodward on fijl,
collu’ct ancy. n.j. [collu'lor, lat.] a tendency to contest;
opposition of nature.
coliuct aotion, n.s. [collusiatio, lat.] contest; two,
contrariety; opposition ; spite.
the thermae, natural baths, or hot springs, do not owe
their heat to any colluciation or effervescence of the mineral;
in them. woodward's natural him,
to collut) e. v. n. [colludo, lat..] to conspire in a fraud:
to aci in concert ; to play into the hand of each other. o
collu'sion. n.s. [collusio, latin.]
callusion is, in our common law, a deceitful agreement or
compact between two or more, for the one part to bring an
action against the other to some evil purpose ; as to defraud a
third of his right. cowel,
by the ignorance of the merchants, or dishonesty of wea.
vers, or the collusion of both, the ware was bad, and the price
excessive. swift,
collu’sive. adj. [from collude..] . fraudulently concerted.
coll u's iv ely. adv. [from collusive..] in a manner fraudulently
concerted.
collu’sory. adj. [from collude, latin.] carrying on a fraud
by secret concert.
co'll y. m. s. [from coal.] the smut of coal.
suppose thou saw her dressed in some old hirsute attire, out
of fashion, coarse raiment, besmeared with soot, cally, per-
fumed with opopanax. burton an melanchoj,
to co'lly. v. a. to grime with coal; to smut with coal.
brief as the lightning in the collied night,
that, in a speen, unfolds both heav'n and earth;
and, ere a man hath pow'r to say behold,
the jaws of darkness do devour it up. shakespeare.
colly” rium. "#. [latin..] an ointment for the eyes.
co’lmar. m. s. [fr.] a sort of pear.
coologn earth. n.s. is a deep brown, very light bastard ochre,
which is no pure native fossil; but contains more vegetable
than mineral matter, and owes its origin to the remains of
wood long buried in the earth. hill on foji,
co lon. m. s. [xoov, a member.]
i. a point [:] used to mark a pause greater than that of a com-
ma, and less than that of a period. . its use is not very exactly
fixed, nor is it very necessary, being confounded by most
with the semicolon. it was used before punetuation was
refined, to mark almost any sense less than a period. to ap-
ply it properly, we should place it, perhaps, only where the
sense is continued without dependence of grammar or con-
struction; as, i love him, i despise him : i have long aftli,
trusi, but shall never forbear to succour him.
2. the greatest and widest of all the intestines, about eight
or nine hands breadth long. it begins where the ilium ends,
in the cavity of the os ilium on the right side ; from thence
ascending by the kidney, on the same side, it passes under the
concave side of the liver, to which it is sometimes tied, as
likewise to the gall-bladder, which tinges it yellow in that
place: then it runs under the bottom of the stomach to the
spleen in the left side, to which it is also knit : from thence it
turns down to the left kidney; and thence passing, in form of
an s, it terminates at the upper part of the os sacrum, in the
rectum. ... quin).
now, by your cruelty hard bound,
i strain my guts, my colon wound. swift,
the contents of the colon are of a sour, fetid, acid smell in
rabbits. flyer on the humours,
colonel. m. s. [of uncertain etymology. skinner ima-
gines it originally colonialis, the leader of a colony. minstow
deduces it from colonna, a pillar: as, patriae columen; extratus
columen. each is plausible.] the chief commander of a
regiment; a field officer of the highest rank, next to the go-
neral officers. it is now generally sounded with only two
distinet syllables, cal'nel. o
the chiefest help must be the care of the colonel, that bath
the government of all his garrison. spensor on ireland.
captain or colonel, or night in arms, -
whose chance on these defenceless doors may seize,
if deed of honour did thee ever please,
guard them, and him within protect from harms. milton.
colonelship. a. s. [from colonel.] the office or character of
colonel.
while he continued a subaltern, he complained against the
pride of colonels towards their officers; yet, in a few minutes
after he had received his commission for a regiment, he con-
felled that colone/hip was coming fast upon him. so
w
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 421</div><p class="text">c o l
:*i; :
**\,
:bioto
eois wo
the son.
hill of
hat of 1:
very ti.
†.
ituation
od. t.
ily who
lsilas go t
e log+
, it::::
:he ice.
; frco or
assor-
etos: -
ytz - or
for:
:::::::::
‘g to
across to
*
&amp;
acido.
itzer -
* * *
; : * *
…s 1
t, colonise. v. a. [from colony.] to plant with inhabi-
tants; to settle with new planters; to plant with colonies.
there was never an hand drawn, that did double the rest
ef the habitable world, before this; for so a man may truly
term it, if he shall put to account as well that that is, as that
which may be hereafter, by the farther occupation and colo-
nizing of those countries; and yet it cannot be affirmed, if
one speak ingenuously, that it was the propagation of the
christian faith that was the adamant of that discovery, entry,
and plantation; but gold and silver, and temporal profit and
glory; so that what was first in god's providence, was but
i̇econd in man's appetite and intention. bacon’s holy j/ar.
druina hath advantage by acquest of islands, which she
colonizeth and fortifieth daily. howel's pocal forg/l.
colonna'de. m. s. [from colonna, ital, a column.]
1. a peristyle of a circular figure, or a series of columns, dis-
posed in a circle, and insulated within side. builder's dic?.
here circling colonnades the ground inclose,
and here the marble statues breathe in rows. addison.
2. any series or range of pillars.
for you my colonnades extend their wings. pope.
colony. m. s. [colonia, latin.]
1. a body of people drawn from the mother-country to inhabit
some distant place.
to these new inhabitants and colonies he gave the same law
under which they were born and bred. spenser on ireland.
rooting out these two rebellious septs, he placed english
colonies in their rooms. davies on ireland.
osiris, or the bacchus of the ancients, is reported to have
civilized the indians, planting colonies and building cities.
arbuthnot on coins.
2. the country planted; a plantation.
the rising city, which from far you see,
is carthage; and a trojan colony. dryd. wirg.
colophony. n.s.. [from colophon, a city whence it came.]
rosin.
of venetian turpentine, slowly evaporating about a fourth
or fifth part, the remaining substance suffered to cool, would
afford me a coherent body, or a fine colophony. boyle.
turpentines and oils leave a colophony, upon a separation
of their thinner oil. floyer on the humours.
coloqui'nteda. n.s.. [colocynthis, lat. xoxaxvv81;..] the fruit
of a plant of the same name, brought from the levant, about
the bigness of a large orange, and often called bitter apple.
both the seed and pulp are intolerably bitter. it is a violent
purgative, of considerable use in medicine. chambers.
color ate. adj. [coloratus, lat.] coloured; died; marked
or stained with some colour.
had the tunicles and humours of the eye been colorate, many
rays from visible objects would have been stopt. ray.
color ation. m. s. [coloro, latin.]
1. the art or practice of colouring.
some bodies have a more departable nature than others, as
is evident in coloration; for a small quantity of saffron will
tinet more than a great quantity of brasil. bacon.
2. the state of being coloured.
amongst curiosities i shall place coloration, though some-
what better; for beauty in flowers is their preheminence.
bacon's natural history.
color1'fick. adj. [colorificus, latin.] . that which has the
power of producing dies, tints, colours or hues.
in this composition of white, the several rays do not suffer
any change in their colorific; qualities by acting upon one
another; but are only mixed, and by a mixture of their co-
lours produce white. newton's opticks.
colosse. un. s. [colossus, latin.] a statue of enormous
§s.} magnitude.
not to mention the walls and palace of babylon, the pyra-
mids of egypt, or colose of rhodes. temple.
there huge colosus rose, with trophies crown'd,
and runick characters were grav'd around. pope.
coloss e(an. adj. [colosseus, lat..] in form of a colossus ; of
the height and bigness of such a statue; giantlike.
co'lour. m. s. [color, latin.]
1. the appearance of bodies to the eye only ; hue; die.
it is a vulgar idea of the colours of solid bodies, when we
perceive them to be a red, or blue, or green tincture of the
surface; but a philosophical idea, when we consider the various
colours to be different sensations, excited in us by the refracted
rays of light, refle&amp;ted on our eyes in a different manner, ac-
cording to the different size, or shape, or situation of the par-
ticles of which surfaces are composed. //atts.
her hair shall be of what colour it please god. shakesp.
for though our eyes can naught but colours see,
yet colours give them not their pow'r of fight. davies.
the lights of colours are more refrangible one than an-
other in this order; red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo,
deep violet. newton's opt.
2. the freshness; or appearance of blood in the face.
my cheeks no longer did their colour boast. dryden.
a sudden horror seiz'd his giddy head,
and his ears trickled, and his colour fled. dryden,
vol. i.
3. the tint of the painter.
when each bold figure just begins to live,
the treach'rous colours the fair art betray,
and all the bright creation fades away. pope.
4. the representation of any thing superficially examined. *
their wisdom is only of this world, to put false colours
upon things, to call good evil, and evil good, against the
conviction of their own consciences. swift.
5. concealment; palliation; excuse; superficial cover.
it is no matter if i do halt; i have the wars for my colour,
and my pension shall seem the more reasonable.
shakespeare's henry iv.
their fin admitted no colour or excuse. king charles.
6. appearance; pretence; false shew.
under the colour of commending him,
i have access my own love to prefer. shakespeare.
merchants came to rhodes with a great ship laded with
corn, under the colour of the sale whereof they noted all that
was done in the city. knolles's hylory of the turks.
7. kind; species; chara&amp;ter.
boys and women are, for the most part, cattle of this co-
lour. shakespeare's as you like it.
8. in the plural, a standard; an ensign of war : they say the
colours of the foot, and standard of horse.
he at venice gave
his body to that pleasant country's earth,
and his pure soul unto his captain christ,
under whose colours he had fought so long. shak. rich. ii.
against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
i must advance the colours of my love,
and not retire. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
the banks were filled with companies, passing all along
the river under their colours, with trumpets sounding. knolles.
9. colours is used singularly by addison.
an author compares a ragged coin to a tattered colours.
- addison.
to colour. v. a. [coloro, latin.]
1. to mark with some hue, or die.
the rays, to speak properly, are not coloured: in them there
is nothing else than a certain power and disposition to stir up
a sensation of this or that colour. scwton's opt.
2. to palliate; to excuse; to dress in specious colours, or fair
appearances. -
i told him, that i would not favour or colour in any sort his
former folly. raleigh's essays.
he colours the falshood of æneas by an express command
from jupiter to forsake the queen. dryden's dedic. aen.
3. to make plausible.
we have scarce heard of an insurre&amp;tion that was not co-
loured with grievances of the highest kind, or countenanced
by one or more branches of the legislature. addis. freeholder.
4. to colour a stranger's goods, is when a freeman allows a
foreigner to enter goods at the customhouse in his name ; so
that the foreigner pays but single duty, when he ought to pay
double. - phillips.
to colour. v. n. to blush. a low word, only used in
conversation,
colour able. adj. [from colour.] specious; plausible. it is
now little used.
they have now a colourable pretence to withstand innova-
tions, having accepted of other laws and rules already. spenser.
they were glad to lay hold on so colourable a matter, and to
traduce him as an author of suspicious innovation. hooker.
had i sacrificed ecclesiastical government and revenues to
their covetousness and ambition, they would have found no
colourable necessity of an army. king charles.
we hope the mercy of god will consider us unto some
mineration of our offences; yet had not the sincerity of our
parents so colourable expectations. brown's vulgar errours.
co'lour ably. adv. [from colourable.] speciously; plausibly.
the process, howsoever colourably awarded, hath not hit
the very mark whereat it was dire&amp;ted. bacon.
coloured. participial adj. [from colour.] streaked; diver-
sified with variety of hues.
the coloured are coarser juiced, and therefore not so well,
and equally concocted. bacon's natural history.
colourisq. m. s. [from colour.] the part of the painter's
art that teaches to lay on his colours with propriety and beauty.
but as the slightest sketch if justly trac'd,
is by ill colouring but the more disgrac'd,
so by false learning is good sense defac’d. pope.
coolourist. m. s. [from colour.] a painter who excels in
giving the proper colours to his designs.
titian, paul veronese, van dyck, and the rest of the
good colourists, have come nearest to nature. dryd. dufresnoy.
colourless, adj. [from colour.] without colour; not distin-
guished by any hue ; transparent.
transparent substances, as glass, water and air, when made
very thin by being blown into bubbles, or otherways formed
into plates, exhibit various colours, according to their various
thinness; although, at a greater thickness, they appear very
clear and colourless. newton's opt.
4 x pellucid
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 422</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
pellucid colourlos; glass or water, by being beaten into a
powder or froth, do acquire a very intense whiteness. bentley.
colt. n.f. [ce, c, saxon 3
1. a young hot te: used commonly for the male offspring of a
horse, as foal for the female.
the col: hath about four years of growth, and so the fawn,
and so the calf. bacon's nat. hisłory.
like colts or unmanaged horses, we start at dead bones and
lifeless blocks. taylor’s holy living.
no sports, but what belong to war, they know ;
to break the stubborn cost, to bend the bow. dryd. æn.
2. a young foolish fellow.
ay, that's a colt, indeed; for he doth nothing but talk of
his horse. shakesp. merchant of penice.
to colt. v. n. [from the noun..] to frisk; to be licentious ;
to run at large without rule; to riot; to frolick.
as soon as they were out of fight by themselves, they shook
off their bridles, and began to colt anew more licentiously
than before. - speoser's state of ireland.
to colt. v. a. to befool.
- what a plague mean ye, to colt me thus? shak. hen. iv.
colts-foot. n. . [t/logo; from colt and foot j. it hath a
radiated flower, whose disk consists of many florets, but the
crown composed of many half florets: the embryoes are in-
cluded in a multifid flowercup, which turns to downy feeds
fixed in a bed.
colts-root h. m. s. [from cost and tooth j
1. an imperfect or superfluous tooth in young horses.
2. a love of youthful pleasure; a disposition to the practices of
youth.
well said, lord sands;
your cots-to this not cast yet —
- no, my lord; nor shall not, while i have a stump. shak.
co lte r. n. f. [custon, sax. culter, lat. j the sharp iron cf
a plough that cuts the ground perpendicularly to the share.
co lt is h. adj. [trom cost. j having the tricks of a colt ;
want on. -
coolu br in e. ad;. solubrious, latin.]
1. relating to a serpent.
2. cunning ; crafty
cool. u m bary. m. s. [columbai ium, lat..] a dovecot; a pigeon-
house.
the earth of colombaries or dovehouses, is much desired in
the artifice of saltpetre. brown's vulgar errours.
coolu mip in f. m. s. [colum:lina, latin j a plant with leaves
like the meadow rue. miller.
columbines are of several sorts and colours. they flower
in the end of may, when few other flowers shew. mortiner.
coolu mbin f. m. s. [columbinus, lat.] a kind of violet colour,
or changeable dove colour. dici.
co'lumn. n. s. [columna, latin.]
1. a round pillar.
some of the old greek columns, and altars were brought
from the ruins of apollo's temple at delos. peacham.
round broken columns clasping ivy twin'd. pope.
2. any body of certain dimensions pressing vertically upon its
base.
the whole weight of any column of the atmosphere, and
likewise the specifick gravity of its bases, are certainly known
by many experiments. bentley.
3. [in the military art.] the long file or row of troops, or of
baggage, of an army in its march. an army marches in one,
two, three, or more columns, according as the ground will
allow. -
4. [with printers j a column is half a page, when divided
into two cqual parts by a line pailing through the middle,
from the top to the bottom, as in this bock ; and, by seve-
ral parallel lines, pages are often divided into three or more
columns.
col u m n a r.
colums aria n.
white columnar spar, out of a stone-pit.
colu’res. m. s [couri, latin ; xococo.j
two great circles supposed to pass through the poles of the
world: one through the cquinoctial points aries and libra;
the other through the solstitial points, cancer and capricorn.
they are called the quinoctial and solititial colures, and divide
the ecliptick into four equal parts. the points where they
} adj. [from column.] formed in columns.
j/oodw. on fossils.
interfect the ecliptick are called the cardinal points. harris.
thrice the equinoctial line
he cir, led ; four times cross'd the car of night
from ole to pole, traversiog each colore. milton.
co’m a. m. s. (x0 oz.)
thargy.
co's. art. m. s. this word, which i have only met with in
one place, seems to fightly ; treaty ; article from con and mart,
or market.
a morbid disposition to sleep; a le-
by the same comart,
and carriage of the articles design'd, -
his fell to hamlet. shakespeare's hamlet.
cjma 1 e. m. s. [con and mate.] companion,
millor.
my comates and brothers in exile. shakes. a you like it.
comato's e. adj. [from coma.j lethargick; sleepy to a disease.
our best castor is from russia ; the great and principal
use whereof, is in hysterical and comatose cases. grew.
comb in the end, and comp in the beginning of names, seem
to be derived from the british kum, which signifies a low
situation. - gilson's camden,
comb, in cornish, signifies a valley, and had the same mean-
ing anciently in the french tongue.
comb. m. s. scamb, saxon; kam, dutch..]
1. an instrument to separate and adjust the hair.
by fair ligea's golden comb,
where with she fits on diamond rocks, o
sleeking her soft alluring locks.
i made an instrument in fashion of a comb, whose teeth,
being in number sixteen, were about an inch and a half broad,
and the intervals of the teeth about two inches wide. newton,
2. the top or crest of a cock, so called from its pectinated in-
dentures.
cocks have great com's and spurs, hens little or none. bacon.
high was his comb, and coral-red withal,
with dents embattl’d, like a castle-wall. dryden.
3. the cavities in which the bees lodge their honey. perhaps
from the same word which makes the termination of towns,
and signifies hollow or deep.
- - this in affairs of state,
employ'd at home, abides within the gate,
to fortify the combs, to build the wall,
to prop the ruins, left the fabrick fall. dryd. wirg.
7. como. v. a [from the noun.] -
1. to divide, and clean, and adjust the hair with a comb.
her care shall be
to comb your noddie with a three-legg'd stool. shakspeare.
divers with us, that are grown grey, and yet would appear
young, find means to make their hair black, by combing it, as
they say, with a leaden comb, or the like. bacon.
she with ribbons tied
his tender neck, and comb'd his silken hide. dryden's zn.
there was a sort of engine, from which were extended
o long poles, wherewith the man-mountain combs his
ead. -
2. to lay any thing consisting of filaments smooth, by draw-
ing through narrow interstices; as, to comb wool.
comb brus h. n. s. scomb and brish.) a brush to clean combs.
comb-maker, n. s. [comb and maker.] one whose trade is to
make combs.
this wood is of use for the turner, engraver, carver, and
comb maker. 41ortimer's husbandry.
to combat. v. n. [combattre, fr.]
1. to fight; generally in a duel, or hand to hand.
pardon me, i will not combat in my shirt. shakespeare:
2. to act in opposition, as the acid and alkali combat.
two planets rushing from aspect malign
of fiercest opposition in mid sky,
should combat, and their jarring spheres confound. milton.
to comb.a.t. v. a. to oppose; to fight.
their oppressors have changed the scene, and combated the
opinions in their true shape. decay of piety.
love yields at last, thus combated by pride,
and she submits to be the roman’s bride. granville.
comb.a.t. n.s.. [from the verb.] contest; battle ; duel;
strife; opposition generally between two; but sometimes it is
used for battle.
those regions were full both of cruel monsters and mon-
strous men ; all which, by private combats, they delivered the
countries of. sidney.
the noble combat that, 'twixt joy and sorrow, was fought
in paulina | she had one eye declined for the loss of her hus-
band, another elevated that the oracle was fulfilled. shakes?.
the combat now by courage must be try’d. dryden.
co'mbat ant. n.s.. [combattant, french.] -
1. he that fights with another; duellist; antagonist in arms.
so frown'd the mighty combatants, that hell
grcw darker at their frown. milton's paradise lift,
who, single combatant, -
duel'd their armies rank'd in proud array,
himself an army. milton's agonisłat.
he with his sword unsheath'd, on pain of life,
commands both combatants to cease their firife. dryden.
like despairing combatants they strive against you, as if they
had beheld unveiled the magical shield of arioso, which daz-
zled the beholders with too much brightness. dryden.
2. a champion.
when any of those combatants strips his terms of ambi-
guity, i shall think him a champion for knowledge. lock.
3. with for before the thing defended.
men become combatants for those opinions. locłe.
co'mber. n.s.. [from comb.] he whose trade it is to disentangle
wool, and lay it smooth for the spinner.
co'mbinate. ad. [from combine.] betrothed; promised;
settled by compact. a word of shakespeare.
amilton.
swift. .
7
she
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 423</div><p class="text">c o. m.
c o m
h
*, no
h ali; o
owo,
in it; kos
to
oil, o,
|,
o,
io.
o,
l,
offics
o %
o
i.
% of
**::::::::::
noble brother; with him the finew of her for-
her marriage dowry 3 with both, her combinate husband,
...i seeming angelo. shakesp. measure for measure.
this on. m. s. [from combine.] - -
combl some certain purpose ; association ; league. a
ion for - - -
i. o is of private persons, a confederacy of states or
combs
reigns, - -
sovereig this cunning cardinal -
rticles o' th' combination drew,
o pleas'd. shaks. hory viii.
it is now generally used in an ill sense; but was formerly in-
2. c
o to subdue all to their own will and power, un-
der the disguises of holy combinations. - k. charles.
o on of bodies, or qualities; commixture; conjunction.
3. #. natures, from the moment of their first combination,
have been and are for ever inseparable. hooker.
resolution of compound bodies by fire, does not so much
oh mankind as it divides the bodies; as upon the score of
en making new compounds by new combinations. boyle.
*::::::: is always in combination with pride and hard-
hearines. - - - south.
, copulation of ideas in the mind. . . . . . . -
they never suffer any ideas to be joined in their under-
standings, in any other or stronger combination than what their
own nature and correspondence give them. locke.
combination is used in mathematicks, to denote the va-
*... or alteration of any number of quantities, letters,
founds, or the like, in all the different manners possible.
thus the number of possible changes or combinations of the
twenty-four letters of the alphabet, taken first two by two,
then three by three, &amp;c. amount to 1,391,724,288,887,252,
999,425,128,493,402,200. - - chambers.
t, cômbine. v. a. [combiner, fr. binos jungere.]
1. to join together.
let us not then suspect our happy state,
as not secure to single or combin'd. milton's paradise los!.
2. to link in union. -
god, the best maker of all marriages,
she lost a
oth go combine your hearts in one, your realms in one. shakes.
&amp; friendship is the cement which really combines mankind.
o: government of the tongue.
o 3. to agree; to accord ; to settle by compact.
lood:- my heart's dear love is set on his fair daughter;
o: as mine on her’s, so her’s is set on mine,
and all combin'd, save what thou must combine
so by holy marriage. shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
'sini'.h. 4. to join words or ideas together : opposed to analyse.
t. comb1'ne. v. n. -
ind, 1. to coalesce; to unite each with other. used both of things
it. so and persons. -- -
com: honour and policy, like unsever'd friends
l i' th' war, do grow together: grant that, and tell me
in peace what each of them by th' other loses, -
insound, that they combine not there : shakop. coriolanus.
2. to unite in friendship or design.
ando combine together 'gainst the enemy :
do for these domestick and particular broils -
ide, are not the question here. shakespeare's king lear.
&amp; you with your foes combine,
; : : and seem your own destruction to design. dryd, aurengz.
uts: co'mbless, adj. [from comb.] wanting a comb or crest.
what, is your crest a coxcomb :
onor: —a combloss cock, so kate will be my hen; shakoffeare.
too combust. adj. [from comburo, combus'um, latin.] -
when a planet is not above eight degrees and a half distant
so, so from the sun, either before or after hon, it is said to be con-
::fff; buff, or in combustion. harris.
o combustible. adj. [comburo, combos’um, lat.] having the
". . quality of catching fire; susceptible of fire. - -
charcoals, made out of the wood of oxycedar, are white,
o: because their vapours are rather sulphureous than of any other
ol combustible substance. brown's pulgar erraurs.
#: sin is to the soul like fire to combylible matter, it assimilates
- before it destroys it, - . . . south.
they are but strewed over with a little penitential ashes ;
so and will, as soon as they meet with combustible matter, flame
o out, decay of piety.
s: . the flame shall still remain ;
jo nor, 'till the fuel perish, can decay,
o by nature form'd on things combustible to prey. drydon.
.. combu's tibleness. n.s.. [from contiyible.] aptness to take
fire.
or of combu'stion. n. s. [french.] -
* * 1. conflagration; burning; consumption by fire. - -
the future combustion of the earth is to be ushered in and
. accompanied with violent impressions upon nature. burnet.
o!” 2. tumult; hurry; hubbub ; bustle ; hully buily.
mutual combosions, bloodsheds, and wastes may enforce
so them, through very faintness, after the experience of so end-
less miseries. - hooker.
*"
o
-
*—
prophecying, with accents terrible,
qf dire combustion, and confus'd events,
new-hatch'd to th' woeful time. shakoshcare’s macleta.
those cruel wars between the houses of york and lancas-
ter, brought all england into an horrible combyssion. raleigh.
how much more of pow'r,
army against army, numberless to raise
preadful com/ustion warring, and disturb,
though not destroy, their happy native seat milton.
but say, from whence this new confusion springs: dryd.
the comet moves in an inconceivable fury and combustion,
and at the same time with an exact regularity. addis. guard.
to come. v. n. pret. came, particip. come. [coman, saxon;
aomen, dut. kommen, german.]
1. to remove from a distant to a nearer place; to arrive: op-
posed to go.
and troubled blood through his pale face was seen
to come and go, with tidings from the heart. fairy 9:leen.
caesar will come forth to-day. shakesp. julius casar.
coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
i spake unto the crown as having sense. shak. hon. iv.
the colour of the king doth cone and go,
between his purpose and his conscience. shak. king john.
the christians having stood almost all the day in order of
battle, in the fight of the enemy, vainly expecting when he
should come forth to give them battle, returned at night unto
their camp. koles's history of the turks.
'tis true that since the senate's succour cam.
they grow more bold. dryden's hyrannick love.
this christian woman i
ah there the mischief comes.
2. to draw near ; to advance towards.
by the pricking of my thumbs,
something wicked this way comes.
3. to move in any manner towards another; implying the idea
of being received by another, or of tending toward; another.
the word always respects the place to which the motion
tends, not that place which it leaves; yet this meaning is
sometimes almost evanescent and imperceptible.
- i did hear -
the galloping of horse: who was’t came by sh. macbeth.
bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will
come in to dinner. shaftsp. azrchant of penice.
as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of
israel brought in abundance the first fruits. 2 chron.
knowledge is a thing of their own invention, or which
they came to by fair reasoning. burnet's theory.
it is impossible to come near your lordship at any time,
without receiving some favour. congreve.
rowe's royal convert.
none may come in view, but such as are pertinent. jiao.
no perception of bodies, at a distance, may be accounted
for by the motion of particles coming from then, and striking
on our organs. locke.
they take the colour of what is laid before them, and as
soon lose and resign it to the next that happens to come in their
way. looke.
god has made the intelle&amp;taal world harmonious and beau.
tiful without us; but it will never come into our heads all at
oil ce. loce.
4. to proceed; to issue.
behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh
my life. - 2 sa. xvi. 1 1.
5. to advance from one stage or condition to another.
trust me, i am exceeding weary. -
—is it came to that? i had thought weariness durst not have
attacked one of so high blood. shakoff, henry iv.
though he would after have turned his teeth upon spain,
yet he was taken order with before it came to that. bacon.
seditious tumults, and seditious fames, differ no more but
as brother and sister; if it come to that, that the best actions
of a state are taken in an ill sense, and traduced. bacon.
his soldiers had skirmishes with the numidians, so that
once the skirmish was like to come to a just battle. kizlies.
when it came to that once, they that had most flesh wished
they had had less. - l’e/irange.
every new sprung passion is a part of the aetion, except we
conceive nothing action 'till the players come to blows. dryd.
the force whereby bodies cohere is very much greater
when they come to immediate contact, -than when they are at
ever so small a finite distance. chyne's phil. prin.
6. to be brought to some condition either for better or worse,
implying some degree of casualty: with to.
one said to aristippus, ’tis a strange thing why men should
rather give to the poor than to philosophers. he answered,
because they think themselves may sooner come to be poor than
to be philosophers. bacon's apophth gmi.
his sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not. 'foc.
he being come to the estate, keeps a busy family. .
you were told your master had gone to a tavern, and come
to some mischance. swift.
7. to attain any condition or character.
a serpent,
shakesh. macbeth. .
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 424</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
a serpent, c'er he comes to be a dragon,
does eat a bat. benj. johnson's catiline.
he wonder'd how she came to know
what he had done, and meant to do. hudibras.
the testimony of conscience, thus informed, comes to be
so authentick, and so much to be relied upon. south.
8. to become.
- so came i a widow ;
and never shall have length of life enough
to rain upon remembrance with mine eyes, shak. hen. iv.
when he returns from hunting,
i will not speak with him; say i am sick.
if you come slack of former services,
you shall do well. shakespeare's king lear.
how came the publican justified, but by a short and humble
prayer . duppa's rules for devotion.
9. to arrive at some act or habit, or disposition.
they would quickly come to have a natural abhorrence for
that which they found made them slighted. - locke.
to. to change from one state into another desired; as the but-
ter comes when the parts begin to separate in the churn.
it is reported, that if you lay good store of kernels of grapes
about the root of a vine, it will make the vine come earlier,
and prosper better. bacon's natural history.
then butter does refuse to come,
and love proves cross and humoursome. hudibras.
in the coming or sprouting of malt, as it must not come
too little, so it must not come too much. mortimer.
11. to become present, and no longer future.
a time will come, when my maturer muse,
in caesar's wars, a nobler theme shall chuse. dryd. virg.
12. to become present; no longer absent.
that's my joy
not to have seen before; for nature now
comes all at once, confounding my delight. dry?. k. arth.
mean while the gods the dome of vulcan throng,
apollo comes, and neptune came along. pope's odyss.
come then, my friend, my genius come along,
thou master of the poet and the song. pope's essays.
13. to happen; to fall out.
the duke of cornwal, and regan his dutchess, will be
here with him this night-
—how comes that ?
14. to befal as an event.
let me alone that i may speak, and let come on me what
will. job xiii. 13.
15. to follow as a consequence.
those that are kin to the king, never prick their finger but
they say, there is some of the king's blood spilt. how comes
that says he, that takes upon him not to conceive: the an-
swer is, i am the king's poor cousin, sir. shakesp. henry iv.
16. to cease very lately from some act or state; to have just
done or suffered any thing.
david said unto uriah, cams; thou not from thy journey :
2 sa. xi. io.
17. to come about. to come to pass; to fall out; to come
into being. probably from the french venir a bout.
and let me speak to th' yet unknowing world,
how these things came about. shakespeare.
that cherubim, which now appears as a god to a human
soul, knows very well that the period will come about in eter-
nity, when the human soul shall be as perfect as he himself
now is. addison's spectator.
i conclude, however it comes about, that things are not as
they should be. swift.
how comes it about, that, for above sixty years, affairs have
been placed in the hands of new men. swift.
18. to come about. to change; to come round.
the wind came about, and settled in the west for many
days. bacon's new atlantis.
on better thoughts, and my urg’d reasons,
they are came about, and won to the true side. b. johnson.
19. to come again. to return.
there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his
spirit came again, and he revived. judg. xv. 19.
20. to come after. to follow.
if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow me. mat. xvi. 24.
21. to come at. to reach ; to get within the reach of ; to
obtain ; to gain.
neither sword nor sceptre can come at conscience; but it is
above and beyond the reach of both. suckling.
cats will eat and destroy your marum, if they can come at
it. evelyn's kalendar.
in order to come at a true knowledge of ourselves, we should
consider how far we may deserve praise. addison.
nothing makes a woman more esteemed by the opposite
sex than chastity, and we always prize those most who are
hardest to come at. addison's speciator.
22. to come by. to obtain; to gain ; to acquire. this
seems an irregular and improper use, but has very powerful
authorities.
shakespeare's king lear.
things most needful to preserve this life, are most prompt
and easy for all living creatures to come by. awker,
love is like a child,
that longs for every thing that he can come by. shałoston.
thy case
shall be my precedent; as thou got'st milan,
i’ll come by naples. shakespeare's temps,
are you not ashamed to inforce a poor widow to so rough
a course to come by her own. shakespeare's henry iw.
the ointment wherewith this is done is made of divers in.
gredients, whereof the strangest and hardest to come by is the
moss of a dead man unburied. bacon's natural history,
and with that wicked lye
a letter they came by,
from our king's majesty. denham,
he tells a sad story, how hard it was for him to come t, to
book of trigantius. stillingful,
amidst your train, this unseen judge will wait,
examine how you came by all your state. dryd. aurangzd,
23. to come in. to enter.
what, are you there come in, and give some help. shas,
the simple ideas, united in the same subject, are as persed.
ly distinet as those that come in by different senses. luck,
24. to come in. to comply; to yield; to hold out no longer.
if the arch-rebel tyrone, in the time of these wars,
should offer to come in, and submit himself to her majesty,
would you not have him received. spenser on ireland.
25. to come in. to arrive at a port, or place of rendez-
wous.
at what time our second fleet, which kept the narrow seas,
was come in and joined to our main fleet. bacon,
there was the plymouth squadron now come in,
which in the streights last winter was abroad. drydon.
26. to come in. to become modish; to be brought into use,
then came rich cloaths and graceful action in,
then instruments were taught more moving notes. room.
silken garments did not come in ’till late, and the use of them
in men was often restrained by law. arbuthnot on coins.
27. to come in. to be an ingredient; to make part of a com-
position.
a generous contempt of that in which too many men place
their happiness, must come in to heighten his character. aftterb.
28. to come in. to accrue from an estate, trade, or otherwise,
as gain.
i had rather be mad with him that, when he had nothing,
thought all the ships that came into the harbour his, than
with you, when you have so much coming in, think you have
nothing. suckling,
29. to come in. to be gained in abundance.
sweetheart, we shall be rich ere we depart
if fairings come thus plentifully in. shakesham,
30. to come in for. to be early enough to obtain: taken
from hunting, where the dogs that are slow get nothing,
shape and beauty, worth and education, wit and under-
standing, gentle nature and agreeable humour, honour and
virtue, were to come in for their share of such contracts. templ.
if thinking is essential to matter, stocks and stones will
come in for their share of privilege. collier on thought,
one who had i'the rear excluded been,
and cou’d not for a taste o' th' flesh come in,
licks the solid earth. tate's juv,
the rest came in for subsidies, whereof they sunk consi-
derable sums. swift.
31. to come in to. to join with ; to bring help.
they marched to wells, where the lord audley, with
whom their leaders had before secret intelligence, came in so
them; and was by them, with great gladness and cries of joy,
accepted as their general. bacon's henry vii.
32. to come in to. to comply with ; to agree to.
the fame of their virtues will make men ready to come into
every thing that is done for the publick good. atterbury.
33. to come near. to approach; to resemble in excellence:
a metaphor from races.
whom you cannot equal or come near in doing, you would
destroy or ruin with evil speaking. ben. johnson's discoverij.
the whole atchieved with such admirable invention, that
nothing ancient and modern seems to come near it. temple.
34. to come of. to proceed; as a descendant from ancestors,
of priam's royal race my mother came, dryden's £n,
self-love is so natural an infirmity, that it makes us partial
even to those that come of us, as well as ourselves. l'estrang!.
35. to come of to proceed; as effects from their causes.
will you please, sir, be gone,
i told you what would come of this.” shais. winter's tak,
the hiscough comes of fulness of meat, especially in chil-
dren, which causeth an extension of the stomach. baton,
this comes of judging by the eye, without consulting the
reason. - d'esirange.
my young master, whatever comes on't, must have a wise
looked out for him by that time he is of age, lotke.
36. to come off. to deviate; to depart from a rule or di-
rection. 2. '
!
4. the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 425</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
is os
softs.
#: so
th: so
too,
* .
o
hit,
o, on
*:::::::
o #cat
osio,
mitor
o: #n
***
h:*::::::
south:
thinks.
shah,
obtain:
noth;
it an: ;
i, ho
itroesi,
ind to:
irgi.
so
*/ so
*
aoi
inst no
so
offin.
!),
go
into
re of a bell partaketh of the pyramis, but yet
- off and dilating more suddenly. bacon's nat. history.
*::::.. off. to escape; to get free.
37. * knew the foul enchanter, though disguis'd,
enterd the very lime-twigs of his spells,
r ons.
*:::::::s here come off, surmounts my reach. milt.
if, upon such a fair and full trial, he can come off, he is
dodar and innocent. - - - south.
those that are in any signal danger implore his aid; and,
if they ame off safe, call their deliverance a miracle. addison.
: . £o off. to end an affair ; to take good or bad for-
the figu
tunes oh, bravely came we off,
with a volley of our needless shot, -
. bloody toil, we bid good-night. shakes k. john.
everfince spain and england have had anything to debate 56. to come up to. to rise; to advance.
one with the other, the english, upon all encounters, have
£ome off with honour and the better. bacon.
w; must expect sometimes to come off by the worst, before
we obtain the final conquest. calamy.
he oft', in such attempts as these,
came off with glory and success.
9. to come off from. to leave; to forbear:
t, an off from these grave disquisitions, i would clear the
point by one instance more. felton on the classicks.
o, t, come on. to advance; to make progress.
things seem to come on apace to their former state. bacon.
there was in the camp both strength and victual sufficient
for the obtaining of the victory, if they would not protract
the war until winter were come on. knolles's hisł.
the sea came on, the south with mighty roar
dispers'd and dash'd the rest upon the rocky shoar, dryden.
so travellers, who waste the day,
noting at length the setting sun,
they mend their pace as night comics on.
i, t, come on. to advance to combat.
the great ordnance once discharged, the armies came fast
on, and joined battle. knollos's history of the turks.
rhymer, come on, and do the worst you can ;
i fear not you, nor yet a better man. dryden.
42. to come on. to thrive; to grow big; to grow.
come on, poor babe ;
some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
to be thy nurses. shakespeare's jwinter's tale.
it should seem by the experiments, both of the malt and of
the roses, that they will come far faster on in water than in
earth; for the nourishment is easier drawn out of water than
out of earth. bacon's natural history.
13. to come over. to repeat an act.
4. to come over. to revolt. -
they are perpetually teizing their friends to come over to
them. addison's speciator.
a man, in changing his side, not only makes himself hated
by those he left, but is seldom heartily esteemed by those he
comes over to. addison's spectator.
45. to come over. to rise in distillation.
perhaps also the phlegmatick liquor, that is wont to come
over in this analysis, may, at least as to part of it, be pro-
duced by the operation of the fire. boyle.
46. to come out. to be made publick.
before his book came out, i had undertaken the answer of
several others. stillingfleet.
i have been tedious; and, which is worse, it comes out
from the first draught, and uncorrected. dryden.
47. to come out. to appear upon trial; to be discovered.
it is indeed come out at last, that we are to look on the saints
as inferior deities. stillingfeet.
the weight of the denarius, or the seventh of a roman
ounce, comes out fixty-two grains and four sevenths. arbuthn.
48. to come out with. to give a vent to ; to let fly.
those great masters of chymical arcana must be provoked,
hudibras.
granville.
before they will come out with them. boyle.
49. to como to. to consent or yield. -
what is this, if my parson will not come to ? swift.
50. to come to. to amount to.
the emperour imposed so great a custom upon all corn to
be transported out of sicily, that the very customs came to as
much as both the price of the corn and the freight toge-
ther. knolles's history of the turks.
you saucily pretend to know
more than your dividend comes to. huaibras.
animals either feed upon vegetables immediately, or, which
“mes to the same at last, upon other animals which have fed
upon them. !/oodward's natural history.
. he pays not this tax immediately, yet his purse will find
it by a greater want of money than that comes to. locke.
51. h. come to himself. to recover his senses.
he falls into sweet ecstacy of joy, wherein i shall leave him
'til he comes to himself. temple.
53. to come to pos. to be effected; to fall out.
lt w.; we grant, many times to pass that the works of
ol. le
on being the same, their drifts and purpose therein are
divers. hooker.
how come; it to pass, that some liquors cannot pierce into
or moisten some bodies, which are easily pervious to other
liquors boyle's history of firmnesi.
milton. 53. to come up. to grow out of the ground.
over-wet at sowing time, with us breedeth much dearth,
insomuch as the corn never cometh up. bacon.
if wars, should mow them down never so fast, yet they
may be suddenly supplied, and come up again. bacon.
good intentions are the seeds of good actions, and every
man ought to sow them, whether they come up or no. temple.
54. to come up. to come into use, as a fashion comes up.
55. to come up to. to amount to.
he prepares for a surrender, asserting that all these will not
come up to near the quantity requisite. woodw. nat. history.
whose ignorant credulity will not
come up to th’ truth. shakespeare's jointer's tale.
considerations there are, that may make us, if not come up
to the character of those who rejoice in tribulations, yet at
least satisfy the duty of being patient. isake's prep. for death.
the vestes byssinae, which some ladies wore, must have
been of such extraordinary price, that there is no stuff in our
age comes up to it. arbuthnot on coins.
when the heart is full, it is angry at all words that cannot
come up to it. swift.
57. to come up with. to overtake.
58. 70 come upon. to invade; to attack.
three hundred horse, and three thousand foot english,
commanded by sir john norris, were charged by parma,
coming upon them with seven thousand horse. bacon.
when old age comes upon him, it comes alone, bringing no
other evil with it but itself. south.
59. to come. in futurity; not present; to happen hereafter.
it serveth to discover that which is hid, as well as to foretel
that which is to come. bacon's natural history.
in times to come, -
my waves shall wash the walls of mighty rome. dryden.
taking a lease of land for years to come, at the rent of one
hundred pounds. locke.
60. com e is a word of which the use is various and extensive,
but the radical signification of tendency hitherward is uniform-
ly preserved. . when we say he came from a place, the idea is
that of returning, or arriving, or becoming nearer; when we say
he went fom a place, we conceive simply departure; or removal
to a greater distance. the butter comes. it is passing from
its former state to that which is desired, it is advancing to-
wards us.
come. [participle of the verb.]
thy words were heard, and i am come to thy words. dan.
como. a participle of exhortation; be quick; make no delay.
come, let us make our father drink wine. gen. xix. 32.
come. a particle of reconciliation, or incitement to it.
come, come, at all i laugh, he laughs no doubt;
the only difference is, i dare laugh out. pope.
come. a kind of adverbial word for when it shall come; as,
come wednesday, when wednesday shall come.
come candlemas, nine years ago she dy'd, gay.
come. n.s.. [from the verb.] a sprout: a cant term.
that the malt is sufficiently well dried, you may know both
by the taste, and also by the falling off of the come or sprout.
mortimer's husbandry.
come'dian. m. s. [from comedy.]
1. a player or actor of comick parts.
2. a player in general ; a stage-player; an actress or actor.
melissarion, pretty honey-bee, when of a comedian she be-
came a wealthy man's wife, would be saluted madam pithias,
or prudence. camden's remains.
3. a writer of comedies.
scaliger willeth us to admire plautus as a comedian, but
terence as a pure and elegant speaker. peacham of poetry.
co’medy. n.s.. [comedia, lat.] a dramatick representation
of the lighter faults of mankind, with an intention to make
vice and folly ridiculous: opposed to tragedy.
your honour's players
are come to play a pleasant comedy. shak. tam of the shrew.
a long, exact, and serious comedy,
in every scene some moral let it teach,
and, if it can, at once both please and preach. pope.
co'meliness. n. s. [from conely. ]. grace; beauty; dignity.
it signifies something less forcible than beauty, less elegant
than grace, and less light than prettines. -
a careless comeliness with comely care. sidney.
the service of god hath not such perfeotion of grace and
comelings; as when the dignity of the place doth concur. hooker.
they skilled not of the goodly ornaments of poetry, yet
were sprinkled with some pretty flowers, which gave good
grace and comeliness. sjensor on ireland.
hardly shall you meet with man or woman so aged or ill-
favoured, but, if you will commend them for comelinos, nay
and for youth too, * it well. #.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 426</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
- - - f proportion in
there is great pulchritude and comelines of p - - -
the leaves, ao. and fruits of plants. ray on the creation.
a horseman's coat shall hide -
thy taper shape and comeliness of side. prior.
comely. adj. [from become; or from cpeman, sax. to please.]
1. graceful; decent; having dignity or grandeur of men or
look. comeliness seems to be that species of beauty which
excites respect rather than pleasure. . . -
if the principal part of beauty is in decent motion, no
marvel though persons in years seem many times more.”-
able; for no youth can be comely but by pardon, and consider-
ing the youth as to make up the comeliness. bacon.
'he that is comely when old and decrepit, surely was very
beautiful when he was young. south.
thou art a comely, young, and valiant knight. dryden.
2. used of things: decent; according to propriety.
oh, what a world is this, when what is comely - - -
envenoms him that bears it? shakesp. as you like it.
this is a happier and more comey time,
than when these fellows ran about the streets, -
crying confusion. shakespeare's coriolanus.
co(m ely adv, [from the adjective.] handsomely; gracefully.
to ride comey, to play at all weapons, to dance comely, be
very necessary for a courtly gentleman. asokan's schoolmg/ier.
comer. n.s. [from come.] one that comes.
time is like a fashionable host,
that slightly shakes his parting guest by th' hand;
but with his arms outstretch'd, as he would fly,
grasps in the comer: welcome ever smiles,
a d'harewel goes out fighing. shak troilus and crossida.
yourself, renowned prince, then stood as fair
as any comer i have look'd on yet, -
for my affection. shakespeare's merchant of penice.
plants move upwards; but if the sap puts up too fast, it
maketh a slender stalk, which will not support the weight;
and therefore these are all swift and hasty comers. bacon.
it is natural to be kind to the last comer. l'estrange.
now leave those joys, unsuiting to thy age,
to a fresh comer, and resign the stage. dryden.
the renowned champion of our lady of loretto, and the
miraculous translation of her chapel, about which he hath
published a defiance to the world, and offers to prove it against
all comers. stilling feet.
there it is not strange, that the mind should give itself up
to the common opinion, or render itself to the first comer. locke.
house and heart are open for a friend; the passage is easy,
and not only admits, but even invites the corer. south.
com et. m. s. scorneta, latin, a hairy star.]
a heavenly body in the planetary region appearing sud-
denly, and again disappearing ; and, during the time of its ap-
pearance, moving through its proper orbit, like a planet.
the orbits of comets are ellipses, having one of their foci in
the center of the fun ; and being very long and eccentrick,
they become invisible, when in that part most remote from the
sun. comets, popularly called blazing stars, are distinguished
from other stars by a long train or tail of light, always op-
posite to the sun : hence arises a popular division of com/ts
into three kinds, bearded, tailed, and haired comets; though
the division rather relates to the different circumstances of the
same comet, than to the phaenomena of the several. thus
when the comet is eastward of the sun, and moves from it,
the comet is said to be bearded, barbatus, because the light
matches before it. when the light is westward of the sun,
the comit is said to be tailed, because the train follows it.
when the comet and the sun are diametrically opposite, the
earth being between them, the train is hid behind the body of
the comet, excepting a little that appears around it, in form
of a border of hair, hence called crinitus.
according to sir isaac newton, the tail of a comet is a
very thin vapour, emitted by the head or nucleus of the co-
met, ignited by the neighbourhood to the sun, and this va-
pour is furnished by the atmosphere of the comet. the va-
pours of comets being thus dilated, rarefied, and diffused, may
probably, by means of their own gravity, be attracted down
to the planets, and become intermingled with their atmo-
spheres. for the conservation of the water, and moisture of
the planets, comets seem absolutely requisite; from whose con-
jensed vapours and exhalations all that moisture which is
spent in vegetations and putrefactions, and turned into dry
earth, may be resupplied and recruited; for all vegetables in-
crease wholly from fluids; and, turn by putrefaction into
orth: honoe the quantity of dry earth must continually in-
crease, and the moisture of the globe decrease, and at last be
‘suite evaporated, if it have not a continual supply. and i
{"spot, adds sir isaac, that the spirit which makes the finest,
subsilest, and best part of our air, and which is absolutely re-
quisite for the life and being of all things, comes principally
from the comets.
the same great author has computed that the sun's heat,
the comet 9f 1680, was, to his heat with us at midsummer,
*****nty-eight thousand to one; and that the heat of the body
of the “met, was near two thousand times as great as that of
in
red-hot iron. he also calculates, that a globe of red-h
iron, of the dimensions of our earth, would scarce be o o:
fifty thousand years. if then the comet be supposed i.
a hundred times as fast as red-hot iron, yet, since its heat o
a thousand times greater, supposing it of the bigness of o
earth, it would not be cool in a million of years. e
trevoux.
and wherefore gaze this goodly company, chambers,
as if they saw some wond’rous monument,
some comet, or an unusual prodigy. shak. tam, oft
such his fell glances as the o light of the shrow.
of staring comets.
i considered a comet, or, in the language of the
blazing star, as a sky-rocket discharged by an hand . is
almighty. addison's guardian
fierce meteors shoot their arbitrary light, -
and comets march with lawless horrors bright. prior
co metary. -
com et1ck.
refractions of light are in the planetary and cometary regions
as on our globe. coyne's phil. e.
co’mfit. m. s. [bellaria arida, konfit ; dutch. it shows
seem that both are formed by hasty pronunciation from so-
fee?..] a dry sweetmeat ; any kind of fruit or root preserved
with sugar, and dried,
by feeding me on beans and pease,
he crams in nasty crevices,
and turns to comfits by his arts,
to make me relish for desserts. hudibrat.
to co'mf it. v. a. [from the noun..] to preserve dry with
sugar.
the fruit that does so quickly waste,
o
crashaw,
vulgar, 3.
{ adj. [from comet..] relating to a comet.
men scarce can see it, much less taste,
thou comfite/l in streets to make it last.
co'mfiture. m. / [from confit, or confidiure.] sweetmeat.
from country grass to confitures of court,
or city's quelque-choses, let not report }
my mind transport. donne.
to co'm. jrt. v. a. scomfrto, low latin. salvia comfortal
nervos. sohol. sal.]
1. to strengthen ; to enliven; to invigorate.
the evidence of god's own testimony, added unto the
natural assent of reason, concerning the certainty of them,
doth not a little comfort and confirm the same. hooker,
light excelleth in comforting the spirits of men: light varied
doth the same effect, with more novelty. this is the cause
why precious stones comfort. bacon's natural hisloy.
some of the abbots had been guilty of comforting and affit.
ing the rebels. ayloffe's parergon.
2. 'i o console; to strengthen the mind under the pressure of
calamity.
they bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil
that the lord had brought upon him. job, xlii. 11,
co'm for t. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. support; assistance; countenance.
poynings made a wild chace upon the wild irish; where,
in respect of the mountains and fastnesses, he did little good,
which he would needs impute unto the comfort that the rebels
should receive underhand from the earl of kildare. bacon.
the king did also appoint commissioners for the fining of
all such as were of any value, and had any hand or partaking
in the aid or comfort of perkins, or the cornishmen. bacon,
2. consolation; support under calamity or danger.
her soul heav'n's queen, whose name she bears,
in comfort of her mother’s fears,
hath plac'd among her virgin train. ben. johnson,
as they have no apprehension of those things, so they need
no comfort against them. tillosin.
3. that which gives consolation or support in calamity.
i will keep her ign'rant of her good,
to make her heavenly comforts of despair,
when it is least expc&amp;ted. shaksp. measure for mosart.
your children were vexation to your youth, -
but mine shall be a comfort to your age. shakoff. rih. iii.
we need not fear
to pass commodiously this life, sustained
by him with many comforts, till we end
in dust, our final rest and native home. milton,
co'm fort able. adj. [from comfort.]
1. receiving comfort; susceptible of comfort; chearful; of p*
sons. not in use.
for my sake be comfortable; hold death -- r *
a while at the arm’s end. shosh. as you like it.
my lord leans wond’rously to discontent;
his comfortable temper has forsook him :
he is much out of health.
2. admitting comfort: of condition. -
what can promise him a comfortable appearance before his
dreadful judge? south.
3. dispensing comfort; having the power of giving comsort.
he had no brother, which, though it be comfortable sorko
to have, yet draweth the subjects yes aside. bacon's hon. };
shałospeare's time".
r
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 427</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
o
:
the lives of many miserable men were saved, and a com-
frtable provision made for their subsistence. dryd. fab. dedic.
comfort a bly. adv. [from comfortable.] in a comfortable
manner; with chearfulness ; without despair.
upon view of the fincerity of that performance, hope com-
fortably and chearfully for god's performance. hammond.
côm fort e.r. n.s.. [from comfort.]
1. one that administers consolation in misfortunes; one that
strengthens and supports the mind in misery or danger.
this very prayer of christ obtained angels to be sent him,
as comforters in his agony. hooker.
the heav'ns have blest you with a goodly son,
to be a comforter when he is gone. shakesp. richard iii,
nineveh is laid waste, who will bemoan her f whence shall
i seek comforters for thee? neh. iii. 7.
2. the title of the third person of the holy trinity; the pa-
raclete.
co’m fort loss. adj. [from comfort.j wanting comfort; being
without any thing to allay misfortune : used of persons as well
as things.
yet shall not my death be comfortly, receiving it by your
sentence. sidney.
where was a cave, y wrought with wond’rous art,
deep, dark, uneasy, doleful, comfortless. fairy soueen.
news fitting to the night;
black, fearful, comfortless, and horrible. shaksp. k. john.
on thy feet thou stood'st at last,
though comfor tiss, as when a father mourns
his children, all in view destroyed at once. milton.
that unsociable comfortles deafness had not quite tired me. sw.
co'mfrey. m. s. [consolida. lat. com/rie, french.] a plant. mill.
co. mcal. adj. [comicus, latin.]
1. raising mirth ; merry ; diverting.
a he greatest resemblance of our author is in the familiar
stile and pleasing way of relating comical adventures of that
11 at uic. dryden's fabies, preface.
something so comi al in the voice and gestures, that a man
can hardly sorbear being pleased addison on italy.
2. relating to comedy ; befitting comedy ; not tragical.
that all might appear to be knit up in a comical conclusion,
the duke's daughter was afterwards joined in marriage to the
lord lisle. hayward.
they deny it to be tragical, because its catastrophe is a
wedding, which hath ever been accounted comical. gay.
cosmically, adv. [from comical j
1. in such a manner as raises mirth.
2. in a manner befitting comedy.
cosmic al ness. m. s. [from comical j the quality of being
comical ; the power of raising mirth.
co’mick. adj. [comicus, lat. comique, french.]
1. relating to comedy ; not tragick.
i never yet the tragick muse essay'd,
deter'd by thy inimitable maid;
and when i venture at the comick flile,
thy scornful lady seems to mock my toil. jwaller.
a comick subject loves an humble verse,
thyestes scorns a low and comick stile; , ,
yet comedy sometimes may raise her voice. roscommon.
thy tragick mule gives smiles, thy comick sleep. dryden.
2. raising north.
stately triumphs, mirthful comick shows,
such as befit the pleasure. shakespeare's henry vi.
co'm ing. m. s. (from to come.]
1. the act of coming ; approach.
where art thou, adam wont with joy to meet
my coming, seen far off? milton's paradis? lost.
sweet the coming on
of grateful ev'ning mild.
2. state of being come; arrival.
may't please you, noble madam, to withdraw
into your private chamber; we shall give you
the full cause of our coming. shakesp. henry viii.
some people in america counted their years by the coming
of certain birds amongst them at their certain seasons, and
leaving them at others. locke.
co'm ing-1n. m. s. revenue ; income. -
here's a small trifle of wives, eleven widows and nine
maids is a simple coming-in for one man. shakespeare.
what are thy rents; what are thy comings-in #
o ceremony, shew me but thy worth:
what is thy toll, o adoration ?
co'ming. participial adj. [from come.]
1. fond ; forward ; ready to come.
now will i be your rosalind in a more coming on disposi-
tion; and ask me what you will, i will grant it. shakespeare.
that very lapidary himself, with a coming stomach, and in
the cock's place, would have made the cock's choice. l’eslr.
that he had been so affectionate a husband, was no ill ar-
gument to the coming dowager. dryden.
on morning wings, how active springs the mind,
how easy every labour it pursues,
how coming to the poet every muse!
milton's paradise lost.
shakesp. henry v.
pope's horace.
2. future; to come.
praise of great acts, he scatters as a seed,
which may the like in coming ages breed. roscommon.
com1otial. adj. [comitia, lat. an assembly of the romans.]
relating to the assemblies of the people of rome.
com1ty. m. s. [comitas, latin.] courtesy; civility; good-
breeding. dic?.
co'm m a. n. s. [xaouz.]
i. the point which notes the distinetion of clauses, and order
of construction in the sentence, marked thus [•].
comma; and points they set exactly right. pope.
2. the ninth part of a tone, or the interval whereby a semitone
or a perfect tone exceeds the imperfect tone. it is a term used
only in theorical musick, to shew the exact proportions be-
tween concords. harris.
to command. v. a. [commander, fr. mand, latin.]
1. to govern ; to give orders to ; to hold in subjection or obe-
dience: correlative to obey. o
look, this feather,
obeying with my wind when i do blow,
and yielding to another when it blows,
commanded always by the greater gust;
such is the lightness of you common men. shak. hen. vi.
christ could command legions of angels to his rescue d.c. p.
should he, who was thy lord, command thee now,
with a harsh voice, and supeicilious brow,
to servile duties. dryden's pe's sat. 5.
the queen commands, and we'll obey,
over the hills, and far away. old song.
2. to order; to direct to be done: contrary to prohibit. -
my conscience bids me ask, wherefore you have
commanded of me these most pois'nous compounds. shakes?.
we will sacrifice to the lord our god, as he shall command
ll.s. ex, viii. 27.
whatever hypocrites austerely talk
of purity and place and innocence,
defaming as impure, what god declares
pure, and command, to some, leaves free to all,
our maker bids increase. who bids abstain
but our destroyer, foe to god and man? milton.
3. to have in power.
if the strong cane support thy walking hand,
chairmen no longer shall the wall command. gay's trivia.
4. to overlook; to have so subject as that it may be seen or
annoyed.
up to the eastern tower,
whose height commands as subject all the vale,
to see the fight. shakespeare's troilus and crossida.
his eye might there command, wherever stood
city, of old or modern fame; the seat
of mightiest empire. milton.
one side commands a view of the finest garden in the
world. adiyon's guardian.
5. to lead as a general.
those he commands move only in command,
nothing in love. shakespeare's macbeth.
to com man d. v. n. to have the supreme authority; to pos-
sess the chief power; to govern.
those two commanding powers of the soul, the understand-
ing or the will. south.
comma'nd. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the right of commanding; power; supreme authority. it
is used in military affairs, as magistracy or government in
civil life : with over.
take pity of your town and of your people,
while yet my soldiers are in my command. shakesp. hen. v.
with lightning fill her awful hand,
and make the clouds seem all at her command. //aller.
he assumed an absolute command over his readers. dryden.
2. cogent authority; despotism.
command and force may often create, but can never cure,
an aversion; and whatever any one is brought to by compul-
sion, he will leave as soon as he can. locke on education.
3. the act of commanding ; the mandate uttered; order given.
of this tree we may not taste nor touch;
god so commanded, and left that command
sole daughter of his voice. milton's paradis, loft.
as there is no prohibition of it, so no command for it. taylor.
the captain gives command, the joyful train
glide through the gloomy shade, and leave the main. dryd.
4. the power of overlooking, or surveying any place.
the steepy stand,
which overlooks the vale with wide command. dryd. æn.
comma'nder. n.s.. [from command.]
1. he that has the supreme authority; a general; a leader; a
chief.
we'll do thee homage, and be rul’d by thee,
love thee as our commander and our king. shakespeare.
i have given him for a leader and commander to the people.
is lv. 4.
the romans, when commanders in war, spake !. a:
army, and styled them, my soldiers. bacon's apophthegms.
i charles,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 428</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
charles, henry, and francis of france, often adventured
rather as soldiers than as commanders. hayward.
sir phelim o'neil appeared as their commander in chief. clar.
supreme commander both of sea and land. jwaller.
the heroick action of some great commander, enterprised
for the common good, and honour of the christian cause. dryd.
their great commanders, by credit in their armies, fell into
the scales as a counterpoise to the people. swift.
2. a paving beetle, or a very great wooden mallet, with an
handle about three foot long, to use in both hands. moxon.
. an instrument of surgery.
the glossocomium, commonly called the commander, is of
use in the most strong tough bodies, and where the luxation.
hath been of long continuance. wiseman's surgery.
comma'ndery. n.s.. [from command.] a body of the knights
of malta, belonging to the same nation.
comma(ndment. n.s.. [commandement, french.]
1. mandate; command ; order; precept.
they plainly require some special commandment for that
which is exacted at their hands. hooker.
say, you chose him more after our commandment,
than guided by your own affections. shakesp. coriolanus.
by the easy commandment by god given to adam, to for-
bear to feed thereon, it pleased god to make trial of his obe-
dience. t raleigh's history of the world.
2. authority; coactive power.
i thought that all things had been savage here,
and therefore put i on the countenance
of stern commandment. shakespeare's as you like it.
3. by way of eminence, the precepts of the decalogue given
by god to moses.
and he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant
and the ten commandments. exod. xxxiv. 28.
comma'ndress. n. s. [from commander.] a woman vested
with supreme authority.
to prescribe the order of doing in all things is a peculiar
prerogative, which wisdom hath, as queen or sovereign com-
mandress, over all other virtues. hooker.
be you commandros; therefore, princess, queen
of all our forces, be thy word a law. fairfax.
commate’rial. adj. . [from con and materia.] consisting
of the same matter with another thing.
the beaks in birds are commaterial with teeth. bacon.
• the body adjacent and ambient is not commaterial, but
merely heterogeneal towards the body to be preserved. bacon.
commateria lity. m. s [from commaterial. j resemblance
to something in its matter.
co'mmeline. m. s. [commelina, latin.] a plant. miller.
comme'morable. adj. [from commemorate.] deserving to be
mentioned with honour; worthy to be kept in remembrance.
to comme'morate. v. a. [con and memoro, latin.] to
preserve the memory by some publick act; to celebrate so-
lemnly.
such is the divine mercy, which we now commemorate; and
if we commemorate it, we a rejoice in the lord. fiddes.
commemoration. n.s.. [from commemorate.] an act of pub-
lick celebration; solemnization of the memory of any thing.
that which is daily offered in the church, is a daily com-
memoration of that one sacrifice offered on the cross. taylor.
st. austin believed that the martyrs, when the commemora-
tions were made at their own sepulchres, did join their prayers
with the churches, in behalf of those who there put up their
supplications to god. stillingfleet.
commemoration was formerly made with thanksgiving, in
honour of good men departed this world. ayliffe's parergon.
comme'morative., adj. . [from commemorate.] tending to
preserve memory of anything.
the annual offering of the paschal lamb was commemorative
of that first paschal lamb. atterbury.
the original use of sacrifice was commemorative of the ori-
inal revelation, a sort of daily memorial or record of what
e. declared, and man believed. forbes.
to comme'nce. v. n. [commencer, french.]
1. to begin ; to take beginning.
why hath it given me earnest of success,
commencing in a truth. shakespeare's macbeth.
man, conscious of his immortality, cannot be without con-
cern for that state that is to commence after this life. rogers.
2. to take a new character.
if wit so much from ign’rance undergo,
ah! let not learning too commence its foe! pope.
to comme'nce. v. a.
to commence a suit.
most shallowly did you these arms commence,
fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence. shakespeare.
comme'ncement. n.s.. [from commence.] beginning ; date.
the waters were gathered together into one place, the third
day from the commencement of the creation. woodw. nat. hisł.
to comme'nd. v. a. [commendo, latin.]
1. to represent as worthy of notice, regard, or kindness; to
recommend.
to begin; to make a beginning of: as
after barbarossa was arrived, it was known how effectually
the chief bassa had commended him to solyman. knoles's history.
among the objects of knowledge, two especially commend
themselves to our contemplation; the knowledge of god, and
the knowledge of ourselves. hale's origin of mankind.
vain-glory is a principle i commend to no man. dec. p.
2. to deliver up with confidence.
to thee i do commend my watchful soul,
ere i let fall the windows of mine eyes:
sleeping and waking, o defend me still. shakesp. rich. iii.
father, into thy hands i commend my spirit. luke.
3. to praise; to mention with approbation.
who is silvia? what is she,
that all our swains commend her ?
holy, fair, and wife is she. shakespeare.
old men do most exceed in this point of folly, commanding
the . of their youth they scarce remembered, at least well
understood not. brown's vulgar errours.
he lov'd my worthless rhymes; and, like a friend,
would find out something to commend. cowly.
historians commend alexander for weeping when he read
the actions of achilles. dryden's wing. æn. dedicat.
each finding, like a friend,
something to blame, and something to commend. pope.
4. to mention by way of keeping in memory; to recommend
to remembrance.
signior anthonio
commends him to you.-
ere i ope his letter,
i pray you tell me how my good friend doth. sh. mer of jon.
5. to produce to favourable notice.
the chorus was only to give the young ladies an occasion
of entertaining the french king with vocal musick, and of
commending their own voices. dryden's dufresnoy.
6. to send,
these draw the chariot which latinus sends,
and the rich present to the prince commends. dryd. an.
comme'nd. m. s. [from the verb.] commendation. not now
in use.
tell her i send to her my kind commends:
take special care my greetings be deliver'd. shak. rich. ii.
commendable... adj. [from commend..] laudable; worthy
of praise. anciently accented on the first syllable.
and power, unto itself most commendable,
hath not a tomb so evident, as a chair
t'extol what it hath done. shakespeare's coriolanus.
order and decent ceremonies in the church, are not only
comely, but commendable. bacon's advice to willieri.
many heroes, and most worthy persons, being sufficiently
commendable from true and unquestionable merit, have received
advancement from falshood. brown's vulgar errourr.
britannia is not drawn, like other countries, in a soft peace-
ful posture; but is adorned with emblems, that mark out the
military genius of her inhabitants. this is, i think, the only
commendable quality that the old poets have touched upon in
the description of our country. addison on medals.
comme ndably. adv. [from commendable.] laudably ; in a
manner worthy of commendation.
of preachers the shire holdeth a number, all commendably
labouring in their vocation. carew's survey of cornwall.
commendam. [commenda, low latin.]
commendam is a benefice, which, being void, is commended
to the charge and care of some sufficient clerk to be supplied,
until it be conveniently provided of a pastor. cowes.
it had been once mentioned to him, that his peace should
be made, if he would resign his bishoprick, and deanry of
westminster; for he had that in commendan. clarendon.
comme ndatary. m. s. [from commendam..] one who holds
a living in commendam.
commendation. m. s. [from commend.]
1. recommendation ; favourable representation.
- this jewel and my gold are your’s, provided i have your
commendation for my more free entertainment. shaft. cymbeline.
the choice of them should be by the commendation of the
great officers of the kingdom. bacon.
2. praise; declaration of esteem.
his fame would not get so sweet and noble an air to fly in
as in your breath, so could not you find a fitter subject of con-
mendation ? sidney.
3. ground of praise. -
good-nature is the most godlike commendation of a man.
dryden's juvenal, dedication.
4. message of love.
mrs. page has her hearty commendations to you too. shakesp.
hark you, margaret, *
no princely commendations to my king !
such commendations as become a maid,
a virgin, and his servant, say to him. shakesp. henry.
comme'ndatory, adj. [from commend..] favourably repre-
sentative; containing praise.
it doth much add to a man’s reputation, and is like perpe-
5 tual
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 429</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
* ,
no.
i.
!s.
o
**
*i.
*.
o
tual letters commendatory, to have good forms; to attain them,
it almost sufficeth not to despise them. bacon's essays.
we bestow the flourish of poetry on those commendatory
conceits, which popularly set forth the eminency of this crea-
ture. brown's sugar errours.
if i can think that neither he nor you despise me, it is a
greater honour to me, by far, than if all the house of lords
writ commendatory verses upon me. pope.
commender. n. s. [from commend..] praiser.
such a concurrence of two extremes, by most of the same
commenders and disprovers. 1/2tton.
commen's a lity. m. s. [from commensalis, lat..] fellowship
of table; the custom of eating together. -
they being enjoined and prohibited certain foods, thereb
to avoid community with the genties, upon promiscuous
commensal ty. brown's wulgar ernours.
commensu rabi'lity. n. s. [from commensarable.j. capacity
of being compared with another, as to the measure; or of
being measured by another. thus an inch and a yard are
commensurable, a yard containing a certain number of inches.
the diameter and circumference of a circle are incommen-
surable, not being reduceable to any conmon measure. pro-
portion.
some place the essence thereof in the proportion of parts,
conceiving it to consist in a comely commensurability of the
whole unto the parts, and the parts between themselves. brown.
comme'nsu rable. adj. [con and mensura, lat.] reducible
to some common measure; as a yard and a foot are measured
by an inch.
comme'nsur able ness. n. s. [from commensurable.] com-
mensurability; proportion.
there is no commensurablenes; between this object and a
created understanding, yet there is a congruity and connatu-
rality. hale's origin of mankind.
7% commensurate. v. a. [con and mensura, lat..] to
reduce to some common measure.
that division is not natural, but artificial, and by agree-
ment, as the aptest terms to commensurate the longitude of
places. brown's vulgar errours.
comme'nsu rate. adj. [from the verb.]
1. reducible to some common measure.
they permitted no intelligence between them, other than
by the mediation of some organ equally commensurate to soul
and body. - government of the tongue.
2. equal; proportionable to each other.
is our knowledge adequately commensurate with the nature
of things glanville's scepsis.
those who are persuaded that they shall continue for ever,
cannot chuse but aspire after a happiness commensurate to their
duration, - tillotson.
nothing commensurate to the desires of human nature, on
which it could fix as its ultimate end, without being carried
on with any farther desire. rogers's sermons.
matter and gravity are always commensurate. bently.
comme'nsu rately. adv. [from commensurate.] with the
capacity of measuring, or being measured by some other
thing.
we are constrained to make the day serve to measure the
year as well as we can, though not commensurately to each
year; but by colle&amp;ing the fraction of days in several years,
'till they amount to an even day. holder on time.
commensuration. n.s.. [from commensurate.) proportion ;
reduction of some things to some common measure.
a body over great, or over small, will not be thrown so far
as a body of a middle size; so that, it seemeth, there must be
a commensuration or proportion between the body moved and
the force, to make it move well. bacon’s natural history.
all fitness lies in a particular commensuration, or proportion
of one thing to another. south.
to comment. v. n. [commentor, lat.]
1. to annotate; to write notes upon an author; to expound ;
to explain: with upon before the thing explained.
such are thy secrets, which my life makes good,
and comments on thee; for in ev'rything
thy words do find me out, and parallels bring,
and in another make me understand. herbert.
criticks having first taken a liking to one of these poets,
proceed to comment on him, and illustrate him. dryd, juv. ded.
they have contented themselves only to comment upon those
texts, and make the best copies they could after those ori-
ginals. temple.
indeed i hate that any man should be idle, while i must
translate and comment. - - pope.
2. to make remarks; to make observations.
enter his chamber, view his lifeless corps,
and comment then upon his sudden death. shaks. hen. vi.
co'mr.1 ent. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. annotations on an author; notes ; explanation ; exposition;
remarks. -
adam came into the world a philosopher, which appeared
by his writing the nature of things upon their naiacs: he
vol. i.
could view essences in themselves, and read forms without the
comment of their respective properties. south's sermons.
all the volumes of philosophy,
with all their comments, never could invent
so politick an instrument. prizr.
proper gestures, and vehement exertions of the voice, are
a kind of comment to what he utters. addison's speciator.
soil with itself compar'd, his text peruse;
and let your comment be the mantuan muse. pope.
2. remarks ; observation.
in such a time as this, it is not meet,
that every nice offence should bear its comment. shakoff.
forgive the comment that my passion made
upon thy feature ; for my rage was blind. shakesh. k. john.
all that is behind will be by way of comment on that part
of the church of england's charity. hammond's fundamentals.
commentary. m. s. [commentarius, latin.]
i. an exposition; book of annotations or remarks.
in religion, scripture is the best rule; and the church's uni-
versal practice, the best commentary. ring charles.
2. memoir; narrative in familiar manner.
vere, in a private commentary which he wrote of that ser-
vice, testified that eight hundred were slain. bacon.
they shew still the ruins of caesar's wall, that reached
eighteen miles in length, as he has declared it in the first book
of his commentaries. addison on italy.
commenta to r. m. s. [from comment.] expositor; annotator.
i have made such expositions of my authors, as no commen-
tator will forgive me. dryden.
some of the commentators tell us, that marsya was a lawyer
who had lost his cause. addison on italy.
galen's commentator tells us, that bitter substances engender
choler, and burn the blood. arbuthnot on aliments.
no commentator can more slily pass
o'er a learn'd unintelligible place. pope.
co'mmenter. m. s. [from comment.] one that writes coin-
ments; an explainer; an annotator.
slily as any commenter goes by
hard words or sense. damme.
commentiorious. adj. [commentitius, lat.] invented; fieii-
tious ; imaginary.
it is easy to draw a parallelism between that ancient and this
modern nothing, and make good its resemblance to that com-,
mentitious inanity. glanville's sceps.
co’mmerce. n.s.. [commercium, latin. it was anciently ac-
cented on the last syllable.]
1. intercourse; exchange of one thing for another; interchange
of any thing; trade; traffick,
places of publick resort being thus provided, our repair
thither is especially for mutual conference, and, as it were,
commerce to be had between god and us. ficoker.
how could communities,
degrees in schools, and brotherhoods in cities,
peaceful commerce from dividable shores,
but by degrees stand in authentick place? sh. trail, and cres.
instructed ships shall sail to quick commerce,
by which remotest regions are ally'd ;
which makes one city of the universe,
where some may gain, and all may be supply'd. dryden.
these people had not any commerce with the other known
parts of the world. tiloson.
in any country, that hath commerce with the rest of the
world, it is almost impossible now to be without the use of
silver coin. locke.
2. common or familiar intercourse.
good-nature which consists in overlooking of faults is to
be exercised only in doing ourselves justice in the ordinary
commerce and occurrences of life. addison.
to co'mm erce. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to traffick.
ezekiel in the description of tyre and of the exceeding
trade that it had with the east, as the only mart town, re-
citcth both the people with whom they commerce, and also
what commodities every country yielded. raleigh.
when they might not converse or commerce with any civil
men ; whither should they fly but into the woods and moun-
tains, and there live in a wild manner. sir j. davies.
2. to hold intercourse with.
come, but keep thy wonted state,
with even step and musing gait,
and looks commercing with the skies,
thy rapt’ soul sitting in thine eyes. milton.
comme’rc1al. adj. [from commerce..] relating to commerce
or traffick.
t. commigrate. v. n. [con and migro, latin.] to re-
move in a body, or by consent, from one country to
another. -
commigration. m. s. [from commigrate.] a removal of a
large body of people from one country to another. -
both the inhabitants of that and of our world lost all me-
mory of their commigration hence. j/ozdward's nut. hi/.
4 z co34-
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 430</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
z ... n.s.. [comminatio, latin.]
o !...s. punishment, or of vengeance.
i. some fans of knowledge god has thought ; to o:
from us, to fence them not only by precept *; o; &gt;
but with difficulty and impossibilities. ecay of pity.
2. the recital of god's threatenings on stated days. - -
comm1'n at or y. adj. [from commination.] denunciatory;
zoo. v. a... [commisceo, latin.] to mix into
one mass; to unite intimately; to mix; to blend.
blest are those,
whose blood and o are so yoko,
they are not a pipe for fortune's nger,
: ". stop i. please. shakespeare's hamlet.
7% comm1'ngle. v. n. to unite one with another.
dissolutions of gum tragacanth and oil of sweet almonds do
oot *mmingle, the oil remaining on the top 'til they be
stirred. bacon'; physical rem.
comminu'ible, adj. [from cominute.] frangible; reducible
to powder; susceptible of pulverisation.
the best diamonds are comminuible, 2nd are so far from
breaking hammers, that they submit unto pettilation, and re-
sist not any ordinary pestle. -
to comminute. j. a. scomminuo,
pulverise; to break into small parts. - -
parchment, skins, and cloth drink in liquors, though them.
selves be intire bodies, and not commonuted, as sand and ashes.
bacon's natural 11://ory.
comminotion, n.s. [from comminute.] - *- -
1. the act of grinding into small parts; pulverisation.
the jaw in men and animals furnished with grinders, hath
an oblique or transverse motion, necessary for communition of
the meat. kay on the creation.
this smiting of the steel with the flin, oh only make a
comminution, and a very rapid whirling and melting of some
particles; but that idea of flame is wholly in us.
2. attenuation.
causes of fixation are the even spreading of the spirits and
tangible parts, the closeness of th: tangible parts, and the
jjuneness or extreme comminution of spirits; of which the
two first may be joined with a nature liquefiable. bacon.
comm1's era ble. adj. [from commiserate.] worthy of com-
passion ; pitiable; such as must excite sympathy or sorrow.
it is the sinfullest thing in the world . destitute a plantation
once in forwardness: for, besides the dishonour, it is the
guiltiness of blood of many comiserable persons. #.…, f/.
this was the end of this noble and commiserable person, ed-
ward eldest son to the duke of clarence. bacon's hen. vii.
to comm1(serate. v. a. [con and to sorcor, lat..] to pity;
to look on with compassion; to compassionate.
then we must those, who groan beneath the weight
of age, disease, or want, commiserate.
we should commiserate our mutu. ignorance,
vour to remove it.
comm is erati on, n.s.. [from commis rate.] pity; compas-
tion ; tenderness, or concern for another's pains.
these poor seduced ***ures, whom i can neither speak
nor think of but with much commiseration and pily. 11….r.
- live, and hereafter say
a mad man's mercy bade thee run away.
i do defy thy commiseration,
and apprehend thee for a felon here. *a*, rom, and yot.
god knows with how much commiseration, and solicitous
caution, i carried on that business, that i might neither en-
courage the rebels, nor discourage the protesia. k. charles.
she ended weeping ; and her lovely plight
immoveable, ’till peace obtain’d from fault
acknowledg’d and *plor'd, in adam wrought
commiseration. a.ilton's parado lo/?.
from you their estate may expect effectual comfort, there
are none from whom it may not deserve “” is ration. spratt.
no where fewer boggars appear to charm up commiseration,
yet no where is there greater charity. craunt's bill, of 44'ort.
o i prevailed with myself to go and see him, partly out of
£onseration, and partly out of curiosity
- swift.
commissary, n. s. scommissarius, low latin.]
1. an officer made
9ocationally for a certain purpose; a dele-
goto ; a deputy.
2. it is a title of ecclesiastical ju
as exercises spiritual jurisdicti
brown.
latin.] to grind; to
bentley.
derham.
and endea-
locke.
risdiction, *ppertaining to such
- zor- * - w - 9", (at least so far as his com.
mission pomits) in places of the diocese so far distant from
the chief city, as the chancellor cannot call the subjects. cowel.
the commissaries of bishops have authority only in some
sertain place of the diocese, and in some certain causes of
the jurisdiction limited to them by the bishop's commission.
ayliff.
army,
sion or
3. an officer who
and regulates the
ammunition.
but is it thus
with
draws up lists of the numbers of an
procuration and conveyance of provi
- you english bards compose
runick lays thus tag insipid prose :
4. charge; mandate ; office;
5. act of committing a crime; perpetration.
6. a number * people joined in a trust or office.
7. the state
70 commi'ssion.
1. to empower;
2. to send with
7. cox m1'ssion are. ,
or other lawful warrant,
com m1'ssur e. ”. s. sco,
* part is joined to anothor.
and when you should your heroes deeds
give us **missary's list in verse :
co'mmissar iship. * / [siom “” say..] the offs
commissary.
a commissariship is not gotable for life, so as to bind th
succeeding bishop, though it should be confirmed by the o
and chapter. ... 4 liff's po. o
99 mmission. a. s. scommis, low latin.] §91.
1. the act of entrusting any thing.
2. a trust; a warrant by which any trust is held
exercised.
commission is the warrant, or letter
exercising jurisdiction, either ordinar
for their power.
rehearse,
poir,
c of a
or author,
* patent, that a
at all men
y or extraordinary
have
- - cow
omission to do what is necessary, zwel,
seals a commission to a blank of danger. sh. 7?oil, and cr
the subjects grief off.
comes through *:/o, which compel from each
the sixth part of his tubstance, to be sevied
without delay. shakespeare', benry viii
he led our powers; -
bore the commission of my place and person;
the which immediacy may well said up, -
and call itself your bootho. shakes. king lear.
he would have them fully acquainted with the nature and
extent of their office, and so “joins commission with instruc-
tion: by one he ooys power, by the other knowledge. south.
3. a warrant by which a military officer is constituted.
solyman, filled with the vil hope of the conquest of per-
sia, gave out his commissions into all parts of his empire, for
the raising of a mighty army. a.o.e.'s hjo. of the tarif,
i was made acclonel ; though i gained my commission by the
horse's virtues, having
*p over a six-bar gate. 4ads. fah,
he for his son a
gay often bu y's,
who drinks, whores, fights, and in a duel dies.
employment.
it was both a stran go commission, and a #range obedience to
* : *ifton, for men, in the midst of their own blood, and
being so furiously affailed, to hold their hands contrary to the
bacon's war with spain,
laws of nature and necessity.
ion from above
post,
such commi
i have receiv'd, to answer thy desire
9 knowledge within too. aston's paradis. loft,
at his command the storms invade 3.
the winds by his coofton low;
'till with a mod he bid. them cease. dryden,
he bore his greatono, in his look;
but sweetly temperd ***, *d often’d all he spoke, dr.
sons of comms.
jon are dislinguished in theology from sins of omission.
every */ion of sin intioduces into o soul a certain
degree of hardness. south's sermoni.
he indulges himself in the habit of known fin, whether
commission of something which god hath forbidden, or the
omission of something commanded. a ger's sermon,
of that which is intrusted to a number of joint
officers; as, the broadseat was put into coison.
8. [in commerce j the old. by which a faitor trades for
another person.
* a [sion commission.j
to appoint.
mandate or authority.
the peace polluted thus, a chosen band
he first commissions to the litan land, s
in threatoning embassy. prydn's so,
• * [from commission.] to commis.
fion ; to empower.
as he was thus sent by his father, so also were the apostles
solemnly commissionated by him to preach to the gentile world,
who, with indefatigable industry and resolute sufferings, pur-
fued the charge; and sure this is competent evidence, that the
design was of the most weighty importance. decay of pitts.
commi'ssion er. n.), [from commission.] one included in a
warrant of authority.
aoiftoner is one who hath commission, as letters fo:
to execute any publick office. cod.
one article they flood upon, which i with your anning
have agreed upon. - sidney,
these commissioners came into england, with whom cove-
nants were concluded. ... hayward.
the archbishop was made one of the commissioners of th:
treasury. - carandon.
suppose itinerary commissioners to inspect, throughout the
kingdom, into the conduct of men in office, with respect to
morals and religion as wejia.o. swift.
like are their merits, like rewards they share, ad
that shines a consul, this commissioner. pope's dunciad.
*issura, latin, j joint; a place where
* these inducement. ...of countervail the inconvenience
of
i.…"
*:::
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 431</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
hu, (f &amp;
3'co.,
“y to .
o
o,
w
s. *s
of:
crit:
sooo
sson;
o,
o i.
"o.
o
too -
où
ko,
of is to:
§§
o
* {4}
o
" or
to:
o
no ---
oo::.
o
o o:
sins of
mission,
he soul:
swift.
wn in
food,
koi..
!c.
sm:
o,
for
of disjointing the commissires with so many strokes of the
hizel. - wotton's architecture.
c this animal is covered with a strong shell, jointed like ar-
mour by four transverse commissures in the middle of the body,
connected by tough membranes. - ray on the creation.
to commit. v. 4. [committe; latin.] -
... to intrust; to give in trust ; to put into the hands of
*. not for your health thus to commit
your weak condition to the raw, cold morning. shakesp.
2. to put in any place to be kept safe. -
they who are desirous to commit to memory, might have
case. 2 a4ae. ii. 25.
is my muse controul’d
by servile aweł born free, and not be bold !
at least i'll dig a hole within the ground,
and to the trusty earth commit the sound.
. to send to prison; to imprison.
here comes the nobleman that committed the prince, for
striking him about bardolph. shakespeare's henry iv.
they two were committed, at least restrained of their
liberty. clarendon.
so though my ankle she has quitted,
my heart continues still committed;
and, like a bail'd and main-priz'd lover,
although at large, i am bound over. hudibras.
4. to perpetrate ; to do a fault; to be guilty of a crime.
keep thy word justly 5 swear not; commit not with man's
sworn spouse. shakespeare's king lear.
letters out of ulster gave him notice of the inhumane mur-
ders tommitted there upon a multitude of the protestants. claren.
a creeping young fellow committed matrimony with a brisk
gamesome lass. - l’estrange.
'tis policy
for son and father to take different sides;
then lands and tenements commit no treason. dryden.
5. to put together for a contest : a latinism.
how becomingly does philopolis exercise his office, and
seasonably commit the opponent with the respondent, like a
long practised moderator. amore's divine dial.
6. to place in a state of hostility or incongruity: a latinism.
harry whose tuneful and well measured song,
first taught our english musick how to span
words with just note and accent, not to scan
with midas' ears, committing short and long. milton.
commit ment. m. s. [from commit.]
1. act of sending to prison; imprisonment.
it did not appear by any new examinations or commitments,
that any other person was discovered or appeached. bacon.
they were glad to compound for his bare commitment to the
tower, whence he was within few days enlarged. clarendon.
i have been considering, ever since my commitment, what it
might be proper to deliver upon this occasion. swift.
2. an order for sending to prison. -
comm1'ttee, n. s. [from commit.]
those to whom the consideration or ordering of any mat-
ter is referred, either by some court to whom it belongs, or
by consent of parties. as in parliament, after a bill is read,
it is either agreed to and passed, or not agreed to ; or neither
of these, but referred to the consideration of some appointed
by the house, to examine it farther, who thereupon are called
a committee. cowel.
manchester had orders to march thither, having a committee
of the parliament with him, as there was another committee of
the scottish parliament always in that army; there being also
now a committee of both kingdoms residing at london, for the
carrying on the war. clarendon.
all corners were filled with covenanters, confusion, com-
mittee men, and soldiers, serving each other to their ends of
revenge, or power, or profit; and these committee men and
soldiers were possest with this covenant. j/alton.
committer. n. s. [from commit.] perpetrator; he that
commits.
such an one makes a man not only a partaker of other
men's fins, but a deriver of the whole guilt to himself; yet
so as to leave the committer as full of guilt as before. south.
committ1ble. adj. [from commit.] liable to be com-
mitted.
besides the mistakes committible in the solary compute, the
difference of chronology disturbs his computes. brown.
to comm1(x. v. a. [commisces, lat.] to mingle; to blend;
to mix; to unite with things in one mass.
a dram of gold, dissolved in aqua regia, with a dram of
copper in aqua fortis commixed, gave a great colour. bacon.
. i have written against the spontaneous generation of frogs
in the clouds; or, on the earth, out of dust and rain-water
commixed. ray on the creation.
it is manifest by this experiment, that the commixed impres-
fions of all the colours do stir up and beget a sensation of
white; that is, that whiteness is compounded of all the
olours; 3 newton's opt.
dryd. pers.
comm1(xion. n.s.. [from commix.] mixture; incorporation
of different ingredients.
were thy commixion greek and trojan, so
that thou could'st say, this hand is grecian all,
and this is trojan. shakespeare's troilus and cressida.
comm1(x+10n. n.j. [from commix.] mixture; incorporation;
union of various substances in one mass.
some species there be of middle and participating natures,
that is, of birds and beasts, as batts, and some few others,
to confirmed and set together, that we cannot define the be.
ginning or end of either; there being a commixtion of both in
the whole, rather than adaptation or cement of the one unto
the other. brown's pulgar errours.
comm1(x+ure. m. s. [from commix.]
1. the act of mingling; the state of being mingled; incorpo-
ration; union in one mass.
in the commixture of any thing that is more oily or sweet,
such bodies are least apt to putrey, the air working little upon
them. - - - - bacon s natural history.
2. the mass formed by mingling different things; composition;
compound.
fair ladies, mask'd, are roses in the bud;
orangels veil'd in clouds: are roses blown,
dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shewn. shakesp.
my love and fear glew'd many friends to thee;
and now i fall, thy tough commixtures melt,
impairing henry, strength'ning misproud york. shakesp.
there is scarcely any rising but by a commixture of good and
evil arts. bacon.
all the circumstances and respea of religion and state inter-
mixed together in their commixture, will better become a royal
history, or a council-table, than a single life. j/otion.
comomo'd e. m. s. [french..] the head-dress of women.
let them reflect how they would be affected, should they
meet with a man on horseback, in his breeches and jack-boots,
dressed up in a commode and a nightrail. spectator.
she has contrived to shew her principles by the setting of
her commode; so that it will be impossible for any woman that
is disaffected to be in the fashion.
she, like some pensive statesman, walks demure,
and smiles, and hugs, to make destruction sure;
or under high commodes, with looks ereșt,
barefac’d devours, in gaudy colours deck'd.
commo'diou.s. adj. [commodus, latin.]
1. convenient; suitable; accommodate to any purpose; fit :
proper; free from hindrance or uneasiness.
such a place cannot be commodious to live in ; for being so
near the moon, it had been too near the sun. raleigh's his'.
to that recess, coronzelious for surprize,
when purple light shall next suffuse the skies,
with me repair.
2. useful ; suited to wants or neceflities.
lf they think we ought to prove the ceremonies commodows,
they do greatly deceive themselves. hocker.
bacchus had found out the making of wine, and many
things else commodious for mankind.
raleigh's iłzory of the world.
the gods have done their part, ---
by sending this commodious plague.
maro's muse,
thrice sacred muse, commodious precepts gives,
instructive to the swains. philips.
com mo‘diously. adv. [from commodiots.]
1. conveniently. - -
at the large foot of an old hollow tree,
in a deep cave seated commodiously,
his ancient and hereditary house
there dwelt a good substantial country mouse. cowley,
2. without distress.
we need not fear
to pass commodiously this life, sustain'd
by him with many comforts, ’till we end
in dust; our final rest, and native home.
milton's paradis? loo.
granville.
pope's oos.
dryden's oedipus,
o
3. suitably to a certain purpose.
wisdom may have framed one and the same thing to serve
commodiously for divers ends. hooker.
galen, upon the consideration of the body, challenges any
one to find how the least fibre might be more commodiously
placed for use or comeliness. south’s sermons.
com modious n ess. n.f. [from commodious.] convenience ;
advantage.
the place requireth many circumstances; as the situation
near the sea, for the commodiousness of an intercourse with
england. - bacon.
of cities, the greatness and riches increase according to the
commodiousness of their situation in fertile countries, or upon
rivers and havens. temple
com mo'dity. m. s. [commoditas, latin.]
1, interest ; advantage; profit.
they knew, that howsoever men may seek their own on-
mory,
addison's freeholder.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 432</div><p class="text">c o m . -
c o m
noisy, yet if this were done with injury unto others, it }. o:
to be suffered. 0.2% dr.
commodity, the biass of the world,
the world, which of itself is poised well.
'til this advantage, this vile drawing biass,
this sway of motion, this commodity,
makes it take head from all indifferency, -
from all direction, purpose, course, intent. shakes. k. john.
after much debatement of the commodities or discommodi-
ties iike to ensue, . o hayward.
convenience, particular advantage.
2. o on: o her head certain verses, which, if she had
had present commodity, she would have adjoined as a retraction
to the other. - sidney.
she demanded leave, not to lose this long sought-for con-
modity of time, to ease her heart. sidney.
tsavellers turn out of the highway, drawn either by the
commodity of a footpath, or the delicacy or the freshness of the
fields. - ben. johnson's discov.
it had been difficult to make such a mole where they had
not so natural a commodity as the earth of puzzuola, which
immediately hardens in the water. addison on lialy.
3. wales; merchandise; goods for traffick.
all my fortunes are at sea ;
nor have i money, nor commodity
to raise a present sum. shakesp. merchant of penice.
commodities are moveables, valuable by money, the common
measure. locke.
of money in the commerce and traffick of mankind, the
principal use is that of saving the commutation of more bulky
commodities. arbuthnot on coins.
cox; modo'r.e. n s. [probably corrupted from the spanish com-
mandador.] the captain who commands a squadron of ships;
a temporary admiral. -
common. m. s. [communis, latin.]
1. belonging equally to more than one.
though life and sense be common to man and brutes, and
their operations in many things alike ; yet by this form he
lives the life of a man, and not of a brute, and hath the fense
of a man, and not of a brute. hale's origin of mankind.
| je who hath received damage, has, besides the right of
punishment canon on to him with other men, a particular right
to seek reparatics). locke.
2. having no posiosicror owner.
where no kindred are to be found, we see the possession of
a private man revert to the community, and so become again
persectly common, nor can any one have a property in them,
otherwise than in other things common by nature. locke.
vulgar; mean ; not distinguished by any excellence ; often
seen ; easy to be had ; of little value; not rare; not scarce.
or as the man whom princes do advance,
upon their gracious mercy-seat to fit,
doth common things, of course and circumstance,
to the reports of common men commit. davies.
4. publick; general; serving the use of all.
he was advised by a parliament-man not to be strict in
reading all the common prayer, but make some variation. //alt.
i need not mention the old common shore of rome, which
ran from all parts of the town, with the current and violence
of an ordinary river. addison on italy.
5. of no rank; mean ; without birth or descent.
look, as i blow this feather from my face,
and as the air blows it to me again,
such is the lightness of you common men. shak. henry vi.
flying bullets now,
to cxecute his rage, appear too slow;
they mis, or sweep but common souls away,
for such a loss opdam his life must pay. l/aller.
6. frequent ; usual ; ordinary.
there is an evil which i have seen common among men.
eccles. vi. 1.
the papists were the most common place, and the butt
against whom all the arrows were directed. clarendon.
neither is it strange that there should be mysteries in divi-
nity. as well as in the commons operations in nature. swist.
7. prostitute.
'' is a strange thing, the impudence of some women i was
the wood of a dame, who herself was common. l'e/irange.
hipparchus was going to marry a common woman, but con-
futed philander upon the occasion. spectator.
8. [in grammar.] such verbs as signify both action and passion
are called common ; as aspernor, i dispise, or an dyspised; and
also such nouns as are both masculincasid feminine, as parens.
co'mmon. m. s. (from the adjective..] an open ground equal-
ly used by many persons. o
-- hen take we down his load, and turn him off,
like to the empty ass, to shake his ears,
and groze in commons. shakespeare's julius caesar.
is not the separate property of a thing the great cause of its
endearment; inces *y one respect a common as much as he
docs his garden south
* f.7-
7
co'mm9s. adv. [from the adjedive..] commonly; ordinarily
i am more than common tall. shakesp. 4; you i. i.
in coom mon. -
1. equally to be participated by a certain number.
by making an explicite consent of every commoner netes
sary to any one's appropriating to himself any part of what i.
given in common, children or servants could not cut s
which their father or master had provided for th
without assigning to every one his peculiar part.
2. equally with another ; indiscriminately.
in a work of this nature it is impossible to avoid puerilities
it having that in common with dictionaries, and books of ini.
quities. arbuthnot on co.
to co. mmon. v. n. [from the noun..] to have a joint.
with others in some common ground. §
comm on law contains those customs and usages which have
by long prescription, obtained in this nation the force of law.
it is distinguished from the statute law, which owes its auth.
rity to acts of parliament.
com mos pleas. the king's court now held in westminster.
hall; but anciently moveable. gwin observes, that 'till hem,
iii. granted the magna charta, there were but two courts, the
exchequer, and the king's bench, so called because it followed
the king ; but upon the grant of that charter, the court of
common pleas was erected, and settled at westminster. all
civil causes, both real and personal, are, or were formerly
tried in this court, according to the strict laws of the rejo
and fortescue represents it as the only court for real cas.
the chief judge is called the lord chief justice of the common
fleas, and he is assisted by three or four associates, created by
letters patent from the king. cowel.
communable. adj. [ fiom common. j what is held in
cosit on gil.
much good land might be gained from forests and chases,
and from other commonable places, so as there be care taken
that the poor commoners have no injury. bacon to willieri.
co'mmon ag e. n.s.. [from common.] the right of feeding on
a common ; the joint right of using any thing in common
with others.
co'm mon alty. m. s. [ communaut?, french.t
1. the common people ; the people of the lower rank.
bid him strive
to gain the love o' th' commonally; the duke
shall govern england. shakoshtar.
there is in every state, as we know, two portions of sub-
jccts ; the nobles and the commznalty. bacon.
the emmet joined in her popular tribes
of commonasty. milton's paradis, loft.
all gentlemen are almost obliged to it; and i know no rea-
son we should give that advantage to the commonally of eng-
land, to be foremost in brave actions. drydon,
2. the bulk of mankind.
i myself too will use the secret acknowledgment of the
commonalty bearing record of the god of gods. hoskir,
co’mmon.e.r. m. s. [from common.]
1. one of the common people; a man of low rank; of mean
condition.
- the meat
on in commm,
lock,
doubt.not
the commoners, for whom we stand, but they,
upon their ancient malice, will forget. shakesp. coriolanus,
his great men dust not pay their court to him, 'till he had
satiated his thirst of blood by the death of some of his loyal
corn 7??&amp; 7.5. addison's freeholder.
2. a man not noble.
this commoner has worth and parts,
is prais'd for arms, or lov'd for arts:
his head achs for a coronet;
and who is bless'd, that is not great : prior,
3. a member of the house of commons. -
there is hardly a greater difference between two thing:
than there is between a representing commoner in his publick
calling, and the same person in common life. swift.
4. one who has a joint right in common ground.
much land might be gained from commonable places, so as
there be care taken that the poor commoners have no injury.
bacon’s advice to willieri.
5. a student of the second rank at the university of oxford; on"
that cats at the common table.
6. a prostitute.
behold this ring,
whose high respect, and rich validity,
did lack a parallel: yet, for all that,
he gave it to a commoner o' th' camp. shałoffers
comomo'niorio n. m. s. [commonitia, latin.] advice ; warning;
instruction.
co’mm on ly. adv. [from common.] frequently; usually; or
dinarily ; for the most part.
this hand of your's requires
much castigation, exercise devout;
for here's a strong and sweating devil here, r
that commonly relels. shakoffeare's ohel".
a great
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 433</div><p class="text">c o m
o
ol.
-".
a great disease may change the frame of a body, though,
if it lives to recover strength, it commonly returns to its natural
constitution. temple.
commonness. n. s. [from common.]
1. equal participation among many.
nor can the commonness of the guilt obviate the censure,
there being nothing more frequent than for men to accuse their
own faults in other persons. government of the tongue.
2. frequent occurrence; frequency.
blot out that maxim, res nolunt diu male adminisłrari : the
commonnes, makes me not know who is the author; but sure
he must be some modern. swift.
t, common place. v. a. to reduce to general heads.
i do not apprehend any difficulty in collecting and common-
placing an universal history from the historians. felton.
commonplace-book. n. s. a book in which things to be
remembered are ranged under general heads.
. i turned to my commonplace-book, and found his case under
the word coquette. tatler.
commons. n.s.
1. the vulgar; the lower people; those who inherit no honours.
little office
the hateful commons will perform for us;
except, like curs, to tear us all in pieces. shak. richard ii.
hath he not pass'd the nobles and the commons * shakesp.
these three to kings and chiefs their scenes display,
the rest before the ignoble commons play. dryden's fables.
the gods of greater nations dwell around,
and, on the right and left, the palace bound ;
the commons where they can : the nobler sort,
with winding doors wide open, front the court. dryden.
2. the lower house of parliament, by which the people are re-
presented, and of which the members are chosen by the
people.
my good lord,
how now for mitigation of this bill
urg’d by the commonso doth his majesty
incline to it, or no shakespeare's henry vi.
in the house of commons many gentlemen, unsatisfied of his
guilt, durst not condemn him. king charles.
.3 food; fare; diet: so called from colleges, where it is caten
in common.
he painted himself of a dove-colour, and took his commons
with the pigeons. l’estrange.
meanwhile she quench'd her fury at the flood,
and with a lenten sallad cool’d her blood :
their commons, though but coarse, were nothing scant ;
nor did their minds an equal banquet want. dryden.
the doctor now obeys the summons, -
likes both his company and commons. swift.
cox. mosweal. ! m. s. [from common and weal, or wealth.]
com mon we alth.
1. a polity; an established form of civil life. - - -
two foundations bear up publick societies; the one incli-
nation, whereby all men desire sociable life; the other an or-
der agreed upon, touching the manner of their union in living
together: the latter is that which we call the law of a common-
weal. hooker.
it was impossible to make a commonweal in ireland, without
fettling of all the estates and possessions throughout the king-
dom. davies on ireland.
a continual parliament would but keep the commonweal in
tune, by preserving laws in their vigour. king charles.
there is no body in the commonwealth of learning who does
not profess himself a lover of truth. locke.
2. the publick; the general body of the people.
such a prince,
so kind a father of the commonweal. shakesp. henry iv.
their sons are well tutored by you: you are a good mem-
ber of the commonwealth. shakespeare's love's labour losł.
3. a government in which the supreme power is lodged in the
people ; a republick. - -
did he, or do yet any of them, imagine -
the gods would sleep to such a stygian practice,
against that commonwealth which they have founded. johnson.
commonwealths were nothing more, in their original, but
free cities; though sometimes, by force of orders and disci-
pline, they have extended themselves into mighty dominions.
temple.
co'mmor ance. q n.s. [from commorant.] dwelling; habita-
3...? tion ; abode; residence.
the very quality, carriage, and place of commorance of
witnesses, is plainly and evidently set forth. - hale.
an archbishop, out of his diocese, becomes subject to the
archbishop of the province where he has his abode and com-
morancy. - ayliffe's parergon.
co’mmorant. adj. [commorans, latin.] resident ; dwell-
ing ; inhabiting.
the abbot may demand and recover his monk, that is com-
marant and residing in another monastery. ayliffe's parergon.
comomo'tion. n.s.. [commotio, latin.]
v ol, i. 3
1. tumult; disturbance; combustion; sedition; publick disor:
der; insurrection.
by flatt'ry he hath won the common hearts;
and when he’ll please to make commotion,
'tis to be fear'd they all will follow him. shas. horry vi.
ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified. luke.
the iliad consists of battles and a continual commotion;
the odyssey in patience and wisdom. broome's notes on the 01/.
2. perturbation; disorder of mind; heat ; violence; agitation.
some strange commotion
is in his brain ; he bites his lips, and starts. shak. h. viii.
he could not debate any thing without some commotion,
when the argument was not of moment.
3. disturbance; restlessness.
sacrifices were offered when an earthquake happened, that
he would allay the commotions of the water, and put an end
to the earthquake. howard’s natural history.
com motion er. m. s. [from commotion.] one that causes com-
motions; a disturber of the peace. a word not in use.
the people more regarding commotioners than commissioners,
flocked together, as clords cluster against a storm. hayward.
to commove. v. a. [commoveo, latin.] to disturb; to agi-
tate ; to put into a violent motion; to unsettle. not used.
strait the sands,
conmoy'd around, in gathering eddies play. thoms summer:
7% commune. v. n. [communico, lat.j to converse; to
talk together; to impart sentiments mutually.
so long as guyon with her communed,
unto the ground she cast her modest eye;
and ever and anon, with rosy red,
the bashful blood her snowy cheeks did dye. fairy queen.
i will commune with you of such things,
that want no ears but your's. shak. 44 asure for measure.
they would forbear open hostility, and resort unto him
peaceably, that they might commune together as friends. hayw.
then commune, how that day they best may pl
their growing work. milton's parad's loft.
ideas, as ranked under names, are those that, for the most
part, men reason of within themselves, and always those
which they commune about with others. locke.
communicabi'lity. n.s. (from communicable.] the quality
of being communicable; capability to be imparted.
commu'nicable. adj. [from communicate.]
1. that which may become the common possession of more
than one : with to.
sith eternal life is communicable unto all, it behooveth that
the word of god be so likewise. hooker.
2. that which may be recounted ; that of which another may
share the knowledge: with to.
nor let thine own inventions hope
things not reveal’d, which th' invisible king,
only omniscient, hath suppress'd in night,
to none communicable in earth or heav'n. milton's par. loft.
3. that which may be imparted.
the happy place
rather inflames thy torment, representing
lost bliss, to thee no more communicable. asiston's par. rog.
commu'nica nt. m. s. [from communicate.] one who is pre-
sent, as a worshipper, at the celebration of the lord's supper;
one who participates of the blessed sacrament.
communicants have ever used it ; and we, by the form of the
very utterance, do shew we use it as communicants. hooker.
a constant frequenter of worship, and a never-failing
monthly communicant. atterbury's sermons.
to commu'nicate. v. a. [communico, latin.]
1. to impart to others what is in our own power; to give to
others as partakers; to confer a joint possession; to bestow.
common benefits are to be communicated with all, but pecu-
liar benefits with choice. - bacon.
where god is worshipped, there he communicates his bless-
ings and holy influences. taylor's worthy communicant.
which of the grecian chiefs consorts with thee *
but diomede desires my company,
and still communicates his praise with me.
2. to reveal; to impart knowledge.
i learned diligently, and do communicate wisdom liberally: i
do not hide her riches. j/isd. vii. 13.
3. it had anciently the preposition with before the person, to
whom communication either of benefits or knowledge was
made. -
charles the hardy would communicate his secrets with none;
and least of all, those secrets which troubled him most. bacon.
he communicated those thoughts only with the lord digby,
the lord colepeper, and the chancellor. clarendon.
a journey of much adventure, which, to shew the strength
of his privacy, had been before not communicated with any
other. //otton.
4. now it has only to : clarendon uses both with and to.
let him, that is taught in the word, communicate unto him
that teacheth. gal. vi. 6.
his majesty frankly promised, that he could not, in any
a
5 degree,
clarendon.
dryd. fables.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 434</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
3. a common or publick act.
degree, communicate to any person the matter, o: he *
taken and communicated to them his own o j
those who speak in publick, are better hear . cil .
discourse by a lively genius and ready, memory, than n. cil
they read all they would communicate to their hearers. attj.
mu'nicate. v. n.
o #. of the blessed sacrament. tayl
the primitive christians communicated every day. h ; or.
2. to have something in common with another; as, the houses
communicate, there is a passage between them common to both,
by which either may be entered from the other.
the whole body is nothing but a system of such canals,
which all communicate with one another, mediately or imme-
diately. - arbuthnot on aliments.
communication. m. s. [from communicate.]
1. the act of imparting benefits or knowledge. -
both together serve completely for the reception and com-
munication of learned knowledge. holder's elments of speech.
2. common boundary or inlet; passage or means, by which
from one place there is a way without interruption to another.
the map shews the natural communication providence has
formed between the rivers and lakes of a county at so great a
distance from the sea. addison on italy.
the euxine sea is conveniently situated for trade, by the
communication it has both with asia and europe. arbuthnot.
3. interchange of knowledge; good intelligence between several
persons. - - -
secrets may be carried so far, as to stop the communication
necessary among all . the management of affairs. swift.
. conference ; conversation. -
4. co, had communication with the elders of israel, saying,
ye sought for david in times past to be king over you: now
then do it. . . 2 sam. iii. 17.
the chief end of language, in communication, being to be
understood, words serve not for that end, when any word does
not excite in the hearers the same idea which it stands for in
the mind of the speaker. - locke.
commu'nicative. adj. [from communicate.] inclined to make
advantages common; liberal of benefits or knowledge; not
close ; not selfish.
we conceive them more than some envious and mercenary
gardeners will thank us for ; but they deserve not the name of
that communicative and noble profession. aveyn's kalendar.
we have paid for our want of prudence, and determine for
the future to be less communicative. swist and pope.
commu'nicativen ess. n.s.. [from communicative.] the qua-
lity of being communicative, of bestowing or imparting be-
nefits or knowledge.
he is not only the most communicative of all beings, but
he will also communicate himself in such measure as entirely
to satisfy otherwise some degrees of communicativeness would
be wanting. no ris.
communion. n.s.. [communio, latin.]
1. intercourse ; fellowship; common possession; participation
of something in common; interchange of transactions.
consider, finally, the angels, as having with us that cam-
*ion which the apostle to the hebrews noteth ; and in re-
gard whereof angels have not disdained to profess themselves
our fellow servants. - hooker.
we are not, by ourselves, sufficient to furnish ourselves
with competent stores for such a life as our nature doth desire ;
therefore we are *uially induced to seek communion and fl.
lowship with others. hooker.
the israelites had never any communion or affairs with the
ethiopians. raleigh.
thou, so pleas'd,
can't raise thy creature to what height thou wilt
qf union, or communion, deify’d. milton's paradise los.
we maintain communion with god himself, and are made
in the same degree partakers of the divine nature. fiddes.
* the common or publick celebration of the lord's supper;
the participation of the blested sacrament.
they resolved, that the "onding of the communion table in
all churches should be altered clarendon.
tertullian reporteth, that the piclure of christ was engraven
upon the communion cup. peacham on drawing.
men began p*kly to call on the name of the lord;
that is, they served and praised god by communion, and in
publick it anner. raleigh's history of the world.
4. union in the common worship of any church.
bare communion with a good church, can never alone make
* £994 man; if it could, we should have no bad ones. south.
"genuous men have lived and died in the communion of
that church. stillingfleet.
commu'nity. * / [communitas, latin.]
i. the ommonwealth; the body politick.
how could communities,
degrees in schools, and brotherhood in cities,
**) degree, stand in authentic. place : sh. trail. and cress.
** a single person only, but in a community or multi-
tude of men, +sammond's fundamenia.
this parable may be *ptly enough expounded of the laws
that secure a civil community. l'estrang,
it is not designed for her own use, but for the whose on.
munity. addison's guardian.
the love of our country is impressed on our mind, for the
preservation of the community. addison's freeholar.
he lives not for himself alone, but hath a regard in all his
aotions to the great community. alterbury.
2. common possession; the state contrary to property or to:
priation.
sit up and revel,
call all the great, the fair and spirited dames
of rome about thee, and begin a fashion
of freedom and community. ben, johnson,
the undistinetion of many in the community of name
misapplication of the act of one unto the other,
y 0s
hath made
some doubt thereof. brown's vulgar brroirs,
this text is far from proving adam sole proprietor, it is
a confirmation of the original community of all things. lai,
3. frequency; commonness. not in use.
e was but, as the cuckow is in june,
heard, not regarded ; seen, but with such eyes,
as, sick and blunted with community,
afford no extraordinary gaze. shakoftar,
commutability. m. s. [from commutable.] the
being capable of exchange.
quality of
commu'taels. adj. [from *ute.] that may be ex.
changed for something else; that may be bought off, or tan-
somed.
commutation. n.s.. [from commute.]
1. change; alteration.
an innocent nature could hate nothing that was innocent:
in a word, so great is the £ommutation, that the soul
then hated
only that which now only it loves, i... fin. south's sermon.
2. exchange ; the act of giving one thing for another.
the whole universe is supported by giving and
by commerce and commutation.
according to the present temper of mankind, it i
ly necessary that there be some method and itleans
returning,
south's sermo.
s absolute-
of commu-
tation, as that of money. roy on the creation.
the use of money in the commerce and traffick of man-
kind, is that of saving the commutation of more bulky com-
modities. arbuthnot on coins,
3. ransom; the aet of exchang
punishment.
the law of god had allowed an evasion, that
of commutation or redemption.
commutative. adj. [from £ommute.] relative to
**sative justice, that honesty which is exerci
fick, and which is contrary to fraud in bargains.
72 commute. v. a. [commute, latin.]
1. to exchange; to put one thing in the place of a
give or receive one thing for another.
ging a corporal for a pecuniary
is, by way
brown,
exchange;
sed in trif.
nother; to
this will commute our tasks, exchange these pleasant and
gainful ones, which god affigns, for those uneasy and fruit-
less ones we impose on ourselves. decay of pay,
2. to buy off, or ransom one obligation by another.
some commute swearing for whoring ; as if sorbearance of
the one were a dispensation for the otho.
l'eirange.
to commu'te. v. n. to attone; to bargain for exemption.
those institutions which god designed for mean
s to further
men in holiness, they look upon as a privilege to serve instead
of it, and to commute for it. south's sermons,
commutual. adj. [con and mutual.] mutual;
used only in poetry.
reciprocal:
love our hearts, and hymen did our hands,
unite commutual in most sacred bands. shakespeare's hamlet,
there, with commutual zeal, we both had strove
in acts of dear benevolence and love;
boho, in peace, not rivals in command. pope's ods).
compact. n.s. [peoton, latin.] a contract; an accord;
*******; a mutual and settled appointment between two
or more, to do or to forbear something. it had an
accent on the last syllable.
i hope the king made peace with all of us;
ciently the
and the compac is firm and true in me. sag. rich, iii,
in the beginnings of speech there was an implicit compac,
founded upon common consent, that such words,
gestures should be signs
thoughts.
to compa’ct. v. a. [compingo compacłum, latin.]
voices, or
whereby they would express their
south.
i. to join together with firmness; to unite closely; to conso-
lidate.
inform her full of my particular fears;
and thereto add such reasons of your own,
as may compact it more. , shakespeare's
nor are the nerves of his compaord strength
stretch'd, and dissolv’d into unfinewod length.
y what degrees this earth's compa&amp;#ed sphere
king lear.
denham,
as harden'd, woods, and rocks, and towns to bear.
this disease is more dangerous as the solids are
rossomno,
more strict
2s)
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 435</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
o *
i. #5 i.
*::: of **i.
*so
&amp;#ms
****
*:::::::::::
lso
to
iyet) to:
oxercis:
sis,
of ano;
es: lo
intiffs:
door:
other,
if sor
l:
1 for to:
mois;" i.
set, o:
§: or
toil; or
juro,
o:
hidio:
to
si; or
mono
o
and consequently more so as people are ad-
and oo: q y ...}. on diet.
*. the bright sun compac's the precious stone, -
imparting radiant lustre, like his own. blackmore's creation.
2. to make out of something.
if he, compact of jars, grow musical,
we shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
3. to league with.
shakespeare.
thou pernicious woman,
compad with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
though they would swear down each particular fact,
were testimonies. - - shakesp. measure for measure.
to join together; to bring into a system. -
4. we see the world so compacted, that each thing preserveth
other things, and also itself. - hooker.
coract, adj, [compacius, latin.]
1. firm; solid; close; dense; of firm texture. -
is not the density greater in free and open spaces, void of
air and other grosser bodies, than within the pores of water,
glass, crystal, gems, and other compact bodies. newton's opt.
without attraction the diffevered particles of the chaos
could never convene into such great compaci masses as the
planets. - bentley.
2. 'composed; consisting:
the lunatic, the lover, and the poet,
are of imagination all compact.
a wand'ring fire,
compass of unctuous vapour, which the night
and the cold environs round condenses
kindled thro' ag...ation to a flame.
3. joined; held together. -
in one hand pan has a pipe of seven reeds, compact with wax
peacham.
shakespeare.
milton.
together. -
4. brief, and well connected; as, a compaci discourse.
where a foreign tongue is elegant, expressive, close and
ampus, we must study the utmost force of our language. felt.
comfa'ctedx ess. n.s.. [from compacted.]. firmness; density.
sticking or compacfedness, being natural to density, requires
some excess of gravity in proportion to the density, or some
other outward violence, to break it. digby on bodies.
those atoms are supposed infrangible, extremely compacted
and hard ; which compactedness and hardness is a demonitra-
tion, that nothing could be produced by them. cheyne.
compactly. adv, [from compaci.]
1. closely; densely.
1. with neat joining; with good compacture.
compact ness. n. s. [from compaci.] firmness; closeness;
density. . . .
irradiancy or sparkling found in many gems, is not disco-
verable in this, for it cometh short of their compactness and
durity. brown.
the best lime mortar will not have attained its utmost com-
paints, till fourscore years after it has been employed in
building. this is one reason why in demolishing ancient fa-
brics, it is easier to break the stone than the mortar. boyle.
the rest, by reason of the compacines of terrestrial
matter, cannot make its way to wells. hoodward.
comp acture. n. s. [from compaci.j structure; manner in
which anything is joined together; compagination. a good
word, but not in use. -
and over it a fair portcullis hong,
which to the gate direetly did incline, -
with comely compass and compaciure strong, -
neither unseemly short, nor yet exceeding long. fai. queen.
comp4 ges. m. s. [latin.]. a system of many parts united.
the organs in animal bodies are only a regular compages of
pipes and vessels, for the fluids to pass through. - ray.
compagina’tion. m. s. [compago, latin.] union; struc-
ture; junction; connexion; contexture. -
the intire or broken compagination of the magnetical
fabrick under it. brown's wulgar errours.
companableness. n.s.. [from company.] the quality of
being a good companion; sociableness. a word not now in
use.
his eyes full of merry simplicity, his words of hearty cam-
fanablenes. - sidney.
comfaniable. adj. [from company.] social; having the
qualities of a companion; sociable, maintaining friendly in-
tercourse.
towards his queen he was nothing uxorious, but compa-
nialle and respective. bacon's hon. vii.
companion. m. s. [compagnon, french.] -
1. one with whom a man frequently converses, or with whom
he shares his hours of relaxation. it differs from friend, as
“suaintance from confidence.
zo how now, my lord, why do you keep alone?
oil.” qf sorriest fancies your companion; make?' shakes. macbeth.
o . some friend is a companion at the table, and will not con-
* tinue in the day of thy affliction. ecclus. vi. 10.
o with anxious doubts, with raging passions torn,
o wo sweet companion near, with whom to mourn. prior.
o * a partner; an associate,
-
-
*—
compa'nionably. adv.
1. persons assembled together; a body of men.
epaphroditus, my brother and companion in labour, and
fellow soldier. phil. ii. 25.
bereav'd of happiness thou may'st partake
his punishment, eternal misery;
which would be all his solace and revenge,
theo.once to gain companion of his woe.
milton.
3. a familiar term of contempt; a fellow.
i scorn you, scurvy companion / what you poor, base,
rascally, cheating, lack-linnen mate: awa , you mould
rogue away. shakespeare's henry iv.
it gives boldness to every petty companion to spread rumours
to my defamation, where scannot be present. raleigh.
compa'nionable. adj. [from companion.] fit for good fel-
lowship; social; agreeable.
he had a more companionable wit, and swayed more among
the good fellows. clarendon.
- [from companionable.] in a compa-
nionable manner.
compa'nionship. n.s. [from companion.]
1. company; train.
alcibiades, and some twenty horse,
all of companionship. shakespeare's timon,
2. fellowship; assiciation.
if it be honour in your wars, to seem
the same you are not, which, for your best ends,
you call your policy; how is't less, or worse,
that if shall hold companionship in peace .
with honour as in war. shakespeare's coriolanus.
company. m. s. [compagnie, french; either from con and
pogo, one of the same town; or con and panis, one that eats
of the same mess.]
go, carry fir john falstaff to the fleet; -
take all his company along with him. shakesp. henry iv.
honest company, i thank you all, -
that have beheld me give away myself
to this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.
shakesp;
2. persons assembled for the entertainment of each other; an
assembly of pleasure.
a crowd is not company, and faces are but a gallery of pic-
tures, where there is no love. bacon's essay.
3. persons considered as assembled for conversation; or as "ca-
pable of conversation and mutual entertainment.
monsieur zulichen came to me among the rest of the good
contany of the town. temple.
knowledge of men and manners, the freedom of habitudes,
and conversation with the best company of both sexes, is ne-
cessary. dryden,
4. the state of a companion; the aet of accompanying; con-
versation; fellowship.
it is more pleasant to enjoy the company of him that can
speak such words, than by such words to be persuaded to fol-
low solitariness. sidney.
nor will i wretched thee
in death forsake, but keep thee company. dryd. fables.
abdallah grew by degrees so enamoured of her conversa-
tion, that he did not think he lived when he was not in com-
pany with his beloved balfora. guardian.
5. a number of persons united for the execution or performance
of any thing ; a band.
shakespeare was an actor, when there were seven companies
of players in the town together. dennis.
6. persons united in a joint trade or partnership.
7. a number of some particular rank or profession, united by
some charter; a body corporate; a corporation.
this emperor seems to have been the first who incorpo-
rated the several trades of rome into companies, with their
particular privileges. arbuthnot on coins.
8. a subdivision of a regiment of root; so many as are under
one captain. - - - - -
every captain brought with him thrice so many in his com-
pany as was expected. knolles's history of the turks.
9. to bear company. { to accompany; to associate with ; to
be a companion to.
l do desire thee
to bear me company. and go with me. shakespeare.
those indian wives are loving fools, and may do well to
keep company with the arrias and portias of old rome. dryd.
admitted to that equal sky,
his faithful dog shall bear him company. pope's essay on man.
why should he call her whore ? who keeps her company?
shakespeare's othello.
io. to keep company. to frequent houses of entertainment.
ii. sometimes in an ill sense.
to co'mpany. v. a. [from the noun..] to accompany; to
attend ; to be companion to ; to be associated with.
i am
the soldier that did company these three. shakes cymbeline.
thus, through what path soe'er of life we rove,
to keep company.
rage companies our hate, and grief our love. prior.
to co'mpany. v. n. -
. to associate one's self with -
1. t - i wrote
-
2<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 436</div><p class="text">c o m
ot to company with fornicators. ' cor. v. 9.
i wrote to you n
mpanion. obsolete.
2. to ... needs must learn to laugh, to lye,
to face, to forge, to scoff, to *w o to: o:
comparable. adj. [from to compare.] orthy . e c
ared; of equal regard; worthy to contend for preference.
p this present world affordeth not anything artwo o
the publick duties of religion. ins of that a o *
a.nparable with any of the captaino,” h §: a.
excellent soldier both by sea and land. knolles's hist. of t * i tur f
there is no blesfing of life comparable to the enjoyment o
a discreet and virtuous friend. addison s spectator.
coorpa rably. adv. too in a manner or de-
ree worthy to be compared. -
go. 3. no . for such a royal use be comparall,
imagined, like that of the foresaid nation. isotton's architect.
corates. n.s.. [from compare.] in logick, the two things
compared to one another. - -
comparative. adj. [comparativuo. latin.]
1. estimated by comparison; not positive; not absolute.
thou wert dignified enough,
ev’n to the point of envy, if 'twere made
comparative for your virtues, to be stiled -
the under hangman of his realm. shakes? cymbeline.
there refleth the comparative that is, granted that it is
either lawful or binding; yet whether other things be not to
be preferred before the extirpation of heresies. bacon.
the blossom is a positive good; although the remove of it,
to give place to the fruit, be a comparative good. bacon.
of his bubble, by reason of its comparative levity to the fluid
that incloses it, would necessarily ascend to the top. bently.
2. having the power of comparing different things. -
beauty is not known by an eye or nose: it consists in a
symmetry, and it is the comparative faculty which notes it.
glanville's scopsis scientifica.
3. [in grammar.] the comparative degree expresses more of
any quantity in one thing than in another; as, the right hand
is the stronger.
compa’ratively. adv. [from comparative..] in a state of
comparison; according to estimate made by comparison ; not
positively.
the good or evil, which is removed, may be esteemed
good or evil comparatively, and not positively or simply. bacon.
in this world whatever is called good is comparatively with
other things of its kind, or with the evil mingled in its com-
position; so he is a good man that is better than men com-
monly are, or in whom the good qualities are more than the
bad. temple.
the vegetables being comparatively higher than the ordinary
terrestrial matter of the globe, subsided last. j/ccdward.
but how few, comparatively, are the instances of this wise
application rogers.
to compare. v. a. [comparo, latin.]
1. to make one thing the measure of another; to estimate the
relative goodness or badness, or other qualities, of any one
thing, by observing how it differs from something else.
i will hear brutus speak.
i will hear cassius, and compare their reasons. shakspeare.
they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing
themselves among themselves, are not wise. 2 cor. x. 12.
no man can think it grievous, who considers the pleasure
and sweetness of love, and the glorious victory of overcoming
evil with good; and then compares these with the restless tor.
ment, and perpetual tumults, of a malicious and revengeful
spirit. tillotson.
he that has got the ideas of numbers, and hath taken the
pains to compare one, two, and three to six, cannot chuse but
know they are equal. locke.
thus much of the wrong judgment men make of present
and future pleasure and pain, when they are compared together,
and so the absent considered as future. locke.
2. it may be observed, that when the comparison intends only
similitude or illustration by likeness, we use to before the thing
brought for illustration; as, he compared anger to a fire.
solo compared the people unto the sea, and orators and
counsellors to the winds; for that the sea would be calm and
quiet, if the winds did not trouble it. bacon's apophthegms.
3. when two persons or things are compared, to discover their
relative proportion of any quality, with is used before the
thing used as a measure.
- black macbeth
will seem as pure as snow, being compar'd
//ith my confineless harms. shakespeare's macbeth.
- to compare
small things with greatest. milton's paradise regained.
he carv’d in iv'ry such a maid so fair,
as nature could not with his art compare. dryden.
's he compares this translation with the original, he will
find that the three first stanzas are rendered alja word for
word. . addison's spediator.
4 * *pare is, in spenser, used after the latin compare, for
to got; to procure; to obtain.
but, both from back and belly, still did spare
to fill his bags, and riches to compare. fairy &amp;to
compa’re. m. s. [from the verb.] tw.
1. the state of being compared; comparative estimate;
- - - - - - - - ; com
parison ; posibility of entering into comparison.
there i the rarest things have seen,
oh, things without compare. sutilin:
as their small galleys may not hold compare o
with our tall ships. hallor
beyond compare the son of god was seen
most glorious. milton's parads: ly;
2. simile ; similitude; illustration by comparison.
true swains in love shall in the world to come,
approve their truths by troilus ; when their rhimes,
full of protest, and oath, and big compare,
want similies. shakespeare's troilus and crisi.
comparison. m. s. scomparaison, french.] wo-
1. the aet of comparing.
natalis comes, comparing his parts with those of a man
reckons his claws among them, which are much more ic
those of a lion : so easy it is to drive on the comparison too
far, to make it good. grew's 4.itsain,
our author saves me the comparison with tragedy; for he
says, that herein he is to imitate the tragick poet. dryan,
2. the state of being compared.
if we will rightly estimate what we call good and evil, we
shall find it lies much in comparison. lao,
objects near our view are apt to be thought greater than
those of a larger size that are more remote; and so it is with
pleasure and pain: the present is apt to carry it, and those at
a distance have the disadvantage in the comparison. lai.
3. a comparative estimate; proportion.
lf men would live as religion requires, the world would be
a most lovely and desireable place, in comparison of what now
it is. tilson.
one can scarce imagine how so plentiful a soil should be.
come so miserably unpeopled, in comparison of what it once
was. adaison's remarks on italy.
4. a simile in writing or speaking; an illustration by similitus.
as fair and as good a kind of hand in hand comparison, had
been something too fair and too good for any lady. shakespear.
5. [in grammar.] the formation of an adjective through its
various degrees of signification; as strong, siranger, stronges,
to compatrt. v. a. [compartir, fr. from can and partir,
lat.] to divide; to mark out a general design into its vi.
rious parts and subdivisions.
i make haste to the casting and comparting of the whole
work. j/otton's architoire.
cox pa'rtiment. n.s.. [compartiment, french..] a division of
picture, or design.
the circumference is divided into twelve compartiment,
each containing a complete picture. pope,
com part1 tion. n. /. [from compart.]
1. the act of comparting or dividing.
i will come to the compartition, by which the authors of
this art understand a graceful and useful distribution of the
whole ground-plot, both for rooms of office and entertain-
intnt. l/ction.
2. the parts marked out, or separated; a separate part.
their temples and amphitheatres needed no compartitions.
j/attan's architesīure.
compa’rtment. m. s. [compartiment, french..] division; se-
parate part of a design.
the square will make you ready for all manner of compart-
ments, bases, pedestals, and buildings. peacham on drawing,
to compass. v. a. [compasser, fr. compasare, ital, pastus
metiri, latin.]
1. to encircle; to environ; to surround; to inclose: it his
somc:imes around, or about, added.
a darksome way,
that deep descended through the hollow ground,
and was with dread and horrour compassed around. fairy &amp;
i see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's peers, t
that speak my salutation in their minds. shaks. macbeth.
now all the blessings
of a glad father compas; thee about ! shakespeare's tempts.
the shady trees cover him with their shadow: the willows
of the brook compass him about. jab, xi.21.
observe the crowds that compass him around. dryd, wirg.
to dare that death, i will approach yet nigher;
thus, wert thou compassed with circling fire. dryden.
2. to walk round any thing.
old chorineus compass'd thrice the crew,
and dipp'd an olive-branch in holy dew,
which thrice he sprinkl’d round. dryden's fin.
3. to beleaguer; to besiege ; to block.
thine cnemies shall cast a trench about thee, and composi
thee round, and keep thee in on cvery fide. luke, xix. 43.
4. to grasp: to inclose in the arms; to seize.
5. to obtain; to procure; to attain; to have in the power.
that which by wisdom he saw to be requisite for that
people, was by as great wisdom compassed. hookr's p*:
- l
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 437</div><p class="text">c o m c o m
ld: is master being one of great regard, coasting, they kept the land within their ken
s o i o to ...; any suit not hard. . hubberd's tale. and knew no north but when the pole-star none. dryden,
is, ". i can check my erring love, i will; - with equal force the tempest blows by turns,
* † o lf not, to compos, her i'll use my skill. shakespeare. from ev’ry corner of the seamen's composs. row's j. shore.
poo how can you hope to compass your designs, * he that first discovered the use of the compass, did more for
- and not dissemble them denham's sophy. the supplying and increase of useful commodities than those
* he had a mind to o o: *... yo, if o o . h locke.
**** § it without engag rmy before it. claren. • 1m old language there was a phrase to come in co
o: k lo. of rome createth titular patriarchs of con- be brought . p compass, to
o, stantinople and alexandria; so loth is the pope to lose the re- como ss-saw. m. s.
o p membrance of any title that he hath once compassed. brerewood. the compass-saw should not have its teeth set, as other saws
o ...tion is the first part, and absolutely necessary to them have ; but the edge of it should be made so broad, and the
o both; yet no rule ever was, or ever can be given. how to back so thin, that it may easily follow the broad edge. its
en o ampus it. - dryden s dufresnoy. office is to cut a round, and therefore the edge must be made
o “s †† knowledge of what is good and what is evil, what broad, and the back thin, that the back may have a wide kerf
!'; i. - ought and what ought not to be done, is a thing too large to to turn in. moxon.
*s, beamposed, and too hard to be mastered, without brains and compassion. n. s. [compassion, fr. from con and pation, lat.]
fludy, parts and contemplation. . 3. south. pity; commiseration; sorrow for the sufferings of others;
with to, “” in ev'ry work regard the writer's end, painful sympathy. -
... since none can compass more than they intend. - pope. ye had compassion of me in my bonds. heb. x. 34.
0s to o 6, [in law.] to take measures preparatory to any thing; as, . . their angry hands
o ampus, the death of the king. my brothers hold, and vengeance these exact;
with o cours. n.f [from the verb.] this pleads composion, and repents the fact. dryd. faber.
sick o 1, circle ; round. the good-natured man is apt to be moved with compassion
*k, - this day i breathed first ; time is come round ; for those misfortunes or infirmities, which another would turn
orm and where i did begin, there shall i end : into ridicule. addison's spectator.
* solo: my life is run its compass. shakesp. julius casar. to compa'ssion. v. a. [from the noun..] to pity; to com-
too. 2. extent; reach; grasp. passionate; to commiserate. a word scarcely used
o so o, juliet, i already know thy grief; - o, heavens ! can you hear a good man groan,
o it strains me past the compass of my wits. shakespeare. and not relent, or not compassion him shakes. tit. andron.
o that which is out of the compass of any man's power, is compa'ssion ate, adj. [from compassion.] inclined to com-
so, , to that man impossible. south's sermons. passion; inclined to pity; merciful; tender; melting; soft ;
** - how few there are may be justly bewailed, the compass of easily affected with sorrow by the misery of others.
o them extending but from the time of hippocrates to that of there never was any heart truly great and generous, that
o, marcus antoninus. tomple. was not also tender and compassionate. south's sermons.
o," animals in their generation are wiser than the sons of men; to comfa'ssion ate. v. a. [from the noun..] to pity; to
offs. but their wisdom is confined to a few particulars, and lies in a comuniserate.
o ! . very narrow composs. o addison's spectator. experience layeth princes torn estates before their eyes,
owls. this author hath tried the force and compass of our lan- and withal persuades them to composionate themselves. raleigh.
osmo. guage with much success. swift. compassionates my pains, and pities me !
3, space; room; limits, either of time or space. what is compassion, when 'tis void of love addison's cato.
no less than the compass of twelve books is taken up in com pa'ssion ately. adv. [from compassionate.] mercifully;
these. pope's essay on homer's battles. tenderly. -
the english are good confederates in an enterprize which the fines were assigned to the rebuilding st. paul's, and
may be dispatched in a short compass of time. addis. freeholder. thought therefore to be the more severely imposed, and the
you have heard what hath been here done for the poor by less compassionately reduced and excused. - clarendon.
* * * the five hospitals and the workhouse, within the compass of one com pater nity. m. s. [con and paternitas, latin.]
so so year, and towards the end of a long, expensive war. alterb. goslipred, or compaternity, by the canon law, is a spiritual
ło 4. enclosure ; circumference. affinity; and a juror that was goslip to either of the parties
ch] a. and their mount palatine, might, in former times, have been challenged as not indiffe-
o th' imperial palace, compass huge, and high rent by our law. davies's state of ireland.
ove &amp;m: the structure. as ton’s paradise rogained. compati bility. m. s. [from compatible.] consistency; the
old rome from such a race deriv'd her birth, power of co-existing with something else; agreement with
which now on sev’n high hills triumphant reigns, any thing.
and in that compas all the world contains. dryd. virg. compatible, adj. [corrupted, by an unskilful compliance
sh the to 5. a departure from the right line; an indirect advance; as, to with pronunciation, from competible, from competo, latin, to
listibuto, fetch a compass round the camp. suit, to agree. competible is found in good writers, and ought
ice is 6. moderate space; moderation; due limits. always to be used.] -
e. certain it is, that in two hundred years before (i speak 1. suitable to ; fit for; consistent with ; not incongruous to.
passes. within compass) no such commission had been executed in the object of the will is such a good as is compatible to an
no to either of these provinces. davies on ireland. intelle&amp;tual nature. hale's origin of mankind.
off. nothing is likelier to keep a man within compass than the 2. consistent; agreeable.
th. 1- having constantly before his eyes the state of his affairs, in a our poets have joined together such qualities as are by na-
- regular course of account. locke. ture the most compatible; valour with anger, meekness with
mo 7. the power of the voice to express the notes of musick. piety, and prudence with dissimulation. broome.
roof. you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compatibleness. n. s. [ from compatible. j consistency;
tamps. shakespeare's hamlet. agreement with any thing. - -
from harmony, from heavenly harmony, compa’ribly, adv, [from compatible.j. fitly; suitably. . .
this universal frame began : f compatient. adj. [from con and pation, latin.] suffering
from harmony to harmony, together. - dicf.
through all the compass of the notes it ran, compat riot. n. s. [from con and patria, lat.] one of the
good. the diapason closing full in man. dryden. same country. - dicf.
ado 8. [this is rarely used in the fingular.] the instrument with the governor knew. he was so circumspect as not to ad-
so which circles are drawn. here to any of the factions of the time, in a neutrality indif-
o if they be two, they are two so, ferently and friendly entertaining all his compatriots. - drumm.
- as stiff twin compass are two: compeer. m. s. [compar, latin.] equal; companion; col-
o thy soul, the fixt foot, makes no show league ; associate. -
ow, so to move; but doth, if th’ other do." donne. sesostris,
}. in his hand that monarchs harness'd, to his chariot yok'd
o: vo he took the golden compasses, prepar’d base servitude, and his dethron'd compeers • * *
togo. in god's eternal store, to circumscribe lash'd furiously. philips.
i: a this universe, and all created things. milton's par. loft. to compeer. v. a. [from the noun..] to be equal with; to
to fix one foot of their compass wherever they think fit, n]ate. - -
| and extend the other to such terrible lengths, without describ- sn his own grace he doth exalt himself
ing any circumference at all, is to leave us and themselves in more than in your advancement.
so a very unctrtain state. swift. in my right, -
9. the instrument composed of a needle and card, whereby by me invested, he compeers the best. shakes. king lear.
o, so mariners steer. to competl. v. a. [compello, latin j -
lo” the breath of religion fills the sails, profit is the compas, by 1. to force to some act; to oblige; to constrain; to necessi-
which factious men steer their course. king charles. tate; to urge irresistibly. -
rude as their ships was navigation then; you will compel me then to read the will !. -
nquseful compos, or meridian known: - shakespeare's julius caesar.
vol. i. - 5 b. the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 438</div><p class="text">c
o m
c
o -
m
i w
rote to
you no
t to com
pany wi
ith forni
is. i cor. v
. 9.
but
, both
from
back
and b
elly
, still di
id s
pare
2. t
o be a
for gay co
there mpani
thou on. o
needs m bsolet
ust lea c.
rn t
o laugh, to l
ye,
to fi
- gs
n. s. &gt; and -
... [from rich
the v cs to
erb.] compare
fai
ry 9,
o,
to
face
, to for
ge, to s
coff, t
o compa
ny. s
'pens. h.
. hubb. t.
- ale
. 1. t
. the state
of bei
ingr
g com
pared -
; com
parati
ve esti
iiilate
; com-
co'
mpa
so ad;
o o o to c
publick ent worl rd ; wort ompare
a m dutie d affo hyt ..] w
excell an compa s of reli rdeth n o conte orthy
jo rable wi igion. ot an nd for to be
2 jo is ... . any of y thing o:.
co and o: ea and 1 the ca - parable e. parison
gree r a bly 1 stuou f life and. k. ptains of #". o posii -
j.". t adv. o friend o that a ooker. oh here o of
im here c o be c rom - e to j/?. of th ge, an , thi the enteri
c agined ould omp compa the eni e t a 1ngs rarest ering i
oo: like o o: rable.] i o w; their . o: co
c - - m
. * # the . such a in a *::::: o tall #. o: 3.we on.
m : o ano rom . ...” us or de- 2. s: glori o may not
*:::::::: or. . #o. o j e the so hold c
fv’n %soativ n logick, . o: apo o e; ill n of god w ompare sucklin
ov'n t o in 3 zoo - e t o appro ns i s o,
o the . wert i. not poh latin.] wo e. full o o in ...i. o w.
1. so of e gnified it! we : gs co wan o o by co milton' aller
th under h r your nvy, o not abs i mpa’ toi. and y t n the mparis s pa -
do... angman ..". 2 olute. o o, and oth o . radis, i
be pre awful th the of his : to be is.” na act of n. s. sc 2 and to: th conne %.
r rr one tom in re is c moi, - ... ir *
to § o iled sh #. rhime
give oflom i &amp; the yet wh at i ake yose o is civ. con , fren or. $,
o i: o: o: oft o o his ch. j oilus and cross.
i rui good; thi at i :- - e i : io g th f
2. i. . . ... ao, . ings be i. 1s 2 o: it o: ..". th od.
s beaut le powe ould ne of its o: the r ba to he st at herei a vcs inn to drive 2 re n ose of
yo; 1s not : : emove o sh if wo of i. he is i. the comp on o o man
- » and i ;now aring di ce e levi 1t all will ri ng imi aris? co reli y
3. ... o: to o t so o ... o
*"... mar.] % of o p. o ho ho imate w ...” o
ce, the str tity in o the c e facul ose: it tley. pleasur a lar our wo c2//7 fa what w poet. y; so
o ... o consists i o ger size ... ." e call bo.
conn ativ - ng tha ative d nville’s o not s in a 3. a ance h pain : that re apt - good m,
th y. ccordino [fr er: pi. entifica. a sm inc. in w. ive esti isadva nt is rcrno ought or o:
good . ; or ng to ... ; as, the ... of it o i. o: o ..". to . ind . to
; : - t o - d pro ine - it i -
o §: o whi c ...] in hand one nd ao ...”. o: . is with
er thi world rative/ ich i y co a st cone can s eable in re : 0?!. those :
positio ings of i wo and s remo mpariso ate of was so mis carce ... l 3t
#. so ...'. ... is ... . na n ; not 4. a fini erably . 2 iil o world air,
th whi m e evi ls to pl med e alt ritin , in enti at
o om the an that #: . bacon 5. [. i. ..". o speaki o a soi #.
#. in att les bein good *: . in o with 7. * o: o: a .."; - %. of : no.
appli o er of g co ities an s co o c ous d a t. air | in ; an ill n’s r at i -
t2 § w few the mparati s as c ne in - co egr j t and of ha lustrati torto 1t o
om ow, an glob atively hi inor in com l mpa’ ees of he f to o nd i ation r/s on ince
i. t pa's para obe, su ly high e tha - zat.] rt signi ormati good f n hand by simi ital;
o mak r.e. z tively bfded er tha . the ii ous to divi o tion o an compa ois.
o c one o a. [can , are the #. n the so i ...' in. o i. ..} an o so i:
ing o: ing th omparo nstan i/2 i inar work ake h subdi o 1113 artir rong jective akespe
• dyo ess o c m , lati ccs cdw y c - ast ivisi rk o , fr , stron throo art.
i ...' badn easure tin.] of this ard. o mpa’ ... .". it of from ger, so ugh it
#. of so ... #. jo e casting o o
ear b iff e er: oger; t ; or - - g a ign i arti
them ey m r casli r br ers s r q to - - he ci des m. s. nd gn into i ior
sel casuri us, a utus s i onn ualiti estim each cin ign ... [com comparti city.
no wcs am ing th nd com peak some tes, of ate t com cont cumfe - nparti rt 1//g wal-
ando ..oft. for the ...” ... " #. o: rence i ment, f ;..."
evil o: n thini mselve cs by eir reas c. ne he act tion a coin i. divid - rench 1's archi hole
th ith p s of 1 k it es, a them on s. i wi of c • ?: - /. plete pi ed in ..] a bitoire.
. o ... o, o o, jo ". wo o: to twelve go
- es th e wno - c2 (?? a. "il g und o th ! or di impar cozo
* that h petual o o 2 * o: o fartiment;
£o. to cz as got ts, of these tory of e pl o “ i. plot, b raceful ion, b po.
ow th zmpare the i 3. in with ove easure t parts oth f and y whi -
fi. one ideas alici the r rcomi heir mark os i usef ich
and f us inu re equal two, of nu ous and estless .# co templ. ed out ooins o i. auth
and uture ch of th and th mbers loss mpa’ o se offi ibution ors of
• 2. so th pleas the w ree to , and ti geful para rtm e amphi parat ice and 1 of th
|. may o i. and rong j six, c hath o ‘i te part nt. ag phitheatr ed; a s entertai e
- - - ~ : d - - - c e ill-
o ... m il ilot i. the 7. o: a so [compart s o: part }.
o - - l w • - i. - s*** * - -
c §. for #. ... o o ey ar o o: of o o y 1ment, fooo:tition:
ouns c0/711) ratio y lik the - mfared pres. . i - #. l - estals 'ou re 1c ..] rchit -
o #: ... . ... ." tog ent o to 2atin v. ..." and b ady f divisi t?ure,
- - 2 pa - gcth s onc ..] - uildi or 111011 :
3 w.," the * wo o copy: we use rison in }. ...; to to: dings. all man ; se-
relati tw ind ds : ple u pared to be tend æe. s at envi &gt; f p ner of
thi tlve o pers sdid no for ogo efore th s onl t round in viron t. s.077 eacham of compart
ing o . . so o sea, j" . (i. 4. deep d 'a'. ... sur posare, o
as in in e i ca w n - c nq w 3. , add tou al. so
wills 3. *:::: any . are ... . o 2 - i so as so o: nd; to i pajilu;
//ith €em c. uality mpare o a. calm nd tha e thee dread rough ay, nclose: i
o ...m o, ...” and t speak o ... ." : it has
f 07/ - -
small thi ..". o used i. g. o: g! y |...} o ground
he things wi ... ourse ..". of he #. fathe n. i. ...; .
as na carv'd with gr t ompar'd c the bro dy tre r compa all the eir mil m spee und. fairy &amp;
* o: ...? o o compare shakes. oo:: o off o s, y &amp;
0. ul v - t’
* ... § o maid #. speare's macb 2 to i. o &amp;: !". so - shak p. macbeth,
ouise o art o,"adise r th. " to ...i. w trf o †. that. cir §: tempest
1o npa egai o ro 1ou , i op : the wi £/l,
anzas n with re. gained a ld c und a (07/1 will as hi e will
are re the o - v nd di horine ny o: in arou? ob ows
- - - &gt; r - d 3. xl.
ndered riginal dryder 3. t ...'" d an us com ng. ith o yet s . dryd, 21.
almost he : ; thrice o: so ling fire igher; virg,
l - ye- ri -
word for the hine o o: . . the c dryd
4. to ro nemi besi l’d 1 hol re w. - this
to und ies s 1ege round y dew &gt;
grono and ke jo. - '?
; to i. into 2 . d
c lil o oin o abou ryden's an
2 run ery si t the o
s ; to *. }. and com
cl2c. uke, xix yaft
- 43.
4. 7.
0 co.
to mpa
get; re i
$ to s; in
proc sp
ocure ; ensor
; to ot used
tain after ad
- the l 'dison'
atin j. sped
cow. a for
*::::: * *
obtai
th tain i
y at 3 to
people, o o
as b y wi ; to
y as .." o: t
wo saw o have i
qin w to we in
«7/1f) be the
passed requis power,
- o: for th
w ar's pr at
*fast.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
his
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 439</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
o,
his master being one of great regard,
- ... to compass any suit not hard. hubberd's tale.
lo on check my erring love, i will;
if not, to amposs her i'll use my skill. shakespeare.
n you hope to compass your designs,
*:o: .. p - denham's sophy.
he had a mind to make himself master of weymouth, if
c ld compass it without engaging his army before it. claren.
*: church of rome createth titular patriarchs of con-
o le and alexandria; so loth is the pope to lose the re-
*. of any title that he hath once compassed. brerewood.
". is the first part, and absolutely necessary to them
o yet no rule ever was, or ever can be given, how to
of it. - dryden's dufresnoy.
# knowledge of what is good and what is evil, what
ught and what ought not to be done, is a thing too large to
jo, and too hard to be mastered, without brains and
study, parts and contemplation. south.
“” in ev'ry work regard the writer's end,
since none can compass more than they intend. pope.
6, [in law.] to take measures preparatory to any thing; as,
to compass the death of the king.
corks, n.f [from the verb.]
i. circle; round: - -
this day i breathed first ; time is come round;
and where i did begin, there shall i end:
my life is run its compass. shakesp. julius casar.
2. extent; reach; grasp. -
o, juliet, i already know thy grief; -
it strains me past the compass of my wits. shakespeare.
that which is out of the compass of any man's power, is
to that man impossible. south's sermons.
how few there are may be justly bewailed, the compass of
them extending but from the time of hippocrates to that of
marcus antoninus. temple.
animals in their generation are wiser than the sons of men;
but their wisdom is confined to a few particulars, and lies in a
very narrow compos. addison's spectator.
this author hath tried the force and compass of our lan-
guage with much success. swift.
, spice; room; limits, either of time or space.
no less than the compass of twelve books is taken up in
these. pope's essay on homer's battles.
the english are good confederates in an enterprize which
may be dispatched in a short compass of time. addis. freeholder.
you have heard what hath been here done for the poor by
the five hospitals and the workhouse, within the compass of one
year, and towards the end of a long, expensive war. alterb.
4. enclosure ; circumference.
and their mount palatine,
th’ imperial palace, compass huge, and high
the structure. asi'ton's paradise rogained.
old rome from such a race deriv'd her birth,
which now on sev’n high hills triumphant reigns,
and in that compas, all the world contains. dryd. wirg.
5. a departure from the right line; an indirect advance; as, to
filth a compass round the camp.
6, moderate space; moderation; due limits.
certain it is, that in two hundred years before (i speak
within compass) no such commission had been executed in
either of these provinces. davies on ireland.
nothing is likelier to keep a man within compass than the
having constantly before his eyes the state of his affairs, in a
regular course of account. locke.
7. the power of the voice to express the notes of musick.
you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my
tamps, shakespeare's hamlet.
from harmony, from heavenly harmony,
this universal frame began :
from harmony to harmony,
through all the compass of the notes it ran,
the diapason closing full in man. dryden.
8. [this is rarely used in the singular.] the instrument with
which circles are drawn.
if they be two, they are two so,
as stiff twin compass are two:
thy soul, the fixt foot, makes no show
to move; but doth, if th' other do."
in his hand
he took the golden compasses, prepar'd
in god's eternal store, to circumscribe
this universe, and all created things. milton's par. lost.
to fix one foot of their compass wherever they think fit,
and extend the other to such terrible lengths, without describ-
ing any circumference at all, is to leave us and themselves in
a very unctrtain state. swift.
9. the instrument composed of a needle and card, whereby
mariners steer.
the breath of religion fills the sails, profit is the compas, by
which factious men steer their course. king charles.
rude as their ships was navigation then;
no useful compas, or meridian known:
wol. i.
donne.
coasting, they kept the land within their ken,
and knew no north but when the pole-star shone. dryden,
with equal force the tempest blows by turns,
from ev'ry corner of the seamen's composs. row's j. shore.
he that first discovered the use of the compass, did more for
the supplying and increase of useful commodities than those
who built workhouses. locke.
10. in old language there was a phrase to come in compass, to
be brought round.
compass saw. m. s.
the compass-saw should not have its teeth set, as other saws
have ; but the edge of it should be made so broad, and the
back so thin, that it may easily follow the broad edge. its
office is to cut a round, and therefore the edge must be made
broad, and the back thin, that the back may have a wide kerf
to turn in. moxon.
compassion. m. s. [compassion, fr. from con and pation, lat.]
pity; commiseration; sorrow for the sufferings of others;
painful sympathy.
ye had compassion of me in my bonds.
their angry hands
my brothers hold, and vengeance these exact;
this pleads compassion, and repents the fact. dryd. faber.
the good-natured man is apt to be moved with compassion
for those misfortunes or infirmities, which another would turn
into ridicule. addison's spectator.
to compa’ssion. v. a. [from the noun..] to pity; to com-
passionate; to commiserate. a word scarcely used
o, heavens ! can you hear a good man groan,
and not relent, or not compassion him shakes. tit. andron.
compa'ssion at e. adj. [from compassion.] inclined to com-
passion; inclined to pity; merciful; tender ; melting; soft ;
easily affected with sorrow by the misery of others.
there never was any heart truly great and generous, that
was not also tender and compassionate. south's sermons.
to comfa'ssion ate. v. a. [from the noun..] to pity; to
comuniserate.
experience layeth princes torn estates before their eyes,
and withal persuades them to compassionate themselves. raleigh.
compassionates my pains, and pities me !
what is compassion, when 'tis void of love addison's catz.
compa'ssion ately. adv. [from compassignate.] mercifully;
tenderly. -
the fines were assigned to the rebuilding st paul's, and
thought therefore to be the more severely imposed, and the
less compassionately reduced and excused. clarendon.
com paternity. m. s. [con and paternitas, latin.]
goslipred, or compaternity, by the canon law, is a spiritual
affinity ; and a juror that was goslip to either of the parties
might, in former times, have been challenged as not indiffe-
rent by our law. davies's state of ireland.
comp at i e1 lit y. m. s. [from compatible.]. consistency; the
power of co-existing with something else; agreement with
any thing.
compatible, adj. [corrupted, by an unskilful compliance
with pronunciation, from competible, from competo, latin, to
suit, to agree. competible is found in good writers, and ought
always to be used.] -
1. suitable to ; fit for; consistent with ; not incongruous to.
the object of the will is such a good as is compatible to an
intelle&amp;tual nature. hale's origin of mankind.
2, consistent; agreeable.
our poets have joined together such qualities as are by na-
ture the most compatible; valour with anger, meekness with
piety, and prudence with dissimulation. broome.
compatiblen ess. n. s. [ from compatible. j consistency;
agreement with any thing.
compa^r ibly. adv, [from compatible.] fitly; suitably.
heb. x. 34.
compatient. adj. [from con and pation, latin.] suffering
together. - dic7.
compat riot. n. s. [from con and patria, lat.] one of the
same country. die?.
the governor knew he was so circumspect as not to ad-
here to any of the factions of the time, in a neutrality indif-
ferently and friendly entertaining all his compatriots. drumm.
compe'er. m. s. [compar, latin, j. equal; companion; col-
league ; associate.
sesostris,
that monarchs harness'd, to his chariot yok'd
base servitude, and his dethron'd compeers -
lash'd furiously. philips.
to compeer. v. a. [from the noun..] to be equal with; to
mate.
sn his own grace he doth exalt himself
more than in your advancement.
in my right,
by me invested, he compeers the best.
to competl. v. a. [compello, latin j
1. to force to some act; to oblige; to constrain; to necessi-
tate; to urge irresistibly. -
you will compel me then to read the will?
- shakespeare's julius caesar.
the
shakes. king lear.
5 b<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 440</div><p class="text">- c o m
c o m
the spinners, carders, o ors".
and lack of other means, in despro "* 3.
fo. th” event to the tooth, are all in uproar. soft.
he refused, and said, i will not eat : but his .
- ther with the woman, competed h": sa. xxvii. 23.
o but first the lawless . who .
to know their god, or message to "go". -
- most . ol’d by signs and so dire. pel o:
== one ild but enable, not compe
h all these blesfings cou u 2 clarendon.
*hole droves of minds are by the driving god
compell'd to drink the deep lethean flood. dryden.
2. to take by force or violence; to ravish from ; to seize.
this signification is uncommon and harsh.
o the subjects grief
comes through commissions, which compel from each
the sixth part of his substance, to be levied &gt;
without delay. shakespeare's henry viii.
3. to gather together, and unite in a company. a latinism,
compellere gregam.
he to the town return'd,
attended by the chiefs who fought the field,
now friendly mix’d, and in one troop compell’d. dryden.
4. to seize; to overpower. -
our men secure, nor guards nor centries held,
but easy fleep their weary limbs compell’d. dryden.
compe'll able. adj. [from compel.] that may be forced.
compellation, n. f. [from compella, latin.] the stile of
address; the word of salutation.
the file best fitted for all persons on all occasions to use,
is the compellation of father, which our saviour first taught.
duppa's rules of d. votion.
the peculiar compellation of the kings in france, is by stro,
which is nothing else but father. temple.
compe’ller. n.). [from compel.] he that forces another.
co'mpend. n s. [compendium, latin.] abridgment; sum-
mary; epitome; contraction ; breviate. -
fix in memory the discourses, and abstract them into brief
compends. i/atts's improvement of the mind.
com pen dia'r1ous. adj. [compendiarius, latin.] short; con-
tracted; summary ; abridged.
compen dio's 1ty. m. s. [from compendious.] shortness; con-
tracted brevity. dic.
compe n dious. adj. [from compendium.] short; summary 5
abridged; comprehensive; holding much in a narrow space ;
direct; near; by which time is saved, and circuition cut
off.
they learned more compendicus and expeditious ways, where-
by they shortened their labours, and gained time. woodward.
com pe'ndiously. aav. [from compendious.] shortly ; in a
short method; summarily ; in epitome.
by the apostles we have the substance of christian belief
compendiosly drawn into few and short articles. hooker.
the state or condition of matter, before the world was a-
making, is compendiously expressed by the word chaos. bintly.
compe'n dious n ess. n.s. [from com; endious j shortness; bre-
vity; comprehension in a narrow compass.
the inviting easiness and compendiousness of this assortion,
should dazzle the eyes. bentley's sermons.
compendium. m. s. [latin.] abridgment; summary;
breviate; abbreviature; that which holds much in a narrow
room ; the near way.
after we are grown well acquainted with a short system or
compendium of a science, which is written in the plainest and
most simple manner, it is then proper to read a larger regular
treatise on that subject. //atts on the mind,
compe'nsabi.e. adj. [from compensate.] that which may be
recompensed.
to compensate. v. a. [compens, lat.] to recompense;
to be equivalent to; to counterbalance ; to countervail; to
make amends for.
the length of the night, and the dews thereof, do compen-
fate the heat of the day. bacon's natural history.
the pleasures of life do not compensate the miseries. prior.
nature to these, without profusion kind, -
the proper organs, proper pow'rs affign'd ;
each seeming want compensated of course,
here with degrees of swiftness, there of force. pope.
comf essarion. n: s (from compensate.] recompence; some-
thing equivalent; amends.
poynings, the better to make compensation of his service in
the wars, called a parliament. bacon.
all other debts may compensation find;
but love is strict, and will be paid in kind. dryd. aarongz.
compensatve, adj. [from composite.] that which com-
pensates ; that which countervals.
to compe'sse. v. a. [compose, latin.] to compensate; to
countervail; to be equivalent to ; to counterbalance; to re-
compense.
it seemeth, the weight of the quicksilver doth not com-
fos, he weight of a stone, more than the weight of the
aqua-fortis. bacon's nat. history.
o
3
the joys of the two marriages were compensed with the
mournings and funerals of prince arthur. bacon', henry vii
to comperendinate. v. a. [comperending, latin.] t.
delay. q
comperendination. m. s. [from conferendinate.] delay,
dilatoriness. );
§:::::::. }n. s. [from competent.]
1. such a quantity of any thing as is sufficient, without super-
fluity.
something of speech is to be indulged to common civility
more to intimacies, and a corry to those recreative i.
courses which maintain the chearfulness of society. g. of tor
2. such a fortune as, without czuberance, is equal 'g.
sities of life.
for confeteor of hife i will allow you,
that lack of means enforce you not to evil. shak, hon. iv
it is no mean happiness to be seated in the mean: so.
fluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives lo,
shakesheare's 4/erchant of poi.
a discreet learned clergyman, with a competency fit for on.
of his education, may be an entertaining, an useful, and
sometimes a necessary companion. swift,
reason's whole pleasure, all the joys of sense,
lie in three words, health, peace, and competence. po,
3. [in law.] the power or capacity of a judge, or court so
taking cognisance of an affair. 2.
compet ent. adj. [competens, latin.]
1. suitable ; fit 5 adequate; proportionate.
if there be any power in imagination, the distance must be
competent, the medium not adverse, and the body apt and pro-
portionate. bacon's natural history,
2. adapted to any purpose without dose&amp;t or superfluity.
the greatest captain of the english brought rather a guard
than a comotent army to recover ireland. davies on iran.
to draw men from great excess, it is not amiss, though
we use them unto somewhat less than is competent. ho.
3. reasonable; moderate.
a competent number of the old being first read, the new
should succeed. - hooker.
the clergy have gained some insight into men and things,
and a competent knowledge of the world. atterbury's sermoni.
4. qualified ; fit a competent judge is one who has a right of
jurisdiction in the case.
let us first consider how competent we are for the office.
government of the tongue,
to the neces.
5. consistent with ; incident to.
thot is the privilege of the infinite author of things, who
never fluorbers nor sleeps, but is not competent to any finite
being. lot.
cool pet ently. a v. [from competent.]
1. adequately ; properly.
i think it hath been competently proved. bently,
2. reasonably; moderately; without supersuity or want.
some places require men competently endowed; but none
think the appointment to be a duty of justice bound to respect
desert. isotton,
competible, adj. [srom compet, latin. for this word a
corrupt orthography has introduced compatible.] suitable to;
confistent with.
it is not competiole with the grace of god so much as to in-
cline any man to do evil. hammond on fundansali,
those are properties not at all competitle to body or mattes,
though of never so pure a mixture. glanville,
the duration of eternity a parte ante is such as is only on-
petible to the eternal god, and not communicable to any
created being. sir m. hall,
comir etiel en ess. n. s. [from competible.] suitableness; fit-
ness.
competition. n.s.. [from con and fetto, latin.]
1. the act of endeavouring to gain what another endeavours to
gain at the same time; rivalry ; contest.
the ancient flames of discord and intestine wars, upon the
competition of both houses, would again return. bao.
a portrait, with which one of i'itian's could not come 1"
competition. dryden's dusso;
though what produces any degree of pleasure, be in its.
good, and what is apt to produce any degree of pain be evil,
yet often we do not call it so, when it comes in competitio
the degrees also of pleasure and pain have a preference. lock.
we should be ashamed to rival inserious, and dishonous
our nature by so degrading a coopetitizo. rogers.
2. 1jouble claim ; claim of more than che to one thing : *
ciently with to. -
competition to the crown there is none, nor can be. bato
3. now with for.
the prize of beauty was disputed till you were seen; but
now all pretenders have withdrawn their claims: there **
camp tition but for the second place. dryden.
competitor. n.s. sc.n and petitor, latin.] -
1. one that has a claim opposite to another's; a rival: with
for before the thing claimed.
how<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 441</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
s
o
- how furious and impatient they be,
and cannot brook competitors in love. shaksp, tit. andron.
some undertake suits with purpose to let then fall, to gra-
tify the competitor. bacon.
cicereius and scipio were competitors for the office of
prietor. tatler.
he who trusts in god has the advantage in present felicity;
and, when we take futurity into the account, stands alone, and
is acknowledged to have no competitor. rogers.
2. it had formerly of before the thing claimed.
selymes, king of algiers, was in arms against his brother
mechemetes, competitor of the kingdom. knolles's history.
3. in shakspear; it seems to signify only an opponent.
the guilfords are in arms,
and every hour more competitors
flock to the rebels. shakespeare's richard iii.
compilation. n.s.. [from compila, latin.]
1. a colle&amp;tion from various authors.
2. an assemblage; a coacervation.
there is in it a small vein filled with spar, probably since
the time of the compilation of the mass. woodward on fossils.
to compi(le. v. a. [compilo, latin.]
1. to draw up from various authors; to collect into one body.
2. to write; to compose.
in poetry they compile the praises of virtuous men and ac-
tions, and satyrs against vice. temple,
by the accounts which authors have left, they might learn
that the face of sca and land is the same that it was when
those accounts were compiled. 122dward's natural history.
the regard he had for his shield, had caused him formerly
to compile a dissertation concerning it. arbuthnot and pope.
3. to contain; to comprise: not in use.
after so long a race as i have run
through fairy land, which those fix books compile,
give leave to rest me.
4. to make up; to compose. not used.
lion like, uplandish and more wild,
slave to his pride, and all his nerves being naturally compil’d
of eminent strength, stalks out and preys upon a silly sheep.
chapman's iliad.
comp1’lement. n.s.. [from compile.] coacervation; the aet
of piling together; the act of heaping up.
i was encouraged to assay how i could build a man; for
there is a moral as well as a natural or artificial compilement,
and of better materials. j/otton on education.
compi'ler. m. s. [from compile.] a colle&amp;tor; one who frames
a composition from various authors.
some draw experiments into titles and tables; those we
call compilers, bacon’s new atalantis.
some painful compiler, who will study old language, may
inform the world that robert earl of oxford was high trea-
surer. swift.
complac fnc e.
compla ce. ncy.
1. pleasure; satisfaction; gratification.
i by conversing cannot these erect
from prote, nor in their ways complacence find. milton.
when the supreme faculties move regularly, the inferior
affections following, there arises a serenity and complacency
upon the whole soul. south.
diseases extremely lessen the complacence we have in all the
good things of this life. atterbury's sermons.
others proclaim the infirmities of a great man with satis-
faction and complacency, if they discover none of the like in
spenser.
}n. f. [complacentia, low latin.]
themselves. addison's speciator.
2. the cause of pleasure; joy.
o thou, in heav'n and earth the only peace -
found out for mankind under wrath! o thou,
my sole complacences milton's paradis: lost.
3. civility; complaisance; softness of manners.
they were not satisfied with their governour, and appre-
hensive of his rudeness and want of complacency. clarendon.
his great humanity appeared in the benevolence of his
aspect, the complacency of his behaviour, and the tone of his
voice. addison's freeholder.
complacancy and truth, and manly sweetness,
dwell ever on his tongue, and smooth his thoughts. addis.
with mean complacence ne'er betray your trust,
nor be so civil as to prove unjust. pope.
complacent. adj. [complacens, lat..] civil; affable; soft;
complaisant.
to compla(in. v. n. [complaindre, french.]
1. to mention with sorrow or resentment; to murmur; to la-
ment. with of before the cause of sorrow ; sometimes with
&amp;77.
lord hastings,
humbly complaining to her deity,
got my lord chamberlain his liberty. shakesp. richard iii.
- i will speak in the anguish of my spirit, i will complain in
the bitterness of my soul. job, vii. 11.
shall i, like thee, on friday night complain?
for on that day was coeur de lion slain. dryden's fables.
do not all men complain, even these as well as others, of the
great ignorance of mankind? burmet's prof. to theory of earth.
thus accurs'd,
in midst of water i complain of thirst.
2. sometimes with for before the causal roun.
wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the pu-
nishment of his fins : lam. iii. 39.
3. to inform against.
now, matter shallow, you'll com"' in of me to the
council shakso. a ferry of ves of jwindsor.
to compla'1n. v. a. [this sense is rare, and perhaps not very
proper.] to lament; to bewail.
pale death our valiant leader hath opprest,
come wreak his loss whom bootless yozoon.
gaufride, who couldst so well in rhime complain
the death of richard, with an arrow slain. dryd. fables.
they might the grievance inwardly complain, -
but outwardly they needs must temporize. dam. civil isar.
compla'1n ant. m. s. [from complain.j one who urges a
suit, or commences a prosecution against another.
congreve and this author are the most cager complainants
of the dispute. collier's defence.
compla is e.r. m. s. [from complain..] one who complains; a
murmurer; a lamenter. -
st. jude observes, that the murmurers and complainers are
the fame who speak swelling words. government of the tongue.
philips is a complainer; and on this occasion i told lord car-
teret, that complainers never succeed at court, though railers
do. swift.
compla'1nt. m. s. [complainte, french.]
1. representation of pains or injuries; lamentation.
i cannot find any cause of complaint, that good laws have so
much been wanting unto us, as we to them. hor’s dedicat.
as for me, is my complaint to man. job, xxx. 4.
adam saw
already in part, though hid in gloomies shade,
to sorrow abandon'd, but wo: it felt within,
and in a troubled sea of passion tossed,
thus to disburthen sought with sad complaint.
2. the cause or subject of complaint; grief.
the poverty of the clergy in england hath been the cam-
plaint of all who wish well to the church. swift.
3. a malady; a disease.
one, in a complaint of his bowels, was let blood till he had
scarce any left, and was perfeotly cured. a bathnot on coins.
4. remonstrance against; information against.
full of vexation, come 1 with complaint
against my child. shakesp. midsummer night's dream.
in evil strait this day i stand
before my judge, either to undergo
myself the total crime, or to accuse
my other self, the partner of my life;
whose failing, while her faith to me remains,
i should conceal, and not expose to blame
by my complaint ; but strict necessity
subdues me, and calamitous constraint. milton.
against the goddess these complaints he made. dryd. an.
complaisa nce, n.s...[complaisance, french..] civility; desire
of pleasing; act of adulation.
her death is but in complaisance to her. dryden.
you must also be industrious to discover the opinion of your
enemies; for you may be assured, that they will give you no
quarter, and allow nothing to complaisance. dryd. dufresnoy.
fair venus wept the sad disaster
of having lost her fav'rite dove:
in complaisance poor cupid mourn’d ;
his grief reliev'd his mother's pain. - prior.
complaisa nt, adj. [complaisant, french..] civil; defirous
to please.
there are to whom my satire seems too bold;
scarce to wise peter complaisant enough,
and something said of charters much too rough. pope.
com plais antly. adv. [from complaisant..] civilly; with
desire to please; ceremoniously.
in plenty starving, tantaliz'd in state,
and complaisantly help'd to all i hate;
treated, caress'd, and tir’d, i take my leave. pope.
com plais a‘ntn ess. n. s. [from complaisant..] civility; com-
pliance. dicf.
to com pla nate. uv. a. [from planus, lat.] to level; to
to com pla’ne. } reduce to a flat and even surface.
the vertebrae of the neck and back-bone are made short
and complanated, and firmly braced with muscles. derham.
com ple a^t. see complete. -
co'mplement. m. s. [complementum, latin.]
1. perfection ; fulness; completion; completement.
our custom is both to place it in the front of our prayers
as a guide, and to add it in the end of some principal limbs
or parts, as a complement which fully perfecteth whatsoever
may be defective in the rest. płooker.
they as they feasted had their fill,
for a full complement of all their ill. hubberd's 7ale.
for
dryden.
fairfax.
milton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 442</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
for a complement of these blesfings, they were enjoyed by
the protection of a king of the most harmless disposition, the
most exemplary piety, the greatest sobriety, chastity, and
mercy. clarendon.
the sensible nature, in its complement and integrity, hath
five exterior powers or faculties. hale's origin of mankind.
2. complete set; complete provision; the full quantity or number.
the god of love himself inhabits there,
with all his rage, and dread, and grief and care; ;
his complement of stores, and total war. prior.
3. adscititious circumstances; appendages; parts not necessary,
but ornamental: whence ceremony was called complement, now
corrupted to compliment.
if the case permitteth not baptism, to have the decent com-
plements of baptism, better it were to enjoy the body without
his furniture than to wait for this, ’till the opportunity of that,
for which we desire it, be lost. hooker.
these, which have lastly sprung up, for complements, rites,
and ceremonies of church actions, are, in truth, for the great-
est part, such filly things, that very easiness doth make them
hard to be disputed of in serious manner. płocker.
a doleful case desires a doleful song,
without vain art or curious complements. spenser.
garnish'd and deck'd in modest complement,
not working with the ear, but with the eye. shakesp.
4. [in geometry.] what remains of a quadrant of a circle, or
of ninety degrees, after any certain arch hath been retrenched
from it. • ,
5. [in astronomy.] the distance of a star from the zenith.
6. co'mplement of the curtain, in fortification, that part in
the interiour side of it which makes the demigorge.
7. arithmetical complement of a logarithm, is what the lo-
garithm wants of 10,000oco. chambers.
complete. adj. [completus, latin.]
1. perfeot; full ; having no deficiencies.
with us the reading of scripture is a part of our church
liturgy, a special portion of the service which we do to god;
and not an exercise to spend the time, when one doth wait
for another coming, 'till the assembly of them that shall after-
wards worship him be complete. hocker.
and ye are complete in him which is the head of all princi-
pality and power. col. ii. 10.
then marvel not, thou great and complete man,
that all the greeks begin to worship ajax. shakespeare.
2: complete, having no degrees, cannot properly admit more and
*10/r.
o: any disposition should appear towards so good a work,
the affistance of the legislative power would be necessary to
make it more complete. swift.
3. finished ; ended; concluded.
this course of vanity almost complete, -
tir'd in the field of life, i hope retreat. prior.
to complete. v. a. [from the noun..] to perfeot; to finish.
mr. sanderson was completed master of arts. // alton.
bred only and completed to the taste of lustful appetence.
44ilion.
to town he comes, completes the nation's bope,
and heads the bold train'd-bands, and burns a pope. pope.
completely. adv. [from complete.] fully; perfectly.
then tell us, how you can your bodies roll, -
through space of matter, so completely full 2 i'lackmore.
whatever person would aspire to be completely witty, smart,
humorous and polite, must be able to retain in his memory
every single sentence contained in this work. swist.
completement. n.s.. [from completement, french i the act
of completing.
allow me to give you, from the best authors, the origin,
the antiquity, the growth, the change, and the completement
of satire among the romans. dryden's dedic. to juvenal.
complete ness. n.s.. [from complete.] perfection; the state
of being complete.
i cannot allow their wisdom such a completenes, and inerrabi-
lity, as to exclude myself. king charles.
these parts go to make up the completenes of any subject.
jwatts's logick.
comple' tron. n.s.. [from complete.]
1. accomplishment; act of fulfilling; state of being fulfilled.
there was a full entire harmony, and consent of all the
divine predictions, receiving their completion in christ. south.
2. utmost height; perfect state.
he makes it the utmost completion of an ill character to bear
a malevolence to the best men. pope.
co'mplex. q adj. [complexus, latin.] compositc.; of many
go: parts ; not simple ; including many particu-
lars.
to express complexed significations they took a liberty to
compound and piece together creatures of allowable forms
into mixtures inexistent. brown.
ideas made up of several simple ones, i call complex ; such
as beauty, gratitude, a man, the universe ; which though
complicated of various simple ideas, or complex ideas made up
of simple ones, yet are considered each by itself as one. locke.
*.
a secondary essential mode, called a property, sometimes
goes toward making up the effence of a complex being. //atts.
with such perfection fram’d, -
is this complex stupendous scheme of things. thoms. spring.
co'mplex. n.s.. [from the adjective..] complication; collection.
this parable of the wedding-supper comprehends in it the
whole complex of all the blessings and privileges exhibited by
the gospel. south's sermons.
complexednfss. m. s. [from complex.] complication; in-
volution of many particular parts in one integral; contrariety
to simplicity; compound state or nature.
from the complexedness of these moral ideas, there follows
another inconvenience, that the mind cannot easily retain those
precise combinations. locłe.
comple'xios. m. s. [complexio, latin.]
1. the inclosure or involution of one thing in another.
though the terms of propositions may be complex, yet
where the composition of the argument is plain, simple and
regular, it is properly called a simple syllogism, since the com-
plexion does not belong to the syllogistick form of it. iwaits,
2. the colour of the external parts of any body.
men judge by the complexion of the sky
the state and inclination of the day. shakesp. rich. ii.
what see you in those papers, that you lose
so much complexion * shakespeare's henry v.
he so takes on yonder, so rails against all married mankind,
so curses all eve's daughters, of what complexion soever. shak.
why doth not beauty then refine the wit,
and good complexion rectify the will davies.
niceness, though it renders them insignificant to great pur-
poses, yet it polishes their complexion, and makes their spirits
seem more vigorous. collier on pride.
if i write on a black man, i run over all the eminent per-
sons of that comflexion. addison's spediator.
3. the temperature of the body according to the various pro-
portions of the four medical humours. .
'tis ill, though different your complexions are,
the family of heav'n for men should war. dryden's fables.
for from all tempers he could service draw,
the worth of each, with its allay, he knew ;
and, as the confident of nature, saw
how she complexioms did divide and brew. dryden.
the methods of providence men of this complexion must be
unfit for the contemplation of. burnet's theory of the earth.
let melancholy rule supreme,
choler preside, or blood or phlegm,
it makes no diff'rence in the case,
nor is complexion honour's place. swis?.
comple xion al. adj. [from complexion.] depending on the
complexion or temperament of the body.
men and other animals receive different tinetures from
conflexional efflorescencies, and descend still lower as they par-
take of the fuliginous and denigrating humours. brown.
ignorance, where it proceeds from early or complexional pre-
judices, will not wholly exclude from favour of god. filder.
comple'x1onally. adv. [from compl.xion.] by complexion.
an indian king sent unto alexander a fair woman, fed with
poisons, either by converse or copulation complexionally to de-
stroy him. brown's pulgar errours.
comfl exly. adv. [from complex.] in a complex manner;
not simply. -
comple xness. n.s.. [from complex.] the state of being complex.
complex ure. m. s. [from complex.] the involution or com-
plication of one thing with others.
compl1 anc e. m. s. [from comply. ]
1. the act of yielding to any desire or demand; accord; sub-
mission.
i am far from excusing that compliance, for plenary consent
it was not, to his destruction. king charles.
we are free from any necessary determination of our will
to any particular action, and from a necessary compliance with
our desire, set upon any particular, and then appearing prefer-
able good. locke.
let the king meet compliance in your looks,
a free and ready yielding to your wishes. rowe.
the aetions to which the world solicits our compliance are
sins, which forfeit eternal expectations. rogers.
what compliances will remove dissention, while the libcrty
continues of professing what new opinions we please ? swift.
2. a disposition to yield to others; complaisance.
he was a man of few words, and of great compliance; and
usually delivered that as his opinion, which he foresaw would
be grateful to the king. clarendon.
com p li’ant. adj. [from comply.]
i. yielding; bending.
the compliant boughs
yielded them.
2. civil ; complaisant.
to complicate. v. a. [complico, latin.]
1. to entangle one with another; to join ; to involve mutually.
though the particular actions of war are complicate in fact,
yet they are separate and distinet in right. *:
n
milton's paradise loo.
!
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 443</div><p class="text">c-o m
co m
o
:
o
.
in case our offence against god hath been complicated with
injury to men, we should make restitution. tillotson.
when the disease is complicated with other diseases, one must
consider that which is most dangerous. a, buthnot on diet.
there are a multitude of human actions, which have so
many complicated circumstances, aspects, and situations, with
regard to time and place, persons and things, that it is impos-
fible for any one to pass a right judgment concerning them,
without entering into most of these circumstances. //atts.
2. to unite by involution of parts one in another.
commotion in the parts may make them apply themselves
one to another, or complicate and dispose them after the man-
ner requisite to make them stick. boyle's history of firmness.
3. to form by complication; to form by the union of several
parts into one integral.
lreadful was the din
of hissing through the hall ! thick swarming now
with complicated monsters, head and tail. milt. par. lost.
a man, an army, the universe, are complicated of various
simple ideas, or complex ideas made up of simple ones. locke.
co'mplicat e. adj. [from the verb.] compounded of a mul-
tiplicity of parts.
what pleasure would felicitate his spirit, if he could grasp
all in a survey; as a painter runs over a complicate piece
wrought by titian or raphael. jwatts on the mind.
co'mplicat eness. n. s. [from complicate.] the state of being
complicated; intricacy; perplexity.
there is great variety of intelligibles in the world, so much
objected to our senses, and every several object is full of sub-
divided multiplicity and complicateness. hale's origin of mank.
cox, p lic a'tio n. m. s. [from complicate.]
1. the act of involving one thing in another.
2. the state of being involved one in another.
all our grievances are either of body or of mind, or in
complications of both. l’estrange.
the notions of a confused knowledge are always full of
perplexity and complications, and seldom in order. j/ilkins.
3. the integral consisting of many things involved, perplexed,
and united. -
by admitting a complication of ideas, and taking too many
things at once into one question, the mind is dazzled and be-
wildered. j/atts's logick.
co'mpl ice. m. s. [fr. from complex, an associate, low latin.]
one who is united with others in an ill design; an associate;
a confederate ; an accomplice.
to arms, victorious noble father,
to quell the rebels and their complices. shakesp. henry vi.
justice was afterwards done upon the offenders, the prin-
cipal being hanged and quartered in smithfield; and divers of
his chief complices executed in divers parts of the realm. hayw.
the marquis prevailed with the king, that he might only
turn his brother out of the garrison, after justice was done
upon his complices. clarenaon.
com pl1 er. m. f. [from comply..] a man of an easy temper;
a man of ready compliance. -
suppose a hundred new employments were erected on pur-
pose to gratify compliers, an insupportable difficulty would re-
main. swift.
compliment. n. s. [compliment, fr.] an act, or expres-
sion of civility, usually understood to include some hypocrisy,
and to mean less than it declares : this is properly complement,
something superfluous, or more than enough.
he observed few compliments in matter of arms, but such
as proud anger did indite to him. sidney.
my servant, sir? 'twas never merry world
since lowly feigning was call’d compliment:
y’are servant to the duke orsino, youth. shakespeare.
one whom the musick of his own vain tongue
doth ravish, like inchanting harmony:
a man of compliments, whom right and wrong
have chose as umpire of their meeting. shakespeare.
what honour that,
but tedious waste of time, to sit and hear
so many hollow compliments and lies,
outlandish flatteries : milton's paradise regain'd.
virtue, religion, heaven and eternal happiness, are not trifles
to be given up in a compliment, or sacrificed to a jest. rogers.
to co'mpliment. v. a. [from the noun.] to sooth with
acts or expressions of respect; to flatter; to praise.
it was not to compliment a society, so much above flattery
and the regardless air of common applauses. glanville.
monarchs should their inward soul disguise,
dissemble and command, be false and wise ;
by ignominious arts, for servile ends,
should compliment their foes, and shun their friends. prior.
the watchman gave so very great a thump at my door,
that i awaked, and heard myself complimented with the usual
salutation, tatler.
to compli’ment. v. n. to use ceremonious or adulatorylan-
guage.
vol. i.
i make the interlocutors upon occasion compliment with one
*
another. boyle.
she compliments menelaus very handsomely, and says he
wanted no accomplishment either of mind or body. pope.
complimental. adj. [from compliment.] exprefive of re-
spect or civility; implying compliments.
i come to speak with paris from the prince troilus: i will
make a complimental assault upon him. shak. troil. and cross.
languages, for the most part, in terms of art and erudi-
tion, retain their original poverty, and rather grow rich and
abundant in complimental phrases, and such froth. //otton.
this falsehood of ulysses is intirely complimental and off-
cious. brooms.
complime'stally, adv. [from complimental.] in the nature
of a compliment; civilly; with artful or false civility.
this speech has been condemned as avaricious: eusłathius
judges it spoken artfully and complimentally. broome.
com pl ment er. n.s. [from compliment..] one given to com-
pliments ; a flatterer.
co'mpline. n.s. [compline, fr. completinum, low lat.] the last
act of worship at night, by which the service of the day is
completed.
at morn and eve, besides their anthems sweet,
their peny masses and their complines mcet. hubb. tale,
if a man were but of a day's life, it is well if he lasts till
even song, and then says his compline an hour before the time.
taylor's holy living.
to com plo'r e. v. n. [complaro, lat.] to make lamentation
together.
complot. m. s. [fr. from completum for complexum, low
latin, asanage.] a confederacy in some secret crime; a
plot ; a conspiracy.
i cannot, my life, my brother, like but well
the purpose of the complat which ye tell. hubberd's tase.
i know their complot is to have my life. shak. hen. vi.
to comp lo"r. v. a. [from the noun.j. to form a plot; to
conspire ; to join in any secret design, generally criminal.
nor ever by advised purpose meet,
to plot, contrive, or complet any ill. shakos. richard ii.
a few lines after, we find them complatting together, and con-
triving a new scene of miseries to the trojans. pope.
com ploor rr r. m. s. [from complot..] a conspirator; one
joined in a plot.
jocasta too, no longer now my sister,
is found complotter in the horrid deed. dryd, and lee's oedip.
to comply. v. n. [skinner derives it from the french coin-
plaire ; but probably it comes from complier, to bend to. plier
is still in use.] to yield to ; to be obsequious to; to accord
with 5 to suit with. it has with before as well persons as things.
the rising sun complies with our weak sight,
first gilds the clouds, then shews his globe of light. isoaller.
they did servilely comply with the people in worshipping god
-
by sensible images and representations. tillotson.
the truth of things will not comply with our conceits, and
bend itself to our interest. - 7 illotson.
remember i am she who sav'd your life,
your loving, lawful, and complying wife. - dryden,
he made his wish with his eitate comply,
joyful to live, yet not afraid to die, prior.
com po'nent. adj. [componens, latin.] that which constitutes
the compound body. -
the bigness of the component parts of natural bodies may
be conjectured by their colours.
to compo'rt. v. n. [comporter, fr. from porto, lat.] to
agree; to suit: followed by with.
some piety's not good there, some vain disport
on this side sin, with that place may comport. donne.
such does not comport with the nature of time. holder,
it is not every man's talent to distinguish aright how far
our prudence may warrant our charity, and how far our cha-
rity may comport with our prudence. l’eslrange.
children, in the things they do, if they comport with their
age, find little difference, so they may be doing. locke.
to com po'rt. v. a.
1. to bear ; to endure. this is a gallick signification, not
adopted among us.
the malecontented sort,
that never can the present state comport, -
but would as often change as they change will. daniel.
2. to behave ; to carry: with the reciprocal pronoun.
at years of discretion and comport
yourself at this rantipole rate. congreve's way of the world.
compo'rt. m. s. [from the verb.] behaviour; conduct; man-
ner of acting and looking. -
i shall account concerning the rules and manners of de-
portment in the receiving, our comport and conversation in
and after it. taylor's worthy communicant.
i know them well, and mark'd their rude comport;
in times of tempest they command alone,
and he but sits precarious on the throne. dryden's fables.
5 c com-
g
newton's opticks. ,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 444</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
compo'r'rable. adj. [from comport.] consistent; not con-
tradictory. on -
we cast the rules and cautions of this art into some com-
portable method. , wotton's archite&amp;ure.
compo'rtance. n. s. [from comport.] behaviour; gesture of
ceremony. " - -
goodly comportance each to other bear,
and entertain themselves with court'sies meet. fairy queen.
compo'rtment. m. s. [from comport.] behaviour; practice.
the will of god is like a streight unalterable rule or line;
but the various comportments of the creature either thwarting
this rule or holding conformity to it, occasion several habitudes
of this rule. - hale.
by her serious and devout comportment on these solemn occa-
fions, she gives an example that is very often too much
wanted. addison's freeholder.
to compose. v. a. [composer, fr. compono, latin.]
1. to form a mass by joining different things together.
zealought to be composed of the highest degrees of all pious
affe&amp;tions. spratt.
2. to place any thing in its proper form and method.
in a peaceful grave my corps compose. dryden's an.
how doth the sea exactly compose itself to a level superficies,
and with the earth make up one spherical roundness. ray.
the greatest conqueror in this nation, after the manner of
the cla grecian lyricks, did not only compose the words of
his divine odes, but generally set them to musick himself. add.
3. to dispose; to put in the proper state for any purpose.
the whole army seemed well composed to obtain that by their
swords, which they could not by their pen. clarendon.
4. to put together a discourse or sentence ; to write as an au-
thour.
words so pleasing to god, as those which the son of god
himself hath composed, were not possible for men to frame.
phooker.
5. to constitute by being parts of a whole.
nor did israel'scape
th’ infection, when their borrow'd gold compos'd
the calf in oreb. milton's paradise loft.
a few useful things, confounded with many trifles, fill their
memories, and compose their intellectual possessions. watts.
6. to calm ; to quiet.
he would undertake the journey with him, by which all
his fears would be composed. clarendon.
you, that had taught them to subdue their foes,
cou'd order teach, and their high sp'rits compose. waller,
compose thy mind;
nor frauds are here contriv'd, nor force design'd. dryden.
he, having a full command over the water, had power to
ftill and compose it, as well as to move and disturb it. woodw.
yet to compose this midnight noise,
go, freely search where-e'er you please. prior.
7. to adjust the mind to any §: by freeing it from dis-
turbance.
the mind being thus disquieted, may not be able easily to
compose and settle itself to prayer. duppa's rules for devotion.
we beseech thee to compose our thoughts, and preserve her
reason, during her sickness. swift.
8. to adjust ; to settle: as, to compose a difference.
9. [with printers.] to arrange the letters; to put the letters
in order in the forms.
io. [in musick.] to form a tune from the different musical
notes.
compo's ed. participial adj. [from compose..] calm; serious ;
even sedate.
in spain there is something still more serious and composed
in the manner of the inhabitants. addison on italy.
the mantuan there in sober triumph sate,
compos'd his posture, and his look sedate. pope.
compo'sedly, adv. [from composed.] calmly ; seriously; sc-
dately.
a man was walking before the door very composedly without
a hat: one crying, here is the fellow that killed the duke,
every body asked which is he, the man without the hat very
composedly answered, i am he. clarendon.
com po's edn ess. m. s. [from composed.] sedateness; calmness;
tranquillity.
he that will think to any purpose, must have fixedness and
composedness of humour, as well as smartness of parts. norris.
compo's er. m. s. [from compose.] * * - -
1. an author; a writer.
now will be the right season of forming them to be able
writers and composers in every excellent matter. milton.
if the thoughts of such authors have nothing in them, they
at least do no harm, and shew an honest industry and a good
intention in the composer. addison's freeholder.
2. he that adapts the musick to words; he that forms a tune,
for the truth of the theory i am in no wise concerned, the
composer of it must look to that. woodward.
for composition i prefer next ludovico, a most judicious
and sweet composer. peacham on musick.
* - - - - o
the composer has so expressed my sense, where i intended
to move the passions, that he seems to have been the poet as
well as the composer. dryden's albion and albanius, preface.
com posite. adj. [compositus, latin.]
the composite order in architecture is the last of the five or-
ders of columns; so named because its capital is composed out
of those of the other orders; and it is also called the roman
and italick order. płarris.
some are of opinion, that the composite pillars of this arch
were in imitation of the pillars of solomon's temple. addison.
com position. m. s. [compositio, latin.]
1. the act of forming an integral of various dissimilar parts.
we have exact forms of composition, whereby they incorpo-
rate almost as they were natural simples. bacon's new atlantis.
in the time of the yncas reign of peru, no composition was
allowed by the laws to be used in point of medicine, but only
simples proper to each disease. temple.
2. the act of bringing simple ideas into complication, opposed
to analysis, or the separation of complex notions.
the investigation of difficult things, by the method of
analysis, ought ever to precede the method of composition.
newton's opticks.
3. a mass formed by mingling different ingredients.
heat and vivacity in age, is an excellent composition for
business. bacon's essays.
vast pillars of stone, cased over with a composition, that looks
the most like marble of any thing one can imagine. addison.
jove mix’d up all, and his best clay employ'd,
then call'd the happy composition floyd. swift.
4. the state of being compounded; union; conjunetion; com-
bination.
contemplate things first in their own simple natures, and
afterwards view them in composition with other things. j4 atts.
5. the arrangement of various figures in a picture.
the disposition in a picture is an assembling of many parts,
is also called the composition, by which is meant the distribu-
i. and orderly placing of things, both in general and in par-
ticular. dryden's duffe/hay.
6. written work. y oft shay
writers are divided concerning the authority of the greater
part of those compositions that pass in his name. l’estrange.
that divine prayer has always been looked upon as a com-
position fit to have proceeded from the wisest of men. addison.
when i read rules of criticism, i enquire after the works of
the author, and by that means discover what he likes in a
composition. addison's guardian.
7. adjustment; regulation.
a preacher in the invention of matter, election of words,
composition of gesture, look, pronunciation, motion, useth all
these faculties at once. ben. johnson's discov.
8. compact; agreement; terms on which differences are
settled.
to take away all such mutual grievances, injuries and
wrongs, there was no way but only by going upon compo-
jition and agreement amongst themselves. and again, all pub-
lick regiment, of what kind soever, seemeth evidently to have
arisen from deliberate advice, consultation, and composition be-
tween men, judging it convenient and behoveful. haoker.
thus we are agreed;
i crave our composition may be written,
and seal’d between us. shakesp. anthony and cleopatra.
their courage droops, and, hopeless now, they wish
for composition with th' unconquer'd fish. waller.
9. the act of discharging a debt by paying part; the sum paid.
io. consistency; congruity.
there is no composition in these news,
that gives them credit.
—indeed they are disproportion'd. shakespeare's othel'.
ii. [in grammar.] the joining of two words together, or the
prefixing a particle to another word, to augment, diminish, or
change its signification.
12. a certain method of demonstration in mathematicks, which
is the reverse of the analytical method, or of resolution. it
proceeds upon principles in themselves self-evident, on defi-
nitions, postulates and axioms, and a previously demonstrated
series of propositions, step by step, 'till it gives a clear know-
ledge of the thing to be demonstrated. this is called the syn-
thetical method, and is used by euclid in his elements. harris.
compo's itive. adj. [from compose..] compounded; or having
the power of compounding. dic?.
compo'sitor. m. s. [from compose.] he that ranges and adjusts
the types in printing; distinguished from the pressman, who
makes the impression upon paper.
compost. m. s. [fr. composition, lat.] a mixture of various
substances for enriching the ground; manure.
- avoid what is to cone,
and do not spread the composi on the weeds,
to make them ranker. " " ' shakespeare's hamlet.
we also have great variety of composs and soils, for the
making of the earth fruitful. ** bacon's ailantis.
water young planted shrubs, amomum especially, which
- you
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 445</div><p class="text">c o m
o:
o
h
%.
s:
o
o:
o
you can hardly refresh too often, and it requires abundant
compos. evelyn's kalendar.
there, as his dream foretold, a cart he found,
that carry'd compos! forth to dung the ground. dryden.
in vain the nursing grove
seems fair awhile, cherish'd with foster earth;
but when the alien compos! is exhaust,
its native poverty again prevails. philips.
t. compo's t. v. a. [from the noun..] to manure; to enrich
with soil.
by removing into worse earth, or forbearing to compos, the
earth, water-mint turneth into field-mint, and the colewort
into rape. bacon's natural history.
as for earth, it composseth itself; for i knew a garden that
had a field poured upon it, and it did bear fruit excellently.
bacon's natural history.
compo'sture. m. s. [from compost.] soil; manure. not used.
the earth’s a thief,
that feeds and breeds by a composiure stol'n
from gen'ral excrements. shakespeare's timon.
compossu re. m. s. [from compose.]
1. the act of composing or inditing.
their own forms are not like to be so sound, or compre-
hensive of the nature of the duty, as forms of publick com-
posure. king charles.
2. arrangement; combination ; mixture; order.
hence languages arise, when, by institution and agreement,
such a temposure of letters, such a word, is intended to signify
such a certain thing. holder on elements of speech.
from the various composures and combinations of these
corpuscles together, happen all the varieties of the bodies
formed out of them. woodward's natural history.
3. the form arising from the disposition of the various parts.
in compositre of his face,
liv’d a fair, but manly grace.
4. frame; make ; temperament.
to reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet
with slaves that smell of sweat; say this becomes him :
as his composure must be rare indeed,
whom these things cannot blemish. shakes. ant, and cleop.
the duke of buckingham sprung, without any help, by a
kind of congenial composure, to the likeness of our late sove-
reign and master. wotton.
5. adjustment. -
god will rather look to the inward raptures of the mind
than to the outward form and composure of the body. duppa.
6. composition; framed discourse.
discourses on such occasions are seldom the productions of
leisure, and should be read with those favourable allowances
that are made to hast, composures. atterbury.
in the composures of men, remember you are a man as well
as they and it is not their reason, but your own, that is
given to guide you. - watts on the amind.
7. sedatoness; calmness; tranquillity.
to whom the virgin majesty of eve,
as one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
with sweet austere composure thus reply'd. milton,
the calmest and serenest hours of life, when the passions of
nature are all silent, and the mind enjoys its most perfect
composure. . . watts's logick.
8. agreement; composition; settlement of differences.
the treaty at uxbridge gave the fairest hopes of an happy
composure. - king charles.
van guard! to right and left the front unfold,
that all may see, who hate us, how we seek
peace and composure. milton's paradise lost.
things were not brought to an extremity: there seems yet
to be room left for a composure; hereafter there may be only
for pity. - - dryden.
compotaotion. m. s. [compotatio, lat..] the aet of drinking
or tippling together.
secrecy to words spoke under the rose, only mean, in com-
potation, from the ancient custom in symposiack meetings, to
wear chaplets of roses. brown's vulgar errours.
if thou wilt prolong
dire compotation, forthwith reason quits
her empire to confusion and misrule,
and vain debates; then twenty tongues at once
conspire in senseless jargon; nought is heard
but din and various clamour, and madrant.
7% compound. v. a. [compono, latin.]
1. to mingle many ingredients together in one mass.
2. to form by uniting various parts. *
whosoever compoundeth any like it, shall be cut off. ex. xxx.
it will be difficult to evince, that nature does not make de-
compounded bodies; i mean, mingle together such bodies as
are already compounded of elementary, or rather of fimple
oil es. lo- boyle's sceptical chymist.
the ideas, being each but one single perception, are easier
got than the more complex ones; and therefore are not liable
to the uncertainty which attends those compounded ones. locke.
crashaw.
philips.
*
o
3. to mingle in different positions; to combine.
we cannot have a single image that did not enter through
the fight; but we have the power of altering and compounding
those images into all the varieties of picture. addis. speziator.
4. [in grammar.] to form one word from two or more words.
where it and tigris embrace each other under the city of
apamia, there do they agree of a joint and compounded name,
and are called piso-tigris. raleigh's history of the ssorld.
5. to compose by being united. . . -
who'd be so mock'd with glory, as to live
but in a dream of friendship : ".
* - to have his pomp, and all what state compounds,
but only painted, like his varnish'd friends ! shuks. timon.
6. ". adjust a difference by some recession from the sigour of
clainn s. - o
i would to god all strifes were well compounded. shakes.
if there be any discord or suits between any of the family,
they are compounded and appeased. bacon's new atlantii.
7. to discharge a debt by paying only part.
shall i, ye gods, he cries, my debts compound 8
to com po'und. v. n.
1. to come to terms of agreement by abating something of the
first demand. it has for before the thing accepted or remitted.
they were, at last, glad to compound for his bare commit-
- * * * : * * *
* -
* * *
- - gay.
ment to the tower. clarendon.
pray but for half the virtues of this wife ;
compound for all the rest, with longer life. dryden.
2. to bargain in the lump. - -
here's a fellow will help you to-morrow : compound with
him by the year. shakespeare's measure for measure.
3. to come to terms, by granting something on each side.
cornwal compounded to furnish ten oxen after michaelmas
for thirty pounds, carew's survey of carnival.
- once more i come to know of thee, king harry,
if for thy ransom thou wilt now compound, -
before thy most assured overthrow shakesp. henry v.
made all the royal stars recant, -
compound and take the covenant,
but useless all, when he, despairing, found
catullus then did with the winds compound. dryd.juvenal.
paracelsus and his admirers have compounded with the ga-
lenists, and brought a mixed use of chymical medicines into
the present practice. - temples
4. to determine. this is not in use. -
- we here deliver,
subscribed by the consuls and patricians, , - a
together with the seal of the senate, what
we have compounded on. . . . shakespeare's coriolanus.
compound. adj. [from the verb.] "
1. formed out of many ingredients; not simple. - -
the ancient eleetrum had in it a fifth of silver to the gold,
and made a compound metal, as fit for most uses as gold. bacon.
compound substances are made up of two or more fimple
substances. . . . . . . . . watts's logick.
2. [in grammar.] composed of two or more words; not
simple. - • *.*.*, ... •
those who are his greatest admirers, seem pleased with them.
as beauties; i speak of his compound epithets. ... pope.
3. compou nd or aggregated flower, in botany, is such as con-
sists of many little flowers, concurring together to make up
one whole one ; each of which has its style and stamina, and
adhering seed, and are all contained within one and the same
calyx : such are the sunflower and dandelion. o, harris.
compound. n.s.. [from the verb.] the mass formed by the
union of many ingredients. -
for present use or profit, this is the rule: consider the price
of the two simple bodies; confider again the dignity of the
one above the other in use; then see if you can make a com-
pound, that will save more in price than it will lose in dignity
of the use. * a bacon's physical rem.
as man is a compound and mixture of flesh, as well as
spirit.” a 1. - - - - - - south's sermons.
love, why do we one passion call?
when 'tis a compound of them all;
where hot and cold, where sharp and sweet,
in all their equipages meet. swift.
compo'undable, adj. [from compound.] capable of being
compounded. - - -
compo'under, n. s. [from to compound..] .
1. one who endeavours to bring parties to terms of agreement.
those fostners, sweetners, compounders, and expedient-
mongers, who shake their heads so strongly. swift.
2. a mingler; one who mixes bodies. -
to comprehend. v. a. [comprehendo, latin.]
1. to comprise ; to include ; to contain; to imply. *
if there be any other commandment, it is briefly compre-
hended in this saying, namely, thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself. - * * - - - ram, xiii. 9.
it would be ridiculous to grow old in the study of every
• necessary thing, in an art which comprehend, so many several
parts. dryden’s pop!
2, 1 j
ihudibras.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 446</div><p class="text">c o m
c o m
2. to contain the mind; to understand; to conceive.
rome was not better by her horace taught,
than we are here to comprehend his thought. jwaller.
'tis unjust, that they who have not the least notion of
heroic writing, should therefore condemn the pleasure which
others receive from it, because they cannot comprehend it. dryd.
comprehe'nsible. adj. [comprehensible, fr. comprehensibilis,
latin.]
1. intelligible; attainable by the mind; conceivable by the
understanding.
the horizon sets the bounds between the enlightened and
dark parts of things, between what is and what is not com-
prehensible by us. locke.
2. possible to be comprised.
lest this part of knowledge should seem to any not cam-
prehensible by axiom, we will set down some heads of it. bacon.
cox prehe'ssibly, adv. [from comprehensible.] with great
power of signification or understanding; significantly; with
great extent of sense.
the words wisdom and rightcousness are commonly used
very comprehensibly, so as to signify all religion and virtue. tillot.
cox prehe'ssios. n.s. [comprehensin, latin.]
1. the act or quality of comprising or containing; inclusion.
in the old testament there is a close comprehension of the
new, in the new an open discovery of the old. hook, r.
the comprehension of an idea regards all essential modes and
properties of it; so body, in its comprehension. takes in solidity,
figure, quantity, mobility. j/atts's logic.
2. summary; epitome; compendium ; abstract; abridgment in
which much is comprised.
if we would draw a short abstract of human happiness,
bring together all the various ingredients of it, and digest
the m into one prescription, we must at last fix on this wife
and religious aphorism in my text, as the sum and comprehen-
sian of all. rogers.
3. knowledge ; capacity; power of the mind to admit and
contain many ideas at once.
you give no proof of decay of your judgment, and com-
prehension of all things, within the compass of an human un-
det standing. 19nyden.
4. [{n rhetorick. a trope or figure, by which the name of a
whole is put for a part, or that of a part for the woole, or a
definite number for an indefinite. 11arris.
cow preh e’nsive. adj. [from comprehend j
1. having the power to comprehend or understand many things
at once.
he must have been a man of a most wonderful comprehensive
nature, because he has taken into the compass of his canter-
bury tales the various manners and humours of the whole
english nation in his age; not a single character has escaped
him. drydon's fables, prosace.
his hand unstain'd, his uncorrupted heart,
his comprehensive head , all int’rests weigh'd,
all europe sav’d, yet britain not betray'd. pope's episoles.
2. having the quality of comprising much ; compendious; ex-
tensive.
so diffusive, so comprehensive, so catholick a grace is charity,
that whatever time is the opportunity of any other virtue, that
time is the opportunity of charity. spratt's sermons.
cox preh e n six e l y. adv. [from comprehensive..] in a com-
prehensive manner. -
cox pr = he'ssiv en ess. m. s. [from comprehensive..] the qua-
lity of including much in a few words or narrow compass.
compare the beauty and comprehensiveness of legends on an-
cient coins. addison on ancient 44-dair.
to compress. v. a. [compressus, latin.]
1. to foice into a narrower compass 5 to squeeze together.
2. to embrace.
her neptune ey'd, with bloom of beauty blest,
and in his cave the yielding nymph comprest. pope's odyss.
there was in the island of lo a young girl compressed by a
genius, who delighted to associate with the muses. pope.
compre'ss, n.s. [from the verb, j bolsters of linen, by which
surgeons suit their bandages for any particular part or purpose.
&amp;uincy.
i applied an intercipient about the ankle and upper part of
the foot, and by compress and bandage dressed it up. joseman.
cox pressibility. m. s. [from compressible.] the quality of
being compressible; the quality of admitting to be brought by
force into a narrower compass; as air may be compressed, but
water can by no violence be reduced to less space than it na-
turally occupies.
compressible. adj. [from compress.] capable of being forced
into a narrower compass; yielding to pressure, so as that one
part is brought nearer to another.
their being spiral particles, accounts for the elasticity of
air; their being spherical particles, which gives free passage
to any heterogeneous matter, accounts for air's being comi-
pressible. cheyne's phil. prin.
cômor essielen ess, n.s.. [from compressible.] capability of
being pressed close, die?.
compre'ssion. n.s.. [compressio, latin.] the act of brin
the parts of any body more near to each other by viole
the quality of admitting such an effort of force as may
pel the body compressed into a narrower space.
whensoever a solid body is pressed, there is an inward
tumult in the parts, seeking to deliver themselves from i.
compression; and this is the cause of all violent motion. bao.
the powder in shot, being dilated into such a flame as .
dureth not comprehen, moveth in round, the flame being a
the nature of a liquid body, sometimes recoiling. bo
tears are the effects of the compression of the moisture of.
brain, upon dilatation of the spirits. bacon's natural history
merry michael the cornish poet piped this upon his so
pipe for, merry england, but with a mocking comprison.
normandy. camden's kemains
he that shall find out an hypothesis, by which water.
be so rare, and yet not be capable of compression by force,
ging
tice ;
cqiil-
- - - s
may doubtless, by the same hypothesis, make gold and water,
and all other bodies, as much rater as he pleases; so that light
may find a ready passage through transparent substances. no.
cook e'ssu re. m. s. [from comproß.] the act or force off.
body pressing against another.
we tried whether heat would, notwithstanding so forcible
a compresire, dilate it, boyle's spring of the air
to com print. v. n. [comprimere, latin.] -
l to point together; it is commonly taken, in law, for the
deceitful printing of another s copy or book, to the prejudice
of the rightful proprietor. philips's i/orld of word,
to com pri se. v. a. [comprendre, compris, french..] to con.
tain ; to com; rehead ; to include.
necessity of shortness causeth men to cut off impertinent
discourses, and to comprise much matter in few words. hozier.
do they not, under doctrine, comprehend the same that we
intend by matters of faith? do not they, under discipline,
comprise the regimen of the church 2
'tis the polluted love that multiplies;
but friendship does two souls in one comprise. rostommon,
coxipoop a'tion. * / [comproeo, latin.j proof; attestation.
that is only esteemed a legal testimony which receives con-
probation from the mouths of at least two witnesses.
compromise. m. s. [compromisjum, latin.]
1. confromise is a mutual promise of two or more parties at dis.
ference, to refer the ending of their controversies to the arbi.
trement or equity of oxic or more arbitrators. cool,
2. a compact or bargain, in which some concessions are male
on each side.
wars have not wasted it ; for warr'd he hath not;
but basely yielded, upon compromise,
that which his ancestors atchiev'd with blows. sh. ril. ii.
to co. mpr omis e. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to compound; to adjust a compact by mutual concessions:
as, they compromised the affair at a middle rate.
2. in shaftspeare it means, unusually, to accord ; to agree,
laban and himself were compromis'd,
that all the yearlings, which were streak'd and pied,
should fall as jacob's hire. shakesp. merchant of winic,
comp rox11sso'rial. adj. [siom compromise.] relating to a
compromise.
comp roy is scial. m. s. [from con and provincial.] belonging
to the same province. -
at the consecration of an archbishop, all his comprovincial,
ought to give their attendance. ayliffe's purorgan,
compt. m. s. [comple, fr. computus, lat..] account; comi-
putation 3 reckoning.
your servants ever
have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compi,
to make their audit at your highness' pleasure,
still to return your own. shakesp. king john,
73 com pt. v. a. [compler, french..] to compute; to num-
ter. we now use to count, which see.
co'mr tible, adj. [from compt..] accountable; responsible;
ready to give account; subject ; submissive.
good beauties, let me sustain my scorn; i am very constill:
even to the least finister usage. shakespeare.
to comptro'll. v. a. s. this word is written by some
authors, who did not attend to the etymology, for control;
and some of its derivatives are written in the same manner.]
to controll ; to overrule; to oppose.
com ptro'ller. m. s. [from comptroll.] director; supervisor;
superior intendent; governour.
this night he makes a supper, and a great one,
to many lords and ladies:
i was spoke to, with sir henry guilford,
this night to be comptrollers. shosh. henry viii.
the comptrollers of vulgar opinions pretend to find out such
a similitude in some kind of baboons. tompk.
my fates permit me not from hence to fly;
nor be, the great comptroller of the sky. dryden's £r:#.
comptro'll er ship, n. /.. [from comptroller.] superintendence.
the gayle for stannery-causes is annexed to the comptrolor:
/hip. carew's survey of cornwal.
hooir.
brown,
:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2
com-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 447</div><p class="text">c o m
c o n
comru'lsatively. adv. [from compasatory..] with force :
by constraint. - clariffa.
compu'ls atory. n. s. [from compulsor, latin.] having the
force of compelling; coactive.
which is no other
but to recover from us by strong hand,
and terms compulsatory, those 'foresaid lands -
so by his father lost. shakespeare's hamlet.
compu'lsion. n.s.. [compulsio, latin.]
1. the act of compelling to something; force; violence of the
2gent. -
so reasons were as plenty as blackberries, i would give no
man a reason on compulsion. shakespeare's henry iv.
thoughts, whither have ye led me ! with that sweet
compulsion thus transported. milton's paradise lost.
such sweet compulsion doth in musick lye,
to lull the daughters of necessity. milton.
2. the state of being compelled; violence suffered.
compulsion is in an agent capable of volition, when the
beginning or continuation of any action is contrary to the
preference of his mind. ilocke.
when the fierce foe hung on our broken rear,
with what compulsion and laborious flight
we sunk thus low milton's paradise lost.
this faculty is free from compulson, and so spontaneous,
and free from determination by the particular object. hale.
possibly there were others who assisted harold, partly out of
fear and compulsion. hale on common law.
compu'lsive. adj. [from compulser, fr. compulsus, latin.]
having the power to compel; forcible.
the danube, vast and deep,
supreme of rivers, to the frightful brink,
urg'd by compulsive arms, soon as they reach'd,
new terror chill'd their veins. phillips.
the clergy would be glad to recover their dues by a more
short and compulsive method. swift.
compu'lsively. adv. [from compulsive..] by force; by vio-
lence.
com pu'lsive ness. n.s.. [from compulsive..] force; compulsion.
com pu'lsorily. adv. [from compulsory.] in a compulsory or
forcible manner; by force; by violence.
to say that the better deserver hath such right to govern,
as he may compulsorily bring under the less worthy, is idle. bac.
compu'lsory. adj. [compulsoire, french.] having the power
of necessitating or compelling.
he erreth in this, to think that actions, proceeding from
fear, are properly compulsory actions; which, in truth, are not
only voluntary, but free actions; neither compelled, nor so
much as physically necessitated. bramh, agains? hobbes.
kindly it would be taken to comply with a patent, al-
though not compulsory. swift.
computnction. n.s. [componelion, fr. from pungo punctum,
to prick, latin.] -
1. the power of pricking; stimulation; irritation.
this is that acid and piercing spirit, which, with such ac-
tivity and compundion, invadeth the brains and nostrils of those
that receive it. brown's vulgar errours.
2. the state of being pricked by the conscience; repentance;
contrition.
he acknowledged his disloyalty to the king, with xpressions
of great compunesion. clarendon.
comfu'nctious. adj. [from compunelion.] repentant; sorrow-
ful; tender.
stop up th’ access and passage to remorse,
that no compunetious visitings of nature
shake my fell purpose. shakespeare's macbeth.
compu'nctive. adj. [from compunelion.] causing remorse.
compurg ation. n.j. [compurgatio, latin.] the pracice of
justifying any man's veracity by the testimony of another.
compurgator. n. s. [latin.] one who bears his testi-
mony to the credibility of another.
the next quarry, or chalk-pit, will give abundant attesta-
tion: these are so obvious, that i need not be far to seek for a
compurgator. iwoodward’s natural history.
compu‘table. adj. [from compute.] capable of being num-
bered or computed.
if, instead of twenty-four letters, there were twenty-four
millions, as those twenty-four millions are a finite number ;
so would all combinations thereof be finite, though not easily
computable by arithmetick. hale's origin of mankind.
comput a’tion. n.s.. [from compute.]
1. the aet of reckoning; calculation.
my princely father
then, by just computation of the time,
found that the issue was not his. shakes. richard iii.
2. the sum colle&amp;ied or settled by calculation.
we pass for women of fifty: many additional years are
thrown into female computations of this nature. addis, guardian.
to compute. v. a. s.computo, latin.] to reckon; to cal-
culate; to number; to count.
compute how much water would be requisite to lay the
“o under water, burnet’s theory of the earth.
ol. i.
where they did compute by weeks, yet still the year was
measured by months. halder on time.
alas! not dazzled with their noon-tide ray,
compute the morn and ev'ning to the day;
the whole amount of that enormous fame,
a tale that blends their glory with their shame. pope.
comoore... n.s. [computus, lat..] computation; calculation.
though there were a fatality in this year, yet divers were
but in their account, aberring several ways from the true and
just compute; and calling that one year which perhaps might
be another. brown's vulgar errours.
computer. m. s. [from compute.] reckoner; accountant;
calculator.
the kalendars of these computers, and the accounts of these
days, are different. brown's vulgar errours.
i have known some such ill computers, as to imagine the
many millions in stocks so much real wealth. swift.
co'mrutist. n. s. [computise, fr.] calculator; one skilled
in the art of numbers or computation.
the treasurer was a wise man, and a strict computiff. wotton.
we conceive we have a year in three hundred and fixty-five
days exact: computiffs tell us, that we escape fix hours. brown.
co'mrade. m. s. [camerade, fr. from camera, a chamber, one
that lodges in the same chamber, contubernio fruitur.]
1. one who dwells in the same house or chamber.
rather i abjure all roofs, and chuse
to be a comrade with the wolf and owl. shakesp. k. lear.
2. a companion; a partner in any labour or danger.
he permitted them
to put out both thine eyes, and fetter'd send thee
into the common prison, there to grind
among the slaves and asles, thy comrades,
as good for nothing else. milton's agonisłes.
a footman, being newly married, desired his comrade to tell
him freely what the town said of it. swift.
con. a latin inseparable preposition, which, at the beginning
of words, signifies union or association: as concourse, a running
together ; to convene, to come together.
con. [abbreviated from contra, against, lat.] a cant word for
one who is on the negative side of a question; as the pros and
coors.
to con. v. a. [connan, sax. to know ; as in chaucer, old
wymen connen mochil thinge; that is, old women have much
knowledge.]
1. to know.
of muses, hobbinol, i conne no skill
enough to me to paint out my unrest. spensor's pasłorals.
2. to study; to commit to memory; to fix in the mind. it is
a word now little in use, except in ludicrous language.
pretty answers: have you not been acquainted with gold.
smiths wives, and conn'd them out of rings. shakespeare.
here are your parts; and i am to intreat you to con them
by to-morrow night. shakes. midsummer night's dream.
our understanding cannot in this body arrive so clearly to
the knowledge of god, and things invisible, as by orderly
conning over the visible and inferior creatures. milton.
shew it him written; and, having the other also written in
the paper, shew him that, after he has conn'd the first, and re-
quire it of him. holder's elements of speech.
the books of which i'm chiefly fond,
are such as you have whilom conn'd. prior.
all this while john had conn'd over such a catalogue of hard
words, as were enough to conjure up the devil. arbuthnot.
3. to con thanks; an old expression for to thank. it is the
same with stavoir gre.
1 con him no thanks for’t, in the nature he delivers it. shak.
to conca'merate. v. a. [concamero, lat..] to arch
over ; to vault; to lay concave over.
of the upper beak, an inch and a half consisteth of one
concamerated bone, bended downwards, and toothed as the
other. grew's museum.
concamera'tion. m. s. [from concamerate.] arch; vault.
what a romance is the story of those impossible concamera-
tions, and feigned rotations of solid orbs glanville's sceps.
to concatenate. v. a. [from catena, lat. a chain.]
to link together; to unite in a successive order. -
concatenat ion. n. s. [from concatenate.] a series of links;
an uninterrupted unvariable succession.
the stoicks affirmed a fatal, unchangeable concatenation
of causes, reaching to the elicit acts of man's will. , south.
concavation, n. s. [from concave.] the act of making
concavc, -
concacve. adj. [concavus, latin.]
1. hollow without angles; as, the inner surface of an eggshell,
the inner curve of an arch: opposed to convex.
these great fragments falling hollow, inclosed under their
concave surface a great deal of air. burnet's theory.
2. hollow.
have you not made an universal shout,
that tyber trembled underneath his banks,
to hear the replication of your sounds
made in his concave shores : shakesp. julius caesar.
for
5 d
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 448</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
for his verity in love, i do think him as concave as a co-
vered goblet, or a worm-eaten nut. shakesp. as you like it.
conca’ve n ess. n. s. [from concave..] hollowness. dicf.
concavity. m. s. [from concave..] internal surface of a hol-
low spherical or spheroidical body.
niches that contain figures of white marble should not be
coloured in their concavity too black. wotton.
they have taken the impresses of these shells with that exqui-
site niceness, that no metal, when melted and cast in a mould,
can ever possibly represent the concavity of that mould with
greater exactness than these flints do the concavities of the
{hells, wherein they were moulded. woodw. natural history.
concavo-concave. adj. concave or hollow on both sides.
concavo-convex. adj. [from concave and convex.] concave
one way, and convex the other.
i procured another concavo-convex plate of glass, ground on
both sides to the same sphere with the former plate. newton.
a concave-convex pentangular plate, part of a shell that be-
longs to the entrochus. jwoodward on fossils.
co'ncavous. adj. [concavus, latin.] concave; hollow with-
out angles. -
co'ncavously. adv. [from concavous.] with hollowness ; in
such a manner as discovers the internal surface of a hollow
sphere. . - - -
the dolphin that carrieth arion is concavously inverted,
and hath its spine depressed. brown's wulgar errours.
t, conce'al. v. a. [concelo, latin.] to hide; to keep
secret; not to divulge ; to cover ; not to detect.
he oft’ finds med'cine, who his grief imparts;
but double griefs afflict concealing hearts. fairy queen.
come, catesby, thou art sworn
as deeply to effect what we intend,
as closely to conceal what we impart. shakesp. richard iii.
ulysses himself adds, he was the most eloquent and the
most silent of men: he knew that a word spoke never wrought
so much good as a word concealed. broome.
there is but one way i know of conversing safely with all
men, that is, not by concealing what we say or do, but by say-
ing or doing nothing that deserves to be concealed. pope.
conce/alable. adj. [from conceal.] capable of being con-
cealed; possible to be kept secret, or hid. -
returning a lye unto his maker, and presuming to put off
the searcher of hearts, he denied the omnisciency of god,
whereunto there is nothing concealable. brown's pulg. errours.
conce'aled ness. n. s. . [from conceal.] the state of being
concealed ; privacy; obscurity. die?.
conce’aler. m. s. [from conceal.] he that conceals any thing.
they were to undergo the penalty of forgery, and the con-
cealer of the crime was equally guilty.
con ce’alment. n.s.. [from conceal.]
1. the aet of hiding; secresy.
she never told her love;
butlet concealment, like a worm in the bud,
feed on her damask cheek. shakespeare's twelfth night.
he is a worthy gentleman,
exceedingly well read, and profited
in strange concealments. shakespeare's henry iv.
. few own such sentiments, yet this concealment derives ra-
ther from the fear of man than of any being above. glanville.
2. the state of being hid; privacy; delitescence.
a person of great abilities is zealous for the good of man-
kind, and as solicitous for the concealment as the performance
of illustrious actions. addison's freeholder.
3. hiding place; retreat; cover; shelter.
the choice of this holy name, as the most effectual conceal-
ment of a wicked design, supposes mankind satisfied that no-
thing but what is just is directed by the principles of it. rogers.
the cleft tree
offers its kind concealment to a few ;
their food its inse&amp;ts, and its moss their nests. thomson.
to conce'de. v. a. [concedo, latin.] to yield; to admit;
to grant; to let pass undisputed.
by expurgatory animadversions we might strike out great
numbers of hidden qualities; and having once a conceded list
we might with more safety attempt their reasons. brown.
this must not be conceded without limitation. boyle.
the atheist, if you concede to him that fortune may be an
agent, doth presume himself safe and invulnerable. bentley.
concett. n.s.. [concept, french; conceptus, latin.]
1. conception; thought; idea; image in the mind.
here the very shepherds have their fancies lifted to so high
conceits, as the learned of other nations are content both to
borrow their names and imitate their cunning. sidney.
impossible it was, that ever their will should change or in-
cline to remit any part of their duty, without some object
having force to avert their conceit from god. hooker.
his grace looks chearfully and smooth this morning:
there's some conceit, or other, likes him well,
when that he bids good-morrow with such spirit. shakesp.
in laughing there ever precedeth a conceit of somewhat ridi-
culcus, and therefore it is proper to man. bacon's not. hiss.
2. understanding; readiness of apprehension.
how often, alass did her eyes say unto me, that they loved?
and yet, i not looking for such a matter, had not my conceit
open to understand them. sidney.
the first kind of things appointed by laws humane, con-
taineth whatsoever is good or evil, is notwithstanding more
secret than that it can be discerned by every man's present con-
ceit, without some deeper discourse and judgment. hooker.
i shall be found of a quick conceit in judgment, and shall be
admired. wisd. viii. 11.
3. opinion, generally in a sense of contempt; fancy; imagina-
tion; fantastical notion.
i know not how conceit may rob
the treasury of life, when life itself
yields to the theft. shakespeare’s king lear.
strong conceit, like a new principle, carries all easily with
it, when yet above common sense. locke.
malbranche has an odd conceit, -
as ever enter'd frenchman's pate. prior.
4. opinion in a neutral sense.
seest thou a man wise in his own conceit * there is more
hope of a fool than of him. prov. xxvi. 12.
i shall not fail to approve the fair conceit,
the king hath of you. shakespeare's henry viii.
5. pleasant fancy; gaiety of imagination ; acuteness.
his wit is as thick as tewksbury mustard: there is no more
conceit in him than is in a mallet. shakesp. henry iv.
while he was on his way to the gibbet, a freak took him in
the head to go off with a conceit. l’estrange.
6. sentiment, as distinguished from imagery.
some to conceit alone their works confine,
and glitt'ring thoughts struck out at ev'ry line. pope.
7. fondness; favourable opinion; opinionative pride.
since by a little studying in learning, and great conceit of
himself, he has, lost his religion; may he find it again by
harder study under humbler truth. bently.
8. out of conceit with. no longer fond of.
not that i dare assume to myself to have put him out of con-
feit with it, by having convinced him of the fantasticalness of
1t. tillotson, preface.
what hath chicfly put me out of conceit with this moving
manner, is the frequent disappointment. swift.
70 conce it. v. a. [from the noun..] to conceive; to ima.
gine; to think; to believe.
one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
either a coward, or a flatterer. shakes. julius caesar.
they looked for great matters at their hands, in a cause
which they conceited to be for the liberty of the subjeca. bacon.
he conceit, himself to be struck at, when he is not so much
as thought of. l'estrange.
the strong, by conceiting themselves weak, are thereby ren-
dered as unactive, and consequently as useless, as if they really
were so. south's sermons,
conchitep, particip. adj. [from conceit.]
1. endowed with fancy.
he was of countenance amiable, of feature comely, acive of
body, pleasantly conceited, and sharp of wit. knoller.
2. proud; fond of himself; opinionative; affected; fantastical.
there is another extreme in obscure writers, which some
empty conceited heads are apt to run into, out of a prodigality
of words, and a want of sense. fe.ton on the clafficks.
if you think me too conceited,
or to passion quickly heated. swift.
what you write of me, would make me more conceited than
what i scribble myself. pope.
3. with of before the object of conceit.
every man is building a several way, impotently conceited of
his own model and his own materials. dryden.
if we consider how vicious and corrupt the athenians were,
how conceited of their own wit, science, and politeness. bently.
corrow. adv. [from conceited.] fancifully; whimsi-
cally.
conceitedly dress her, and be assign'd
by you fit place for every flower and jewel;
make her for love fit fuel. donne,
conce'ite dness. n.s.. [from conceited.] pride; opinionative-
ness; fondness of himself.
when men think none worthy esteem, but such as claim
under their own pretences, partiality and conceitedness makes
them give the pre-eminence. collier on pride.
conce'itless. adj. [from conceit.] stupid, without thought;
dull of apprehension.
think'st thou, i am so shallow, so conceities,
to be seduced by thy flattery. shak. two gent. of parora.
conce'iv able. adj. [from conceive.]
1. that may be imagined or thought.
if it were possible to contrive an invention, whereby any
conceivable weight may be moved by any conceivable power with
the same quickness, without other instrument, the works of
nature would be too much subjected to art. jwilkins.
2. that may be understood or believed.
the freezing of the words in the air in the northern climes,
is as conceivable as this strange union. glanville's scopsis.
it
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 449</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
t
o
t
it is not conceivable that it should be indeed that very person,
whose shape and voice it assumed. atterbury's sermons.
conceivable ness. n.s [from conceivable.] the quality of
being conceivable. dic7.
conceivably. adv. [from conceivable.] in a conceivable or
intelligible manner.
t, conce'ive. v. a. [concevoir, fr. concipere, latin.]
1. to admit into the womb ; to form in the womb.
i was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
once psalm li. 5.
a. to form in the mind; to imagine.
nebuchadnezzar hath conceived a purpose against you. jer.
this man conceived the duke's death; but what was the
motive of that felonious conception is in the clouds. wotton.
3. to comprehend; to understand. he conceives the whole
zem.
// this kiss, if it durst speak,
would stretch thy spirits up into the air:
conceive, and fare thee well. shakespeare's king lear.
4. to think; to be of opinion.
if you compare my gentlemen with sir john, you will
hardly conceive him to have been bred in the same climate. sw.
to conce' iv e. v. n.
1. to think; to have an idea of
the griev'd commons
hardly conceive of me: let it be nois'd,
that, through our intercession, this revokement
and pardon comes. shakespeare's henry viii.
o what avails me now that honour high
to have conceived of god, or that salute,
hail highly favour'd, among women blest' milton.
conceive of things clearly and distinetly in their own natures;
conceive of things completely in all their parts ; conceive of
things comprehensively in all their properties and relations;
conceive of things extensively in all their kinds; conceive of
things orderly, or in a proper method. watts's logick.
2. to become pregnant.
the flocks should conceive when they came to drink. gen.
the beauteous maid, whom he beheld, possess'd :
conceiving as she slept, her fruitful womb
swell'd with the founder of immortal rome. addison.
conce'iver. n.s.. [from conceive..] one that understands or
apprehends.
though hereof prudent symbols and pious allegories be
made by wiser conceivers, yet common heads will fly unto su-
perstitious applications. brown's vulgar errours.
conce nt. n. s. [concentus, latin.]
1. concert of voices; harmony; concord of sound.
it is to be considered, that whatsoever virtue is in num-
bers, for conducing to concent of notes, is rather to be ascribed
to the ante-number than to the entire number. bacon.
2. confistency.
reasons borrowed from nature and the schoolmen as sub-
fervient mediums, carry a musick and concent to that which
god hath said in his word. dr. maine.
'tis in concent to his own principles, which allow no me-
rit, no intrinsick worth to accompany one state more than
another. atterbury.
t, conce'ntrate. v. a. [concentrer, fr. from con and
centrum, lat.] to drive into a narrow compass; to drive
towards the center: contrary to expand or dilate.
spirit of vinegar, concentrated and reduced to its greatest
{trength, will coagulate the serum. arbuthnot on aliments.
concestration. n.s.. [from concentrate.] collection into a
narrow space round the center; compression into a narrow
compass.
all circular bodies, that receive a concentration of the light,
must be shadowed in a circular manner. peacham on drawing.
to conce’ntre. v. n. [concentrer, fr. from con and centrum,
latin.] to tend to one common centre; to have the same
centre with something else.
the bricks having first been formed in a circular mould,
and then cut, before their burning, into four quarters or more,
the fides afterwards join so closely, and the points concentre so
exactly, that the pillars appear one intire piece. watton.
all these are like so many lines drawn from several objects,
that some way relate to him, and concentre in him. hale.
to conce’ntre. v. a. to direet or contract towards one
ccntre.
the having a part less to animate, will serve to concentre the
spirits, and make them more a&amp;tive in the rest. dec. of piety.
in thee concentring all their precious beams
of sacred influences milton.
conce’ntr1cal. { adj. [concentricus, lat.] having one con-
conce’ntri ck. mon centre.
if, as in water stirr'd, more circles be
produc’d by one, love such additions take :
those, like so many spheres, but one heav'n make;
for they are all concentrick unto thee. donne.
any substance, pitched steddy upon two points, as on an
axis, and moving about on that axis, also describes a circle
zoncentrick to the axis. moxon's mech. exer.
if the crystalline humour had been concentrical to the scle-
rodes, the eye would not have admitted a whole hemisphere
at one view. fay on the creation.
- if a stone be thrown into stagnating water, the waves ex-
cited thereby continue some time to arise in the place where the
ftone fell into the water, and are propagated from thence into
concentrick circles upon the surface of the water to great
distances. newton's opi.
the manner of its concretion is by concentrical rings, like
those of an onion about the first kernes. arbuthnot on diet.
circular revolutions in concentrick orbs about the sun, or
other central body, could in no wise be attained without the
power of the divine arm. bentley's sermons.
conceptacle. n-f. [conceptaculum, lat.] that in which any
thing is contained; a vessel.
there is at this day resident, in that huge conceptacle, water
enough to effect such a deluge. woodward's nai. hisi. prof.
conceptible. adj. [from concipio conceptum, latin.] that
my be conceived; intelligible ; capable to be understood.
ome of his attributes, and the manifestations thereof, are
not only highly delectable to the intelle&amp;tive faculty, but are
most suitable and easily conceptible by us, because apparent in
his works. hale's origin of mankind.
conce'ption. n.s.. [conceptio, latin.]
1. the act of conceiving, or growing quick with pregnancy.
i will greatly, multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception; in
sorrow thou shalt bring forth children. gen. iii. 16.
thy sorrow i will greatly multiply
by thy conception; children thou shalt bring
in sorrow footh. milton's paradis? left.
2. the state of being conceived.
joy had the like conception in our eyes,
and at that instant, like a babe, sprung up. shakespeare.
our own productions flatter us: it is impossible not to be
fond of them at the moment of their conception. dryd. dufresh.
3. notion ; idea; image in the mind.
as conceptions are the images or resemblances of things to
the mind within itself, in the like manner are words or names
the marks, tokens, or resemblances of those conceptions to the
minds of them whom we converse with. south's sermons.
consult the acutest poets and speakers, and they will confess
that their quickest, most admired conceptions were such as darted
into their minds, like sudden flashes of lightning, they knew
not how, nor whence; and not by any certain consequence,
or dependence of one thought upon another, as it is in mat-
ters of ratiocination. south's sermons.
to have right conceptions about them, we must bring our
understandings to the inflexible natures and unaiterable rela-
tions of things, and not endeavour to bring things to any pre-
conceived notions of our own.
- locke.
4. sentiments; purpose.
thou but remember'st me of my own conception. i have
perceived a most faint neglect of late; which i have rather
blamed as my own jealous curiosity, than as a very pretence
and purpose of unkindness. shakespeare's king lear.
please your highness, note
his dangerous carception in this point:
not friended by his wish to your high person,
his will is most malignant, and it stretches
beyond you to your friends. shakespeare's henry viii.
5. apprehension; knowledge.
and as if beasts conceiv'd what reason were,
and that conception should distinctly show
they should the name of reasonable bear;
for, without reason, none could reason know.
6. conceit ; sentiment; pointed thought.
he is too flatulent sometimes, and sometimes too dry;
many times unequal, and almost always forced; and, besides,
is full of conceptions, points of epigram, and witticisms; all
which are not only below the dignity of heroic verse, but
contrary to its nature. dryden's juvenal, dedication.
conceptious. adj. [conceptum, latin.] apt to conceive;
fruitful; pregnant.
davies.
common mother,
ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb;
let it no more bring out to ingrateful man. shakes. timon.
conceptive. adj. [ conceptum, latin. j. capable to con-
ceive. -
in hot climates, and where the uterine parts exceed in heat,
by the coldness of this simple they may be reduced into a con-
ceptive constitution. brown's vulgar errours.
to conce'rn. v. a. [concerner, fr. concerno, low latin.]
1. to relate to; to belong to.
exclude the use of natural reasoning about the sense of holy
scripture, concerning the articles of our faith; and then, that
the-scripture doth concern the articles of our faith, who can
assure us?
-- hooker.
count claudio may hear; for what i would speak of con-
cerns him. shakespeare.
gracious things
thou hast reveal’d ; those chiefly which concern
just abraham, and his feed. milon's paradis, loft.
thi
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 450</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
this place concerns not at all the dominion of one brother
over the other. docke.
2. to affect with some passion; to touch nearly; to be of im-
portance to.
i would not
the cause were known to them it most concerns. shakespeare.
our wars with france have affected us in our most tender
interests, and concerned us more than those with any other
nation. addison on the war.
it much concerns them not to suffer the king to establish his
authority on this side. addison on italy.
the more the authority of any station in society is ex-
tended, the more it concerns publick happiness that it be com-
mitted to men fearing god. rogers's sermons.
3. to interest; to engage by interest.
i knew a young negroe who was sick of the small-pox : i
found by enquiry, at a person's concerned for him, that the little
tumours left whitish specks behind them. boyle on colours.
above the rest two goddesses appear,
concern'd for each: here venus, junothere. dryden's afn.
providence, where it loves a nation, concerns itself to
own and assert the interest of religion, by blasting the spoilers
of religious persons and places. south's sermons.
whatever past actions it cannot reconcile, or appropriate
to that present self by consciousness, it can be no more con-
ce, med in than if they had never been done. locke.
they think themselves out of the reach of providence, and
no longer concerned to solicit his favour. rogers.
4. to disturb; to make uneasy:
in one compressing engine i shut a sparrow, without forcing
any air in ; and in an hour the bird began to pant, and be con-
cerned, and in less than an hour and a half to be fick. derham.
5. to concern himself. to intermeddle; to be busy.
being a layman i ought not to have concerned myself with
speculations which belong to the profession. dryden.
conce‘rn. n. s. (from the verb.]
1. business; affair; considered as relating to some one.
let early care thy main concerns secure,
things of less moment may delays endure. denham.
this manner of exposing the private concerns of families,
and sacrificing the secrets of the dead to the curiosity of the
living, is one of those licentious practices, which might well
deserve the animadversion of our government. addis. freeholder.
a heathen emperor said, if the gods were offended, it
was their own concern, and they were able to vindicate them-
selves. swift.
religion is no trifling concern, to be performed in any careless
and superficial manner. rogers.
2. interest; engagement.
no plots th' alarm to his retirements give;
'tis all mankind's concern that he should live. dryden.
when we speak of the conflagration of the world, these
have no concern in the question. burnet's theory of the earth.
3. importance; moment,
mysterious secrets of a high concern,
and weighty truths, solid convincing sense,
explain’d by unaffected eloquence. roscommon.
the mind is stunned and dazzled amidst that variety of ob-
jects: she cannot apply herself to those things which are of the
utmost concern to her. addison's speciator.
4. passion; affection; regard.
ah, what concerns did both your souls divide 1
your honour gave us what your love deny'd. dryden.
o marcia, let me hope thy kind concerns,
and gentie wishes, follow me to battle ! addison's cato.
why all this concern for the poor we want them not, as
the country is now managed: where the plough has no work,
one family can do the business of fifty. swift.
conce'rnedly. adv. [from concern..] with affection; with
interest.
they had more positively and concernedly wedded his cause,
than they were before understood to have done. clarendon.
conce'rning, prep. [from concern : this word, originally a par-
ticiple, has before a noun the force of a preposition.] relating
to ; with relation to.
there is not any thing more subject to errour than the true
judgment concerning the power and forces of an estate. bacon.
the ancients had no higher recourse than to nature, as may
appear by a discourse concerning this point in strabo. brown.
none can demonstrate that there is such an island as ja-
maica, yet, upon testimony, i am free from all doubt concern-
ing it. tillotson, preface.
concernment. n. s. [from concern.]
1. the thing in which we are concerned or interested; affair;
business; interest.
to mix with thy concernment; i defist
hencesorth, nor too much disapprove my own. milt. agon.
this shews how useful you have been,
to bring the king's concernments in. hudibras.
yet when we’re sick, the doctor’s fetcht in haste,
leaving our great concernment to the last. denham.
when my concernment takes up no more room or compass
than myself, then, so long as i know where to breathe and to
exist, i know also where to be happy. south.
he that is wise in the affairs and concernments of other men,
but careless and negligent of his own, that man may be said
to be busy, but he is not wise. tillossom.
our spiritual interests, and the great concernments of a future
state, would doubtless recur often. atterbury.
propositions which extend only to the present life, are
small, compared with those that have influence upon our ever-
lasting concernments. jwatts on the mind.
2. relation; influence.
sir, 'tis of near concernment, and imports
no less than the king's life and honour. denham's sophy.
he justly fears a peace with me would prove
of ill concernment to his haughty love. dryd. ind. emp.
3. intercourse; business.
the great concernment of men is with men, one amongst
another. locke. -
4. importance ; moment.
i look upon experimental truths as matters of great con-
cernment to mankind. boyle.
5. interposition; regard; meddling.
he married a daughter to the earl, without any other ap-
probation of her father, or concernment in it, than suffering
him and her to come into his presence. clarendon.
6. passion; emotion of mind.
while they are so eager to destroy the fame of others, their
ambition is manifest in their concernment. dryden.
if it carry with it the notion of something extraordinary,
if apprehension and concernment accompany it, the idea is like-
ly to sink the deeper. locke.
to concert. v. a. [concerter, french, from concertare, lat.
to prepare themselves for some publick exhibition or per-
formance, by private encounters among themselves.]
1. to settle any thing in private by mutual communication.
2. to settle; to contrive; to adjust.
mark how already in his working brain
he forms the well-concerted scheme of mischief.
co'nce rt. n.s. (from the verb.]
1. communication of designs; establishment of measures among
those who are engaged in the same affair.
all those discontents, how ruinous soever, have arisen from
the want of a due communication and concert. swift.
2. a symphony; many performers playing to the same tune.
conce rta'tion. m. s. [concertatio, latin.] strife; con-
tention.
conce'rtative. adj. [concertativus, latin.] contentious ;
quarrelsome 3 recriminating. dic7.
conce'ssion. n.s. [concessio, latin.]
1. the act of granting or yielding.
the concision of these charters was in a parliamentary
way. hale's common law of england.
2. a grant; the thing yielded.
i still counted myself undiminished by my largest cencessions,
if by them i might gain the love of my people. king charles.
when a lover becomes satisfied by small compliances, with-
out further pursuits, then expect to find popular assemblies
content with small concussions. swift.
conce'ssion ary. adj. [from concision.] given by indulgence
or allowance.
conce'ssively. adv. [from concession.] by way of concession;
as yielding, not controverting by assumption.
some have written rhetorically and concosively; not contro-
verting, but assuming the question, which, taken as granted,
advantaged the illation. brown's vulgar errours.
conch. m. s. [concha, latin.] a shell; a sea-shell.
he furnishes her closet first, and fills
the crowded shelves with rarities of shells:
adds orient pearls, which from the conchs he drew,
and all the sparkling stones of various hue. dryden's fablet.
co'nchoid. n.s. the name of a curve.
concsiiar. adj. [concilium, lat..] relating to a council.
having been framed by men of primitive simplicity, in free
and conciliar debates without any ambitious regards.
baker's reflections on learning.
to conci’iiate. v. a. [concilio, lat..] to gain; to pro-
cure good will; to reconcile.
it was accounted a philtre, or plants that conciliate affec-
tion. brown's vulgar erreurs.
concil1a"tion. m. s. [from conciliate.] the act of gaining
or reconciling. dic?.
concilia tor. n.s.. [from conciliate.] one that makes peace
between others.
conci'liatory. adj. [from conciliate.] relating to recon-
ciliation. dic7.
conci'nnity. m. s. [from concinnitas, latin.] decency;
fitness.
conci'nnou.s. adj. [concinnus, latin.] becoming; pleasant;
agreeable.
co. ncion a tor y. adj. [concionatorius, concio, lat..] used at
preachings or public assemblies. .
their comeliness unbeguiled the vulgar of the old opio
tno:
fowe.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 451</div><p class="text">c o n
***
&amp;
ises it:
goto
the loyalists had formerly infused into them by their conclona-
tory investives. howel.
concise. adj. [concisus, cut, latin.] brief; short ; broken
into short periods.
the concis stile, which expresseth not enough, but leaves
somewhat to be understood. ben. johnson's discoveries.
where the author is obscure, enlighten hin; where he is
too brief and concise, amplify a little, and set his notions in
a fairer view. watts on the mind.
concis ely. adv. [from concisc.] briefly; shortly ; in few
words; in short sentences.
ulysses here speaks very concisely, and he may seem to break
abruptly into the subject. broome on the odyssey.
conci's en ess. m. s. [from concise.] brevity; shortness.
giving more scope to mezentius and lausus, that version,
which has more of the majesty of virgil, has less of his con-
ci/enes. - dryden.
conci'sios. m. s. [concisim, latin.] cutting off; excision;
destruction.
concit a tion. m. s. [concitatio, latin.] the aet of stirring
up, or putting in motion.
the revelations of heaven are conceived by immediate il-
iumination of the soul; whereas the deceiving spirit, by con-
citation of humours, produces conceited phantasmes. brown.
conclam a^t ion. m. s. [conclamatio, latin.] an outcry or
shout of many together. dicf.
co. nclave. m. s. [conclave, latin.]
i. a private apartment.
2. the room in which the cardinals meet; or the assembly of
the cardinals.
i thank the holy conclave for their loves;
they've sent me such a man i would have wish'd for. shak.
it was said of a cardinal, by reason of his apparent likeli-
hood to step into st. peter's chair, that in two conclaves he
went in pope and came out again cardinal. south's sermons.
3. a close assembly.
fortn with a conclave of the godhead meets,
where juno in the shining senate sits.
to conclu'de. v. a. [concludo, latin.]
1. to shut. -
the very person of christ therefore, for ever and the self-
same, was only, touching bodily substance, concluded within
the grave. hooker.
2. to include; to comprehend.
god hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might
have mercy upon all. romans, xi. 32.
3. to collect by ratiocination.
the providences of god are promiscuously administred in
this world; so that no man can conclude god’s love or hatred
to any person, by any thing that befals him. tillotson.
4. to decide; to determine : that is to shut or close the dis-
utt.
p youth, ere it sees the world, here studies rest;
and age, returning thence, concludes it best.
but no frail man, however great or high,
can be concluded blest before he die.
5. to end; to finish.
is it concluded he shall be protector
it is determin'd, not concluded yet;
but so it must be, if the king miscarry. shakesh. rich. iii.
i will conclude this part with the speech of a counsellor of
state. bacon.
these are my theme, and how the war began,
and how concluded by the godlike man. dryden's afn.
6. to oblige, as by the final determination. -
the king would never endure that the base multitude should
frustrate the authority of the parliament, wherein their votes
and consents were concluded. bacon’s henry vii.
if therefore they will appeal to revelation for their creation,
they must be concluded by it. hale's origin of mankind.
he never refused to be concluded by the authority of one
legally summoned. alterbury.
to conclu’de. v. n.
1. to perform the last act of ratiocination; to colle&amp;t the con-
sequence; to determine.
for why should we the busy soul believe,
when boldly she concludes of that and this ;
when of herself she can no judgment give,
nor how, nor whence, nor where, nor what she is davies.
the blind man's relations import no necessity of concluding,
that though black was the roughest of colours, therefore white
should be the smoothest. boyle on colours.
there is something infamous in the very attempt: the world
will conclude i had a guilty conscience. arbuth. hist. of j. bull.
2. to settle opinion.
can we conclude upon luther's instability, as our author has
done, because, in a single notion no way fundamental, an
enemy writes that he had some doubtings atterbury.
i question not but your translation will do honour to our
country; for i conclude of it already from those performances.
addison to pope.
garth.
dryden.
addison's ovid.
3. finally to determine,
vol. i.
i. determination; final decision.
they humbly sue unto your excellence,
to have a goodly peace concluded of,
between the realms of england and of france. shakoozart.
4. to end.
and all around wore nuptial bonds, the ties
of love's assurance, and a train of lies,
that, made in lust, conclude in perjuries. dryden's fables.
we'll tell when 'tis enough,
or if it wants the nice concluding bout. king,
conclu'dency. m. s. [from concludent.] consequence; regu-
lar proof; logical deduction of reason.
judgment concerning things to be known, or the neglect
and concludency of them, ends in decision. hale.
conclu'pe n.t. adj. [from conclude.) decifive; ending in just
and undeniable consequences.
though these kind of arguments may seem more obscure,
yet, upon a due consideration of them, they are highly con-
sequential and concludent to my purpose. hall's orig. of asank.
conclu'dingly. adv. [from conclude..] with uncontrovert-
ible evidence.
examine whether the opinion you meet with repugnant to
what you were formerly embued with, be concludingly demon-
ftrated or not. digby.
conclu'sible. adj. [from conclude..] determinable; certain
by regular proof.
'tis as certainly conclusible from god’s prescience, that they
will voluntarily do this, as that they will do it at all. hammond,
conclu'sion... n.s. [from conclude..] .
ways of peaceable conclusion there are but these two cer-
tain; the one a sentence of judicial decision, given by autho-
rity thereto appointed within ourselves; the other, the like
kind of sentence given by a more universal authority. hooker.
2. the collection from propositions premised ; the con-
sequence.
the conclusion of experience, from the time past to the time
present, will not be sound and perfect. bacon's joar with spain.
and marrying divers principles and grounds,
out of their match a true conclusion brings.
then doth the wit
build fond conclusions on those idle grounds;
then doth it fly the good, and ill pursue.
i only deal by rules of art,
such as are lawful, and judge by
conclusions of astrology. hudibrar.
it is of the nature of principles, to yield a conclusion different
from themselves. tillotson.
he granted him both the major and the minor; but denied
him the conclusion. addison's freeholder.
3. the close; the last result of argumentative deduction.
let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, fear god and
keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.
- eccles. xii. 13.
i have been reasoning, and in conclusion have thought it best
to return to what fortune hath made my home. wist.
4. the event of experiments.
her physician tells me,
she has pursu’d conclusions infinite
of easy ways to die. shakespeare's anthony and cleopatra.
we practise likewise all conclusions of grafting and inocu-
lating, as well of wild trees as fruit trees. bacon's new atlant.
5. the end; the last part.
i can speak no longer; yet i will strain myself to breathe
out this one invocation, which shall be my conclusion. howel.
6. in shakespeare it seems to signify silence; confinement of the
thoughts. -
your wife o&amp;tavia, with her modest eyes
and still conclusion, shall acquire no honour,
demuring upon me. shakespeare's anthony and cleopatra.
conclu’s 1 v e. adj. [from conclude. j
1. decisive; giving the last determination to the opinion.
the agreeing votes of both houses were not by any law or
reason conclusive to my judgment. king charles.
the last dictate of the understanding is not always absolute
in itself, nor conclusive to the will, yet it produces no antece-
dent nor external necessity. bramh. answer to hobbes.
they have secret reasons for what they seem to do, which,
whatever they are, they must be equally conclusive for us as
they were for them. rogers.
2. regularly consequential.
those that are not men of art, not knowing the true forms
of syllogism, cannot know whether they are made in right
and conclusive modes and figures. locke.
conclu’s ively. adv. [from conclusive, 1 decisively; with
final determination.
this i speak only to desire eupolis not to speak perempto-
rily, or conclusively, touching the point of possibility, 'till they
have heard me deduce the means of the execution. bacon.
conclu'sive ness. n.s.. [from conclusive..] power of determin-
ing the opinion; regular consequence.
consideration of things to be known, of their several
weights, conclusivenes, or gons. hale's orig. of mankind.
5 to
davies.
davies.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 452</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
39 coscoagulate. v. a. [from con and coagulate.] to eoncord., n. f. [concordia, latin.]
curdle or congeal one thing with another.
the saline parts of those, upon their solution by the rain,
may work upon those other substances, formerly concoagulated
with them. boyle's experiments.
they do but coagulate themselves, without concoagulating
with them any water. boyle's history of firmness.
concoagulation. m. s. [from concoagulate.] a coagulation
by which different bodies are joined in one mass.
to conco ct. v. a. [concoquo, latin.]
i. to digest by the stomach, so as to turn food to nutriment.
the working of purging medicines cometh two or three
hours after the medicines taken; for that the stomach first
maketh a proof, whether it can concoct them. bacon.
assuredly he was a man of a feeble stomach, unable to con-
&lt;0&amp; any great fortune, prosperous or adverse. hayward.
the vital functions are performed by general and constant
laws; the food is concocted, the heart beats, the blood circu-
lates, the lungs play. cheyne's phil. prin.
the notions and sentiments of others judgment, as well
as of our own memory, makes our property : it does, as it were,
concoet our intellectual food, and turns it into a part of our-
selves. l/atts on the mind.
2. to purify or sublime by heat; or heighten to perfection.
the small close-lurking minister of fate,
whose high concodied venom through the veins
a rapid lightning darts. thomson's summer.
3. to ripen.
the root which continueth ever in the earth, is still con-
cocied by the earth; and fruits and grains are half a year in
concoeting ; whereas leaves are out and perfeot in a month.
baccn.
con.co’ction. m. s. [from concoei.] digestion in the stomach;
maturation by heat ; the acceleration of any thing towards
purity and perfeotion.
this hard rolling is between concoction and a simple matu-
ration. bacon's natural history.
the constantest notion of conczelion is, that it should sig-
nify the degrees of alteration of one body into another, from
crudity to perfect concoction, which is the ultimity of that ac-
tion or process. bacon's natural history.
he, though he knew not which soul spake,
because both meant, both spake the same,
might thence a new concoction take,
and part far purer than be came. donne.
conco lou r. adj. [concolor, latin.] of one colour without
variety.
in concolour animals, and such as are confined unto the same
colour, we measure not their beauty thereby ; for if a crow or
blackbird grow white, we account it more pretty. brown.
con.co'mitance. un. s. [from concomitor, latin.) subsistence
con co’ mit ancy. } together with another thing.
the secondary action subsisteth not alone, but in concomi-
tancy with the other; so the nostrils are useful for respiration
and smelling, but the principal use is smelling. brown.
to argue from a concomitancy to a causality, is not infallibly
conclusive. glanville's scepsis.
conco'mitant. adj. [concomitans, latin.] conjoined
with; concurrent with 3 coming and going with, as collateral,
not causative, or consequential.
the spirit that furthereth the extension or dilatation of bo-
dies, and is ever concomitant with porosity and dryness. bacon.
it has pleased our wise creator to annex to several objects,
as also to several of our thoughts, a concomitant pleasure; and
that in several objects, to several degrees. locke.
coxco mitant. n. s. companion ; person or thing collate-
rally connected.
these effects are from the local motion of the air, a conco-
mitant of the sound, and not from the sound. bacon.
he made him the chief concomitant of his heir apparent and
only son, in a journey of much adventure. j/otton.
in consumptions the preternatural concomitants, an universal
heat of the body, a torminous diarrhoea, and hot distilla-
sons, have all a corrosive quality. harvey on consumptions.
the other concomitant of ingratitude is hard-heartedness, or
want of compassion. south's sermons.
horrour stalks around,
wild staring, and his sad concomitant,
despair, of abject look. philips.
reproach is a concomitant to greatness, as satires and invec-
tives were an essential part of a roman triumph. addison.
and for tobacco, who could bear it
filthy concomitant of claret ! prior.
where antecedents, concomitants and consequents, causes
and effects, signs and things signified, subjects and adjuncts,
are necessarily connected with each other, we may infer. watts.
con.co. mit antly. adv. [from concomitant..] in company with
others. . die?.
to cosco'mitate. v. a. [concomitatus, lat.] to be collaterally
connected with anything; to come and go with another.
this simple bloody spectation of the lungs, is differenced
from that which concimitates a pleurisy. harv. on consumptions.
1. agreement between persons or things; suitableness of one to
another; peace ; union ; mutual kindness.
had i power, i should
pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
uproar the universal peace. shakespeare's macha,
what concord hath christ with belial 2 cor. vi. i5.
cne shall rise
of proud ambitious heart, who not content
with fair equality, fraternal state,
will arrogate dominion undeserv’d
over his brethren, and quite dispossess
concord and law of nature from the earth. milton,
unsafe within the wind
of such commotion; such as, to set forth
great things by small, if nature's concord broke,
among the constellations war were sprung. milton.
kind concord, heavenly born! whose blissful reign
holds this vast globe in one surrounding chain;
soul of the world ! tickel,
2. a compact.
it appeareth by the concord made between henry and ro-
derick the irish king. davies on ireland,
3. harmony; concent of sounds.
the man who hath not musick in himself,
nor is not mov’d with concord of sweet sounds,
is fit for treasons. shakesp. merchant of venia,
4. principal grammatical relation of one word to another, di-
stinet from regimen.
have those who have writ about declensions, concord, and
syntaxes lost their labour lock,
conco rdan ce. n.s.. [concordantia, latin.]
1. agreement.
2. a book which shews in how many texts of scripture any
word occurs.
i shall take it for an opportunity to tell you, how you are
to rule the city out of a concordance, south's serm. dedicat.
some of you turn over a concordance, and there, having
the principal word, introduce as much of the verse as will
serve your turn. swift.
an old concordance bound long since. swift.
3. a concord in grammar ; one of the three chief relations in
speech. it is not now in use in this sense.
after the three concordance; learned, let the master read unto
him the epistles of cicero. ascham's schoolmosler,
con.co'rd ant. adj. [concordans, lat..] agreeable ; agreeing;
correspondent ; harmonious.
were every one employed in points concordant to their na-
tures, professions, and arts, commonwealths would rise up of
themselves. brown's sugar errouri,
conco'r date. m. s. [concordat, fr. concordatum, lat..] a com-
pact ; a convention.
how comes he to number the want of synods in the gal-
lican church among the grievances of that concordate, and as
a mark of their slavery, since he reckons all convocations of
the clergy in england to be useless and dangerous? swift.
con coor por al. adj. [from concorporo, latin, to incorporate.]
of the same body. diff.
to conco'rpor at e. v. a. [from con and corpus.] to unite
in one mass or substance.
when we concorporate the sign with the signification, we
conjoin the word with the spirit. taylor's so orthy communicant.
to conco'rporate. v. n. icon and corpus.] to unite into
one body.
thus we chastise the god of wine
with water that is feminine,
until the cooler nymph abate
his wrath, and so concorporate. cleaviland.
con cor por ation, n.s. [from concorporate.] union in one
mass; intimate mixture. diff.
con course. m. s. [concursus, latin.]
1. the confluence of many persons or things to one place.
do all the nightly guards,
the city's watches, with the people's fears,
the concourse of all good men, strike thee nothing b. johns.
the coalition of the good frame of the universe was not
the product of chance, or fortuitous concourse of particles of
inhatter. hale's origin of mankind.
vain is his force, and vainer is his skill,
with such a concours, comes the flood of ill. dryden's falki,
2. the persons assembled.
the prince with wonder hears, from ev’ry part,
the noise and busy concourse of the mart. dryd, wiig,
3. the point of junction or interseaion of two bodies.
$o soon as the upper glass is laid upon the lower, so as to
touch it at one end, and to touch the drop at the other end,
making, with the lower glass, an angle of about ten or fifteen
minutes; the drop will begin to move towards the concourse
of the glasses, and will continue to move with an accelerated
motion, 'till it arrives at that concourse of the glasses, newton.
con cre ma *9n. m.s.. [from concremo, lat. to burn together.]
the act of burning many things together. diff.
co'n'<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 453</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
it!
o: {-
5, ''',
-
! -
ors.
*|†, ,
o
10:
a
t
itent
ifth
.
th
o,
ing
obso
'; this,
!con hos
**.
mo,
so,
so o,
ori to s
".
so, gol,
| *
its of .
s c ; *::::
s
o, or,
~ org, !.
*** **
o: o, ...
to so; go
kok; go
orint to to
is would: '
of sort
7, lat.] :
nods in:
:::::::::::
ill como:
s?
go .
1, 10 s. 7.
ro. i.
it sort
! or; or
..] t.:
to or
y
as: ..
too.
o
::::: *
oo::::*
o, to **
so to
to screment. ” s: [from controsco, latin. j. the mass
formed by concretion ; a colle&amp;tion of matter growing together.
there is the cohesion of the matter into a more loose con-
sistency, like clay, and thereby it is prepared to the concrement
; , pebble or flint. hale's origin of mankind,
cococo. n. s. [from concresco, lat.] the act or qua-
‘. of growing by the union of separate particles.
l it is neither a substance perfect, nor inchoate, how
any other substance should thence take concrescence hath not
been taught: raleigh's history of the world.
1, concrete. v. n. [concrosco, latin.j. to coalesce into
one mass; to grow by the union and cohesion of parts.
the mineral or metallick matter, thus concreting with the
crystalline, is equally diffused throughout the body of it.
iwoodward's natural history.
when any saline liquor is evaporated to a cuticle, and let
cool, the salt concretes in regular figures; which argues that
the particles of the salt, before they concreted, floated in the
liquor at equal distances, in rank and file. newton.
the blood of some who died of the plague, could not be
made to concrete, by reason of the putrefaction begun. arbuth.
t, concrete. v. a. to form by concretion ; to form by
the coalition of scattered particles.
that there are in our inferiour world divers bodies, that
are concreted out of others, is beyond all dispute: we see it in
the meteors. hale's origin of mankind.
concrete, adj. [from the verb.]
1. formed by concretion ; formed by coalition of separate par-
ticles into one mass.
the first concrete state, or consistent surface of the chaos,
must be of the same figure as the last liquid state. burnet.
2. [in logick j. not abstract: applied to a subject.
a kind of mutual commutation there is, whereby those
contrate names, god and man, when we speak of christ, do
take interchangeably one another's room; so that, for truth
of speech, it skilleth not whether we say that the son of god
hath created the world, and the son of man by his death hath
saved it; or else that the son of man did create, and the son of
god died to save the world. hooker.
concrete terms, while they express the quality, do also either
express or imply, or refer to some subject to which it belongs ;
as white, round, long, broad, wife, mortal, living, dead :
but these are not always noun adjectives in a grammatical
sense; for a fool, a philosopher, and many other concretes, are
substantives, as well as knavery, folly and philosophy, which
are the abstract terms that belong to them. watts's logick.
co'ncrete. n.s. a mass formed by concretion; or union of
various parts adhering to each other.
if gold itself be admitted, as it must be, for a porous con-
trate, the proportion of void to body, in the texture of com-
mon air, will be so much the greater. bentley's sermons.
concretely. adv. [from concrete.] in a manner including
the subject with the predicate; not abstractly.
sin confidered not abstractedly for the mere a&amp; of obli-
quity, but concretely, with such a special dependance of it upon
seeing
the will as serves to render the agent guilty. norris.
concreteness. m. s. [from concrete.] coagulation ; collec-
tion of fluids into a solid mass. dic7.
concretion. n.s. [from concrete.]
1. the aet of concreting; coalition.
2. the mass formed by a coalition of separate particles.
some plants upon the top of the sea, are supposed to grow
of some concretion of slime from the water, where the sea
stirreth little. bacon's natural history.
heat, in general, doth not resolve and attenuate the juices
of a human body; for too great heat will produce concretions.
arbuthnot on aliments.
concretive. adj. [from concrete.] having the power to pro-
duce concretions; coagulative.
when wood and other bodies petrify, we do not ascribe
their induration to cold, but unto salinous spirit, or concretive
juices. brown's vulgar errours.
concreture. n. s. [from concrete.] a mass formed by coa-
gulation.
coscu'binage. n. s. [concubinage, fr. concubinatus, latin.]
the act of living with a woman not married.
adultery was punished with death by the ancient heathens:
(oubinage was permitted. broome.
concubine. n.s. [conculina, lat.] a woman kept in for-
nication; a whore; a strumpet.
i know, i am too mean to be your queen;
and yet too good to be your concubine. shakesp. henry vi.
when his great friend was suitor to him to pardon an of-
fender, he denied him: afterwards, when a concubine of his
made the same suit, he granted it to her; and said, such suits
were to be granted to whores. bacon.
he caused him to paint one of his concubines, campaspe,
who had the greatest share in his affection. dryden.
the wife, though a bright goddess, thus gives place
to mortal concubines of fresh embrace. granville.
to conculcate. v.a. [conculco, latin.] to tread or
trample under foot. ixic7.
conculcation. n.s. [conculcatio, latin.] trampling with
the feet. dici,
concupiscence. of [oncupiscentia, latin.] irregular de-
fire ; libidinous wish ; lust; lechery.
we know even secret concupiscence to be fin, and are made
fearful to offend, though it be but in a wandering cogitation.
hooker.
in our faces evident the signs
qf foul concupiscence; whence evil store,
ev’n shame, the last of evils. amilton's paradise loft.
nor can they say, that the difference of climate inclines
9me nation to concupiscence and sensual pleasures, another to
blood-thirstiness: it would discover great ignorance not to
know, that a people has been overrun with recently invented
vice. bentley's sermons.
concu'piscent. adj. [concupiscent, latin.] libidinous ;
lecherous.
he would not, but by gift of my chaste body
to his concupiscent intemperate lust, -
release my brother shakesp. measure for measure.
concupisce'ntial. adj. [from concupiscent.] relating to
concupiscence. dic7.
concupi'scible. adj. [concupiscibilis, lat.] impressing desire,
eager; desirous; inclining to the pursuit or attainment of any
thing.
the schools reduce all the passions to these two heads, the
concupiscible and irascible appetite. south's sermons.
to concur. v. n. [concurro, latin.]
1. to meet in one point.
though reason favour them, yet sense can hardly allow
them ; and, to satisfy, both these must concur. temple.
2. to agree ; to join in one action, or opinion.
acts which shall be done by the greater part of my execu-
tors, shall be as valid and effectual as if all my executors had
concurred in the same. swift's last will.
3. it has with before the person with whom one agrees.
it is not evil fimply to concur with the heathens, either in
opinion or action; and that conformity with them is only
then a disgrace, when we follow them in that they do amis,
or generally in that they do without reason. hooker.
4. it has to before the effect to which one contributes.
their affections were known to concur to the most desperate
counsels. clarendon.
extremes in nature equal good produce,
extremies in man concur to general use. pope.
5. to be united with ; to be conjoined.
to have an orthodox belief, and a true profession, concurring
with a bad life, is only to deny christ with a greater so.
lemnity. south.
testimony is the argument; and, if fair probabilities of
reason concur with it, this argument hath all the strength it
can have. tillotson.
6. to contribute to one common event with joint power.
when outward causes concur, the idle are soonest seized
by this infection. collier on the spleen,
concu'rrence.
z m. s. s fr ol?",
concu ... } s: [from concur.]
i. union ; association ; conjunetion.
we have no other measure but our own ideas, with the
concurrence of other probable reasons, to persuade us. locke.
2. agreement; act of joining in any design, or measures.
their concurrence in persuasion, about some material points
belonging to the same polity, is not strange. hooker, preface.
the concurrence of the peers in that fury, can be imputed
to the irreverence the judges were in. clarendon.
tarquin the proud was expelled by an universal concurrence
of nobles and people. swift on the dissent. in athens and rome.
3. combination of many agents or circumstances.
struck with these great concurrences of things. crashaw.
he views our behaviour in every concurrence of affairs, and
secs us engage in all the possibilities of action. addis. speciat.
4. assistance ; help.
from these sublime images we colle&amp;t the greatness of the
work, and the necessity of the divine concurrence to it. rogers.
5. joint right ; equal claim.
a bishop might have officers, if there was a concurrency
of jurisdiction between him and the archdeacon. ayliffe.
concu'rrent. adj. [from concur.]
1. acting in conjunction; agreeing in the same act; contri-
buting to the same event; concomitant in agency.
i join with these laws the personal presence of the king's
son, as a concurrent cause of this reformation. davies on ireland.
for without the concurrent consent of all these three parts
of the legislature, no such law is or can be made. hale.
this sole vital faculty is not sufficient to exterminate noxious
humours to the periphery, unless the animal faculty be concur-
rent with it to supply the fibres with animal spirits. harvey.
- all combin'd, -
your beauty, and my impotence of mind;
and his concurrent flame, that blew my fire ; -
for still our kindred souls had one desire. dryden's fables.
2. conjoined; associate ; concomitant. th
gre<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 454</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
there is no difference between the concurrent echo and the
iterant, but the quickness or slowness of the return. bacon.
concu'rrent. n.s. [from concur.] that which concurs; a
contributory cause.
to all affairs of importance there are three necessary con-
currents, without which they can never be dispatched; time,
industry, and faculties. decay of piety.
concu'ssion. m. s. [concussia, lat.]
1. the act of shaking; agitation; tremefaction.
it is believed that great ringing of bells in populous cities,
hath dissipated pestilent air; which may be from the concussion
of the air. bacon's natural history.
the strong concussion on the heaving tide,
roll'd back the vessel to the island's side. pope's odyssey.
2. the state of being shaken.
there want not instances of such an universal concussion of
the whole globe, as must needs imply an agitation of the
whole abyss. woodward's natural history.
concu'ssive. adj. [concussias, latin.] having the power or
uality of shaking.
to conde"mn. v. a. [condemno, latin.]
1. to find guilty; to doom to punishment: contrary to alsolve.
my conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
and every tongue brings in a sev’ral tale,
and ev'ry tale condemns me for a villain.
ls he found guilty
—yes truly, is he, and condemn’d upon't.
shakespeare's henry viii.
considered as a judge, it con 'emns where it ought to ab-
solve, and pronounces absolution where it ought to condemn.
fuddes's sermons.
shakoff. rich. iii.
2. it has to before the punishment.
the son of man shall be betrayed unto the scribes, and
they shall condemn him to death. mat. xx. 18.
3. to censure ; to blame; to declare criminal : contrary to
approve.
* who then shall blame
his pester'd senses to recoil and start,
when all that is within him does condemn
itself for being there shakespeare's macbeth.
the poet who flourished in the scene, is condemned in the
ruel!e. dryden's an. preface.
he who was so unjust as to do his brother an injury, will
scarce be so just as to condemn himself for it. locke.
they who approve my conduct in this particular, are much
more numerous than those who condemn it. spediator.
4. to fine. -
and the king of egypt put him down at jerusalem, and
condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver. 2 chro.
5. to show guilt by contrast. -
the righteous that is dead shall condemn the ungodly which
are living. // isol. iv. 16.
conde(mnable. adj. [from condemn.] blameable; culpable.
he commands to deface the print of a cauldron in ashes,
which strictly to observe were condemnable superstition. brown.
con demnat10 n. m. f. [condemnatio, latin. j. the sentence
by which any one is doorned to punishment; the act of con-
demning ; the state of being condemned.
there is therefore now no condemnation to them. rom. viii.
, con demn at or y. adj. [from condemn.] passing a sentence of
condemnation, or of censure.
he that passes the first condemnatory sentence, is like the
incendiary in a popular tumult, who is chargeable with all
those disorders to which he gave rise. gov. of the tongue.
con demner. m. s. [from condemn.] a blamer; a censurer;
a censor.
some few are the only refusers and condemners of this ca-
tholick practice. taylor's worthy communicant.
conde'n'sable. adj. [from condensate.] that which is capable
of condensation ; that which can be drawn or compressed
into a narrower compass.
this agent meets with resistance in the moveable, and not
being in the utmost extremity of density, but condensable yet
further, every resistance works something upon the mover
to condense it. digby on the soul.
to con dens ate. v. a. [condens, latin.] to condense; to
make thicker.
to con den's ate. v. n. to grow thicker.
con de'n's ate. adj. [condensatus, latin.] made thick; con-
densed; compressed into less space.
water by nature is white ; yea, thickened or condensate,
most white, as it appeareth by the hail and snow. peacham.
condens a tio n. n.s.. [from condensate.] the aet of thicken-
ing any body, or making it more gross and weighty. opposite
to rarfaation.
if by natural arguments it may be proved, that water, by
wondensation, may become earth ; the same reason teacheth,
that earth, rarefied, may become water. raleigh's history.
by water-glasses the account was not regular ; for, from
attenuation and condensation, the hours were shorter in hot
weather than in cold. brown's vulgar errours.
the supply of its moisture is by rains and snow, and dews
and condensation of vapours, and perhaps by subterraneous
passages. bently.
to conde/nse. v. a. [condens, latin.] to make any body
more thick, close, and weighty; to drive or attract the parts
of any body nearer to each other. to inspislate; opposed to
rarefy.
moing in so high a sphere, he must needs, as the sun,
raise many envious exhalations; which condensed by a popular
odium, were capable to cloud the brightest merit. k. charles.
some lead their youth abroad, while some condense
their liquid store, and some in cells dispense. dryd, virg.
such dense and solid strata arrest the vapour, at the surface
of the earth, and colle&amp;t and condense it there. woodward.
to con de'nse. v. m. to grow close and weighty; to with-
draw its parts into a narrow compass.
the water falling from the upper parts of the cave, does
presently there condense into little stones. boyle's scop. chym.
all vapours, when they begin to condense and coalesce into
small parcels, become first of that bigness whereby azure must
be reflected, before they can constitute other colours.
newton's optic{5.
con de'n's e. adj. [from the verb.] thick; dense; conden-
sated; close ; massy; weighty.
they colour, shape and size
assume, as likes them best, condense or rare. milton.
they might be separated without consociating into the huge
condense bodies of planets. bentley's sermon.
cond ense.r. m. s. [from condens...] a strong metalline vessel,
wherein to croud the air, by means of a syringe fastened
thereto. $2uincy.
condensity, n.s.. [from condens...] . the state of being cost.
densed; condensation; denseness; density.
co'n de rs. n.s. [conduire, french.]
such as stand upon high places near the sea coast, at the
time of herring-fishing, to make signs to the fishers which
way the shole passeth, which may better appear to such as
stand upon some high cliff, by a kind of blue colour that the
fish causeth in the water, than to those in the ships. these
be likewise called huers, by likelihood of the french huyer,
exclamare, and balkers. cowel.
t., foresco's d. v. n. [cond sendre, fr. from condescendo,
atin. )
1. to depart from the privileges of superiority by a voluntary
submission ; to sink willingly to equal terms with inferiours;
to sooth by familiarity.
this method carries a very humble and condsending air,
when he that instructs seems to be the enquirer. watts.
2. to consent to do more than mere justice can require.
spain's mighty monarch,
in gracious clemency does conds, end,
on these conditions, to become your friend. dryd. ind emp.
he did not primarily intend to appoint this way; but con-
descended to it as accommodate to their present state 1 illot on.
3. to stoop 3 to bend; to yield; to submit ; to become subject.
can they think me so broken, so debas'd
with corporal servitude, that my mind ever
will condescend to such absurd commands amilton.
nor shall my resolution
disarm itself, nor condescend to parly -
with foolish hopes. denham's sophy.
condesce'ndence. n.s. [condescendance, french.j voluntary
submission to a state of equality with inferiours.
cond esce’ndingly, adv. [from cond sterding.] by way of
voluntary humiliation; by way of kind concession.
we cond scendingly made luther's works umpires in the
controversy. atterlury.
cond esce’nsion, n.s.. [from condescend..] voluntary humilia-
tion; descent from superiority; voluntary submission to equa-
lity with inferiours.
it forbids pride and ambition, and vain glory; and com-
mands humility and modesty, and condescension to others. tills.
courtesy and condescension is an happy quality, which never
fails to make its way into the good opinion, and into the very
heart, and allays the envy which always attends a high
station. - atterbury's sermons.
raphael, amidst his tenderness, shews such a dignity and
condescension in all his behaviour, as are suitable to a superiour
nature. - addison.
condesce'nsive. adj. [from condescend.] courteous; willing
to treat with inferiours on equal terms; not haughty; not
arrogant,
condign. adj. [condignus, latin.] worthy of a person;
suitable; deserved; merited: it is always used of something
deserved by crimes.
unless it were a bloody murtherer,
i never gave them condigm punishment. shakes. henry vi.
consider who is your friend, he that would have brought
him to condign punishment, or he that has saved him. arbuthn.
cond1'gn ess, n. s. [from candign.] suitableness; agreeableness
to deserts. - dicf.
co’n-
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 455</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n.
wom-
o: must we look, from his age, to receive not alone the imperfec-
is so. tions of long engrafted condition, but the unruly waywardness
o that infirm and cholerick years bring with them. shakespeare.
co. 4, moral quality; virtue or vice.
onton jupiter is hot and moist, temperate, modest, honest, adven-
- turous, liberal, merciful, loving and faithful, that is, giving
to it: these inclinations; and therefore those ancient kings, beau-
with sing tified with these conditions, might be called thereafter jupiter.
raleigh's history of the ip'orld.
trio socrates espoused xantippe only for her extreme ill condi-
o, tions, above all of that sex. south.
squit, 5 state; external circumstances.
to us all,
that feel the bruises of the days before,
drids. and suffer the condition of these times
s was: to lay an heavy and unequal hand
to upon our humours, shakespeare's henry iv.
bo. it was not agreeable unto the condition of paradise and state
'd of innocence. brown's wulgar errours.
sor estimate the greatness of this mercy by the condition it finds
h the finner in, when god vouchsafes it to them. south's serm.
dio we perfectly know the state of our own condition, and
what was most proper for us, we might have reason to conclude
do our prayers not heard, if not answered. joake's preparation.
no or this is a principle adapted to every passion and faculty of
o our nature, to every state and condition of our life. rogers.
o, or some desponding people take the kingdom to be in no con-
o dition of encouraging so numerous a breed of beggars. swift.
to condition, circumstance, is not the thing ;
to bliss is the same in subject as in king. pope's essay on man.
jors 6. rank. -
imao i am in my condition,
a prince, miranda. shakes care's tempest.
o the king himself met with many entertainments, at the
o orge of particular men, which had been rarely practised
to oc' then by the persons of the best condition. clarendon.
or 7. stipulation; terms of compact.
too - - condition /
o what condition can a treaty find -
*:::" th' part that is at mercy! shakespeare's coriolanus.
o yield upon conditions.—we give none --- -
* to traitors: strike him down. ben. johnson's catiline.
too he could not defend it above ten days, and must then sub-
o "it to the worst conditions the rebels were like to grant to his
-: person, and to his religion. clarendon.
ts:: - lany are apt to believe remission of fins, but they believe
. o * without the condition of repentance. taylor.
those barborous pirates willingly receive
- cositions, such as we are pleas'd to give. jwaller.
** make our conditions with yon' captive king.—
* §cure me but my solitary cell ;
*. tis all i ask him. dryden's don sebastian.
* . the writing in which the terms of agreement are comprised;
o compact ; bond,
s vol. i.
-
condi'gnly. adv. [from condign.] deservedly; “so
worst. n.f. [condimentum, latin.] seasoning; sauce;
o which excites the appetite by a pungent taste.
as for radish and the like, they are for condiments, and not
for nourishment. - bacon's natural history.
manythings are swallowed by animals rather for condiment,
ust, or medicament, than any substantial nutriment. brown.
copisciple, n.f. [candisciplo, lat.]. a schoolfellow.
... condite. v. a. [condio, lat..] to pickle ; to preserve
by salts or aromaticks. -
much after the same manner as the sugar doth, in the con-
dising of pears, quinces, and the like. grew's musæum.
the most innocent of them are but like condited or
ickled mushrooms, which, carefully corrected, may be harm-
iss, but can never do good. , taylor's rule of living holy.
conditement. m. s. [from condite.] a composition of con-
serves, powders, and spices in the form of an electuary. dict.
condition. m. s. [condition, fr. conditio, latin.]
1. quality; that by which any thing is denominated good or
d.
ba a rage, whose heat hath this condition,
that nothing can allay, nothing but blood. shak. k. john.
2. attribute; accident; property.
the king is but a man : the violet smells, the element
shews to him as to me: all his senses have but human con-
ditions. shakespeare.
it seemed to us a condition and property of divine powers
and beings, to be hidden and unseen to others. bacon.
they will be able to conserve their properties unchanged in
posing through several mediums, which is another condition of
the rays of light. newton's opticks,
3. natural quality of the mind; temper; temperament; com-
lexion.
the child taketh most of his nature of the mother, besides
speech, manners, and inclination, which are agreeable to the
anditions of their mothers, spenser on ireland.
the best and soundest of his time hath been but rash : now
go with me to a notary, seal me there
your single bond; and in a merry sport,
if you repay me not on such a day,
in such a place, such sum or sums as are
express'd in the condition, let the forfeit - *
be nominated. shakspeare's merchant of ponio,
to condition. v. n. [from the noun..] to make terms; to
stipulate.
it was conditioned between saturn and titan, that saturn
should put to death all his male children. raleigh's history.
small towns, which stand stiff, 'till great shot -
enforce them, by war's law, condition not. donne.
'tis one thing, i must confess, to condition for a good office,
and another thing to do it gratis. l’estrange.
condi’tional. adj. [from condition.] -
1. by way of stipulation; not absolute; made with limitations;
granted on particular terms,
for the use we have his express commandment, for the
effect his conditional promise; so that, without obedience to the
one, there is of the other no assurance. hocker.
many scriptures, though as to their formal terms they are
absolute, yet as to their sense they are conditional. south.
this strict necessity they fimple call; -
another sort there is conditional. dryden’s fables.
2. [in grammar and logick.j expressing some condition or sup-
position.
conditional. n.s.. [from the adjective..] a limitation. a
word not now in use.
he said, if he were sure that young man were king ed-
ward's son, he would never bear arms against him. this case
seems hard, both in respect of the conditional, and in respect
of the other words. bacon's henry vii.
condition a'lity. m. s. [from conditional.] the quality of
being conditional ; limitation by certain terms.
and as this clear proposal of the promises may inspirit our
endeavours, so is the conditionality most efficacious to necessitate
and engage them. decay of piety.
condition ally. adv. [from conditional. j. with certain
limitations; on particular terms; on certain stipulations.
i here intail
the crown to thee, and to thine heirs for ever;
conditionally, that here thou take an oath -
to cease this civil war. shakespeare's henry vi.
a false apprehension understands that positively, which was
but conditionally expressed. brown's wulgar errours.
we see large preferments tendered to him, but conditionally,
upon his doing wicked offices: conscience shall here, accord-
ing to its office, interpose and protest. south.
conditionary. adj. [from condition.] stipulated.
would god in mercy dispense with it as a conditionary, yet
we could not be happy without it, as a natural qualification
for heaven. norris.
7a condi" 10nate. v. a. [from condition.] to qualify; to
regulate.
that ivy ariseth but where it may be supported; we cannot
ascribe the same unto any science therein, which suspends and
conditionates its eruption. brown's wulgar errours.
conditionate, adj. [from the verb.] established on certain
terms or conditions. -
that which is mistaken to be particular and absolute,
duly understood, is general, but conditionate, and belongs to
none, who shall not perform the condition ? hammon l.
condition.e.d. adj. [from condition.] having qualities or pro-
perties good or bad.
the dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
the best condition'd. shakespeare's mirchant of venice.
to condot.e. v. n. [condoleo, latin.] to lament with
those that are in misfortune; to express concern for the mise-
ries of others. it has with before the person for whose mis-
fortune we profess grief. it is opposed to congratulate.
your friends would have cause to rejoice, rather than con-
dole with you. temple.
i congratulate with the beasts upon this honour done to
their king ; and must condale with us poor mortals, who, are
rendered incapable of paying our respects. addison.
to condo'le. v. a. to bewail with another.
i come not, sampson, to condale thy chance,
as these perhaps, yet wish it had not been,
though for no friendly intent. milton's agon:les.
why should our poet petition isis for her safe delivery, and
afterwards condole her miscarriage.
condo lement. n. s. [ from condle. j
mourning.
dryden.
grief; sorrow ;
to persevere,
in obstinate cond-lement, is a course
of impious stubbornness, unmanly grief.
shakespeare's hamlet.
condo'lence. m. s. [condalance, french..] the expression of
grief for the sorrows of another ; the civilities and messages of
friends upon any loss or misfortune.
the reader will excuse this digression, due by way of con-
dolence to my worthy brethren. arbuthnot.
5 f 4 cos-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 456</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
a corpool. er. m. s. [from cond.le.] one that compliments
another upon his misfortunes. in re -
co n. s. [condonatio, lat.] a pardoning; %.
zoopuce. v. n. [conduco, lat.] to promote an end;
to contribute; to serve to some purpose: followed by to. -
the boring of holes in that kind of wood, and then laying
it abroad, seemeth to conduce 10 ". it "... ce tonto t o:
arations that may cooldt, -
..o.o. and prep y bacon's holy war.
i. man does love or hate things, according as he ap-
prehends them to conduce to this end, or to contradict it. tills.
they may conduce to farther discoveries for compleating the
theory of light. - . newton.
t, condu'ce. v. a. to conduct; to accompany in order to
shew the way. in this sense i have only found it in the fol-
i assage. -
logo o to conduce hither the princess henrietta-
maria. - wotton.
condu'cible. adj, [conducibilis, latin.] having the power of
conducing; having a tendency to promote or forward: with to.
to both, the medium which is most propitious and condu-
cible, is air. bacon's natural history.
those motions of generations and corruptions, and of the
conducibles the unto, are wisely and admirably ordered and
contemporated by the rector of all things. hale.
none of these magnetical experiments are sufficient for a
perpetual motion, though those kind of qualities seem most
conducible unto it. wilkins’; math. magic.
our saviour hath enjoined us a reasonable service: all his
laws are in themselves conducible to the temporal interest of
them that observe them. bently,
conducibleness. n. s. [from conducible.] the quality of
contributing to any end. - dici.
condu'cive. adj. [from conduce.] that which may contribute;
having the power of forwarding or promoting: with to.
an action, however conducive to the good of our country,
will be represented as prejudicial to it. addison's freeholder.
those proportions of the good things of this life, which
are most consistent with the interests of the soul, are also most
conducive to our present felicity. rogers.
cox pusciv eness. n.s.. [from conducive.] the quality of con-
ducing.
i mention some examples of the conducivenes of the small-
ness of a body's parts to its fluidity. boyle.
- conduct. n.s.. [conduit, fr. &amp;n and dacius, latin.]
1. management; economy.
young men, in the conduct and manage of a&amp;ions, em-
brace more than they can hold, stir more than they can quiet,
and fly to the end without confideration of the means, bacon.
how void of reason are our hopes and fears
what in the conduct of our life appears
so well design'd, so luckily begun,
but when we have our wish, we wish undone? dryd, juv.
2. the aet of leading troops; the duty of a general.
conduct of armies is a prince's art.
3. convoy; escorte; guard.
his majesty,
tend'ring my person's safety, hath appointed
this conduci to sonome to the tower. shakes. rich. iii.
i was ashamed to ask the king footmen and horsemen, and
j/aller.
*** for safeguard against our adversaries. i esdr.
4. the act of convoying or guarding. -
\ome three or four of you,
go, give him courteous condus to this place. shakeshcare.
5. a warrant by which a convoy is appointed, or safety is
assured.
6. exact behaviour; regular lise.
though all regard for *putation is not quite laid aside, it is
so low, that very few think virtue and conduct of absolute ne-
cessity for preserving it. swift.
7, condu’ct. v.a. [conduire, french.]
i. to lead; to direct; to *sompany in order to shew the way.
i shall strait cond.: you to a hill side, where i will point
you out the right path. 44ilion on education.
*y toy pow'r, propitious still to me,
£onomy steps to find the fatal tree, -
in this deep fores.
2. to usher, and to attend in civility.
pray, receive them nobly, and condu: them
into our presence. shakspeare's henry viii.
ascanius bids 'em be condused in. -
3. to *ge; as, to conduct an affair.
4. to head an *my to lead and order troops.
conductionious, adj. [conductilius, latin.] hired; employed
for wages, .
dryden's zn.
b the persons were neither titularies nor perpetual curates,
utotirely *ious and removeable at pleasure, ayliff.
9n du’ctor. m. s. ifrom conduc.]
*'. a leader; one ho she -
l
him. 2 who shows another the way by accompanying
dryden's an.
shame of change, and fear of future ill,
and zeal, the blind conductor of the will. dro,
2. a chief; a general. juch,
who is conductor of his people?—
as 'tis said, the bastard son of glo'ster. shakes. k. l.
3. a manager; a director. • lear,
if he did not intirely project the union and regency, no
will deny him to have been the chief condusor in both. % o
4. an instrument to put up into the bladder, to dired the #.
in cutting for the stone. o:
condu’ctress. n. s. [from conduc.] a woman that ao.
directress. 2.
co'nduit. m. s. [conduit, french.]
i. a canal of pipes for the conveyance of waters; an aqueduc.
water, in conduit pipes, can rise no higher
than the well-head from whence it first dj. spring.
this face of mine is hid c
in sap consuming winter's drizzled snow,
and all the conduits of my blood froze up.
god is the fountain of honour; and th: conduit, by oft
he conveys it to the sons of men, are virtuous and §therous
practices. south,
these organs are the nerves which are the conduits to con.
vey them from without, to their audience in the brain. lock,
wise nature likewise, they suppose,
has drawn two conduits down our nos.
2. the pipe or cock at which water is drawn.
i charge and command, that the conduit run nothing but
claret wine. shakosheare's ho wi.
conduplication. m. s. [conduplicatio, latin.] a doubling;
a duplicate. y
cone. n.s. [x:y^2. to ove 9&amp;c.; xuzx&amp; irs, ariffith..] a sold
body, of which the base is a circle, and which ends in a point.
co’ney. see cony.
to confa’bulate. v. n. [confabul, lat.] to talk easily
or carelessly together; to chat; to prattle.
confabula’rios. n. j. [consabulatio, lat.] easy convers.
tion; chearful and careless talk.
confa'bulatox. adj. [from *fabulate.] belonging to talk
or prattle.
c9nfarrea'tion. m. s. scomfarreatio, lat. from fer, corn.]
the solemnization of marriage by eating bread together,
by the ancient laws of romulus, the wife was by consor.
reation joined to the husband. ayliff's parigo,
7% confect. v. a. [consisius, latin j. to make up into
sweetmeats; to preserve with sugar. it seems now corrupted
into comfit.
conf ect. n. s. [from the verb.] a sweetmeat.
at supper eat a pippin roasted, and sweeten’d with sugar of
roses and caraway comfools. harvey on cons.
confe"ction. m. s...[consectio, latin.]
1. a preparation of fruit, or juice of fruit, with sugar; a sweet-
iil cat.
hast thou not learn'd me to preserve yea so,
that our great king himself doth woome of:
for my confections? shakespeare's cymlin,
they have in turky and the east certain confessions, which
they call servets, which are like to candied conserves, and ast
made of sugar and lemons. bacon's natural hilo,
he saw him devour fish and flesh, swallow wines and spices,
constelions and fruits of numberless sweets and flavours. adj.
2. an assemblage of different ingredients; a composition; a
mixture. -
of best things then, what world shall yield confaion
to liken her shakeshare.
there will be a new confession of mould, which perhaps
will alter the seed. bacon’s natural history,
cocoon ary. n.s.. [from confession.] one whose taic
is to make sweetmeats.
myself,
who had the world as my confessionary,
the mouths, the tongues, the eyes, the hearts of men
at duty, more than i could frame employments. shafts,
confe'ction er. m. s. [from confession.] one whose trade is
to make confections or sweetmeats.
nature's confectioner the bee,
whose suckets are moist alchimy,
the still of his refining mold
minting the garden into gold. cavos.
consooners make much use of whites of eggs. - boyle,
confe deracy. m. s [confederation, fr. fedus, latin) a
league; a contract by which several persons or bodies of .
ongage to support each other; union; engagement; federa
compact. -
what confederacy have you with the traitors? sh.k.lo,
judas sent them to rome, to make a league of amity an
cosideracy with them. i mac. viii. 17.
virgil has a whole confederacy against him, and i must *
deavour to defend him. dryden,
the friendships of the world are oft -
costdoratics in vice, or leagues of pleasure. *:
david,
sha}'star,
prior,
- (0
din<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 457</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
!
an avaricious man in office is in confideracy with the whole
clan of his district, or dependance; which, in modern terms
of art, is called to live and let live. swift.
t, confederate. v. a... [confederer, french.] to join
in a league ; to unite; to ally.
they were confederated with charles’s enemy. knolles.
with these the piercies them confederate,
and as three heads conjoin in one intent. daniel.
t, con fe'derate. v. n. to league; to unite in a league.
by words men come to know one another's minds; by
those they covenant and confederate. south.
it is a confederating with him to whom the sacrifice is
offered. atterbury.
confe(derat e. adj. [from the verb.] united in league.
- for they have consulted together with one consent: they
are confederate against thee. ps. lxxxiii. 5.
all the swords
in italy, and her confederate arms,
could not have made this peace. shakespeare's coriolanus.
while the mind of man looketh upon second causes scat-
tered, it may sometimes rest in them, and go no farther; but
when it beholdeth the chain of them confederate and linked
together, it must need fly to providence and deity. bacon.
oh race confed', ate into crimes, that prove
triumphant o'er th’ eluded rage of jove | pope's statius.
in a confederate war, it ought to be considered which party
has the deepest share in the quarrel. swift.
confe(derate. m. s. [from the verb.] one who engages
to support another; an ally.
sir edmond courtney, and the haughty prelate,
with many more confederates, are in arms. sh. richard iii.
we still have fresh recruits in store,
if our confederates can afford us more. dryden's aon.
confederation. m. s. [confederation, french.j league ;
compact of mutual support; alliance.
the three princes enter into some strict league and confede-
ration amongst themselves. bacon's henry vii.
nor can those confederations or designs be durable, when
subjects make bankrupt of their allegiance. king charles.
t2 confe/r. v. n. [confero, lat. comforer, french..] to
discourse with another upon a stated subject; to ventilate any
question by oral discussion; to converse solemnly ; to talk
gravely together; to compare sentiments.
you will hear us confer of this, and by an auricular assu-
rance have your satisfaction. shakespeare's king lear.
reading makes a full man, conference a ready man, and
writing an exact man; and therefore, if a man write little,
he had need have a great memory; if he confer little, he had
need have a present wit; and if he read little, he had need
have much cunning, to seem to know that he doth not. bacon.
when they had commanded them to go aside out of the
council, they conferred among themselves. acis, iv. i 5.
he was thought to confer with the lord colepeper upon the
subject; but had some particular thoughts, upon which he
then conferred with nobody. clarendon.
the christian princess in her tent confers
with fifty of your learn'd philosophers :
whom with such eloquence she does persuade,
that they are captives to her reasons made. dryd. tyr. love.
to confe'r. v. a.
1. to compare; to examine by comparison with other things
of the same kind.
the words in the eighth verse, conferred with the same
words in the twentieth, make it manifeit. raleigh.
if we confer these observations with others of the like na-
ture, we may find cause to reetify the general opinion. boyle.
pliny conferring his authors, and comparing their works
together, found those that went before transcribed by those
that followed. brown.
2. to give; to bestow : with on before him who receives the
ift.
g rest to the limbs, and quiet i consor
on troubled minds. waller.
the conferring this honour upon him would increase the
credit he had. clarendon.
coronation to a king, consors no royal authority upon
him. south.
there is not the least intimation in scripture of this privi-
lege conferred upon the roman church. tillotson.
thou confirrest the benefits, and he receives them ; the first
produces love, and the last ingratitude. arbuth. his?. of j, bull.
3. to contribute; to conduce : with to.
the closeness and compactness of the parts resting toge-
ther, doth much confer to the strength of the union. glanv.
co’s feren ce. n. s. [conference, french.)
1. the act of conversing on serious subjects; formal discourse;
oral discussion of any question.
i shall grow skilful in country matters, if i have often con-
ference with your servant. sidney.
sometime they deliver it, whom privately zeal and piety
moveth to be instructors of others by conference; sometime of
them it is taught, whom the church hath called to the poie,
either reading thereof, or interpreting. hocker.
what passion hangs these weights upon my tongue
i cannot speak to her; yet she urg'd conference. shakespeare,
*a. appointed meeting for discussing some point, by personal
ebate,
3. comparison; examination of different things by comparison
of each with other.
our diligence must search out all helps and furtherances,
which scriptures, councils, laws, and the mutual conference of
all men's collections and observations may afford. hooker.
the consorence of these two places, containing so excellent
a piece of learning as this, expressed by so worthy a wit as
tully's was, must needs bring on pleasure to him that maketh
true account of learning. ascham's schoolmaster.
conferrer. m. s. [from conser.]
1. he that converses.
2. he that bestows.
to confe'ss. v. a. [confiser, fr. confiteor consson, latin.]
1. to acknowledge a crime; to own a failure.
he doth in some sort conses; it.—lf it be confessed, it is not
redressed. shakoff. merry wives of 11 indsor.
human faults with human grief confift;
'tis thou art chang'd. prior.
2. it has of before the thing confessed, when it is used reci-
procally.
consos, thee freely of thy fin;
for to deny each article with oath,
cannot remove nor choke the strong conception. sh. othell,.
3. to disclose the state of the conscience to the priest, in order
to repentance and pardon.
if our fin be only against god, yet to confs; it to his mi-
nister may be of good use. wake's preparation for death.
4. it is used with the reciprocal pronoun.
our beautiful votary took the opportunity of confossing her-
self to this celebrated father. alason's spotator.
5. to hear the confession of a penitent, as a priest.
6. to own; to avow; to profess; not to deny.
whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will
i confs; also before my father which is in heaven; but who-
soever shall deny me before men, him will i also deny before
my father which is in heaven. 44att. x. 32, 33.
7. to grant; not to dispute.
if that the king
have any way your good deserts forgot,
which he confseth to be manifold,
he bids you name your griefs. shakespeare.
they may have a clear view of good, great and confessd
good, without being concerned, if they can make up their
happiness without it.
- locke.
8. to shew ; to prove; to attest.
tall thriving trees confess'd the fruitful mold;
the red’ning apple ripens here to gold. pope's odyssey.
9. it is used in a loose and unimportant sense by way of intro-
duction, or as an affirmative form of speech.
i must confs, i was most pleased with a beautiful prospea,
that none of them have mentioned. addison on italy.
to confe'ss. v. n. to make confession; to disclose; to re-
veal; as, he is gone to the pris' to confess. -
confe'ssedly. adv, [from consised. j avowedly ; indis-
putably ; undeniably.
labour is confessedly a great part of the curse, and therefore
no wonder if men fly from it. south.
great genius's, like great ministers, though they are con-
fossedly the first in the commonwealth of letters, must be en-
vyed and calumniated. pope's essay on homer.
con fe'ssion. n.s.. [from confess.]
1. the acknowledgment of a crime; the discovery of one's own
uilt.
g your engaging me first in this adventure of the moxa, and
desiring the story of it from me, is like giving one the tor-
ture, and then asking his confession, which is hard usage. temple.
2. the act of disburdening the conscience to a priest.
you will have little opportunity to practise such a consis.
fon, and should therefore supply the want of it by a due per-
formance of it to god. wake's preparation for death.
3. profession ; avowal.
who, before pontius pilate, witnessed a good confoshon 2
- 1 tin. vi. 13.
if there be one amongst the fair'st of greece,
that loves his mistress more than in confession,
and dare avow her beauty and her worth, -
in other arms than her’s ; to him this challenge. shakesh.
4. a formulary in which the articles of faith are comprised.
con fe'ssion al. m. s. [french..] the seat or box in which
the confessor fits to hear the declarations of his penitents.
in one of the churches i saw a pulpit and confessional, very
finely inlaid with lapis-lazuli. addison on italy.
confe'ssion ary. m. s. [confessionaire, fr.] the confession-
chair or seat, where the priest sits to hear confessions. dict.
co'nfessor. m. s. [confiscur, french.]
1. one
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 458</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
1. one who makes profession of his faith in the face of danger.
he who dies for religion is a martyr; he who suffers for it is
a confessor.
the doctrine in the thirty-nine articles is so orthodoxly
settled, as cannot be questioned without danger to our reli-
gion, which hath been sealed with the blood of so many mar-
tyrs and confessors. bacon's advice to killiers.
was not this an excellent confsor at least, if not a martyr
in this cause: stillingfleet.
the patience and fortitude of a martyr or comfor lie con-
cealed in the flourishing times of christianity. addison's speci.
it was the assurance of a resurrection that gave patience to
the com/sor, and courage to the martyr. rogers.
2. he that hears confessions, and prescribes rules and measures
of penitence. -
see that claudio
be executed by nine to-morrow morning:
bring him his confessor, let him be prepar'd ;
for that’s the utmost of his pilgrimage. shakespeare.
if you find any sin that lies heavy upon you, disburthen
yourself of it into the bosom of your confessor, who stands
between god and you to pray for you. taylor.
one must be trusted; and he thought her fit,
as passing prudent, and a parlous wit:
to this sagacious confissor he went,
and told her. dryden's isis of bath.
3. he who confesses his crimes. dicf.
con fe's t. adj. [a poetical word for confessed.] open ; known ;
acknowledged ; not concealed; not disputed ; apparent.
but wherefore should i seek,
since the perfidious author stands confst 2
this villain has traduc’d me. rowe's royal convert.
confe's tly. adv. [from conf/1.] undisputably; evidently;
without doubt or concealment.
they address to that principle which is consoftly predomi-
nant in our nature. decay of piety.
con f1'cient. adj. [consciens, lat..] that causes or procures;
effective. dic?.
co'n fida.n.t. m. s. [coofdent, french..] a person trusted with
private affairs, commonly with affairs of love.
martin composed his billet-doux, and intrusted it to his
confidant. - arbuthnot and pope.
to confide. v. n, [confido, latin.] to trust in; to put
trust in.
he alone won’t betray, in whom none will conside. congr.
co'n fidence. n. s. [confidentia, latin.]
1. firm belief of another’s integrity or veracity; reliance.
society is built upon trust, and trust upon considence of one
another's integrity. south.
2. trust in his own abilities or fortune; security: opposed to
djecion or timidity.
alas, my lord,
your wisdom is consum’d in confidence:
do not go forth to-day. shakespeare's julius caesar.
his times, being rather prosperous than calm, had raised
his considence by success. bacon's henry vii.
he had an ambition and vanity, and a confidence in himself,
which sometimes intoxicated, and transported, and exposed
him. clarendon.
3. vitious boldness; false opinion of his own excellencies: op-
posed to mod/ly.
these fervent reprehenders of things established by publick -
authority, are always confident and bold-spirited men ; but
their confidence, for the most part, riseth from too much credit
given to their own wits, for which cause they are seldom free
from errors. hooker, dedication.
4. consciousness of innocence; honest boldness; firmness of
integrity.
beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confi-
dence towards god. i jo. iii. 21.
be merciful unto them which have not the confidence of good
works. 2 esd. viii. 36.
just considence, and native righteousness,
and honour. milton's parad's loft.
5. that which gives or causes confidence, boldness, or se-
curity.
co’nfident. adj. [from confide.]
1. assured beyond doubt.
he is so sure and confident of his particular ele&amp;tion, as to
resolve he can never fall. hammond on fundamentals.
i am confident, that very much may be done towards the
improvement of philosophy. boy'e.
2. positive ; affirmative ; dogmatical : as, a confident talker.
. secure of success; without fear of miscarriage.
both valiant, as men despising death; both confident, as un-
wonted to be overcome. sidney.
douglas, and the hot-spur both together,
are consident against the world in arms. shakesp. hon. iv.
be not confident in a plain way. ecclus. xxxii. 21.
people forget how little they know, when they grow conft-
dent upon any present state of things. south.
4. without suspicion ; trusting without limits.
he, true knight,
no lesser of her honour confident,
than i did truly find her, stakes this ring. shak. cymbeline.
rome, be as just and gracious unto me,
as i am confident and kind to thee. shakes). tit. andr.
5. bold to a vice; elated with false opinion of his own excel-
lencies ; impudent.
co’nfident, n.s.. [from confide..] one trusted with secrets.
if ever it comes to this, that a man can say of his confident
he would have deceived me, he has said enough. south.
you love me for no other end,
but to become my confident and friend;
as such, i keep no secret from your fight. dryden's aureng.
co'nfident ly. adv. [from confident.]
1. without doubt; without fear of miscarriage.
we shall not be ever the less likely to meet with success, if
we do not expect it too confidently. atterbury.
2. with firm trust.
the maid becomes a youth; no more delay
your vows, but look, and confidently pay. dryden.
3. without appearance of doubt; without suspecting any failure
or deficiency; positively; dogmatically.
many men least of all know what they themselves most
confidently boast. ben. johnson.
it is strange how the ancients took up experiments upon
credit, and yet did build great matters upon them: the obser-
vation of some of the best of them, delivered confidently, is,
that a vessel filled with ashes will receive the like quantity of
water as if it had been empty; this is utterly untrue. bicon.
every fool may believe, and pronounce confidently; but wise
men will conclude firmly. south.
co'nfidentn ess. m. s. [from confident.] favourable opinion
of one's own powers; assurance. dico.
conf1gura'tion. m. s. [configuration, french.]
1. the form of the various parts of any thing, as they are
adapted to each other.
the different effects of fire and water, which we call heat
and cold, result from the so differing configuration and agitation
of their particles. glanvil e's scepsis.
no other account can be given of the different animasse-
cretions, than the different configuration and action of the solid
parts. arbuthnot on aliments.
there is no plastick virtue concerned in shaping them, but
the configurations of the particles whereof they consist. iłz-dw.
2. the face of the horoscope, according to the aspects of the
planets towards each other at any time.
to con f1'gur e. v. a. [from figura, latin.] to dispose into
any form, by adaptation.
mother earth brought forth legs, arms, and other members
of the body, scattered and distinet, at their full growth;
which coming together, cementing, and so configuring them-
selves into human shape, made lusty men. bentley’s sermons.
confine. m. s. [confinis, lat. it had formerly the accent on
the last syllable.] common boundary; border ; edge.
here in these confines slily have i lurk'd,
to watch the waining of mine enemies. shakesp. rich. iii.
you are old :
nature in you stands on the very verge
of her confine. shakosheare’s king lear.
the confines of the river niger, where the negroes are,
are well watered. bacon.
'twas ebbing darkness, past the noon of night,
and phosphor on the confines of the night. dryd. fables.
the idea of duration, equal to a revolution of the sun, is
applicable to duration, where no motion was; as the idea of
a foot, taken from bodies here, to distances beyond the confines
of the world, where are no bodies. locke.
confine, adj. [confinis, latin.] bordering upon; beginning
where the other ends ; having one common boundary.
to cos fi'n e. v. n. to border upon; to touch on different
territories, or regions: it has with or on.
half lost, i seek
what readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds
confine with heav'n. milton's parads: lysł.
full in the midst of this created space,
betwixt heav'n, earth, and skies, there stands a place
confining on all three. dryden.
to confi'n e. v. a. [confiner, fr. confinis, latin.]
1. to bound ; to limit: as, he confines his subject by a rigorous
definition,
2. to shut up; to imprison; to immure; to restrain within
certain limits.
i’ll not over the threshold.
fy, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come, you
must go visit the good lady. shakespeare's coriolanus.
i had been
as broad and gen'ral as the casing air;
but now i'm cabbin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in. shakoff.
3. to restrain ; to tie up to. -
children permitted the freedom of both hands, do ofttimes
confine unto the left, and are not without great difficulty re-
itrained from it. brown's wulgar erreurs.
make
.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 459</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
s. so,
t, o
so
o
o vil o
i. "is
lay o o o
ough,
it, do. #
age,
not with o
*
*
e k;
o,
uska -
p 3: :
w
s
hy too,
bo :
too.
o them. o
- o
fo
:::\]
| tiss, 3 or
shot.";
o:
] to jo
ind others:
heir full g
of trio
bento
letly th: :
sits; to;
d,
, shift !.
offio.
j. -
st the so
noff.
ht, o
lution:-
wis; #29
so
ng o
on boro.
to wo
loomso
so
o, ,
o
aft|
hotosis.
o
(0 offs: s
-*
make one man's fancies or failings, confining laws to others,
and convey them as such to their succeeders. - boyle.
where honour, or where conscience does not bind,
no other tie shall shackle me,
slave to myself i will not be ;
nor shall my future actions be confin'd
by my own present mind. cowley.
if the gout continue, i confine myself wholly to o: o:
- emple.
o, is to confine himself to the compass of numbers, and e.
slavery of rhime. dryden.
cosroeless, adj. [from confine.] boundless; unlimited; un-
bounded; without end.
esteem him as a lamb, being compar'd
with my confineles, harms. shakespeare's macbeth.
cone1'nement. m. s. . [from confine.] imprisonment; incar-
ceration; restraint of liberty.
our hidden foes,
now joyful from their long confinement rose. dryd. virgil.
the mind hates restraint, and is apt to fancy itself under
confinement, when the fight is pent up. addison.
as to the numbers who are under restraint, people do not
seem so much surprised at the confinement of some as the li-
berty of others, addison.
confi'ner. m. s. [from confine.]
1. a borderer; one that lives upon confines; one that inhabits
the extreme parts of a country.
the senate hath stirr'd up the confiners, shakes. cymbeline.
happy confiners you of other lands,
that shift your soil.
2. a near neighbour.
though gladness and grief be opposite in nature, yet they
are such neighbours and confiners in art, that the least touch
of a pencil will translate a crying into a laughing face. wotton.
. one which touches upon two different regions.
the participles or confiners between plants and living crea-
tures, are such as have no local motion; such as oysters. bacon.
confinity. n.s.. [confinitas, latin.] nearness; neighbour-
hood; contiguity. dic7.
t confi'rm. v. a. [confirmo, latin.]
1. to put past doubt by new evidence.
the testimony of c. was confirmed in you. i cor. i. 6.
so was his will
pronounc'd among the gods, and by an oath
which shook heav'n's whole circumference confirm'd. milt.
whilst all the stars, that round her burn,
and all the planets in their turn,
confirm the tidings as they roll,
and spread the truth from pole to pole. addison's spediator.
2. to settle; to establish either persons or things.
i tonfirm thee in the high priesthood, and appoint thee
ruler. i mac. xi. 57.
confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs. shak. hen. vi.
3. to fix; to radicate.
fernelius never cured a confirmed pox without it. wiseman.
4. to complete; to perfeot.
he only liv'd but 'till he was a man;
the which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd,
but like a man he died. shakespeare's macbeth.
5. to strengthen by new solemnities or ties.
that treaty, so prejudicial, ought to have been remitted
rather than confirmed. swift.
6. to settle or strengthen in resolution, or purpose or opinion.
confirm'd then i resolve,
daniel’s civil war.
adam shall share with me in bliss or woe. milton.
they in their state though firm, stood more confirm'd. milt.
believe and be confirm'd. milton.
7. to admit to the full privileges of a christian, by imposition
of hands.
those which are thus confirmed, are thereby supposed to be
fit for admission to the sacrament. hammond's fundamentals.
cone1'rmable. adj. [from confirm.] that which is capable
of incontestible evidence.
it may receive a spurious inmate, as is confirmable by many
examples. brown's vulgar errours.
confirma'tion. n.s.. [from confirm.]
1. the act of establishing any thing or person; settlement;
establishment.
embrace and love this man.—
-with brother's love i do it.—
—and let heav’n
witness how dear i hold this confirmation! shak. hen. viii.
2. * by which any thing is ascertained; additional
proof.
a false report hath
honour'd with confirmation your great judgment. shakesp.
the sea-captains answered, that they would perform his
command; and, in confirmation thereof, promised not to do
too *y thing which beseemed not valiant men. knolles's history.
3. proof; convincing testimony.
o wanting frequent confirmation in a matter so confirmable,
o their affirmation carrieth but slow persuasion. brown.
is.” vol. i.
*—
the arguments brought by christ for the confirmation of his
doctrine, were in themselves sufficient. south.
4. an ecclesiastical rite.
what is prepared for in catechising, is, in the next place,
performed by confirmation; a most profitable usage of the
church, transcribed from the practice of the apostles, which
consists in two parts: the child's undertaking, in his own
name, every part of the baptismal vow (having first approved
himself to understand it); and to that purpose, that he may
more solemnly enter this obligation, bringing some godfather
with him, not now (as in baptism) as his procurator to un-
dertake for him, but as a witness to testify his entering this
obligation. hammond on fundamentals.
confirma tor. m. s. [from confirmo, latin.] an attester ;
he that puts a matter past doubt.
there wants herein the definitive confirmator, and test of
things uncertain, the sense of man. brown's pulgar errours.
conf1'rmatory. adj. [from confirm.] giving additional
testimony; establishing with new force.
conf1'rmedness. n. s. [from confirmed.] confirmed state;
radication. -
if the difficulty arise from the confirmedness of habit, every
resistance weakens the habit, abates the difficulty. dec. of p.
conf1'rmer. n. s. [from confirm.] . one that confirms; one
that produces evidence or strength; an attester; an esta-
blisher.
be these sad fighs confirmers of thy words?
then speak again. shakespeare's king john.
the oath of a lover is no stronger than the word of a
tapster: they are both the confirmers of false reckonings. shak.
conf1'scable. adj. [from confiscate.] liable to forfeiture.
to confiscate. v. a. [confiscare, conftuer, i.e. in publicum
addicere, from fiscus, which originally signifieth a hamper,
pannier, basket, or freil; but metonymically the emperor's
treasure, because it was anciently kept in such hampers. cowel.]
to transfer private property to the prince or publick, by way
of penalty for an offence.
it was judged that he should be banished, and his whole
estate confiscated and seized, and his houses pulled down. bacon.
whatever fish the vulgar fry excel,
belong to caesar, wherefoe'er they swim,
by their own worth confiscated to him. dryd, juv.
conf1'scate. adj. [from the verb.] transferred to the pub-
lick as forfeit. the accent in shakespeare is on the first syl-
lable.
thy lands and goods
are, by the laws of venice, confiscate
unto the state of venice. shakesp. merchant of venice.
confiscation. n.s.. [from confiscate.] the aet of transfer-
ring the forfeited goods of criminals to publick use.
it was in every man's eye, what great forfeitures and confis:
cations he had at that present to help himself. bacon’s h. vii.
co'nfitent, n. s... [confitens, latin.] one confessing; one
who confesses his faults.
a wide difference there is between a meer confitent and a
true penitent. decay of piety.
co'nf1ture. n. s. [french ; from confreiura, latin.j a sweet-
meat; a confection; a comfit.
it is certain, that there be some houses wherein confitures
and pies will gather mould more than in others. bacon.
we contain a oft. house, where we make all sweet-
meats, dry and moist, and divers pleasant wines. bacon.
to conf1'x. v. a. [configo confixum, latin.] to fix down; to
fasten.
as this is true,
let me in safety raise me from my knees;
or else, for ever be confixed here,
a marble monument 1 shakesp. measure for measure.
conflagrant: adj. [conflagrans, latin.] burning toge-
ther; involved in a general fire.
then raise
from the conflagrant mass, purg’d and refin'd,
new heav'ns, new earth. milton's parads: lost.
conflagra’tion. n.s.. [conflagratio, latin.]
1. a general fire spreading over a large space.
the opinion deriveth the complexion from the deviation of
the sun, and the conflagration of all things under phaeton.
brown's vulgar errours,
next o'er the plains, where ripen'd harvests grow,
the running conflagration spreads below. addis. ovid.
mankind hath had a gradual increase, notwithstanding what
floods and conflagrations, and the religious profession of celi-
bacy, may have interrupted. bentley's sermons.
2. it is generally taken for the fire which shall consume this
world at the consummation of things.
conflation. m. s. [conflatum, latin.]
1. the act of blowing many instruments together.
the sweetest harmony is, when every part or instrument is
not heard by itself, but a conflation of them all. bacon.
2. a casting or melting of metal.
con flexus e. n.f. [conflexura, latin.] a tending or turn-
ing-
5 g 7,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 460</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
7% conflict. v. n. [confligo, lat..] to strive; to contest;
to fight; to flruggle; to contend ; to encounter; to engage:
properly by striking agains one another.
bare unhoused trunks
to the conflicling elements exposed,
answer meer nature. shakspeare's timon.
you shall hear under the earth a horrible thundering of fire
and water confticting together. . bacon's notural history.
a man would be content to strive with himself, and conflic?
with great difficulties, in hopes of a mighty reward. tillotson.
lash'd into foam, the fierce conflicting brine
seems o'er a thousand raging waves to burn.
a co'n flict. m. s. [conflicius, latin.]
1. a violent collision, or opposition of two substances.
pour dephlegmed spirit of vinegar upon salt of tartar, and
there will be such a conflici or ebullition, as if there were scarce
two more contrary bodies in nature. boyle.
2. a combat; a fight between two. it is seldom used of a ge-
neral battle.
the luckless conflic with the giant stout,
wherein captiv'd, of life or death he stood in doubt. spens.
f it is my father's face,
whom in this conflici i unawares have kill’d.
3. contest; strife; contention. -
there is a kind of merry war betwixt signior benedick and
her: they never meet but there's a skirmish of wit between
them.—alas! he gets nothing by that. in our last consioł,
four of his five wits went halting off. shakespeare.
. struggle ; agony ; pang.
4. njifiliance g victories can make present conflic’s
so sweet and easy, but nature will shrink from them. hooker.
if he attempt this great change, with what labour and con-
flici must he accomplish it? rogers.
he perceiv'd -
th’ unequal conflici then, as angels look
on dying saints.
co’nfluence. m. s. [confluo, latin.]
1. the junetion or union of several streams.
you see this confluence, this great flood of visitors. shakes.
nimrod, who usurped dominion over the rest, sat down in
the very confluence of all those rivers which watered paradise.
raleigh's history of the j/orld.
bagdet is beneath the confluence of tigris and euphrates.
- brerewood on languages.
in the veins innumerable little rivulets have their confluence
into the great vein, the common channel of the blood, bentley.
2. the act of crowding to a place.
some come to make merry, because of the confluence of all
sorts. bacon.
you had sound by experience the trouble of all men's con-
fuence, and for all matters, to yourself. bacon to williers.
. a concourse; a multitude crowded into one place.
this will draw a confluence of people from all parts of the
country. temple.
4. collection; concurrence.
we may there be instructed how to rate all goods by those
that will concentre into the felicity we shall possess, which
shall be made up of the confluence, perfection and perpetuity
of all true joys. boyle.
confluent. adj. [confluens, lat j running one into an-
other ; mecting. .
at length, to make their various currents one,
the congregated floods together run :
these confluent streams make some great river's head,
thomson.
shakesp.
thomson's summer.
by stores still melting and descending fed. blackmore.
co'n flux. m. s. [confluxio, latin.]
1. the union of several currents; concourse.
knots by the conflux of meeting sap
infect the found pine and divert his grain. shakspeare.
he quickly, by the general conflux and concourse of the
whole people, streightened his quarters. clarendon.
2. crowd; multitude colle&amp;ed.
to the gates cast round thine eye, and see
what conflux issuing forth, or ent’ring in. milton.
con fo'r.m. adj. [conformis, latin.] assuming the same form ;
wearing the same form ; resembling.
variety of tunes doth dispose the spirits to variety of pas.
sions conform unto them. bacon’s natural history.
to conform. v. a. [conformo, latin.] to reduce to the
like appearance, shape, or manner with something else: with to.
then followed that most natural effect of conforming one's
self to that which she did like. sidney.
the apostles did conform the christians as much as might
be, according to the pattern of the jews. hooker.
demand of them wherefore they conform not themselves
wnto the order of the church 2 hooker.
to con fo'r.m. v. n. to comply with ; to yield: with to.
among mankind so few there are,
who will confo, m to philosophick fare.
confo'rmable. adj. [from conform.]
1. having the same form ; using the same manners; agreeing
either in exterior or moral characters; similar ; resembling.
dryden's juv.
the gentiles were not made conformable unto the jews,
in that which was to cease at the coming of christ. hooker.
2. it has commonly to before that with which there is agree-
ment,
he gives a reason conformable to the principles. arbuthnot.
3. sometimes with, not improperly; but to is used with the verb.
the fragments of sappho give us a taste of her way of
writing, perfectly conformable with that character we find of
her. addison's spectator.
4. agreeable ; suitable; not opposite; consistent.
nature is very consonant and conformable to herself. newton.
the productions of a great genius, with many lapses, are
preferable to the works of an inferiour author, scrupulously ex-
act, and conformable to all the rules of correot writing. addison.
5. compliant ; ready to follow dire&amp;tions ; submissive; peace-
able ; obsequious.
i’ve been to you a true and humble wife,
at all time to your will conformalle. shakesp. henry viii.
for all the kingdoms of the earth to yield themselves wil-
lingly conformable, in whatever should be required, it was
their duty. hocker.
such delusions are reformed by a conformable devotion, and
the well-tempered zeal of the true christian spirit. spratt.
confo'rmably, adv. [from conformable.] with conformity;
agreeably ; suitably : it has to.
so a man observe the agreement of his own imaginations,
and talk conformably, it is all certainty. locke.
i have treated of the sex consormably to this definition. addis.
coneormation. m. s. [french; conformatio, latin.]
1. the form of things as relating to each other; the parti-
cular texture, and consistence of the parts of a body, and
their disposition to make a whole: as, light of different co-
lours is reflected from bodies according to their differ.nl confor-
in 3 to on.
varieties are found in the different natural shapes of the
mouth, and several conformations of the organs. holder.
where there happens to be such a structure and conforma-
tion of the earth, as that the fire may pass freely into these
spiracles, it then readily gets out. woodward's nat. history.
2. the act of producing suitableness, or conformity to any
thing: with to.
virtue and vice, sin and holiness, and the conformation of
our hearts and lives to the duties of true religion and mora-
lity, are things of more consequence than the furniture of
understanding. j/atts.
con fo'rm1st. n. s. [from conform.] one that complies with
the worship of the church of england; not a dissenter.
they were not both nonconformists, neither both consor-
mis's. dunton.
con fo'rmity. m. s. [from conform.]
1. similitude; resemblance ; the state of having the same cha-
raeter of manners or form.
by the knowledge of truth, and exercise of virtue, man,
amongst the creatures of this world, aspireth to the greatest
conformity with god. hocker.
judge not what is best
by pleasure, though to nature seeming meet;
created as thou art to nobler end,
holy and pure, conformity divine ! milton's paradise loft.
space and duration have a great conformity in this, that they
are justly reckoned amongst our simple ideas. locke.
this metaphor would not have been so general, had there
not been a conformity between the mental taste and the sensitive
taste. addison's speciator.
2. it has in some authors with before the model to which the
conformity is made.
the end of all religion is but to draw us to a conformity with
• god. decay of piety.
3. in some to. -
we cannot be otherwise happy but by our conformity to
god. tillotson.
conformity in building to other civil nations, hath disposed
us to let our old wooden dark houses fall to decay. graunt.
4. consistency.
many instances prove the conformity of the essay with the
notions of hippocrates. arbuthnot on aliments.
confort aotion. n.s.. [from conforto, a low latin word.]
collation of strength ; corroboration.
for corroboration and confortation, take such bodies as are
of astringent quality, without manifest cold. bacon's nat. hist.
7% confo und. v. a... [confondre, fr. confundo, latin.]
i. to mingle things so that their several forms or natures can-
not be discerned.
let us go down, and there confound their language, that
they may not understand one another's speech. gen. xi. 7.
two planets rushing from aspect malign
of fiercest opposition, in mid sky
should combat, and their jarring spheres confound. milton.
3. to perplex; to compare or mention without due dis-
tinetion.
a fluid body and a wetting liquor are wont, because they
agree in many things, to be confounded. boyle.
they
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 461</div><p class="text">c o n
rtue,
he 3
o
they who strip not ideas from the marks men use for them,
but confound them with words, must have endless dispute. locke.
3. to disturb the apprehension by indistinet words or notions.
i am yet to think, that men find their simple ideas agree,
though, in discourse, they confound one another with different
nanlo s. locke.
4. to throw into consternation ; to perplex; to terrify; to
amaze; to astonish ; to stupify.
so spake the son of god; and satan stood -
a while as mute, confounded what to say. a4iii. par. rog.
now with furies surrounded,
despairing, confounded,
he trembles, he glows,
amidst rhodope's snows.
5. to destroy ; to overthrow.
the sweetest honey
is loathsome in its own deliciousness,
and in the taste consound; the appetite. shakespeare.
the gods confound thee! do'st thou hold there still ; shak.
let them be confounded in all their power and might, and
pope's st. cecilia.
let their strength be broken. dan, xxi.
so deep a malice to confound the race
of mankind in one root. milton.
cos fou n'ded. particip. adj. [from confound.] hateful ; de-
testable; enormous ; odious: a low cant word.
a most confounded reason for his brutish conception. grew.
sir, i have heard another story,
he was a most confounded tory;
and grew, or he is much bely'd,
extremely dull before he dy’d. swift.
confo'un de dly. adv. [from confound.d.] hatefully ; shame-
fully : a low or ludicrous word.
you are confoundedy given to squirting up and down, and
chattering. l’estrange.
thy speculations begin to smell confoundedly of woods and
meadows. addison's spectator.
con foun der. m. s. [from confound.] he who disturbs, per-
plexes, terrifies, or destroys.
con fraternity. m. s. [from con and fraternitas, latin.] a
brotherhocq ; a body of men united for some religious
purpose.
we find days appointed to be kept, and a confraternity
established for that purpose with the laws of it. stillingfleet.
conf rication. m. s. [from can and frico, lat..] the act of
rubbing against any thing. -
it hath been reported, that ivy hath grown out of a flag's
horn; which they suppose did rather come from a confrication
of the horn upon the ivy, than from the horn itself. bacon.
to confrotnt. v. a. [confronter, french.]
1. to stand against another in full view ; to face.
he spoke, and then confronts the bull;
and on his ample forehead, aiming full, -
the deadly stroke descended. dryden's wirg.
2. to stand face to face, in opposition to another.
the east and west churches did both confront the jews
and concur with them. hooker.
blood hath bought blood, and blows have answer'd blows,
strength match'd with strength, and power confronted power.
* . shakespeare's king john.
bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
confronted him with self comparisons,
point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm. shak. mac.
3. to oppose one evidence to another in open court.
we began to lay his unkindness unto him: he seeing him-
folf confronted by so many, went not to denial, but to justify
his cruel falshood. - sidney.
4. to compare one thing with another.
when i confront a medal with a verse, i only shew you the
fame design executed by different hands. addison on medals.
cos frontation. m. s. [french..] the act of bringing two
evidences face to face.
to confuse. v. a. [confusus, latin.]
1. to disorder; to disperse irregularly.
thus roving on
in confus'd march forlorn, th' advent'rous bands
view'd first their lamentable lot, and found
no rest. milton.
2. to mix, not separate. -
at length an universal hubbub wild,
of stunning sounds and voices all confus'd,
borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear. milton.
3. to perplex, not dislinguish ; to obscure.
we may have a clear and distinct idea of the existence of
many things, though our ideas of their intimate essences and
causes are very confused and obscure. watts's logick.
4. to hurry the mind,
confus’d and sadly she at length replies.
confu'sedly. adv. [from confused.]
i. in a mixed mass; without separation.
these four nations are every where mixt in the scriptures,
because they dwelt confusedly together. raleigh's history.
2. indistinetly; one mingled with another.
pope's statius.
th’ inner court with horror, noise and tears,
confus'dly fill'd; the women's shrieks and crics
the arch'd vaults re-echo.
on mount vesuvius next he fix’d his eyes,
and saw the smoaking tops consus’dly rise;
a hideous ruin addison on italy.
i viewed through a prism, and saw them most confusay do-
fined, so that i could not distinguish their smaller ports from
one another. newton's opticks.
heroes and heroines shouts confus'dly rise,
and base and treble voices strike the skies.
3. not clearly ; not plainly. -
he confusedly and obscurely delivered his opinion. clarend.n.
4. tumultuously; hastily; not deliberately; not exactly.
the propriety of thoughts and words, which are the hid-
den beauties of a play, are but confusedy judged in the vehe-
mence of action. dryden,
confu's edness. m. s. [from confused.] want of distinaness;
want of clearness.
hitherunto these titles of honour carry a kind of confused-
nes, and rather betokened a successive office than an established
dignity. carew's survey of cornwal.
the cause of the confusedness of our notions, next to natural
inability, is want of attention.
confu'sion, n. s. [from confuse.]
1. irregular mixture ; tumultuous medley.
god, only wise, to punish pride of wit,
among men's wits hath this confusion wrought ;
as the proud tow'r, whose points the clouds did hit,
by tongues confusion was to ruin brought. davies.
2. tumult; disorder. -
god is not a god of sedition and confusion, but of order and
of peace. hooker, prof.ce:
this is a happier and more comely time,
than when these fellows ran about the streets
crying confusion. shakespeare's coriolanus.
3. indistinet combination.
the confusion of two different ideas, which a customary
connexion of them in their minds hath made to them almost
one, fills their head with false views, and their reasonings with
false consequences. locke.
4. overthrow ; destruction.
the strength of their illusion,
shall draw him in to his confusion. shakespeare's macbeth.
5. astonishment ; distraction of mind; hurry of ideas.
confusion dwelt in ev'ry face,
and fear in ev'ry heart, o
when waves on waves, and gulphs in gulphs,
o'ercame the pilot's art. społotor.
confu table, adj. [from confute.] possible to be disproved;
possible to be shewn false. -
at the last day, that inquisitor shall not present to god a
bundle of calumnies, or confutable accusations; but will offer
unto his omniscience a true list of our transgressions. brown.
confutation. m. s. [consulatio, latin.] the act of con-
futing; disproof.
a confutation of atheism from the fame of the world. pont.
to confute. v. a. [consuto, latin.] to convict of errour
or falshocq 3 to disprove.
he could on either side dispute;
confute, change hands, and still cois use. f'...?' -as.
for a man to doubt whether there be any hell, and there-
upon to live as if there were none, but, when he dies, to find
himself confuted in the flames, must be the height of woe. south.
co'nge. n.s.. [conge, french.] -
1. act of reverence ; bow; courtesy.
the captain salutes you with conge profound,
and your ladyship curt'sies half way to the ground. swift,
2. leave ; farewel.
so, courteous conge both did give and take,
with right hands plighted, pledges of good will. fairy q4.
to co’nge. v. n. [from the noun..] to take leave.
i have congeed with the duke, and done my adieu with his
nearest. shakespeare's all's well that ends well.
co'nge d’elire is french ; and signifies, in common law,
the king's permission royal to a dean and chapter, in time of va-
cation, to chuse a bishop. the king, as sovereign patron of
all archbishopricks, bishopricks, and other ecclesiastical bene-
fices, had, in ancient times, the free appointment of all ec-
clesiastical dignities ; investing them first per boculum &amp; an-
nulum, and afterwards by his letters patent. in process of
time he made the election over to others, under certain forms
and conditions; as, that they should, at every vacation, before
they chuse, demand of the king a conge d'elire, that is, licence
to proceed to election. * cowel.
a woman, when she has made her own choice, for form's
sake, sends a conge d'elire to her friends. spectator.
co'ng e. n.s. [in architecture.] a moulding in form of a quar-
ter round, or a cavetto, which serves to separate two members
from one another: such is that which joins the shaft of the
column to the cincture. cham!ers.
to congeal. v. a. [congelo, latin.]
denhahi:
pope.
orris.
1. to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 462</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
1. to turn, by frost, from a fluid to a solid state.
what more miraculous thing may be told,
than ice, which is congeal’d with senseless cold,
should kindle fire by wonderful device spenser.
in whose capacious womb
a vapoury deluge lies, to snow congeal’d. thomson's winter.
2. to bind or fix, as by cold.
oh, gentlemen, see see, dead henry's wounds
open their congeal’d mouths, and bleed afresh. shak. r. iii.
too much sadness hath congeal"d your blood. shakesp.
to conge'al. v. n. to concrete; to gather into a mass by
cold.
in the midst of molten lead, when it beginneth to congeal,
make a little dent, into which put quicksilver wrapt in linen,
and it will fix and run no more, and endure the hammer. bac.
when water congeals, the surface of the ice is smooth and
level, as the surface of the water was before. burnet's theory.
conge'alment. n.s.. [from congeal.] the clot formed by
congelation ; concretion.
enter the city, clip your wives, your friends ;
tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears
wash the congealment from your wounds. sh. ant, and cleop.
conge'la ble. adj. [from congeal.] susceptible of congela-
tion; capable of losing its fluidity.
the consistencies of bodies are very divers: dense, rare,
tangible, pneumatical, fixed, hard, soft, congelable, not con-
gelable, liquefiable, not liquefiable. bacon.
the chymists define salt, from some of its properties, to be
a body fixable in the fire, and congelable again by cold into
brittle glebes or crystals. arbuthnot on aliments.
cong el a"rion. m. s. [from congeal.]
1. act of turning fluids to solids, by cold.
the capillary tubes are obstructed either by outward com-
pression or congelation of the fluid. arbuthnot on aliments.
there are congelations of the redundant water, precipita-
tions, and many other operations. arbuthnot on air.
2. state of being congealed, or made solid, by cold.
many waters and springs will never freeze; and many
parts in rivers and lakes, where there are mineral eruptions,
will still persist without congelation. brown's vulgar errours.
co'ngener. n.s. [latin.] of the same kind or nature.
the cherry-tree has been often grafted on the laurel, to
which it is a congener. miller.
conge'ne rous. adj. [congener, latin.] of the same kind;
arising from the same original.
those bodies, being of a congenerous nature, do readily re-
ceive the impressions of their nature. brown's wulgar errours.
from extreme and lasting colds proceeds a great run of
apoplexies, and other congenerous diseases. arbuthnot on air.
conge'nerous ness. n.f. [from congenerous.] the quality of
being from the same original ; belonging to the same
class. dic7.
conge/nial. adj. [con and genus, lat..] partaking of the
same genius; kindred; cognate: in swift it is followed by
with.
he sprung, without any help, by a kind of congenial com-
posure, as we may term it, to the likeness of our late sove-
reign and master. wotton.
you look with pleasure on those things which are some-
what congenial, and of a remote kindred to your own con-
ceptions. dryden's dedication of juvenal.
smit with the love of sister arts we came,
and met congenial, mingling flame with flame. pope.
he acquires a courage, and stiffness of opinion, not at all
congenial with him. swift.
cong enia'lity. m. s. [from congenial.] participation of the
same genius; cognation of mind, or nature.
conge'nialness. m. s. [from congenial.] cognation.
conge'nite. adj. [congenitus, latin.] of the same birth ;
born with another; connate; begotten together.
many conclusions of moral and intellectual truths seem,
upon this account, to be congenite with us, connatural to us,
and engraven in the very frame of the soul. .
hale's origin of mankind.
did we learn an alphabet in our embryo-state and how
comes it to pass, that we are not aware of any such congenite
apprehensions : glanville's scepsis.
co’nger. n.s.. [congrus, latin.] the sea-eel.
many fish, whose shape and nature are much like the eel,
frequent both the sea and fresh rivers; as the mighty conger
taken often in the severn. walton's angler.
conge'ries. n.s. [latin.] a mass of small bodies heaped up
together.
the air is nothing but a congeries or heap of small, and,
for the most part, of flexible particles, of several sizes, and
of all kinds of figures. boyle.
7% conge'st. v. a. [congero, congoslum, lat..] to heap up ;
to gather together.
conge's tible. adj. [from conges?..] that may be heaped
up. dici.
conge'stion. n.s.. [congestio, latin.] a collection of matter,
as in abscesses and tumours. &amp; i toy.
congestion is then said to be the cause of a tumour, when
the growth of it is slow, and without pain. wiseman.
congiary. m. s...[congiarium, from congius, a measure of corn,
lat] . a gift distributed to the roman people or soldiery,
originally in corn, afterwards in money.
we see on them the emperor and general officers, standing
as they distributed a congiary to the soldiers or people. addison.
7 conglaciate. v. n. [conglaciatus, latin.] to turn
to 1ge.
no other doth properly conglaciate but water; for the de-
termination of quicksilver is properly fixation, and that of
milk coagulation. brown's vulgar errours.
conglaciation. n.s.. [from conglaciate.] the state of being
changed, or act of changing into ice.
if crystal be a stone, it is concreted by a mineral spirit and
lapidifical principles; for, while it remained in a fluid body,
it was a subject very unfit for proper conglaciation. brown.
to co'nglobate. v. a. [conglobatus, latin.] to gather
into a hard firm ball.
the testicle, as is said, is one large conglobated gland, con-
sisting of soft fibres, all in one convolution. grew.
co'nglobate, adj. [from the verb.] moulded into a firm
ball, of which the fibres are not distinetly visible.
fluids are separated from the blood in the liver, and the
other conglobate and conglomerate glands. cheyne's phil. prin.
co'nglobately. adv. [from conglobate. j . in a spherical
form. diff.
conglobation. n.s. . [from conglobate.] a round body;
colle&amp;tion into a round mass.
in this spawn are discerned many specks, or little congloba-
tions, which in time become black. brown.
to conglobe. v. a. [conglobo, lat.] to gather into a round
mass ; to consolidate in a ball.
then he founded, then conglob’d
like things to like. milton's paradise left.
for all their centre found,
hung to the goddess, and coher'd around :
not closer, orb in orb conglob'd, are seen
the buzzing bees about their dusky queen. pope's dunciad.
to conglo'be. v. n. to coalesce into a round mass.
thither they
hasted with glad precipitance, up-roll'd
as drops on dust conglobing from the dry.
hio, paradise loft.
7% conglo merate. v. a. [conglomero, lat..] to gather
. a ball, like a ball of thread; to inweave into a round
iilass.
the liver is one great conglomerated gland, composed of in-
numerable small glands, each of which consisteth of soft fibres,
in a distinet or separate convolution. grew's cosmal.
conglo'merate. adj. [from the verb.]
1. gathered into a round ball, so as that the constituent parts
and fibres are distinet.
fluids are separated in the liver, and the other conglobate
and conglomerate glands. cheyne's phil. prin.
2. collected; twisted together.
the beams of light, when they are multiplied and conglo-
merate, generate heat. bacon's natural history.
conglomeration. n.s.. [from conglomerate.]
1. collection of matter into a loose ball.
2. intertexture; mixture.
the multiplication and conglomeration of sounds doth gene-
rate rarefaction of the air. bacon's natural hi/?ory.
to conglutinate. v. a. [conglutino, latin.] to ce-
ment; to reunite; to heal wounds.
to congluotinate. v. n. to coalesce; to unite by the in-
tervention of a callus.
conglutination. m. s. [ from conglutinate. j the aet of
uniting wounded bodies; reunion; healing.
the cause is a temperate conglutination; for both bodies are
clammy and viscous, and do bridle the deflux of humours to
the hurts. bacon's natural history.
to this elongation of the fibres is owing the union or con-
glutination of parts separated by a wound. arbuth. cn aliments.
conglutinative. adj. [from conglutinate. j having the
power of uniting wounds.
cong lutina tor. m. s. [from conglutinate.] that which has
the power of uniting wounds.
the osteocolla is recommended as a conglutinator of broken
bones. woodward on fossils.
congratulant. adj. [from congratulate.] rejoicing in par-
ticipation; expresfing participation of another's joy.
forth rush'd in haste the great consulting peers,
rais'd from the dark divan, and with like joy
congratulant approach'd him.
to congratulate. v. a. [gratulor, latin.]
1. to compliment upon any happy event; to express joy for
the good of another.
i congratulate our english tongue, that it has been enriched
with words from all our neighbours. watts's logick.
2. it has sometimes the accusative case of the cause of joy and
to before the person.
milton.
an
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 463</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
o
an ecclesiastical union within yourselves, i am rather ready
to congratulate to you. spratt's sermons.
the subjects of england may congratulate to themselves,
that the nature of our government and the clemency of our
king secure us. dryden's preface to aurengzebe.
to cosgr a*tulate. v. n. to rejoice in participation.
i cannot but congratulate with my country, which hath
outdone all europe in advancing conversation. swift.
cono ratul a tion, n. s. [from congratulate.] -
1. the act of professing joy for the happiness or success of
another.
2. the form in which joy for the happiness of another is pro-
fesled.
con gra’tulator y. adj. [from congratulate.] expressing joy
for the good fortune of another.
to congre’e. v. n. [from gre, french.] to agree ; to ac-
cord; to join ; to unite. not in use.
for government,
put into parts, doth keep in one concent,
congreeing in a full and natural close. shakes). henry v.
to congreet. v. n. [from con and greet.] to salute reci-
procally. not in use.
my office hath so far prevail'd,
that face to face, and royal eye to eye, -
you have congreeted. shakespeare's henry v.
t: cotngregate. v. a. [congrego, lat..] to collect to-
gether; to assemble; to bring into one place.
any multitude of christian men congregated, may be termed
by the name of a church. hooker.
these waters were afterwards congregated, and called the
sea. raleigh's history of the world.
tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
the gutter'd rocks and congregated sands,
as having sense of beauty, do omit
their mortal natures. shakespeare's othello.
the dry land, earth; and the great receptacle
of congregated waters, he call'd seas ;
and saw that it was good. milton's paradis? loft.
heat congregates homogeneal bodies and separates hetero-
geneal ones. newton's opticks.
light, congregated by a burning glass, acts most upon sul-
phureous bodies, to turn them into fire. newton's opticks.
to co'ngre gate. v. n. to assemble ; to meet; to gather
together.
he rails,
ev’n there where merchants most do congregate,
on me, my bargains. shakespeare's merchant of venice.
'tis true, (as the old proverb doth relate)
equals with equals often congregate. denham,
co'ngregate. adj. [from the verb.] colle&amp;ted ; compact.
where the matter is most congregate, the cold is the greater.
bacon's natural history.
congregation. m. s. [from congregate.]
i. the act of collecting.
the means of reduction by the fire, is but by congregation
of homogeneal parts. bacon.
2. a colle&amp;tion; a mass of various parts brought together.
this brave o'erhanging firmament appears no other thing
to me, than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. shak.
3. an assembly met to worship god in publick, and hear
do&amp;trine.
the words which the minister first pronounceth, the whole
congregation shall repeat after him. hooker.
the practice of those that prefer houses before churches,
and a conventicle before the congregation. south.
if those preachers, who abound in epiphonemas, would
look about them, they would find part of their congregation
out of countenance, and the other asleep. swift.
congrega/tio nal. adj. [from congregation.] publick; per-
taining to a congregation or assembly. it is a word used of
such christians as hold every congregation to be a separate
and independant church.
congress. m. s. [congresis, latin.]
1. a meeting ; a shock; a conflict.
here pallas urges on, and lausus there;
their congress in the field great jove withstands,
both doom'd to fall, but fall by greater hands. dryd. æn.
from these laws may be deduced the rules of the congresses
and reflections of two bodies. cheyne’s phil. prin.
2. an appointed meeting for settlement of affairs between dif-
ferent nations: as, the congress of cambray.
congre'ssive. adj. [from congress.] meeting; encountering;
coming together.
if it be understood of sexes conjoined, all plants are fe-
male ; and if of disjoined and congressive generation, there is
no male or female in them. brown's /ugar errours.
to congru’e. v. n. [from congruo, latin.] to agree ; to
be consistent with ; to suit; to be agreeable. not in use.
our sovereign process imports at full,
by letters congruing to that effect,
the present death of hamlet.
shakespeare's hamlet,
vol. i.
congru'ence. m. s. [congruentia, latin.] agreement; suit.
ableness of one thing to another; consistency.
cost. adj. [congruens, latin.] agreeing; correspon-
ent.
these planes were so separated as to move upon a common
side of the congruent squares, as an axis. cheyne's phil. prin.
congru's ry, n.s. [from congrue.]
i. suitableness; agreeableness.
congruity of opinions to our natural constitution, is one
great incentive to their reception. glanville.
2. fitness; pertinence.
* a whole sentence may fail of its congruity by wanting one
particle. sidney.
3. consequence of argument; reason; consistency.
with what congruity doth the church of rosne deny, that
her enemies do at all appertain to the church of christ? hook.
4. [in geometry.] figures or lines which exactly correspond,
when laid over one another, are in congruity.
co ngrument. n.s.. [from congrue..] fitness; adaptation.
not in use.
the congrument and harmonious fitting of periods in a sen-
tence, hath almost the fastening and force of knitting and con-
nexion. ben. johnson's discovery.
co'ngruous, adj. [congruus, latin.]
i. agreeable to ; consistent with.
the existence of god is so many ways manifest, and the
obedience we owe him so congruous to the light of reason,
that a great part of mankind give testimony to the law of
inature. locke.
2. suitable to ; accommodated to ; proportionate or commen-
surate.
the faculty is infinite, the object infinite, and they infi-
nitely congruous to one another. cheyne's phil. prin.
3. rational ; fit. -
motives that address themselves to our reason, are fittest to
be employed upon reasonable creatures: it is no ways con-
grows, that god should be always frightening men into an
... acknowledgment of the truth. atterbury.
co'ngruously, adv. [from congruous.] suitably; pertinently;
consistently.
this conjecture is to be regarded, because, congruously unto
it, one having warmed the bladder, found it then lighter than
the opposite weight. boyle's spring of the air.
sonical. } adj. [conicus, latin.] having the form of a cone,
o'nick. § or round decreasing.
tow'ring firs in conick forms arise,
and with a pointed spear divide the skies. prior.
a brown flint of a conick figure: the basis is oblong. woodw.
they are conical vessels, with their bases towards the heart ;
and as they pass on, their diameters grow till less. arbuthnot.
co'nically, adv. [from conical.] in form of a cone.
in a watering pot, shaped conically, or like a sugar loaf,
filled with water, no liquor falls through the holes at the bot"
tom, whilst the gardener keeps his thumb upon the orifice at
the top. boyle's spring of the air.
conical ness, n.s. [from conical.] the state or quality of
being conical.
conick seciian. n.s. a curve line arising from the section of
a cone by a plane.
co'nick seclions. ; n. s. that part of geometry which considers
co'nicks. the cone, and the curves ariting from its
sections. -
to conject. v. m. [conjec'um, lat.] to guess; to con-
jecture. not in use.
i intreat you then,
from one that but imperfectly conjec's,
your wisdom would not build yourself a trouble. shakesp.
conje"ctor. m. s. [from conjeci.) a guesser; a conjecturer.
for so conjectors would obtrude,
and from thy painted skin conclude. swift.
conje'cturable. adj. [from conjecture.] being the object of
conjecture ; possible to be guessed.
conje’ct ural. adj. [from conjecture.] depending on con-
jecture; said or done by guess.
they'll fit by th’ fire, and presume to know
who thrives, and who declines, side factions, and give out
conjeclural marriages. shakespeare's coriolanus.
thou speak'st it falsely, as i love mine honour, -
and mak'st conjeciural fears to come into me. shakespeare.
it were a matter of great profit, save that i doubt it is too
conjectural to venture upon, if one could discern what corn,
herbs, or fruits, are likely to be in plenty or scarcity. bacon.
the two last words are not in callimachus, and conse-
quently the rest are only conjeclural. broome.
conjectura'lity. m. s. [from conjeclural.] that which de-
pends upon guess,
they have not recurred unto chronology, or the records of
time, but taken themselves unto probabilities, and the coojec-
turality of philosophy. brown's pulgar errowry. "
conje'cturally. adv. [from conjeciural j by guess ; by
conjecture.
5 h whatsoever<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 464</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
whatsoever may be at any time out of scripture, but pro-
bably and conjecturally surmised. hooker.
let it be probably, not conjeou, ally proved. amaine.
conj escor u r e. m. s. [conjectura, latin.]
1. guess; imperfect knowledge; preponderation of opinion
without proof. -
in the casting of lots a man cannot, upon any ground of
reason, bring the event so much as under conjeclure. south.
2. idea; notion ; conception. not now in use. - -
now entertain conjecjure of a time,
when creeping murmur, and the poring dark,
fills the wide vessel of the universe. shakosh. hinry v.
to conject ure. v. a. [from the noun..] to guess ; to
judge by guess; to entertain an opinion upon bare probability-
when we look upon such things as equally may or may not
be, human reason can then, at the best, but conjeciure what
will be. south.
a conj e^ctur e.r. m. s. [from conjesure.] a guesser ; one
who forms opinion without proof.
it we should believe very grave conjecurers, carnivorous
animals now were not flesh devourers then. brown.
i shall leave conjourers to their own inaginations. add.
cos isr e rous. a.o. [conus and fero, latin.]
such trees or herbs are coniferous as bear a squamose scaly
fruit, of a woody substance, and a figure approaching to a
cone, in which are many feeds; and when they are ripe, the
several cells in the cone open, and the seeds drop out. of
this kind are the fir, pinc, and beech. quincy.
io con job bl e. v. a. [from can, together, and jobberno/, the
head.) to concert; to settle; to discu's. a low cant word.
what would a body think of a minister that should con-
jobsle matters of state with tumblers, and confer politicks with
tinkers : - l'estrange.
t3 conjo in. v. a. [cofondre, fr. conjungo, latin.]
1. to unite; to consolidate into one.
thou wrong'st pirithous, and not him alone;
but, while i live, two friends conjoin'd in one. dryden.
2. to unite in marriage.
if either of you know any inward impediment,
why you should not be conjoin'd, i charge
you on your souls to utter it. shakesp. much ado.
3. to associate ; to connect.
common and universal spirits convey the aetion of the
remedy into the part, and conjoin the virtue of bodies far
disjoined. brown's wulgar errours.
men of differing interests can be reconciled in one com-
munion; at least, the designs of all can be conjoined in liga-
tures of the same reverence, and piety, and devotion. taylor.
let that which he learns next be nearly conjoined with what
he knows already. locke.
to cos jo'in. v. n. to league; to unite.
this part of his -
conjoins with my disease, and helps to end me. sh. hen. iv.
conjo'int. adj. [ conjoint, fr. j united ; connected ; as-
sociate.
con joi nt dogrees. [in musick.] two notes which imme-
diately follow each other in the order of the scale; as ut
and re. dic.
conjo'1ntly. adv, [from conjoint.j in union; together; in
asiociation; jointly; not apart.
a gross and frequent error, commonly committed in the
use of doubtful remedies, conjointly with those that are of ap-
proved virtues. brown's pulgar errours.
the parts of the body separately, make known the passions
of the soul, or else conjointly one with the other. dryden.
co's isok. ste cog niso r.
conjugal. adj. [conjugalis, lat.] matrimonial; belong-
ing to marriage; connubial.
their conjugal affection still is ty'd,
and still the mournful race is multiply'd. dryd. fables.
i could not forbear commending the young woman for her
conjugal affection, when i found that she had left the good
man at home. spectator.
he mark’t the conjugal dispute;
nell roar'd incessant, dick sat mute. swift.
co'n juga lly. adv. [from conjugal.] matrimonially; con-
nubially. r
‘i a co's ju gate. v. a. [conjugo, latin.]
1. to join ; to join in marriage; to unite.
those drawing as well marriage as wardship, gave him
both power and occasion to conjugate at pleasure the norman
and the saxon houses. j/otton.
2. to inflect verbs; to decline verbs through their various ter-
imlilations.
co'njugate. m. s. [conjugatus, latin.] agreeing in deriva-
tion with another word, and therefore generally resembling in
signification.
his grammatical argument, grounded upon the derivation
of spontaneous from sponte, weighs nothing : we have learned
in logick, that conjugates are sometimes in name only, and not
in decd. bramh. answer to hobbs.
co'n jug ate diameter, or axis. [in geometry.] a right lice
bisecting the transverse diameter. charter.
conjugation. m. s. [conjugatio, latin.] -
i. a couple ; a pair.
the heart is so far from affording nerves unto other parts,
that it receiveth very few itself from the sixth conjugation or
pair of nerves. brown's pulgar error.
2. the act of uniting or compiling things together.
• the general and indefinite contemplations and notions of
the elements, and their conjugations, are to be set aside, being
but notional, and illimited and definite axioms are to be drawi
out of measured instances. bacon.
all the various mixtures and conjugations of atoms do beget
nothing. bentley's sermont.
3. the form of infle&amp;ting verbs through their series of termi-
nations.
have those who have writ so much about declensions and
conjugations, about concords and syntaxes, lost their labour,
and been learned to no purpose : lock.
4. union; assemblage
the supper of the lord is the most sacred, mysterious, and
useful conjugation of secret and holy things and duties. taylor.
conju'nct. adj. [conjundzic, latin.j conjoined; concur-
1 ent; united. not in use.
it pleas'd the king his master to strike at me,
when he, conjune; and flatt’ring his displeasure,
tript me behind. shakespeare's king lear.
conju'nction. n.s. [conjunaio, latin.]
1. union; association; league.
with our small conjune?ion we should on,
to see how fortune is dispos'd to us. shakoff. henry iv.
he will unite the white rose and the red; -
smile, heaven, upon his fair conjun:tion,
that long hath frown'd upon their enmity.
shakespeare's richard iii.
the treaty gave abroad a reputation of a strict conjunction
and amity between them. bacon's henry vii.
man can effect no great matter by his personal strength,
but as he acts in society and conjunglion with others. south.
an invisible hand from heaven mingles hearts and souls
by strange, secret, and unaccountable conjunelions. south.
2. the congress of two planets in the same degree of the zodiack,
where they are supposed to have great power and influence.
god, neither by drawing waters from the deep, nor by any
conjunction of the stars, should bury them under a second
flood. raleigh's history of the jorld.
has not a poet more virtues and vices within his circle 2
cannot he observe their influences in their oppositions and
conjunctions, in their altitudes and depressions he shall sooner
find ink than nature exhausted. rymer’s tragedies of last age.
pompey and caesar were two stars of such a magnitude,
that their conjunction was as fatal as their opposition. swift.
3. a word made use of to connect the clauses of a period toge-
ther, and to signify their relation to one another. clarie,
conju'nctive. adj. [conjunctivus, latin.j
1. closely united. a sense not in use.
she's so conjunctive to my life and soul,
that as the star moves not but in his sphere,
i could not but by her. shakspeare's henry iv.
2. [ln grammar.] the mood of a verb, used subscquently to
a conjunetion. - -
conju'nctive ly. adv. from conjun:live..] in union; not
apart.
these are good mediums conjunchively taken, that is, not
one without the other. brown's wulgar errour.
conju'nctiv en ess. m. s. [from conjunctive.] the quality of
joining or uniting.
conju'nctly, adv. [from conjunct.] jointly; together; not
apart.
conju'n cture. m. s. [conjon&amp;ure, french.]
1. combination of many circumstances, or causes.
i never met with a more unhappy conjuncture of affairs than
in the business of that ear!. king charles.
every virtue requires time and place, a proper object, and
a fit conjunciure of circumstances. adaison's spectator.
2. occasion; critical time.
such censures always attend such conjune?ures, and find fault
for what is not done, as with that which is done. clarendon.
3. mode of union; connection.
he is quick to perceive the motions of articulation, and
conjunciures of letters in words. holder's elements of speech.
4. consistency.
i was willing to grant to presbytery what with reason it can
pretend to, in a conjune?ure with episcopacy. king charlei.
conjuration. m. s. [from conjure.]
1. the form or act of summoning another in some sacred name.
we charge you, in the name of god, take heed:
under this conjuration speak, my lord. shakesp. henry v.
2. a magical form of words; an incantaticn; an enchantment.
your conjuration, fair knight, is too strong for my poor
spirit to disobey. sidney.
*
vv hat
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 465</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
* .
*-
*
what drugs, what charms,
what conjuration, and what mighty magick,
for such proceeding i an charg’d withal,
i won his daughter with . - shakespeare's othello.
3. a plot ; a conspiracy. dic?.
‘i a conju're. v. a. [conjuro, latin.]
1. to summon in a sacred name; to enjoin with the highest
solemnity.
he concluded with sighs and tears to conjure them, that
they would no more press him to consent to a thing so contrary
to his reason. clarendon.
the church may address her sons in the form st. paul does
the philippians, when he conjure; them to unity. dec. of piety.
i conjure you ! let him know,
whate'er was done against him, cato did it. addis. cato.
2. to bind many by an oath to some common design. this
sense is rare.
he in proud rebellious arms
drew after him the third part of heav'n's sons,
conju’d against the highest. a silt n’ paradis, l37.
3. to influence by magick; to affect by enchantinent ; to
charm.
what black magician conjures up this fiend,
to stop devoted charitable deeds : shak.jp. richard iii.
what is he whose griefs
bear such an emphasis ; whose phrase of sorrow
conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
like wonder-wounded hcarers? shakosheare's hamlet.
i thought their own fears, whose black arts first raised up
those turbulent spirits, would force them to conjure them down
again. king charles.
you have conjured up persons that exist no where else but
on old coins, and have made our passions and virtues visible.
addison on ancient losedals.
4. it is to be observed, that when this word is used for summon
cr conspire, its accent is on the last syllable, conjure; when for
charm, on the first, conjure. 4.
to co'n juke. v. n. to practise charms or enchantments; to
enchant.
my invocation is honest and fair; and in his mistress's
name i conjure only but to raise up him.
shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
out of my door, you witch you hag, you baggage, you
poulcat, you runaway! out, out, out; i'll conjure you, i'll
fortunt tell you. shakespeare's merry wives of windsor.
co's jur e.r. m. s. [from conjure.]
1. an enchanter; one that uses charms.
good doctor pinch, you are a conjurer;
establish him in his true sense again. shak. cam. of errours.
figures in the book
of some dread conjurer, that would enforce nature. donne.
thus has he done you british consorts right,
whose husbands, should they pry like mine to-night,
would never find you in your conduct flipping,
though they turn'd conjurers to take you tripping. addison.
2. an impostor who pretends to secret arts; a cunning man.
from the account the loser brings,
the conj'rer knows who stole the things. prior.
3. by way of irony; a man of shrewd conjecture; a man of
sagacity.
though ants are very knowing, i don't take them to be
conjurers; and therefore they could not guess that i had put
some corn in that room. addison.
cosju'rement. m. s. [from conjure.] serious injunction ;
folemn demand.
i should not be induced but by your earnest intreaties and
serious conjurements. milton on education.
conna'scence. n.s.. [can and nascar, latin.]
1. common birth; production at the same time ; community,
of birth.
2. being produced together with another being.
christians have baptized these geminous births and double
connascencies, as containing in them a distinetion of soul.
brown's vulgar errours.
3. the act of uniting or growing together: improperly.
symphysis denotes a connascence, or growing together.
//iseman's surgery.
connate. adj. [from con and natus, latin.] born with an-
other; being of the same birth.
many, who deny all connate notions in the speculative in-
telle&amp;t, do yet admit them in this. south.
their dispositions to be reflected some at a greater, and
others at a less thickness, of thin plates or bubbles, are con-
nate with the rays, and immutable. newton's opt.
con natural. adj. [con and natural.]
1. united with the being; connected by nature.
first, in man's mind we find an appetite
to learn and know the truth of ev'rything,
which is connatural, and born with it. davies.
these affections are connatural to us, and as we grow up
so do they. d'estrange.
2. participation of the same nature. -
is there no way, besides
these painful passages, how we may come
to death, and mix with our connatural dust *
whatever draws me on,
or sympathy, or some connat'ral force,
pow'rful at greatest distance to unite,
with secret amity. a filton', paradis? l3/".
cossa turality. m. s. [from connatural.j participation of
the same nature ; natural inseparability.
there is a connaturality and congruity between that know-
ledge and those habits, and that future estate of the soul. hale.
coss aturally. adv. [from connatural.] in coexistence with
nature; originally.
some common notions seem connaturally engraven in th:
soul, antecedently to discussive ratiocination. hair.
conna"r uraln ess. n. s. [from connatural j participation of
the same nature; natural union.
such is the connaturaln's of our corruptions, except we
looked for an account hereafter. pearson on the cod.
to connect. v. a. [connecio, latin l
1. to join ; to link; to unite; to conjoin ; to foster tooth r.
the corpuscles that constitute the quicks vet will b \,,,,.
reoed to one another, that, instead of a fluid body, they will
appear in the form of a red powder. -
2. to unite by intervention, as a centent.
the natural order of the connecting ideas must dire? the
sy!!ogisms, and a man must see the connection of each inter-
mediate idea with those that it connects, before he can use it in
a syllogism. loco.
3. to join in a just series of thought, or regular construction
of language: as, the authour connects his resons wil.
to coss e^ct. v. n. to cohere; to have just relation to
things precedent and subsequent. this is seldom used but in
conversation.
conne crively. adv. [from connect.] in conjunction; in
union; jointly; conjointly ; conjunctly.
the people's power is great and indisputable, whenever they
can unite conne:tively, or by deputation, to exert it. swift.
to con nex. v. a. [connexum, latin.] to join or link toge-
ther ; to fasten to each other.
those birds who are taught some words or sentences, can-
not connex their words or sentences in coherence with the
matter which they signify. hale's origin of mankind.
mitan.
13-ye.
** y 3
by chains connex'd, and with destructive sweep
behead whole troops at once. philips,
conn exion. m. s. [fron connex, or connexio, lat.] :
1. union; junetion ; the aet of fastening together; the state
of being fastened together.
my heart, which, by a secret harmony,
still moves with thine, join'd in consixian sweet. moston.
there must be a future state, where the eternal and inse-
parable connexion between virtue and happiness shall be nami-
fested. . - alt.rbury.
2. just relation to some thing precedent crosubsequent; cens:-
quence of argumentation; coherence.
contemplation of human nature doth, by a necessary co-
nexion and chain of causes, carry us up to the deity. hale.
each intermediate idea must be such as, in the 'whole chain,
hath a visible connexion with those two it is placed between. locke.
a conscious, wife, reflecting cause,
that can deliberate, means elect, and find
their due connexion with the end design'd. błocłm. croatian,
conn exive. adj. [from connex.] having the force of con-
nexion; conjunctive.
the predicate and subject are joined in a form of words by
connexive particles. j/atty's logice.
con nictation. n.s.. [from connie?!, lat..] a winking, dia.
conni'v ance. m. s. [from connive. j
1. the act of winking. not in use.
2. voluntary blindness; pretended ignorance; forbearance.
it is better to mitigate usury by declaration, than to suffer
it to rage by connivance. bacon.
disobedience, having gained one degree of liberty, will
demand another: every vice interprets a connivance an appro-
bation. south.
a connivance to admit half, will produce ruin. swift.
to conni've. v. m. [canniveo, latin j
1. to wink.
this artist is to teach them how to nod judiciously, to con-
mive with either eye. spectator.
2. to pretend blindness or ignorance; to forbear; to pass un-
censured.
the licentiousness of inferiours, and the remissness of su-
periours, the one violates, and the other connives. dec. of p.
with whatever colours he persuades authority to cannive at
his own vices, he will desire its protection from the effects of
other men's. rogers.
he thinks it a scandal to government to connive at such
tracts as reject all revelation. swift.
connoisse'u.r. m. s. [french..] a judge; a critick. it is
often used of a pretended critick.
your<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 466</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
your lesson learnt, you'll be secure -
to get the name of connoissour. swift.
t, connotate. v. a. soon and nota, lat.] to designate
something besides itself; to imply ; to inser.
god's foreseeing doth not include or connotate predeter-
mining, any more than i decree with my intelled. hammond.
connota’t son. m. s. [from connotate.] implication of some-
thing besides itself; inference ; illation. -
by reason of the co-existence of one thing with another,
there ariseth a various relation or connotation between them.
hale's origin of mankind.
plato by his ideas means only the divine essence with this
connotation, as it is variously imitable or participable by created
beings. sorris.
t, connot e. v. a. scan and nota, latin.] to imply ; to
betoken ; to include.
good, in the general notion of it, connotes also a certain
suitableness of it to some other thing. south.
con nu'bial. adj. [connubiasis, latin.] matrimonial; nup-
tial; pertaining to marriage; conjugal.
should second love a pleasing flame inspire,
and the chaste queen connulial rites require pope's odyssey.
co'noid. m. s. [x,yceions.] a figure partaking of a cone;
approaching to the form of a cone.
the tympanum is not capable of tension as a drum : there
remains another way, by drawing it to the centre into a conoid
form. h lic's elements of speech.
cono.’d1c al. adj. [from concid.] approaching to a conick
form, to the form of a round decreasing.
to conquassate. v. a. [conquaso, latin.] to shake;
to agitate. not in use.
vomits do violently conquasate the lungs.
conquass ation. m. s. [from conquasate.]
cussion.
to conquer. v. a. [conquerir, fr. conquirere, latin.]
1. to gain by conquest ; to over-run ; to win.
they had conquered them, and brought them under tribute.
i asac. viii. 2.
welcome, great stagirite, and teach me now
all i was born to know,
thy scholar's victories thou dost outdo
harvey.
agitation; con-
he conquer'd th’ earth, the whole world you. cowly.
'twas fit,
who conquer'd nature, should preside o'er wit. pope.
we conquer’d france, but felt our captive's charms,
their arts victorious triumph'd o'er our arms.
2. to overcome ; to subdue ; to vanquish.
both tugging to be victors, breast to breast;
yet neither conqueror, nor conquer'd shakesp. henry vi.
the conquer'd also, and inslav’d by war,
shall, with their freedom lost, all virtue lose,
pope.
and fear of god. milton.
anna conquer; but to save,
and governs but to bless. smith.
3. to surmount; to overcome: as, he conquered his reludiance.
to co'nquer. v. m. to get the victory; to overcome.
put him to choler straight: he hath been used
ever to conquer and to have his word
off contradiction. shakespeare's coriolanus.
equal success had set these champions high,
and both resolv'd to conquer, or to die.
the logick of a conquering sword has no propriety.
decay of piety.
co'not erable. adj. [from conquer..] possible to be overcome.
while the heap is small, and the particulars few, he will
find it easy and conquerable. south.
co'nique ror. m. s. [from conquer.]
1. a man that has obtained a victory; a victor.
bound with triumphant garlands will i come,
and lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed. shaks. rich. iii.
the gain of civil wars will not allow
bags for the conq'rour's crew. cowley.
a critick that attacks authours in reputation, is as the slave
who called out to the conqueror, remember, sir, that you are a
771477. addison's guardian.
2. one that subdues and ruins countries.
deserving freedom more
than those their conquerors, who leave behind
nothing but ruin wherefoe'er they rove. milt. par. reg.
that tyrant god, that restless conqueror,
may quit his pleasure, to assert his pow'r,
co'nquest. n.s.. [conque/fe, french.]
1. the act of conquering; subjection.
a perfect conquest of a country reduces all the people to the
condition of subjecls. davies on ireland.
2. acquisition by victory; thing gained.
more willingly i mention air,
this our old conquis?; than remember hell,
our hated habitation. milton's paradise regained.
3. victory; success in arms.
i must yield my body to the earth,
and by my fall, the conquest to my foe. shakesp. henry vi.
jwaller.
prior.
i’ll lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
to whom i will retail my conquis won,
and she shall be sole victress. shakespeare's richard iii.
not to be o'ercome, was to do more
than all the conquests former kings did gain. dryden.
in joys of conquest he resigns his breath,
and, fill'd with england's glory, smiles in death. addison.
consangui'neous. adj. [consanguineus, lat.] near of
kin; of the same blood; related by birth, not affined.
am i not consanguineous * am i not of her blood? . shakes.
consanguinity. m. s. [consanguinitas, latin.] relation by
blood ; relation by descent from one common progenitof.
distinguished from offinity, or relation by marriage. near-
ness of kin.
i've forgot my father;
i know no touch of consanguinity. , shakes. troil, and cross.
there is the supreme and indissoluble conjanguinity and so-
ciety between men in general ; of which the heathen poet,
whom the apostle calls to witness, faith, we are all his ge.
neration. bacon's holy war.
the first original would subsist, though he outlived all terms
of consanguinity, and became a stranger unto his progeny.
- brown's wugar errouri.
christ has condescended to a cognation and consanguinity
with us. o south.
consarcination. m. s. [from consarcino, latin, to piece.]
the act of patching together. dici.
co'nscience. m. s. [conscientia, latin.]
1. the knowledge or faculty by which we judge of the goodness
or wickedness of ourselves,
when a people have no touch of conscience, no sense of their
evil doings, it is bootless to think to restrain them. spensor.
who against faith, and conscience, can be heard
infallible a/ilton's paradise loft.
coscience has not been wanting to itself, in endeavouring
to get the clearest information about the will of god. south,
but why must those be thought to 'scape, that feel
those rods of scorpions, and those whips of steel,
which conscience shakes : creech's juv.
no courts created yet, nor cause was heard;
but all was safe, for conscience was their guard. dryd. ovid.
conscience signifies that knowledge which a man hath of his
own thoughts and actions; and, because if a man judgeth
fairly of his actions, by comparing them with the law of
god, his mind will approve or condemn him, this knowledge
or conscience may be both an accuser and a judge. swift.
2. justice; the estimate of conscience; the determination of
conscience ; honesty. this is sometimes a serious and some-
times a ludicrous sense.
this is thank-worthy, if a man, for conscience toward god,
endure grief. 1 pet. ii. 19.
now is cupid a child of conscience; he makes restitution.
shakespeare's merry wives of windsor.
he had, against right and conscience, by shamefus treachery,
intruded himself into another man's kingdom. anoles.
what you require cannot, in conscience, be deferred beyond
this time. a4ilton.
her majesty is obliged in conscience to endeavour this by her
authority, as much as by her practice. swift.
3. consciousness; knowledge of our own thoughts or actions.
merit, and good works, is the end of man's motion; and
conscience of the same is the accomplishment of man's rest. bac.
the reason why the simpler sort are moved with authority,
is the conscience of their own ignorance. hocker.
the sweetest cordial we receive at last,
is conscience of our virtuous actions past. denham.
hector was in an absolute certainty of death, and depressed
with the conscience of being in an ill cause. pope.
4. real sentiment; veracity; private thoughts.
do'st thou in conscience think, tell me, æmilia,
that there be women do abuse their husbands,
in such gross kind shakespeare's othell.
they did in their consciences know, that he was not able to
send them any part of it. clarendon.
5. scruple ; principle of a&amp;ion.
we must make a conscience in keeping the just laws of su-
periours. taylor's holy living.
why should not the one make as much conscience of be-
traying for gold, as the other of doing it for a crust. l’estr.
children are travellers newly arrived in a strange country;
we should therefore make conscience not to mislead them. locke.
6. in judicrous language, reason; reasonableness.
why do'st thou weep? can't thou the conscience lack,
to think i shall lack friends shakespeare's timon.
half a dozen fools are, in all conscience, as many as you
should require. swift.
conscie’ntious, adj. [from conscience..] scrupulous; exactly
just ; regulated by conscience.
lead a lise in so consientious a probity, as in thought, word
and deed to make good the character of an honest man. l’e/ir.
conscientiously, adv, [from conscientious.] according to
the direetion of conscience.
more
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 467</div><p class="text">6 o n
to:
* ...
o
o,
y &amp;
o:
o,
lo \.
o: o
o
n *
soon o
o,
s iris
fo t
o
we 1st o
o #.
o,
0 lo o:
o
is as
fo
lit.
.
g: o
**s,
a this, s
*:::::
o *:::.
o:
g. &amp;
o, to
o:
*}
to:
joo
olonio,
imo
wo o
to:
g
dom:
so
it to
1 p.
kes rest:
to fi
mefuls:
l,
des:
l
avourt:
so
also
sm::
door
more stress has been laid upon the strictness of law, than
oins, did belong to it. - - l’estrange.
there is the erroneous as well as the rightly informed con-
and if the conscience happens to be deluded, fin does
not therefore cease to be sin, because a man committed it con-
finish. f - - south.
cosscie'stiousnß. n: s [from conscientious.] exactness of
astice; tenderness of conscience.
j it will be a wonderful conscientiousnes; in them, if they will
content themselves with less profit than they can make. locke.
consciosable off. [from conscience..] reasonable; just ;
according to conscience. -
a knave, very voluble; no farther conscionable than in put-
on the meer form of civil and humane seeming. shakesp.
tool
science;
o my debtors have conscionable satisfaction. wotton.
conscionableness. n.s.. [from conscionable.] equity; rea-
sonableness. dic7.
conscionably adv. [from conscionable.] in a manner agree-
able to conscience ; reasonably; justly.
a prince must be used conscionably as #. as a common
erson. - - aylor's holy living.
cous. adj. [conscius, latin.] g
1. endowed with the power of knowing one's own thoughts
and actions.
matter hath no life nor perception, and is not conscious of
its own existence. bentley's sermons.
among substances some are thinking or conscious beings, or
have a power of thought. watts's logick.
2. knowing from memory; having the knowledge of any thing
without any new information.
the damsel then to tancred sent,
who conscious of th’ occasion, fear'd th' event. dryden.
3. admitted to the knowledge of any thing: with to.
the rest stood trembling, struck with awe divine,
eneas only conscious to the sign,
presag'd th’ event. dryden's aon.
roses or honey cannot be thought to smell or taste their
own sweetness, or an organ be conscious to its musick, or gun-
powder to its flashing or noise. bentley's sermons.
4. bearing witness by the dictate of conscience to any thing.
the queen had been solicitous with the king on his be-
half, being conscious to herself that he had been encouraged by
her. clarendon.
cossciously, adv. [from conscious.] with knowledge of
one's own actions.
if these perceptions, with their consciousness, always re-
mained in the mind, the same thinking thing would be always
assiusly present. locke.
conscious ness. n.s.. [from conscious.]
i, the perception of what passes in a man's own mind. locke.
if spirit be without thinking, i have no idea of any thing
left; therefore consciousness must be its essential attribute.
watts's logick.
2. internal sense of guilt, or innocence.
no man doubts of a supreme being, until, from the con-
sciousness of his provocations, it become his interest there
should be none. government of the tongue.
such ideas, no doubt, they would have had, had not their
consciousness to themselves, of their ignorance of them, kept
them from so idle an attempt. locke.
an honest mind is not in the power of a dishonest: to
break its peace, there must be some guilt or consciousness. pope.
conscript, adj. [from conscribo, latin.] a term used in
speaking of the roman senators, who were called patres con-
|. from their names being written in the register of the
enate,
conscription, n.s.. [conscriptio, latin.] an enrolling or re-
giffering. dicf.
to consecrate. v. a. [consecro, latin.]
1. to make sacred; to appropriate to sacred uses.
enter into the holiest by the blood of jesus, by a new and
living way which he bath onsecrated for us. heb. x. 20.
shall i abuse this consecrated gift
of strength again returning with my hair. milton.
the water consecrate for sacrifice,
appears all black. waller.
a bishop ought not to consecrate a church which the patron
has built for filth gain, and not for true devotion. ayliffe.
o * to dedicate inviolably to some particular purpose, or per-
so son: with to.
‘. . he shall to secrate unto the lord the days of his separation,
o and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering.
so numb. vi. 12.
so 3. to canonize.
o consecrate. adj. [from the verb.] consecrated; sacred;
ja’ devoted; devote; dedicated.
shouldst thou but hear i were licentious;
to' and that this body, consecrate to thee,
o #y rufian lust should be contaminate. shak. com. of err.
*...* the cardinal ftanding before the choir, lets them know
} that they were assembled in that consecrate place to sing unto
god. bacon's henry vii.
wol, i. 3
*—
into these secret shades, cry’d she,
how dar'st thou be so bold
to enter, consecrate to me; -
co touch this hallow'd mold 2 drayton's cynthic:
*******, *s, [from consecrate.] one that performs
thosites by which anything is devoted to sacred purposes.
whether it be not against the notion of a sacrament, that
the consecrater alone should partake of it. zorio,
consecration. n.s.. [from consecrate.] y-
i. a rite or ceremony of dedicating and devoting things or per-
sons to the service of god, with an application of certain
proper solemnities. ayliffe's parergon.
at the erection and consecration as well of the tabernacs: as
of the temple, it pleased the almighty to give a sign. hooker
the consecration of his god is upon his head. numb. vi ..
we must know that consecration makes not a place ficies.
but only solemnly declares it so: the gift of the owner to
god makes it god's, and consequently sacred. south
2. the act of declaring one holy by canonization. ******-
the calendar swells with new consecrations of saints. hale
consectary. adj. [from consolarius, lat.] consequent.
consequential ; following by consequence. &gt;
from the inconsistent and contrary determinations thereof
consolary impieties and conclusions may arise. brown.
co'nsectary. m. s. [from the adjective..] deduction from
premises; consequence; corollary.
these propositions are consectaries drawn from the observa-
tions. woodward's natural history.
consecution. n.s.. [consecutio, latin.]
1. train of consequences; chain of deductions; concatenation
of propositions.
some consecutions are so intimately and evidently connexed
to or found in the premises, that the conclusion is attained
and without any thing of ratiocinative progress. hai.
2. succession.
in a quick consecution of the colours, the impression of every
colour remains in the sensorium. newton's opticks.
3. in astronomy.
the month of consecution, or, as some term it, of progres,
son, is the space between one conjunction of the moon with
the sun unto another. - brown's vulgar errours.
the moon makes four quarterly seasons within her little
year, or month of consecution. holder.
conse'cutive. adj. [consecutif, french.]
1. following in train; uninterrupted; successive. -
that obligation upon the lands did not come into disuse
but by fifty consecutive years of exemption. arbuth. on coins.
2. consequential ; regularly succeeding.
this is seeming to comprehend only the aetions of a man,
consecutive to volition. lockey
consecutively. adv. [from consecutive..] a term used in the
school philosophy, in opposition to antecedently, and some-
times to effectively or causally. dic7.
to conse minate. v. a. [consemino, latin.] to sow diffe-
rent seeds together. dici.
conse'nsion. m. s. [consensin, latin.] agreement; accord. .
a great number of such living and thinking particles could
not possibly, by their mutual contact, and pressing and striking,
compose one greater individual animal, with one mind and
understanding, and a vital consenson of the whole body. bent.
conse/nt. n.s...[consensus, latin.]
1. the aet of yielding or consenting.
i am far from excusing or denying that compliance; for
plenary consent it was not. king charles.
when thou canst truly call these virtues thine,
be wise and free, by heav'n's consent and mine. dryd, pers:
2. concord; agreement; accord : unity of opinion.
the fighting winds would stop there and admire,
learning consent and concord from his lyre. cowley's david.
3. coherence with ; relation to ; correspondence.
demons found
in fire, air, flood, or under ground,
whose power hath a true consent
with planet or with element. - milton.
4. tendency to one point; joint operation. -
such is the world's great harmony that springs
from union, order, full consent of things. pope.
5. in physick.
the perception one part has of another, by means of some
fibres and nerves common to them both ; and thus the stone in
the bladder, by vellicating the fibres there, will affect and
draw them so into spasms, as to affect the bowels in the same
manner by the intermediation of nervous threads, and cause a
colick; and extend their twiches sometimes to the stomach,
and occasion vomitings. quincy.
to consent. v. n. [consentio, latin.]
1. to be of the same mind; to agree.
though what thou tell'st some doubt within me move,
but more desire to hear, if thou consent, -
the full relation. milton.
2. to co-operate to the same end. .
3. to yield; to give consent; o allow ; to admit: with *y
c<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 468</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
ye comets, scourge the bad revolting stars
that have consented into henry's death. shakesp. henry vi.
upon a due confideration of them, the
y are highly co
tial, and concludent to my purpose ! consequen.
• hale's origin of alaiti.
- - ill be as we be. geness. conseque’nr. ally. adv. [from oftuential.j
in ". we o: # ... jo. s i. yo just deduction of consequences; with right conneaion
at 111 - 3.s.
- - do. milton. on 10c - - -
waking ... loft * nobody writes a book without meaning something, though
their num j does with heav'n consent he may not have the faculty of writing onsequential. and ex-
p. ... waller. pressing his meaning.
o all they wrote.
conse nta neous. adj. [consentaneus, latin.] agreeable to ;
consistent with.
in the picture of abraham sacrificing his son, o is de-
- - ; which is not consentaneous unto the circum-
scribed a little boy; whi !s. brown's wugar errours.
of the text. -
*. cost no pains to bring }. ..o.o.;
ice, it being very agreeable and consentaneous - -
... t g very ag hammond's practical gatechism.
consenta neously. adv. [from consentaneous.] agreeably ;
nsistently; suitably. -
“. did nowy. write so consentaneously to himself,
that his opinions were confidently to be collected from every
place of his writings, where he seems to express it. boyle,
consen ta’s eous ness. m. s. [from consentaneous.] agree-
ment; consistence. - - dic.
conse ntient. ads...[consentions, latin.] agreeing; united
in opinion; not differing in sentiment. -
the authority due to the consentient judgment and practice
of the universal church. oxford reasons against the covenant.
consequence. n.s.. [consequentia, latin.]
1. that which follows from any cause or principle.
2. event; effect of a cause.
spirits that know -
all mortal cosouences have pronounc'd it. shakesp. macbeth.
shun the bitter consequence ; for know, -
the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die. milton.
3 proposition collected from the agreement of other previous
propositions; deduction; conclusion. - -
it is no good consequence, that reason aims at our being hap-
py, therefore it forbids all voluntary sufferings. decay of p.
4. the last proposition of a syllogism: as, what is commanded by
*ur saviour is our duty: prayer is commando, cons. ther screprayer
is our duty.
can syllogism set things right?
no, majors soon with minors fight:
or both in fiendly consort join'd,
the cofouence limps false behind.
5. concateration of cases and effects ; consecution.
sorrow being the natural and dirca offer offin, that which
first brought sin into the world, must, by necessary consequence,
bring in sorrow too. south.
prior.
i felt
that i must after thee, with this thy son :
such fatal consequence unites us three. milton's par. left.
6. that which produces consequences; influence; tendency.
asserted without any colour of scripture-proof, it is of very
ill consequence to the superstructing of good life. hammond.
7. importance; moment.
the instruments of darkness
win us with honest trifles, to betray us
in deepest consequence. shakespeare's macbeth.
the anger of achilles was of such consequence, that it em.
broiled the kings of greece. 4ddison's spectator.
their people are sunk in poverty, ignorance and cowardice;
* of as little consequence as women. children. swift.
co(nsequent. adj. [*/4uens, latin.]
1. following by rational deduction.
2. following as the effect of a cause: with to.
. it was not a power possible to be inherited, because the
figh; was count to, and built on, an act perfectly per-
sonal. locke.
3. sometimes with tl/0/1.
this satisfaction or dissatisfaction
acing suitably or unsuitably to con
easily to be worn out
co'nsequent. n. s.
1. consequence; that which follo
by rational deduction.
doth it follow that they, bein
* nothing to be followed; thi
the custom of the people of god is to be observed. hooker.
2. effect; that which follows an acting cause.
• , they were ill paid. *y were ill governed, which is
always a consequent of ill payment. davies on ireland.
he could see co, 64ttent; yet d t in their princi d
- effects yet .* yet dormant in their *::::
cosseqgential.
1. produced by then
we sometimes "angle, when we should debate;
a consequential ill which freedom draws 5
a bad effect, but from a noble cause.
2. having the consequences justly connected with
conclusive. -
*.*.squent upon a man's
science, is a principle in ot
&gt; p p
south.
ws from previous propositions
g not the people of god, are
§ {onsequent were good, if only
prior.
the premises;
though these kind of arguments may seem obscure; yet,
addison's whig
2. by consequence; not immediately; eventually,
this relation is so necessary, that god hims;
charge a rational creature from it; although co
doed he may do so, by the annihilation of such cr
3. in a regular series. -
**.*.* king, in his dreams, and a be
and dreamt */*entially, and in continued unbro
would he be in reality a king or a beggar?
conseque ntialness. m. s. [from cosontial.] regular
consecution of discourse, - da
co'nsequently, adv. [from consistent j -
1. by consequence; necessarily ; inevitasy, by the connection
of effects to their causes.
in the most perfed poem a perfect idea was required, and
cons quently all poets 94%t rather to imitate it. 7) den
the place of the several forts of terrestrial matter, suici
in the floid, being contingent and uncertain, their inter.
tures with each other are co'sequently so. //ccd.o.o.
2. in consequence; pursuantly.
there is consequent}, upon this distin
inward satisfaction or dissatisfaction in t
after good or evil. south.
consequentness. n. s [from */**ht.] regular conn.
tion of propositions; consecution of discourse.
let them examine the consequentnos of the whole body of
the doctrine i deliver. digby on the soul, dedication,
9nsf r v able. adj. [from *sorvo, latin, to keep.] capable
of being kept, or maintained.
conse'rvan&amp;y. m. /.. [from conservans, latin.] courts held
by the lord mayor of london . the preservation of the
fishery on the river thames, are called co, of coservancy,
*...**vation. n.s.. [conservati, latin.
i. the ael of proserving; care to keep from perishing; conti.
nuance ; protection.
though there do indeed happen some alterations in the
globe, yet they are such as tej rather to the benefit and ...
jorvation of the earth, and its productions, than to the dio.
or and destruction of both. //oodward's natural hjoy.
2. preservation from corruption.
it is an enquiry of excellent use, to enquire of the means
of preventing or #aying of putrefaction; for therein confist.
eth the means of *servation of bodies. baco, no,...] hijio,
conse’ryative. ad. [from consorvo, latin.] haviglio
p9wor of opposing diminution or injury. -
the spherical figure, as to all heavenly bodies, so it agree-
eth to light, as the most perfect and conservative of alloi.
peachim.
conservator. m.s. [latin.] preserver; one that is, i.
care or office of keeping any thing from detriment, dimiru.
tion, or extinction. -
for that you declare that you have many sick amongst you,
he was warned by the conservator of the city, that he should
keep at a distance. bacon's new atlanti,
the lords of the secret council were likewise made consor-
*ators of the peace of the two kingdoms, during the intervals
of parliament. clarendon,
such individuals as are the single cosrvators of their own
species. bale's origin of manlind,
cosse ryatory. a. s. [from cosorvo, latin.] a place where
any thing is kept in a manner proper to its peculiar nature;
as, fish in a pond, corn in a granary. .
a "servatory of snow and ice, such as they use for deli.
cacy to cool wine in summer. bacon's natural hilo).
you may set your tender trees and plants, with the win-
dows and doors of the greenhouses and ‘. open,
for eight or ten days before april. 'velyn's kalendar.
the water dispensed to the carth and atmosphere by the
great abyss, that subterranean conservatory is by that means
restored back. //codward's natural history.
conse'rvatory. adj. having a preservative quality. did.
a conse'rve. z. z. [conservo, latin.]
1. to preserve without loss of detriment.
yothing was lost out of thes. stores, since the part of go
joving what others have gained in knowledge is easy. tempt.
they will be able to conserve their properties unchanged in
passing through several mediums, which is another condition
of the rays of light. newton's off.
3: to candy or pickle fruit.
conse'rve. m. s. [from the verb.] it hailed with
* a sweetmeat made of the inspiffated juices of fruit, boiled wit
sugar 'till they will harden j candy.
ill't please your honour, taste of these conserves *.
shakosheart.
they have in turkey and the east certain so
wi.
&amp;amily.
cannot dis.
oftential, in-
“atures. so,
*gor awake,
ken scheme,
4tdo.
guishing principle, an
he heart of cycry man,
!.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 469</div><p class="text">c o n
- 3. to
which they call servets, which are like to candied conso, ves,
and are made of sugar and lemons. bacon's natural history.
the more cost they were at, and the more sweets they be-
stowed upon them, the more their conserves stunk. dennis.
2. a conservatory or place in which any thing is kept. this
sense is unusual.
tuberoses will not endure the wet of this season, therefore
set the pots into your conserve, and keep them dry. evelyn.
cuss e(rv er. m. s. [from conserve.]
1. a layer up ; a repositer; one that preserves any thing from
loss or diminution.
he hath been most industrious, both colle&amp;ter and conserver
of choice pieces in that kind. hayward.
in the eastern regions there seems to have been a general
custom of the priests having been the perpetual conservers of
knowledge and story. temple.
2. a preparer of conserves. -
con se’ssion. m. s. [consissio, latin.] a sitting together. dic.
conse'ssor. m. s. [latin.] one that sits with others. dict.
t. consi/der. v. a. [considero, latin.]
1. to think upon with care; to ponder; to examine; to sift;
to study.
at our more consider'd time we'll read,
answer, and think upon this business. shakesp. hamlet.
2. to take into the view ; not to omit in the examination.
lt seems necessary, in the choice of persons for greater em-
ployments, to consider their bodies as well as their minds, and
ages and health as well as their abilities. temple.
o have regard to ; to respect; not to despise.
let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to
good works. heb. x. 24.
4. in the imperative mood it is a kind of interjection; a word
whereby attention is summoned.
consider,
thy life hath yet been private, most part spent
at home. milton's paradise regained.
5. to requite; to reward one for his trouble.
take away with thee the very services thou hast done,
which, if i have not enough considered, to be more thankful to
thee shall be my study. shakespeare's winter's tale.
to consi'der. v. n.
1. to think maturely ; not to judge hastily or rashly.
none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge
nor understanding. isaiah xliv. 1.
2. to deliberate; to work in the mind.
widow, we will consider of your suit;
and come some other time to know our mind. shak. h. vi.
such a treatise might be consulted by jurymen, before they
consider of their verdict. swift.
doubt; to hesitate.
many maz'd considerings did throng,
and press'd in with this caution. shakespeare's henry viii.
'twas grief no more, or grief and rage were one
within her soul; at last ’twas rage alone,
which burning upwards, in succession dries
the tears that stood considering in her eyes. dryden's fables.
cox's 1'derable. adj. [from consider.]
1. worthy of consideration; worthy of regard and attention.
eternity is infinitely the most considerable duration. tillotson.
it is considerable that some urns have had inscriptions on
them, expressing that the lamps were burning. wilkins.
2. respectable; above negle&amp;t; deserving notice. *
men considerable in all worthy professions, eminent in many
ways of life. spratt's sermons.
ł. so considerable a man, that i cannot have less than forty
fhillings a year, addison's freeholder.
3. important; valuable.
christ, instead of applauding st. peter's zeal, upbraided
his absurdity that could think his mean aids considerable to him,
who could command legions of angels to his rescue. dec. of p.
in painting, not every action nor every person is consider-
able enough to enter into the cloth. dryden's o!.
many can make themselves masters of as considerable estates
as those who have the greatest portions of land. addison.
4. more than a little. it has a middle signification between
little and great.
many brought in very considerable sums of money. clarendon.
very probably a considerable part of the earth is yet un-
known. wilkins.
those earthy particles, when they came to be collected,
would constitute a body of a very considerable thickness and
folidity. burnet's theory of the earth.
every cough, though severe, and of some considerable con-
tinuance, is not of a consumptive nature, nor presages disso-
lution and the grave. blackmore.
cons 1'derable ness. n. s. [from considerable.] importance;
dignity; moment; value; desert ; a claim to notice.
we must not always measure the considerableness of things
by their most obvious and immediate usefulness, but by their
fitness to make or contribute to the discovery of things highly
useful. boyle.
their most flight and trivial occurrences, by being theirs,
they think to acquire a considerableness, and are forcibly im-
posed upon the company. government of the tongue,
cossi'derably. adv. [from cous krall...]
1. in a degree deserving notice, though not the highest.
and europe still considerably gains,
both by their good example and their pains.
2. with importance; importantly.
i defire no sort of favour so much, as that of serving you
more considerably than i have been yet able to do. pop.
con stop erance. m. s. [from consider.] consideration; reflec-
tion; sober thought.
after this cold consid’rance, sentence me;
and, as you are a king, speak in your state,
what i have done that misbecame my place. soak. h. iv.
conside rat e. adj. [consideratus, latin )
i. serious ; given to consideration; prudent; not rash ; not
negligent.
i will converse with iron-witted fools,
and unrespective boys: none are for me,
that look into me with consid’rate eyes. satos). rich. i's.
aeneas is patient, considerate, and careful of his people.
dryden's falks, preface.
i grant it to be in many cases certain, that it is such as a
considerate man may prudently rely and proceed upon, and
hath no just cause to doubt of. tillotson.
the expediency in the present juneture, may appear to
every considerate man. addison.
2. having respect to ; regardful. little used.
though they will do nothing for virtue, yet they may be
presumed more considerate of praise. decay of piety.
3. moderate; not rigorous. this sense is much used in con-
versation. -
cons. derately. adv. [from considerate.] calmly; coolly;
prudently.
circumstances are of such force, as they sway an ordinary
judgment of a wise man, not fully and considerately pondering
the matter. “ bacon's colours of good and evil.
constop eraten ess. n.s. [from considerate.] the solo, of
being considerate; prudence. ict.
consideration. n.s.. [from consider.]
1. the aet of confidering; mental view ; regard; notice.
as to present happiness and misery, when that alone comes
in consideration, and the consequences are removed, a man
never chuses amiss. - locke.
2. mature thought; prudence; serious deliberation.
let us think with consideration, and consider with acknow-
ledging, and acknowledge with admiration. sidney.
the breath no sooner left his father's body,
but that his wildness mortified in him ;
consideration, like an angel, came,
and whipt th' offending adam out of him. shao so. h. v.
3. contemplation; meditation upon any thing. -
the love you bear to mopsa hath brought you to the consi.
deration of her virtues, and that consideration may have made
you the more virtuous, and so the more worthy. sidney.
4. importance; claim to notice ; worthiness of regard.
lucan is the only author of consideration among the latin
poets, who was not explained for the use of the dauphin,
because the whole pharsalia would have been a satire upon the
french form of government. addison's freeholder.
5. fo compensation.
e are provident enough not to part with any thing ser-
viceable to our bodies under a good consideration, but make lit-
tle account of our souls. ray on the crcation.
foreigners can never take our bills for payment, though
they might pass as valuable considerations among your own
people. . locke.
6. motive of a&amp;tion; influence; ground of conduct.
the consideration, in regard whereof the law forbiddeth
these things, was not because those nations did use them. hook.
he had been made general upon very partial, and not
enough deliberated considerations. clarendon.
he was obliged, antecedent to all other considerations, to
search an asylum. - dryden.
the world cannot pardon your concealing it, on the same
consideration. dryden.
7. reason; ground of concluding.
not led by any commandment, yet moved with such cons-
derations as have been before set down. hooker.
uses, not thought upon before, be reasonable causes of re-
taining that which other considerations did procure to be in-
stituted. - jhooker.
8. [in law.] consideration is the material cause of a contract,
without which no contract bindeth. it is either expressed, as
if a man bargain te give twenty shillings for a horse; or else
implied, as when a man comes into an inn, and taking both
meat and lodging for himself’and his horse, without bargain-
ing with the host, if he discharge not the house, the host may
stay his horse. cowel.
consi(derer. n.s. [from consider.] aman of refle&amp;tion; a thinker.
rysomon.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

a vain
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 470</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
an impious jest, or of reason
for a deep considerer. &amp;overnment of the tongue.
coopering. [this is a kind of conjunction, o been
more grammatically written considered; vo french ; but con-
- if allowance be made for.
fidering is always used.] - ‘ing the kness
it is not possible to act otherwise, considering t s:
a vain applause of wit for
of our §§ [consigno, latin j
- - - d. co 3. - - - -
o o: to inor any thing, with the right to it, in a
formal manner ; to give into other hands; to transfer.
- - - times over to.
sometimes with to: some - -
m., by free gist, consign over a place to the divine wor-
ship south.
- must i pass -
again to nothing, when this vital breath -
coasing, consigns me o'er to rest and death? prior.
at the day of general account, good men are then to be
consigned over to another state, a state of everlasting love and
charity. atterbury.
2. to appropriate; to quit for a certain purpose. - - -
the french commander consigned it to the use for which it
was intended by the or. dryden's fables, dedication.
. to commit; to entrust. -
3 the four evangelists consigned to writing that history. addis.
atrides, parting for the trojan war, -
consign'd the youthful consort to his care. pope's odyssey.
to consi(g.n. v. m. - - -
i. to submit to the same terms with another. this is not
now in use.
thou hast finish’d joy and moan;
all lovers young, all lovers must &gt; -
consign to thee, and come to dust. shakespeare's cymbeline.
2. to fign; to consent to. obsolete. . .
a maid yet rosed over with the virgin crimson of modesty:
it were a hard condition for a maid to consign to. shakespeare.
consignation. n.s.. [from consign.] - - - - -
1. the act of configning; the act by which any thing is deli-
vered up to another. -
as the hope of salvation is a good disposition towards it, so
is despair a certain consignation to eternal ruin. taylor.
2. the act of signing.
if we find that we increase in duty, then we may look
upon the tradition of the holy sacramental symbols as a direct
consignation of pardon. taylor's jp'orthy communicant.
consign ment. n. s. [from consign.]
1. the act of consigning.
2. the writing by which any thing is consigned.
consi'milar, adj. [from consimilis, latin.] having one com-
mon resemblance. dic7.
to consist. v. n. [consisło, latin.]
i. to subsist; not to perish.
he is before all things, and by him all things cons?. col.
2. to continue fixed; without dissipation.
flame doth not mingle with flame, as air doth with air, or
water with water, but only remaineth contiguous; as it
cometh to pass betwixt consisting bodies.
bacon's natural hislory.
it is against the nature of water, being a flexible and pon-
derous body, to cons? and stay itself, and not fall to the lower
parts about it. brerewood on languages.
3. to be comprised; to be contained.
i pretend not to tie the hands of artists, whose skill cons/?s
only in a certain manner which they have affected. dryden.
a great beauty of letters does often consist in little passages of
private conversation, and references to particular matters. walsh.
4. to be composed.
the land would consist of plains and valleys, and mountains,
according as the pieces of this ruin were disposed. burnet.
5. to have being concurrently; to coexist.
necessity and election cannot consist together in the same
act. bramhall agains? hobbes.
6. to agree; not to oppose; not to contradict; not to coun-
terast: it has with before the thing compared or co-existent.
his majesty would be willing to consent to any thing that
could consist with his conscience and honour. clarendon.
nothing but what may easily consist with your plenty, your
prosperity, is requested of you. spratt's sermons.
you could not help bestowing more than is consisting with
the fortune of a private man, or with the will of any but an
alexander. dryden's fables, dedication.
. it cannot consis with the divine attributes, that the im-
pious man's joys should, upon the whole, exceed those of the
upright. atterbury.
health consists with temperance alone. pope.
the only way of securing the constitution will be by les-
sening the power of domestick adversaries, as much as can
consisi with lenity. swift.
consist ence. * .
consist ency. m. s. [consistentia, low latin.]
1. state with respect to material existence.
. water, being divided, maketh many circles, ’till it restore
itself to the natural consistence. bacon's natural history.
the consistencies of bodies are very 3, wers geor, rare.
tangible, pneumatical, volatile, fixed, goclona..., 'i.
minate, hard, and soft. bron matoa, so -
there is the same necessity for the livine influe. o
regimen to order and govern, conserve and keep togeth, the
universe in that consistence it hath received, as it was at first t
give it, before it could receive it. hale's origin fo.
i carried on my enquiries farther, to try whether this in:
world, when formed and finished, would continue always th
same, in the same form, structure, and consistency. o:
2. degree of denseness or rarity. -
let the expressed juices be boiled into the consolina of 4
syrup. arbuthnot on aliment
3. substance ; form ; make. -
his friendship is of a noble make, and a lasting consistency,
south's 3
4. durable or lasting state. jermans,
meditation will confirm resolutions of good, and givethem
a durable consistence in the soul. hammond
these are fundamental truths that lie at the bottom, i.
basis upon which many others rest, and in which theyo
their consistencies teeming and rich in store, with which the
furnish the mind. - f.
5. agreement with itself, or with any other thing; -
uniformity.
that consistency of behaviour, whereby he inflexibly pur-
sues those measures, which appear the most just and equitable.
addison's frachildr.
6. a state of rest, in which things capable of growth or decrease
continue for some time at a stand, without either; as the
growth, consistence, and return. chambers.
consistent. adj. [consiens, latin.]
1. not contradictory; not opposed.
with reference to such a lord, to serve and to be free, are
terms not consistent only, but equivalent. south.
a great part of their politicks others do not think com/fiant
with honour to practise. addison on italy.
on their own axis as the planets run,
yet make at once their circle round the sun;
so two com/slent motions act the soul,
and one regards itself, and one the whole. pope's essays:
shew me one that has it in his power
to act consistent with himself an hour. pope.
the fool consistent, and the false sincere. pope,
2. firm; not fluid.
pestilential miasms infinuate into the humoral and consint
parts of the body. harvey on consumption.
the sand, contained within the shell, becoming solid and
consslent, at the same time that of the stratum without it
did. j/oodward's natural history.
cons1's tently. adv. [from consient.] without contradic-
tion; agreeably.
the phoenicians are of this character, and the poet de-
scribes them consiently with it: they are proud, idle, and effe-
minate. broom,
cons 1sto'rial. adj. [from com/story..] relating to the eccle-
siastical court.
an official, or chancellor, has the same consistorial audience
with the bishop himself that deputes him. ayliffe's partron.
consistory.. n.s.. [consistorium, latin.]
1. the place of justice in the court christian. cowel.
an offer was made, that, for every one minister, there
should be two of the people to fit and give voice in the eccle-
siastical consistory. hooker, preface.
congruity;
pius was then hearing of causes in cons/lory. bacon.
christ himself, in that great consistory, shall deign to step
down from his throne. south,
2. the assembly of cardinals.
how far i’ve proceeded,
or how far further shall, is warranted
by a commission from the com/story,
yea the whole consory of rome. thakespeare's hen. viii.
a late prelate, of remarkable zeal for the church, were
religions to be tried by lives, would have lived down the pop"
and the whole consistory. atterbury,
3. any solemn assembly.
in mid air
to council summons all his mighty peers
within thick clouds, and dark tenfold involv’d, -
a gloomy consistory. a4ilton's paradise rogained.
at jove's assent the deities around,
in solemn state the com/story crown'd.
4. place of residence.
my other self, my counsel's consistory, my oracle,
i, as a child, will go by thy direction. -
shakespeare's richard iii.
consociate... n. s. [ from conscio, latin. j. an acco"
plice; a confederate; a partner. -
patridge and stanhope were condemned as consociate in the
conspiracy of somerset. hayward.
to conso’ciate. v. a. [consolio, latin.]
1. to unite; to join.
pope's statius,
generally<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 471</div><p class="text">- " - - -
*
* --
*
2-
o
z-
c o. n.
generally the best outward, shapes are also the likeliest to
be consociated with good inward faculties. isotton on laucasion.
2. to cement; to hold together. , - -
the ancient philosophers always brought in a supernatural
principle to unite and consociate the parts of the chaos. burnet.
t, con sociate. v. n. to coalesce; to unite.
if they cohered, yet by the next conflict with other atoms
they might be separated again, without ever consociating into
the huge condense bodies of planets. bentley's sermoni.
consociation. m. s. [from consociate.]
1. alliance.
there is such a consociation of offices between the prince
and whom his favour breeds, that they may help to sustain his
power, as he their knowledge. ben. johnson's discoveries.
2. union; intimacy; companionship.
by so long and so various consociation with a prince, he had
now gotten, as it were, two lives in his own fortune and
greatness. j/otton.
conso'lable. adj. [ from console. j that which admits
comfort.
to co'nsolate. v. a. [consolar, latin.] to comfort; to con-
sole; to sooth in misery. not much used.
i will be gone,
that pitiful rumour may report my flight,
to consolate thine ear. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
what may somewhat consolate all men that honour virtue,
we do not discover the latter scene of his misery in authors of
antiquity. - brown's vulgar errours.
consolation. m. s. [consolatio, latin.] comfort; alleviation
of misery; such alleviation as is produced by partial
remedies.
we that were in the jaws of death, were now brought into
a place where we found nothing but consolations. bacon.
against such cruelties,
with inward consolations recompens’d ;
and oft supported so, as shall amaze
their proudest persecutors. milton's paradis, loft.
let the righteous persevere with patience, supported with
this consolation, that their labour shall not be in vain. rogers.
con solator. n.s. [latin.] a comforter.
conso lat or y. m. s. [from consolate.] a speech or writing
containing topicks of comfort.
consolatories writ
with studied argument, and much persuasion sought,
lenient of grief and anxious thought. milton's agonisłes.
consol atory. adj. i from consolate. j tending to give
comfort.
to conso'le. v. a. [consolor, lat..] to comfort; to cheer;
to free from the sense of misery.
others the syren sisters compass round,
and empty heads console with empty sound. pope's dunciad.
console. m. s. [french..] in archite&amp;ture, is a part or
member projecting in manner of a bracket, or shoulder-piece,
serving to support a cornice, bust, vase, beam, and frequently
used as keys of arches. chambers.
conso ler. m. s. [from console.] one that gives comfort.
pride once more appears upon the stage, as the great con-
soler of the miseries of man. comment, on pope's ess, on man.
con solid ant. adj. [from consolidate.] that which has the
uality of uniting wounds.
to consolidate. v. a. [consolider, fr. solidus, latin.]
1. to form into a compact and solid body; to harden; to unite
into a solid mass. -
the word may be rendered either he stretched, or he fixed
and consolidated the earth above the waters. burnet's theory.
the effects of spirits in stopping hemorrhages, and conso-
lidating the fibres, is well known to chirurgeons. arbuthnot.
2. to combine or unite two parliamentary bills into one.
to conso'lidate. v. n. to grow firm, hard, or solid.
in hurts and ulcers in the head, dryness maketh them more
apt to consolidate. bacon’s natural history.
the sand, sparry, and flinty matter was then soft, and sus-
ceptible of any form in these shelly moulds ; and it consoli-
dated, and became hard afterwards.
j/oodward's natural history.
consolid a^t ion. n.s [from consolidate.]
1. the act of uniting into a solid mass.
the consolidation of the marble, and of the stone, did not
fall out at random. woodward’s natural history.
2. the annexing of one bill in parliament to another.
3. in law, it is used for the combining and uniting of two be-
nefices in one. cowel.
conso'lid ative. adj. [from consolidate.] that which has the
quality of healing wounds. dicf.
$o. }n. s. [consonance, fr. consonans, latin.]
1. accord of sound.
the two principal consonances that most ravish the ear, are,
by the consent of all nature, the fifth and the octave. wotton.
and winds and waters flow'd
in consonance.
2. consistency; congruence; agreeableness.
v vl. i.
thomson's spring.
c o n
such decisions held consonancy and congruity with resolution:
and decisions of former times. 4 sale's law of england.
i have set down this, to shew the perfect consonany of our
persecuted church to the doctrine of scripture and antiquity.,
- hammond on fundamentals.
3. agreement; concord; friendship. a sense now not used.
let me conjure you by the rights of our fellowship, by
the consonancy of our youth. shakspeare's flamet.
c9'nsonant, adj. [consonans, lat.] agreeable ; accord-
ing; consistent: followed by either with or to. -
were it consonant unto reason to divorce these two sen-
tences, the former of which doth shew how the latter is re-
strained hooker.
that where much is given there shall be much required, is
a thing consonant with natural equity. decay of piety.
religion looks consonant to itself. decay of piety.
he discovers how consonant the account which moses hash
left, of the primitive earth, is to this from nature. if zodivar.,
cossos ant. n.s. [consonans, latin.] a letter which cannot
be sounded, or but imperfeotly, by itself.
in all vowels the passage of the mouth is open and free,
without any appuise of an organ of speech to another: but is,
all consonants there is an appulse of the organs, sometimes (if
you abstract the consonants from the vowels) wholly precluding
all found; and, in all of them, more or less checking and
abetting it. holder's elements of speech.
he confidered these as they had a greater mixture of vowels
or consonants, and accordingly employed them as the verse re-
quired a greater smoothness. pope's essay on homer.
coasro, adv. [from consonant..] confiscatly; agree-
ably.
this as consonantly it preacheth, teacheth, and delivereth,
as if but one tongue did speak for all. hooker.
ourselves are formed according to that mind which frames
things consonantly to their respective natures. garv. scepsis.
if he will speak consonantly to himself, he must say that hap-
pened in the original constitution. tillotson.
conson antn ess. n.s.. [from consonant..] agreeableness; con-
sistency. dic7.
consonous. adj. [consonus, latin.] agreeing in sound;
symphonious.
cosso piation. m. s. [from consopio, latin.] the agı of lay-
ing to sleep. little in use.
one of his maxims is, that a total abstinence from intem-
perance is no more philosophy than a total consopiation of the
senses is repose. digby to pope.
co'nsort. n.s...[consors, latin. it had anciently the accen.
on the latter syllable, but has it now on the former. milton
has used them both.] -
1. companion ; partner; generally a partner of the bed; a
wife or husband.
fellowship,
such as i seek fit to participate,
all rational delight; wherein the brute
cannot be human consort.
male he created thee; but thy consort
female for race; then bless'd mankind, and said,
be fruitful, multiply, and fill the earth. a/ilton's par. loft.
thy bellona, who the consort came,
not only to thy bed, but to thy fame.
he single chose to live, and shun'd to wed,
well pleas'd to want a consort of his bed. dryden’s faber.
his warlike amazon her host invades,
th’ imperial consort of the crown of spades.
2. an assembly; a divan ; a consultation.
in one consort there sat
cruel revenge, and rancorous despite,
disloyal treason, and heart-burning hate. fairy queen.
3. a number of instruments, playing together; a symphony.
this is probably a mistake for concert.
a consort of musick in a banquet of wine, is as a signet of
carbuncle set in gold. acciut. xxxii. 5.
4. concurrence; union.
take it singly, and it carries an air of levity; but, in con-
sort with the rest, has a meaning quite different. atterbury.
to conso'rt. v. n. [from the noun..] to associate with , to
unite with ; to keep company with.
what will you do? let's not consort with them. sjaich.
which of the grecian chiefs consorts with thee dyin.
to conso'rt. v. a.
1. to join ; to mix; to marry.
he, with his consorted eve,
the story heard attentive. a silton's parad-so l27.
he begins to consort himself with men, and thinks himself
one. locee on education.
2. to accompany. not used.
i'll meet with you upon the mart,
and afterward conso i you 'till bed-time. she resear'.
cosso'rtable. adj. [from consort.j to be compared with ;
to be ranked with ; suitable. not used.
he was consortable to charles brandon, under henry viii.
who was cqual to him. - //otton.
con-
milton.
denham.
pope.
5 k<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 472</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
conso'rtion. n.s. [consortio, latin.] partnership; fellow-
ship; society. dic.
conspeocragle. adj. [from conspecius, latin.] easy to be
seen. dic.
conspectu'ity. m. s. [from conseous, latin.] sight; view;
sense of seeing. i his word is, i believe, peculiar to shake-
feare, and perhaps corrupt. - - -
what hasm can your bisson consteouities glean out of this
chara&amp;ter? shakspeare's coriolanus.
cosspersion m. s. [consperso, lat.] a sprinkling about. dic.
cosspicuoit y. m. s. [from conspicuous.] brightness; favour-
ableness to the fight.
if this definition be clearer than the thing defined, midnight
may vie for conspicuity with noon. glanv. scepsis.
conspicuous.. [conspicuus, latin.]
1. obvious to the fight; seen at distance.
or come i less conspicuous * or what change
absents thee? milton's paradise loft.
2. eminent; famous; distinguished.
he attributed to each of them that virtue which he thought
most conspicuous in them. dryden's juven. dedication.
thy father's merit points thee out to view,
and sets thee in the fairest point of light,
to make thy virtues or thy faults conspicuous. addis. cato.
the house of lords,
conspicuous scene pope's epift. of horace.
conspicuously. adv. [from conspicuous.]
1. obviously to the view.
these methods may be preserved conspicuo'ssy, and intirely
distinci. - //atts's logick.
2. eminently; famously; remarkably.
conspicuous n ess. m. s. [from conspicuous.]
1. exposure to the view; state of being visible at a distance.
looked on with such a weak light, they appear well pro-
portioned fabricks; yet they appear so but in that twilight,
which is requisite to their conspicuousness. boyle's proem. essay.
2. eminence; fame; celebrity.
their writings attract more readers by the author's conspi-
cuousness. boyle on colours.
consp1’racy. n.s.. [conspiratio, latin.]
1. a private agreement among several persons to commit some
crime; a plot; a concerted treason.
o conspiracy!
sham’s thou to shew thy dang'rous brow by night,
when evils are most free ? shakespeare's julius casar.
i had forgot that foul conspiracy
of the beast caliban, and his confed’rates,
against my life. - shakespeare's temps.
when scarce he had escap'd the blow
offaetion and conspiracy,
death did his promis'd hopes destroy: dryden.
2. in law, an agreement of men to do anything; always taken
in the evil part. it is taken for a confederacy of two at the
least, falsely to indict one, or to procure one to be indicted of
felony. cowel.
3. a concurrence; a general tendency of many causes to one
event.
when the time now came that misery was ripe for him,
there was a conspiracy in all heavenly and earthly things, to
frame fit occasions to lead him unto it. sidney.
the air appearing so malicious in this morbific conspiracy,
exacts a more particular regard. harvey on consumptions.
conspi'rant. adj. [conspirans, latin.] conspiring; engaged
in a conspiracy or plot; plotting.
thou art a traitor,
conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince. shak. k. lear.
conspira"tion. n. s. [conspiratio, lat...] an agreement of
many to one end.
one would wonder, how from so differing premisses, they
should infer the same conclusion, were it not that the conspi-
ration of interest were too potent for the diversity of judg-
nne int, decay of piety.
conspi rator. m. s. [from conspiro, latin.] a man engaged
in a plot; one who has secretly concerted with others com-
mission of a crime; a plotter.
achitophel is among the conspirators with absalom. 2 sam.
stand back, thou manifest conspirator;
thou that contriv'st to murder our dread lord. sh. hen. vi.
but let the bold conspirator beware;
for heav'n makes princes its peculiar care. dryd. spa. fryar.
one put into his hand a note of the whole conspi-
racy against him, together with all the names of the conspi-
7'4 tors. south.
to conspire. v. n. [conspiro, latin.]
1. to concert a crime; to plot; to hatch secret treason.
tell me what they deserve,
that do conspire my death with devilish plots
of damned witchcraft? shakespeare's richard iii.
what was it -
that mov’d pale cassius to conspire * shak. ant. and cleop.
they took great indignation, and conspired against the
king. apocrypha.
let the air be excluded; for that undermineth the bod
and conspireth with the spirit of the body to dissolve it. bao.
there is in man a natural possibility to destroy the world;
that is, to conspire to know no woman. brown's wugar error.
the press, the pulpit, and the stage,
conspire to censure and expose our age. roscommon.
2. to agree together: as, all things conspire to make him happy.
so moist and dry when phoebus shines,
conspiring give the plant to grow. heigh,
conspirer. m. s. [from conspire.] a conspirator; a plotter.
take no care,
who chases, who frets, and where conspirers are;
macbeth shall never vanquish'd be. shakespeare's macbeth,
conspiring powers. [in mechanicks.] all such as act indi.
rection not opposite to one another. harris.
con spurcation. m. s. [from conspurco, latin.] the act of
defiling; defilement; pollution.
constable. m. s. [comes slaluli, as it is supposed.]
1. lord high com/lable is an ancient officer of the crown. the
funetion of the constable of england consisted in the care of the
common peace of the land in deeds of arms, and in matters
of war. to the court of the constable and marshal belonged
the cognizance of contracts, deeds of arms without the realm,
and combats and blasonry of arms within it. the first cons.
falle of england was created by the conqueror, and the office
continued hereditary 'till the thirteenth of henry viii. when
it was laid aside, as being so powerful as to become trouble-
some to the king. from these mighty magistrates are derived
the inferiour constables of hundreds and franchises; two of
whom were ordained, in the thirteenth of edward i. to be
chosen in every hundred for the conservation of the peace,
and view of armour. these are now called high conftall,
because continuance of time, and increase both of people and
offences, have occasioned others in every town of inferiour
authority, called petty constables. besides these, we have
constalles denominated from particular places; as, constable of
the tower, of dover castle, of the castle of carnarvon; but these
are properly castellani, or governours of castles. cowel, chamb,
when i came hither, i was lord high constable,
and duke of buckingham; now poor edward bohun. shak,
the knave constable had set me i' th' stocks, i' th' common
stocks, for a witch. shakesp. merry wives of i/indsor.
the constable being a sober man, and an enemy to sedition,
went to observe what they did. clarendon.
2. to over-run the constable. [perhaps from contestable, fr.
the settled, firm and stated account.] to spend more than
what a man knows himself to be worth : a low phrase.
co'nstaple ship. m. s. [from constable.] the office of a
constable.
this keepership is annexed to the constall ship of the castle,
and that granted cut in lease. carew's survey of cornwall.
co'nstancy. m. s. [constantia, latin.]
1. immutability; perpetuity; unalterable continuance.
the laws of god himself no man will ever deny to be of
a different constitution from the former, in respect of the
one's constancy, and the mutability of the other. hocker.
2. consistency; unvaried state.
incredible, that constancy in such a variety, such a multi-
plicity, should be the result of chance. ray on the creation.
3. resolution; firmness; steadiness; unshaken determination.
in a small isle, amidst the widest seas,
triumphant constancy has fix’d her seat;
in vain the syrens fing, the tempests beat.
4. lasting affection; continuance of love, or friendship.
constancy is such a stability and firmness of friendship, as
overlooks and passes by lesser failures of kindness, and yet still
retains the same habitual good-will to a friend. south.
prior.
5. certainty; veracity; reality.
but all the story of the night told over,
more witnesseth than fancy's images,
and grows to something of great constancy,
but, however, strange and admirable.
constant. adj. [constans, latin.]
1. firm; fixed; not fluid.
if you take highly reetified spirit of wine, and dephlegmed
spirit of urine, and mix them, you may turn these two fluid
liquors into a constant body. boyle's history of firmns,
2. unvaried; unchanged; immutable; durable.
the world’s a scene of changes, and to be
constant, in nature were inconstancy. cowley,
3. firm; resolute; determined; immoveable; unshaken.
some shrewd contents -
now steal the colour from bassanio's cheek:
some dear friend dead ; else nothing in the world
could turn so much the constitution
of any constant man. shakespeare's merchant of wenice.
4. free from change of affection.
both loving one fair maid, they yet remained constant
friends. sidney.
5. certain; not various; steady ; firmly adherent: with to.
now, through the land, his care of souls he stretch'd,
and like a primitive apostle preach'd;
6
shakespeare.
still
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 473</div><p class="text">c o n
q o n
*
.
s
to:-
still chearful, ever constant to his call ; -
by many follow'd, lov’d by most, admir’d by all. dryden.
he shewed his firm adherence to religion as modelled by
our national constitution, and was constant to its offices in de-
votion, both in publick and in his family. addison's freeholder.
const antly. adv. [from constant..] unvariably ; perpetual-
ly; certainly ; steadily.
it is strange that the fathers should never appeal; nay, that
they should not constantly do it. - tillotson.
7, constellate. v. n. [constellatus, latin.] to join
justre; to shine with one general light.
the several things which engage our affections, do, in a
transcendent manner, shine forth and com/lellate in god. boyle.
to cosste'll ate. v. a. to unite several shining bodies in
one splendour.
gicat constitutions and such as are consiellated into know-
ledge do nothing till they outdo all. brown's vulgar err.
these scattered perfeotions, which were divided among
the several ranks of inferiour natures, were summed up and
constellated in ours. glanville's scepsis.
constellation. m. s. [from consiellate.]
1. a cluster of fixed stars.
for the stars of heaven, and the constellations thereof, shall
not give their light. is xiii. 10.
the earth, the air resounded
the heav'ns and all the consiellations rung. milt. par. loft.
a constellation is but one ;
though 'tis a train of stars.
2. an assemblage of splendours, or excellencies.
the condition is a consiellation or conjuncture of all those
gospel-graces, faith, hope, charity, self-denial, repentance,
and the rest. hammond's prac7. cat.
conster nation. m. s. [from cons?erno, latin.] astonish-
ment; amazement; alienation of mind by a surprise ; sur-
prize; wonder.
they find the same holy consernation upon themselves that
jacob did at bethel, which he called the gate of heaven. south.
the natives, dubious whom
they must obey, in consternation wait,
*till rigid conquest will pronounce their liege.
to co’nstipate. v. a. [from com/lipo, latin.]
1. to croud together into a narrow room; to thicken ; to
condense.
of cold, the property is to condense and constipate. bacon.
it may, by amassing, cooling, and cons?ipating of waters,
turn them into rain. ray on the creation.
there might arise some vertiginous motions or whirlpools
in the matter of the chaos, whereby the atoms might be
thrust and crouded to the middle of those whirlpools, and
there consiipate one another into great solid globes. bentley.
2. to stuff up, or stop by filling up the passages.
it is not probable that any aliment should have the quality
of intirely coastipating or shutting up the capillary vessels.
- arbuthnot on aliments.
dryden.
philips.
3. to bind the belly; or make costive.
omitting honey which is laxative and the powder of some
loadstones in this, doth rather constipate and bind, than purge
and loosen the belly. brown's vulgar errours.
const ipa(tion, n. s. [from com/?ipate.]
1. the aet of crouding any thing into less room; condensation.
this worketh by the detention of the spirits, and constipa-
fion of the tangible parts. bacon's natural history.
it requires either absolute fulness of matter, or a pretty
close com/?ipation and mutual contaet of its particles. bentley.
2. stoppage; obstruction by plenitude.
the inactivity of the gall occasions a com/?ipation of the
belly. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. the state of having the body bound,
con stituent. adj. [com/?ituens, latin.] that which makes
anything what it is ; necessary to existence; elemental ; es-
sential; that of which anything consists.
body, soul, and reason, are the three parts necessarily con-
fittent of a man. dryden's dufresnoy.
all animals derived all the cons?ituent matter of their bodies,
successively, in all ages, out of this fund. l/?odward.
it is imposible that the figures and sizes of its constituent
particles, should be so justly adapted as to touch one another
in every point. bentley's sermons.
const 1"ru ent. m. s.
1. the person or thing which constitutes or settles any thing
in its peculiar state.
their first composure and origination requires a higher and
nobler conflituent than chance. hal's origin of mankind.
2. that which is necessary to the subsistence of any thing.
the obstruction of the mesentery is a great impediment to
nutrition ; for the lymph in those glands is a necessary consii-
tizer:t of the aliment. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. he that deputes another; as, the representatives in parliament
disregard their com/lituents.
to co'nstitute. v. a. s.com/?ituo, latin.]
1. to give formal existence ; to make any thing what it is ; to
produce.
- o: is o: only a moral but christian virtue, such as
is necessary to the constituting of all others. decay of piety.
2. to erect; to o g y of piety
we must obey laws appointed and constituted by lawful au-
thority, not against the law of god, taylor's holy living.
it will be necessary to consider, how at first those several
churches were constituted, that we may understand how in
this one church they were all united. peasan,
3. to depute; to appoint another to an office.
co'nstitute.r. m. s. [from constitute.] he that constitutes or
appoints.
cons ritu'rion. n.f. [from constitute.]
1. the act of constituting; enacting; deputing; establishing;
producing.
2. o of being ; particular texture of parts; natural qua-
111&amp;s.
this is more beneficial than any other conflitution. bently.
this light being trajected through the parallel prisms, if it
suffered any change by the refraction of one, it iost that im-
pression by the contrary refraction of the other; and so, being
restored to its pristine consiitution, became of the same condi.
tion as at first. newton's opticks.
3. corporeal frame.
amongst many bad effeots of this oily constitution, there is
one advantage; such who arrive to age, are not subject to
stricture of fibres, arbuthnot on aliments.
4. temper of body, with respect to health or disease.
if such men happen, by their native com/litutions, to fall
into the gout, either they mind it not at all, having no leisure
to be sick, or they use it like a dog. temple.
beauty is nothing else but a just accord and harmony of the
members, animated by a healthful constitution. dryden.
5. temper of mind.
dametas, according to the com/?’tution of a dull head, thinks
no better way to shew himself wise than by suspecting every
thing in his way. sidney.
some dear friend dead; else nothing in the world
could turn so much the com/?itation
of any constant man. shakespeare's mirchant of penice.
he defended himself with undaunted courage, and tess pas-
sion than was expected from his constitution. clarendon.
6. established form of government ; system of laws and
customs.
the norman conqu'ring all by might,
mixing our customs, and the form of right,
with foreign constitutions he had brought. daniel,
7. particular law; established usage; establishment; institution.
we lawfully may observe the positive constitutions of our
own churches. coker.
constitution, properly speaking in the sense of the civil law,
is that law which is made and ordained by some king or em-
peror; yet the canonists, by adding the word sacred to it,
make it to signify the same as an ecclesiastical canon. ayliff.
constitutional. adj. [from constitution.]
1. bred in the constitution ; radical.
it is not probable any constitutional illness will be communi-
cated with the small-pox by inoculation. sharp's surgery.
2. consistent with the civil constitution; legal.
const itu'tive. adj. [from conslitute.]
1. that which constitutes any thing what it is; elemental ; es-
sential ; productive.
although it be placed among the non-naturals, that is, such
as neither naturally constitutive, nor merely destructive, do
preserve or destroy. brown's vulgar errours.
the elements and constitutive parts of a schismatick, being
the esteem of himself, and the contempt of others. dec. of p.
2. having the power to enaet or establish.
to constra'in. v. a. [consoraindre, fr. consiringo, latin.]
i. to compel ; to force to some action.
thy sight which should
make our eyes flow with joy,
constrains them weep. * shakespeare's coriolanus.
namur subdu'd is england's palm alone,
the rest besieg'd, but we com/lrain'd the town. dryden.
2. to hinder by force; to restrain.
my fire in caves constrains the winds,
can with a breath their clan’rous rage appease;
they fear his whistle, and forsake the seas. dryden.
3. to necessitate.
the scars upon your honour, therefore, he
does pity as constrained blemishes,
nothing deserv'd. shakes?: anthony and cleopatra.
when to his lust afgysthus gave the rein,
did fate or we th’ adult'rous act constrain; pope's odsy.
4. to violate ; to ravish. -
her spotless chastity,
inhuman traitors, you constrain’d and forc’d. shak. tit. and,
5. to confine; to press.
when amidst the servour of the feast,
the tyrian hugs and fonds thee on her breast,
and with sweet kisses in her arms com/irains,
thou may’st infuse thy venom in i.er veins. drydon.
how
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 474</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
how the strait stays the slender waste constrain * gay.
6. to constringe. -
when v. inter frosts com/?rain the field with cold
the s anty root can take no steady hold. dryden.
7. to tie, to bind.
scarce the weary god had clos'd his eyes, -
when rushing on with shouts, he binds in chains
the drowsy prophet, and his limbs com/irains. dryden.
8. to imprison. -
costrain'd him in a bird, and made him fly -
with party coloured plumes a chattering pye. dryden.
9. to force; to produce in opposition to nature.
in this northern tract our hoarser throats
utter unripe and ill constrained notes. j/aller.
io. to restrain; to withhold.
the soft weapons of paternal persuasions after mankind
began to forget the original giver of life, became overweak
to resist the first inclination of evil, or after, when it became
habitual to cohs?rain it. raleigh.
const ra’inable. adj. [from cosłrain..] liable to constraint ;
obnoxicus to compulsion.
whercas men before stood bound in conscience to do as
reason teacheth, they are now, by virtue of human law, on-
sirainable; and, if they outwardly transgress, punishable. ho.
consor r.a/1s edly. adv. [from coytrain..] by constraint, by
compelsion.
what occasion it had given them to think to their greater
obduration in evil, that through a froward and wanton de-
fire of innovation we did constrainedy those things, for which
conscience was pretchded. hocker.
conso ra’s e.r. m. s. (from cons? ain.] he that constrains.
cossi ra’s n.t. m. s. [contrainte, french.)
1. compulsion ; compelling force; violence; act of over-
ruling the desire ; confinement.
i did suppose it should be on consoraint ;
but, heav'n be thank'd, it is but voluntary. shak. k. john.
like you a man; and hither led by fame,
not by &amp;ons/raint, but by my choice, i came. dryd. ind. emp.
the constant desire of happiness, and the com/?' aint it puts
upon us to act for it, no body, i think, accounts an abridg-
ment of liberty. locke.
2. confinement. cut of use.
his limbs were waxen weak and raw,
thro' long imprisonment and hard con/fraint. speos. r.
7% constr1. ct. v. a. s.com/ringo, coyiridium, latin.j
1. to bind ; to cramp; to confine into a narrow compass.
2. to contract; to cause to shrink.
such things as coy?, ict the fibres and strengthen the solid
parts. - arbuthnot on diet.
csnst ri'ction. m. s. [from co-strict.] contraction ; com-
pression; forcible contraction. compresin is from an out-
ward force; consiriclion from some quality ; as the throat is
compressed by a bandage, and consoringed by a cold.
the air which these receive into the lungs, may serve to
render their bodies equiponderant to the water ; and the con-
siricion or dilatation of it, may probably assist them to ascend
or descend in the water. ray on the creation.
const ri'cror. n.s.. [cons? iołor, latin.] that which com-
presses or contracts.
he supposed the consoriciars of the eye-lids must be strength-
ened in the supercilious. arbuth. and pope's 4/art. scrib.
t, constri'nge. v. a. [com/?ringo, lat.) to compress;
to contract; to bind ; to force to contract itself.
the dreadful spout,
which shipmen do the hurricano call,
consiring'd in mass by the almighty sun. sh. tro. and c off.
strong liquors, especially inflammatory spirits, intoxicate,
consiringe, harden the fibres, and coagulate the fluids. arbuth.
constri'ng ent. adj. [consoringens, latin.] having the qua-
lity of binding or compressing.
try a deep well, or a conservatory of snow, where the cold
may be more consiringent. bacon's natural history.
winter-binds
our strengthen’d bodies in a cold embrace
consoringent. thomson's is inter.
t, constru’ct. v. a. s.com/?rucius, lat.]
1. to build ; to form; to compile; to constitute.
let there be an admiration of those divine attributes and
prerogatives, for whose manifesting he was pleased to construck
this vast fabrick. boyle's usefulness of natural philosophy,
2. to form by the mind: as, he conylrucied a new system.
const ru’ction. m. s. [construdio, latin.]
1. the act of building, or piling up in a regular method.
2. the form of building ; structure; conformation.
there's no art -
to shew the mind’s consiruciion in the face. shakes care.
the ways were made of several layers of flat stones and
flint : the construction was a little various, according to the
nature of the soil, or the materials which they found. arbuth.
3. [in grammar.] the putting of words, duly chosen, together
in such a manizer as is proper to convey a complete senie.
clar ke's zatin grammar.
some particles constantly, and others in certain com/?rusions,
have the sense of a whole sentence contained in them. locke.
4. the act of arranging terms in the proper order, by disen-
tangling transpositions ; the act of interpreting; explanation.
this label, whose containing
is so from sense in hardness, that i can
make no colle&amp;tion of it; let him shew
his skill in the construction. siak speare', comilesino.
5. the sense; the meaning ; interpretation.
in which sense although we judge the apostle's words to
have been uttered, yet hereunto we do not require them to
yield, that think any other construction more found. hooker.
he that would live at case, should always put the best con-
// to/ion on business and conversation. collier on the spleen.
religion, in its own nature, produces good will towards
men, and puts the mildest construction upon every accident that
befals them. speciat.r.
6. judgment; mental representation.
it cannot, therefore, unto reasonable consorussions seem
strange, or favour of singularity, that we have examined this
point. brown's sugar erraurs,
7. the manner of describing a figure or problem in geometry.
8. coss rruct ion of equations, in algebra, is the method of
reducing a known equation into lines and figures, in order to
a geometrical demonstration.
constru'cture. m. s. [from consiruci.]
brick.
they shall the earth's constructure closely bind,
and to the centre keep the parts confin'd. blackmore.
to co’nstrue. v. a. [construo, latin.]
i. to range words in their natural order; to disentangle trans-
position.
i'll teach mine eyes with meek humility,
love-learned letters to her eyes to read;
which her deep wit, that true heart's thought can spell,
will soon conceive, and learn to construe well. speyer.
com/rue the times to their necessites,
and you shall say, indeed, it is the time,
and not the king, that doth you injuries. shak. hen. iv.
2. to interpre'; to explain ; to shew the meaning.
i must crove that i be not so understood or construed, as if
any such thing, by virtue thereof, could be done without the
aid and assistance of god's most blessed spirit. hooker.
virgil is so very figurative, that he requires (i may almost
say) a grammar apart to com/h ue him. dryden.
thus we are put to construe and paraphrase our own words,
to free ourselves either from the ignorance or malice of our
adversaries. stillingfleet.
when the word is construed into its idea, the double mean-
ing vanishes. addison on ancient medals.
to constuprate. v. a. [com/?up, o, . lat..] to violate;
to debauch ; to defile.
con stu pration. n.s.. [from consuprate.] violation; de-
filement.
consubsta(ntial. adj. [consubstantialis, latin.]
1. having the same effence or subsistence.
the lord our god is but one god: in which indivisible
unity, notwithstanding we adore the father, as being altoge-
ther of himself, we glorify that consubstantial word which is
the son; we bless and magnify that co-etiential spirit, eternally
proceeding from both, which is the holy ghost. booker.
2. being of the same kind or nature.
it continueth a body consulstantial with our bodies; a body
of the same, both nature and measure, which it had on earth.
hocker.
in their conceits the human nature of christ was not con-
substantial to ours, but of another kind. brerewood.
cons upst antiality.. n.s.. [from consulstantial j
1. existence of more than one, in the same substance.
the eternity of the son's generation, and his co-eternity
and consulstantiality with the father, when he came down
from heaven. - hammond on fundamentali.
2. participation of the same nature.
to cossu estantiat e. v. a. [from con and substantia, lat.]
to unite in one common substance or nature.
con subst:antiation. m. s. [ from consubstantiate. j the
union of the body of our blessed saviour with the sacramental
element, according to the lutherans.
in the point of consubstantiation, toward the latter end of
his life, he changed his mind. alterbury.
consus,. n. s. i consul, consu'endo, latin.]
1. the ci.ief magistrate in the roman republick.
or never be so noble as a consul,
nor yoke with him for tribune. shakespeare's coriolanus.
consuls of mod'iate pow'r in calms were made ;
when the gauls came, one sole dictator sway’d. drydon.
2. an officer commissioned in foreign parts to judge between
the merchants of his nation, and protect their commerce.
co'n's j l ar. adi, [consularis, latin.j -
1. relating to the consul. -
the consular power had only the ornaments, without the
force of the royal authority. spectator.
pile ; edifice; fa-
o
2. ccn-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 475</div><p class="text">- c, o n
to go
ow..."
ta
so *
ve
w ****
wox: .
sur
e doo
doctor:
to
iolat-
latin.
hich a
so:-
où. w.
with dying dorax.
2. consular man. one who had been consul.
rise not the consular men, and left their places, - * *
so soon as thou sat’t down ben. johnson's catline.
co'ssulate. n.s. [consulatus, latin.1. the office of consul.
his name and consulate were estaced out of all publick re-
gisters and inscriptions. addison on italy.
consulship. m. s. [from consul..] the office of consul.
the patricians should do very ill, - - -
to let the consulship be so defil’d. ben. johnson's catiline.
the lovely bov, with his auspicious face, ;
shall pollio’s consulship and triumph grace. dryden.
of consu'lt. v. n. [consulto, latin.] to take counsel to-
gether; to deliberate in common : it has with before the
person admitted to consultation.
every man,
after the hideous storm that follow'd, was
a thing inspir'd ; and, not consulting, broke
into a general prophecy, that this tempest,
dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
the sudden breach on't. shakspeare's henry viii.
a senate-house, wherein three hundred and twenty men sat
consulting always for the people. - i 44-c. viii. 15.
consult not with the slothful for any work. ecclus. xxxvii.
he sent for his boson friends, with whom he most confi-
dently consulted, and shewed the paper to them, the contents
whereof he could not conceive. . . . . claren ion.
to cossus lt. v. a. -
1. to ask advice of: as, he consulted his friend; ; to consult an
author. .
2. to regard; to act with view or respest to.
we are, in the first place, to consult the necessities of life,
rather than matters of ornament and delight. l’e/irange.
the senate owes its gratitude to cato, . -
who with so great a soul consults its safety, -
and guards our lives, while he neglects his own. addison.
3. to plan ; to contrive. -
thou hast consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many
people. hab. ii. 16.
manythings were there consulted for the future, yet nothing
was positively resolved. • * clarendon.
consult. m. s. [from the verb. it is variously accented.]
1. the act of consulting.
yourself in person head one chosen half,
and march t” oppress the faction in cons. it -
dryden's don sebastian.
a. the effect of consulting; determination. - -
he said, and rose the first; the council broke;
and all their grave consults dissolv’d in smoke. ixryd. fables,
3. a council; a number of persons assembled in deliberation.
divers meetings and consults of our whole number, to con-
* - * *
fider of the former labours. bacon.
a consult of coquets below
was call’d, to rig him out a beau. - swift.
consult a tio n. m. s. [from consult.]
1. the act of consulting; secret deliberation. .
the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and
scribes. -
2. a number of persons consulted together; a council.
a consultation was called, wherein he advised a salivation.
j/seman of absess.
3. [in law.] consultatio is a writ, whereby a cause, being for-
merly removed by prohibition from the ecclesiastical court, or
court christian, to the king's court, is returned thither again:
for the judges of the king's court, if, upon comparing the
libel with the suggestion of the party, they do find the sug-
estion false, or not proved, and therefore the cause to be
wrongfully called from the court christian ; then, upon this
consultation ordeliberation, decree is to be returned again. cowel.
consult er. m. s. [from consult..] one that consults or asks
council or intelligence.
there shall not be found among you a charmer, or a con- *
sulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard. ...deut. xviii. 11.
consu'mab i.e. adj. [from come.] susceptible of destruc-
tion ; possible to be wasted, spent, or destroyed.
asbestos does truly agree in this common quality ascribed
unto both, of being incombustible, and not consumable by
fire; but it doth contract so much fuliginous matter from the
earthy parts of the oil, though it was tried with some of the
purest oil that in a very few days it did choak and extinguish
the flame. j/ilkins's mathem. magick.
our growing rich or poor depends only on, which is
greater or less, our importation or exportation of consumable
commodities. locke.
to consume. v. a. [consumo, latin.] to waste; to spend;
to destroy. -
- where two raging fires meet together,
they do constone the thing that feeds their fury. shakes are.
thou shalf carry much seed out into the field, and shalt
gather but little in; for the locusts shall consume it. deut. xxviii.
thus in soft anguish she consumes the day,
nor quits her deep retirement. thomson's spring.
7osonsp?ae. v. n. to waste away; to be exhausted. '
vol. i,
mark, xv. 1,
these violent delights have violent ends,
and in their triumph die; like fire and powder,
which, as they meet, consumo, shakop. romeo and joist,
cosso'mer. m. s. stron consume.) one that spends, wastes,
or defroys any thing. -
money may be considered as in the hands of the consumer,
or of the merchant who buys the commodity, when made to
export. ... locke,
to consummate. v. a. sconsommer, fr. consummare, lat. j.
to complete; to perfect; to finish; to cnd. anciently ac-
cented on the first syllable. . .
yourself, myself, and other lords, will pass
to consummate this business happily. . . shakesp. king john.
there shall we consummate our spousal rites. shakespeare.
the person was cunning enough to begin the deceit in the
weaker, and the weaker sufficient to. consummate the fraud in
the stronger. brown's pulgar erroirs.
he had a mind to consummate the happiness of the day. tati.
consu'mmate. adj. [from the verb..] complete; persea,
finished ; omnibus namori; absolutiis. . *
i do but stay ’till your marriage be consimmate. shakespeare.
* * -- earth, in her rich attire
* - consummate, lovely smil’d. milton's parads? loff,
gratian, among his maxims for raising a man to the most
consummate greatness, advises to perform extraordinary actions,
and to secure a good historian. addison's freeholder.
* if a man of perfect and consummate virtue falls into a mis-
fortune, it raises our pity, but not our terrour. 43's. speciat,
consummation. n.s. (from consummate.] :
i. completion; perfection; end. -
that just and regular process, which it must be supposed to
take from its original to its consummation. addis. spedator.
2. the end of the present system of things; the end of the
world. -
from the first beginning of the world unto the last con-
j”ation thereof, it neither hath been, nor can be other-
wise. hooker,
3. death ; end of life. - - .
chost, unlaid, forbear thee!
nothing ill coine near thee i
quiet consummation have,
… unremoved be thy gravel . shakespeare's cymbaline.
consu'mp'tion. m. s. [consumptio, latin.]
1. the act of consuming; waste; destruction. .
in commodities the value rises as its quantity is less and
vent greater, which depends upon its being preferred in its
consumption. - - locke,
2. the state of wasting or perishing. -
etna and vesuvius have sent forth flames for this two or
throe thousand years, yet the mountains themselves have not
fusored any considerable diminution or consumption; but are,
at this day, the highest mountains in those countries. isoodw.
3. [in physick.] a waste of muscular flesh. it is frequently
ottended with a heołick fever, and is divided by physicians into
several kinds, according to the variety of its causes. &amp;#9.
corsiomptions sow
in hollow bones of man. skałeffcare's tomon.
the stoppage of women's courses, if not sooked to, sets
them into a consumotion, dropsy, or other disease. harvey.
the effential and distinguishing character of a confirmed
ofumotion is a waiting of the body by reason of an ulcerated
state of the lungs, attended with a cough, a discharge of pu-
rulent matter, and a hectick fever. - - blackmore.
consumptive. a j. [from consume.] -
1. destructive ; wasting; exhausting ; having the quality of
consuming. -
a long consumptive war is more likely to break this grand
alliance than disable france. addison on the //ar.
2. diseased with a consumption.
nothing faints sound lungs sooner than inspiring the breath
of consornptive lungs. harvey on consumptions.
the jean, consumptive wench, with coughs decay’d,
is call’d a pretty, tight, and slender maid. dryden.
by an exact regimen a consumptive person may hold out for
years. - arbuthnot on diet.
consu m prs v eness. m. s. [from consumptive..] a tendency to
a consumption. -
cossu’til e. adj. [constilis, latin.] that is sewed or stitched
together. dicf.
7% conta'bulate. v. a. [conta'alo, latin.] to floor
with boards.
"con tabula’t 1o n. m. s. [contabulatio, latin.] a joining of
boards together; a boarding a floor.
contact. m. s. [conta&amp;us, latin.] touch; close union;
juneture of one body to another.
the platonists hold, that the spirit of the lover doth pass
into the spirits of the person loved, which causeth the desire
of return into the body; whereupon followeth that appetite
of conta? and conjunction. bacon's natural hijory.
when the light fell so obliquely on the air, which in other
places was between them, as to be all reflected, it seened in
that place of contaci to be wholly transmitted. newt a' qat.
5 l the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 476</div><p class="text">c o n
co n.
the air, by its immediate contaff, may coagulate the blood
which flows along the air-bladders. arbuthnot on diet.
conta’ction. n.j. [contacius, latin.] the act of touching;
a joining one body to another. -
that deleterious it may be at some distance, and destruc-
tive without corporal contaction, there is no high improba-
bility. brown's vulgar errours.
contagion. m. s. [contagio, latin.]
1. the emission from body to body by which diseases are com-
municated.
w if we two be one, and thou play false,
i do digest the poison of thy flesh,
being strumpeted by thy contagion. shakes. com. of errours.
in infection and contagion from body to body, as the plague
and the like, the inse&amp;ion is received many times by the body
passive; but yet is, by the strength and good disposition there-
of, repulsed. bacon.
2. infection; propagation of mischief, or disease.
nor will the goodness of intention excuse the scandal and
contagion of example. king charles.
down fell they,
and the dire hiss renew'd, and the dire form -
catch'd by contagion. milton's paradise loft.
3. pestilence; venomous emanations.
will he steal out of his wholesome bed,
to dare the vile contagion of the night?
- shakespeare's julius caesar.
conta"grous. adj. [from contagio, latin.] infectious; caught
by approach ; poisonous; pestilential. -
the jades
that drag the tragick melancholy night,
from their misty jaws
breathe foul, contagious darkness in the air. shak. hen. vi.
we sicken soon from her contagious care, -
grieve for her sorrows, groan for her despair. prior.
conta giousness. n.s.. [from contagious.] the quality of
, being contagious. -
72 contain. v. a. [contineo, latin.]
1. to hold as a vessel. - -
there are many other things which jesus did, the which,
if they should be written every one, i suppose that even the
world itself could not contain the books that should be written.
john, xxi. 25-
gently instructed i shall hence depart,
greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill
of knowledge what this vessel can contain.
what thy stores contain bring forth, and pour
abundance.
2. to comprehend ; to comprise.
what seem'd fair in all the world, seem'd now
milton.
miltjoe
mean, or in her summ'd up, in her contain'd. milton.
the earth,
though in comparison of heav'n so small
nor glist’ring, may of solid good contain
more plenty, than the sun that barren shines. milton,
3. to comprise; as a writing. --
wherefore also it is contained in the scripture. i pet. ii. 6.
4. to restrain; to with-hold; to keep within bounds.
all men should be contained in duty ever after, without the
terrour of warlike forces. spensor on ireland.
their king's person contains the unruly people from evil oc-
casions. spensor.
i tell you, sirs,
if you should smile, he grows impatient.—
—fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves. shakesp.
to cont a'in. v. n. to live in continence.
i felt the ardour of my passion increase, ’till i could no
longer contain. arbuthnot and pope.
conta'1nab, . adj. [from contain.] possible to be contained.
the air, containable within the cavity of the eolipile,
amounted to eleven grains. boyle.
to contaminate. v. a. [contamino, lat..] to defile; "
to pollute; to corrupt by base mixture.
shall we now
contaminate our fingers with base bribes? shak, jul. casar.
a base pander holds the chamber-door,
whilst by a slave, no gentler than a dog,
his fairest daughter is contaminated. shakesp. henry v.
, do it not with poison; strangle her in her bed,
even in the bed she hath contaminated. shakespeare's othello.
i quickly shed
some of his bastard-blood; and, in disgrace,
bespoke him thus: contaminated, base,
and misbegotten blood i spill of thine. shakesp. henry vi.
though it be necessitated, by its relation to flesh, to a ter-
restrial converse; yet ’tis like the sun, without contaminating
its beams. glanville's apol.
he that lies with another man's wife, propagates children
in another's family for him to keep, and contaminates the honour
thereof as much as in him lies. ayliffe's parergon.
contamination. m. s. [from contaminate.] pollution ; de-
filement, 2
conte merated, adj. [contameratus, latin.] violated; pol-
luted. - dia.
7% contemn. v. a...[contemno, latin.] to despise; to
scorn ; to slight; to disregard; to negle&amp;t; to desy.
yet better thus, and known to be contemned,
than still contemned and flattered. , shakespeare's king lear.
eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
to argue in thee something more sublime
and excellent than what thy mind contemns.
pygmalion then the tyrian sceptre sway’d ;
one who contemn'd divine and human laws,
then strife ensu’d. dryden's wirgil's aeneid.
conto'mner. m. s. [from contemn.] one that contenns; a
despiser; a scorner.
he counsels him to persecute innovators of worship, not
only as contemmers of the gods, but disturbers of the state. south.
to contemper. v. a. [contempero, latin.] to moderate;
to reduce to a lower degree by mixing something of opposite
qualities.
the leaves qualify and contemper the heat, and hinder the
evaporation of moisture. ray on the creation.
conte'mper ament. n.s.. [from contempero, latin.] the de-
gree of any quality. -
there is nearly an equal contemperament of the warmth of
our bodies to that of the hottest part of the atmosphere. derh.
to conte mperate. v. a. [from contemper.] to diminish
any quality by something contrary; to moderate; to temper.
the mighty nile and niger do not only moisten and con-
temperate the air, but refresh and humectate the earth. brown.
if blood abound, let it out, regulating the patient's diet,
and contemperating the humours. joseman's surgery.
contemperation. m. s. [from contemperate.]
i. the ad of diminishing any quality by admixture of the con-
trary; the act of moderating or tempering.
the use of air, without which there is no continuation in
life, is not nutrition, but the contemperation of fervour in the
heart. brown's vulgar errouri.
2. proportionate mixture; proportion.
there is not greater variety in men's faces, and in the
contemperations of their natural humours, than there is in their
phantasies. hale's origin of mankind.
to contemplate. v. a. [contemplor, latin. this seems to
have been once accented on the first syllable.] to consider
with continued attention; to study; to meditate.
there is not much difficulty in confining the mind to con-
template what we have a great desire to know. j?atts.
to contemplate. v. n. to muse; to think studiously with
long attention.
so many hours must i take my rest;
so many hours must i contemplai. shakspeare's henry vi.
sapor had an heaven of glass, which he trod upon, contem-
plating over the same as if he had been jupiter. peacham.
how can i consider what belongs to myself, when i have
been so long contemplating on you. dryd. juv. preface.
contempla'tion. n.s.. [from contemplate.]
1. meditation; studious thought on any subject; continued at-
tention.
how now, what serious contemplation are you in shaftoff.
contemplation is keeping the idea, which is brought into the
mind, for some time actually in view. locke.
2. holy meditation; a holy exercise of the soul, employed in at-
tention to sacred things. -
i have breathed a secret vow,
to live in prayer and contemplation,
only attended by neriffa here. shakesp. merch. of penice.
3. the faculty of study; opposed to the power of action.
there are two functions, contemplation and practice, ac-
cording to that general division of objects; some of which en-
milton,
tertain our speculation, others employ our actions. south.
conte'mplative. adj. [from contemplate.]
1. given to thought or study; studious; thoughtful.
fixt and contemplative their looks,
still turning over nature's books. denham.
2. employed in study; dedicated to study.
i am no courtier, nor versed in state affairs: my life hath
rather been contemplative than aetive. bacon.
contemplative men may be without the pleasure of discovering
the secrets of state, and men of action are commonly without
the pleasure of tracing the secrets of divine art. grew's cosmol.
3. having the power of thought or meditation.
so many kinds of creatures might be to exercise the con-
templative faculty of man. ray on the creation.
cono e'mplatively, adv. [from contemplative.] thought-
fully; attentively; with deep attention. -
contemplator. n. s. [latin.] . one employed in study;
an enquirer after knowledge; a student.
in the persian tongue the word magus imports as much as a
contemplator of divine and heavenly science. raleigh's hylory.
the platonick contemplators reject both these descriptions,
founded upon parts and colours. brown's wulgar errours.
contemporary. adj. [contemporain, french i
1. living in the same age ; coetaneous.
albert
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 477</div><p class="text">c o n
-
o
-
albert durer was contemporary to lucas. dryd, dufrostoy.
2. born at the same time.
a grove born with himself he sees,
and loves his old contemporary trees.
3. existing at the same point of time.
it is impossible to make the ideas of yesterday, to-day, and
to-morrow, to be the same; or bring ages past and future to-
gether, and make them contemporary. locke.
cowley.
coste’mporary. m. s. one who lives at the same time with
another.
all this in blooming youth you have atchiev'd ;
nor are your foil'd contemporaries griev'd. dryden.
as he has been favourable to me, he will hear of his kind-
ness from our contemporaries; for we are fallen into an age il-
literate, censorious, and detracting. dryd, juv. prefate.
the aetive part of mankind, as they do most for the good
of their contemporaries, very deservedly gain the greatest share
in their applauses. addison's freeholder.
to conte"mporise. v. a. [con and tempus, latin.] to make
contemporary; to place in the same age.
the indifferency of their existences contemporised into our
actions, admits a farther consideration. brown's pulgar err.
conte'mpt. : [contemptus, latin.]
1. the aet of despising others; slight regard; scorn.
it was neither in contempt nor pride that i did not bow. esth.
the shame of being miserable,
exposes men to scorn and base contempt,
even from their nearest friends. denham.
there is no action in the behaviour of one man towards
another, of which human nature is more impatient than of
contempt; it being an undervaluing of a man, upon a belief
of his utter uselessness and inability, and a spiteful endeavour
to engage the rest of the world in the same slight esteem of
him. south.
his friend smil’d scornful, and with proud contempt
rejects as idle what his fellow dreamt. dryden's fables.
nothing, says longinus, can be great,
the contempt of which is great.
2. the state of being despised; wileness.
the place was like to come unto contempt.
conte"mptible. adj. [from contempt.]
1. worthy of contempt; deserving scorn.
no man truly knows himself, but he groweth daily more
contemptible in his own eyes. taylor's guide to devotion.
from no one vice exempt,
and most contemptible to shun contempt.
2. despised ; scorned; neglected.
there is not so contemptible a plant or animal that does not
confound the most enlarged understanding. locke.
3. scornful; apt to despise; contemptuous. this is no proper use.
if she should make tender of her love, ’tis very possible he'll
foorn it; for the man hath a contemptible spirit. shakespeare.
conte'mptiblen ess. n. s... [from contemptible.] the state of
being contemptible; the state of being despised; meanness;
vileness; baseness ; cheapness.
who, by a steddy practice of virtue, comes to discern the
contemptiblness of baits wherewith he allures us. decay of piety.
conte'mptibly, adv. [from contemptible.] meanly; in a
manner deserving contempt.
know'st thou not
their language, and their ways they also know,
and reason not contemptibly. milton's paradise lost.
conte'mptuous. adj. [from contempt..] scornful; apt to de-
spise; using words or actions of contempt; insolent.
to neglect god all our lives, and know that we negle&amp;t
him; to offend god voluntarily, and know that we offend
him, casting our hopes on the peace which we trust to make
at parting, is no other than a rebellious presumption, and even
a contemptuous laughing to scorn and deriding of god, his laws
and precepts., raleigh's history of the world.
some much averse i found, and wond’rous harsh,
contemptuous, proud, set on revenge and spite. milt. agon.
rome, the proudest part of the heathen world, entertained
the most contemptuous opinion of the jews. atterbury.
conte’mptuously. adv. [from contemptuous.] with scorn;
with despite ; scornfully; despitefully.
1 throw my name against the bruising stone,
trampling contemptuously on thy diadem. shakespeare.
the apostles and most eminent christians were poor, and
used contemptuously. taylor's holy living.
if he governs tyrannically in youth, he will be treated con-
temptuously in age ; and the baser his enemies, the more in-
tolerable the affront. l’esrange.
a wise man would not speak contemptuously of a prince,
though out of his dominions. - tillotson.
conte'mptuousness. m. s. [from contemptuous.] disposition
to contempt; insolence. idicf.
to contend. v. n. [contendo, latin.]
1. to strive; to struggle in opposition.
hector's forehead spit forth blood
- at grecian swords contending.
addison.
2 mac. iii. 18.
pope’s epiffles.
shakespeare's coriolanus.
his wonders and his praises do contend
which should be thine or his, shakespeare's macbeth.
death and nature do contend about them,
whether they live or die. shakespeare's macbeth.
distress not the moabites, neither contend with them in.
battle; for i will not give thee of their land. deut. ii. 9."
2. to vie; to act in emulation,
you sit above, and see vain men below *
contend for what you only can bestow. dryden.
3. it has for before the ground or cause of contention.
the question which our author would contend for, if he did.
not forget it, is what persons have a right to be obeyed. locłe.
4. sometimes about. -
he will find that many things he fiercely contended about were
trivial. decay of piety.
5. it has with before the opponent.
this battle fares like to the morning's war, o
when dying clouds contend with growing light. sh. h. vi.
if we consider him as our maker, we cannot contend with
him. temple.
6. sometimes agains.
in ambitious strength i did
contend against thy valour. shakespeare's coriolanus.
to con te'nd. v. a. to dispute anything; to contest.
their airy limbs in sports they exercise,
and on the green contend the wrestler's prize.
a time of war at length will come,
when carthage shall contend the world with rome. dryd.
thus low we lie,
shut from this day and that contended sky. dryden.
conte'ndent. n.s.. [from contend..] antagonist; opponent ;
champion; combatant. not used.
in all notable changes and revolutions the contendents have
been still made a prey to the third party. l’e/trange.
contender. n.s.. [from contend.] combatant; champion.
the contenders for it, look upon it as undeniable. locke.
those disputes often arise in good earnest, where the two
contenders do really believe the different propositions which they
support. //atts on the mind,
conte'nt. adj. [contentus, latin.]
is i. so as not to repine; easy, though not highly
pleased.
born to the spacious empire of the nine,
one wou'd have thought she shou'd have been content,
to manage well that mighty government. dryden.
who is content, is happy. locke.
a man is perfeotly content with the state he is in, when he
dryd. æn.
is perfeotly without any uneasiness. locke.
foe to loud praise, and friend to learned ease,
content with science in the vale of peace. pope's episolor.
2. satisfied so as not to oppose.
submit you to the people's voices,
allow their officers, and be content
to suffer lawful censure. shakspeare's coriolanus.
to content. v. a, [from the adjective.]
i. to satisfy so as to stop complaint; not to offend; to appease
without plenary happiness or complete gratification.
content thyself with this much, and let this satisfy thee,
that i love thee. sidney.
great minds do sometimes content themselves to threaten,
when they could destroy. tillotson.
do not content yourselves with obscure and confused ideas,
where clearer are to be attained. jwatts's logick.
2. to please; to gratify. w
is the adder better than the eel,
because his painted skin contents the eye * shakespeare.
it doth much content me
to hear him so inclin'd. shakespeare's hamlet.
if a man so temper his actions, as in some one of them he
doth content every faction, the musick of praise will be fuller.
bacon.
wheat is contented with a meaner earth, and contenting with
a suitable gain. carew's cornwal.
conte’nt. n.s.. [from the verb 1
1. moderate happiness; such satisfaction as, though it does not
fill up desire, appeases complaint.
nought's had, all's spent,
where our desire is got without content. shakesp. macbeth.
one thought content the good to be enjoy'd ;
this every little accident destroy’d.
a wise content his even soul secur'd ;
by want not shaken, nor by wealth allur'd. smith on philips.
2. acquiescence; satisfaction in a thing unexamined.
others for language all their care express,
and value books, as women men, for dress:
their praise is still—the stile is excellent; -
the sense they humbly take upon content. . pope's epistles.
3. [from contentus, contained.] that which is contained, or
included in any thing.
though my heart's content firm love doth bear,
nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
dryden.
shakesp.
scarcely<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 478</div><p class="text">c o n
ined of the particalar con-
e inspection. j/oodward.
d of healthy animals: in
arbuthnot.
searcely anything can be determ
tents of any single mass of ore by mer
experiments are made on the bloo
a weak habit serum might afford other o
f containing; extent; capacity. . .
4. ". had then film hundred strong ships, o:
*... good to know the geometrical content, figure, and
situation of all the lands of a kingdom, according to natural
, bounds. graunt's bills of mortality.
5. that which is comprised in a writing. in this sense the
plural only is in use. . o
i have a letter from her -
of such contents, as you will wonder at. . . shaos?eare.
i shall prove these writings not counterfeits, but authen-
tick, and the contents true, and worthy of a divine original.
- grew's cosmol.
the contents of both books come before those of the first
book, in the thread of the story. addison's speaator.
contentation. n.s.. [from content.] satisfaction; content.
out of use. -
i seek no better warrant than my own conscience, nor no
greater pleasure than mine own contentation. ~ sidney.
fourteen years space, during the minority of gordianus,
the government was with great applause and contentation in
the hands of mistheus, a pedant. bacon.
the shield was not long after incrusted with a new rust,
and is the same a cut of which hath been engraved and ex-
hibited, to the great contentation of the learned. a. b. and pope.
conte'nted. participial adj. [from content.] satisfied; at
quiet; not repining; not demanding more; easy, though
not plenarily happy.
barbarossa, in hope by sufferance to obtain another king-
dom, seemed contented with the answer. knolles's history.
dream not of other worlds, -
contented that thus far has been reveal’d,
not of earth only, but of highest heav'n. milt, par. lost.
if he can descry
some nobler foe approach, to him he calls,
- and begs his fate, and then contented falls. denham.
to distant lands vertumnus never roves, -
like you, contented with his native groves. . . . pope.
contentedn ess. n.s.. [from contented.j state of satisfaction
in any lot. - -
angling was, after tedious study, a calmer of unquiet
thoughts, a moderator of passions, a procurer of contentedness.
j/alton's angor,
uonte’ntion. m. s. [contentio, latin.] -
1. strife; debate; contest; quarrel; mutual opposition.
can we with manners ask what was the difference 2
—safely, i think; ’twas a contention in publick. shakes.
avoid foolish questions and genealogies, and contentions and
rrivings. it. iii. 9.
can they keep themselves in a perpetual contention with
their ease, their reason, and their god, and not endure a short
combat with a sinful custom. decay of piety.
the ancients made contention the principle that reigned in
the chaos at first, and then love; the one to express the divi-
fions, and the other the union of all parties in the middle and
common bond. burnet's theory of the earth.
2. emulation; endeavour to excel.
sons and brother at a strife
what is your quarrel; how began it first
no quarrel, but a sweet contention. shakes), hon. vi.
3. eagerness; zeal; ardour; vehemence of endeavour.
your own earnestness and contention to effect what you are
about, will continually suggest to you several artifices. holder.
this is an end, which, at first view, appears worthy our
utmost contention to obtain. rogers.
conte'ntious. adj. [from contend..] quarrelsome; given to
debate; perverse; not peaceable. -
thou think'st much that this contentious storm
invades us to the skin. shakespeare's king lear.
hore are certain contentious humours that are never to be
pleased. l'e/irange.
rest made them idle, idleness made them curious, and cu-
riosity contentious, decay of piety.
conte nt19us jurisdiclion. [in law.] a court which has a
po."jogo and determine differences between contending
#.o. o: justices, and judges, have a conten-
i. . o: othe lords of the treasury, and the coun-
of accountaiji customs, have none, being merely judges
ransactions. chambers.
z
conte'n' lously. adv. [from contentious.] perversely ; quar-
relsomely.
7. - - -
to: o: rejoin, or only to justify our own,
* irm his maturer assertions. brown.
‘...."ousness. n. s. . [from contentious.] proneness to
ooost; perverseness; turbulence; quarrelsomeness.
***tentiosis, and cruelty, and study of revenge
seldom fall of retaliation? bentley's so.
conte's tlf'ss. adj. [from content.] discontented; diff
fied; uneasy. - - ui
best states, contentles,
have a distracted and most wretched being,
worse than the worst, content. słasffaro, t.,
conte’ntment. n.s...[from content, the verb.]" . hion,
1. acquiescence without plenary satisfaction.
such men's contentment must be wrought by flratsgem. th
usual method of fare is not for them. - ho: c
submission is the only reasoning between a creature is.
maker, and contentment in his will is the best remedy we o
apply to misfortunes. . . - - - #.
contentment, without external honour, is humility; win.
the pleasure of eating, temperance. grew, 8.
some place the bliss in action, some in case, "jui.
those call it pleasure, and contentment these. pop.' eff.
but now no face divine contentment wears, ofuji,
'tis all blank sadness, or continual tears.
2. gratification. - - -
at paris the prince spent one whole day, to give his mind
some contentment in viewing of a famous city. waitan
con terminous, a #.. [conterminus, latin.j. bordering wo
touching at the boundaries. - son;
this conformed so many of them, as were conforming
pot.
sty to
the colonies and garrisons, to the roman laws, hall,
conterran eous. adj. [conterrantos, lat.] of the so.
country. - - - - - dia.
to contest. v. a. [contester, fr. probably from contra
testari, latin.] to dispute; to controvert; to litigate. to
call in question. * so--&gt; y
'tis evident, upon what account none have presumed to
cont/? the proportion of these ancient pieces. 1934. dojo,
to con te's t. v. n. -
1. to strive; to contend : followed by with.
the difficulty of an arguinent ados to the pleasure of on.
testing with it, when there arc hopes of victory. eurot.
2. to vie; to emulate.
i do conts:
as hotly and as nobly with thy love,
as ever in ambitions strength i did
contend against thy volour. shakespeare's coriolanus,
of man, who dires in pomp with jove contest,
... . unchang'd, immortal, and supremely tiest; pope's odyss.
co'n test. n. s. [from the verb. it is now accented on th:
first syllable.] dispute; difference; debate.
this of old no less contests did move, -
than when for homer's birth sev’n cities strove. darkm.
a definition is the only way whereby the meaning of words
can be known, without leaving room for contest about it. .
- - lah.
leave all noisy cont/s, all immodest clamours, and bowl-
ing language. watli,
conte's fable. adj. [from conts?..] that may be contested;
disputable; controvertible.
conte's rableness. n. j. [from contestable.] possibility of
contest. - dia.
contestation. n.f. [from contest.] the act of contesting;
debate; strife. -
doors shut, visits forbidden, and, which was worse, divers
contestations, even with the queen herself. j/2:ton.
after years spent in domestick, unsociable contsations, she
found means to withdraw. clarendon.
to conte'x. v. a. [contexo, lat. to weave together; to
unite by interposition of parts. this word is not in use.
nature may contex a plant, though that be a perfectly mist
concrete, without having all the elements previously presented
to her to compound it of. jk.
the fluid body of quicksilver is contexed with the solo
carries up in sublimation. boyk.
co’nt exor. m. s. [contextus, latin.] the general series of a
discourse ; the parts of the discourse that precede and ""
the sentence quoted. -
that chapter is really a representation of one, which hit,
only the knowledge, not practice of his duty; as is manifest
from the context. . hammond in fundatinia".
context, adj. [srom contex.] knit together; firm.
hollow and thin, for lightness; but withal context and film,
for strength. - derham's physic-theol{}.
conte'k'i ure. m. s. [from contex.] the disposition of "
one amongst others; the composition of any thing out of epi-
rate parts; the system; the constitution; the manner!" whic
any thing is woven or formed. -
he was not of any delicate contexture; his limbs rathers of
than dainty. jwotton,
every species, afterwards expressed, was product: son
that idea, forming that wonderful contexture of created being”
- dryden's dufroso).
hence 'gan relax,
the ground's contexture; hence tartarian dregs,
sulphur, and nitrous spume, enkindling fierce,
bellow'd within their darksome caves. philipi,
it.tis.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5 this
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 479</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n.
o
s-
4.
****
.*
*
-
-
this apt, this wife contexture of the sea,
makes it the ships, driv'n by the winds, obey;
whence hardy merchants fail from shore to shore. blackm.
costig nat ros. m. s. [contignatio, latin.]
1. a frame of beams joined together; a story.
we mean a porch, or cloister, or the like, of one contigna-
tion, and not in storied buildings. //otton's architecture.
where more of the orders than one shall be set in several
stories or contignations, there must be an exquisite care to place
the columns one over another. //atton.
2. the act of framing or joining a fabrick of wood.
contigu'ity. n.f. [from contiguous.] actual contact; situa-
tion in which two bodies or countries touch upon each other.
he defined magnetical attraction to be a natural imitation
and disposition conforming unto contiguity. brown.
the immediate contiguity of that convex were a real space.
hale's origin of mankind.
conti'guous. adj. [contiguus, latin.] -
1. meeting so as to touch ; bordering upon each other ; not
separate.
flame doth not mingle with flame as air doth with air, or wa-
ter with water, but only remaineth contiguous, as it cometh to
pass betwixt consisting bodies. bacon's nat. hylory.
the loud misrule -
of chaos far remov’d ; left fierce extremes,
contiguous, might distemper the whole frame. milton.
the east and west o
upon the globe, a mathematick point
only divides: thus happiness and misery, -
and all extremes, are still contiguous. denham's sophy.
distinguish them by the diminution of the lights and sha-
dows, joining the contiguous objects by the participation of
their colours. dryden's dufresnoy.
when i viewed it too near, the two halfs of the paper did
not appear fully divided from one another, but seemed conti-
guous at one of their angles. newton's opt.
2. it has sometimes with. o * --
water, being contiguous with air, cooleth it, but moisteneth
it not. - - bacon's natural history.
cont1'guously. adv. [from contiguous.] without any inter-
vening spaces. -
thus disembroil'd, they take their proper place,
the next of kin contiguously embrace, :
and foes are sunder'd by a larger space. dryden’s ovid.
conti'gu ous n ess. n.s.. [from contiguous...] close connection;
concreil cc, s idic?.
§: n, f: [continentia, latin.]
1. restraint; command-of one's self.
he knew what to say; he knew also when to leave off, a
continence which is practised by few writers. dryd, fab. prof.
2. forbearance of lawful pleasure. * -
content without lawful venery, is continence; without un-
lawful, chastity. grew's cosnol.
3. chastity in general.
- o where is he 2–
—in her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her,
and rails, and swears, and rates. shak. tam. of the shrew.
suffer not dishonour to approach
th” imperial seat; to virtue consecrate,
to justice, continence, and nobility. shak. titus andronicus.
4- moderation in hawful pleasures.
chastity is either abstinence or continence: abstinence is that
of virgins or widows; continence, of married persons. taylor.
5. continuity; uninterrupted course. -
answers ought to be made before the same judge, before
whom the depositions were produced, left the continence of the
course should be divided; or, in other terms, left there should
be a discontinuance of the cause. ayliffe's parergon.
continent. cdj. [continens, latin.]
1. chaste; abstemious in lawful pleasures.
life
hath been as continent, as chasle, as true,
as i am now unhappy. shakespeare's j/inter's tale.
2. restrained; moderate; temperate.
i pray you, have a continent forbearance, 'till the speed of
his rage goes slower. shakespeare's king lear.
3- continuous; connected.
the north-east part of asia is, if not continent with the
west fide of america, yet certainly it is the least disjoined by
sea of all that coast of asia. brerewood on languages.
. opposing; restraining.
4. opposing my desire
all continent impediments would o'erbear,
that did oppose my will.
co’s tin ent. m. s. [continens, latin.] o
1. land not disjoined by the sea from other lands.
whether this portion of the world were rent,
by the rude ocean, from the continent;
or thus created, it was sure design'd
to be the sacred refuge of mankind. j/aller.
the declivity of rivers will be so much the less, and there-
vol. i. *
shakspeare.
cont1 nc excy.
fore the continents will be the less drained, and will gradually
increase in humidity.
2. that which contains any thing.
in shakespeare.
bently’s sermons.
this sense is perhaps only
o cleave my fides 1
heart, once be stronger than thy continent,
crack thy frail case. shakesp. anthony and clopatra.
close pent-up guilts,
rive your contending continents. shakosh. king lear.
7% continge. v. n. [contingo, lat.] to touch; to reach ;
to happen. dico.
cont1'ng ence. } n: s [from contingent.]. the quality of being
fortuitous ; accidental possibility.
their credulities assent unto any prognosticks, which, con-
sidering the contingency in events, are only in the prescience of
god. brown's vagar errours.
for once, o heav'n' unfold thy adamantine book;
if not thy firm, immutable decree,
at least the second page of great contingeny,
such as consists with wills originally free. dryden.
aristotle says, we are not to build certain rules upon the
contingency of human actions. - sooth.
cont1'ngent, adj. [ contingens, latin. j. falling cut by
chance; accidental; not determinable by any certain rule.
hazard naturally implies in it, first, something future; se-
condly, something contingent. south.
i first informed myself in all material circumstances of it,
in more places than one, that there might be nothing casual
or contingent in any one of those circumstances. //oodward.
cont1'ng ent. m. s. -
1. a thing in the hands of chance.
by contingents we are to understand those things which come
to pass without any human forecast. grew's csimol.
his understanding could almost pierce into future contingents,
his conjectures improving even to prophecy. south's sormons.
2. a proportion that falls to any person upon a division: thus,
in time of war, each prince of germany is to furnish his
contingent of men, money, and munition.
cont1'ng ently. adv. [ from contingent. j
without any settled rule. -
it is digged out of the earth contingently, and indifferently,
as the pyrita and agates. //oodwara's natural hi/ory.
conting entn ess, n.s.. [from contingent.] accidentalness.
cont1'nual. adj. [continuus, latin.] - -
1. incessant; proceeding without interuption; successive without
any space of time between. continual is used of time, and
continuous of place.
he that is of a merry heart, hath a continual feast. prov. xv.
other care perhaps
may have diverted from continual watch - -
our great forbidder. milton.
- 'tis all blank sadness, or continual tears. pope.
2. [in law.] a continual claim is made from time to time,
within every year and day, to land or other thing, which, in
some respect, we cannot attain without danger. for exam-
ple, if i be diffeised of land, into which, though i have right
into it, i dare not enter, for fear of beating; it behooveth me
to hold on my right of entry to the best opportunity of me
and mine heir, by approaching as near it as i can, once every
year as long as i live; and so i save the right of entry to my
heir. - cowel.
3. it is sometimes used for perpetual.
cont1'nually. adv. [from continual.]
1. without pause; without interruption. -
the drawing of boughs into the inside of a room, where
fire is continually kept, hath been tried with grapes. bacon.
2. without ceasing. -
why do not all animals continually increase in bigness,
during the whole space of their lives bentley's ser nons.
cont1'nuance. m. s. [from continue.]
i. succession uninterrupted.
the brute immediately regards his own preservation, or the
continuance of his species. addison's speciator.
2. permanence in one state.
comtinuance of evil doth in itself increase evil. sidney.
a chamber where a great fire is kept, though the fire be
at one stay, yet with the continuance continually hath its heat
increased. sidney.
these romish casuists speak peace to the consciences of
men, by suggesting something which shall satisfy their minds,
notwithstanding a known, avowed continuance in sins. south.
3. abode in a place. -
4. duration ; lastingness.
you either fear his humour, or my negligence, that you
call in question the continuance of his love. shac. twelfth night.
their duty depending upon fear, the one was of no greater .
continuance than the other. " hayward.
that pleasure is not of greater continuance, which arises
from the prejudice or malice of its hearers. addis, freeholder.
5. perseverance. -
to them who, by patient continuance in well-doing, sock
for glory, and honour, and immortality, eternal life. ro. ii. 7.
- 5 m 6. pro-
accidentally ;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 480</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
r
6. progression of time. - - -
in thy book all my members were written, which in conti-
nuance were fashioned. ps. cxxxix. 16.
7. resistance to separation of parts; continuity.
wool, tow, cotton and raw silk, have besides the desire of
continuance in regard of the tenuity of their thread, a greedi-
ness of moisture. bacon.
cosri'nu at e. adj. [continuatus, latin.]
1. immediately united.
we are of him and in him, even as though our very flesh
and bones should be made continuate with his. hooker.
2. uninterrupted; unbroken.
a most incomparable man breath'd, as it were,
to an untirable and continuate goodness. shakesh. timan.
a clear body broken to small pieces produceth white; and
becometh most black, while it is continuate and undivided, as
we see in deep waters and thick glasses. peacham.
costi'nu an ely. adv. [from continuate.] with continuity;
without interruption. -
the water ascends gently, and by intermissions; but it
falls continuately, and with force. jvilkins.
cost inua’t los. m. s. [from continuate.] protraction, or suc-
cession uninterrupted.
these things must needs be the works of providence, for
the continuation of the species, and upholding the world. ray.
the roman poem is but the second part of the ilias; a
continuation of the same story. dryden.
costi's uative. m. s. [from continuate.] an expression noting
permanence or duration. - -
to these may be added continuatives: as rome remains to
this day; which includes at least two propositions, viz. rome
was, and rome is. j/atts's logick.
continu ato r. m. s. [from continuate.] he that continues or
kceps up the series or succession.
it seems injurious to providence to ordain a way of produc-
tion which should destroy the producer, or contrive the cotti-
nuation of the species by the destruction of the continuator.
brown's wugar erreurs.
t, continue. v. n. [continuer, fr. continuo, latin.]
1. to remain in the same state, or place.
the multitude continue with me now three days, and have
nothing to eat. 4. t. xv. 32.
the popular vote -
inclincs here to continue, and build up her
- a growing empire. - milton.
- happy, but for so happy ill secur'd, -
long to continue. milton.
- he six days and nights
continued making. jolton.
2. to last; to be durable. -
thy kingdom shall not continue. i sa xiii. 14.
for here have we no contini.ing city, but we seek one to
coril c. heb. xiii. 14.
they imagine that an animal of the longest duration should
live in a continued motion, without that reit whereby all others
continue. brown's poigar errours.
3. to persevere. - *- - -
if ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples in-
deed. - j2. viii. 31.
down rush'd the rain
jmpetuous, and continued till the earth
no more was sten.
to cont1'nu e. v. c. -
1. to protract, or hold without interruption.
o continue thy loving kindness unto them. fs. xxxvi. 10.
you know how to make yourself happy, by only continuing
such a life as you have been long accustomed to lead. pope.
2. to unite without a chasm, or intervening substance.
the use of the navel is to continue the infant unto the mo-
ther, and by the vessels thereof to convey its aliments and
sustenance. brown's vulgar errours.
the dark abyss, whose boiling gulph
tamely endur'd a bridge of wond’rous length,
frcm hell continu’d reaching th' utmost orb
of this frail world. milton's parad's loft.
here priam's son, deiphobus, he found,
whose face and limbs were one continu’d wound;
dishonest, with sop'd arms, the youth appears,
spoil'd of his nose, and shorten’d of his ears. dryd. æn.
where any motion or succession is so slow, as that it keeps
not pace with the ideas in our minds, there the series of a
constant continued succession is lost; and we perceive it not
but with certain gaps of rest between. locke.
cont1 nu fdly. aav. [from continued.] without interruption,
without ceasing.
by perseverance, i do not understand a continued uniform,
equal course of obedience, and such as is not interrupted with
the least act of fin. norris.
cont1's uer. m. s. [from continue..] having the power of per-
severance. -
i would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so
good a continuer. shakespeare's 41ach ado avoist yothing.
milton.
cost inu'ity. m. s. [continuitas, latin.]
1. connection uninterrupted ; cohesion; close union.
it is certain, that in all bodies there is an appetite of union,
and evitation of solution of continuity. bacon's nat. history;
after the great lights there must be great shadows, which
we call reposes, because in reality the fight would be tired,
if it were attracted by a continuity of glittering objects. dod.
it wraps itself about the flame, and by its continuity hinders
any air or nitre from coming. addison on italy.
2. in physick. -
that texture or cohesion of the parts of an animal body,
upon the destruction of which there is said to be a solution of
continuity. &amp;uincy.
as in the natural body a wound or solution of continuit, is
worse than a corrupt humour, so in the spiritual. bac. essays.
the solid parts may be contracted by dissolving their on-
tinuity; for a fibre, cut through, contracis itself. arbuthnot.
cont1'nuous, adj. [continuus, latin.j joined together with-
out the intervention of any space.
as the breadth of every ring is thus augmented, the dark
intervals must be diminished, until the neighbouring rings be-
come continuous, and are blended. newton's opt.
- to whose dread expanse,
continuous depth, and wond’rous length of course,
our floods are rills. thomson's summer.
to conto'rt. v. a. [contortus, latin.] to twist; to
writhe.
the vertebral arteries are variously contorted. roy.
air seems to consist of spires contorted into small sphers,
through the interstices of which the particles of light may
freely pass. cheyne.
cox to rtios. m. s. [from contort.] twist; wry motion;
flexure.
disruption they would be in danger of, upon a great and
sudden stretch or contortion. ray on the creation.
how can she acquire those hundred graces and motions,
and airs, the contortions of every muscular motion in the
face swift.
contour. m. s. [french..] the outline; the line by which
any figure is defined or terminated.
co not ra. a latin preposition used in composition, which
signifies agains.
co’ntra band... adj. [contrabando, ital. contrary to procla-
mation.] prohibited; illegal; unlawful.
if there happen to be found an irreverent expression, or a
thought too wanton, in the cargo, let them be staved or for-
feited, like contraband goods. dryden's fables, preface.
to co. ntraband, v. a. [from the adjective.] to import
goods prohibited.
to contract. v. a. [contracius, latin.]
1. to draw together into less compass.
why love among the virtues is not known;
it is, that love contracis them all in one.
2. to leden; to make less ample.
in all things desuetude does contrac and narrow our fa-
culties. government of the tongue.
3. to draw the parts of any thing together. -
to him the angel with contracted brow.
4. to make a bargain.
on him thy grace did liberty bestow;
but first contracted, that, if ever found,
his head should pay the forfeit.
5. to betroth ; to affiance.
the truth is, she and i, long since contracied,
are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us. shakespeare.
she was a lady of the highest condition in that country,
and contracted to a man of merit and quality. tatler.
6. to procure; to bring; to incur ; to draw ; to get.
of enemies he could not but contra: good store, while
moving in so high a sphere. king charles.
he that but conceives a crime in thought,
contracis the danger of an actual fault. dryden's jav.
like friendly colours, found them both unite, -
and each from each contract new strength and light. pope.
such behaviour we contrac by having much conversed with
persons of high stations. swift.
7. to shorten: as life was contracied.
8. to epitomise; to abridge.
to contra"ct. v. n.
1. to shrink up; to grow short.
whatever empties the vessels, gives room to the fibres to
contrac. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. to bargain: as, to contract for a quantity of provisions.
contract. part adj. [from the verb..] affianced; contracted.
first was he contract to lady lucy;
your mother lives a witness to that vow. shakes. rich. iii.
contr act. n.s. [from the verb. anciently accented on the first.}
1. an act whereby two parties are brought together; a bargain;
a compact.
the agreement upon orders, by mutual contrast, with the
consent to execute them by common strength, they make the
rise of all civil governments. temple.
s.-ii
donne,
milton.
, dryden's falls.
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 481</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n -
o
5.
shall ward draw contra..!?s with a statesman's skill
or japhet pocket, like his grace, a will pope.
2. an act whereby a man and woman are betrothed to one
another.
touch'd you the bastardy of edward's children?—
—i did, with his contrac with lady lucy,
and his contra: by deputy in france. shakes. richard iii.
3. a writing in which the terms of a bargain age included.
contra'ctedn ess. n. s. [from contracted.] the state of
being contracted ; contracijon. dict.
conorf act, bi lity. m. s. [from contracible.] possibility of
being contracted ; quality of suffering contrastion.
by this continual contractibility and dilatibility by different
degrees of heat, the air is kept in a constant motion. arbuthn.
contra’crible. adj. [ from contrac, ) capable of con-
traction. - o -
small air-bladders, dilatable and contraciible, are capable to
be inflated by the admission of air, and to subside at the ex-
pulsion of it. arbuthnot on aliments.
contract ibleness. m. s. [from contracible.] the quality
of suffering contraction. - die?.
con tractile. adj. [from contra?..] having the power of
contraction, or of shortening itself.
the arteries are elastick tubes, endued with a contracile
force, by which they squeeze and drive, the blood still for-
ward. arbuthnot on aliments.
con tra’ction. n.s.. [contracio, latin.] - -
1. the act of contraciing or shortening.
the main parts of the poem, such as the fable and senti-
ments, no translator can prejudice but by omitions or con-
tractions. - pope's essay on homer.
2. the act of shrinking or shriveling. -
oil of vitriol will throw the stomach into involuntary con-
tractions. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. the state of being contracted, or drawn into a narrow
compass. - - -
some things induce a contraciion in the nerves, placed in the
mouth of the stomach, which is a great cause of appetite. bacon.
comparing the quantity of contraction and dilatation. made
by all the degrees of each colour, i found it greatest in the
red. newton's opticks.
4. [in grammar.] the reduction of two vowels or syllables
to osle.
5. anything in its state of abbreviation or contraction; as, the
writing is full of contractions. . -
contra’ctor. m. s. [from contraci.] one of the parties to a
contract or bargain. -
let the measure of your affirmation or denial be the un-
derstanding of your contracior; for he that deceives the buyer
or the seller by speaking what is true, in a sense not under-
stood by the other, is a thief. , taylor's rule of living holy:
all matches, friendships, and societies are dangerous and
inconvenient, where the contractors are not equals. l'estrange.
t., contradi’ct. v. a. [contradico, latin.]
1. to oppose verbally; to assert the contrary to what has been
asserted. -
it is not lawful to contradict a point of history which is
known to all the world, as to make hannibal and scipio con-
temporaries with alexander. dryden.
2. to be contrary to ; to repugn 3 to oppose.
no truth can contradic any truth. hooker.
i contradic your banes :
if you will marry, make your loves to me. shak. k. lear.
contradi’cter. n.s.. [from contradict.] one that contra-
dicis ; one that opposes; an opposer.
if no contradicier appears herein, the suit will surely be
good. ayliffe's parergon.
if a gentleman is a little sincere in his representations, he
is sure to have a dozen contradiciers. swift's view of ireland.
contradi’ction. n.s.. [from contradic.] -
1. verbal opposition; controversial aslertion.
that tongue,
inspir'd with contradiction, durst oppose
a third part of the gods.
2. opposition.
consider him that endureth such contradicion of sinners
against himself, left ye be wearied. heb. xii. 3.
3. inconsistency with itself; incongruity in words or
thoughts.
can he make deathless death 2 that were
strange contradiction, which to god himself
impossible is held ; as argument
of weakness, not of pow'r, milton's paradise lost.
the apostle's advice to be angry and sin not, was a contra-
iction in their philosophy. south's sermons.
if truth be once perceived, we do thereby also perceive
whatsoever is false in contradiction to it. grew's cosmol.
4. contrariety, in thought or effect.
all contradictions grow in those minds, which neither abso-
lutely climb the rock of virtue, nor freely sink into the sea of
vanity. sidney.
milton's paradis: loft. .
laws human must be made without contradion unto any
positive law in scripture. hooker.
contra disctious. adj. [from contradici.]
i. filled with contradictions ; inconsistent.
the rules of decency, of government, of justice itself,
are so different in one place from what they are in another,
so party-coloured and contradioious, that one would think
the species of men altered according to their climates. collier.
2. inclined to contradict ; given to cavil.
3. opposite to ; inconsistent with. -
where the act is unmanly, and the expe&amp;tation immoral,
or “ntradictious to the attributes of god, our hopes we ought
il cver to entertain. - collier.
contradi’ctious n ess. n.s.. [from contradioious.]
1. inconsistency; contrariety to itself.
this opinion was, for its absurdity and contradicliousness,
unworthy of the refined spirit of plato. norris.
2. disposition to cavil; disputatious temper. -
contradi'crorily. adv. [from contradiciory.] inconsistently
with himself; oppositely to others. -
such as have discoursed hereon, have so diversely, contra-
rily, or contradictorily delivered themselves, that no affirmative
from thence can be reasonably deduced. brown.
contradi'croriness. n.s. [from contradicory..] opposition
in the highest degree. 19icf.
contra pictory. adi, [contradiciorius, latin.]
1. opposite to ; inconsistent with.
the jews hold, that in case two rabbies should happen to
contradict one another, they were yet bound to believe the
contradic/ory assertions of both. soath’s sormons.
the schemes of those gentlemen are most obsurd, and con-
tradictory to common sense. złason's freeholder.
2. [in logick.] that which is in the fullest opposition, where
both the terms of one proposition are opposite to those of
another. -
contradi’ctory. n. s. a proposition which opposes another
in all its terms; contrariety; inconsistency.
it is common with princes to will contradiclories; for it is
the solecism of power to think to command the end, and yet
not to endure the means. bacon.
to ascribe unto him a power of eleetion, not to chuse this
or that indifferently, is to make the same thing to be determined
to one, and to be not determined to one, which are contra-
dictories. bramh. mosiver to hottes.
contradisti'nction. n.s.. [from contradislingash..] distinc-
tion by opposite qualities.
we must trace the soul in the ways of intelle&amp;ual actions,
whereby we may come to the distinet knowledge of what is
meant by imagination, in contradistinction to some other powers.
- glanville's scepsis.
that there are such things as sins of infirmity, in contra-
dislinesion to those of presumption, is a truth not to be ques-
tioned. . ; south.
to contradisti'nguish. v. a. [from centra and dis-
tinguish..] to distinguish not simply by differen:ial but by
opposite qualities. -
the primary ideas we have peculiar to body, as contradis-
tinguished to spirit, are the cohesion of solid, and consequently
separable parts, and a power of communicating motion by
impulse. locke:
these are our complex ideas of soul and body, as contra-
dislinguished. lice.
contraf1'ssure. n.s.. [from contra and fisors.]
contusions, when great, do usually produce a fissure or
crack of the scull, either in the same part where the blow was
inflicted, and then it is called fissure; or in the contrary part,
in which case it obtains the name of contrassure. //semian.
to contrai’ndicate. v. a. [contra and indie, lat..] to
point out some peculiar or incidental symptom or method of
cure, contrary to what the general tenour of the malady
requires.
vomits have their use in this malady; but the age and sex
of the patient, or other urgent or contraindicating symptoms
must be observed. harvey on consumptions.
con traindica^tio n. n.s.. [from contraindicate.] an indica-
tion or symptom, which forbids that to be, done which the
main scope of a disease points out at first. &amp;#incy.
i endeavour to give the most simple idea of the distonper,
and the proper diet, abstracting from the complications of
the first, or the contraindications to the second. -
arbuthnot on aliments.
contr amu're. m. s. [contremur, french j in fortification, is
an out wall built about the main wall of a city. chambers.
contranit ency. m. s. [from contra and nitens, latin.) re-
action ; a resistency against pressure. dic7.
contraposition, n.f. [from contra and position.] a plasing
over against. -
contraregula'rity.. n.
contrariety to rule.
it is not only its not promoting, but its opposing, or at
least its natural aptness to oppose the greatest and beit of ends;
fe
f: [from contra and regularity.]<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 482</div><p class="text">c o n
| c o n
so that it is not so properly an irregularity as a controrogo-
larity. - norris.
contra’riant. adj. [contrariant, from contrarier, french.]
inconsistent; contradictory: a term of law. -
the very depositions of witnesses themselves, being false,
various, contrariant, single, inconcludent. ayliff's parergon.
co'n's raries. m. s. [from contrary.] in logick, propositions
which destroy each other ; but of which the falshood of one
does not establish the truth of the other. -
if two universals differ in quality, they are contraries ; as,
very vine is a tree, no vine is a tree. these can never be both
true together, but they may be both false. watts's logick.
con trariet y. m. s. [from contrarietas, latin.]
1. repugnance; opposition. -
the will about one and the same thing may, in contrary
respects, have contrary inclinations, and that without contra-
riety. - fhooker.
making a contrariety the place of my memory, in her foul-
ness i beheld pamela's fairness, still looking on mopsa, but
thinking on pamela. sidney,
he which will perfectly recover a fick and restore a diseased
body unto health, must not endeavour so much to bring it to
a state of simple contrariety, as of fit proportion in contrariety
unto those evils which are to be cured. hooker.
it principally failed by late setting out, and by some contra-
riety of weather at sea, - motion.
their religion had more than negative contrariety to virtue.
decay of piety.
there is a conirariety between those things that conscience
inclines to, and those that entertain the senses. south.
these two interests it is to be feared, cannot be divided ;
but they wili also prove opposite, and not resting in a bare
diversity, quickly rise into a contrariety. south.
there is nothing more common than contrariety of opi-
nions; nothing more obvious than that one man wholly dis-
believes what another only doubts of, and a third stedfastly
believes and firmly adheresto. locke.
2. inconsistency; quality or position destructive of its op-
posite. .. -
he will be here, and yet he is not here ;
how can these contrarieties agree ? shakesp. henry iv.
contr a rily. adv. [from contrary.] -
1. in a manner contrary. -
many of them conspire to one and the same action, and all
this contrarily to the laws of specifick gravity, in whatever
posture the body be formed.
2. different ways; in different direetions.
though all men desire happiness, yet their wills carry them
so contrarily, and consequently some of them to what is evil.
ray on the creation.
- locke.
cox tra'riness. m. s. [from contrary..] contrariety; opposi-
tion. die?.
contra rious. adj. [from contrary..] opposite; repugnant
the one to the other. -
god of our fathers, what is man
that thou towards him, with hand so various,
or might i say contrarious,
temper'st thy providence through his short course?
milton's paradise loft.
contra'rio usly. adv. [from contrarious...] oppositely; con-
trarily. -
many things, having full reference
to one consent, may work contrariously.
contra riwise. adv. [contrary and wise.]
1. conversely.
divers medicines in greater quantity move stool, and in
smaller urine ; and so, contrariwise, some in greater quantity
move urine, and in snailer stool. bacon's natural history.
every thing that acts upon the fluids, must, at the same
time, act upon the solids, and contrariwise. arbuth. on alim.
2. oppositely. -
the matter of faith is constant, the matter, contrariwise, of
acions daily changeable. hooker.
this request was never before made by any other lords;
but, contrariwise, they were humble suitors to have the benefit
and protection of the english laws. davies on ireland.
the sun may set and rise:
but we, contrariwise,
sleep, after our short light, -
one everlasting night. raleigh's history of the world.
contrary. adj. [contrarius, latin.]
1. opposite; contradictory; not simply different, or not alike,
but repugnant, so that one destroys or obstructs the other.
perhaps some thing, repugnant to her kind,
by strong antipathy the soul may kill;
but what can be contrary to the mind,
which holds all contraries in concord still.
2. inconsistent ; disagreeing.
he that believes it, and yet lives contrary to it, knows that
he hath no reason for what he does. tillotson.
the various and contrary choices that men make in the
shakesp. henry v.
davies.
world, do not argue that they do not at all pursue good ; but
that the fame thing is not good to every man alike. locke.
3. adverse; in an opposite direction. - -
the ship was in the midst of the sea, tossed with the waves;
for the wind was contrary. 44at. xiv. 24.
co'n trary. m. s. [from the adjective.]
1. a thing of opposite qualities.
no contraries hold more antipathy, -
than i and such a knave. shakespeare's king lear.
he sung, -
why contraries feed thunder in the cloud. cowley’s davidii.
honour should be concern’d in honour's cause ;
that is not to be cur'd by contraries,
as bodies are, whose health is often drawn
from rankest poisons. southern's orzonakz.
2. a proposition contrary to some other; a fact contrary to the
allegation. .
the instances brought by our author are but slender proofs
of a right to civil power and dominion in the first-born, and
do rather shew the contrary. lock.
3. on the con 1 rary. in opposition; on the other side.
- - he pleaded still not guilty;
the king's attorney, on the contrary,
urg'd on examinations, proofs, confessions
of diverse witnesses. shakoffeare's henry viii.
if justice stood on the fide of the single person, it ought to
give good men pleasure to see that right should take place;
but when, on the contrary, the commonweal of a whole nation
is overborn by private interest, what good man but must la-
ment 2 - swift.
4. to the contrary. to a contrary purpose; to an opposite
1i]tent. -
they did it, not for want of instruction to the contrary. still.
70 co'ntrary. v. a. [contrarier, french.] to oppose; to
thwart; to contradict.
when i came to court i was advised not to contrary the
king. - latimer.
finding in him the force of it, he would no further con-
trary it, but employ all his service to medicine it. sidney.
contrast. m. s. [contrasoe, fr.] opposition and dissimi-
litude of figures, by which one contributes to the visibility or
effect of another. o - -
to co'ntrast. v. a. ssrom the noun.]
i. to place in opposition, so that one figure shews another to
advantage. - - -
2. to shew another figure to advantage by its colour or situa-
tion.
the figures of the groups must not be all on a side, that is,
with their face and bodies all turned the same way; but must
contras; each other by their several positions. dryden.
contravall aotion. m. s. [from contra and vallo, latin.]
the fortification thrown up, by the besiegers, round a city,
to hinder the sallies of the garrison.
when the late czar of muscovy first acquainted himself
with mathematical learning, he practised all the rules of cir-
cumvallation and contravallation at the siege of a town in
livonia. - watts's logick.
to contravene. v. a. [contra and venia, lat.] to op-
pose; to obstruct; to baffle.
contrave'ner. n.s.. [from contravene.]
another. -
contrave'ntion. m. s. [french.] opposition.
if christianity did not lend its name to stand in the gap,
and to employ or divert these humours, they must of neceflity
be spent in contraventions to the laws of the land. swift.
contraye’ova. m. s. [contra, against, and yerva, a name by
which the spaniards call black hellebore; and, perhaps, some-
times poison in general.] - a species of birthwort growing in
jamaica, where it is much used as an alexipharmick. miller.
contrectation. n.s.. [contreciatio, latin.] a touching or
handling. ioł.
contri'but ary. adj. [from con and tributary..] paying tri-
bute to the same sovereign. -
thus we are engaged in the objects of geometry and arith-
metick 5 yea, the whole mathematicks must be contributary,
and to them all nature pays a subsidy. glanville's scepsis.
he who opposes
to contribute. v. a. [contribuo, latin.] to give to
some common stock; to advance towards some common
design.
england contributes much more than any other of the allies.
• adaison on the war.
his master contributed a great sum of money to the jesuits
church, which is not yet quite finished. addison on italy.
to contri'bute. v. n. to bear a part; to have a share in
any act or effect. o
whatever praises may be given to works of judgment, there
is not even a single beauty in them to which the invention
must not contribute. pope's essay on homer.
contribu'tion. n.s.. [from contribute.]
1. the act of promoting some design in conjunction with other
persons. -
7 2. that
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 483</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
* * *
o:
as:
aj, t
**
3.17.
iqui.
ir:
no
f : o
*...
*
-
2. that which is given by several hands for some common
purpose. - -
it hath pleased them of macedonia to make a certain con-
tribution for the poor saints. ram. xv. 26.
parents owe their children not only material subsistence for
their body, but much more spiritual contributions for their
mind. digby.
beggars are now maintained by voluntary contributions.
graunt's bills of mortality.
3. that which is paid for the support of an army lying in a
country.
the people 'twixt philippi and this ground,
do stand but in a forc'd affection;
for they have grudg’d us contribution. shakesh. jul. casar.
contri'but ive. adj. [from contribute.] that which has the
power or quality of promoting any purpose in concurrence
with other motives.
as the value of the promises renders them most proper in-
centives to virtue, so the manner of proposing we shall find
also highly contributive to the same end. decay of piety.
contr1. butor. m. s. [from contribute.] one that bears a part
in some common design; one that helps forward, or exerts his
endeavours to some end, in conjunction with others.
i promis'd we would be contributors,
and bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er. shakespeare.
a grand contributor to our disientions is passion. dec. of piety.
art thou a true lover of thy country zealous for its reli-
gious and civil liberties? and a chearful contributor to all those
publick expences which have been thought necessary to secure
them? atterbury.
the whole people were witnesses to the building of the
ark and tabernacle, they were all contributers to it. forbes.
contr1. butory. adj. [from contribute.] promoting the same
end; bringing assistance to some joint design, or increase to
some common stock.
72 contristate. v. a. [contrislo, latin.] to sadden;
to make sorrowful; to make melancholy. not used.
* blackness and darkness are but privatives, and therefore
have little or no activity: somewhat they do cartri/late, but
very little. bacon's natural hisory.
contr1st aotion. n.s.. [from contrislate.] the act of making
sad; the state of being made sad; sorrow; heaviness of heart;
sadness; sorrowfulness; gloominess; grief; moan; mourn-
fulness; trouble; discontent ; melancholy. not used.
incense and nidorous smells, such as were of sacrifices,
were thought to intoxicate the brain, and to dispose men to
devotion ; which they may do by a kind of sadness and con-
triflation of the spirits, and partly also by heating and exalting
them. bacon's natural history.
contrite. adj. [contritus, latin.]
1. bruised; much worn.
2. worn with sorrow ; harassed with the sense of guilt; pe-
nitent. in the books of divines contrite is sorrowful for fin,
from the love of god and desire of pleasing him; and attrite
is sorrowful for sin, from the fear of punishment.
i richard's body have interred now ;
and on it have bestow'd more contrite tears,
than from it issu'd forced drops of blood.
shakespeare's henry v.
with tears
wat’ring the ground, and with our fighs the air
frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. milton.
the contrite sinner is restored to pardon, and, through faith
in christ, our repentance is intitled to salvation. rogers.
contrit en ess. m. s. [from contrite.] contrition; repent-
ancc. dici.
contr1'tion. n.s.. [from contrite.]
1. the act of grinding ; or rubbing to powder.
some of those coloured powders, which painters use, may
have their colours a little changed, by being very elaborately
and finely ground ; where i see not what can be justly pre-
tended for those changes, besides the breaking of their parts
into less parts by that contrition. newton's of ticks.
2. penitence; sorrow for fin : in the strict sense, the sorrow
which arises from the desire to please god, distinguished from
attrition, or imperfeot repentance produced by dread of hell.
what is sorrow and contrition for fin a being grieved with
the conscience of fin, not only that we have thereby incurred
such danger, but also that we have so unkindly grieved and
provoked so good a god. hammond's praci. cat.
fruits of more pleasing savour, from thy seed
sown with contrition in his heart, than those
which, his own hand manuring, all the trees
of paradise could have produc’d. , milton's parad's loft.
your fasting, contrition, and mortification, when the church
and state appoints, and that especially in times of greater riot
and luxury. spratt's sermons.
my future days shall be one whole cartrition;
- a chapel will build with large endowment,
* where every day an hundred aged men -
shall all hold up their wither'd hands to heav'n. dryden.
vol. i. \ -
ccorsi'yan e. ad. [from controv..] possible to be planned
by the mind ; possible to be invented and adjusted.
it will hence appear how a perpetual motion may seem
easily contrivable. //ilkins's daedalus.
contr 1 v a.nce. n.s.. [from contrive.] " .
1. the act of contriving; excogitation ; the thing contrived.
there is no work impossible to these contrivators, but there
may be as much asted by this art as can be fancied by imagi-
nation. - j/ikin's 41ath. alsag.
instructed, you’ll explore
divine contrivance, and a god adore. backmore's creation.
2. scheme ; plan ; disposition of parts or causes.
our bodies are made according to the most curious artifice,
and orderly contrivance. glanville's scepsis.
3. a conceit ; a plot; an artifice. - - -
have i not manag'd my contrivance well,
to try your love, and make you doubt of mine drydon.
there might be a feint, a contrivance in the matter, to
draw him into some secret ambush. -
to contri've. v. a. [controuver, french.]
1. to plan out; to excogitate.
one that slept in the contriving lust, and waked to do it.
shak speare's king lear.
what more likely to contrive this admirable frame of the
universe than infinite wisdom. till tson.
our poet has always some beautiful design, which he first
establishes, and then contrives the means which will naturally
4ttereury.
conduct him to his end. dryden.
2. to wear away. out of use. -
three ages, such as mortal men contrive. fairy queen.
please ye, we may contrive this afternoon,
and quaff carouses to our mistress' health. shakspeare.
to con tr 1 v e. v. n. to foim or design; to plan; to scheme ;
to complot.
is it enough
that masking habits and a borrowed name,
contrive to hide my plenitude of shame prior.
contri'v ement. m. s. [from contrive..] invention. dic7.
con tri'v e.r. m. s. [from contrive..] an inventer; one that
plans a design ; a schemer.
i, the mistress of your charms,
the close contriver of all harms,
was never call'd to bear my part. shakespeare's macbeth.
epeus, who the fraud’s contriver was. denham.
plain loyalty, not built on hope,
i leave to your contriver, pope:
none loves his king and country better, -
yet none was ever less their debtor. swift.
scenes of blood and desolation, i had painted as the
common effects of those destructive machines; whereof, he
faid, some evil genius, enemy to mankind, must have been
the first contriver. swift's gull travels.
control. m. s. [controle, that is, contre role, frence.]
1. a register or account kept by another officer, that each may
be examined by the other.
2. check; restraint.
let partial spirits still aloud complain,
think themselves injur'd that they cannot reign;
and own no liberty, but where they may, -
without control, upon their fellows prey. waller.
he shall feel a force upon himself from within, and from
the control of his own principles, to engage him to do
worthily. - south.
if the finner shall win so complete a victory over his con-
science, that all those considerations shall be able to strike no
terrour into his mind, lay no restraint upon his lusts, no con-
trol upon his appetites, he is certainly too strong for the
means of grace. south's sermons.
speak, what phoebus has inspir'd thy soul
for common good, and speak without control. dryd. ham.
3. power; authority ; superintendence.
the beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
are their male's subjects, and at their controls. shakespeare.
to cont ro l. v. a. [from the noun.j
1. to keep under check by a counter reckoning.
2. to govern ; to restrain ; to subject.
authority to convent, to control, to punish, as far as with ex-
communication, whomsoever they think worthy. hooker.
give me a staff of honour for minc age ;
but not a sceptre to control the world. shaos. 77t. andron.
who shall control me for my works : . ecclus. v. 3.
i feel my virtue struggling in my soul ;
but stronger passion does its pow'r control. dryd. aurengz.
with this he did a berd of goats control, .
which by the way he met, and lily stole;
clad like country swain he pip’d and sung,
and playing drove his jolly troop along. dryden.
o, dcarest andrew, says the humble droll,
henceforth may i obey, and thou control. prior.
3. to overpower ; to confute: as, he contiolled all the evidence
of his adversary.
as for the time while he was in the tower, and the man-
5 n ints<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 484</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
ner of his brother's death, and his own escape, she knew they
were things that a very few could control. bacon's henry vil.
contro'liable. adj. [from control.] subject to control;
subject to command; subject to be over-ruled. -
passion is the drunkenness of the mind, and therefore, in
its present workings, not controllable by reason. south.
controller. n.s.. [from control.] one that has the power
of governing or restraining; a superintendent.
he does not calm his contumeiious spirit,
nor cease to be an arrogant controller. shakesp. henry vi.
the great controller of our fate,
deign'd to be man, and liv'd in low estate. dryden.
contro’llers hip. n.s.. [from controller.] the office of a
controller.
contro'lment. n.s.. [from control.]
1. the power or act of superintending or restraining.
2. the state of being restrained; restraint.
they made war and peace with one another, without con-
trolment. davies on ireland.
3. opposition; confutation.
were it reason that we should suffer the same to pass with-
out controlment, in that current meaning whereby every where
it prevaileth. hooker.
4. resistance; hostility.
here have we war for war, and blood for blood,
controlment for controlment. shakespeare's king john.
controve'rs1al. adj. [from controversy..] relating to dis-
putes; disputatious. -
it happens in controversial discourses as it does in the assault-
ing of towns, where, if the ground be but firm whereon the
batteries are erected, there is no farther enquiry whom it
belongs to, so it affords but a fit rise for the present purpose.
locke.
co'ntroversy. n.s.. [controversia, latin.]
1. dispute; debate; agitation of contrary opinions: a dispute
is commonly oral, and a controversy in writing.
how cometh it to pass that we are so rent with mutual con-
tentions, and that the church is so much troubled if men had
been willing to learn, all these controversies might have died
the very day they were first brought forth. hooker.
without controversy great is the mystery of godliness. 1 tim.
wild controversy then, which long had slept,
into the press from ruin’d cloisters leapt. denham.
this iest no room for controversy about the title, nor for en-
croachment on the right of others. locke.
2. a suit in law.
if there be a controvers between men, and they come unto
judgment, that the judges may judge them, then they shall
justify the righteous and condemn the wicked. deut. xxv. 1.
3. a quarrel.
the lord hath a controversy with the nations. jer, xxv. 31.
4. opposition; enmity. this is an unusual sense.
the torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
with lusty finews; throwing it aside,
and stemming it with hearts of controversy. shak. jul. cas:
t, controvert. v. a. [controverto, lat.] to debate; to
ventilate in opposite books; to dispute any thing in writing.
if any person shall think fit to controvert them, he may do
it very fafely for me. cheyne's phil. prin.
hooker seems to use the word controverse, if it be not an
crsaturn.
persuasion ought to be fully settled in men's hearts that in
litigations and controversed causes of such quality, the will of
god is to have them to do, whatsoever the sentence of judi-
cial and final decision shall determine. hooker.
controve'rtible. adj. [from controvert.] disputable; that
may be the cause of controversy.
discoursing of matters dubious, and many controvertible
truths, we cannot without arrogancy intreat a credulity, or
implore any farther aslent than the probability of our reasons
and verity of our experiments. brown's wulgar errours.
controve'rtist. m. s. [from controvert.] disputant; a man
versed or engaged in literary wars or disputations.
who can think himself so considerable as not to dread this
mighty man of demonstration, this prince of controvertists,
this great lord and possessor of first principles. tillotson.
contuma"cious. adj. [contumax, latin.] obstinate; per-
verse; stubborn; inflexible.
he is in law said to be a contumacious person, who, on his
appearance afterwards, departs the court without leave.
ayliffe's parergon.
there is another very efficacious method for subduing of
the most obstinate contumacious sinner, and bringing him into
the obedience of the faith of christ. hammond's fundamentals.
contumasciously... adv. [from contumacious...] obstinately;
stubbornly ; inflexibly; perversely.
contuma’cious ness. m. s. [from contumacious.] obstinacy;
perverseness; inflexibility; stubbornness.
from the description i have given of it, a judgment may be
given of the difficulty and contumaciousness of cure. joseman.
contumacy. n.s.. [from contumacia, latin.] -
1. obstinacy perverseness; stubbornness; inflexibility.
such acts
of contumacy will provoke the highest
to make death in us live. milton's paradis. loft
2. [in law.] a wilful contempt and disobedience to any laws.
summons or judicial order. 4|iffe's parergon.
these certificates do only, in the generality, mention the
party's contumacies and disobedience. ayliffe's parergon,
contume'lious. adj. [contumeliosus, latin.]
i. reproachful ; rude; sarcastick; contemptuous.
with scoffs and scorns, and contumelious taunts,
in open market-place produc’d they me
to be a publick spectacle. shakespeare's henry vi,
in all the quarrels and tumults at rome, though the people
frequently proceeded to rude contumelious language, yet no
blood was ever drawn in any popular commotions, ’till the
time of the gracchi. swift.
2. inclined to utter reproach or practise insults; brutal ; rude.
there is yet another sort of contumelious persons, who, in-
deed, are not chargeable with that circumstance of ill employ-
ing their wit; for they use none in it. gov. of the tongue.
giving our holy virgins to the stain
of contumelious, beastly, madbrain’d war. shakesp. timon.
3. productive of reproach ; shameful; ignominious.
as it is in the highest degree injurious to them, so is it conta.
melious to him. decay of piaf.
contume'liously. adv. [from contumelious.] reproachfully;
contemptuously; rudely. 2.
the people are not wont to take so great offence, when they
are excluded from honours and offices, as when their person,
are contumeliously trodden upon. hooker.
fie, lords; that you, being supreme magistrates,
thus contumeliously should break the peace. shakesp. h. vi.
colourses. n-s [from contumelious.] rudeness; re-
proach.
contumely., n.s.. [contumelia, latin.] rudeness; con.
temptuousness ; bitterness of language; reproach.
if the helm of chief government be in the hands of a few
of the wealthiest, then laws, providing for continuance there-
of, must make the punishment of contumely and wrong, offered
unto any of the common sort, sharp and grievous, that so the
cvil may be prevented. hooker.
th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
the pang of despis'd love, the law's delay. shakes. hamlet.
it was undervalued and depressed with some bitterness and
contumey. clarendon.
why should any man be troubled at the contumelies of those
whose judgment deserves not to be valued 2 tillotson.
eternal contumely attend that guilty title which claims ex-
emption from thought, and arrogates to its wearers the pre-
rogative of brutes. addison's guardian,
to contu'se. v. a. [contusus, latin.]
1. to beat together; to bruise.
of their roots, barks, and seeds, contused together, and min-
gled with other earth, and well watered with warm water,
there came forth herbs much like the other. bacon.
2. to bruise the flesh without a breach of the continuity.
the ligature contuses the lips in cutting them, so that they
require to be digested before they can unite. joseman.
contu'sion. n.s.. [from contuso.]
1. the act of beating or bruising.
2. the state of being beaten or bruised.
take a piece of glass, and reduce it to powder, it acquiring
by contusion a multitude of minute surfaces, from a diaphanous,
degenerates into a white body. boyle on colours.
3. a bruise ; a compression of the fibres, distinguished from a
wound.
that winter lion, who in rage forgets
aged contusions, and all bruise of time. shakesp. henry vi.
the bones, in sharp colds, wax brittle; and all contusins, in
hard weather, are more difficult to cure. bacon.
$...} n. s. [from convalesco, latin.] renewal
convale'scency. 5 of health; recovery from a disease.
being in a place out of the reach of any alarm, she reco-
vered her spirits to a reasonable convalescence. clarendon.
convalescent, adj. [convalesceni, latin.] recovering;
returning to a state of health.
con v b'nable. adj. [convenable, french.]
1. consistent with ; agreeable to ; accordant to. not now
in use.
he is so meek, wise, and merciable,
and with his word his work is convenable. spenser's pass.
2. that may be convened.
to convene. v. n. [convenia, latin.]
1. to come together; to associate; to unite.
the fire separates the aqueous parts from the others where-
with they were blended in the concrete, and brings them into
the receiver, where they convene into a liquor. boyle.
in short-fighted men, whose eyes are too plump, the re-
fraction being too great, the rays converge and convene in the
eyes, before they come at the bottom. newton's opticks.
2. te
y
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 485</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
2. to assemble for any publick purpose. &gt; -
there are settled periods of their convening, or a liberty
left to the prince for convoking the legislature. looe.
t2 con v esne. v. a.
1. to call together; to assemble ; to convoke. -
o no man was better pleased with the convening of this par-
liament than myself. king charles.
all the factious and schismatical people would frequently,
as well in the night as the day, convene themselves by the
found of a bell. clarendon.
- and now th’ almighty father of the gods
s convenes a council in the blest abodes.
h 2. to summon judicially. - - - -
| by the papal canon law, clerks, in criminal and civil causes,
cannot be convened before any but an ecclesiastical judge. ayliffe.
conve"nience.
conve"niency. a
. fitness; propriety. -
i *:::::...". &amp;hen a thing or action is so fitted to the
circumstances, and the circumstances to it, that thereby it
becomes a thing convenient. perkins.
in things not commanded of god, yet lawful, because per-
mitted, the question is, what light shall shew us the conve-
niency which one hath above another. ph:oker.
2. commodiousness; ease; freedom from difficulties.
a man putting all his pleasures into one, is like a traveller’s
putting all his goods into one jewel: the value is the same,
and the convenience greater. south's sermons.
every man must want something for the conveniency of his
life, for which he must be obliged to others. calamy's serm.
there is another convenience in this method, during your
. waiting. swift's direaiions to the footman.
s 3. cause of ease; accommodation.
if it have not such a convenience, voyages must be very
uncomfortable. wilkins's math. magic.
; : a man alters his mind as the work proceeds, and will have
this or that convenience more, of which he had not thought
*- when he began. dryden's fables, preface.
-- there was a pair of spectacles, a pocket perspective, and
several other little conveniencies, i did not think myself bound
o: in honour to discover. swift's gulliver's travels.
o . 4. fitness of time or place. -
use no farther means;
but with all brief and plain conveniency, -
- let me have judgment. shakesp. merchant of venice.
conve/nient. adj. [conveniens, latin.]
r. fit; suitable; proper; well adapted; commodious.
the least and most trivial episodes, or under actions, are
either necessary or convenient; either so necessary that without
them the poem must be imperfeot, or so convenient that no
others can be imagined more suitable to the place in which
they are. dryd. dedication to the aneid.
health itself is but a kind of temper, gotten and preserved
by a convenient mixture of contrarieties. - arbuth. on aliments.
2. it has either to or for before the following noun: perhaps it
ought generally to have for before persons, and to before
hings. -
t give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food con-
venient for me. prov. xxx. 8.
there are some arts that are peculiarly convenient to some
particular nations. tillotson,
conve"niently. adv. [from convenient.]
1. commodiously; without difficulty.
- i this morning know
where we shall find him most conveniently. shakesp. hamlet.
2: fitly; with proper adaptation of part to part, or of the
whole to the effect proposed.
it would be worth the experiment to inquire, whether or
no a sailing chariot might be more conveniently framed with
moveable sails, whose force may be impressed from their mo-
tion, equivalent to those in a wind-mill. jwilkins.
convent. n. s. [conventus, latin.]
1. an assembly of religious persons; a body of monks or nuns.
he came to leicester;
lodg’d in the abbey, where the reverend abbot,
with all his convent, honourably receiv'd him. shakesp.
2. a religious house; an abbey; a monastery; a nunnery.
one seldom finds in italy a spot of ground more agreeable
.. than ordinary, that is not covered with a convent. addi 0/?.
to conve'n't. v. a. [convenio, latin.] to call before a judge
or judicature.
o he with his oath
by all probation will make up full clear,
whenever he's convented. shakesp. measure for measure.
they sent forth their precepts to attach men, and convent
them before themselves at private houses. bacon's henry vii.
*** conve"nt1cle. n.s.. [conventiculum, latin.]
: 1. an assembly; a meeting. -
- they are commanded to abstain from all conventicles of men
whatsoever; even out of the church, to have nothing to do
with publick business, ayliff's parergon.
pope's statius.
! n. s. [convenientia, latin.]
2. an assembly for worship. generally used in an ill sense,
including heresy or schism.
it behoveth, that the place where god shall be served by the
whole church be a publick place, for the avoiding of privy
*venticles, which, covered with pretence of religion, may
serve unto dangerous practices. hocker.
who far from steeples and their sacred sound
in fields their fullen conventice, found. dryden.
a sort of men, who are content to be stiled of the church
of england, who perhaps attend its service in the morning,
and go with their wives to a conventick in the afternoon. swift.
3. a secret assembly; an assembly where conspiracies are
formed. -
ay, all of you have laid your heads together,
(myself had notice of your conventicles)
andall to make away my guiltless life. shakoff. henry vi.
4. an assembly in contempt.
if he revoked this plea too, 'twas because he found the ex-
pected council was dwindling into a conventicle, a pack’d as-
sembly of italian bishops; not a free convention of fathers
from all quarters. - atterbury.
conventicler. m. s. [from conventicle.] one that supports
or frequents private and unlawful assemblies.
another crop is too like to follow ; nay, i fear, it is un-
avoidable, if the conventiclers be permitted still to scatter. dryd.
conye’ntion. n.s.. [conventio, latin.]
1. the act of coming together; union; coalition; junetion.
they are to be reckoned amongst the most general affec-
tions of the conventions, or associations of several particles of
matter into bodies of any certain denomination. boyle.
2. an assembly.
publick conventions are liable to all the infirmitics, fossies,
and vices of private men. swift.
3. a contract; an agreement for a time, previous to a definitive
treaty. -
conve stion al. adj. [from convention.] stipulated; agreed
on by compact.
conventional services reserved by tenures upon grants, made
out of the crown or knights service. hale's com. law.
conve'ntion ary. adj. ifrom convention.] acting upon con-
tract ; settled by stipulations.
the ordinary covenants of most conventionary tenants are,
to pay due capon and due harvest journeys. carew', survey.
con ve'ntual, adj. [conventuel, french..] belonging to a con-
vent; monastick.
those are called conventual priors that have the chief ruling
power over a monastery. ayliffe's parergon.
cosve'n'tual. n. s. [from convent.] a monk; a nun; one
that lives in a convent.
i have read a sermon of a conventual, who laid it down, that
adam could not laugh before the fall. addison's spectator.
to converge. v. n. [convergo, latin.] to tend to one
point from different places.
where the rays from all the points of any object meet
again, after they have been made to converge by reflexion or
refraction, there they will make a picture of the object upon
a white body. newton's opt.
ensweeping first
the lower skies, they all at once converge
high to the crown of heaven. thomson's autumn.
con we'r gent. { adj. [from converge.] tending to one point
conve'r ging. s from different parts.
conve'rging series. see series.
conve'rsable. adj. [from converse. it is sometimes written
conversible, but improperly; conversant, conversation, conversable.]
qualified for conversation; fit for company; well adapted to
the reciprocal communication of thoughts; communicative.
that fire and levity which makes the young scarce conver-
fible, when tempered by years, makes a gay old age. addis.
conye'rsableness. n.f. [from conversable.] the quality of
being a pleasing companion; fluency of talk.
conve'rsably. adv. [from conversible.] in a conversable
manner; with the qualitics of a pleasing communicative com-
panion.
conve’rs ant. adj. [conversant, french.j
1. acquainted with ; having a knowledge of any thing acquired
by familiarity and habitude; familiar: with in.
the learning and skill which he had by being conversant in
their books. hocker.
let them make some towns near to the mountain's side,
where they may dwell together with neighbours, and be con-
versant in the view of the world. spenser's state of ireland.
those who are conversant in both the tongues, 1 leave to
make their own judgment of it. dryden's dufreshoy.
he uses the different dialects as one who had been conver-
fant with them all. pope's essay on howler.
2. having intercourse with any; acquainted; familiar by coha-
bitation or fellowship; cohabiting : with among or with.
all that moses commanded, joshua read before all the con-
gregation of israel, with the women, and the little ones, and
the strangers that were conversant among them, jos, * 35.
cw cr
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 486</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
never to be info@ed with delight, - -
nor conversant with ease and idleness. shakesp. king john.
old men who have loved young company, and been con-
versant continually with them, have been of long life. bacon.
gabriel, this day by proof thou shalt behold,
thou, and all angels conversant on earth
j/ith man, or men's affairs, how i begin
to verify that solemn message. milton's par. regained.
to such a one, an ordinary coffeehouse gleaner of the city
is an arrant statesman, and as much superiour too, as a man
conversant about whitehall and the court is to an ordinary
shopkeeper. locke.
3. relating to; having for its object; concerning: with about,
formerly in.
the matters wherein church polity is conversant, are the
publick religious duties of the church. . hooker.
if any think education, because it is conversant about chil-
dren, to be but a private and domestick duty, he has been
ignorantly bred himself. //otton on education.
discretion, confidered both as an accomplishment and as a
virtue, not only as is conversant about worldly affairs, but as
regarding our whole existence.
indifference cannot but be criminal, when it is conversant
about objecis which are so far from being of an indifferent na-
ture, that they are of the highest importance to ourselves and
our country. addison's freeholder.
cos v ers a'rion. n.s.. [conversatio, latin.]
1. familiar discourse ; chat; easy talk: opposed to a formal
conference.
she went to pamela's chamber, meaning to joy her thoughts
with the sweet conversation of her sister. sidney.
what i mentioned some time ago in conversation, was not
a new thought, just then started by accident or occasion. swift.
2. a particular act of discoursing upon any subject ; as, we had
a long conversation on that question.
3. commerce; intercourse ; familiarity.
the knowledge of men and manners, the freedom of habi-
tudes, and conversation with the best company. drydon.
his apparent, open guilt;
i mean his conversation with shore's wife. shakos. rich, iii.
4. behaviour; manner of acting in common life.
having your conversation honest among the gentiles. 1 p. t.
5. practical habits; knowledge by long acquaintance.
i set down, out of long experience in business and much
conversation in books, what i thought pertinent to this bu-
finess. bacon.
by experience and conversation with these bodies, a man
may be enabled to give a near conjecture at the metallic in-
gredients of any mass. 17%adward.
con v ersat iv e. adj. [from converse.] relating to publick
life, and commerce with men; not contemplative.
finding him little studious and contemplative, she chose to
endue him with conversative qualities of youth. ls atton.
t, converse. v. n. [converser, fr. conversor, latin.]
1. to cohabit with 3 to hold intercourse with ; to be a com-
panion to : followed by with.
by approving the sentiments of a person with whom he
conversed, in such particulars as were just, he won him over
from those points in which he was mistaken. asas. freehold.r.
for him who lonely loves
to seek the distant hills, and there convers:
!!"ith nature. of horson's summer.
2. to be acquainted with ; to be familiar to agtion.
i will converse with iron-witted fools,
and unrespective boys: none are for me,
that look into me with considerate eyes. shakes. rih. iii.
men then come to be furnished with fewer or more simple
ideas from without, according as the objects they converse
with afford greater or less variety. locke.
3. to convey the thoughts reciprocally in talk.
go therefore half this day, as fiend with friend,
converse with adam. a filton's paradise los!.
much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl,
so well converse, a sistan’s paradis: losł.
4. to discourse familiarly upon any subject: with on before the
thing.
we had conversed so often on that subject, and he had com-
municated his thoughts of it so fully to me, that i had not
the least remaining disficulty. dryden's dufros.oy.
5. to have commerce with a different sex.
being asked by some of her sex, in how long a time a wo-
man might be allowed to pray to the gods, after having con-
versed with a man : if it were a husband, says she, the next
day; if a stranger, never. guardian.
con v frse. n, s, [from the verb. it is sometimes accented on
the first syllable, scimetimes on the last. pope has used both :
the first is more analegical.] -
1. conversatien; manner of discoursing in familiar life. :
his converse is a system fit,
alone to fill up all her wit. - swift.
gen'rous converse; a soul exempt from pride,
and love to praise with reason on his side. pope.
addison's speciator.
cosy ertiei lit y. m. s. [from convertible.] the quality of
convertible, adj. [from convert.] -
2. so much alike as that one may be used for the other.
form'd by thy convers, happily to steer
from grave to gay, from lively to severe, po:
2. acquaintance ; cohabitation; familiarity. -i.
though it be necessitated, by its relation to flesh, to a ter-
restrial converse; yet it is like the sun, without contaminatin |
its beams. glanvillo, a.
by such a free converse with persons of different seas, w
shall find that there are persons of good sense and virtue, per-
sons of piety and worth. hatt, on the mio
3. [in geometry; from conversus.] a proposition is said to t
the converse of another, when, after drawing a conclusion from
something first proposed, we proceed to suppose what had been
before concluded, and to draw from it what had been sp- |
posed. thus, if two sides of a triangle be equal, the j
opposite to those sides are also equal: the corse of the o:
position is, that if two angles of a triangle be equal, the .
opposite to those angles are also equal. chambri,
con ve rs el y. adv. [from converse. j with change of order;
in a contrary order; reciprocally. . . . y
cos y esks to n. m. s. [conversio, latin.] .
1. change from one state into another; transmutation.
artificial conversion of water into ice, is the work of a few
hours; and this of air may be tried by a month's space. buon.
there are no such natural gradations, and convoy, of .
metal and mineral into another, in the earth, as many hast
fancied. - woodward's natural hjor,
the conversion of the aliment into fat, is not properly nu.
trition. - 4 bathhot on aimont,
2. change from reprobation to grace, from a bad to a holy list,
3. change from one religion to another. -
they passed through phenice and samaria, declaring the
conversion of the gentises. ael, xv, 4.
4. the interchange of terms in an argument; as, no virtuo;
of de : 770 u1&amp; 13 u17 tue. -- - chamberi,
5. cos v ersion of equations, in algebra, is the reducing of a
fractional equation into an integral one.
cosy rosly e. adj. [from converse.] conversable; sociable.
‘i o convert. v. a. [conver £2, latin.]
1. to change into another substance; to transmute.
if the whole atmosphere was converted into water, it would
make no more than eleven yards water about the earth. burnet,
2. to change from one religion to another.
augustine is converted by st. ambrose's sermon, when he
came to it on no such design. hammond,
3. to turn from a bad to a good life.
he which converteth the finner from the errour of his way,
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude offins,
d. v. 20.
then will i teach transgressors thy ways, and finners shill
be converted unto thee. if, ii. 13.
4. to turn towards any point.
crystal will calify into eleetricity, and convert the needle
freely placed. brown's /ugar errouri,
5. to apply to any use ; to appropriate.
the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the
forces of the gentiles shall come unto thee. !s, lx. 5.
he acquitted himself not like an honest man; for he on-
verted the prizes to his own use. arbuthnot on clini,
6. to change one proposition into another, so that what was
the subject of the first becomes the predicate of the second,
the papists cannot abide this proposition converted: all sin
is a transgression of the law; but every transgression of the
law is sin. the apostle therefore turns it for us: all un-
righteousness, says he, is sin; but every transgression of the
law is unrighteousness, says austin, upon the place. hak,
to con v ert. v. n. to undergo a change; to be transmuted,
the love of wicked friends converts to fear; -
that fear, to hate. shakespeare's richard ii.
they rub out of it a red dust which convertet into worms,
which they kill with wine. sando's trav.
co'nvert. m. s. [from the verb ] a person converted from
one opinion or one practice to another.
the jesuits did not persuade the convents to lay aside the so
of images. stillingfect's defence of disotos on kon, idol.
when platonism prevailed, the convert to christianity of
that school, interpreted holy writ according to that philo'
sophy. - lot.
let us not imagine that the first converts only of christianity
were concerned to defend their religion, roger.
con ve'rter, n. s. [from convert.j one that makes converts.
being possible to be converted.
1. susceptible of change; transmutable; capable of transmutation.
minerals are not convertible into another species, though of
the same gonus ; nor reducible into another genis. haro.
the gall is not an alcali; but it is a calescent, conceptible
and convertible into a corrosive alcaii. as of cn ailili,
though it be not the reas conce of any substance, it is
the specifick offence, to which our name b,;ongs, and is an.
vertible with it, izoc,
8 mały,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 487</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
own.
"..
-o-
o, to a
* * *
to-
o, o
oo::
nd so
i
uert to
poor:
w
t
ut's to
many, that call themselves protestants, look upon our wor-
ship to be idolatrous as well as that of the papists, and put
prelacy and popery together, as terms convertible. swift,
convertibly. adv. [from convertible.] reciprocally; with
interchange of terms.
there never was any person ungrateful, who was not also
proud ; nor, convertibly, any one proud, who was not equally
ungrateful. south's sermons.
co'nvert it e. n.s [converti, french j a convert; one con-
verted from another opinion. not in use.
since you are a gentle convertite,
my tongue shall hush again this storm of war. sh. k. john.
nor would i be a convertite so cold,
as not to tell it. donne.
convex. adj. [convexus, latin.] rising in a circular form;
opposite to concave.
it is the duty of a painter, even in this also, to imitate the
convex mirrour, and to place nothing which glares at the bor-
der of his picture. dryden's dufresnoy.
an orb or ball round its own axis whirl;
will not the motion to a distance hurl
whatever dust or sand you on it place,
and drops of water from its convex face? blackm. creation.
co’s vex. m. s. a convex body; a body swelling externally into
a circular form. -
a comet draws a long extended blaze;
from east to west burns through th' ethereal frame,
and half heav'n's convex glitters with the flame. tickel.
conve'xed. particip, adj. [from convex.] formed convex ;
protuberant in a circular form.
dolphins are straight; nor have they their spine convexed,
or more considerably embowed than either sharks, porposes,
whales, and other cetaceous animals. brown's wu gar errouns.
conv e^xedly, adv. [from convexed.] in a convex form.
they be drawn convexedly crooked in one piece; yet the
dolphin, that carrieth arion, is concavously inverted, and
hath its spine depresied. brown's vulgar errours.
con vesz.ity.. n. s. [from convex.] protuberance in a circular
form.
convex glasses supply the defe&amp;t of plumpness in the eye,
and, by increasing the refraction, make the rays converge
sooner, so as to convene distinetly at the bottom of the eye,
if the glass have a due degree of convexity. newton's opt.
if the eye were so piercing as to descry even opake and
little objects a hundred leagues off, it would do us little ser-
vice; it would be terminated by neighbouring hills and woods,
or in the largest and evenest plain, by the very convexity of the
earth. bentley.
con v e^xly. adv. [from convex j in a convex form.
almost all, both blunt and sharp, are convexly conical,
they are all along convex, not only per ambitum, but between
both ends. grew's musæum.
con vesz ness. n.s.. [from convex.] spheroidical protuberance ;
convexity.
con v exo concave. adj. having the hollow on the inside,
corresponding to the external protuberance.
these are the phenomena of thick convexo concave plates of
lass which are every where of the same thickness. newton.
to conve'y. v. a. [conveho, latin.]
1. to carry; to transport from one place to another.
let letters be given me to the governours beyond the river,
that they may convey me over 'till i come into judea. neh. ii. 7.
i will convey them by sea in floats, unto the place thou shalt
appoint me. - 1 kings, v. 9.
2. to hand from one to another.
a divine natural right could not be conveyed down, without
any plain, natural, or divine rule concerning it. locke.
3. to remove secretly.
there was one conveyed out of my house yesterday in this
basket. shakespeare's merry wives of 14/indsor.
4. to bring any thing, as an instrument of transmission; to
transmit.
since there appears not to be any ideas in the mind, before
the senses have conveyed any in, i conceive that ideas in the
understanding are coeval with sensation. locke.
5. to transfer ; to deliver to another. -
the earl of desmond, before his breaking forth into re-
bellion, conveyed secretly all his lands to feoffees in trust. spens.
adam's property or private dominion could not convey any
sovereignty or rule to his heir, who, not having a right to in-
herit all his father's possessions, could not thereby come to have
any sovereignty over his brethren. locke.
6. to impart, by means of something.
men fill one another's heads with noise and sounds, but con-
vey not thereby their thoughts. locke.
that which uses to produce the idea, though conveyed in by
the usual organ, not being taken notice of, there follows no
sensation. locke.
some single imperceptible bodies must come from them to
the eyes, and thereby convey to the brain some motion which
produces those ideas. locke.
to: give energy to our expressions, and convey our thoughts
ol. i.
in more ardent and intense phrases, than any in our own
tongue. addison's speciator.
7. to impart; to introduce.
what obscured light the heav'ns did grant,
did but convoy unto our fearful minds
a doubtful warrant of immediate death. shak. com. of err.
others convoy themselves into the mind by more senses than
one. locke.
8. to manage with privacy.
i will convey the business as i shall find means, and acquaint
you withal. shakespeare's king lear.
hugh capet also who usurp'd the crown
to fine his title with some shews of truth
convey’d himself as heir to th’ lady lengare.
conve'yance. m. s. [foom convoy.]
1. the act of removing any thing.
tell her, thou mad'st away her uncle clarence,
her uncle rivers; ay, and for her sake,
mad'st quick conveyance with her good aunt ann. sh. r. iii.
2. way for carriage or transportation.
following the river downward, there is conveyance into the
countries named in the text. raleigh's history of the is orld.
iron works ought to be confined to places, where there is
no conveyance for timber to places of vent, so as to quit the
cost of the carriage. temple.
3. the method of removing secretly from one place to another.
your husband's here at hand; bethink you of some convey-
ance: in the house you cannot hide him. shakespeare.
4. the means or instrument by which any thing is conveyed.
we powt upon the morning, are unapt
to give or to forgive; but when we’ve
stuff'd these pipes, and these conveyances of blood,
with wine and feeding, we have suppler souls. sh. corizlan.
how such a variety of motions should be regularly con-
ducted in such a wilderness of passages and distinet avenues
by mere impellents and material convoyances, i have not the
least conjecture. glan. san. dog.
5. transmission; delivery from one to another.
our author has provided for the descending and conveyance
down of adam's monarchical power, or paternal dominion,
to posterity. locke.
6. act of transferring property; grant.
doth not the act of the parent, in any lawful grant or con-
voyance, bind their heirs for ever thereunto ? spens on ireland.
7. writing by which property is transferred.
the very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box;
and must the inheritor himself have no more?' shakesp. hamlet.
this begot a suit in the chancery before the lord coventry,
who found the conveyances in law to be so firm, that in justice
he must decree the land to the earl. clarendon.
8. secret management; juggling artifice; private reinoval;
secret substitution of one thing for another.
it cometh herein to pass with men, unadvisedly fallen into
error, as with them whose state hath no ground to uphold it,
but only the help which, by subtile conveyance, they draw out
of casual events, arising from day to day, 'till at length they
be clean spent. hooker.
close conveyance, and each pracice ill
of cofinage and knavery. spenser's hubberd's 7ale.
i am this day come to survey the tower;
since henry's death, i fear, there is conveyance. sh. h. vi.
can they not juggle, and with slight
conveyance play with wrong and right. hudibras.
conveyancer., n. s. [from conveyance.] a lawyer who
draws writings by which property is transferred.
con ve"yer. m. s. [from convey j. one who carries or trans-
mits any thing from one place or person to another.
the conveyers of waters of these times content themselves
with one inch of fall in six hundred feet. brerewood on lang.
those who stand before earthly princes, in the nearest de-
gree of approach, who are the dispensers of their favours,
and convoyers of their will to others, do, on that very account,
challenge high honours to themselves. alterbury.
to convi'ct. v. a. [convinco, latin.]
1. to prove guilty; to detect in guilt.
and they which heard it, being convicfed by their own con-
science, went out one by one. jo. viii. 9.
things, that at the first shew seemed possible, by ripping
up the performance of them, have been convicted of in-
possibility. bacon's holy war.
2. to confute; to discover to be false.
although not only the reason of any head, but experience
of every hand, may well convist it, yet will it not by divers
be rejected. brown's wugar errours.
. to shew by proof or evidence.
if there be no such thing apparent upon record, they do as
if one should demand a legacy by virtue of some written testa-
ment, wherein there being no such thing specified, he
pleadeth that there it must needs be, and bringeth argu-
ments from the love which always the testator bore him, ima-
gining that these proofs will convic; a testament to have that
in it which other men can no where by reading find. hooker.
5 o con-
shakespeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 488</div><p class="text">c o n
c o n
convict. adi, [rather the participle of the verb.] convicted;
detected in guilt.
before i be convic; by course of law,
to threaten me with death is most unlawful. shak. r. iii.
by the civil law a person convici, or confessing his own
crime, cannot appeal. aysse's parergon.
convict a papist he, and i a poet. pope's epift. of hor.
co’nvict. n.s.. [from the verb.] a person cast at the bar; one
found guilty of the crime charged against him; a criminal de-
tected at his trial.
on the score of humanity, the civil law allows a certain
space of time both to the convici and to persons confessing, in
order to satisfy the judgment. ayliffe's parergon.
conyi'ction. m. s... [from convici.]
1. detection of guilt, which is, in law, either when a man is
outlawed, or appears and confesses, or else is found guilty by
the inquest. - cowel.
the third best absent is condemn'd,
convict by flight. and rebel to all law,
conviction to the serpent none belongs. milton's par. loff.
2. the act of convincing; confutation; the act of forcing
others, by argument, to allow a position.
when therefore the apostle requireth hability to convict
hereticks, can we think he judgeth it a thing unlawful, and
not rather needful, to use the principal instrument of their
conviction, the light of reason. hooker.
the manner of his conviction was designed, not as a pecu-
liar privilege to him ; but as a standing miracle, a lasting ar-
gument, for the conviclion of others, to the very end of the
world. atterbury.
3. state of being convinced.
their wisdom is only of this world, to put false colours
upon things, to call good evil, and evil good, against the con-
vicion of their own consciences, swift.
con victly e. adj. [from convic.] having the power of con-
vincing.
to conwince. v. a. [convinco, latin.]
1. to force any one to acknowledge a contested position.
that which i have all this while been endeavouring to cow-
vince men of, and to persuade them to, is no other but what
god himself doth particularly recommend to us, as proper for
o human consideration. 7 ill son.
but having shifted ev'ry form to 'scape,
convinc'd of conquest, he resum’d his shape. dryd. wirg.
history is all the light we have in many cases, and we re-
ceive from it a great part of the useful truths we have, with a
convincing evidence. locke.
2. to convict ; to prove guilty of.
to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their
ungodly deeds. jude 15.
the discovery of a truth, formerly unknown, doth rather
convince man of ignorance, than nature of errour. raleigh.
o seek not to convince me of a crime,
which i can ne'er repent, nor can you pardon. dryden.
3. to evince ; to prove ; to manifest ; to vindicate. not in
use.
your italy contains none so accomplished a courtier, to
convince the honour of my mistress. shakespeare’s cymbeline.
* this letter, instead of a confutation, only urgeth me to
prove divers passages of my sermon, which m. cheynel's part
was to convince. dr. 41aine.
4. to overpower; to surmount. this sense is now obsolete.
there are a crew of wretched souls
that stay his cure; their malady convinces
the great essay of art. shakespeare's macbeth.
knaves be such abroad,
who having, by their own importunate suit,
or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
convinc'd or suppled them, they cannot chuse
but they must blab. shakespeare's othello.
when duncan is asleep, his two chamberlains
will i, with wine and wastel, so convince,
that memory, the warder of the brain,
shall be a fume, shakes care’s macbeth.
con v i ncement. m. s. [from convince.] conviction.
if that be not convincement enough, let him weigh the other
also. - decay of piety.
con vi'nciblf. adj. [from convince.]
1, capable of conviclion.
2. capable of being evidently disproved, or detealed.
upon what uncertainties, and also convincible falsities, they
- often erected such emblems, we have delivered. brown.
"conv i'ncingly, adv. [from convince.) in such a manner as
to leave no room for doubt or dispute; so as to produce con-
f viction.
this he did so particularly and convincingly, that those of
tle parliament were in great confusion. clarendon.
the resurre&amp;ion is to convincingly attested by such persons,
with such circumstances, that they who confider and weigh
the testimony, at what distance foever they are placed, can-
not entertain any more doubt of the resurrection than the
crucifixion of jesus. zoe busy.
-
convi'ncinoness, n. s. [from convincing.] the power of
convincing.
to convi ve. v..a... [convivo, latin.] to entertain; to
feast. a word, i believe, not elsewhere used. -
first, all you peers of greece, go to my tent,
there in the full convive you. shakesp. 7 rail, and crs.
conviv al. adj. [convivialis, latin.] relating to an smo.
con v1 vial : tainment; festas; social.
i was the first who set up festivals;
not with high tastes our appetites did force,
but fill'd with conversation and discourse;
which feasts, convivial meetings we did name. dahan,
your social and convivial spirit is such that it is a happines,
to live and converse with you. dr. newton,
conu'n drum. n.s. a low jett; a quibble; a mean conceit:
a cant word.
mean time he smoaks, and laughs at merry tale,
or pun ambiguous, or conundrum quaint. philo,
to convocate. v. a [conveco, lat.] to call together,
to summon to an assembly.
con voca’t so n. m. s. [convocatio, latin.]
1. the act of calling to an assembly.
diaphantus making a general convocation, spake to them in
this manner. sidney.
2. an aslembly.
on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you.
lev. xxiii. 10.
3. an assembly of the clergy for consultation upon matters ec.
clesiastical, in time of parliament; and as the parliament con.
sists of two distinet houses, so does this; the one called the
upper house, where the archbishops and bishops fit severally
by themselves; the other the lower house, where all the res:
of the clergy are represented by their deputies. cowt',
i have made an offer to his majesty,
upon our spiritual convocation,
as touching france, to give a greater sum
than ever at one time the clergy yet
did to his predecessors part withal. shakes. henry iv.
this is the declaration of our church about it, made by
those who met in convocation. stillingfiest,
to convo ke. v. a. [convoco, latin.] to call together;
to summon to an assembly
assemblies exercise their legislature at the times that their
constitution, or their own adjournment appoints, if there be
no other way prescribed to convoke them. lott,
when next the morning warms the purple east,
convoke the peerage. pope's 0#s.
the senate originally consisted all of nobles, the people
being only convoked upon such occasions as fell into their cog-
nizance. swift,
to conv o'lve. v. a. [convolvo, latin.] to roll together;
to roll one part upon another.
he writh’d him to and fro convolv’d. milton.
it is a wonderful artifice how newly hatch'd maggots, not
the parent animal, because she emis no web, nor hath any
textrine art, can convolve the stubborn leaf, and bind it with
the thread it weaves from its body. darham,
us’d to milder scents, the tender race
by thousands tumble from their honey'd domes,
convolv’d and agonizing in the dust. thomson's autumn.
co'n voluted part. [of the verb i have found no example.]
twisted ; rolled upon itself.
this differs from muscovy-glass only in this,that the plates
of that are flat and plain, whereas these are convited and
inflected. j/oodward on fossi,
con volution. m. s. [convolutio, latin.j
1. the act of rolling any thing upon itself; the state of being
rolled upon itself.
observe the convolution of the said fibres in all other glands,
in the same or some other manner. grew'. cool,
a thousand secret, subtle pipes bestow,
from which, by num’rous convolutions wound,
wrap'd with th' attending nerve, and twisted round, blic".
2. the state of rolling together in company.
and toss'd wide round,
o'er the calm sea, in convolution swift
the feather'd eddy floats. thomson's autumn,
7% con voy. v. a. tonvoyer, fr. from conviare, low latin.)
to accompany by land or sea for the sake of defence: *, *
was convoyed by ships of war.
co'n voy. n. / [from the verb. anciently the accent was on
the last syllable; it is now on the first.j
1. one attending on the road by way of defence.
had not god set peculiar value upon his temple, he would
not have made himself his people's convoy to ecure them."
their passage to it. south's sero.
my soul grows hard, and cannot death endure,
your convoy makes the dangerous way secure.
dryan'. aro.
convoy ships accompany their merchants 'til they may p*
soute the voyage without danger. dryden's pos, lufos.
* the act of attending as a defence. such
l
o<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 489</div><p class="text">c o o
lo, o
rosso,
lot
only to
o
| tito.
: o 5:
* wisła,
o, ,
totro:
oni, so
.
joki.
took, to
illino:
to so;
to to
web, so
i, anio
e
id:
to: r
foot
such fellows will learn you by rote where services were
done; at such a breach, at such a convoy. shakesp. henry v.
swift, as a sparkle of a glancing star, -
is... from heav'n to give him safe convoy. milt. par. rog.
conveyance. not now in use.
3 *saor, as the winds give benefit,
and convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
butlet me hear from you. shakespeare.
co'nusance: n s. [conoisance, french..] cognizance; notice;
knowledge. a law term. - - -
1, convulse. v. a. [convulsus, latin.] to give an irre-
ular and involuntary motion to the parts of any body.
follows the loosen'd, aggravated roar,
enlarging, deepening, mingling, peal on peal,
crush'd horrible, convulsing heaven and earth. thomson.
conyu'lsion. m. s. [convulsio, latin.] - -
... a onvulsion is an involuntary contradion of the fibres and
muscles, whereby the body and limbs are preternaturally
distorted. - $24ing.
if my hand be put into motion by a convulsion, the indiffe-
rency of that operative faculty is taken away. locke.
2. any irregular and violent motion; tumult; commotion ;
disturbance.
all have been subject to some concussions, and fallen under
the same convulsions of state, by dissentions or invasions. temple.
convu'lsive. adj. [convulsif, french.] that which produces
involuntary motion ; that which gives twitches or spasms.
they are irregular and convulsive motions, or strugglings of
the spirits, hale's origin of mankind.
shew me the flying soul's convulsive strife,
and all the anguish of departing life. dryden's aurengzebe,
her colour chang'd, her face was not the same,
and hollow groans from her deep spirit came :
her hair stood up; convulsive rage possess'd
her trembling limbs, and heav'd her lab’ring breast. dryd.
in filence weep,
and thy convulsive sorrows inward keep. prior.
c0ny. n. s. [kanin, germ. connil or connin, fr. cuniculus,
latin.] a rabbit; an animal that burroughs in the ground.
with a short-legg'd hen,
lemons and wine for sauce; to these a cony
is not to be despair'd of, for our money. ben. johns. epig.
the husbandman suffers by hares and conys, which eat the
corn trees. martimer's husbandry.
cony-borough. m. s. a place where rabbits make their holes
in the ground.
t. co'nycatch. v. n. to catch a cony, is, in the old cant
of thieves, to cheat; to bite ; to trick.
i have matter in my head against you, and against your
tnycatching rascals. shakesp. merry wives of , ; indsor.
co'nycatcher. m. s. a thief; a cheat; a sharper; a tricking
fellow; a rascal. now obsolete.
t, coo. v. n. [from the sound.] to cry as a dove or pigeon.
the stock-dove only through the forest cools,
mournfully hoarse. thomson's summer.
cook. n. s. scoquus, latin.] one whose profession is to
dress and prepare victuals for the table.
one mistress quickly, is in the manner of his nurse, or his
dry-nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his washer, and his
wringer. shakespeare's mrry i/ives of // indsor.
the new-born babe, by nurses overlaid,
and the cook caught within the raging fire he made. dryden.
their cooks could make artificial birds and fishes, in default
of the real ones, and which exceeded them in the exquisite-
ness of the taste. - a buthnot on coins.
ow. n, s. [cook and maid.] a maid that dreies pro-
willons.
a friend was complaining to me, that his wife had turned
off one of the best cook maids in england. addison.
cook-room. n, s. [cook and room..] a room in which provi-
fions are prepared for the ship's crew. the kitchen of a ship.
the commodity of this new cook-room, the merchants hav-
ing found to be so great as that in all their ships the cook-rooms
are built in their fore-castles, contrary to that which had been
anciently used. raicigh's essays.
to cook. v. a. scoquo, latin.]
i. to prepare victuals for the table.
had either of the crimes been cooked to their palates, they
s o might have changed messes. decay of piety.
&amp; j. j. 2. to prepare for any purpose.
# o' hanging is the word, sir ; if you be ready for that, you
- are well czost. shakespeare's cymbeline.
- 90 kery. n.s. (from cook.] the art of dressing victuals.
o ome man's wit
o found th’ art of cook'ry to delight his sense:
o more bodies are consum’d and kill'd with it,
h o than with the sword, famine, or pestilence. davies.
o ev'ry one to cookery pretends. king’s cookery.
o these are the ingredients of plants before they are pre-
so so by ory. arbuthnot on aliments.
... 999l. j. [son, dutch.]
* , , , 8
*—
1. somewhat cold; approaching to cold. -
. he set his leg in a pale-full as hot as he could well endure
it, renewing it as it grew cool. temple.
2. not zealous; not ardent ; not angry; not fond ; without
passion: as, a cool friend; a cool deceiver.
cool. n.s. freedom from heat, soft and refreshing coldness.
but fee, where lucia, at her wonted hour,
amid th’ cool of yon high marble arch,
enjoys the noon day breeze.
philander was enjoying the cool of the morni
dews that la
a freshness.
to cool. v. a. [koelen, dutch.]
1. to make cool; to allay heat. -
snow they use in naples instead of ice, because, as the
say, it cool, or congeals any liquor sooner. addison on italy.
jelly of currants, or the jelly of any ripe subacid fruit, is
cooling, and very agreeable to the stomach. a buthnot on bia.
2. to quiet passion; to calm anger; to moderate ze.j.
my lord northumberland will soon be could. so, h. iv.
he will keep his jealousy to himself, and repine in private
because he will be apt to fear some ill effect it may produce in
cooling your love to him. addson's speciator.
had they thought they had been fighting only other people's
quarrels, perhaps it might have cooled their zeal. swift.
to cool. v. n. so if
i. to grow less hot.
2. to grow leis warm with regard to passion or inclination.
my humour shall not cool; i will incense ford to deal with
poison ; i will possess him with yellowness. shakespeare.
you never cool while you read homer. dryden.
i’m impatient 'till it be done; i will not give myself liberty
to think, left i should cool. congreve's old batchelor.
cool e.r. m. s. [from coal.]
1. that which has the power of cooling the body.
coolers are of two sorts; first, those which produce an im-
mediate sense of cold, which are such as have their parts in
less motion than those of the organs of feeling; and secondly,
such as, by particular viscidity, or grossness of parts, give a
greater consistence to the animal fluids than they had before,
whereby they cannot move so fast, and therefore will have
less of that intestine force on which their heat depends. the
former are fruits, all acid liquors, and common water; and
the latter are such as cucumbers, and all substances producing
viscidity. &amp;uincy. .
in dogs or cats there appeared the same necessity for a cooler
as in man. *harvey on consumptions.
acid things were used only as coolers. arbuth, on aliments.
2. a vessel in which any thing is made cool.
your first wort being thus boiled, lade off into one or more
coolers, or cool-backs, in which leave the sullage behind, and
let it run off fine. 44ortimer’s husbanary.
cool ly. adv. [from cool.]
i. without heat, or sharp cold.
she in the gelid caverns, woodbine wrought,
and fresh bedev'd with ever-spouting streams,
sits cooly calm. thomson's summer.
2. without passion.
motives that address themselves coolly to our reason, are
fittest to be employed upon reasonable creatures. atterbury.
coolness. n. s. [from coal.]
1. gentle cold; a soft or mild degree of cold.
this difference consisteth not in the heat or coons of
spirits ; for cloves, and other spices, naptha and petroleum,
have exceeding hot spirits, hotter a great deal than oil, wax,
or tallow, but not inflamed. bacon's natural history.
the toad loveth shade and coolness. bacon’s n.tural hylory.
yonder the harvest of cold months laid up,
gives a fresh coolness to the royal cup;
there ice, like crystal, firm and never lost,
tempers hot july with december's froit.
the sheep enjoy the coolness of the shade.
2. want of affection ; disinclination.
they parted with such coolness towards each other, as if
addison's cato.
- - ng, among the
yon everything about him, and that gave the air
addison on medals.
j/aller.
dryd. wirg.
they scarce hoped to meet again. clare.don.
3. freedom from passion.
coo m. m. s. secume, french.]
1. soot that gathers over an oven's mouth. philips.
2. that matter that works out of the wheels of carriages. bailey.
. it is used in scotland for the useless dust which falls from
large coals.
coo mb, or comb. m. s. [comble, fr. cumulus, lat. a heap,
skinner, j a measure of corn containing tour bushes. bailey.
coop. m. s. [kuype, dutch..]
1. a barrel; a vessel for the preservation of liquids.
2. a cage; a penn for animals; as poultry or ibeep.
gracchus was slain, the day the chickens refused to eat out
of the coop; and claudius pulcher underwent the like success,
when he contemned the tripudiary augurations. brown.
there were a great many crammed capons together in a
coop. 4. estrange.
72<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 490</div><p class="text">c o p
c o p
7. coop. v. a. [from the noun..] to shut up in a narrow
compass ; to confine; to cage; to imprison: when it is used
absolutely, it has often, perhaps always, the intensive par-
ticle up.
that pale, that white-fac'd shore,
whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides,
and coops from other lands her islanders. shakesp. k. john.
the englishmen did coop up the lord ravenstein, that he
stirred not ; and likewise held in strait siege the town. bacon.
in the taking ef a town the poor escape better than the
rich; for the one is let go, and the other is plundered and
cooped ap. l’estrange.
twice conquer’d cowards, now your shame is shown,
coop'd up a second time within your town
who dare not issue forth in open field. dryden's aeneid.
one world suffic’d not alexander's mind;
coop’d up, he seem'd in earth and seas confin'd.
coop'd in a narrow isle, observing dreams
with flattering wizards. dryden's juvenal.
the trojans, coop'd within their walls so long,
unbar their gates, and issue in a throng. dryden's afneid.
the contempt of all other knowledge, as if it were nothing
in comparison of law or physick, of astrology or chymistry,
coops the understanding up within narrow bounds, and hinders
it from looking abroad into other provinces of the intellectual
world. locke.
they are cooped in close by the laws of their countries, and
the strict guards of those whose interest it is to keep them ig-
norant. locke.
what | coop whole armies in our walls again. pope.
coope’e. n.s. [coupe, french.] a motion in dancing.
as cooper. m. s. [from coop.] one that makes coops or
barrels.
societies of artificers and tradesmen, belonging to some
towns corporate, such as weavers and coopers, by virtue of
their charters, pretend to privilege and jurisdiction. child.
cooper ag.e. n.s.. [from cooper.] the price paid for cooper's
work.
70 cooperate. v. n. [con and opera, latin.]
1. to labour jointly with another to the same end: it has with
before the agent, and to before the end.
it puzzleth and perplexeth the conceits of many, that per-
haps would otherwise cooperate with him, and makes a man
walk almost alone to his own ends. bacon.
by giving man a free will, he allows man that highest satis-
faction and privilege of cooperating to his own felicity. boyle.
2. to concur in producing the same effect.
his mercy will not forgive offenders, or his benignity co-
operate to their conversions. brown's vulgar errours.
all these causes cooperating, must, at last, weaken their
motion. cheyne's phil. prin.
the special acts and impressions by which the divine spirit
introduces this charge, and how far human liberty cooperates
with it, are subjects beyond our comprehension. rogers.
cooperation. n.s.. [from cooperate.] the act of contri-
buting or concurring to the same end.
we might work any effect without and against matter; and
this not holpen by the cooperation of angels or spirits, but only
by the unity and harmony of nature. bacon's nat. hisł.
coo'perative. adj. [from cooperate.] promoting the same
end jointly.
cooper aotor. m. s. [from cooperate.] he that, by joint en-
deavours, promotes the same end with others.
cooptation. n s. [coopto, latin j adoption; assumption.
coo'rdinate adj. [con and ordinatus, latin.] holding
the same rank; not being subordinate. thus shell fish may
be divided into two coordinate kinds, crustaceous and testa-
ceous; each of which is again divided into many species,
subordinate to the kind, but coordinate to each other.
the word analysis signifies the general and particular heads
of a discourse, with their mutual connexions, both coordinate
and subordinate, drawn out into one or more tables. watts.
coo’r dina tely. adv. [from coordinate.] in the same rank; in
the same relation; without subordination.
coordinateness. n.s.. [from coordinate.] the state of being
coordinate.
coo'rdinat to n. m. s. [from coordinate j the state of holding
the same rank; of standing in the same relation to something
higher; collateralness.
in this high court of parliament there is a rare coordination,
of power, a wholesome mixture betwixt monarchy, optimacy,
and democracy. hywel's pre-eminence of parliament.
when these petty intrigues of a play are so ill ordered, that
they have no coherence with the other, i must grant that
lysidius has reason to tax that want of due connexion; for
coordination in a play is as dangerous and unnatural as in a
itate. dryden on dramatick poesy.
coot. m. s. [maer-koet, dut. cotee, french. j a small black
water fowl, seen often in fens and marches.
a lake, the haunt
of coots, and of the fishing cormorant. dryden's fables.
cop. m. s. [kop, dut. cop, sax.] the head; the top of any
dry. juv.
thing; any thing rising to a head. as a cop, vulgarly cock of
hay; a cob-ca/le, properly cop-castle, a small castle or house on
a hill. a cab of cherrystones for cop, a pile of stones one laid
upon another ; a tuft on the head of birds.
co'pal. m. s. the mexican term for a gum.
copa rcenary. m. s. [from coparcener.] joint succession to
any inheritance.
in descent to all the daughters in coparcenary, for want of
sons, the chief house is allotted to the eldest daughter.
bale's history of common lain
copa'rcener. n.s.. [from con and so law.
cofarcentry are otherwise called parceners; and, in com.
mon law, are such as have equal portion in the inheritance of
the ancestor. cowel.
this great lordship was broken and divided, and partition
made between the five daughters: in every of these portions,
the coparceners severally exercised the same jurisdiction royal,
which the earl marshal and his sons had used, in the whole
province. davies on ireland.
coparcen.y. m. s. an equal share of coparceners.
philips's world of włord.
copa'rtner. m. s. sco and partner j one that has a share in
some common stock or affair; one equally concerned ; a
sharer; a partaker; a partner. milton has used it both with
of and in.
our faithful friends,
th' associates and copartners of our loss.
shall i to him make known
as yet my change, and give him to partake
full happiness with me or rather not;
but keep the odds of knowledge in my pow'r,
without copartner p 44ilton's parad's loft.
rather by them
i gain'd what i have gain'd, and with them dwell
copa, ther in these regions of the world. milt. par. rer.
copattner ship. m. s. [from copartner.) the state of bear.
ing an equal part, or possessing an equal share.
in case the father left only daughters, the daughters equally
succeeded to their father as in copartneship. t a hase.
copatain. adi, [from cop.] high raised'; pointed. hanner.
oh, fine villain a silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet
cloke, and a copatain hat. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
copa's v a. m. s. [it is sometimes written capivi, ovi, capa; va,
****, r*pow", cupoyba. j a gum which disłils from a tree
o brasil. it is much used in disorders of the urinary pas-
ages.
cope. n.s. [see cop j
i. any thing with which the head is covered.
2. a facerdotal cloak, or vestment worn in sacred ministration.
3. anything which is spread over the head; as the concave of
the skies; any archwork over a door.
all these things that are contained
within this goodly cope, both most and least,
their being have, and daily are increast.
over head the dismal hiss
of fiery darts in flaming volleys flew ;
and, flying, vaulted either host with fire;
so, under fiery cope, together rush'd
both battles main. milton's paradis? lest.
the scholar believes there is no man under the cope of
heaven, who is so knowing as his master. dryden.
to cope. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to cover, as with a cope.
a very large bridge, that is all made of wood, and coped
over head. addison on italy.
2. to contend with ; to oppose.
know my name is lost;
by treason's tooth bare gnawn, and canker bit;
yet i am noble as the adversary i come to cope. sh. k. lear.
3. to reward ; to give in return.
i and my friend
have, by your wisdom, been this day acquitted
of grievous penalties; in lieu whereof,
three thousand ducats, due unto the jew,
we freely cope your courteous pains withal.
to cope. v. n.
1. to contend ; to struggle; to strive. it has with before the
thing or person opposed. [in this sense it is a word of
joubtful etymology. the conjecture of junius derives it
from kooten, to buy, or some other word of the same import;
so that to cope with signifies to interchange blows, or any thing
else, with another.]
amilt, par. loft.
spenser.
shakespeare.
let our trains
march by us, that we may peruse the men
we should have cop'd withal. shakesp. hen. iv.
it is likely thou wilt undertake
a thing, like death, to chide away this shame,
that copes with death itself, to 'scape from it. shakespeare.
but eve was eve ;
this far his over match, who self deceiv'd
and rash, beforehand had no better weigh'd
the strength he was to cope with, or his own. milton.
they
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 491</div><p class="text">c o p +
:
**-
so
they persealy understood both the hares and the enemy
they were to “p” withal. l'e/irange.
y on every plain,
hood with host, dire was the din of war. philips.
their generals have not been able to cope with the troops of
athens, which i have conducted. addison's j/hig examiner.
if the mind apply itself first to easier subjects, and things
nea, a kin to what is already known: and then advance to
the more remote and knotty parts of knowledge by slow de-
grees, it will be able, in this manner, to cope with great diffi-
culties, and prevail over them with amazing and happy suc-
cess. //atts on the mind.
2. to encounter; to interchange kindness or sentiments.
thou fresh piece
of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know
the royal fool thou cop's with. shakesp. winter's tale.
thou art e'en as just a man,
as e'er my conversation coped withal.
to cope. v. a. to embrace. not in use.
1 will make him tell the tale anew ;
where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
he hatn, and is again to cope your wife. shakesp. othello.
coopes m.a.t.e. m. s. [perhaps for cutsinate, a companion in
drinking, or one that dwells under the same cope, for house.]
companion ; friend. an old word.
ne ever staid in place, ne spake to wight,
*till that the fox his copesinate he had found. hubberd's tale.
co’p 1 e.r. m. s. [from copy.]
1. one that copies ; a transcriber.
a coin is in no danger of having its characters altered by
copiers and transcribers. addison on coins.
2. one that imitates ; a plagiary; an imitator.
without invention a painter is but a copier, and a poet but
a plagiary of others. dryden's dufresnoy.
let the faint copier, on old tiber's shore,
nor mean the task, each breathing bust explore;
line after line with painful patience trace,
this roman grandeur, that athenian grace.
co'p1 ng. m. s. [from cope.]
covers the wall. -
all these were of costly stones, even from the foundation
unto the coping. 1 kings, vii. 9.
the coping, the modillions, or dentils, make a noble shew
by their graceful projections. addison's freeholder.
copious. adj. [copia, latin.]
1. plentiful; abundant; exuberant; in great quantities.
rose, as in dance the stately trees, and spread
their branches hung with copious fruit.
full measure only bounds
excess, before the all-bounteous king, who showr’d
with copious hand, rejoicing in their joy. milton.
this alcaline acrimony indicates the copious use of vinegar
and acid fruits. arbuthnot on aliments.
the tender heart is peace,
and kindly pours its copious treasures forth
in various converse. thomson's spring.
2. abounding in words or images; not barren ; not confined 3
in ot coil clie.
hail son of god, saviour of men, thy name
shall be the copious matter of my song
henceforth, and never shall my hasp thy praise
forget, nor from thy father's praise disjoin.
co'piously. adv. [from copious.]
1. plentifully; abundantly ; in great quantities.
2. at large; without brevity or conciseness; diffusely.
. these several remains have been so copiously described by
abundance of travellers, and other writers, that it is very dif-
ficult to make any new discoveries on so beaten a subject. addis.
coopious n ess. n.s.. [from copious.]
1. plenty; abundance ; great quantity; exuberance.
2. diffusion; exuberance of stile.
the roman orator endeavoured to imitate the copiousness of
homer, and the latin poet made it his business to reach the
conciseness of demosthenes.
coopist. n. s. . [from copy. j a copyer; a transcriber; an
1mitator.
co'pland. m. s. a piece of ground in which the land termi-
nates with an acute angle. dic?.
co'pped. adj. [from cop.] rising to a top or head.
it was broad in its basis, and rose copped like a sugar-loaf.
wiseman's surgery.
a galeated eschinus being copped and somewhat conic. woodw.
coppel. n.s. [this word is variously spelt; as copel, cupel,
cuple, and cuppel; but i cannot find its etymology..] an in-
strument used in chymistry in the form of a dish, made of
ashes, well washed, to cleanse them from all their salt; or of
bones thoroughly calcined. its use is to try and purify gold
and silver, which is done by mingling lead with the metal,
and exposing it in the coppel to a violent fire a long while.
the impurities of the metal will then be carried off in dross,
which is called the litharge of gold and silver. the refiners
call the coppel a test. harris.
vol. i.
shakespeare's hamlet.
tickel.
the upper tire of masonry which
milton.
milto73,
dryden.
copper. m. s. [{oper, dut. cuprum, latin.] one of the six
primitive metals.
copper is the most ductile and malleable metal, after gold
and silver. of a mixture of copper and lapis calaminaris is
formed brass; a composition of copper and tin makes bell-
metal ; and copper and brass, melted in equal quantities, pro-
duces what the french call bronze, used for figures and
statues. chambers.
copper is heavier than iron or tin; but lighter than silver,
lead, and gold. hill on fossils.
two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold. ezra, viii. 27.
co'pper. m. s. a vessel made of copper; commonly used for a
boiler larger than a moveable pot.
they boiled it in a copper to the half; then they poured it
into earthen vessels. bacon's natural history.
copper-nos e. n.s.. [copper and nose..] a red nose.
he having colour enough, and the other higher, is too
flaming a praise for a good complexion: i had as jieve helen's
golden tongue had commended troilus for a copper noso. shac.
gutta rosacea ariseth in little hard tubercles, affecting the
face all over with great itching, which, being scratched, looks
red, and rise in great welks, rendering the visage fiery; and,
makes copper-noses, as we generally express them. josman.
copper-plate. m. s. a plate on which pictures are engraven
for the neater impression: distinguished from a wooden cut.
copper-work. m. s. scopper and work.] a place where cop-
per is worked or manufactured.
this is like those wrought at copper-works. woodward.
co'pperas. n.s. [kopperoose, dut. couperouse, fr. supposed to
be found in copper mines only..] a name given to three sorts
of vitriol; the green, the bluish green, and the white, which
are produced in the mines of germany, hungary, and other
countries. but what is commonly sold here for copperas, is an
artificial vitriol, made of a kind of stones found on the sea-
shore in essex, hampshire, and so westward, ordinarily called
gold stones from their colour. they abound with iron, and
are exposed to the weather in beds above ground, and receive
the rains and dews, which in time breaks and dissolves the
stones: the liquor that runs off is pumped into boilers, in
which is first put old iron, which, in boiling, dissolves. this
faelitious copperas, in many respects, agrees with the native
green vitriol. chambers. hill.
it may be questioned, whether, in this operation, the iron
or copperas be transmuted, from the cognation of copperas with
copper, and the iron remaining after conversion. brown.
co'pper smith. m. s. [copper and smith..] one that manufac-
tures copper.
salmoneus, as the grecian tale is,
was a mad coppersmith of elis;
up at his forge by morning-peep. swift.
co'pper wor m. n.s.. [teredo, in latin.] -
1. a little worm in ships. -
2. a moth that fretteth garments. --
3. a worm breeding in one's hand. ainsworth.
co'ppery. adj. [from copper.] containing copper; made of
copper. - -
some springs of hungary, highly impregnated with vitrio-
lick salts, dissolve the body of iron, put into the spring, and .
deposite, in lieu of the irony particles carried off, coppery par-
ticles brought with the water out of the neighbouring cop-
per-mines. woodward on fossils.
co'ppice. n.s.. [coupeaux, fr. from couper, to cut or lop. it
is often written copse.] low woods cut at stated times for
fuel ; a place over-run with brushwood. - - -
a land, each side whereof was bounded both with high
timber trees, and copses of far more humble growth. sidney.
upon the edge of yonder coffice,
a stand, where you may have the faireit shoot. shakespeare:
in coppice woods, if you leave staddles too thick, they run
to bushes and briars, and have little clean underwood. bacon.
the willows and the hazel copses green,
shall now no more be seen,
fanning their joyous leaves to their soft lays. milton.
raise trees in your seminaries and nurseries, and you may
transplant them for coppice ground, walks, or hedges.
mortimer's hasandry.
the rate of coppice lands will fall upon the discovery of coal-
mines. - locke.
copple-dust. n.s. [probably for coppel, or cupel dus?..] pow-
der used in purifying metals, or the gross parts separated by
the cupel.
it may be also tried by incorporating powder of steel, or
copple-dust, by pouncing into the quicksilver. bacon.
copple-stones are lumps and fragments of stone or marble,
broke from the adjacent cliffs, rounded by being bowled and
tumbled to and again by the action of the water. hoodward.
coppled. adj. [from cop.] rising in a conick form; rising
to a point. . -
there is some difference in this shape, some being flatter
on the top, others more coppled. it’oodward on foss.
copse. n.f. [abbreviated from coppice..] short wood cut at a
certain growth for fuel; a place overgrown with short wood.
- 5 p - they<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 492</div><p class="text">c o p
c o r
5: a picture drawn from another picture.
copy-book, m. / [coy and * a book in which copies
he shire are not destitute of cos:
to east quarters of the carew's survey of cornwal.
woo (js. - • *
oaks and brambles, if the cos/e be bon d,
confounded lie, to the same ashes turn'd.
in what quarter of the copse it lay, * -
ho level could survey. dryden's fabies.
from the noun...] to preserve underwoods.
to o, | cosing wood o down, hath becn of very
evil consequence. swift's addres, fo parliament.
copula. m. s. [latin.] the word which unites the subject
and predicate of a proposition; as, books are dear. -
t the copula is the form of a proposition; it sopresents the
act of the mind, affirming or denying. hatts's logick.
7% cotulate. v. a. [copulo, latin.] to unite; to con-
join ; to link together.
if the force of custom, simple and separate, be great, the
force of custom copulate and conjoined, and collegiate, is far
greater. - bacon.
7. co'pulate. v. m. to come together as different sexes. -
not only the persons so copulating are infected, but also their
children. //sman's surgery.
copulation. n.s.. [from copulate.] the congress or embrace
of the two sexes. - -- -
sundry kinds, even of conjugal copulation, are prohibited as
unhonest. - hooker.
copulative. adj. [copulativus, latin.] a term of grammar.
copulative propositions are those which have more subjects
or predicates conneeted by affirmative or negative conjunc-
tions; as, riches and honours are temptations to pride:
caesar conquered the gauls and the britosis: neither gold nor
jewels will purchase immortality. matt's logick.
copy. m. s. scopie, fr. copia, low latin.] quod culptam facia
off copia essaribondi. sinius inclines, after his manner, to
derive it from x8762, labour; because, says he, to copy an-
other's writing is very painful and laboriosis.
i. a transcript from the archetype or original.
if virtue's self were lost, we might
from your fair mind new copies write. valler.
i have not the vanity to think my coy equal to the ori-
ginal. denham.
he slept forth, not only the £oy of god's hands, but also
the copy of his perfections, a kind of image or representation
of the deity in small, south's sermons.
the romans having sent to athens, and the greck cities
of italy, for the copies of the best laws, chose ten legislators
to put them into form. swift.
j/aller.
2. an individual book; one of many books: as, a good or fair
copy.
the very having of the books of god was a matter of no
small charge, as they could not be had otherwise than in writ-
ten copies. hooker.
3. the autograph ; the original; the archetype; that from
which anything is copied.
it was the copy of our conference ;
in bed he slept not, for my urging it;
at board he fed not, for my urging it. shak. com. of err.
let him first learn to write, after a copy, all the letters in
the vulgar alphabet. holder's element; of speech.
the first of them i have forgotten, and cannot easily re-
trieve, because the coy is at the press. dryden.
4. an instrument by which *y conveyance is made in law.
thou know'st that benguo and his fieance lives;
but in them nature's co's not eternal. shakesp. macbeth.
are written for searners to imitate.
co'py-hoi. d. n: /, scopy and *4] a tenure, for which the
*ht oath nothing to shew both. o9py of the rolls made
by the steward of his lord's court : for the steward, as he en-
rolls other things done in the lord's sourt, so he registers such
*hts as are admitted in the ** to any parcel of land or
tenement belonging to the *or ; and the transcript of this
is called the court-roll, the *py of which the tenant takes
from him, and keeps as his only evidence. this is called a
base tenure, because it holds at the will of the lord; yet not
simply, but “solding to the custom of the manor: so that if
**oy holder break not the custom of the manor, and thereby
oricit his to nure, he **ot be turned out at the lord's plea-
fure. these customs of *nors vary, in one point or other,
almost in every *: sone coy-h%li, are finable, and some
sertain : that which is
- - finable, the lord rates at what fine or
income he pleases, when the tenant is admitted into it: that
which is certain is a kind of inheritance, and called in many
places **onary; because th: “nant dying, and the hola
being old, the next of bio. paying the customary fine, as
owo shillings for an ***, or so, cannot be denied his admis-
fion. some ‘opy-holders have, by custom, the wood growing
y could not have.
*pon their own land, which by law the
o hold by the vosge in ancient demesne 3 and though they
ho! } copy, yet are they, in account, a kind of freeholder:
he commit felony, the king hath ogum, diem,
and volum, as in cas. freehold. some others hold by coin-
mon tenure, called mere copy-hold; and they committin
their land escheats to the lood of the manor.
if a customary tenant die, the widow shall have w
law calls her free bench in as his cof:-old lands.
copy-hold e.r. m. s. [from copyhold.] one that is p0
|and in copyhold.
to copy. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to transcribe; to write after in original: it has sometimes
out, a kind of pleonasm. -
he who hurts a harmless neighbour's poace,
who loves a lie, lame slander helps about,
who writes a libel, or who copies out.
2. to imitate; to propose to imitation; to end
semble.
he that borrows other men's experience, with this 3
opying it out, possesses himself of one of the greatest
tages.
set the examples, and their souls inflame,
to copy out their great forefathers same. dryd, k. 4thur
to cosy her few. nymphs aspir’d, - -
her virtues fewer swain: admir’d. swift
7%. coopy. v. n. o
1. to do any thing in imitation of something else.
some imagine, that whatsoever they find in the
master, who has acquired reputation, must of nece
cellent; and never fail, when they %), to follow the bad 3s
well as the good things. drydn's posoftly
2. it has sometimes from before the thing imitated. y”ys
when a painter copies from the life, he has no
alter features and lineaments, under pretence that
will look better. -
3. sometimes after.
several of our countrymen, and mr.
seem very often to hase copied after i
writings, and in their poems upon love. 4./o sfeiai.
70 coque’r. v. a. [from the noun...] to entertain with com-
pliments and amorous tattle; to treat with an *ppearance of
amorous tenderness.
you are coquetting a maid of honour, my lord looking on
to see how the gamesters play, and i railing at you both. swif
!ji.
70 coque“r. v. n. to act the lover, to entice by iii.
ill cints,
phyllis, who but a month ago
was marry'd to the tunbridge beau,
i saw coquitting t'other night, -
in publick, with that odio knight. swis,
co'que fry. n.s. soutterie, french.j affidation of amorous
advances; desire of attracting notice.
i was often in company with a couple of charming women,
who had all the wit ana beauty one could desire info.
companions, without a dash of o41′etry, that from time to
time gave me a great many agreeable torments,
addison's sptațir.
coquette. z. s, souette, fr. from coquart, a prattler.] a
go), airy girl; a girl who endeavours to attract notice.
the light coquettes in sylphs aloft repair,
and sport and flutter in the fields of . po.
a coquette and a tinder-box are sparkled. arbuthn, and post,
co’ra ce. a. s. scwrwgle, welsh, probably from carium, lea-
ther, lat.] a boat used in was by fishers; made by draw.
ingleather or oiled cloth upon a frame of wicker work.
coral. n s. scorallium, latin.]
1. red coral is a plant of as great hardness and stony nature,
while growing in the water, as it has after long exposure to
the air. the vulgar opinion, that coral is soft, while in the
sea, proceeds from a soft and thin coat, of a crustaceous mat-
ter, covering it while it is growing, and which is taken off
before it is packed up for use. the whole coral plant grows
to a foot or more in height, and is variously ramified. it is
thickest at the stem, and its branches grow gradually smaller.
it grows to stones, without a root, or without any way penetra-
tig them, but as it is found , grow, and take in its nou-
tishment in the manner of plants, and to produce flowers and
feeds, or at least a matter analogous to seeds, it properly be-
longs to the vegetable kingdom. hill's materia asia.
in the sea, upon the south-west of sicily, much coral is
found. it is a submarine plant: it hath no leaves: it branch-
‘th only when it is under water. it is soft, and green of co-
lour ; but being brought into the air, it becomein hard and
thining red, as we see. bacon's natural history.
"his gentleman, desirous to find the nature of cora, caused
*'''” to go down a hundred fathom into the sea, with express
"ders to take notice whether it were hard or soft in the place
where it groweth. brown's sugar errouri,
he hears the crackling sound of coral woods, -
and sees the secret four. subterranean floods. dryd. wiig,
a turret was inclos'd
within the wall, of alabaster white,
and crimson coa/, for the queen of night,
who takes in sylvan sports her chan. delight.
or where's the fense, direct or moral, -
that teeth are pearl, or lips are coral 2 *::
2. i slo
gfelony,
col.
hat the
£on.
-
* -
po, s fo ło,
**our to re.
csgn of
on.
delay of peo.
pioure of a
sity be ex-
privilege to
his picture
pylon,
drydon in particular,
* in their dramatic.
dryden, }
:
o:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 493</div><p class="text">c o r
c o r
*-
-
--&gt;
2. the piece of coral which children have about their necks,
imagined to assist them in breeding teeth.
*her infant grandame's coral next it grew ;
the bells she gingled, and the whittle blew.
coral-tr, e. */ [carall, andron, latin.] -
it is a native of america, and produces very beautiful
scarlet flowers; but never any seeds in the european gar-
dens. miller.
co’s alline. adj. [coralinus, latin.] consisting of coral ;
approaching to coral. . . . - . .
at such time as the sea is agitated, it takes up into itself ter-
restrial matter of all kinds, and in particular the coralline mat-
ter, letting it fall again, as it becomes calm. j%2dward.
co. r alline. m. s. if on the adjective.]
coralline is a sea-plant used in medicine; but much infe-
rior to the coral in hardness, sometimes greenish, sometimes
yellowish, often reddish, and frequently white. hill.
in falmouth there is a sort of sand, or rather coraline, that
lies under the owse. - a sortimer's husbandry.
too. ław. {zozogions.] resembling coral.
now that plants and ligneous bodies may indurate under
water, without approachment of air, we have experiment in
coralline, with many coraloidal concretions. brown.
the pentadrous, columnar, coralloid bodies, that are com-
posed of plates set lengthways of the body, and passing from
the surface to the axis of it. //oodward on fossils.
cor.a. n.t. n. s. [courant, french..] a lofty sprightly dance.
pope.
it is harder to dance a corant well than a jigg; so in con-
versation, even, easy, and agreeable, more than points of
wit. temple.
i would as soon believe a widow in great grief for her hus-
band, because i saw her dance a corant about his coffin. isash.
co rban. m. s. [...inp} an alms-basket; a receptacle of
charity; a gift; an alons. -
they think to satisfy all obligations to duty by their corban
of religion. king charles.
corban stands for an offering or gift made to god, or his
temple. the jews sometimes swore by corban, or the gifts
offered unto god. if a man made all his fortune corban, or
devoted it to god, he was forbidden to use it. if all that he
was to give his wife, or his father and mother, was declared
corban, he was no longer permitted to allow them necessary
fubsistence. even debtors were permitted to defraud their
creditors, by consecrating their debt to god. otir saviour
reproaches the jews, in the gospel, with these uncharitable
and irreligious vows. by this word such persons were like-
wise meant as devoted themselves to the service of god and his
temple. corban signifies also the treasury of the temple,
where the offerings, which were made in money, were de-
posited. calmet.
corbe. adj. [courbe, french..] crooked.
for siker thy head very tottie is,
so thy corbe shoulder it leans amiss. spensor's pastorals.
co rbeils. n.s. little baskets used in fortification, filled with
earth, and set upon the parapet, to shelter the men in firing
upon the besiegers. -
co'r bel. m. s. [in archite&amp;ture. j the representation of a
basket, sometimes placed on the heads of the caryatides.
co'r bel.
co'rbil. ; n.s.
1. a short piece of timber sticking out six or eight inches from
a wall, sometimes placed for strength under the semi-girders
of a platform.
2. a niche or hollow left in walls for figures or statues. chambers.
cord. n. s. scort, welsh; chorda, latin; corde, french.]
1. a rope; a string composed of several strands or twists.
she let them down by a cord through the window.jos. ii. 5.
- form'd of the finest complicated thread,
these num’rous cords are through the body spread. blackm.
2. the cords extended in setting up tents, furnish several meta-
phors in scripture. •
thine eyes shall see jerusalem a quiet habitation, a taber-
nacle that shall not be taken down; none of the stakes thereof
shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof
be broken. isaiah, xxxiii. 20.
3. a quantity of wood for fuel, supposed to be measured with a
cord ; a pile eight feet long, four high, and four broad.
cor d-maker. n.s. [cord and make..] one whose trade is to
make ropes; a ropemaker.
cor d-wood. m. s. [cord and wood.] wood piled up for fuel,
to be sold by the cord. -
to cord. v. a. [from the noun..] to bind with ropes; to
fasten with cords; to close by a bandage.
co'rdag e. n.s.. [from cord..] a quantity of cords; the ropes
of a ship.
our cordage from her store, and cables should be made,
cf any in that kind most fit for marine trade. drayton.
they fastened their ships, and rid at anchor with cables
of iron chains, having neither canvas nor cordage. raleigh.
spain furnished a fort of rush called spartum, useful for
cordage and other parts of shipping. arbuthnot on coins.
co'rded. adj. [from cord..] made of ropes. -
7 -
this night he meaneth, with a corded ladder,
to climb celestial silvia's chamber-window. shaos, arz.
cordeli'e.r. m. s. a franciscan trier; so named from the cord
which serves him for a cineture.
and who to assist but a grave cordelier.
co'rdial. m. s. [from cor, the heart, latin.]
1. a medicine that increases the force of the heart, or quickens
the circulation. -
2. any medicine that increases strength.
a cordial, properly speaking, is not always what increaseth
the force of the heart; for, by increasing that, the animal may
be weakened, as in inflammatory diseases. whatever in.
creaseth the natural or animal strength, the force of moving
the fluids and muscles, is a cordial: these are such substances
as bring the serum of the blood into the properest condition
for circulation and nutrition; as broths made of animal sub-
stances, milk, ripe fruits, and whatever is endued with a
wholesome but not pungent taste. arbuthnot on moments.
3. anything that comforts, gladdens, and exhilarates,
then with some cordials seek for to appease
the inward languor of my wounded heart,
and then my body shall have shortly ease;
but such sweet cordials pass physicians art. sonor,
cardials of pity give me new
prior.
for i too weak for purges grew. cow'ey.
your warrior offspring that upheld the crown,
the scarlet honour of your peaceful gown,
are the most pleasing objects i can find,
charms to my fight, and cardials to my mind. dryden.
co'rdial. adj.
1. reviving; invigorating; restorative.
it is a thing i make, which hath the king
five times redeem'd from death: i do not know
what is more cordial. shakespeare's cymbeline.
he only took cardial waters, in which we infused sometimes
purgatives. - //iseman's surgery.
2. sincere; hearty; proceeding from the heart; without hypo-
crisy. -
doctrines are infused among christians, which are apt to
obstruct or intercept the cordial superstructing of christian
life of renovation, where the foundation is duly laid. hammond,
he with looks of cordial love,
hung over her enamour'd.
cordiality.. n.s. (from cordial.]
i. relation to the heart.
that the antients had any such respe&amp;ts of cordality, or re-
ference unto the heart, will much be doubted. brown.
2. sincerity; freedom from hypocrisy. - -
co'rdially. adv. [from cardial.] sincerely ; heartily; with-
out hypocrisy. -
where a strong inveterate love of fin has made any doc-
trine or proposition, wholly unsuitable to the heart, no argu-
ment or demonstration, no nor miracle whatsoever, shali be
able to bring the heart cordially to close with and receive it.
- - south's sormons.
co'rdiner. m. s. scordonnier, french..] a shoemaker. it is
so used in divers statutes. -
co’rdon, m. s. [fr.] in fortification, a row of stones jutting
out before the rampart and the basis of the parapet. comber.
co'rdwain. m.s. [cordovan leather, from cordova in spain.]
spanish leather.
her straight legs most bravely were embay'd
in golden buskins of costly cordwain. fairy queen.
corpwa'1ner. m.s.. [uncertain whether from cordovan, spa-
nish leather, or from cord, of which shoes were formerly
made, and are now used in the spanish west indies. 7 revoux.]
a shoemaker. o
core. n.s. [caur, french ; cor, latin.]
1. the heart.
a/ilton.
give me that man
that is not passion's slave, and i will wear him
in my heart's core; ay, in my heart of heart.
- shakspeare's hamlet.
2. the inner part of any thing.
in the core of the square she raised a tower of a furlong
high. raleigh's history of the isorld.
dig out the cores below the surface. mortimer's husbandry.
they wasteful eat,
through buds and bark, into the blacken'd core, thomson.
3. the inner part of a fruit which contains the kernels.
it is reported that trees, watered perpetually with warm
water, will make a fruit with little or no core or stone. bacon.
4. the matter contained in a boil or fore.
launce the fore,
and cut the head ; , for, 'till the core be found,
the secret vice is fed, and gathers ground. dryd. wirgil.
5. it is used by bacon for a body or collection [from corps,
french ; pronounced core.]
he was more doubtful of the raising of forces to resist the
rebels, than of the resistance itself; for that he was in a core
of people whose affections he suspected. bacon's henry vii.
coria'ceous, adj. [coriaceus, latin.]
1. consisting of leather.
2. of<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 494</div><p class="text">c o r.
c o r.
2. of a substance resembling leather.
a stronger projectile motion of, the blood must occasion
greater secretions and loss of liquid parts, and from thence
perhaps spiffitude and cariaceous concretions, arbuthnot on alim.
coria’nder. m. s. scoriandrum, latin.] a plant.
the species are, 1. greater coriander. , 2. smaller testicu-
lated cariander. the first is cultivated for the seeds, which
are used in medicine: the second sort is seldom found. miller.
israel called the name thereof manna; and it was, like
coriander seed, white. exod. xiii. 31.
-
corinth. n.s.. [from the city of that name in greece..] a
small fruit commonly called currant.
now will the corinths, now the rasps supply
- delicious draughts. philips.
the chief riches of zant consisteth in corinths, which the
inhabitants have in great quantities. broome.
cor1'n thian order, is generally reckoned the fourth, but by
some the fifth, of the five orders of archite&amp;ture; and is the
most noble, rich, and delicate of them all. vitruvius ascribes
it to callimachus, a corinthian sculptor, who is said to have
taken the hint by passing by the tomb of a young lady, over
which a basket with some of her playthings had been placed
by her nurse, and covered with a tile; the whole having been
placed over a root of acanthus. as it sprung up, the branches
encompassed the basket; but arriving at the tile, bent down-
wards under the corners of it, forming a kind of a volute.
hence callimachus imitated the basket by the vase of his ca-
pital, the tile in the abacus, and the leaves in the volute.
villalpandus imagines the corinthian capital to have taken its
original from an order in the temple of solomon, whose leaves
were those of the palm-tree. the capital is adorned with two
rows of leaves, between which little stalks arise, of which the
sixteen volutes are formed, which support the abacus. harris.
behind these figures are large columns of the corinthian
order, adorned with fruit and flowers. dryden.
cork. n.s. scortex, lat. korck, dutch. -
hic dies, anno redeunte, f/ius
corticem astricium pice dimovebit
amphorae sumum libere instituta:
consule tullo. hor.]
1. a glandiferous tree, in all respects like the ilex, excepting the
bark, which, in the cork tree, is thick, spongy, and soft. miller.
the cork tree grows near the pyrenaean hills, and in several
parts of italy, and the north of new england. mortimer.
2. the bark of the cork tree used for stopples, or burnt into
spanish black. it is taken off without injury to the tree.
3. a piece of cork cut for the stopple of a bottle or barrel.
i pr’ythee take the cork out of thy mouth, that i may drink
thy tidings. shakespeare's as you like it.
be sure, nay very sure, thy cork be good;
then future ages shall of peggy tell, -
that nymph that brew’d and bottled ale so well. king.
, nor stop, for one bad cork, his butler's pay. pope.
co'rking-pin. m. s. a pin of the largest size.
when you put a clean pillow-case on your lady's pillow,
be sure to fasten it well with three corking-pins, that it may
not fall off in the night. swift's direc. to the chambermaid.
co'rky. adj. [from cork.] consisting of cork; resembling cork.
bind fast his corky arms. shakespeare's king lear.
co'rmorant. n.s. scormoran, fr. from corvus marinus, latin.]
1. a bird that preys upon fish. it is nearly of the bigness of a
capon, with a wry bill and broad feet, black on his body, but
greenish about his wings. he is eminently greedy and ra-
pacious.
let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
live register'd upon our brazen tombs;
when, spight of cormorant devouring time,
th’ endeavour of this present breath may buy
• that honour which shall 'bate his scythe's keen edge. shak.
those called birds of prey, as the eagle, hawk, puttock,
and cormorant. peacham on drawing.
thence up he flew, and on the tree of life
sat like a cormorant. milton's paradise loft.
not far from thence is seen a lake, the haunt.
of coots, and of the fishing cormorant. dryden's fables.
2. a glutton.
corn. m. s. [conn, sax. korn, germ. it is found in all the
teutonick dialects; as, in an old runick rhyme,
haguler kaldosłur corna.
hail is the coldest grain.]
1. the seeds which grow in ears, not in pods; such as are
made into bread.
except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it
abideth alone. john xii. 25.
the people cry you mock'd them; and, of late,
when corn was given them gratis, you repin'd. shakesp.
2. grain yet unreaped, standing in the field upon its stalk.
all the idle weeds that grow
in our sustaining corn. shakespeare's king lear.
landing his men, he burnt the corn all thereabouts, which
was now almost ripe. analles's history of the turks.
- still a murmur runs
along the soft inclining fields of corn. thomson's autumn
3. grain in the ear, yet unthreshed. -
thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock
of corn cometh in his season. job, v. 26
4. an excrescence on the feet, hard and painful; probably i.
called from its form, though by some supposed to be denom.
nated from its corneous or horny substance.
ladies, that have your feet
unplagu'd with corns, we'll have a bout with you. shais,
the man that makes his toe, jp's
what he his heart should make,
shall of a corn cry woe,
and turn his sleep to wake. shakespeare's king lear.
even in men, aches and hurts and corns do engrieve either
towards rain or towards frost. bacon's natural history.
the hardest part of the corn is usually in the middle, thrun.
ing itself in a nail; whence it has the latin appellation of
clavis. // seman's surgery,
he first that useful secret did explain, -
that pricking corns foretold the gath'ring rain. gay, pos.
it looks as there were regular accumulations and gatherings
of humours, growing perhaps in some people as corns. artun.
thus lamb, renown'd for cutting corns,
an offer'd fee from radcliff scorns. swift,
to cor n. v. a. [from the noun.] -
i. to salt; to sprinkle with salt. the word is so used, as shin-
ner observes, by the old saxons.
2. to granulate. -
corn-field. m. s. a field where corn is growing.
it was a lover and his lass,
that o'er the green corn-field did pass. shakes. as you like it.
you may soon enjoy the gallant fights of armies, encamp-
ments, and standards waving over your brother's cornfields. pope.
corn-flag. m. s. scorn and flag.] a plant.
aziller enumerates eleven species of this plant, some with
red flowers, and some with white.
corn floor. m. s. the floor where corn is stored.
thou hast loved a reward upon every corn-floor. hos. ix. 1.
corn-flow er. m. s. [from corn and flower.]
there be certain corn-flowers, which come seldom or
never in other places, unless, they be set, but only amongst
corn ; as the blue-bottle, a kind of yellow marygold, wild
poppy, and furmitory. bacon's natural history.
corn-flowers are of many sorts: some of them flower in
june and july, and others in august. the seeds should be
sown in march: they require a good soil. 44artinier.
corn:land. m. s. scorn and land..] land appropriated to the
production of grain.
pastures and meadows are of such advantage to husbandry,
that many prefer them to corn-lands. mortimer’s haslandry.
corn-master. m. s. scorn and master.] one that cultivates
corn for sale. not in use. -
i knew a nobleman in england, that had the greatest audits
of any man in my time; a great grasier, a great fheep-master,
a great timberman, a great collier, a great corn-mo/her, and a
great leadman. bacon.
corn-marigold. m. s. [from corn and marigold.] a flower.
cont. n. s. scorn and mill.] a mill to grind corn into
in cal.
save the more laborious work of beating of hemp, by
making the axle-tree of the corn-mills longer than ordinary,
and placing pins in it to raise large hammers. mortimer.
corn-pip e. n.s. [from corn and pipe.] a pipe made by slitting
the joint of a green stalk of corn.
now the shrill corn-pipes, echoing loud to arms,
to rank and file reduce the straggling swarms. tickel.
corn-rocket. n. s. . [from corn and rocket.] a plant.
corn-rose. n.s. a species of poppy.
corn-sall. ad. n.s.. [from corn and sallad.]
corn-sallad is an herb, whose top-leaves are a sallet of them-
selves. - mortimer's hussandry.
co'rn age. m. s. [from corne, fr. cornu, latin.] a tenure
which obliges the landholder to give notice of an invasion by
blowing a horn.
co'rnchandler. n.s.. [corn and chandler.] one that retails
corn.
co'rncutter. n.s.. [from corn and cut j a man whose pro-
ofession is to extirpate corns from the foot.
the nail was not loose, nor did seem to press into the flesh;
for there had been a corncutter, who had cleared it. iłoszman.
i have known a corncutter, who, with a right education,
would have been an excellent physician. speciator.
co'rnel. w lati
to so.; ... s. [cornus, latin.] -
the cornel-tree beareth the fruit commonly called the cornel
or cornelian cherry, as well from the name of the tree as the
cornelian stone, the colour whereof it somewhat represents.
the wood is very durable, and useful for wheelwork. a £rt.
take a service-tree, or a cornelian-tree, or an elder-tree,
which we know have fruits of harsh and binding juice, and
i - - set
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 495</div><p class="text">c o r
s c o r
e
-
ine or fig-tree, and see whether the grapes or
set * o o sweeter. bacon's natural hylory.
fgs wo huatress issuing from the wood,
reclining on ** torn 1 spear she flood. drydon.
m.m. time the goddess, in disdain, bestows
the mast and acor.” brutal food l and strows 2
the fruits of cornel, as they feast around. pope's odysy.
om wildings and on strawberries they fed;
cornels and brambleberries gave the rest,
and falling acorns o: out a feast.
, c’ st on e. see carn eli a n.
gis; n_s. [french..] a kind of rustick flute.
coogous. adj. [corneus, latin.] horny; of a substance
ing horn. 2
“go. corneous or horny eyes, as lobsters, and crusta-
ceous animals, are generally dimfighted. brown.
the various submarine shrubs are of a corneous or ligneous
constitution, consisting chiefly of a fibrous matter. woodward.
co’rner. n.f. [cornel, welsh ; cornier, french.] -
1. an angle; a place inclosed by two walls or lines, which
would intersect each other, if drawn beyond the point where
they meet.
2. a secret or remote place.
there's nothing i have done yet, o' my conscience,
deserves a corner. shakespeare's henry viii.
it is better to dwell in a corner of a house-top, than with a
brawling woman and in a wide house. proverbs, xxv. 24.
i am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from
him; for this thing was not done in a corner. ac's, xxvi. 26.
all the inhabitants, in every corner of the island, have been
absolutely reduced under his immediate subjection. davies.
those vices, that lurk in the secret corners of the soul. addis.
3. the extremities; the utmost limit: thus every corner is the
whole or every part. -
might i but through my prison, once a day,
behold this maid, all corners else o' th' earth
let liberty make use of. shakespeare's temps?.
i turn'd, and try’d each corner of my bed,
to find if sleep were there; but sleep was lost. dryden.
corner-stone. n.s. [corner and stone..]. the stone that unites
the two walls at the corner ; the principal stone.
see you yond’ coin oth’ capitol, yond’ cornerosione? shakoff.
a mason was fitting a cornerosione. howel's pocal forest.
corner-teeth of a horse, are the four teeth between the mid-
dling teeth and the tushes; two above and two below, on
each side of the jaw, which shoot when the horse is four years
and a half old. farrier’s dic7.
coorn erwise. adv. [corner and wise.] diagonally 5 with the
corner in front.
co. rnet. n.s. [cornette, french.] -
1. a musical instrument blown with the mouth : used anciently
in war, probably in the cavalry. - -
israel played before the lord on psalteries and on timbrels,
and on cornets. 2 sa. vi. 5.
other wind instruments require a forcible breath ; as trun-
pets, cornets, and hunters horns. bacon's natural history.
cornets and trumpets cannot reach his ear,
under an actor's nose, he's never near. dryden's juvenal.
2. a company or troop of horse; perhaps as many as had a cor-
net belonging to them. this sense is now disused.
these noblemen were appointed, with some cornets of horse
and bands of foot, to put themselves beyond the hill where
dryden's ovid.
1he rebels were encamped. bacon.
seventy great horses lay dead in the field, and one cornet
was taken. hayward.
they discerned a body of five cornets of horse very full,
standing in very good order to receive them. clar endon.
3. the officer that bears the standard of a troop.
4. cornet of a horse, is the lowest part of his pastern that runs
round the coffin, and is distinguished by the hair that joins
and covers the upper part of the hoof. farrier's pic.
5. a scarf anciently worn by doctors. dist.
6. a head-dress. dic.
7. a cornet of paper, is described by skinner to be a cap of
paper, made by retailers for small wares.
co'rnetter. n.f. [from cornet.] a blower of the cornet.
so great was the rabble of trumpetters, cornetters, and other
musicians, that even claudius himself might have heard
them. hakewill on providence.
co. rnice. m. s. [corniche, french..] the highest projection of
a wall or column.
the cornice of the palazzo farnese, which makes so beau-
tiful an effect below, when viewed more nearly, will be found
not to have its just measures. drydon's dufresnoy.
the walls were masly brass, the cornice high o
blue metals crown'd, in colours of the sky. pope's odyssey.
corn ice ring. [in gunnery..] the next ring from the muz-
zie backwards. chambers.
cj. r. nicle. n.s.. [srom cornu, latin l, a little horn;
there will be found, on either side, two black filaments,
or membranous strings, which extend unto the long and
shorter cornicle, upon protrusion. brown's pugar erraurs.
vol. i.
corsiculate, adj. [from cornu, lat.] a term in botany.
carniculate plants are such as produce many distinct and
horned pods; and corniculate flowers are such follow flowers
as have on their upper part a kind of spur, or little horn chamb.
corni'fick, adj. [from cornu and facio, latin.] productive of
horns; making horns. dic.
cornigerous, adj. [corniger, latin.] horned; having horns.
nature, in other cornigerous animals, hath placed the horns
higher, and reclining; as in bucks. brown'; wulgar errours.
cornu cop1ae, n.s. (lat..] the horn of plenty; a horn
topped with fruits and flowers in the hands of a goddess.
t2 ors. v. a. scornutus, latin.] to bestow horns; to
cuckold.
cornu‘ted. adj. [cornutus, latin.] grafted with horns;
horned ; cuckolded.
cornu'to. m. s. [from cornutus, latin.] a man horned; a
cuckold.
the peaking cornuto her husband, dwelling in a continual
larum of jealousy. shakespeare's merry jwives of so indsor.
co. rny. adj. [from cornu, horn, latin.]
i. strong or hard like horn; horny.
up stood the corny reed,
embatte!’d in her field. milton's parad's lys.
2. [from corn.] producing grain or corn.
tell me why the ant,
*midst summer's plenty, thinks of winter's want,
by constant journeys, careful to prepare
her stores; and bringing home the corny ear. prior.
3. containing corn.
they lodge in habitations not their own,
by their high crops and corny gizzards known. dryden.
co'roll ary. m. s. [corollarium, lat. f.om corolla; fini; coronat
opus ; corollair, fr.]
1. the conclusion: a corollary seems to be a conclusion, whether
following from the premises necessarily or not.
now since we have considered the malignity of this fin of
detraction, it is but a natural corollary, that we enforce our
vigilance against it. government of the tongue.
as a corollary to this preface, in which i have done justice
to others, i owe somewhat to myself. dryden's fab. prosace.
2. surplus. -
bring a corollary, * . -
rather than want. shakespeare's tempest.
coro'na. m. s. [latin.] a large flat member of the cornice,
so called because it crowns the entablature and the whole or-
der. it is called by workmen the drip. chambers.
in a cornice the gola or cymatium of the corona, the coping,
the modillions or dentelli, make a noble shew by their grace-
ful projections. spectator.
co'ronal. m. s. scorona, latin.]. a crown; a garland.
crown ye god bacchus with a coronal,
and hymen also crown with wreaths of vine. spensor.
co'ronal. adj. belonging to the top of the head.
a man of about forty-five years of age came to me, with
a round tubercle between the sagittal and coronal suture. isosom.
coron ary. adj. [coronarius, latin.]
1. relating to a crown; feated on the top of the head like a
crow il.
the basilisk of older times was a proper kind of serpent,
not above three palms long, as some account; and differenced
from other serpents by advancing his head, and some white
marks, or coronary spots upon the crown. brown.
2. it is applied in anatomy to arteries, which are fancied to en-
compass the heart in the manner of a garland.
the substance of the heart itself is most certainly made and
nourished by the blood, which is conveyed to it by the coro-
nary arteries. bentley's sermons.
coro na"rio n. m. s. [from corona, latin.]
1. the act or solemnity of crowning a king.
fortune smiling at her work therein, that a scaffold of exe-
cution should grow a scaffold of coronation. sidney.
willingly i came to denmark,
to show my duty in your coronation. shakespeare's hamlet.
a cough, fir, which i caught with ringing in the king's
affairs upon his coronation day. shakespeare's henry iv.
now empress fame had publish'd the renown
of sh 's coronation through the town. dryden's mass.
2. the pomp or assembly present at a coronation.
in pensive thought recal the fancy'd scene,
see coronations rise on ev'ry green. pope.
co'ros er. m. s. [from corona.] an officer whose duty is to
enquire, on the part of the king, how any violent death was
occasioncq ; for which purpose a jury is impannelled.
go thou and seek the coroner, and let him fit o' my uncle;
for he's in the third degree of drink; he's drownel. shop.
cosro n.e.t. m. s. [coronetta, ital. the diminutive of corona, a
crown j -
1. an inferiour crown worn by the nobility. the coronet of
a duke is adorned with strawberry leaves; that of a marquis
has leaves with pearls interposed; that of an earl raises the
pearls above the leaves; that of a viscount is surrounded with
only pearls; that of a baron has only four pearis.
5 q. in<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 496</div><p class="text">c o r
c o r
in his livery
walk'd crowns and coronets, realms and islands were
as plates dropt from his pocket. shak. ant, and cleopatra.
all the rest are countesses.
their coronets say so. shakespeare's henry viii.
nor could our nobles hope their bold attempt,
who ruin’d crowns, would coronets exempt. dryden.
peers and dukes, and all their sweeping train,
and garters, stars, and coronets appear. pope.
2. an ornamental head-dress, in poetical language.
the rest was drawn into a coronet of gold, richly set with
pearl. • sidney.
under a coronet his flowing hair, -
in curls, on either cheek play’d. milton's paradise loft.
co'rporal. m. s. [corrupted from caporal, french.] the
lowest officer of the infantry, whose office is to place and re-
move the sentinels.
the cruel corp'ral whisper'd in my ear,
five pounds, if rightly tipt, would set me clear. gay.
co'rporal of a ship. an officer that hath the charge of
setting the watches and sentries, and relieving them; who
sees that all the soldiers and sailors keep their arms neat and
clean, and teaches them how to use them. he has a mate
under him. harris.
co'rporal. adj. [corporel, fr. corpus, latin.]
1. relating to the body; belonging to the body.
to relief of lazars and weak age,
of indigent faint souls, past corporal toil,
a hundred alms-houses, right well supplied.
shakespeare’s henry v.
render to me some corporal sign about her,
more evident than this. shakespeare's cymbeline.
that god hath been otherwise seen, with corporal eyes,
exceedeth the small proportion of my understanding. raleigh.
beasts enjoy greater sensual pleasures, and feel fewer corporal
pains, and are utter strangers to all those anxious and tor-
menting thoughts, which perpetually haunt and disquiet man-
kind. atterbury.
2. material; not spiritual. in the present language, when body
is used philosophically in opposition to spirit, the word corpo-
real is used, as a corporeal being; but otherwise corporal.
corporeal is having a body; corporal relating to the body.
this distinction seems not ancient.
whither are they vanish’d 2
into the air: and what seem’d corporal
melted, as breath, into the wind. shakespeare's macbeth.
and from these corporal nutriments, perhaps,
your bodies may at last turn all to spirit. milt. par. loft.
corpora'lity. m. s. [from corporal.] the quality of being
embodied.
if this light be not spiritual, yet it approacheth nearest
unto spirituality; and if it have any corporality, then, of all
other, the most subtile and pure. raleigh's history.
co'rporally. adv. [from corporal.] bodily.
the sun is corporally conjoined with basiliscus.
co'rporate. adj. [from corpus, latin.]
1. united in a body or community; enabled to act in legal pro-
cesses as an individual.
breaking forth like a sudden tempest, he over-run all mun-
ster and connaught, defacing and utterly subverting all cor-
porate towns that were not strongly walled. spenser on ireland.
the nobles of athens being not at this time a corporate
assembly, therefore the resentment of the commons was usual-
ly turned against particular persons. swift.
2. general; united.
they answer in a joint and corporate voice,
that now they are at fall, shakespeare's timon.
co'rporate ness. n.s.. [from corporate.] the state of a body
corporate; a community. - dicf.
cor poration. n.s.. [from corpus, latin.]
a corporation is a body politick, authorized by the king's
charter to have a common seal, one head officer or more, and
members, able, by their common consent, to grant or receive,
in law, any thing within the compass of their charter: even
as one man may do by law all things, that by law he is not
forbidden; and bindeth the successors, as a single man binds
his executor or heir. to a cowel.
of angels we are not to consider only what they are, and
do, in regard of their own being ; but that also which con-
cerneth them, as they are linked into a kind of corporation
amongst themselves, and of society with men, hooker.
of this we find some foot-steps in our law, -
which doth her root from god and nature take ; . . . . .
ten thousand men she doth together draw, *
and of them all one corporation make. davies.
co'rporature. m. s. [from corpus, latin.] the state of a
being embodied. dic7.
cor po real. adj. [corporeus, latin.]
brown.
1. having a body ; not immaterial ; not spiritual. see cor-
por a l.
the swiftness of those circles attribute,
though numberless, to his omnipotence, - * *
that to corporeal substances could add
speed almost spiritual. milton's paradise left
having surveyed the image of god in the soul, we re i.
to omit those characters that god imprinted upon the boj.
as much as a spiritual substance could be pictured upon a .
portal. . . . south's sermont,
god being supposed to be a pure spirit, cannot be tho.
ject of any corporeal sense. tillotson
. the course is finish'd which thy fates decreed, -
and thou from thy corporeal prison freed. dryden's fable;
fix thy corporeal and internal eye -
qn the young gnat, or new-engender'd fly.
2. it is used by swift inaccurately for corporal.
i am not in a condition to make a true step even on aims.
bury downs; and i declare, that a corporeal false step is wors.
than a political one. swift.
corpqretty, n. s. [from corporeus, latin.] materiality; the
loy of being embodied; the state of having a body; bodi-
inels.
since philosophy affirmeth, that we are middle substances
between the soul and the body, they must admit of someo.
porcity which supposeth weight or gravity. brown.
it is the saying of divine plato, that man is nature's hori.
zon, dividing betwixt the upper hemisphere of immaterial
intellects and this lower of corporeity. glanville's scots.
the one attributed corporeity to god, and the other shape
and figure. stillingfleet.
corrorification, n.s.. [from corporiff.] the act of going
body or palpability. s.
to corpo'rify. v. a. [from corpus, lat.] to embody; to
inspissate into body. not used.
a certain spirituous substance, extracted out of it, is mis.
taken for the spirit of the world corporified. boyle,
cor ps. -
corpse. { m. s... [corps, fr. corpus, latin.]
1. a body.
* . that lewd ribauld
laid first his filthy hands on virgin cleene,
to spoil her dainty corse, so fair and sheene,
of chastity and honour virginal.
2. a body, in contempt.
though plenteous, all too little seems
to stuff this man, this vast unhide-bound corps.
he looks as man was made, with face erect,
that scorns his brittle corps, and seems asham'd
he's not all spirit. dryden's don sebastian.
3. a carcase; a dead body; a corse.
not a friend greet
my poor corps, where my bones shall be thrown.
there was the murder'd corps in covert laid,
and violent death in thousand shapes display’d. dryd. falls.
see where the corps of thy dead son approaches. addison.
the corpse was laid out upon the floor by the emperor's
command ; he then bid every one light his flambeau, and
stand about the dead body. addison's guardian,
4. the body, in opposition to the soul.
cold numbness streight bereaves
her corps of sense, and the air her soul receives.
5. a body of forces.
§:::::::::: } n. s. [corpulentia, latin.]
i. bulkiness of body; fleshiness; fulness of flesh.
to what a cumbersome unwieldiness,
and burdenous corpulence my love had grown. donne.
it is but one species of corpulency; for there may be bulk
without fat, from the great quantity of muscular flesh, the case
of robust people. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. spisfitude; grossness of matter.
the musculous flesh serves for the vibration of the tail, the
heaviness and corpulency of the water requiring a great force to
divide it. ray on the creation.
cor pulent. adj. i corpulentus, latin, j. fleshy; bulky;
having great bodily bulk.
we say it is a fleshy stile, when there is much periphrases,
and circuit of words ; and when with more than enough, it
grows fat and corpulent. ben. johnson's discoveries.
excess of nourishment is hurtful; for it maketh the child
£orpulent, and growing in breadth rather than in height. bacon.
co'rpuscle. n. s. [corpusculum, lat..] a small body; a
particle of matter; an atom ; a little fragment.
it will add much to our satisfaction, if those corpuscles can
be discovered with microscopes. newton's opt.
who knows what are the figures of the little corpuscles that
compose and distinguish different bodies 2 watts's lagick.
cor pu'scu lar. {*. [from corpusculum, lat..] relating
corpuscula rian. ; , , to bodies; comprising bodies. it is
the distinguishing epithet of that philosophy which attempts
the rational solution of all physical appearances by the aetion
of one body upon another.
as to natural philosophy i do not expe&amp;t to see any prin-
ciples proposed, more comprehensive and intelligible than the
corpuscularian or mechanical, boyle.
prior.
spensor.
milton,
shakos.
denham,
this
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 497</div><p class="text">c o r
this may be said, that the modern corpusularians talk, in
st u. ... more intelligibly than the peripateticks. bentley.
o onio or corpuscular philosophy, though perad-
eldest, as well as the best in the world, had lain
yo..., as in contempt and oblivion. bentley.
see cor r t c l e.
oacle. so -
$or. v. a. [corrado, latin.] to rub off; to wear
- o by frequent rubbing; to scrape together.
* cor rada's 19o n. s. [on and radius, lat.) a conjunaion
of rays in ont point.
the impression of colour worketh, not but by a cone of
dirca beams, or right lines, whereof the basis is in the objec,
o and the vertical point in the eye; so as there is a corradiation,
* and conjunesion of beams. - bacon : natural history.
7, correct. v. a...[corrigo corroum, latin.]
1. to punish; to chastise ; to discipline. - o -
sad accidents, and a state of affliction, is a school of virtue;
it corresis levity, and interrupts the confidence of finning. tayl.
after he has once been corre?ed for a lie, you must be sure
never after to pardon it in him. locke on education.
children being to be restrained by the parents only in vici-
ous things, a look or nod only ought to correoł them, when
they do amiss. ** - - locke on education.
2. to amend; to take away faults, in writings, life, or things.
this is a defe&amp;t in the first make of some men's minds,
which can scarce ever be correoied afterwards, either by learn-
ing of age. burnet's theory, preface.
correcting nature, from what actually she is in individuals,
to what she ought to be, and what she was created. dryden.
i writ, because it onused me ; i correołed, because it was as
pleasant to me to correc, as to write. pope's preface.
* the mind may cool, and be at leisure to attend to its
domestick concern: to consider what habit wants to be cor-
re:#ed, and what inclination to be subdued. mogers.
3. to obviate the qualitics of one ingredient by another, or by
any method of preparation: , . -
o happy mixture wherein things contrary do so qualify and
corres the one the danger of the other's excess, that neither
boldness can make us presume as long as we are kept under
or. with the sense of our own wretchedness, nor while we trust
- in the mercy of god thro' christ jesus, fear be able to ty-
f
rannize over us, płooker.
as in habitual gout or stone,
the only thing that can be done,
is to correct your drink and diet,
and keep the inward foe in quiet. prior.
in cases of acidity, water is the proper drink: its quality of
relaxing may be corrected by boiling it with some animal sub-
stances; as ivory or hartshorn. arbuthnot on aliments.
4. to remark faults. - . .
corre'ct. adj. [correcius, latin.] revised or finished with
exactness; free from faults.
what verse can do, he has perform'd in this, -
which he presumes the most correct of his. dryd. aur. prol.
always use the most correoł editions: various readings will
be only troublesome where the sense is complete. felton.
corre"ction. n. s. [from correoł, j
1. punishment; discipline; chastisement; penalty.
wilt thou, pupil like,
take thy correction milily, kiss the rod? shakesp. rich. ii.
an offensive wife,
that hath enrag’d him on to offer strokes,
as he is striking, holds his infant up,
and hangs resolv’d correction in the arm
that was uprear'd to execution. shakesp. henry iv.
we are all but children here under the great master of the
family; and he is pleased, by hopes and fears, by mercies and
corrections, to instruct us in virtue. watts.
one fault was too great lenity to her servants, to whom she
gave good counsel, but too gentle correołion. arbuthnot.
2. alteration to a better state; the act of taking away faults ;
amendment. - -
another poet, in another age, may take the same liberty
with my writings; if, at least, they live long enough to deserve
correclizn. dryden's fables, preface.
3. that which is substituted in the place of anything wrong.
corrections or improvements should be adjoined, by way of
note or commentary, in their proper places. watts,
4. reprehension; animadyersion. - - - - -
‘ihey proceed with judgment and ingenuity, establishing
their assertions not only with great solidity, but submitting
them also unto the correction of future discovery. brown.
5. abatement of noxious qualities, by the addition of something
contrary. - -
to make ambitious, wholesome, do not take
a dram of country's dulness; do not add
correaions, but as chymists purge the bad. donme.
corre"ction er. n. s. from correction.]. one that has been
in the house of correction ; a jayl-bird. this seems to be
the meaning in shakespeare. - -
i will have you soundly swinged for this, you blue-bottle
rogue | you filthy famished correctioner. sha&amp;sp. henry iv.
corrective. adj. [from correa.] having the power toaster
or obviate any bad qualities.
mulberries are pectoral, corrective of bilious alcali. a bath.
corre'crive. n. s.
1. that which has the power of altering or obviating any thing
amiss. - - -
the hair, wool, feathers, and scales, which all animals of
prey do swallow, are a seasonable and necessary corrective, to
prevent their greediness from filling themselves with too suc-
culent a food. ray on the creation.
humanly speaking, and according to the method of the
world, and the little correoves supplied by art and di cipline,
it seldom fails but an ill principle has its course, and nature
makes good its blow.
2. limitation; restriction.
there seems to be such an instance in the regiment, which
the human soul exerciseth in relation to the body, that with
. certain correctives and exceptions, may give some kind of ex-
plication or adumbration thereof. psal.'s origin of lond.
corre'ctly. adv. [from correct.] accurately; exactly; with-
out faults. . . .
there are ladies, without knowing what tenses and parti-
ciples, adverbs and prepositions are, speak as properly and as
correctly as most gentlemen who have been bred up in the or-
dinary methods of grammar schools. locke on education.
such lays as neither ebb nor flow,
correctly cold, and regularly low. pope's effy on criticism.
corre"ctness. m. s. [from correct.] accuracy; exactness;
freedom from faults.
too much labour often takes away the spirit, by adding to
the polishing; so that there remains nothing but a dull cor-
reciness, a piece without any consideratle faults, but with few
beauties. dryden's dios, esney.
the softness of the flesh, the delicacy of the shape, air
and posture, and the correcinoss of design in this statue, are
inexpressible.
late, very late, correołnos; grew our care,
when the tir’d nation breath’d from civil war. pope.
those pieces have never before been printed from the true
copies, or with any tolerable degree of correcins. swift.
corre"ctor. n.s.. [from correct.] -
i. he that amends, or alters, by punishment or animadver-
sion. - -
how many does zeal urge rather to do justice on some sons,
than to forbear all fin how many rather to be correstors than
practisers of religion. spratt's sermons.
with all his faults he sets up to be an universal reformer
and corrector of abuses, and a remover of grievances. sws?.
2. he that revises any thing to free it from faults; as the cor-
reclor of the press, that amends the errours committed in
printing.
i remember a person, who, by his style and literature,
seems to have been the correołor of a hedge press in little bri-
tain, proceeding gradually to an author. swift.
3. in medicine. -
such an ingredient in a composition, as guards against or
abates the force of another ; as the lixivial salts prevent the
grievous vellications of resinous purges, by dividing their par-
ticles, and preventing their adhesion to the intestinal mem-
branes, and as spices and carminative seeds assist the operation
of some catharticks, by diffipating wind. in making a me-
dicine, such a thing is called a corrector which destroys or di-
minishes a quality that could not otherwise be dispensed with:
thus turpentines are correctors of quicksilver, by destroying its
fluxility, and making it capable of mixture. quincy.
to co'rrelate. v. m. [from con and relatus, latin.] to
have a reciprocal relation, as father and son.
co'rrelate. n.s. one that stands in the opposite relation.
it is one thing for a father to cease to be a father, by casting
off his son; and another for him to cease to be so, by the death
of his son: in this the relation is at an end, for want of a
correlate. r - south.
corre'lative. adj. [con and relativus, latin.] having a re-
ciprocal relation, so that the existence of one in a particular
state depends upon the existence of another.
father and son, husband and wife, and such other correla-
tive terms, seem nearly to belong one to another. south.
giving is a relative action, and so requires a correlative to
answer it: giving, on one part, transfers no property, unless
there be an accepting on the other. south.
corre lativeness. n.s.. [from correlative.] the state of
being correlative.
corre'ption. n.f. [corripio, correptum, latin.] objurgation;
chiding; reprehension ; reproof.
if we must be talking of other people's faults, let it not be
to defame, but to amend them, by converting our detrastion
into admonition and fraternal correption. gov. of tongue.
to correspo'nd. v. m. [con and respondeo, latin.]
1. to suit ; to answer; to be proportionate; to be adequate to;
to be adapted to ; to fit.
the days, if one be compared with another successively
throughout the year, are found not to be equal, and will not
7 justly
south's sermons.
foot on to italy.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 498</div><p class="text">c o r
c o r.
s
jusly corres and with any artificial or mechanical equal mea-
sures of time. holder on 7 ime.
words being but empty sounds, any farther than they are
signs of our ideas, we cannot but asient to them, as they cor-
respond to those ideas we have, but no farther than that. locke.
2. to keep up commerce with another by alternate letters.
~ ‘n den ce.
s. } m. s. [from correspond.] -
1. relation; reciprocal adaptation of one thing to another.
between the law of their heavenly operations, and the ac-
tions of men in this our state of mortality, such correspondence
there is as maketh it expedient to know in some sort the one,
for the others more perfect direction. hooker.
whatever we fancy, things keep their course; and their
habitudes, correspondencies, and relations keep the same to one
another. locke.
2. intercourse ; reciprocal intcligence.
i had discovered those unlawful correspondencies they had.
used, and engagements they had made to embroil my king-
doms. king charles.
sure the villains hold a correspondence
with the enemy, and thus they would betray us. denham.
it happens very oddly, that the pope and i should have the
same thought much about the same time: my enemies will be
apt to say, that we hold a correspondence together, and act by
concert in this matter. addison.
3. friendship ; interchange of offices or civilities.
let such military persons be assured, and well reputed of,
rather than factious and popular ; holding also good correspon-
dorce with the other great men in the state. at 077.
cor r espo'nd ent. adj. [from correspond..] suitable; adapted ;
agreeable; answerable.
what good or evii is there under the sun, what action cor-
respondent or repugnant unto the law which god hath im-
posed upon his creatures, but in or upon it god doth work,
according to the law which himself hath eternally purposed to
keep. hocker.
and as five zones th’ etherial regions bind,
five correspondent are to earth assign'd. dryden's ovid.
correspo'nd ent. n.s. one with whom intelligence or com-
merce is kept up by mutual messages or letters.
he was pleased to command me to send to him, and receive
from him all his letters from and to all his corresfondents at
home and abroad. denham's dedication.
cor r espoons 1 v e. adj. [from correspond..] answerable; adapted
to any thing. -
priam's fix gates i' th' city, with masy staples,
and corresponsive and fulfilling bolts, -
sperre up the sons of troy. shakesp. troilus and croffda.
co'rkidor. m. s. [french.] o
1. [in fortification.] the covert way lying round the whole
compass of the fortifications of a place.
2. [in archite&amp;ture.] a gallery or long isle round about a build-
ing, leading to several chambers at a distance from each
other. - harris.
there is something very noble in the amphitheatre, though
the high wall and corridors that went round it are almost in .
tirely ruined. zadison on italy.
ccrr is g.i.e.l.e. adj. [from carrigo, latin.]
1. that which may be altered or amended.
2. he who is a proper object of punishment; punishable.
he was taken up very short, and adjudged corrigible for such
presumptuous language. , howel's wocal forst.
3. corlective; having the power to correct. not proper, nor
used.
our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are gar-
deners; so that, if we will either have it steril with idleness,
or manured with industry, the power and corrigible authority
of this lies in our will. shakespeare's othello.
corriv al. m. s. [con and ival.] rival ; competitor.
they had governours commonly out of the two families of
the geraldines and butlers, both adversaries and carrivals one
against the other. spenser on ireland.
he that doth redeem her thence, might wear
without corrival all her dignities. shakesp. henry iv.
cor ri'v alry. m. s. [from corrival.] competition ; oppo-
sition.
co r rose or ant. adj. [from corroborate.] having the power
to give strength.
there be divers sorts of bracelets fit to comfort the spirits,
and they be of three intentions, refrigerant, corroborant, and
aperient, bacon's natural hyoy.
7% corro'borate. v. a. [con and roboro, latin.]
1. to confirm ; to establish.
machiavel well noteth, though in an ill-favoured instance,
there is no trusting to the force of nature, nor to the bra-
very of words, except it be corroborate by custom. bacon.
2. to strengthen ; to make strong.
to fortify imagination there be three ways; the authority
whence the belief is derived, means to quicken and corroborate
the imagination, and means to repeat it and refresh it. bacon,
it was said that the prince himself had, by the fight of so-
reign courts, and observations on the different natures of
people, and rules of government, much excited and awaked
his spirits, and corroborated his judginent. wotton
as any limb well and duly exercised grows stronger i.
nerves of the body are corroborated thereby. io,
cor robo ration. m. s. [ from corroborite. j the ad of
strengthening of confirming; confirmation by some additional
security; addition of strength.
. the lady herself procured a bull, for the better corror.
tion of the marriage. bacon's henry wii
corrobor ative. adj. [from corroborate.] having the flows:
of increasing strength.
in the cure of an ulcer, with a moist intemperies, as the
heart is weakened by too much humidity, you are to mix tor-
roboratives of an astringent faculty; and the ulcer also requireth
to be dried. l/isman’s surg
to corrote. v. a. scorrod, latin.] to cat away i.
grees, as a menstruum ; to prey upon ; to consume; tower
away gradually.
statesmen purge vice with vice, and may corrod.
the bad with bad, a spider with a toad;
for so ill thrails not them, but they tame ill,
and make her do much good against her will. donne
we know that aqua-fortis corroding copper, which is i.
that gives the colour to verdigrease, is wont to reduce it to .
green blue solution. boyle on colour,
the nature of mankind, left to itself, would soon ho
fallen into dissolution, without the incessant and corroding in-
vasions of so long a time. hale's origin of mankind.
hannibal the pyrenean, past,
and steepy alps, the mounds that nature cast,
and with corroding juices, as he went, -
a passage through the living rock he rent. dryd. juvenal.
fishes, which neither chew their meat nor grind it in their
stomachs, do, by a dissolvent liquor there provided, corrode
and reduce it into a chylus. ray on the creation,
the blood turning acrimonious, corrodes the vessels, pro-
ducing almost all the diseases of the inflammatory kind. arbuth,
should jealousy its venom once diffuse,
carrosing every thought, and blasting all
love's paradise. thomson's spring.
cor ro dent, adj. [from corrode..] having the power of co.
roding or wasting any thing away.
cor ropigi li ty. m. s. [from corrodible.] the quality of being
corrosible; possibility to be consumed by a menstruum. s
cor rooibl e. adj. [from corrode..] possible to be consumed
or corr, ded.
. metals, although corrodible by waters, yet will not suffer a
liquation from the powerfullest heat communicable unto that
element. brown's /ulgar errors,
co. rrody. m. s. [from corrode, latin.] a defalcation from
an allowance or salary for some other than the original
purpose.
besides these floating burgesses of the ocean, there are cer-
tain flying citizens of the air, which prescribe for a corrady
therein. carew.
in those days even noble persons, and other meaner men,
ordered corrodies and pensions to their chaplains and servants
out of churches. ayliffe's parergon.
corro's ible, adj. [from corrode..] possible to be consumed
by a menstruum, this ought to be corrodible.
corrossibles ess. n. s. [from corrosible.] susceptibility of cor-
rosion, rather corrodibility. dido.
cor rosion. n.s. scorrod, latin.] the power of eating cr
wearing away by degrees.
corrosion is a particular species of dissolution of bodies,
either by an acid, or a saline menstruum. it is almost wholly
designed for the resolution of bodies most strongly compostcd,
as bones and metals; so that the menstruums here employed,
have a considerable moment or force. these liquors, whe-
ther acid or urinous, are nothing but salts dissolved in a little
phlegm ; therefore these being solid, and consequently con-
taining a considerable quantity of matter, do both attract one
another more, and are also more attracted by the particles of
the body to be dissolved; so when the more solid bodies are
put into saline menstruums, the attraction is stronger than in
other solutions ; and the motion, which is always proportional
to the attraction, is more violent : so that we may easily con-
ceive, when the motion is in such a manner increased, it
should drive the salts into the pores of the bodies, and open
and loosen their cohesion, though ever so firm. słuing.
a kind of poison worketh either by corrosion, or by a secret
malignity and enmity to nature. bacon’s natural history.
that corrosion and dislolution of bodies, even the most solid
and durable, which is vulgarly ascribed to the air, is caused
merely by the action of water upon them ; the air being
fo far from injuring and preying upon the bodies it environs,
that it contributes to their security and preservation. hood v.
cor rossive. adj. [from corrode, i.atin. it was anciently pro-
nounced with the accent on the first syllable, now indi-
ferently. ]
i. having the power of consuming or wearing away.
8 gold,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 499</div><p class="text">c o r
c o r
o
r
o
s
•
-
:
-. .
co, after it has been divided by corrosive, liquors into in-
vishle o, yet may presently be precipitated, so as to appear
a non its own for". grew's cosmol.
t. sacred sons of vengeance, on whose course -
corrosive famine waits, and kills the year. thomson's spring.
2. h.,ing the quality to set or vex.
is to maintenance of ceremonies be a corrosive to such as
oppugn them: undoubtedly to such as maintain them it can be
in o gest pleasure, when they behold that which they reverence
is oppugned. hooker.
cor rossive. n. j. - - -
1. that which has the quality of wasting any thing away, as
the flesh of an ulcer.
he meant his corrosves to apply,
and with strict dict tame his stubborn malady. fairy queen.
2. that which has the power of fretting, or of giving pain.
such speeches favour not of god in him that useth them,
and unto virtuously disposed minds they are grievous cor-
rosives. hooker.
away; though parting be a fretful corrosive,
it is applied to a deathful wound. shaksp. henry vi.
care is no cure, but rather corrosive,
for things that are not to be remedied. shakesp. henry vi.
cor rossi v ely. adv. [from corrosive..]
1. like a corrosive.
at first it tasted somewhat corrosively.
2. with the power of corrosion.
corrossive ness. n.s.. [from corrosive.] the quality of cor-
roding or eating away ; acrimony.
we do infuse, to what he meant for meat,
corrosveness, or intense cold or heat. donne.
saltpetre betrays upon the tongue no heat nor corrosiveness
at all, but coldness, mixt with a somewhat languid relish re-
taining to bitterness. boyle.
co’r rud ant. adj. [from corrugate.] having the power of
contracting into wrinkles.
fo co’rrugate. v. a. [corrugo, latin.] to wrinkle or
purse up ; as the skin is drawn into wrinkles by cold, or any
other cause. quincy.
the cramp cometh of contraction of sinews: it cometh
either by cold or dryness; for cold and dryness do both of them
contract and corrugate. bacon's natural history.
corruga'tion. m. s. [ from corrugate. j contraction into
wrinkles.
the pain of the solid parts is the corrugation or violent agi-
tation of fibres, when the spirits are irritated by sharp hu-
in ours. floyer on the isunours.
to corrut’t. v. a. [corrumpo, corruptus, latin.]
1. to turn from a sound to a putrescent state; to infect.
2. to deprave; to destroy integrity ; to vitiate; to bribe.
1 fear left by any means, as the serpent beguiled eve
through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from
the fimplicity that is in christ. 2 cor. xi. 3.
evil communications corrupt good manners. i cor. xv. 33.
all that have miscarried
by underhand, corrupted, foul injustice. shak. richard 111.
i have heard it said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife,
is when she's fallen out with her husband. shakesp. coriolanus.
but stay, i smell a man of middle earth;
with trial fire touch me his finger-end ;
lf he be chaste, the flame will back descend,
and turn him to no pain; but if he start, - -
it is the flesh of a corrupted heart. shak. m. j/, of windsor.
language being the conduit whereby men convey their
knowledge, he that makes an ill use of it, though he does not
corrupt the fountains of knowledge, which are in things, yet
he stops the pipes. locke.
hear the black trumpet through the world proclaim,
that not to be corrupted is the shame. ... pope.
3. to spoil; to do mischief. * - -
to corru'pt, v. n. to become putrid; to grow rotten; to
putrefy 3 to lose purity. - -
the aptness or propension of air or water to corrupt or
putrefy, no doubt, is to be found before it break forth into
manifest effects of diseases, blasting, or the like. bacon.
corru'pt. adj. [from corrupt..]
1. spoiled ; tainted; vitiated in its qualities.
coarse hoary moulded bread the foldiers thrust upon the
points of their spears, railing against ferdinand, who with
fuch corrupt and pestilent bread would feed them. anoles.
2. unsound; putrid.
- as superfluous flesh did rot,
amendment ready still at hand did wait,
to pluck it out with pincers fiery hot,
that soon in him was left no corrupt j9t. spensor.
3. vitious; tainted with wickedness; without integrity.
let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth,
but that which is good to the use of edifying. eph. iv. 29.
corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire. sospeare.
these kind of knaves i know, which in this plainness
harbour more craft, and more corrupter ends,
t. twenty silky ducking observants. shaksp. king lear.
ol. i. -
boyle on saltpetre.
. some, who have been corrupt in their morals, have yet been
infinitely solicitous to have their children piously brought up.
south's sermons.
cou'pter, n. s. [from corrupt..] he that taints or vitiates;
he that lessens purity or integrity.
away, away, corrupters of my faith ! shakespeare.
from the vanity of the greeks, the corrupters of all truth,
who, without all ground of certainty, vaunt their antiquity,
came the errour first of all. raleigh's history of the horld.
those great corrupters of christianity, and indeed of natu-
ral religion, the jesuits. addison.
corrupt in lity, n. s. [from corruptible.] possibility to be
corrupted.
corru'ptible. adj. [from corrupt.]
1. susceptible of destruction by natural decay, or without
violence.
our corruptible bodies could never live the life they shall
live, were it not that they are joined with his body,
which is incorruptible, and that his is in ours as a cause of
immortality.’ hooker."
it is a devouring corruption of the essential mixture, which
consisting chiefly of an oily moisture, is corrupt le through
dissipation. harvey on consorptions.
the several parts of which the world consists, being in
their nature corruptible, it is more than probable, that, in an
infinite duration, this frame of things would long since have
been dissolved. tillotson.
2. susceptible of external depravation; possible to be tainted or
vitiated.
corru'ptible ness. n.s.. [from corruptible.] susceptibility of
coi suption. -
corruptiely. adv. [from corruptible.] in such a manner as
to be corrupted, or vitiated.
it is too late; the life of all his blood
is touch'd corruptibly. shakspeare’s king lear.
cor r u ption. n.f. [corruptio, latin.]
1. the principle by which bodies tend to the separation of their
parts.
2. wickedness; perversion of principles; loss of integrity.
precepts of morality, besides the natural corruption of our
tempers, which makes us averse to them, are so abstracted
from ideas of sense, that they seldom get an opportunity for
descriptions and images. addison on the georgicks.
amidst corruption, luxury and rage, -
. ... still leave some ancient virtues to our age.
3. putrescence. -
the wise contriver, on his end intent,
careful this fatal errour to preveat,
and keep the waters from corruption free,
mix'd them with salt, and season'd all the sea. bacomore.
4. matter orpus in a fore.
5. the tendency to a worse state.
after my death i wish no other herald,
no other speaker of my living actions,
to keep mine honour from corruption,
but such an honest chronicler as griffith. shak. hon. viii.
6. cause, or means of depravation.
the region hath by conquest, and corruption of other lan.
guages, received new and differing names. raleigh', history.
all those four kinds of corruption are very common in their
language; for which reasons the greek tongue is become
much altered. - boerewood on languages.
7. [in law.] an infestion growing to a man attainted of iolony,
or treason, and to his issue: for as he loseth all to the prince,
or other lord of the fee, so his issue cannot be heir to him, or
to any other ancestor, of whom they might have claimed by
him; and if he were noble, or a gentleman, he and his chis.
drea are made ignoble and ungentle, in respect of the fa-
ther. t . c.tvel.
cor.ru'ptive. adj. [from corrupt..] having the quality of
tainting or vitating, -
carrying a settled habitude unto the corruptive originals. *
- - - -- prown's pulgar erroars.
it should be endued with an acid ferment, or some cor-
ruptive quality, for so specdy a dissolution of the meat and
preparation of the chyle. ray on the creation.
corrupt less. adj. [from corrupt..] insusceptible of corrup-
tion ; undecaying. * - - - - - - - - - - "…
pope.
all around
the borders, with corruptlos, myrrh are crown'd. dryden,
cor ru'ptly. adv. [from corrupt...] - -
1. with corruption ; with taint; with vice; without integrity.
o, that estates, degrees, and offices,
were not deriv'd corruptly, that clear honour
were purchas'd by the merit of the wearer. shakes care.
we have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not
kept the commandments. neh. i. 7.
2. vitiously ; improperly ; contrary to purity.
we have corrupily contracied most names, both of men
and places. - camden’s remains.
cossu or sess. m. s. [from corrupt..] the quality of corrup-
tion ; putrescence; vice.
5 r co'a&amp;sa, r.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 500</div><p class="text">c o s.
co'rsair. n.s. [french..] a pirate; one who professes to
scour the sea, and seize merchants.
corsf. m. s [corps, french.]
1. a body. not in use.
for he was strong, and of so mighty corse,
as ever wielded spear in warlike hand. spenser.
2. a dead body; a carcase : a poetical word.
that from her body, full of filthy sin,
he reft her hateful head, without remorse ;
a stream of coal-black blood forth gushed from her corso.
spenser.
set down the corse; or, by saint paul, -
i'll make a corse of him that disobeys. shakesp. richard iii.
what may this mean :
that thou, dead corse, again, in complete steel,
revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,
making night hideous
here lay him down, my friends,
full in my fight, that i may view at leisure
- the bloody corse, and count those glorious wounds. addis.
co'rsel et. n.s. scorsolet, french..] a light armour for the
forepart of the body.
some shirts of maile, some coats of plate put on,
some don’d a cuirace, some a corset bright. fairfax.
they lash, they foin, they pass, they strive to bore
their corslets, and their thinnest parts explore. dryden.
but heroes, who o'ercome or die,
have their hearts hung extremely high ;
the strings of which, in battle's heat,
against their very cors'lets beat. prior.
co'rtical. adj. [cortex, bark, lat.] barky ; belonging to
the outer part; belonging to the rind; outward.
their last extremities form a little gland, (all these little
glands together make the cortical part of the brain) termi-
nating in two little vessels. , cheyne's phil. prin.
co'rt1cated. adj. [from corticatus, latin.] resembling the
bark of a tree.
this animal is a kind of lizard, a quadruped corticated and
depilous; that is, without wool, fur, or hair. brown.
co'rt1cose. adj. [from corticosus, lat..] full of bark. die?.
cor vetto. m. s. the curvet. -
you must draw the horse in his career with his manage,
and turn, doing the corvetto and leaping. peacham on drawing.
coru.scant. adj. [corisco, latin.] glittering by flashes;
flashing.
corusca’tion. m. s. scoruscatio, latin.] flash; quick vibra-
tion of light.
we see that lightnings and corusations, which are near at
hand, yield no sound. bacon’s natural history.
we may learn that sulphureous steams abound in the bowels
of the earth, and ferment with minerals, and sometimes take
fire with a sudden cortscation and explosion. newton's opt.
how heat and moisture mingle in a mass,
or belch in thunder, or in lightning blaze;
why nimble corsations strike the eye,
and bold tornado's bluster in the sky. garth's dispensatory.
cory'mbiated. adj. [corymbus, latin. j garnished with
branches of berries. dic7.
corymbi'ferous. adj. [from corymbus and sero, lat.] bear-
ing fruit or berries in bunches.
corymbiferous plants are distinguished into such as have a
radiate flower, as the sun-flower; and such as have a naked
flower, as the hemp-agrimony, and mugwort: to which are
added those a-kin hereunto, such as scabious, teasel, thistle,
and the like. &amp;tiny.
cory mbus. m. s. [latin.]
amongst the ancient botanists it was used to express the
-bunches or clusters of berries of ivy; amongst modern bota-
nists it is used for a compounded discous flower, whose seeds
are not pappous, or do not fly away in down; such are the
flowers of daisies, and common marygold. &amp;#incy.
cosci’nomancy. n. s. [from zooxyov, a sieve, and ozvraz, divi-
nation.] the art of divination by means of a sieve. a very
ancient practice mentioned by theocritus, and still used in
some parts of england, to find out persons unknown. chambers.
cose’c ant. n.s.. [in geometry.] the secant of an arch,
which is the complement of another to ninety degrees. harris.
co's hering. m. s. [irish.]
cosherings were visitations and progresses made by the lord
and his followers among his tenants; wherein he did eat them
(as the english proverb is) out of house and home. davies.
cj's er. m. s. [from couser, old. fr. to sew.] a botcher. hanmer.
do you make an alehouse of my lady's house, that ye
squeak out your coffer catches, without any mitigation or re-
more of voice shakespeare's twelfth night.
co's ine. m. s. [in geometry.] the right fine of an arch,
which is the complement of another to ninety degrees.
a harris.
cosme"tick. adj. [xorontixos.j. having the power of im-
proving beauty : beautifying.
no better cosmeticks than a severe temperance and purity,
modcity and hulality, a gracious temper and calmness of .
shakespeare's hamlet.
spirit no true beauty without the signatures of these graces
in the very countenance. - -
first, rob’d in white, the nymph intent adores,
with head uncover'd, the cosmetick pow'rs. - pop
co'smical, adj. [xorzo.] pe,
i. relating to the world.
2. rising or setting with the sun ; not acronychal.
the cosmical ascension of a star we term that, when it aris.th
together with the sun, or in the same degree of the ecio.
wherein the sun abideth. brown’s sugar eo,
co's mica lly. adv. [from cosmical.] with the sun; o
acronychally. 2 a.
from the rising of this star, not cosmically, that is, with the
sun, but heliacally; that is, its emersion from the rays of the
sun, the ancients computed their canicular days. brown
co's moson y. m. s. [x67462, and yeon.] the rise or bira.
the world ; the creation. -
cosmo grapher, n.s. [xargo and yow.] one who writs
a description of the world; distinct from geographer, wi.
describes the situation of particular countries.
the ancient cosmographers do place the division of the east
and western hemisphere; that is, the first term of longitude
in the canary or fortunate islands, conceiving these parts the
extremest habitations westward. brown's wugar error;
cosmograthical, adj, [from cosmography..] relating to i.
general description of the world.
cosmogra'phically. adv. [from cosmographical.] in a manner
relating to the science by which the structure of the world;
discovered and described.
the terrella, or spherical magnet, cosmographically set out
with circles of the globe. brown's vulgar errour.
cosmo'graphy. m. s. [zorao” and y?322.] the science
of the general system or affections of the world, distinci from
geography, which delivers the situation and boundaries of
particular countries.
here it might see the world without travel; it being a lessor
feheme of the creation, nature contracted, a little congra-
phy, or map of the universe. south.
cos mopo'litan. : n. s. [xero.3" and roxsrz;..] a citizen of the
cos mopo'lite. world; one who is at home in every place,
cosset. m. s. a lamb brought up without the dam.
i o wilt bewail my woeful teen,
all thee give yond' cost for thy pain. sfonsor,
cost. n. s. [kosi, 5....”. o. is found in .
motest teutonick dialects, even in the islandick, it is not pro-
bably derived to us from the latin com/io; though it is not un-
likely that the french cousier comes from the latia.]
1. the price of anything.
2. sumptuousness; luxury.
the city woman bears
the cost of princes on unworthy shoulders. shahjart.
let foreign princes vainly boast
the rude effects of pride and cost
qf vaster fabricks, to which they
contribute nothing but the pay. wallir,
3. charge ; expence.
while he found his daughter maintained without his coff,
he was content to be deaf to any noise of infamy. sidiq,
i shall never hold that man my friend,
whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cos’,
to ransom home revolted mortimer. shak/p. hory iv.
have we eaten at all of the king's cost o or hath he given us
any gift.” 2 sa. xix. 42.
and wilt thou, o cruel boast !
put poor nature to such cost p
o! 'twill undo our common mother,
to be at charge of such another. cashnu,
it is strange to see any ecclesiastical pile, not by ecclesiastical
co/? and influence, rising above ground; especially in an age
in which men's mouths are open against the church, but their
hands shut towards it. south's sermoni.
he whose tale is best, and pleases most,
should win his supper at our common cost. dryden's fabies,
fourteen thousand pounds are paid by wood for the pur-
chase of his patent: what were his other visible col; i know
not ; what his latent, is variously conjectured. swift.
4. loss ; fine ; detriment. -
what they had fondly wished, proved afterwards to their
coffs over true. knolles's hislory of the turki.
to cost. v. m. pret. cy?; particip. coff. [cousier, french.] to
be bought for ; to be had at a price.
the dagger and poison are always in readiness; but to bring
the action to cxtremity, and then recover all, will require the
art of a writer, and cost him many a pang, dryden.
co's tal. adj. [cosia, lat. a rib.] belonging to the ribs.
hereby are excluded all cetaceous and cartilaginous fishes,
many pecinal, whose ribs are rectilineal ; and many cosial,
which have their ribs embowed. brown's pugar errori,
co'sta r d. m. s. [from coffer, a head.]
1. a head. - -
take him over the coard with the belt of thy sword.
- shook speare's richard iii.
7 - 2. an
ray on the creation,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 501</div><p class="text">c o t'
co u
! -
-
2. an apple round and bulky like the head, -
... country vicars are driven to shifts; and, if our greedy
ptions hold us to such conditions, they will make us turn
goslard mongers' grafiers, or soil le. borton on melancholy.
cô's rive adj, soatia, lat. consiso, french..]
... bound in the body; having the excretions obstructed.
when the passage of the gall becomes obstructed, the body
grows offive, and the excrements of the belly white. brown.
* while faster than his coslive brains indites,
philo's quick hand in flowing letters writes ;
his case appears to me like honest teague's,
yvhen he was run away with by his legs.
2. close ; unpermeable.
clay in dry seasons is coffive, hardening with the sun and
wind, "to unlocked by industry, so as to admit of the air and
heavenly influences. mortioner's husbandry.
co’s rives ess. n. / [from coffive.] the state of the body in
which excretion is obstructed.
cost weness disperses malign putrid fumes out of the guts and
mesentery into all parts of the body, occasioning head-aches,
fevers, loss of appetite, and disturbance of conco&amp;tion. harvey.
c/liveness has ill effects, and is hard to be dealt with by
physick ; purging medicines rather increasing than removing
the evil. r locks on education.
cost liness. m. s. [from costly..] sumptuousness ; expensiveness.
though not with curious cosliness, yet with cleanly suffi-
ciency it entertained me. - sidney.
nor have the frugaller sons of fortune any reason to object
the cylings; ; since they frequently pay dearer for less advan-
tageous pleasures. glanville's scepsis.
co’s rix. adj. [from cy?..] sumptuous; expensive; of a high
ric c.
p cosily thy habit as thy purse can buy,
but not exprest in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
for the apparel oft proclaims the man. shakesp. hamlet.
leave for a while thy costly country-seat;
and to be great indeed, forget
the nauseous pleasures of the great. dryden.
the chapel of st. laurence will be perhaps the most costly
piece of work on the earth, when completed. addison.
he is here speaking of paradise, which he represents as a
most charming and delightful place ; abounding with things
not only useful and convenient, but even the most rare and
va'u ble, the most costly and desireable. j/oodw. nat. history.
co's mary. m. s. [costus, latin.] an herb.
co's trel. m. s. [ supposed to be derived from coffer.]
bottle. - -
coor. at the end of the names of places, come generally
3. from the saxon coz, a cottage. gibson.
o -
cot. m. s. scot, sax. cwt, welsh.] a small house; a cot-
rage; a hut ; a mean habitation.
what that usage meant,
which in her cot she daily practised. fairy queen.
besides his cot, his flocks, and bounds of feed,
are now on sale ; and at our sheep cot now,
by reason of his absence, there is nothing
that you will feed on. shakespeare's a you like it.
hezekiah made himself stalls for all manner of beasts, and
cots for flocks. 2 chron. xxxii. 28.
a stately temple shoots within the skies:
the crotchets of their cot in columns rise ;
the pavement, polish'd marble they behold ; - -
the gates with sculpture grac'd, the spires and tiles of gold.
- dryden's bauci, and philemon.
as jove vouchsaf’d on ida's top, 'tis said,
at poor philemon's cot to take a bed.
cot. m. s. an abridgment of cotguean.
cota’nô ent. n.s. [in geometry.] the tangent of an arch
which is the complement of another to ninety degrees. harris.
to core. v. a. this word, which i have found only in
chapman, scems to fignify the same as to leave behind, to
over posi. -
words her worth had prov’d with deeds,
had more ground been allow'd the race, and coted far his
steeds. - chapman's iliads.
core"mpor ary. adj. [con and tempus, latin, j living at the
same time ; coetaneous ; contemporary.
what would not, to a rational man, cotemporary with the
first voucher, have appeared probable, is now used as certain,
because several have since, from him, said it one after an-
other, locke.
coot land. m.s.. [cot and land.] land appendant to a cottage.
coorgy ean. m. s. [probably from coquin, french..] ... a man
who busies himself with women's affairs.
look to the bak'd meats, good angelica ;
spare not for cost. .
go, go, you coloucan, go ;
get you to bed. shałoff. romeo and juliet,
a stateswoman is as ridiculous a creature as a cotguean :
each of the sexes should keep within its bounds.
you have given us a lively picture of husbands hen-peck'd ;
prior.
a
skinner.
fenton.
addison."
but you have never touched upon one of the quite different
character, and who goes by the name of cotoucan. addison.
cottag e. m. s. [from cot j a hut ; a mean habitation; a
cot; a little house.
the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds,
and folds for flocks. zeph. ii. 6.
they were right glad to take some corner of a poor cottage,
and there to serve god upon their knces. hooker.
the self-same fun that shines upon his court,
hides not his visage from our cottage, but
looks on both alike. shakspeare's winter's tale.
let the women of noble birth and great fortunes nurse
their children, look to the affairs of the house, visit poor cot-
tages, and relieve their neceiities. taylor's holy living.
it is difficult for a peasant, bred up in the obscurities of a
cottage, to fancy in his mind the splendors of a court. south.
beneath our humble cottage let us haste,
and here, unenvied, rural dainties tasie.
cott age.r. m. s. [from cottage.]
1. one who lives in a hut or cottage.
let us from our farms,
call forth our cottagers to arms. swift.
the most ignorant irish cottager will not sell his cow for a
groat. - swift's address to parliament.
2. a cottager, in law, is one that lives on the common, with-
out paying rent, and without any land of his own.
the husbandmen and plowmen be but as their work-folks
and labourers, or else mere cottagers, which are but housed
beggars. bacon’s henry vii.
the yeomenry, or middle people, of a condition between
gentlemen and cottagers. . bacon's henry vii.
cotti er. m. s. [from cot.] one who inhabits a cot. die?.
cotton. m. s. snamed, according to skinner, from the down
that adheres to the mala cotonea, or quince, called by the italians
cotagni; whence cottone, ital, cotton, french.j
i. the down of the cotton-tree.
the pin ought to be as thick as a rowling-pin, and covered
with cotton, that its hardness may not be offensive. //sman.
2. cloth made of cotton.
corton. n.s. a plant.
the species are, 1. shrubby cotton. 2. the most excellent
american cotton, with a greenish seed. 3. annual shrubby
cotton, of the island of providence. 4. the tree cotton. 5.
tree cotton with a yellow flower. the first sort is cultivated
plentifully in candia, lemnos, cyprus, malta, sicily, and
at naples; as also between jerusalem and damascus, from
whence the cotton is brought annually into these northern
parts of europe. this cotton is the wool which incloses or
wraps up the seeds, and is contained in a kind of brown husk
or seed-vessel growing upon this shrub. it is from this sort
that the vast quantities of cotton are taken, which furnish our
parts of the world. the second and third sorts are annual:
these are cultivated in the west indies in great plenty. but
the fourth and fifth sorts grow in egypt: these abide many
years, and often arrive to be trees of great magnitude. aziller.
to cotton. v. m. . - -
1. to rise with a nap,
2. to cement; to unite with : a cant word.
a quarrel will end in one of you being turned off, in which
pope's odsey.
case it will not be easy to cotton with another. swift.
to couch. v. n. [coucher, french.]
1. to lie down on a place of repose. -
- if i court more women, you'll couch with more men. shak,
doth not the gentleman - .
deserve as full, as fortunate a bed,
as ever beatrice shall couch upon. sasoffeare.
- . . . when love's fair goddess
couch'd with her husband in his golden bed. dryden's zn.
2. to lie down on the knces, as a beast to rest.
trees bent their heads to hear him sing his wrongs,
fierce tygers couch'd around, and loll'd their fawning
tongues. - dryden's virgil.
these when death -
comes like a rushing lion, cotch like spaniels,
with lolling tongues, and tremble at the paw.
dyin.
3. to lye down in secret, or in ambush.
we'll couch i' th' castle-ditch, 'till we see the light of our
fairies. shakspeare's merry wives of ii indsor.
the earl of angus couched in a furrow, and was passed over
for dead, until a horse was brought for his escape. hayward.
. to lye in a bed, or stratum. . .
blessed of the lord be his land for the dew, and for the
deep that coucheth-beneath. deut. xxxiii. 13.
5. to stoop; or bend down ; to lower in fear, in pain, in
respect. * *
these couchings, and these lowly curtesics,
might stir the blood of ordinary then.
. spakoshea, e's julius cæsar.
islachar, is a strong as couching down between two burdens.
- - gen. xlix. 14.
to couch. v. a.
1. to reposc; to lay on a place of repose.
where<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 502</div><p class="text">c o v
where unbruised youth, with unstuff'd brain,
doth ouch his lobs, there golden sleep doth reign. shakes?.
2. to law down any thing in a bed, or stratum.
if the we ther be warm, we immediately couch malt about
a foot thick; but if a hotter season require it, we spread it on
the floor much thinner. mortimer's husbandry.
the sea and the land make one globe; and the waters couch
themselves, as close as may be, to the centre of this globe, in a
spherical convexity. burnet's theory of the earth.
3. to bed; to hide in another body. -
it is at this day in use at gaza, to couch potsherds, or vessels
of earth, in their walls, to gather the wind from the top, and
to pass it down in spouts into rooms. bacon's nat. history.
4. to involve; to include; to comprise.
but who will call those noble who deface,
by meaner acts, the glories of their race;
whose only title to our father's fame,
is couch'd in the dead letters of their name? dryden's juv.
that great argument for a future state, which st. paul hath
couched in the words i have read to you. atterbury's sermons.
5. to include secretly; to hide: with under. - - -
the foundation of all parables, is some analogy or simili-
tude between the topical or allusive part of the parable and
the thing coached under it, and intended by it. south.
there is all this, and more, that lies naturally couched under
this allegory. l’eshrange.
the true notion of the institution being lost, the tradition
of the deluge, which was couched under it, was thereupon at
length suspended and lost. woodward’s natural history.
6. to lay close to another.
and over all, with brazen scales was arm’d,
like plated coat of steel, so couched near,
that nought might pierce. spensor.
7. to fix the spear in the rest; in the posture of attack.
the knight 'gan fairly couh his steady spear,
and fiercely ran at him with rigorous might. spensor.
before each van
prick forth the aery knights, and couch their spears,
*till thickest legions close. amilton's paradise lost.
the former wav'd in air
his flaming sword, aeneas couch'd his spear. dryden's 42n.
8. to depress the condensed crystalline humour or film that
overspreads the pupil of the eye. this is improperly called
couching the eye, for couching the cataraci : with equal impro-
priety they sometimes speak of couching the patient. -
- some artist, whose nice hand
couches the cataracis, and clears his eyes,
and all at once a flood of glorious light
comes rushing on his eyes. dennis.
whether the cataract be wasted by being separated from its
vessels, i have never known positively, by dissecting one that
had been couched. sharp.
couch. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a seat of repose, on which it is common to lye down
dressed.
so satan fell; and straight a fiery globe
of angels on full sail of wing flew nigh,
who on their plumy vans receiv'd him soft,
from his uneasy station, and upbore
as on a floating couch through the blithe air. milt. par. reg.
to loll on couches, rich with citron steds,
and lay their guilty limbs in tyrian beds. dryd. jirg. geo.
o, ye immortal pow'rs that guard the just,
watch round his couch, and soften his repose. addis. cato.
2. a bed; a place of repose. -
let not the royal bed of denmark be ,
a couch for luxury and damned incest. shakesp. hamlet.
dire was the tossing ! deep the groans ! despair
tended the sick, busiest from couch to couch. milt. pa. loft.
this gentle knight, inspir’d by jolly may,
forsook his early couch at early day. dryden’s fables.
3. a layer, or stratum. -
this heap is called by maltsters a couch, or bed of raw
malt. mortimer’s husbandry.
couch ant. adj. [couchant, fr.] lying down; squatting.
if a lion were the coat of judah, yet were it not probably
a lion rampant, but rather couchant or dormant. brown.
as a tiger, who by chance hath spy’d,
in some purlieu, two gentle fawns at play,
strait couches close ; then rising, changes oft
his couchant watch. milton's paradse loft.
couchee. m. s. [french..] bedtime; the time of visiting late
at night.
none of her sylvan subjects made their court;
levees and couchees pass'd without resort. dryden.
couch er. m. s. [from couch..] he that couches or depresses
cataracts. -
couchfellow. m. s. [couch and follow.] bedfellow ; com-
panion. -
i have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for
you, and your couchfellow, nim ; or else you had looked
through the grate like a geminy of baboons. shakespeare.
coucho r ass. n.s. a weed.
the couchgrass, for the first year, insensibly robs most
plants in sandy grounds apt to graze. mortimer's busandry.
cove. n.s.
1. a small creek or bay.
2. a shelter ; a cover.
covenant. n.s. [convenant, fr. conventum, latin.]
1. a contract; a stipulation.
he makes a covenant never to destroy
the earth again by flood; nor let the sea
surpass his bounds. milton's paradis. loft,
the english make the ocean their abode, ~
whose ready sails with ev'ry wind can fly,
and make a cov'nant with th' unconstant sky. waller,
some men live as if they had made a covenant with hell:
let divines, fathers, friends say what they will, they stop their
ears against them. l'astrange.
2. an agreement on certain terms; a compact.
a covenant is a mutual compact, as we now consider it, be-
twixt god and man ; consisting of mercies on god's part,
made over to man, and of conditions on man's part, required
by god. - hammond's praci. cateth,
3. a writing containing the terms of agreement.
i shall but lend my diamond ‘till your return; let there be
covenants drawn between us. shakespeare's cymbeline.
to coven ant. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to bargain; to stipulate.
w
his lord used commonly so to covenant with him, which if .
at any time the tenant disliked, he might freely depart at his
pleasure. spenser's state of ireland.
it had been covenanted between him and the king of eng-
land, that neither of them should treat of peace or truce with
the french king. hayward on edward vi.
by words men come to know one another's minds; by
these they covenant and confederate. south.
jupiter covenanted with him, that it should be hot or cold,
wet or dry, calm or windy, as the tenant should direet.
l’e/irange.
2. to agree with another on certain terms: with for before
either the price or the thing purchased.
they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. mat,
pointing to a heap of sand, - *
for ev'ry grain to live a year demand;
but, ahl unmindful of th’ effect of time,
forgot to covenant for youth and prime. garth’s ovid.
cove nante'e. m. s. [from covenant..] a party to a covenant;
a stipulator; a bargainer.
both of them were respective rites of their admission into
the several covenants, and the covenantees become thereby en-
titled to the respective privileges. ayliffe’s parergon.
cov ena'n ter n.s.. [from covenant..] one who takes a cove-
nant. a word introduced in the civil wars.
the covenanters shall have no more assurance of mutual
affstance each from other, after the taking of the covenant,
than they had before. oxford reasons against the covenant.
co've no us. adj. [from covin.] fraudulent; collusive; trickish.
i wish some means devised for the restraint of these inor-
dinate and covenous leases of lands, holden in chief, for hun-
dreds or thousands of years. bacon's off. of alienation.
to cover. v. a. [couvrir, french.]
1. to overspread any thing with something else.
the pastures are cloathed with flocks, the valleys also are
covered over with corn. ps. lxv. 13.
sea cover'd sea,
sea without shore. milton,
the flaming mount appear'd
in dothan cover'd with a camp of fire. milton.
go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the
meat, and we will come in to dinner.
shakespeare's merchant of wenice,
2. to conceal under something laid over.
- nor he their outward, only with the skins
of beasts, but inward nakedness much more
opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness
arraying, cover'd from his father's fight. milton,
cover me ye pines,
ye cedars with innumerable boughs
hide me, that i may never see them more. milton.
in life's cool vale let my low scene be laid,
cover me, gods, with tempe’s thickest shade. cowley.
orlead me to some solitary place, -
and cover my retreat from human race.
3. to hide by superficial appearances.
4. to overwhelm ; to bury.
raillery and wit serve only to cover nonsense with shame,
when reason has first proved it to be mere nonsense. watts.
5. to conceal from notice or punishment.
charity shall cover the nuititude of fins.
thou may’tt repent,
and one bad act with many deeds well done
may's cover. milton.
6. to shelter ; to protect.
dryd. wing.
i pet. iv. 8.
3
his
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 503</div><p class="text">c o v
c o v
his calm and blameless life
tocs with substantial beliedness abound,
- and the soft wo of peace cover him round.
~. to incubate 5 o brood on. -
natural historio observe, that only the male birds have
that their songs begin a little before breeding-time,
cowley,
voices;
* .
and end a litt - - - -
the male generally takes his stand upon a neighbouring bough
with his songs during the whole time of her sitting.
addison's spediator.
8. to copulate with a female.
9. to wear the hat, or garment of the head, as a mark of
superiority, or independence. -
that king had conferred the honour of grandee upon him,
** which was of no other advantage or signification to him, than
to be covered in the presence of that king. dryden.
cove r. m.j. [from the verb.] -
1. anything that is laid over another. -
the secundine is but a general cover, not shaped according
to the parts, the skin is shaped according to the parts. bacon.
the fountains could be strengthened no other way than by
making a strong cover or arch over them.
orestes’ bulky rage,
unsatisfy'd with margins closely writ,
foams o'er the covers, and not finish'd yet. dryd, juv.
with your hand, or any other cover, you stop the vessel,
so as wholly to exclude the air. ray on the greation.
2. a concealment; a screen; a veil; a superficial appearance,
under which something is hidden. -
.. the truth and reason of things may be artificially and ef-
fe&amp;ually insinuated, under the cover either of a real fact, or
of a supposed one. i’esłrange.
as the spleen has great inconveniences, so the pretence of
it is a handsome cover for imperfeotions. collier on the spleen.
3. shelter; defence from weather. - - -
in the mean time, by being compelled to lodge in the field,
which grew now to be very cold, whilst his army was under
cover, they might be forced to retire. clarendon.
burnet's theory.
o: cover-shame. . n. s. [cover and shame.] some appearance
w used to conceal infamy. - * -
o, does he put on holy garments for a cover shame of lewd-
o * -
ness 2 : . dryden's spanish fryar.
cover ing. m. s. [from cover.] dress; vesture; anything
spread over another. --
* , the women took and spread a covering over the well's
mouth. - 2 sam. xvii. 19.
! ...” bring some covering for this naked soul,
!-- whom i'll intreat to lead me. shakespeare's king lear.
27: through her flesh methinks is seen . . .
o the brighter soul that dwells within,
h. our eyes the subtle covering pass, . . . . . .
* and see the lily through its glass. cowley.
then from the floor he rais'd a royal bed,
: . with cov'rings of sidonian purple spread. dryden's fables.
o: sometimes providence casts things so, that truth and interest
o:- lie the same way; and when it is wrapt up in this covering,
::: men can be content to follow it. . . . . "- south.
o cover let. n.s...[couvrelic, french..] the outermost of the
- bedcloaths; that under which all the rest are concealed, "is
- - law her in lillies and in violets, ; : * &gt; . ."
and silken curtains over her display, . 2. '
and odour'd sheets, and arras coverlets. , spenser.
*.* ** - this done, the host produc’d the genial bed, -
o - which with no costly coverlet they spread. dryden's fables.
i was for want of a house and bed, forced toolie on the
ground, wrapt up in my coverlet. . . . . . . … ... swift.
cover t. n.s.. [from cover, couvert, french.] ! - - - -
1. a shelter; a defence. - - -
let mine outcasts dwell with thee, moab; be thou a covert
to them from the face of the spoiler. isaiah, xvi. 4.
there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day-time
from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from
storm and rain. ... is. iv, 6.
they are by sudden alarm, or watch-word, to be called out
to their military motions, under sky or cauert, according to
the season, as was the roman wont. 4milton on education.
it was the hour of night, when thus the son
commun’d in silent walk, then laid him down
under the hospitable covert nigh
of trees thick interwoven. milton's paradise lost.
now have a care your carnations catch not too much wet,
therefore retire them to covert. -- evelyn's kalendar.
2. a thicket, or hiding place.
tow’rds him i made; but he was 'ware of me, -
and stole into the covert of the wood. shakes. rem, and jul.
i shall be your faithful guide, -
through this gloomy covert wide. milton.
thence to the coverts, and the consciousgroves,
the scenes of his past triumphs and his loves.
deep into some thick covert would i run,
impenetrable to the stars or sun. dryden's state of innocence.
vol. i.
* - . . .
o:
denham.
!e after ; that whilst the hen is covering her eggs, .
within her hearing: and by that means amuses and diverts her .
the deer is lodg’d; i've track'd her to her covert:
resure ye mind the word; and when i give it,
rush in at once, and seize upon your prey.
cove rt. adj. [couvert, french.]
1. sheltered ; not open; not exposed.
you are, of either side the green, to plant a covert alley,
upon carpenter’s work, about twelve foot in height, by which
you may go in shade into the garden. bacon.
the fox is a beast also very prejudicial to the husbandman,
especially in places that are near forest-woods and covert
places, asortimer’s husbandry.
together let us beat this ample field, -
try what the open, what the covert yield.
2. secret ; hidden; private ; infidious.
and let us presently go fit in council,
how covert matters may be best disclos'd,
and open perils surest answered. shakesp. julius cæsar.
by what best way,
whether of open war, or covert guile,
we now debate. milton's paradis, laff.
covert. adj. [couvert, french.] the state of a womanshoi.
tered by marriage under her husband; as covert baron, fene
covert.
instead of her being under covert baron, to be under covert
feme myself; to have my body disabled, and my head for-
tified. dryden's spanish fryar.
cover t-way. m. s. [from covert and way.] -
it is, in fortification, a space of ground level with the field,
on the edge of the ditch, three or four fathom broad, ranging
quite round the half moons, or other works toward the coun-
try. one of the greatest difficulties in a fiege is to make a
lodgment on the covert-way, because usually the besieged pal-
lisade it along the middle, and undermine it on all sides. it
is sometimes called the corridor, and sometimes the counter-
scarp, because it is on the edge of the scarp. harris.
co've rtly. adv. [from covert.] secretly; closely; in private;
with privacy. - - - -
yet still aragnol (so his foe was hight)
lay lurking, covertly him to surprise. spensor's muiopatmos.
how can'st thou cross this marriage -
-not honestly, my lord; but so coverty, that no disho-
nesty shall appear in me: , shakesp. much ado about nothing.
amongst the poets, persius covertly strikes at nero; some
of whose verses he recites with scorn and indignation. dryden.
sovertness. n.s.. [from covert.] secrecy; privacy. 19ia.
coverture. n.j. [from covert.] - -
1. shelter; defence; not exposure.
it may be it is rather the shade, or other coverture, that they
addis. cato,
pope's essays.
take liking in, than the virtue of the herb. bacon's nat. hist,
he saw their shame that sought . . . . .
vain covertures.’ milton's paradis, loft.
the winds being so fierce, and so severe, as not to suffer
anything to thrive beyond the height of a shrub, in those
islands, unless protected by walls, or other like coverture.
- - . . . . - - - woodward.
2. [in law.] the estate and condition of a married woman,
who, by the laws of our realm, is in potestate viri, and
therefore disabled to contract with any, to the prejudice of
herself or her husband, without his allowance or confirma-
!, tion. " " : - o: avo: , ov. 7 o' cowel.
. ...the infancy of king edward vi, and the coverture of queen
mary, did, in fact, disable them to accomplish the conquest of
ireland. davies on ireland.
to covet. v. a. [convoiter, french.j: " -
1. to desire inordinately; to defire beyond due bounds.
if it be a sin to covet honour, * -
i am the most offending man alive.
- i am yet
unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
scarcely have coveted what was mine own, -
at no time broke my faith. shakespeare's macbeth.
o. father! can it be that souls sublime, -
return to visit our terrestrial clime
and that the gen’rous mind, releas'd by death,
can covet lazy limbs and mortal breath? dryden's aon.
2. to desire earnestly. - -
all things coveting as much as may be to be like unto god
in being ever; that which cannot hereunto attain personally,
doth seek to continue itself another way, by offspring and
propagation. - ooker.
but covet earnestly the best gifts. , 1 cor. xii. 31.
to cover. v. n. to have a strong defire. , - .
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while
some coveted after, they have erred from the faith. i tom. vi.
covetable. adj. [from covet.] to be wished for; to be
coveted. - dic7.
covetise. n.s.. [convoitise, french..] avarice; covetousness
of money. not in use. -
most wretched wight, whom nothing might suffice,
whose greedy lust did lack in greatest store;
shakespeare's henry v.
whose need had end, but no end covetis. fairy queen.
coverous. adj. [convoiteux, french.] -
5 s i. inor-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 504</div><p class="text">c o u
c o u
¥. inordinately desirous; cager. -
while cumber'd with my dropping cloaths 1 lay,
the cruel nation, covetous of prey, - - - - -
stain'd with my blood the unhospitable coast. dryden's aon.
2. inordinately eager of money; avaricious. - --
an heart they have exercised with covetous practices. peter.
what he cannot help in his nature, you must not account a
vice in him: you must in no ways say he is covetous. shakesp.
let never so much probability hang on one side of a covetous
man's reasoning, and money on the other, it is easy to fore-
see which will outweigh. locke.
3. defirous; eager: in a good sense.
sheba was never
more covetous of wisdom and fair virtue, -
than this fair soul shall be. shakespeare's henry viii,
he that is envious or angry at a virtue that is not his own,
at the perfection or excellency of his neighbour, is not covet-
cus of the virtue, but of its reward and reputation, and then
his intentions are polluted. taylor’s rule of living holy.
cov etously. adv. [from covetous.] avariciously; eagerly.
if he care not for’t, he will supply us easily ; if he covetously
reserve it, how shall's get it shakespeare.
covetous ness. m. s. [from covetous.]
. 1. avarice; inordinate desire of money; eagerness of gain.
he that takes pains to serve the ends of covetousness, or
ministers to another's lust, or keeps a shop of impurities or
intemperance, is idle in the worst sense, taylor's holy living.
- covetousness debaseth a man's spirit, and sinks it into the
earth. - tillotson.
2. eagerness; desire: in a neutral sense. -
when workmen strive to do better than well,
- they do confound their skill in covetousness. shak. k. john.
covey. n.s.. [couvee, french.] -
1. a hatch; an old bird with her young ones. -
2. a number of birds together. . - *
a flight of wasps and covey of partridges went to a farmer,
and begged a sup of him to quench their thirst. l’e/irange.
a covey of partridges springing in our front, put our infantry
in disorder. “ ... “ . . . . . . addison's freeholder.
there would be no walking in a shady wood without
springing a covey of toasts. . . . . . . addison's guardian.
cough. m. s. [kuch, dutch..] a convulsion of the lungs,
vellicated by some sharp serosity. "it is pronounced coff.
in consumptions of the lungs, when nature cannot expel
the cough, men fall into fluxes of the belly, and then they
die. - - - bacon's natural history.
for his dear sake long restless nights you bore,
while rattling coughs his heaving vessels tore. smith.
;i, cough. v. n. [aeuchen, dutch..] to have the lungs con-
vulsed; to make a noise in cndeavouring to evacuate the pec-
cant matter from the lungs. - -:
- thou didst drink --
the stale of horses, and the gilded puddle o
which beasis would cough at. shakesp. anth. and cleopatra.
thou hast quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street,
because he hath wakened thy dog that, hath lain asleep in the
sun. . . . . shakesp. romeo and juliet.
the first problem enquireth why a man doth caugh, but not
an ox or cow; whereas the contrary is often observed. brown.
... ... if any humour be discharged upon the lungs, they have a
faculty of casting it up by coughing. . . . . . ray on the creation.
... i cough like horace, and though lean, am short. pope's ep.
to coug h. v. a. to eject by a cough; to expectorate.
if the matter be to be discharged by expectoration, it must
first pass into the substance of the lungs, then into the aspera
arteria, or weasand, and from thence be coughed up, and spit
out by the mouth. - wiseman's surgery.
coucher. n.s.. [from cough..] one that coughs. dicf.
covin. un. s. a deceitful agreement between two or more,
co'v ine, } to the hurt of another. - - cowel.
co’vis g. n.s.. [from cove..] a term in building, used of houses
that project over the ground-plot and the turned: projecture
arched with timber, lathed and plaistered. : harris.
coul d. [the imperfect preterite of can. see can.] ... was
-able to ; had power to. - -
and if i have done well, and as is fitting the story, it is
that which i desired; but if slenderly and meanly, it is that
which i could attain unto. 2 mac. xv. 38.
. . . what if he did not all the ill be could -
and i oblig'd by that t' assist his rapines, - - - --
, and to maintain his murders : dryden's spanish fryar.
co’ulter. m. s. [culter, latin.] the sharp iron of the plow
which cuts the earth, perpendicular to the share. o
the israelites went down to sharpen every man his share,
and his coulter, and his ax, and his mattock. i sa. xiii. 20.
literature is the grindstone to sharpen the coulters, to whet
their natural faculties." hammond on fundamentals.
the plough for stiff clays is long and broad, and the coulter
long, and very little bending, with a very large wing. 443rtin.
council. m. s. [concilium, latin.] - v
1. an askmbly of persons met together in consultation, , ,
- * * * *
-
-
- -- -
- - - --- -
the chief priests, and all the council, sought false witness.
mat. xxvi. 59.
the stygian council thus dissolv’d ; and forth
in order came the grand infernal peers. amilton.
in histories composed by politicians, they are for drawing
up a perpetual scheme of causes and events, and preserving a
constant correspondence between the camp and the council
table. addison's spectator.
2. act of publick deliberation.
the scepter'd heralds call
to council in the city gates: anon
grey-headed men and grave, with warriors mix’d,
assemble, and harangues are heard.
. an assembly of divines to deliberate upon religion.
some borrow all their religion from the fathers of the
christian church, or from their synods or councils. j/atts.
4. persons called together to be consulted on any occasion, or
to give advice.
they being thus assembled, are more properly a council to
the king, the great council of the kingdom, to advise his ma-
jesty in those things of weight and difficulty, which concern
both the king and people, than a court. bacon's adv. to williers.
5. the body of privy counsellors. -
without the knowledge
either of king or council, you made bold
to carry into flanders the great seal. shakesh. henry viii.
council: board. m. s. scouncil and board.] council-table;
table where matters of state are deliberated.
he hath commanded,
to-morrow morning to the council-board,
he be convened. shakespeare's henry viii.
when ship-money was transacted at the council board, they
looked upon it as a work of that power they were obliged to
amiltant.
trust. clarendon.
and pallas, if she broke the laws,
must yield her foe the stronger cause;
a shame to one so much ador'd
for wisdom at jove's council-board. swift.
cotunsel. m. s. [consilium, latin.]
1. advice; direction.
there is as much difference between the counsel that a friend
giveth, and that a man giveth himself, as there is between
the counsel of a friend and of a flatterer. baron.
the best counsel he could give him was, to go to his parlia-
ment. clarendon.
- bereave me not, -
whereon i live, thy gentle looks, thy aid
thy counsel in this uttermost distress. milton.
2. consultation; interchange of opinions.
i hold as little counsel with weak fear
as you, or any scot that lives. shakespeare's henry iv.
3. deliberation; examination of consequences.
they all confess therefore, in the working of that first
cause, that counsel is used, reason followed, and a way ob-
served. ' - #.
4. prudence; art; machination.
o how comely is the wisdom of old men, and understand-
ing and counsel to men of honour. ecclus, xxv, 5.
there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against
the lord. *. * prov. xxi. 30.
5. secrecy; the secrets intrusted in consulting:
the players cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all. shakoff.
6. scheme; purpose; design. not in use.
the counsel of the lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of
his heart to all generations. psal. xxxiii. 11.
o god from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and
all just works do proceed. common prayer.
7. those that plead a cause; the counsellors. this seems only
an abbreviature usual in conversation.
your hand, a covenant; we will have these things set down
by lawful counsel. shakespeare's cymbeline.
for the advocates and counsel that plead, patience and gra-
vity of learning is an essential part of justice; and an over-
speaking judge is no well tuned cymbal. bacon.
what says my counsel learned in the law pope.
to counsel. v. a. [consilior, latin.]
1. to give advice or counsel to any person.
but say, lucetta, now we are alone,
would'st thou then counsel me to fall in love? shakespeare.
truth shall nurse her; o
holy and heav'nly thoughts still counsel her. shak. hen. viii.
there is danger of being unfaithfully counsell'd, and more
for the good of them that counsel than for him that is counsoff'd.
bacon-
ill fortune never crushed that man whom good fortune de-
ceived not; i therefore have counselled my friends never to trust
to her fairer side, though she seemed to make peace with
them. ben. johnson's discoveries.
he supports my poverty with his wealth, and i counsel and
instruct him with my learning and experience. taylor.
2. to advise any thing.
". . . . * * * * -- * * the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 505</div><p class="text">c o u
c o u
the less had been our shame,
- his counsell'd crime which brands the grecian
"the : - !/ dryden's fables.
co'unsella b*** adj. [from couns!..] willing to receive and
i... the advice of opinions of others.
very few men of so great parts were more counseliable than
he; so that he would seldom be in danger of great erous, if
he would communicate his own thoughts to disquisition. clar.
co'unsellor: n. s. [from counsel. this should rather be writ-
ten counseller. -
1. one that gives advice. - --
is mother was his counsellor to do wickedly. 2 chr. xxii. 3.
she would be a counsellor of good things, and a comfort in
cares. i//d. viii. 9.
death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine
are counsellors to fear. shakespeare's macbeth,
2. confidant; bosom friend.
in such green palaces the first kings reign'd,
siept in their shades, and angels entertain'd;
with such old counsellors they did advise,
and by frequenting sacred groves grew wise. j%all, r.
3. one whose province is to deliberate and advise upon publick
affairs.
you are a counsellor, -
and by that virtue no man dare accuse you. shak. h. viii.
of counsellors there are two sorts: the first, consiliarii nati,
as i may term them; such are the prince of wales, and others
of the king's sons: but the ordinary sert of counsellors are such
as the king, out of a due consideration of their worth and
abilities, and, withal, of their fidelity to his person and to his
crown, calleth to be of council with him, in his ordinary
- government. bacon's advice to williers.
so. 4. one that is consulted in a case of law; a lawyer.
a counselor bred up in the knowledge of the municipal
and statute laws, may honestly inform a just prince, how far
his prerogative extends. dryd, juv. ded.
counsellorship. m. s. [from counsellor.] the office or post
o of a privy counsellor. .
of the great offices and officers of the kingdom, the most
part are such as cannot well be severed from the counsellorship.
** bacon’s advice to williers,
: to count. v. a. [compter, fr. computare, latin.]
o 1. to number ; to tell.
here through this grate i can count every one,
and view the frenchmen. shakespeare's henry vi.
the vicious count their years; virtuous, their acts. johns.
for the preferments of the world, he that would reckon up
all the accidents that they depend upon, may as well under-
take to count the sands, or to sum up infinity. south.
when men in fickness ling’ring lie,
they count the tedious hours by months and years. dryden.
argos now rejoice, for thebes lies low ;
thy slaughter'd sons now smile, and think they won,
when they can count more theban ghosts than theirs. dry.
2. to preserve a reckoning.
some people in america counted their years by the coming
of certain birds amongst them at their certain seasons, and
leaving them at others. - locke,
3- to reckon ; to place to an account. -
he believed in the lord, and he counted it to him for
righteousness. gen. xv. 6.
not barely the plowman's pains is to be counted into the
bread we eat ; the labour of those who broke the oxen, must
* all be charged on the account of labour. locke.
* 4. to esteem; to account; to reckon ; to consider as having a
- certain character, whether good or evil.
when once it comprehendeth anything above this, as the
differences of time, affirmations, negations, and contradic-
tions in speech, we then count it to have some use of natural
reason. :- - - - hooker.
count not thine handmaid for a daughter of belial. 1 sam, i.
o nor shall i count it heinous to enjoy . ~ *
the publick marks of honour and reward -
conferr'd upon me. milton's agonsles.
you would not wish to count this man a foe
in friendship, and in hatred, obstinate. philips's briton.
5. to impute to ; to chargeto. *
all th’ impossibilities, which poets
count to extravagance of loose description,
shall sooner be. . rowe's ambitious step-mother.
to count. v. n. to found an account or scheme: with upon.
i think it a great errour to count upon the genius of a nation
as a standing argument in all ages. 'swift.
count. n.f. [compte, french ; computus, latin.]
1. number.
that we up to your palaces may mount, -
of blessed saints for to increase the count. spenser’s epithal.
2. reckoning; number summed. - :
by my count,
i was your mother much upon these
since i saw you last,
there is a change upon you,
o
o
*
years. shakspeare,
..
z
2. to make a shew of.
——well, i know not -
what counts hard fortune casts upon my face. shakespeare,
count. n.s. [comte, fr. comes, latin.] a title of foreign no-
bility ; supposed equivalent to an earl.
co **. adj. [from count..] that which may be num-
cred. -
the evils which you desire to be recounted are very many,
and almost countable with those which were hidden in the
basket of pandora. spenser's ireland.
co'untenance. n.s.. [contenance, french.]
1. the form of the face; the system of the features.
2. air ; look.
a made countenance about her mouth between simpering and
smiling, her head bowed, somewhat down, seemed to lan-
guish with over much idleness.
well, suffolk, yet thou shalt not see me blush,
nor change my countenance for this arrest: -
a heart unspotted is not, easily daunted. shakes. henry vs.
so spake our fire, and by his count'nance seein’d
entering on studious thoughts abstruse. * milton.
to whom, with count'nance calin, and soul sedate,
thus turnus. dryden's afn.
3. calmness of look; composure of face.
she smil'd severe; nor with a troubled look,
or trembling hand, the fun'ral present took;
ev’n kept her count'nance, when the lid remov’d,
disclos’d the heart unfortunately lov’d. dryden's fables.
the two maxims of any great man at court are, always to
keep his countenance, and never to keep his word. swift.
4. confidence of mien ; aspect of assurance: it is commonly
used in these phrases in countenance, and out of countenance.
the night beginning to persuade some retiring place, the
gentlewoman, even out of countenance before she began her
speech, invited me to lodge that night with her father. sidney.
we will not make your countenance to fall by the answer
ye shall receive. bacon’s new atlantis.
their best friends were out of countenance, because they
found that the imputations, which their enemies had laid upon
them, were well grounded. clarendon.
your examples will meet it at every turn, and put it out of
countenance in every place ; even in private corners it will soon
lose confidence. spratt's sermons.
if the outward profession of religion and virtue were once
in practice and countenance at court, a good treatment of the
clergy would be the necessary consequence. swift.
if those preachers would look about, they would find one
part of their congregation out of countenance, and the other
asleep. swift.
it is a kind of ill manners to offer objections to a fine wo-
man, and a man would be out of countenance that should gain
the superiority in such a contest : a coquette logician may be
rallied, but not contradicted. addison's freeholder.
it puts the learned in countenance, and gives them a place
among the fashionable part of mankind. addison's freeholder.
5. kindness or ill-will, as it appears upon the face. *
yet the stout fairy, 'mongst the middest crowd,
thought all their glory vain in knightly view,
and that great princess too, exceeding proud, -
that to strange knight no better countenance allow'd. spensor.
6. patronage; appearance of favour; appearance on any fide;
support. " -
p}. church of christ, which held that profession which had
not the publick allowance and countenance of authority, could
not use the exercise of christian religion but in private. hook.
his majesty maintained an army here, to give strength and
countenance to the civil magistrate. davies an ireland.
now then, we'll use
his countenance for the battle; which being done,
let her who would be rid of him, devise -
his speedy taking off. shakespeare's king lear.
this is the magistrate's peculiar province, to give countenance
to piety and virtue, and to rebuke vice and profaneness. atterb.
7. superficial appearance; show ; resemblance. -
the election being done, he made countenance of great dis.
content thereat. . astham's schoolmaster.
oh, you blessed ministers above
keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time
unfold the evil, which is here wrapt u
in countenance. shakespeare's masure for measure.
bianca's love
made me exchange my state with tranio,
while he did bear my countenance in the town. shakespeare.
to co'untenance. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to support; to patronise; to vindicate.
neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause. exod.
this conceit, though countenanced by learned men, is not
made out either by experience or reason. brown.
this national fault of being so very talkative, looks natural
and graceful in one that has grey hairs to countenance it. adds.
sidney,
each to these ladies love did countenance,
and to his mistress each himself strove to advance. spensor.
- 3. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 506</div><p class="text">c o u
c o u
3. to at suitably to anything; to keep up any appearance.
malcolm | banquo
as from your graves rise up, and walk like sprights, -
to countenance this horroir. shakespeare's macbeth.
4. to encourage; to appear in defence. -
at the first descent on shore he was not immured with a
wooden vessel, but he did countenance the landing in his long-
boat. j/otton.
count es ascek, n.f. [from countenance.] one that coun-
tenances or supports another.
count er. m.s. ffrom count.] -
1. a false piece of money used as a means of reckoning.
will you with counter sum
the vast proportion of his infinite. shakespeare.
. though these half pence are to be received as money in
the exchequer, yet in trade they are no better than counters. .
swift's consideration on wood's coin.
2. money in contempt.
* when marcus brutus grows so covetous,
to lock such rascal counters from his friends,
be ready, gods! with all your thunder-bolts, -
dash him to pieces. shaftspeare's julius cesar.
3. the table on which goods are viewed and money told in a
o -
sh o fine gaudy minx, that robs our counters every night; and
then goes out, and spends it upon our cuckold makers. dryden.
in half-whipt muslin, needles useless lie; - -
• and shuttle-cocks a-cross the counter fly. gay's trivia.
sometimes you would see him behind his counter selling
broad-cloth, sometimes measuring linen. arbuthnot.
whether thy counter shine with sums untold, -
and thy wide-grasping hand grows black with gold. swift.
4. count or of a horse, is that part of a horse's forehand that
lies between the shoulder and under the neck. farrier's dies.
count er. adv. [contre, fr. contra, latin.] -
1. contrary to ; in opposition to : it is commonly used with
the verb run, perhaps by a metaphor from the old, tourna-
ents. - - -- -
in shall we ere&amp; two wills in god's, and make the will of his
purpose and intention run counter to the will of his appro-
bation ? " " ' " - - - - south.
the profit of the merchant, and the gain of the kingdom,
are so far from being always parallels, that frequently they run
counter one to the other. child on trade.
* he thinks it brave, at his first setting out, to signalize him-
self in running counter to all the rules of virtue... " ' lotke.
2. the wrong way ; contrarily to the right course.
". how chearfully on the false trail they cry, -
oh, this is counter, you false danish dogs. - shakes. hamlet.
3. contrary ways. - . . . .
- a man whom i cannot deny, may oblige me to use persua-
sons to another, which, at the same time i am speaking, i
may wish may not prevail on him: in this case, it is plain, the
will and the desire run counter. locke.
4. the face in opposition to the back. not in use. -
they hit one another with darts, as the other do with
their hands, which they never throw counter, but at the back
of the flyer. - - sandys's jour.
5. this word is often found in composition, and may be placed
before either nouns or verbs used in a sense of opposition.
that design was no sooner known, but others of an oppo-
fite party were appointed to set a counter-petition on foot.
- - clarendon.
to count era’ct. v.a. [counter and ad.] to hinder any
thing from its effect by contrary agency. . . -
in this case we can find no principle within him strong
enough to counteraci that principle, and to relieve him. south.
to count erbalance. v. a. [counter and balance.] to
weigh against; to act against with an opposite weight.
there was so much air drawn out of the vessel, that the
remaining air was not able to counterbalance the mercurial
cylinder. - :- boyle.
few of adam's children are not born with some biass,
which it is the business of education either to take off, or
counterbalance. " ' " " ' ' ' ' . . . . . . . 4.4&amp;e.
count erbalance. n.s.. [from the verb.] opposite weight;
equivalent power.
but peaceful kings, o'er martial people set,
each other's poise and counterbalance are. dryd. an. mirab.
money is the counterbalance to all other things purchaseable
by it, and lying, as it were, in the opposite scale of com-
merce, - locke.
to count erbu'ff. v. a. [from counter and .# to im-
pell in a direaion opposite to the former impulse; to strike
back.
the giddy ship, betwixt the winds and tides,
forc’d back and forwards, in a circle rides,
stunn’d with the diff'rent blows; then shoots amain,
*till counterbuff'd she stops, and sleeps again. dryden.
tount erbu'ff. n.s.. [counter and buff..] a blow in a con-
trary dire&amp;tion ; a stroke that produces a recoil.
~ h. at the second gave him such a counterbuff, that, because
phalantus was not to be driven from the saddle, the fiddle
with broken girths was driven from the horse. siing,
go, captain stub, lead on, and £ow
what house you come of, by the blow
you give sir quintin, and the cuff
you 'scape o' th' sandbags counterhoff. ber. jahs,
co unter cast er. m. s. [from counter, for a false piece of solo-
ney, and caster.] a word of contempt for an arithmetician,
a book-keeper; a caster of accounts; a reckoner. y
i, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
at rhodes, at cyprus, must be let and calm'd
by debtor and creditor, this countercosier. shakesp. othell.
counterchange. m. s. [counter and change.] tkchange;
reciprocation. -
she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye
on him, her brothers, me, her master, hitting
each object with a joy. the counterchange
is sev’rally in all. shakespeare's cymbolin,
to co'unterchange. v. a. to give and receive.
count ercha'rm. m. s. [counter and charm.j that by which
a charm is dissolved; that which has the power of destroying
the effects of a charm.
now touch'd by countercharms they change again,
and stand majestick, and recall'd to men. pope's oisy,
to countercha'rm. v. a... [from counter and charm.] “f.
destroy the effect of an enchantment.
like a spell it was to keep us invulnerable, and so countr.
charm all our crimes, that they should only be active to please,
not hurt us. - decay of piaj.
to counterche’ck. v. a. [counter and check j. to oppose;
to stop with sudden opposition.
cous terche'ck. n.s.. [from the verb.] stop; rebuke.
- if again i said his beard was not well cut, he would say i
lye : this is called the countercheck quarrelsome. shaftspur.
to count erdra'w. v. a. [from counter and draw.] with
painters, to copy a design or painting by means of a fine linen
cloth, an oiled paper, or other transparent matter, whereon
the strokes appearing through are traced with a pencil. chamb,
count ere'vidence. n.s. [counter and evidence.] testimony
by which the deposition of some former witness is opposed.
sense itself detects its more palpable deceits by a counter.
evidence, and the more ordinary impostures seldom outlive the
first experiments. glanville's scots,
we have little reason to question his testimony in this
point, seeing it is backed by others of good credit, and all
because there is no counterevidence, nor any witness that appears
against it. burnet's theory of the earth,
to counterfeit. v. a. [controsaire, french.j
r. to copy with an intent to pass the copy for an original; to
forge. - - -
- what art thou,
that counterfeit, the person of a king? shakesp. har iv,
it came into this priest's fancy to cause this sad to a nur.
fit and personate the second son of edward iv. supposed to
be murdered. - bacon's henry vii.
there have been some that could counterfeit the distance of
voices, which is a secondary object of hearing, in such sort,
as when they stand fast by you, you would think the speech
came from afar off in a fearful manner. bacon's nat. hist,
say, lovely dream, where could'st thou find
shadows to counterfeit that face waller.
it happens, that not one single line or thought is contained
in this imposture, although it appears that they who counter-
feited me had heard of the true one. - swift,
2. to imitate; to copy; to resemble. -
- and, oh, you mortal engines, whose rude throats
th’ immortal jove's dread clamours counterfeit,
farewel ! shakespeare's othell.
o eve 1 in evil hour thou did'st give ear
to that false worm, of whomsoever taught
to counterfeit man's voice. milton's paradise loft,
to counterfeit, is to put on the likeness and appearance of
some real excellency: bristol-stones would not pretend to be
diamonds, if there never had been diamonds. tilkson,
count erfelt. adj. [from the verb.]
1. that which is made in imitation of another, with intent to
pass for the original ; forged; fictitious.
i learn
now of my own experience, not by talk,
how counterfeit a coin they are, who friends
bear in their superscription; in prosperous days
they swarm, but in adverse withdraw their head, milton,
general observations drawn from particulars, are the jewels
of knowledge, comprehending great store in a little room;
but they are therefore to be made with the greater care and
caution, lest, if we take counterfeit for true, our shame be the
greater, when our stock comes to a severe scrutiny. loch,
deceitful ; hypocritical. -
true friends appear less mov’d than counterfeit. roscomm.
co'unterfeit, n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. one who personates another; an impostor. - -
i am no counterfeit ; to die is to be a counterfeit ; for he is
but
2.
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 507</div><p class="text">c o u
o:
!
o:
;
terfeit of a man, who hath not the life of a man.
aunters shakespeare.
this priest, being utterly unacquainted with the true per-
- ...rding to whose pattern he should shape his counter-
uld think it possible for him to instruct his player,
sture or fashions, or in fit answers to questions, to
but the
son, a
fit, yet co
either in go
come near the resemblance: - - - bacon.
but trust me, child, i'm much inclin'd to fear
some counterfeit in this your jupiter. addison's ovid.
2. something made in imitation of another, intended to pass for
that which it resembles ; a forgery.
my father was i know not where,
when i was stampt. some coiner, with his tools,
made me a counterfeit ; yet my mother seem’d
the dian of that time. shakespeare's cymbeline.
there would be no counterfeits but for the fake of something
real; though pretenders seem to be what they really are not,
yet they pretend to be something that really is. tillotson.
co’u nterfeiter. m. s. [from counterfeit.] a forger; one who
contrives copies to pass for originals.
henry the second altered the coin, which was corrupted by
counterfeiters, to the great good of the commonwealth. camden.
count erfeitly. adv. [from counterfeit j falsely ; fictiti-
ously; with forgery. -
since the wisdom of their choice is rather to have my cap
than my heart, i will practise the insinuating nod, and be off
to them most counterfiitly. shakspeare's coriolanus.
count erfe/rment. n. f. [counter and ferment.] ferment
opposed to ferment.
what unnatural motions and counterferments must a medly
of intemperance produce in the body | when i behold a
fashionable table, i fancy i see innumerable distempers lurking
in ambuscade among the dishes. addison's speciator.
cou nterfe's ance. m. s. [contrefaisance, french.j. the aet
of counterfeiting ; forgery. not in use.
and his man reynold, with fine counterfisance,
supports his credit and his countenance. hubberd's tale.
such is the face of falshood, such the fight
of foul duessa, when her borrow'd light
is laid away, and counterfsance known.
counterfor t. m. s. [from counter and fort.]
counterforts, buttresses or spurs, are pillars serving to sup-
port walls or terrasses, subject to bulge. chambers.
counter ga'ge. m. s. [from counter and gage.] in carpentry,
fairy queen.
a method used to measure the joints by transferring the breadth
of a mortise to the place where the tenon is to be, in order to
make them fit each other. chambers.
cou n's erguard. m. s. [from counter and guard.] a small
rampart with parapet and ditch, to cover some part of the
body of the place. military dici.
count erl i'ght. n. s. [from counter and light.] a window or
light opposite to anything, which makes it appear to a disad-
vantage. chambers.
t4 counterma'n d. v. a. [contremander, french.]
1. to order the contrary to what was ordered or intended be-
fore ; to contradict, annul, or repeal a command.
in states notoriously irreligious, a secret and irresistible
power countermands their deepest projects, and smites their
policies with frustration and a curse. south.
2. to oppose ; to contradict the orders of another.
for us to alter anything, is to lift up ourselves against god,
and, as it were, to countermand him. hooker.
3. to prohibit. -
avicen counternands letting blood in cholerick bodies, be-
cause he esteems the blood a bridle of the gall. harvey.
covs terma'nd. m. s. [contremand, fr.] repeal of a former
order.
have you no counternand for claudio yet,
but he must die to-morrow shakes. measure for measure.
7 a cous termar ch. v. n. [counter and march..] to march
backward; to march in indirect ways.
cog nter:1a/r ch. m. s. [from the verb j
1. retrocession; march backward; march in a different direc-
tion from the former.
how are such an infinite number of things placed with such
order in the memory, notwithstanding the tumults, marches,
and countermarches of the animal spirits collier on thought.
2. change of measures; alteration of conduct.
they make him do and undo, go forward and backwards
by such countermarches and retractions, as we do not willingly
impute to wisdom. burnet's theory of the earth.
coust erma'rk. m. s. [from counter and mark.]
1. a second or third mark put on a bale of goods belonging to
several merchants, that it may not be opened but in the pre-
sence of them all.
2. the mark of the goldsmiths company, to shew the metal is
standard, added to that of the artificer.
3. an artificial cavity made in the teeth of horses, that have out-
grown their natural mark, to disguise their age.
4. a mark added to a medal a long time after it is struck, by
which the curious know the several changes in value which
it has undergone. chambers.
v cl. i.
to count erma'rk. v. a. scounter and mark.j
a horse is said to be countermarked when his corner-teeth
are artificially made hollow, a false mark being mad, in the
hollow place, in imitation of the eye of a bean, to conceal the
horse's age. farrier's dic.
count erm1'ne. n.s. scounter and mine.]
1. a well or hole sunk into the ground, from which a gallery or
branch runs out under ground, to seek out the enemy's mine;
and disappoint it. a4uitary dici.
after this they mined the walls, laid the powder, and
rammed the mouths; but the citizens made a countermine, and
thereinto they poured such a plenty of water, that the wet
powder could not be fired. hayward.
2. means of opposition ; means of counteraction. -
he thinking himself contemned, knowing no countermine
against contempt but terror, began to let nothing pass, which
might bear the colour of a fault, without sharp punishmat.
3. a stratagem by which any contrivance is defeated. sidney.
the matter being brought to a trial of skill, the counterm me
was only an act of self-preservation. - l'orange.
to sounter mi'n.e. v. a [from the noun.] -
i. to delve a passage into an enemy's mine, by which the pow-
der may evaporate without mischief.
2. to counterwork; to defeat by secret measures,
thus infallibly it must be, if god do not miraculously coun-
termine us, and do more for us than we can do against our-
felves. z decay of piety.
count ermootion. n.s. scounter and motion.] contrary mo-
tion ; opposition of motion. -
that resistance is a counter motion, or equivalent to one, is
plain by this, that any body which is pressed, must needs
press again on the body that presses it. digby on the soul.
if any of the returning spirits should happen to fall loul
"pon others which are outward bound, these countermation,
would overset them, or occasion a later arrival colier.
count ermu‘re. "...s.. [contremur, french..] a wall built up
behind another wall, to supply its place.
the great shot flying through the breach, did beat down
houses; but the countermure, new built against the breach,
standing upon a lower ground, it seldom touched. knolles.
count ernatural. adj. [counter and natural.] contrary to
*inature.
a consumption is a counternatural he&amp;tick extenuation of the
body. harvey on consum tions.
count erno'ise. m. s. scounter and nois...] a sound by which
any other noise is overpowered. -
they endeavoured, either by a constant succession of sen-
sual delights, to charm and lull asleep, or else, by a counternois?
of revellings and riotous excesses, to drown the sofer whispers
of their conscience. - casamy's sermons.
count ero pening. m. s. scounter and opening..] an aperture or
vent on the contrary side. -
a tent, plugging up the orifice, would make the matter re-
cur to the part disposed to receive it, aud mark the place for a
counteropening. sharp's surgery.
count erpa’ce. n.s. [counter and pace..] contrary measure,
attempts in opposition to any scheme. - -
when the least counterpaces are made to these resolutions, it
will then be time enough for our malecontents. soft.
count erpane. m. s. [ontrepoint, french..] a coverlet f: a
bed, or any thing else woven in squares. it is sometimes
written, according to etymology, counterpoint.
in ivory coffers i have stufft my crowns;
in cypress chests my arras counterpanes. shakespeare:
counterpa'rt. n.s.. [counter and part.] the correspondent
part ; the part which answers to another, as the two papers
of a contract; the part which fits another, as the key of a
cipher.
in some things the laws of normandy agreed with the
laws of england; so that they seem to be, as it were, copies
or counterparts one of another. hale's law of england.
an old fellow with a young wench, may pass for a corter.
part of this fable. l’estrange.
oh counterpart o
of our soft sex; well are you made our lords:
so bold, so great, so god-like are you form’d,
how can you love so filly things as women drydon.
he is to confider the thought of his author, and his words,
and to find out the counterpart to each in another language.
dryden.
in the discovery the two different plots look like cooter-
parts and copies of one another. addison's speciaior.
count erplea. m. s. [from counter and plea.] in law, a repli-
cation : as if a stranger to the action begun, desire to be ad-
mitted to say what he can for the safeguard of his estate; that
which the demandant allegeth against this request is called a
counterplea. - cowel.
to counterpio"t. v. a. scounter and plot..] to oppose one
machination by another; to obviate art by art.
count erplot. n.s.. [from the verb..] an artifice opposed
to an artifice. -
5 t
the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 508</div><p class="text">c o u
o ‘c o u
the wolf that had a plot upon the kid, was confounded
by a counterplot of the kid's upon the wolf; and such a coun:
terplot as the wolf, with all his sagacity, was not able to smell
out. l’estrange.
count erpoint. n.s. a coverlet woven in squares, com-
monly spoken counterpain. see counterpane.
to count erpoise. v. a. [counter and poise.]
1. to counterbalance; to be equi-ponderant to ; to act against
with equal weight.
our spoil we have brought home,
do more than counterpoise a full third part
the charges of the action. shakespeare's coriolanus.
the force and the distance of weights, counterpoising one
another, ought to be reciprocal. digby on the soul.
2. to produce a contrary action by an equal weight.
the heaviness of bodies must be counterpoised by a plummet,
fastened about the pulley to the axis. jwilkins.
3. to act with equal power against any person or cause.
so many freeholders of english will be able to beard and to
counterpoise the rest. spenser on ireland.
co'unterpoise. n.s.. [from counter and poise.]
1. equiponderance; equivalence of weight; equal force in the
opposite scale of the balance.
take her by the hand,
and tell her she is thine; to whom i promise
a counterpoise, if not in thy estate,
a balance more replete. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
fastening that to our exact balance, we put a metalline coun-
terpoise into the opposite scale. boyle's spring of the air.
2. the state of being placed in the opposite scale of the
balance.
th’ eternal hung forth his golden scales,
wherein all things created first he weigh'd,
the pendulous round earth, with balanc'd air
in counterpoise. milton's paradise loft.
3. equipollence; equivalence of power.
the second nobles are a counterpoise to the higher nobility,
that they grow not too potent. bacon.
their generals, by their credit in the army, were, with the
magistrates and other civil officers, a sort of counterpoise to the
power of the people. swift.
counterpoison. n.s.. [counter and poison.] antidote; medi-
cine by which the effects of poison are obviated.
counterpoisons must be adapted to the cause; for example, in
poison from sublimate corrosive, and arsenick. arbuthnot.
counterpre'ssure, n.s.. [counter and pressure.] opposite
force; power acting in contrary dire&amp;tions.
does it not all mechanick heads confound,
that troops of atoms from all parts around,
of equal number, and of equal force,
should to this fingle point direct their course;
that so the counterpressure ev'ry way,
of equal vigour, might their motions stay, }
and, by a steady poise, the whole in quiet lay 2 blackm.
count er pro'ject. n.s.. [counter and projeci.] correspondent
part of a scheme. -
a clear reason why they never sent any forces to spain, and
why the obligation not to enter into a treaty of peace with
france, j that entire monarchy was yielded as a prelimi-
nary, was struck out of the counterproject by the dutch. swift.
to count erpr ove. v. a. [from counter and prove.] to take
off a design in black lead, or red chalk, by passing it through
the rolling-press with another piece of paper, both being
moistened with a sponge. chambers.
to counterro.l. v. a. [counter and roll. this is now
generally written as it is spoken, control.] to preserve the
power of detecting frauds by another account.
count erro'lment. n.s.. [from counterral.] a counter ac-
count; controlment.
this manner of exercising of this office, hath many testi-
monies, interchangeable warrants, and counterrolments, where-
of each, running through the hands, and resting in the power
of many several persons, is sufficient to argue and convince
all manner of falshood. bacon.
count erscarp. m. s. [from counter and scarp.] that side of
the ditch which is next the camp, or properly the talus that
supports the earth of the covert-way ; although by this term
is often understood the whole covert-way, with its parapet
and glacis ; and so it is to be understood when it is said the
enemy lodged themselves on the counterscarp. harris.
to count ers1'gn. v. a. [from counter and sign.] to sign an
order or patent of a superiour, in quality of secretary, to ren-
der it more authentick. thus charters are signed by the
king, and countersgned by a secretary of state, or lord chan-
cellor. chambers.
count erte'nor. m. s. [from counter and tenor.] one of the
mean or middle parts of musick; so called, as it were, oppo-
site to the tenor. - harris.
i am deaf: this deafness unqualifies me for all company,
except a few friends with countertenor voices. swift.
counterti'de. m. s. [counter and tide..] contrary tide; fluc-
tuations of the water.
such were our countertides at land, and so
presaging of the fatal blow, - -
in your prodigious ebb and flow. dryden,
count ert i'm e. m. s...[counter and time, contretcmps, freich.
1. the defence or resistance of a horse, that intercepts his &amp;
dence, and the measure of his manage. farrier's did
2. defence; opposition. -
let cheerfulness on happy fortune wait,
and give not thus the countertime to fate.
cous tertu'rn. m. s. [counter and turn.]
the catastasis, called by the romans status, the height and
full growth of the play, we may call properly the counter-
turn, which destroys that expectation, embroils the adjoin
new difficulties, and leaves you far distant from that hope in
which it found you. dryden on dramatick poff
to countervatl. v.a. [contra and valeo, latin.] to i.
equivalent to ; to have equal force or value; to aci against
with equal power. - o
in some men there may be found such qualities as are able
to countervail those exceptions which might be taken agains.
them, and such men's authority is not likely to be fit.
off. haviar,
dryd. aurengz,
and therewithal he fiercely at him flew,
and with important outrage him affail'd;
who, soon prepar'd to field, his sword forth drew,
and him with equal valour countervail’d. fairy queen,
the outward streams, which descend, must be of so much
force as to countervail all that weight whereby the ascendin
side does exceed the other. wilkins's dedal.
we are to compute, that, upon balancing the account, the
profit at last will hardly countervail the inconveniencies that go
along with it. l’estrang,
count e r v atl. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. equal weight; power or value sufficient to obviate any eff.3
or objection.
2. that which has equal weight or value with something else.
surely, the present pleasure of a sinful act is a poor counter-
vail for the bitterness of the review, which begins where the
action ends, and lasts for ever. south's sermon,
count erv1e"w. n.s. [counter and view.]
1. opposition ; a posture in which two persons front each other,
mean while, ere thus was sin’d and judg’d on earth
within the gates of hell sat sin and death,
in counterview. milton's parads: loft.
2. contrast; a position in which two dissimilar things issusole
each other.
i have drawn some lines of linger's characler, on purpose
to place it in counterview or contrast with that of the other
company. swift,
to counterwo'rk. v. a. scounter and work.] to counter.
act ; to hinder any effect by contrary operations.
but heav'n's great view is one, and that the whole:
that counterworks each folly and caprice;
that disappoints th’ effect of ev'ry vice. pot.
coustess. n.s.. [comitisa, lat. comtose, french.] the lis;
of an earl or count.
i take it, she that carries up the train,
is that old noble lady, the dutchess of norfolk.
- it is, and all the rest are countesses. shakoff. henry viii.
it is the peculiar happiness of the countes of abingdon to
have been so truly loved by you, while she was living; and so
gratefully honoured after she was dead. dryden,
co'unting-house. n.s. scount and house.] the room appro-
priated by traders to their books and accounts.
men in trade seldom think of laying out money upon land,
'till their profit has brought them in more than their trade can
well employ ; and their idle bags, cumbering their counting-
houses, put them upon emptying them. loco,
countless. adj. [from count.] innumerable; without num-
ber ; not to be reckoned.
ay, tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,
thy brother marcus tenders on thy lips:
o, were the sum of these that i should pa
countles, and infinite, yet would i pay them.
but oh, her mind, that orcus which includes
legions of mischief, countles; multitudes
of former curses.
by one countless sum of woes opprest,
hoary with cares, and ignorant of rest,
we find the vital springs relax'd and worn;
thus, thro’ the round of age, to childhood we return. prior,
i see, i cry’d, his woes, a countles; train;
i see his friends o'erwhelm’d beneath the main.
pope's odso.
country... n.s.. [contree, fr. contrata, low latin; supposed
to be contracted from conterrata.] -
1. a tract of land ; a region, as distinguished from other
regions.
. they require to be examined concerning the descriptions
of to: countries of which they would be informed. spratt.
2. the parts of a region distant from cities or courts; rural
shakestart,
parts.
would
donnt,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 509</div><p class="text">c o u
c o u
ions,
t the ot
ench]
o, i.
d-.
*::::m i
o
per gor
#arz-
o-
- --
---
2.
would i a house for happiness erect
nature alone should be the architect;
§d build it more convenient than great,
and doubtless in the country chuse her seat. cowley,
i see them hurry from country to town, and then from the
town back again into the country. spectator.
3. the place which any man inhabits, or in which he at pre-
sent resides. -
send out more horses, skirre the country round,
hang those that talk of fear. shakespeare's macbeth.
4. the place of one's birth; the native soil.
the king set on foot a reformation in the ornaments and
advantages of our country. spratt.
o, save my country, heav'n, shall be your last. pope.
5. the inhabitants of any region.
all the country, in a general voice,
cry'd hate upon him; all their prayers and love
were set on hereford. shakespeare's hen. iv.
co'untry. adj.
1. rustick; rural ; villatick.
cannot a country wench know, that having received a shil-
ling from one that owes her three, and a shilling also from
another that owes her three, that the remaining debts in each
of their hands are equal - locke.
i never meant any other, than that mr. trot should con-
fine himself to country dances. spectator.
he comes no nearer to a positive, clear idea of a positive in-
finite, than the country fellow had of the water which was yet
to pass the channel of the river where he stood. locke.
talk but with country people, or young people, and you
ishall find that the notions they apply this name to, are so odd
that nobody can imagine they were taught by a rational
innail. locke.
a country gentleman, learning latin in the university, re-
moves thence to his mansion. house. locke.
the low mechanicks of a country town do somewhat outdo
him. locłe,
come, we'll e'en to our country seat repair, -
the native home of innocence and love. norris.
2. of an interest opposite to that of courts; as, the country party.
3. peculiar to a region or people.
she laughing the cruel tyrant to scorn, spake in her country
language. 2 maccabees, vii. 27.
4. rude; ignorant; untaught.
we make a country man dumb, whom we will not allow to
speak but by the rules of grammar. dryden's dufresnoy.
count ryman n. s. [from country and man.]
1. one born in the same country, or tract of ground. locke.
see, who comes here : -
my countryman; but yet i know him not. shakesp. macbeth.’
horace, great bard, so fate ordain'd, arose ;
and bold as were his countrymen in fight,
snatch'd their fair actions from degrading prose,
and set their battles in eternal light. prior.
the british soldiers act with greater vigour under the con-
duct of one whom they do not consider only as their leader,
but as their countryman. addison on the war.
2. a rustick; one that inhabits the rural parts.
all that have business to the court, and all countrymen
coming up to the city,leave their wives in the country. graunt.
3. a farmer; a husbandman. -
a countryman took a boar in his corn. l’estrange.
co'unty. m. s. [ comte, fr. comitatus, latin.]
1. a shire; that is, a circuit or portion of the realm, into
which the whole land is divided, for the administration of
justice; so that there is no part of the kingdom, but what lieth
within some county. every county is governed by a yearly of—
ficer, called a sheriff, who puts in execution all the com-
mands and judgments of the king's courts. of these counties
four are termed county-palatines, as that of lancaster, ches-
ter, durham, and ely. a county-palatine is a jurisdiction
cf so high a nature, that the chief governors of these, by spe-
cial charter from the king, sent out all, writs in their own
name, and did all things touching justice as absolutely as the
prince himself, only acknowledging him their superior and
iovereign. but this power has, by a statute in henry viii.
his time, been much abridged. there are likewise counties
corporate, which are certain cities or ancient boroughs upon
which our princes have thought good to bestow extraordinary
liberties. of these london is one, york another, the city
of chester a third, and canterbury a fourth. and to these
- may be added many more; as the county of the town of king-
iton upon hull, the county of the town of haverfordwest, and
the county of litchfield. county is, in another signification,
used for the county-court. cowel.
discharge your powers unto their several counties,
as we will ours. - shakesp. henry iv.
he caught his death the last county sessions, where he would
go to see justice done to a poor widow-woman; and her father-
less children. addison's speciator.
2. an earldom.
3. [compte.] a count; a lord. now wholly obsolete.
the gallant, young, and noble gentleman, . . . .
the county paris. shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
he made hugh lupus county palatine of chester, and gave
that earldom to him and his heirs, to hold the same ita liber?
ad gladium sicut rex tenebat angliam ad coronam. davies.
coupe’e. m. s. [french..] a motion in dancing, when one
leg is a little bent and suspended from the ground, and with
the other a motion is made forwards. chambers.
couple. m. s. [couple, fr. copula, latin.]
1. a chain or tye that holds dogs together.
i’ll keep my stable-stand where
i lodge my wife; i’ll go in couples with her, -
then when i feel and see no further trust her. shakes).
it is in some sort with friends as it is with dogs in coups: ,
they should be of the same size and humour. l’e/orange.
* *
2. two; a brace. -
he was taken up by a couple of shepherds, and by them
brought to life again. sidney.
a schoolmaster, who shall teach my son and your's, i will
provide ; yea, though the three do cost me a couple of hundred
pounds. a cham.
a piece of chrystal inclosed a couple of drops, which looked
like water when they were shaken, though perhaps they are
nothing but bubbles of air. addison on italy.
by adding one to one, we have the complex idea of a
couple. locke.
3. a male and his female.
so shall all the couples three, z -
ever true in loving be. shakesp. midsum. night's dream.
oh alas !
i lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth
might, thus have stood, begetting wonder, as
ou gracious couple do. shakesp winter's tale.
i have read of a feigned commonwealth, where the roar-
ried couple are permitted, before they contract, to see one
another naked. bacon's new atlantis.
he said: the careful couple join their tears,
and then invoke the gods with pious prayers. dryden.
all succeeding generations of men are the progeny of one
primitive couple. bentley's sermons.
to couple. v. a. [copula, latin.]
1. to chain together.
huntsman, i charge thee, tender well my hounds; -
and couple clowder with the deep-mouth'd bach. shoff.
. to join one to another.
what greater ills have the heavens in store,
to couple coming harms with sorrow past. sidney.
and wherefoc'er we went, like juno's swans,
still we went coupled and inseparabic. shakes. as you like it.
put the taches into the loops, and comple the ent together,
that it may be one. - - exod xxvi. 1:
they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear.
- 1 pit iii 2.
their concernments were so compled, that if nature had not,
yet their religions would have made them brothers. south.
that man makes a mean figure in the eyes of reason, who
is measuring syllables and coupling rhimes, when he should be
mending his own soul, and securing his own immortality. pope.
3. to marry; to wed; to join in wedlock.
i shall rejoice to see you so coupled, as may be fit both for
your honour and your satisfaction. sidney.
i am just going to assist with the archbishop, in degrading a .
parson who couples all our beggars, by which i shall make one
happy man. swift.
t. co'up le. v. n. to join in embraces.
waters in africa being rare, divers sorts of beasts come
from several parts to drink; and so being refreshed, fall to
couple, and may times with several kinds. bacon.
thou, with thy lusty crew, -
cast wanton eyes on the daughters of men, -
and coupled with them, and begot a race. milt. par. reg.
that great variety of brutes in africa, is by reason of the
meeting together of brutes of several species, at water, and
the promiscuous couplings of males and females of several
species. hale's origin of mankind,
after this alliance,
let tigers match with hinds, and wolves with sheep,
and every creature couple with his foe. dryd. span. fryar.
couple-beggar. n. s. [couple and beggar..] one that makes
it his business to marry beggars to each other.
no couple-beggar in the land,
e'er join'd such numbers hand in hand. swift.
co'uflet. n.s. [french.]
1. two verses; a pair of rhimes.
then would they cast away their pipes, and, holding hand
in hand, dance by the only cademice of their voices, which
they would use in singing some short couplets, whereto the one
half beginning, the other half should answer. sidney.
then at the last, an only couplet fraught
with some unmeaning thing they call a thought;
a needless alexandrine ends the song,
that, like a wounded snake, drags its slow length along. pope.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

in
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 510</div><p class="text">c o u
- c o u :
in pope i cannot read a line,
but with a figh i wish it mine;
when he can in one couplet fix
more sense than i can do in six,
it gives me such a jealous fit,
i cry, pox take him and his wit.
2. a pair; as of doves.
anon, as patient as the female dove,
ere that her golden couplets are disclos'd,
his silence will sit drooping. shakespeare's hamlet.
co’urage. n.s. [courage, fr. from cor, latin.] bravery :
active fortitude; spirit of enterprise.
the king becoming graces,
devotion, patience, courage, fortitude;
i have no relish of them. shakespeare's macbeth.
their discipline
now mingled with their courage. shakespeare's cymbeline.
hope arms their courage: from their tow’rs they throw
their darts with double force, and drive the foe. dryden.
courage, that grows from constitution, very often forsakes
a man when he has occasion for it; and when it is only a kind
of instinet in the soul, it breaks out on all occasions, without
judgment or discretion. that courage which arises from the sense
of our duty, and from the fear of offending him that made
us, acts always in an uniform manner, and according to the
dictates of right reason. addison's guardian.
nothing but the want of common courage was the cause of
their misfortunes. swift.
cour a geous. adj. [from courage.]
1. brave; daring ; bold; enterprising; adventurous; hardy;
stout.
and he that is courageous among the mighty, shall flee away
naked in that day. ainos, ii. 16.
let us imitate the courageous example of st. paul, who
chose then to magnify his office when ill men conspired to
lessen it. atterbury.
2. it is used ludicrously by shakspeare for outrageous. -
- he is very courageous mad, about his throwing into the
water.
cour a geously. adv. . [from courageous.] bravely; stoutly;
boldly.
#. king the next day presented him battle upon the plain,
the fields there being open and champaign: the earl courage-
ously came down, and joined battle with him. bacon's h. vii.
cour a geous n ess. n. s. [from courageous.] bravery; bold-
ness; spirit; courage.
nicanor hearing of the manliness and the courageousness
that they had to fight for their country, durst not try the
matter by the sword. 2 mac. xiv. 18.
cour ant. {n-s [courante, french..] see cor ant.
swift.
cour a'nto,
1. a nimble dance.
i'll like a maid the better, while i have a tooth in my
head: why, he is able to lead her a couranto. shakespeare.
2. anything that spreads quick, as a paper of news.
to courb. v. n. [courber, french..] to bend; to bow; to
stoop in supplication. not in use.
in the fatness of these pursy times,
virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
yea, courb and woo, for leave to do it good. shak. hamlet.
co’urier. m. s. [courier, french.] a messenger sent in haste;
an express; a runner.
i met a courier, one mine ancient friend. shakesp. timon.
this thing the wary bassa well perceiving, by speedy cou-
riers advertised solyman of the enemy's purpose, requesting
him with all speed to repair with his army to tauris.
knolles's history.
course. m. s. [course, fr. cursus, latin.]
1. race ; career.
and some she arms with sinewy force,
and some with swiftness in the course. cowley.
2. passage from place to place ; progress.
ferred the course of a river.
and when we had finished our course from tyre, we came
to ptolemais. acis xxi. 7.
a light, by which the argive squadron steers
their silent course to ilium’s well known shore.
. tilt; act of running in the lists.
but this hot knight was cooled with a fall, which, at the
third course, he received of phalantus. sidney.
4. ground on which a race is run.
5. track or line in which a ship sails, or any motion is per-
formed.
6. sail; means by which the course is performed.
to the courses we have devised studding-sails, sprit-sails,
and top-sails. raleigh's essays.
7. progress from one gradation to another; process.
when the state of the controversy is plainly determined, it
must not be altered by another disputant in the course of the
disputation. jwatts.
8. order of succession; as, every one in his course.
if any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two,
to this may be re-
denham.
shakespeare. .
or at the most by three, and that by coins ; and let one in.
terpret. -
9. stated and orderly method, or manner.
- if she live long,
and in the end meet the old course of death,
women will all turn monsters. shakspeare's king lor
the duke cannot deny the course of law. shaftor.
if god, by his revealed declaration, first gave rule to i.
man, he, that will claim by that title, must have the same
positive grant of god for his succession; for, if it has n.
direeted the course of its descent and conveyance, no body c2n
succeed to this title of the first ruler." - lock
10. series of successive and methodical procedure. -
the glands did resolve during her cours of physick, and
she continueth very well to this day. isosoman’s surgery.
11. the elements of an art exhibited and explained, in amo.
thodical series. hence our courses of philosophy, anatomy
chemistry, and mathematicks. chamo.
12. conduct; manner of proceeding. -
grittus perceiving the danger he was in, began to doubt
with himself what cours were best for him to take. knolls,
that worthy deputy finding nothing but a common mistry
took the best course he possibly could to establish a commo:
wealth in ireland. davies on ireland,
he placed commissioners there, who governed it only in a
course of discretion, part martial, part civil. davies on iraland.
give willingly what i can take by force;
and know, obedience is your safest course. dryd, auroroz,
but if a right course be taken with children, there will i.
be so much need of common rewards and punishments. loci,
'tis time we should decree -
what course to take. - addison's cats.
the senate observing how, in all contentions, they were
forced to yield to the tribunes and people, thought it their
wisest course to give way also to time. swiff.
13. method of life; train of actions. y
a woman of so working a mind, and so vehement spirits,
as it was happy she took a good cause; for otherwise it would
have been terrible. - sidney,
his addiction was to courses vain; -
his companies, unletter'd, rude and shallow;
his hours fill’d up with riots, banquets, sports.
... shakespeare's henry v.
as the dropsy-man, the more he drinks, the drier he is,
and the more he still defires to drink; even so a finner, the
more he sins, the apter is he to fin, and more desirous to keep
i cor. xiv. 27,
still a course in wickedness. pariini.
men will say,
that beauteous emma vagrant cours; took,
her father's house and civil life forsook. prior,
14. natural bent; uncontrolled will.
it is best to leave nature to her cours, who is the sovereign
physician in most diseases. tompk.
so every servant took his course,
and, bad at first, they all grew worse. prior.
15. catamenia. -
the stoppage of women's courses, if not suddenly looked to,
sets them undoubtedly into a consumption, dropsy, or some
other dangerous disease. harvey on consimptions;
16. orderly structure.
the tongue defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire
the course of nature. james, iii. 6.
17. [in architecture.] a continued range of stones, level or of
the same height, throughout the whole length of the building,
and not interrupted by any aperture. harris.
18. series of consequences.
19. number of dishes set on at once upon the table.
- worthy fir, thou bleed'st:
thy exercise hath been too violent -
for a second course of fight. shakespeare's coriolanus,
then with a second cours: the tables load,
and with full chargers offer to the god. dryden's an,
you are not to wash your hands 'till after you have sent up
your second course. swift's directions to the coi.
so quick retires each flying course, you'd swear
sancho's dread doctor and his wand was there. ,
20. regularity; settled rule.
21. empty form.
men talk as if they believed in god, but they live as if
they thought there was none; their vows and promises are no
more than words of course. l'estrange,
22. of course. by consequence.
with a mind unprepossessed by dostors and commentators
of any sect, whose reasonings, interpretation and language,
which i have been used to, will of course make all chime that
way; and make another, and perhaps the genuine meaning of
the author, seem harsh, strained, and uncouth to me. locłe,
23. of course. by settled rule.
sense is of course annex'd to wealth and power;
no muse is proof against a golden show'r, garth.
neither shall i be so far wanting to myself, as not to desire
a patcnt, granted of course to all useful projectors. swift,
pop!,
to
-
-
3.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 511</div><p class="text">c o u
c o u
• *_.
ilf-
"...
*::::
to course. v. 4. [som the noun.]
- - ursue. -
1. to hunt: to p the big round tears
* another down his innocent nose - - -
#. shakespeare's a you like it.
o king is hunting the deer ; i am cousing myself.
shakespeare's love's labour lost.
where's the thane of cawdor? s
'd him at the heels, and had a purpose
x; :::::::::: 3. shakespeare's macbeth.
ith dogs that hunt in view. -
2. too o also in flying of hawks, or in cour ing of
a deer, or hart, with greyhounds. bacon's natural history.
fan continually starting hares for you to course: we were
certainly cut out for one another; for my temper quits an
amour just where thine takes it up. congreve's old batchelor.
o speed ; to force to run.
3. to put to sp when they have an appetite
ery, let them not drink nor eat, ... "
asso. oft, and tire them in the heat. may's virg.
to course. v. n. to run; to rove about.
swift as quicksilver it courses through -
the nat'ral gates and allies of the body. shakesh. hamlet.
the blood, before cold and settled, left the liver white and
pale, which is the badge of pusillanimity and cowardice; but
the sherris warms it, and makes it course from the inwards to
the parts extreme. - shakesp. henry iv.
she did so course o'er my exteriours, with such a greedy in-
tention, that the appetite of her eye did seem to scorch me up
like a burning glass. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
ten brace and more of greyhounds, snowy fair,
and tall as stags, ran loose, and cours'd around his chair. dry.
all, at once -
relapsing quick, as quickly re-ascend
and mix, and thwart, extinguish, and renew, &gt; -
all ether coursing in a maze of light. thomson's autumn.
courser. n.s.. [from course; courser, french..]
i. a swift horse; a war horse: a word not used in prose.
- he proudly pricketh on his coarser strong,
and atinay him pricks with spurs of shame and wrong. sp.
then to his absent guest the king decreed
a pair of coursers, born of heav'nly breed;
who from their nostrils breath’d etherial fire,
whom circe stole from her celestial fire.
- th’ impatient coursor pants in every vein,
and, pawing, secns to beat the distant plain;
hills, vales, and floods appear already cross'd, * *
and, ere he starts, o: o: * lost. pope.
- o pursues the sport of coursing hares. . .
2. o p. leathern ‘. by which a falconer holds his
hawk, or a courser leads his greyhound. . hanmer.
court. m. s. [cour, fr. koert, dut. curtis, low latin.] .
1. the place where the prince resides 3. the palace. • .
here do you keep a hundred knights and squires,
men so disorderly, so debauch'd and bold,
that this our court, infected with their manners,
shews like a riotous inn; epicurism and lust,
make it more like a tavern, or a brothel, 9 tors
than a grac'd palace. shakespeare's king lear.
it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls.
isaiah, xxvi. 13.
his exaeness, that every man should have his due, was such,
that you would think he had never seen a court; the politeness
with which this justice was administred, would convince you
he never had lived out of one. prior's dedication.
a suppliant to your royal court i come. ... pope's odsoy.
2. the hall or chamber where justice is administred.
-- * are you acquainted with the difference
that holds this present question in the court?. shakespeare.
st. paul being brought unto the highest court in athens, to
give an account of the doctrine he had preached, concerning
jesus and the resurrection, took occasion to imprint on those
magistrates a future state. atterbury.
3. open space before a house. -
you must have, before you come to the front, three courts;
a green court plain, with a wall about it; a second court of
the same, but more garnished, with little turrets, or other
embellishments upon the wall; and a third court, to square
dryden’s aen,
with the front, not to be built but inclosed with a naked
wall. bacon.
suppose it were the king's bedchamber, yet the meanest
man in the tragedy must come and dispatch his business, rather
than in the lobby or court yard (which is fitter for him), for
fear the stage should be cleared, and the scenes broken. dryd.
4. a small opening inclosed with houses and paved with broad
stones, distinguished from a street. -
5. persons who compose the retinue of a prince.
their wisdom was so highly esteemed, that some of them
were always employed to follow the counts of their kings, to
advise them. - - - - temple.
6. persons who are assembled for the administration of justice.
7. any jurisdiction, military, civil, or ecclesiastical.
vol. i.
a. if any noise or soldier you perceive
'ear to the wall, by some apparent sign
let us have knowledge at the court of guard. shak. h. vi.
the archbishop
of canterbury, accompanied with other,
learned and reverend fathers of his order,
held a late court at dunstable. shakesh. henry viii.
i have at last met with the proceedings of the court baron,
held in that behalf. - speciaior.
8. the art of pleasing; the art of insinuation. . -
him the prince with gentle court did board. spensor.
hast thou been never base ? did lovencer bend
thy frailer virtue, to betray thy friend? * -
flatter me, make thy court, and say it did;
kings in a crowd would have their vices j. dryd. aureng.
some sort of people, placing a great part of their happiness
in strong drink, are always forward to mak. ..., to m
young master, by offering that which they love best them.
selves. - locke.
i have been considering why poets have such ill succo.
making their court, since they are allowed to be the greatest
and best of all flatterers: the defect is, that they flatter only
in print or in writing. swift to gay.
9. it is often used in composition in most of its senses.
to court. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to woo; to solicit a woman to marriage.
follow a shadow, it flies you;
seem to fly it, it will pursue:
so court a mistress, she denies you ; - -
let her alone, she will court you. ben. johnson's forg/?.
fir'd with her love, and with ambition led,
- the neighb'ring princes court her nuptial bed. dryden's an.
_alas! sempronius, wouldst thou talk of love
to marcia, whilst her father's life's in danger ?
thou might'st as well court the pale trembling vestal,
while she beholds the holy flame expiring. addison's cato.
ev’n now, when filent scorn is als they gain, -
a thousand court you, though they court in vain. pope.
2. to solicit; to seek. ' ' . . .
their own ease and satisfaction would quickly teach chil-
dren to court commendation, and avoid doing what they found
condemned. - - 4.2cke on education.
3. to flatter; to endeavour to please.
court-chaplain, n. s. [court and chaplain..] one who at-
tends the king to celebrate the holy offices. . .
the maids of honour have been fully convinced by a famous
court-chaplain. - swift.
court-day. m. s. scourt and day.] day on which justice is
solemnly administred. -
the judge took time to deliberate, and the next court-day
he spoke. - - arbuthnot and pope.
court-dresser. n.s.. [court and drosor.] one that dresses
the court, or persons of rank; a flatterer.
there are many ways of fallacy; such arts of giving co-
lours, appearances and resemblances, by this court-drossr,
fancy. locke.
couso-favour. n.s. favours or benefits bestowed by princes.
we part with the blesfings of both worlds for pleasures,
ot-favours, and commissions; and at last, when we have
fold ourselves to our lusts, we grow fick of our bargain. l'e/fr.
court-h and. m. s. scourt and hand j the hand or iilan incr
of writing used in records and judicial proceedings.
he can make obligations, and write court-hand. shakso.
court-lady. n.s. scourt and lady..] a lady conversant or
employed in court. -
the same study, long continued, is as intolerable to them,
as the appearing long in the same clothes or fashion is .
court-lady. locke.
*
courteous. 4d}.. [courtois, french..] elegant of manners; .
polite; well-bred; full of acts of respect,
he hath deserved worthily of his country; and his ascent
is not by such easy degrees, as those who have been supple
and courteous to the people. shakes?. coriolanus.
they are one while courteous, civil, and obliging ; but,
within a small time after, are supercilious, sharp, trouble-
some, fierce, and exceptious. south.
co urteously. adv. [from courteous.] respectfully; civilly;
complaisantly. - -
he thought them to be gentlemen of much more worth
than their habits bewrayed, yet he let them courteously
pass. //otton.
whilst christ was upon earth, he was not only easy of ac-
cess, he did not only courteously receive all that addressed them.
selves to him, but also did not disdain himself to travel up
and down the country. calamy's sermons.
alcinous, being prevailed upon by the glory of his name,
entertained him courteously. broome.
co'urteousness. n. s. [from courteous.] civility ; com-
plaisance.
co'urtesan, 7 m. s. scortisana, low latin.] a woman of the
§:::...} town; a prostitute; a strumpet.
'tis a brave night to cool a courtezan. shakes. king lear,
5 u - with<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 512</div><p class="text">c o u
c ow
with them there are no stews, no dissolute houses, no
courtesans, nor any thing of that kind; nay, they wonder,
with detestation, at you in europe, which permit such
things. bacon's new atlantis.
the corinthian is a column, lasciviously decked like a
courtesan. 17%tton.
charixus, the brother of sappho, in love with rhodope the
courtezan, spent his whole estate upon her. .. addison.
courtesy, n.s. scourtoise, fr. cortosa, italian.]
1. elegance of manners; civility; complaisance.
sir, you are very welcome to our house:
it must appear in other ways than words,
therefore i scant this breathing courtesy. shak. merch, of wen.
who have seen his estate, his hospitality, his courtesy to
strangers. pracham.
he, who was compounded of all the elements of affability
and courtesy towards all kind of people, brought himself
to a habit of neglect, and even of rudeness, towards the
queen. clarendon.
courtesy is sooner found in lowly shades
with smoky rasters, than in tap'stry halls, -
and courts of princes, whence it first was nam'd. milton.
so gentle of condition was he known,
that through the court his courtesy was blown. dryd, fab.
2. an act of civility or respect,
you spurn'd me such a day; another time
you call'd me dog; and for these courtesses, -
i'll lend you thus much money. shakes. merchant of venice.
repose you there, while i to the hard house
return, and force their scanted courtesy. shakesp. k. lear.
when i was last at exeter, -
the mayor in courtsy shew'd me the castle. shakes. r. iii.
sound all the lofty instruments of war,
and by that musick let us all embrace;
for heav'n to earth some of us never shall
a second time do such a courtsy. shakespeare's henry iv.
other states, assuredly, cannot be justly accused for not
staying for the first blow ; or for not accepting polyphemus's
courts, to be the last that shall be caten up. bacon.
3. the reverence made by women.
some country girl, scarce to a court’sy bred,
would i much rather than cornelia wed;
if, supercilious, haughty, proud and vain, -
she brought her father's triumphs in her train. dryd.juv.
the poor creature was as full of courtesies as if i had been
her godmother: the truth on’t is, i endeavoured to make her
lock something christian-like. congreve's old batchelor.
4. a tenure, not of right, but by the favour of others; as, to
hold upon courtesy. - - -
5. courtesy of england. a tenure by which, if a man marry
an inheritance, that is, a woman seised of land, and getteth
a child of her that comes alive into the world, though both
the child and his wife die forthwith ; yet, if she were in pos-
session, shall he keep the land during his life, and is called
tenant per legem angliae, or by the courtesy of england. cowel.
to courtes y. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to perform an act of reverence: it is now only used of wo-
in ci1,
toby approaches, and courtses there to me. shakespeare.
the petty traffickers, -
that court's to them, do them reverence. shakespeare.
2. to make a reverence in the manner of ladies.
if i should meet her in my way, -
we hardly court's to each other. prior.
court1e r. n. s. [from court.] - -
1. one that frequents or attends the courts of princes.
he hath been a courtier, he swears.
if any man doubts that, let him put me to my purgation. i
have trod a measure; i have flattered a lady; i have been
politick with my friend, smooth with mine enemy; i have
undone three taylors; i have had four quarrels, and like to
have fought one. shakespeare's as you like it.
you are a flattering boy; now, i see you'll be a courtier.
shakespeare's merry ivives of windsor.
you know i am no courtier, nor versed in state-affairs. bac.
the principal figure in a picture, is like a king among his
courtiers, who ought to dim the lustre of his attendants. dryd.
2. one that courts or solicits the favour of another.
what
made thee, all honour'd honest roman brutus,
with the arm'd rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom,
to drench the capitol shakes. anthony and cleopatra.
there was not among all our princes a greater courtier of
the people than richard the iiid. not out of fear, but
wisdom. suckling.
co’u rtlinc.n. s. [from court.] a courtier; a retainer to a court.
courtling, i rather thou should'st utterly
dispraise my work, than praise it frostily. ben. johnson.
co'urt in e. see curtain.
court lik e. adj. [court and like..] elegant ; polite.
our english tongue is, i will not say as sacred as the he-
brew, or as learned as the greck, but as fluent as the latin,
as courteous as the spanish, as courtlike as the french, and as
anorous as the italian. camden's renaio,
cou rtliness. m. s. [from courtly.] elegance of manner.
grace of mien ; complaisance; civility. &gt;
the flightest part that you excel in, is courtsmos.. .
lord digby to sir kenelin dirl,
courtly. adj. [from court.] relating or retaining too.
court; elegant; soft; flattering.
in our own time, (excuse some courtly strains)
no whiter page than addison's remains. po:
co'urtly. adv. in the manner of courts; elegantly. -
they can produce nothing so courtly writ, or which ex.
presses so much the conversation of a gentleman, as fir john
suckling. dryden on dramatice poetry,
courts hip. m. s. [from court.]
1. the act of soliciting favour.
he paid his courtship with the croud,
as far as modest pride allow’d. swift.
2. the solicitation of a woman to marriage.
be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
to courtship, and such fair ostents of love,
as shall conveniently become you there. shak. merth of win.
in tedious courtship we declare our pain,
andere we kindness find, first meet disdain. dryd. ind. emp,
every man in the time of courtship, and in the first entrance
of marriage, puts on a behaviour like my correspondent's holi-
day suit. 4ddison's guardian,
3. civility; elegance of manners.
my courtship to an university,
my modesty i give to soldiers bare; -
my patience to a gamester’s share. dzon,
cousin. m. s. scousin, fr. consanguineus, lat.]
1. any one collaterally related inore remotely than a brother of
sister.
- macbeth unseam'd him.
–oh, valiant cousin ' worthy gentleman.
tybalt, my cousin ' o, my brother's child
unhappy fight! alas, the blood is spill’d -
of my dear kinsman. shakesh. romeo and joid.
thou art, great lord, my father's sister's son,
and cousin german to great priam's seed. shak. tr. and cros.
2. a title given by the king to a nobleman, particularly to th:
of the council.
cow. m. s. [in the plural, anciently kine, or heen, now com.
monly cow: ; cu, sax. aze, dutch..] the female of the bull;
the horned animal with cloven feet, kept for her milk and
calves.
we see that the horns of oxen and cows, for the most part,
are larger than the bulls; which is caused by abundance of
moisture, which in the horns of the bull faileth. bacon.
after the fever is diminished, asses and goats milk maybe
necessary; yea, a diet of cows milk alone. joseman's surgery,
then, leaving in the fields his grazing cows,
he sought himself some hospitable house: ==
good creton entertain'd his godlike guest. dryden's fillo,
to cow. v. a. [from coward, by contraction.] to depress
with fear; to oppress with habitual timidity.
macduff was from his mother's womb
untimely ripp'd.—
—accursed be that tongue that tells me so;
for it hath cow'd my better part of man. shaos. marleth.
by reason of their frequent revolts they have drawn upon
themselves the pressures of war so often, that it seems to have
fomewhat cowed their spirits. howel's vocal forff.
for when men by their wives are cow'd,
their horns of course are understood. hudibras.
cow-herd. m. s. [cow and hjrb, sax. a keeper.] one whose
occupation is to tend cows.
cow-house. n.s.. [cow and house.] the house in which kine
are kept.
you must house your milch-cows, that you give hay to in
your cow-house all night. mortimer.
cow-leech. m. s. scow and lech..] one who professes to
cure distempered cows.
to cow-leech. v. n. to profess to cure cows.
though there are many pretenders to the art of farriering
and cow-leeching, yet many of them are very ignorant, espe-
cially in the country. mortimer's husbanary,
cow-weed. m. s. scow and weed.] a species of chervil,
q9w.w.h.e.a.t. n.s.. [from cow and wheat..] a plant.
coward. n. s. scouard, fr. of uncertain derivation.]
1. a poltron ; a wretch whose predominant passion is fear,
pyrocles did such wonders, beyond belief, as was able to
lead mufidorus to courage, though he had been born a
corvard. sidney.
there was a soldier that vaunted, before julius cæsar, of
the hurts he had received in his face. caesar knowing him to
be but a coward, told him, you were best take heed, next
time you run away, how you look back. bacon,
some are brave one day, and cowards another, as great cap-
tains have often told me, from their own experience and ob-
servation. tompk.
7 - a coward
software.
.
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 513</div><p class="text">c o vv
c o z
coswis h. adj. [from to cow, to awe.]
a zward does not always escape with disgrace, but some-
times also he loses his life. south.
tremble ye not, oh friends ! and cowards fly,
doom'd by the stern telemachus to die! pope's odosy,
2. it is sometimes used in the manner of an adjective.
having more man than wit about me, i drew ;
and rais’d the house with loud and coward cries. shakespeare.
invading fears repel my coward joy,
and ills fore seen the present bliss destroy. prior.
coow ard1cf. m. s. [from coward.] fear ; habitual timidity;
pusillanimity; wai;t of courage. -
certes, fir knight, ye been too much to blame,
thus for to blot the honour of the dead ;
and with foul cowardice his carcase shame,
whose living hands immortaliz’d his name. fairy queen.
gallant and fearless courage will turn into a native and
heroick valour, and make them hate the cowardice of doing
wrong. milton on education,
none was disgrac'd ; for falling is no shame, -
and cowardice alone is loss of fame:
the vent'rous knight is from the saddle thrown,
but 'tis the fault of fortune, not his own. dryden's fables.
this great, this holy, this terrible being, is present to all
our affections; sees every treacherous inclination of our heart
to desert his service; and treasures up, against the day of his
wrath, the secret cowardice which deters us from asserting his
cause, which prevails on us to compliment, the vices of the
great, to applaud the libertine, and laugh with the prophane.
rogers's sermons.
cow ardliness. n.s.. [from cowardly..] timidity ; cowardice.
cowardly. adj. [from coward.]
1. fearful 5 timorous ; pusillanimous. -
an egyptian soothsayer made antonius believe that his
genius, otherwise brave and confident, was in the presence of
octavius poor and cowardly. bacon's natural history.
2. mean ; befitting a coward; proceeding from fear. o
i do find it cowardly and vile,
for fear of what thight fall, so to prevent
the time of life. shakesp. julius cæsar.
let all such as can enlarge their consciences like hell, and
style a cowardly silence in christ's cause discretion, know, that
christ will one day scorn them. - south.
co'w ar dly. adv. in the manner of a coward ; meanly; vilely.
he sharply reproved them as men of no courage, who had,
most cowardly turned their backs upon their enemies. knolles.
cow ardship. n.s.. [from coward.] the character or quali-
ties of a coward ; meanness: a word not now in use.
a very paltry boy, and more a coward than a hare: his dis-
honesty appears in leaving his friend here in necessity, and de-
nying him; and for his cowardship, ask fabian. shakesp.
‘72 cower. v. n. […wrrian, welsh; courber, fr. or perhaps
borrowed from the manner in which a cow finks on her knees.]
to sink by bending the knees; to stoop; to shrink.
let the pail be put over the man's head above water, then
he cower down, and the pail be pressed down with him. bacon.
the splitting rocks cower'd in the sinking sands,
and would not dash me with their ragged sides. shakespeare.
as thus he spake, each bird and beast beheld,
approaching two and two; these cow'ring low
with blandishment, each bird stoop'd on his wing. milton.
our dame sits cow'ring o'er a kitchen fire;
i draw fresh air, and nature's works admire. dryden;
timorous; fearful;
mean; pusillanimous ; cowardly. not in use.
it is the cowish terrour of his spirit,
that dares not undertake : he'll not feel wrong,
which tie him to an answer. shakesp. k. lear.
coowkeep er. m. s. [cow and keeper.] one whose business is
to keep cows.
the terms cowkeeper and hogherd, are not to be used in
our poetry; but there are no finer words in the greek lan-
guage. broome.
cowl. m. s. scuxle, saxon; cuculius, latin.]
1. a monk’s hood.
you may imagine that francis cornfield did scratch his
elbow, when he had sweetly invented, to signify his name,
faint francis with his friery cowl in a cornfield. camden.
what differ more, you cry, than crown and cow!?
i'll tell you, friend, a wise man and a fool.
pope.
2. [perhaps from cool, cooler, a vessel in which hot liquor is set
- to cool.) a vessel in which water is carried on a pole between
twc.
cowl-star f. n.f. [cowl and staff.] the staff on which a
vessel is supported between two men.
mounting him upon a cowl-sloff,
which (tosing him something high)
he apprehended to be pegasus. suckling.
the way by a cowl-staff is safer: the staff must have a
bunch in the middle, somewhat wedge-like, and covered with
a soft bolster. - jwiseman.
cowslip. n.s. sparalysis; curlippe, sax. as some think, from
their resemblance of scent to the breath of a cow ; perhaps
o
from growing much in pasture-grounds, and often meeting
the cow's lip.j - - co-
qop is also called pagil, grows wild in the o-
and is a species of §...” 2 g o:
he might as well say, that a cow/ip is as white as a lily.
- - sidney.
where the bee sucks, there suck i ; . . laney
in a cowslip's bell i lie. . . . . shakespeare's tampg/?.
- thy little sons
permit to range the pastures: gladly they
will mow the cowslip posies, faintly sweet. philips;
§:::::::::::: m. s. a species of mullein.
o3:99 m.b. m. s. scock and comb, corrupted from co, com/
1. the top of the head. &gt; p rom cock's comb.]
as the cockney did to the eels, when she put them i' the
pasty alive ; she rapt them o' th' coxcombs with a flick and
cried down, wantons, down. - shakesp. k. or.
2. the comb resembling that of a cock, which sons. fools
wore formerly in their caps. . -
there take my coxcomb; why, this fellow has banished two
9f his daughters, and did the third a blesing against his wif
if thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb. shakesp.
3. a fop; a superficial pretender to knowledge or accomplish-
illents. -
- i sent to her,
by this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
tokens and letters, which she did resend.
i scorn, quoth she, thou coxcomb filly,
quarter or council from a foe. hudibras.
it is a vanity for *very pretending coxcomb to make him-
self one of the party still with his betters. l'estrange.
- they overflowed with smart repartees, and were only dis-
tinguished from the intended wits by being called coxcombs
though they deserved not so scandalois a name. byim.
some are bewilder'd in the maze of schools,
and some made coxcombs, nature meant but fools.
4. a kind of red flower.
coxco'mical. adj. [from coxcomb.] foppish; conceited : a
low word unworthy of use. -
because, as he was a very natural writer, and they were
without prejudice, without prepossession, without affectation,
and without the influence of coxcomical, senseless cabal, they
were at liberty to receive the impressions which things naturally
made on their minds. -
shakespeare.
pope.
- dennis
coy adj. [coi, french ; from quietus, latin -
1. modest; decent. - 4. 2 l
jason is as coy as is a maide;
he looked piteously, but nought he said. chaucer.
2. reserved ; not accessible; not easily condescending to fami-
liarity.
andyain delight she saw he light did pass,
a foe of folly and immodest toy;
still solemn sad, or still disdainful coy. stens.
like phoebus sung the no less am’rous boy; pensor.
like daphne she, as lovely and as coy. jp'all r.
at this season every smile of the sun, like the smile of a coy
lady, is as dear as it is uncommon.
the nile's coy source. co
to cox. v. n. [from the adjective.] s"' -
1. to behave with reserve; to reject familiarity.
- what, coying it again -
no more; but make me happy to my gust,
that is, without your struggling. dryden’s k. arthur
retire i beg you, leave me.-- - *** -
—thus to coy it
with one who knows you too ! rowe's jane shore.
2. to make difficulty; not to condescend willingly.
if he coy’d
to hear cominius speak, i'll keep at home. shah, coriolan.
79 cox. v. a. [for decoy.] to allure. not in use.
i'll mountebank their loves
coy their hearts from them, and come home beloved
z of all the trades in rome. shakespeare's coriolanus,
cox ly, adv. [from coy.] with reserve; with difinclination to
familiarity.
this said; his hand he coyly snatcht away
a from forth antinous’ hand. chapman's odyssey.
cox ness. n.s.. [from coy.] reserve; unwillingness to become
familiar.
when the sun hath warmed the earth and water, three or
four male carps will follow a female; and she putting on a
seeming coyos, they force her through weeds and flags. //allon.
when the kind nymph would coyness feign,
and hides but to be found again. -
cosyst r.e.l. n.s. a species of degenerate hawk.
one they might trust, their common wrongs to wreak :
the musquet and the coyorel were too weak, "
too fierce the falcon. dryden's hind and panther.
coz. m. s. a cant or familiar word, contracted from cousin.
be merry, coz; since sudden sorrow
serves to say thus, some good thing comes to-morrow. shas.
to co'zen. v. a. [to cose is in the old scotch dialea, as junio,
** to ---
991-rves,
dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 514</div><p class="text">c r a
observes, to chop or change; whence cozen, to cheat, because
in such traffick there is commonly fraud..] to cheat; to
trick; to defraud.
let the queen pay never so fully, let the muster-master
view them never so diligently, let the deputy or general look
to them never so exactly, yet they can cozen them all. spenser.
goring loved no man so well but that he would cozen him,
and expose him to publick mirth for having been cozen'd.
- - clarendon.
he that suffers a government to be abused by carelessness or
neglect, does the same thing with him that maliciously and
corruptly sets himself to cozen it. l’estrange.
you are not obliged to a literal belief of what the poet
says; but you are pleased with the image, without being
cozened by the fiction. - dryden.
what if i please to lengthen out his date
a day, and take a pride to cozen fate. dryden's aurengzebe.
children may be cozened into a knowledge of the letters,
and be taught to read, without perceiving it to be any thing
but a sport. - locke on education.
coozen age. n.s.. [from cozen.] fraud; deceit ; artifice; fal-
lacy; trick; cheat; the practice of cheating.
they say this town is full of cozenage,
as nimble jugglers that deceive the eye
disguised cheaters. shakespeare.
wisdom without honesty is meer craft and cozenage, and
therefore the reputation of honesty must first be gotten, which
cannot be but by living well: a good life is a main argument.
- ben. johnson's discoveries.
there's no such thing as that we beauty call,
it is meer cozenage all;
for though some long ago
lik'd certain colours ming!'d so and so,
that doth not tie me now from chufing new. suckling.
imaginary appearances offer themselves to our impatient
minds, which entertain these counterfeits without the least
suspicion of their cozonage. glanville's scopsis.
strange coz'nage / none would live past years again,
yet all hope pleasure in what yet remain;
and from the dregs of life, think to receive
what the first sprightly running could not give. dryd. aur.
but all these are trifles, if we consider the fraud and cozonage
of trading men and shopkeepers. swift.
cooze n.e.r. m. s. [from cozen.] a cheater; a defrauder.
indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad, and therefore it be-
hoves men to be wary. shakesp. //inter's tale.
crab. m. s. [cnabba, sax. krabbe, dutch..]
1. a crustaceous fish.
those that cast their shell are, the lobster, the crab, the
crawfish, the hodmandod or dodman, and the tortoise. the
old shells are never found ; so as it is like they scale off and
crumble away by degrees. bacon's natural history.
the fox catches oral fish with his tail, which olaus mag-
nus saith he himself was an eye-witness of. derham.
2. a wild apple ; the tree that bears a wild apple.
noble stock
was graft with crab-tree slip, whose fruit thou art. shakesp.
fetch me a dozen crab-tree staves, and strong ones: these
are but switches. shakesp. henry viii.
when roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
then nightly sings the staring owl. shakes eare.
tell why a graft, taking nourishment from a crab stock,
shall have a fruit more noble than its nurse and parent. taylor.
3. a peevish morose person.
4. a wooden engine with three claws for launching of ships, or
heaving them into the dock. philips.
5. the sign in the zodiack.
then parts the twins and crab, the dog divides,
and argo's keel, that broke the frothy tides. creech.
crab. adj. it is used by way of contempt for any sour or de-
generate fruit; as, a crab cherry, a crab plum.
better gleanings their worn soil can boast,
than the crab vintage of the neighb'ring coast. dryden.
cra’bb.e.d. adj. [from crab.]
1. peevish ; morose; cynical ; four.
a man of years, yet fresh, as mote appear,
of swarth complexion, and of crabbed hue,
that him full of melancholy did shew. spensor.
o, she is
ten times more gentle, than her father’s crabbed ;
and he's compos'd of harshness, shakespeare's tempoff.
2. harsh ; unpleasing.
that was when .
three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,
ere i could make thee open thy white hand, -
and clepe thyself my love. shakespeare's jointer’s tale.
how charming is divine philosophy
not harsh and called, as dull fools suppose,
but musical as is apollo's lute,
ajd a perpetual feast of nectar'd swects,
where no crude surfeit reigns.
aftw.
3. difficult; perplexing,
o
beside, he was a shrewd philosopher,
and had read ev'ry text and gloss over;
whate'er the crabbed's author hath,
he understood b' implicit faith. huds!
lucretius had chosen a subject naturally crabbed, }.
your crabbed rogues that read lucretius, oydon,
are against gods, you know. pr;
cra'bbedly. adv. [from crabbed.] peevishly; moto;
with perplexity. tly;
cra’bbedness. n. s. [from crabbed.]
1. sourness of taste.
2. sourness of countenance; asperity of manners.
3. difficulty; perplexity.
cra’ber. m. s. -
the poor fish have enemies enough, beside such unnatural
fishermen ; as otters, the cormorant, and the craber, o
some call the water-rat. alton's anglo
crabs-eyes. n.s. whitish bodies, rounded on on. fident
depressed on the other, heavy, moderately hard, and without
finell. they are not the eyes of any creature, nor do the
belong to the crab ; but are produced by the common ct2w.
fish: the stones are bred in two separate bags, one on each
fide of the stomach. they are alkaline, absorbent, and in
some degree diuretick.
h;
several persons had, in vain, endeavoured to store o:
selves with crabs-eyes. - boyle,
crack. m. s. [araeck, dutch..]
1. a sudden disruption, by which the parts are separated but a
little way from each other.
2. the chink, fissure, or vacuity made by disruption; a narrow
breach.
contusions, when great, do usually produce a fissure or
track of the skull, either in the same part where the blow was
inflicted, or in the contrary part. wiseman,
at length it would crack in many places; and those crack;
as they dilated, would appear of a pretty good, but yet obscur:
and dark sky-colour. mewton's opticki.
3. the sound of any body bursting or falling.
if i say sooth, i must report, they were
as cannons overcharg’d with double cracks. shak, macbeth,
now day appears, and with the day the king,
whose early care had robb'd him of his rest:
far off the cracks of falling houses ring,
and shrieks of subjects pierce his tender breast. dryden,
4. any sudden and quick sound.
a fourth —start eyes
what will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom? shakes.
vulcan was employed in hammering out thunderbolts,
“that every now and then flew up from the anvil with dreaft
cracks and flashes. addison.
5. change of the voice in puberty.
and let us, paladour, though now our voices
have got the mannish crack, sing him to th’ ground, shais.
6. breach of chastity.
i cannot
believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
so sovereignly being honourable. shakesp. winter's tal,
7. craziness of intellect. o
8. a man crazed.
i have invented projects for raising millions, without bur.
thening the subject; but cannot get the parliament to listen to
me, who look upon me as a crack and a projector. addison,
9. a whore ; in low language.
1o. a boast.
leafings, backbitings, and vain-glorious cracks,
all those against that fort did bend their batteries. spessor,
ii. a boaster. this is only in low phrase.
to crack. v. a. [araecken, dutch.]
1. to break into chinks; to divide the parts a little from each
other.
look to your pipes, and cover them with fresh and warm
litter out of the stable, a good thickness, left the frost craft
them. - mortimir.
2. to break; to split.
o, madam, my heart is crack'd, it's crack'd. shakes eart,
thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
other reason but because thou hasthasel eyes. shakspeare,
should some wild fig-tree take her native bent,
and heave below the gaudy monument,
would crack the marble titles, and disperse
the characters of all the lying verse.
or as a lute, which in moist weather rings
her knell alone, by cracking of her strings. donne.
honour is like that glassy bubble, -
that finds philosophers such trouble;
whose least part track'd, the whole does fly,
and wits are crack'd to find out why.
3. to do any thing with quickness or smartness.
sir balaam now, he lives like other folks;
he takes his chirping pint, he cracks his jokes. pope.
4. to break or destroy any thing.
you'll crack a quart togethers ha, will you not? shafts.
love
dryd juv,
hadibras,
to
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 515</div><p class="text">c r a
co.
thr
wit
5.
love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide: in cities,
• mutinies; in countries, discord; in palaces, treason and the
bond cracked 'twixt son and father. shakesp. k. lear.
5. to craze; to weaken the intelle&amp;t.
i was ever of opinion, that the philosopher's stone, and an
holy war, were but the rendezvous of cracked brains, that
wore their feather in their heads. bacon’s holy j/ar.
he thought none poets 'till their brains were crackt. rose.
to cra ck. v. n. -
1. to burst ; to open in chinks.
by misfortune it cracked in the cooling, whereby we were
reduced to make use of one part, which was straight and
intire. - boyle.
2. to fall to ruin.
the credit not only of banks, but of exchequers, cracks
when little comes in, and much goes out. dryden.
3. to utter a loud and sudden sound.
i will board her, though she chide as loud
as thunder, when the clouds in autumn crack.
4. to boast: with of
to look like her, are chimney-sweepers black,
and since her time are colliers counted bright ;
and ethiops of their sweet complexion crack.
dark needs no candles now, for dark is light. shakes.
cr ack brained. adj. [crack and brained.] crazy ; without
right reason.
we have sent you an answer to the ill-grounded sophisms
of those crack trained fellows. arbuthnot and pope.
cr ack-hemp. n / [crack and hemp.] a wretch fated to the
gallows; a crack-rope. furcifer.
- come hither, cack-hemp.
i hope i may cause, sir.
—come hither, you rogue :
what, have you forgot me shakes. taming of the shrew.
crack-rope. n.s.. [from crack and rope..] a fellow that de-
serves hanging.
cra’cker. m. s. [from crack.]
1. a noisy boasting fellow.
what cra, ker is this same that deafs our ears
with this abundance of superfluous breath. shak. k. john.
2. a quantity of gunpowder confined so as to burst with great
il gil c.
the bladder, at its breaking, gave a great report, almost
like a cracker. boyle.
and when, for furious haste to run,
they du, it not stay to fire a gun,
have don't with bonfires, and at home
made squibs and crackers overcome.
then furious he begins his march,
drives rattling o'er a brazen arch,
with squibs and cra.k.rs arm’d, to throw
among the trembling crowd below. swift.
73 crackle. v. n. [from crack.] to make slight cracks ;
to make small and frequent noises; to decrepitate.
all these motions, which we saw,
shakespeare.
hudibras.
are but as ice, which crackles at a thaw. lanne.
i fear to try new love, -
as boys to venture on the unknown ice
that crackles underneath them. dryden.
caught her dishevell'd hair and rich attire; 2
her crown and jewels crackled in the fire. dryden's aneid.
marrow is a specifick in that scurvy which occasions a crack-
ling of the bones; in which case marrow performs its natural
funetion of moistening them. arbuthnot on aliments.
cra’cknel. n.s. [from crack..] . a hard brittle cake.
albee my love he seek with daily sute,
his clownish gifts and curtesies i disdain,
his kids, his crackness, and his early fruit. spensor.
pay tributary cracknels, which he sells;
and with our offerings, help to raise his vails. dryd, juv.
crat)le. m. s. scnobel, saxon.]
1. a moveable bed, on which children or sick persons are agitated
with a smooth and equal motion, to make them sleep.
she had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle, ere she had a hus-
band for her bed. shakesp. k. lear.
no jutting frieze,
buttrice, nor coigne of vantage, but this bird,
hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle. shakoff.
his birth, perhaps, some paltry village hides,
and sets his cradle out of fortune's way. . dryden.
a child knows his nurse and his cradle, and by degrees the
playthings of a little more advanced age. locke.
the cradle and the tomb, alas ! so nigh:
to live, is scarce distinguish'd from to die.
me let the tender office long cngage,
to rock the cradle of reposing age ;
with lenient arts extend a mother's breath,
make languor smile, and smooth the bed of death.
2. it is used for infancy, or the first part of life.
he knew them to be inclined altogether to war, and therefore
wholly trained them up, even from their cradles, in arms and
military excrcises. spenser's ireland.
voi...i.
prior.
pope.
- the new duke's daughter, her cousin, loves her ; being
ever, from their cradles, bred together. shakesp. a you loss.
they should scarcely depart from a form of worship, in
which they had been educated from their cradle. clarino.
3- so surgeons.] a case for a broken bone, to keep off
pre it re.
4. [with shipwrights.] a frame of timber raised along the
outside of a ship by the bulge, serving more securely and com.
modiously to help to launch her. - harris.
to cra dl e. v. a...[from the substantive.] to lay in a cradle;
to rock in a cradle.
he that hath been cradled in majesty, will not leave the
throne to play with beggars. glanville's apol.
the tears steal from our eyes, when in the street
with some betrothed virgin's herse we meet;
or infant's fun'ral from the cheated womb, -
convey'd to earth, and cradled in a tomb. dryden.
he shall be cradled in my ancient shield, so famous through
the universities. arbuthnot and pope.
cradl e cloa ths. m. s. [from cradle and cloaths.] bed-cloaths
belonging to a cradle.
o could it be prov’d,
that some night tripping fairy had exchang'd,
in cradle-cloaths, our children where they lay,
and call mine piercy, his plantagenet;
then would i have his harry, and he mine.
craft. n. s. scnaept, sax. craffi, in old welsh.]
1. manual art ; trade.
i hear an objeclion, even from some well-meaning men,
that these delightful crafts may be divers ways ill applied in a
land. wotton's architecture.
2. art; ability ; dexterity.
a poem is the work of the poet, poesy is his skill or craft
of making, the very fiction itself of the work. ben, johnson.
3. fraud; cunning ; artifice. o
th’ offence is holy, that she hath committed;
and this deceit loses the name of craft,
of disobedience, or unduteous title. shakspeare.
this gives us a full view of wonderful art and craft in
raising such a structure of power and iniquity. ayliffe.
4. small sailing vessels. -
to craft. v. n. [from the noun..] to play tricks; to prac-
tise.artifice. now out of use. -
- you've made fair hands, -
you and your crafts! you've crafted fair. shakesp. coriolanus.
cra'ftily. adv. [from crafty.] cunningly ; artfully; with
more art than honesty. -
but that which most impaired his credit was the common
report that he did, in all things, favour the christians; and
had, for that cause, craftily persuaded solyman to take in
hand the unfortunate persian war. - knolles.
may he not craftily infer
the rules of friendship too severe,
which chain him to a hated trust;
which make him wretched to be just 2 prior.
cra'ftiness. n. s. [from crofty j cunning; stratagem.
he taketh the wise in their own craftiness. job.
cra’fts m.a.n. m. s. [craft and man.] an artificer; a manu-
facturer; a mechanick. -
that her became, as polish’d ivory,
which cunning craftsman's hand hath overlaid
shakso.
with fair vermillion. sponsor.
what reverence he did throw away on slaves;
wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles. shakesp.
what a resemblance this advice carries to the oration of
demetrius to his fellow craftsmen / decay of piety.
craftsmaster. m. s. [crast and master.] a man skilled in
his trade.
he is not his craftsmasser, he doth not do it right. shakesh.
there is art in pride: a man might as soon learn a trade.
those who were not brought up to it, seldom prove their
craftsmosfer. - collier on pride.
crafty. adj. [from craft.] cunning; artful; full of arti-
fices ; fraudulent; fly. - -
nay, you may think my love was crafty love,
and call it cunning. shakesp. king john.
this oppression did, of force and necessity, make the irish
a crafty people; for such as are oppressed, and live in slavery,
are ever put to their shifts. davies on ireland.
before he came in fight, the crafty god
his wings dismiss'd, but still retain'd his rod. dryden.
no body was ever so cunning as to conceal their being so;
and every body is shy and distrustful of crofty men. locke.
crag. m. s. -
1. crag is, in british, a rough steep rock ; and is used in the
same sense in the northern counties at this day. gilson.
2. the rugged protuberances of rocks.
and as mount etna vomits sulphur out,
with clifts of burning crags, and fire and smoke. fairfax.
who hath dispos'd, but thou, the winding way,
where springs down from the steepy crags do beat. hoofton.
a lion spied a goat upon the trag of a high rock. l'e/?r.
5 x 3. the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 516</div><p class="text">c r a
c r a
3. the neck.
they looken bigge, as bulls that been bate,
and bearen the crag so stiff and so state.
4. the small end of a neck of mutton: a low word.
cra'go ed. adj. [from crag..] full of inequalities and pro-
minences. -
on a huge hill, - -
cragged and steep, truth stands. crashaw.
craggedness. n.j. [from cragged.] fulness of crags or pro-
minent rocks.
that craggedness or steepness of that mountain, maketh
many parts of it in a manner inaccessible. brerewood.
cra'go iness. m. s. [from craggy.] the state of being craggy.
cra'ggy. adj. [from crag..] rugged; full of prominences ;
rough to walk on, or climb.
that same wicked wight
his dwelling has low in an hollow cave,
far underneath a craggy clift ypight,
dark, doleful, dreary, like a greedy grave. spensor.
it was impossible to pass up the woody and craggy hills,
without the loss of those commanders. raleigh's essays.
mountaineers that from severus came,
and from the craggy cliffs of tetrica. dryden.
the town and republick of st. marino stands on the top
of a very high and craggy mountain. addison on italy.
t. cram. v. a. [chamman, saxon.]
1. to stuff; to fill with more than can conveniently be held.
as much love in rhyme,
as wou'd be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper,
writ on both sides the leaf, margent and all. shakesheare.
being thus crammed in the basket, a couple of ford’s
knaves were called. shakesp. merry i/ives of windsor.
thou hast spoke as if thy eldest son should be a fool, whose
skull jove cram with brains. shakesp. twelfth night.
cram not in people by sending too fast company after
company; but so as the number may live well in the planta-
tion, and not by surcharge be in penury. bacon.
2. to fill with food beyond satiety.
you'd mollify a judge, would cram a squire;
or else some smiles from court you may desire. king.
i am sure children would be freer from diseases, if they
were not crammed so much as they are by fond mothers, and
were kept wholly from flesh the first three years, * locke.
as a man may be eating all day, and, for want of digestion,
is never nourished; so these endless readers may cram them-
sclves in vain with intellectual food. watts on the mind.
but annius, crafty seer,
came cramm'd with capon, from where pollio dines.
3. to thrust in by force.
- you cram these words into mine ears, against
the stomach of my sense. shakespeare's tempest.
huffer, quoth hudibras, this sword
shall down thy false throat cram that word.
fate has cranm'd us all into one lease,
and that even now expiring. dryden’s cleomenes.
in another printed paper it is roundly expressed, that he will
pope.
hudibras.
tram his brass down our throats. swift.
to cram. v. n. to eat beyond satiety.
the godly dame, who fleshly failings damns,
scolds with her maid, or with her chaplain crams. pope.
cram bo. m. s. [a cant word, probably without etymology.] a
play at which one gives a word, to which another finds a
rhyme; a rhyme.
so maevius, when he drain’d his skull
to celebrate some suburb trull,
his similes in order set,
and ev'ry crambo he could get.
cramp. n.s. [arampe, dut. crampe, french.j
1. a spasm or contraction of the limbs, generally removed by
warmth and rubbing.
for this, be sure, to-night thou shalt have cramps,
side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. shakesp. tempg/?.
in a retreat, he outruns any lacquey ; marry, in coming on,
he has the cramp. shakespeare.
the cramp, cometh of contraction of sinews; which is
manifest, in that it cometh either by cold or dryness.
bacon’s natural hisłory.
hares, said to live on hemlock, do not make good the tra-
dition ; and he that observes what vertigoes, cramps, and con-
vulsions follow thereon, in these animals, will be of our be-
lief. brown's wulgar errours.
2. a restriotion; a confinement; obstruction; shackle.
a narrow fortune is a cramp to a great mind, and lays a
man under incapacitics of serving his friend. l’estrange.
. a piece of iron bent at each cnd, by which two bodies are
held together. -
to the uppermost of these there should be fastened a sharp
graple, or cramp of iron, which may be apt to take hold of
any place where it lights. jwilkins.
cram.p. adj. difficult; knotty: a low term,
to cramp. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to pain with cramps or twitches.
swift.
spenser.
when the contracied limbs were cramp'd, ev'n then
a wat'rish humourswell'd, and ooz'd again. dryden's wirgil,
2. to restrain; to confine; to obstruct; to hinder.
it is impossible to conceive the number of inconveniences
that will ensue, if borrowing be craoped. bacon.
there are few but find that some companies benumb and
cramp them, so that in them they can neither speak nor do any
thing that is handsome. glanville's scepsis.
he, who serves, has still restraints of dread upon his spirits,
which, even in the midst of action, camps and ties up his
activity. - south's sermons.
dr. hammond loves to contract and cramp the sense of
prophecies. burmet's theory.
the antiquaries are for cramping their subjects into as nar-
row a space as they can, and for reducing the whole extent
of a science into a few general maxims. addison on italy.
marius used all endeavours for depressing the nobles, and
raising the people; particularly for cramping the former in
their power of judicature. swift.
no more
th’ expansive atmosphere is cramp'd with cold,
but full of life, and vivifying soul. 7 homson’s spring.
3. to bind with crampirons.
cramp-fisii. m. s. [from cramp and so..] the torpedo,
which benumbs the hands of those that touch it.
srampiron. n.s.. [from cramp and iron.j see cramp, sense 3.
cra'n age. m. s. [eraragium, tow latin.) a liberty to use a
cranc for drawing up wares from the vessels, at any creek of
the sea or wharf, unto the land, and to make profit of it. it
signifies also the money paid and taken for the same. cowel.
crane, n.s. scran, sax. kraen, dutch.]
1. a bird with a long beak.
like a crane, or a swallow, so did i chatter. isaiah.
that small infantry warr'd on by cranes. al4:/ton.
2. an instrument made with ropes, pullies, and hocks, by whicii
great weights are raised. - -
in case the mould about it be so ponderous as not to be re-
moved by any ordinary force, you may then raise it with a
crane. a sortimer.
then commerce brought into the publick walk
the busy merchant, the big warehouse built,
rais'd the strong crane. thomson's autumn.
3. a siphon; a crooked pipe for drawing liquors out of a cask.
cran es-bill. n.s.. [from crane and bill.]
i. an herb.
2. a pair of pincers terminating in a point, used by surgeons.
cra’n/u.44. m. s. [latin.] the skull.
in wounds made by contusion, when the cranium is a little
naked, you ought not presently to croud in doshis; for if that
contused flesh be well digested, the bone will incarn with the
wound without much difficulty. // is man's surgery.
crank. m. s. [this word is perhaps a contraction of oar.
neck, to which it may bear some resemblance, and is part of
the instrument called a crane.]
i. a crank is the end of an iron axis turned square down, and
again turned square to the first turning down; so that, on the
last turning down, a leather thong is flipt to tread the treddle-
wheel about. - 4/oxon.
2. any bending or winding passage.
i send it through the rivers of your blood,
even to the court, the heart; to th' seat o' th' brain 3.
and, through the cranks and offices of man,
the strongest nerves, and small inferiour veins,
from me receive that natural competency,
whereby they live. shakespeare's coriolanur.
3. any conceit formed by twisting or changing, in any man rier,
the form or meaning of a word.
haste thee, nymph, and bring with thee
jest and youthful jollity,
quips and cranks, and wanton wiles,
nods and becks, and wreathed smiles,
such as hang on hebe's cheek,
and love to live in dimple sieck.
crank., adj. [from onkranck, dutch. shinner.]
1. healthy; sprightly: sometimes corrupted to ranky. notin use.
they looken bigge, as bulls that been bate,
and bearen the cragg so stiff and so state,
as cockle, on his dunghill crowing cranke. spensor.
2. among sailors, a ship is said to be crank, when, by the form
of its bottom, or by being loaded too much above, it is liable
to be overset. [from franck, dut. sick.]
to, crankle. v. n. [from crank, as it fignifies something
bent.] to run in and out ; to run in flexures and windings.
see how this river comes me cranking in,
and cuts me from the best of all my land,
a huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out. shak, hon. iv.
to crankle. v. a. to break into unequal surfaces; to break
into angles. -
milton.
old vaga's stream,
forc’d by the sudden shock, her wonted track
forsook, and drew her humid train aslope,
crankling her banks.
philips.
cra'nkles,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 517</div><p class="text">c r a
c r a
cra'nkles. n.s.. [from the verb.] inequalitics; angular pro-
minences. - -
cra’nkness. n. s. [from crank.]
1. health; vigour.
2. disposition to overset.
cra’nnied. adj. [from cranny..] full of chinks.
a wall it is, as i would have you think, -
that had in it a crannied hole or chink. shakespeare.
a very fair fruit, and not unlike a citron ; but somewhat
rougher chopt and crannied, vulgarly conceived the marks of
adam's teeth. brown's wulgar errours.
cra’nny. n.f. [cren, fr. crena, latin.] a chink; a cleft;
a fissure.
the eye of the understanding is like the eye of the sense;
for as you may see great objects through small crannies or
holes, so you may see great axioms of nature through small
and contemptible instances. bacon's natural history.
and therefore beat, and laid about,
to find a tranny to creep out. hudibras.
in a firm building, the cavities ought not to be filled with
rubbish, but with brick or stone, fitted to the crannies. dryd.
within the soaking of water and springs, with streams and
currents in the veins and crannies. burnet's theory.
he skipped from room to room, ran up stairs and down
fairs; from the kitchen to the garrets, and he peeped into
every cranny. arbuthnot's john bull.
crape. n.s.. [cropa, low latin.]. a thin stuff, loosely woven,
of which the dress of the clergy is sometimes made.
and proud roxana, fir’d with jealous rage,
with fifty yards of crape shall sweep the stage. swift.
to thee i often call'd in vain, -
against that assassin in crape. swift.
'tis from high life high characters are drawn;
a saint in crape, is twice a saint in lawn. pope.
cra pul ence. m. s. [crapula, a surfeit, latin.] drunkenness;
sickness by intemperance. dici.
cra'pulous. adj. [cropulosus, lat..] drunken ; intemperate;
sick with intempera:nce. dici.
to crash. v. n. [a word probably formed from the thing.]
to make a loud complicated noise, as of many things failing
or breaking at once.
there shall be a great crashing from the hills.
when convulsions clave the lab’ring earth,
before the dismal yawn appears, the ground
trembles and heaves, the nodding houses crash.
:i2 crash. v. a. to break or bruise.
my master is the great rich capulet; and if you be not of
the house of montague, i pray you come and crash a cup of
wine. shakespeare.
mr. warburton has it, crush a cup of wine. -
to crash, says hanmer, is to be merry: a crash being a word still
used in some counties for a merry bout.
it is surely better to read crack. see crack.
cra's h. n. s. [from the verb.] a loud sudden mixed sound,
as of many things broken at the same time.
senseless ilium,
seeming to feel this blow, with flaving top
stoops to his base; and, with a hideous crash,
takes prisoner pyrrhus' ear. shakespeare's hamlet.
moralizing sat i by the hazard-table: i look'd upon the
uncertainty of riches, the decay of beauty, and the crash of
worlds, with as much contempt as ever plato did. pope.
zeph. i. io.
smith.
- crasis. n. s. [xports.] temperature; constitution arising from
the various properties of humours.
the fancies of men are so immediately diversified by the
individual crafts, that every man owns something wherein
none is like him. - glanville.
a man may be naturally inclined to pride, lust, and anger,
as these inclinations are founded in a peculiar crosis, and con-
ftitution of the blocq and spirits. - south.
crass. adj. [crafts, latin.] gross; coarse; not thin; not
comminuted; not subtle; not consisting of small parts.
iron in aquafortis, will fall into ebuliition, with noise and
emication ; as also a cras; and fumid exhalation caused from
the combat of the sulphur of iron with the acid and nitrous
spirits of aquafortis. brown's wulgar errours.
metals are intermixed with the common terrestrial matter,
so as not to be discoverable by human industry ; or, if disco-
werable, so diffused and scattered amongst the craffer and more
unprofitable matter, that it would never be possible to separate
and extract it. woodward's natural history.
cra’ssitube. m. s. [craffitudo, latin.] grosiness; coarseness;
thickness.
they must be but thin, as a leaf, or a piece of paper or
parchment; for if they have a greater craffiude, they will alter
in their own body, though they spend not. bacon.
the dead sea, which vomiteth up bitumen, is of that
craffitude, as living bodies, bound hand and foot, cast into it,
have been born up, and not sunk. bacon’s nat. hist.
the terrestrial matter carried by rivers into the sea, is
sustaired therein partly by the greater crashtude and gravity of
the tea-water, and partly by its constant agitation, loodward.
crastination. n.s.. [from cras, latin, to-morrow delay. p.
crat chi. m. s. [creche, french ; crates, latin.] the palisaded
frame in which hay is put for cattle.
when being expelled out of paradise, by reason of fin, thou
wert held in the chains of death; i was inclosed in the virgin's
womb, i was laid in the cratch, i was wrapped in swathling-
cloaths. - hałowill on providence.
crav.a.t. n.s. [of uncertain etymology.] a neck-cloath;
any thing worn about the neck.
less delinquents have been scourg’d,
and hemp on wooden anvils forg’d ;
which others for cravats have worn
about their necks, and took a turn. hudibras.
... the restrictives were applied, one over another, to her
throat: then we put her on a cravat. joseman's surgery.
to crave. v. a. scrapian, saxon.]
1. to ask with earnestness; to ask with submission; to beg; to
entreat.
what one petition is there found in the whole litany,
whereof we shall ever be able at any time to say, that no man
living needeth the grace or benefit therein craved at god's
hands * hooker.
as for my nobler friends, i crave their pardons;
but for the mutable rank-scented many,
let them regard me as 1 do not flatter. shaks). coriolanus.
the poor people not knowing where to hide themselves
from the fury of their enemies, nor of whom to crave help,
fled as men and women dismayed. knolles.
i would crave leave here, under the word acion, to com-
prehend the forbearance too of any action proposed. loce.
each ardent nymph the rising current craves,
each shepherd's pray’r retards the parting waves.
2. to ask insatiably. -
the subjects arm'd ; the more their princes gave,
th' advantage only took the more to crave. denham.
him dost thou mean, who, pitc of all his store,
is ever craving, and will still be poor
who cheats for halfpence; and who doffs his coat,
to save a farthing in a ferry-boat. dryden's pers.
3. to long; to wish unreasonably.
levity pushes us on from one vain desire to another, in a
regular vicisiitude and succession of cravings and satiety. l'eor.
he is actually under the power of a temptation, and the
sway of an impetuous lust; both hurrying him to satisfy the
prior.
cravings of it, by some wicked action. south.
4. to call for importunately.
bestow
your needful counsel to our businesses, -
which crave the instant use. shakesh. k. lear.
the antecedent concomitants and effects of such a consti-
tution, are acids, taken in too great quantities; four erucia-
tions, and a craving appetite, especially of terrestrial and ab-
sorbent substances. 4 out/not on aliments.
5. sometimes with for before the thing sought.
once one may crave for love,
but more would prove
this heart too little, that too great. suckling.
cra’ve n. m. s. [derived by skinner from crave, as one that
craves or begs his life: perhaps it comes originally from the
noise made by a conquered cock.]
1. a cock conquered and dispirited.
what, is your crest a coxcomb?—
—a combless cock, so kate will be my hen.
—no cock of mine ; you crow too like a craven. shakoff.
2. a coward; a recreant ; a weak-hearted spiritless fellow.
is it fit this soldier keep his oath
—he is a craven and a villain else.
cra’ve n. adj. cowadly; base.
upon his coward breast
a bloody cross, and on his craven crest
a bunch of hairs discolour'd dive sly.
whether it be
bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple,
of thinking too precisely on th' event;
a thought, which quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom,
and ever three parts coward. shakspeare's hamilt.
yet if the innocent some mercy find -
from cowardice, not ruth did that proceed;
his noble foes durst not his craven kind
shakespeare's henry v.
speoser,
exasperate by such a bloody deed. fairfix.
to cr a v en. v. a. [from the noun...] to make recreamt or
cowardly. fianner.
'gainst self-slaughter
there is a prohibition so divine,
that cravens my weak hand. shakespeare's cymbeline.
cra’v er. m. s. [from crave..] an insatiable asker. it is used
in clariffa.
to craunch. v. a. [schrantsen, dutch ; whence the vulgar say
more properly to scraunch..] to crush in the mouth. the
word is used by swift.
cra w. m. s. [kroe, danish.7 the crop or first stomach of birds.
in birds there is no mastication, or comminution of the
ii, c. §<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 518</div><p class="text">c r a
c r e'
meat in the mouth; but in such as are not carnivorous, it is
immediately swallowed into the crop or craw, or at least into
a kind of ante-stomach, which i have observed in many,
especially piscivorous birds. . ray on the creation.
cra’w fish. m. s. [sometimes written crayfish, properly crevice ;
in french ecrevise.] a small crustaceous fish found in brooks;
the small lobster of fresh water. - -
those that cast their shell are the lobster, the crab, the
crawfish, the hodmandod or dodman, and the tortoise. bacon.
let me to crack live crawfsh recommend. pope.
the common crawfish, and the large sea crawfish, both
produce the stones called crabs eyes. hill.
to craw l. v. n. [arielen, dutch..]
i. to creep; to move with a slow motion; to move without
rising from the ground, as a worm.
i saw them under a green mantling vine,
that crawls along the side of yon small hill. milton.
that crawling insect, who from mud began;
warm'd by my beams, and kindled into man! dryden.
the streams but just contain'd within their bounds,
by slow degrees into their channels crawl;
and earth increases as the waters fall. dryden.
a worm finds what it searches after, only by feeling, as it
crawls from one thing to another. grew's cosmol.
the vile worm, that yesterday began
to crawl; thy fellow-creature, abject man |
2. to move weakly, and slowly, or timorously.
- 'tis our first intent
to shake all cares and business from our age,
while we unburthen’d crawl tow'rd death.
shakespeare's king lear.
they like tall fellows crept out of the holes; and secretly
crawling up the battered walls of the fort, got into it. knolles.
for the fleets of solomon and the kings of egypt, it is very
apparent they went with great leisure, and crawled close by
prior.
the shore-side. heylyn.
a look so pale no quartane ever gave ;
thy dwindled legs seem crawling to a grave. . dryd, juv.
he was hardly able to crawl about the room, far less to look
after a troublesome business. arbuthn. john bull.
man is a very worm by birth,
vile reptile, weak and vain
a while he crawls upon the earth,
then shrinks to earth again. pope.
it will be very necessary for the threadbare gownman, and
every child who can crawl, to watch the fick's at harvest-
time, swift.
3. to advance slowly and flily.
cranmer
hath crawl"d into the favour of the king,
and is his oracle. shakespeare's henry viii.
4. to move about hated and despised.
refle&amp;t upon that litter of absurd opinions that crawl about
the world, to the disgrace of reason. south.
how will the condemned finner then crawl forth, and ap-
pear in his filth, before that undefiled tribunal south.
behold a rev'rend fire, whom want of grace
has made the father of a nameless race,
crawl through the street, show'd on, or rudely press'd
by his own sons, that pass him by unbless'd pope.
cra’w ler. m. s. [from crawl.] a creeper; any thing that
creeps.
cra’y fish. m. s. [see crawfish.] the river lobster.
the cure of the muriatick and armoniack saltness requires
slimy meats; as snails, tortoises, jellies, and crayfishes. foyer.
cra’yon. m. s. [crayon, french.]
1. a kind of pencil; a roll of paste to draw lines with.
let no day pass over you without drawing a line; that is to
say, without working, without giving some strokes of the
pencil or the crayon. dryden's dufresnoy.
2. a drawing or design done with a pencil or crayon.
to crayz.e. v. a. secrafter, french, to break to pieces.]
1. to break; to crush; to weaken.
in this consideration the answer of calvin unto farrel, con-
cerning the children of popish parents, doth seem crazed. hook.
relent, sweet hermia ; and, lysander, yield
thy crazed title to my certain right. shakespeare.
'till length of years,
and sedentary numbness craze my limbs. amilton.
then through the fiery piliar, and the cloud,
god looking forth, will trouble all his host,
and craze their chariot-wheels.
2. to powder.
the tin ore passeth to the crazing mill, which, between two
grinding stones, bruiseth it to a fine sand. carew's survey.
3. to crack the brain; to impair the intelle&amp;t.
i lov’d him, friend,
no father his son dearer, true, to tell thee, • ,
that grief hath craz'd my wits. shakesp. king lear.
wickedness is a kind of voluntary frenzy, and a chosen
distraction; and every sinner does wilder and more extrava-
gant things than any man can do that is crazed and out of his
amilton.
wits, only with this sad difference, that he knows better what
- he does. - tillotson.
cra’zedsess. m. s...[from crazed.] decrepitude; brokenness:
diminution of intelle&amp;t. &gt;
the nature, as of men that have sick bodies, so likewise of
the people in the crazednes of their minds, possessed with dio
like and discontentment at things present, is to imagine that
any thing would help them. hocker,
cra’z in ess. n.s.. [from crazy.]
1. state of being crazy ; imbecility; weakness.
touching other places, she may be said to hold them as one
should do a wolf by the ears; nor will i speak now of the
o crazines of her title to many of them. howel's wocal froft,
2. weakness of intelle&amp;t.
cra’zy, adj. [ecraze, french.]
1. broken ; decrepit. - . .
- come, my lord,
we will beflow you in some better place;
fitter for sickness and for crazy age. shakesp. henry vi.
when people are crazy, and in disorder, it is natura to:
them to groan. - l'asirange,
2. broken witted; shattered in the intelle&amp;t.
the queen of night, whose large command
rules all the sea and half the land,
and over moist and crazy brains,
hadibra,
in high spring-tides, at midnight reigns.
3. weak; feebie; shattered.
physick can but mend our crazy state,
patch an old building, not a new create. drydon,
were it poffible that the near approaches of eternity, whe.
ther by a mature age, a crazy constitution, or a violent fick-
ness, should amaze so many, had they truly confidered. wait.
creaght. n. f. [an irish word.]
in these fast places, they kept their creaghts, or herds of cat-
tle, living by the milk of the cow, without husbandry of
tillage. davies on ireland.
to creaght. v. n.
it was made penal to the english to permit the irish to
creaght or graze upon their lands, or present them to eccle-
siastical benefices. davies on ireland.
to crea k. v. n. [corrupt from crack.]
1. to make a harsh protracted noise.
let not the creaking of shoes, nor the rustling of silks, be-
tray thy poor heart to women. shakesp. king lear.
no door there was th’ unguarded house to keep,
on creaking hinges turn'd, to break his sleep. dryden,
2. it is sometimes used of animals.
the creaking locusts with my voice conspire,
they fry'd with heat, and i with fierce desire.
cream. n.s. [cremor, latin.] -
1. the unetuous or oily part of milk, which, when it is cold,
floats on the top, and is changed by the agitation of the churn
into butter ; the flower of milk.
it is not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
your bugle eye-balls, nor your cheek of cream,
that can entane my spirits to your worship. shakotaro.
i am as vigilant as a cat to steal cream. shakoff. hory iv.
cream is matured and made to rise speedily, by putting in
cold water; which, as it seemeth, getteth down the whey.
bacon's natural hysory,
how the drudging goblin swet,
to earn his cream-bowl duly set;
when in one night, ere glimpse of morn,
drydon.
his shadowy flail hath thresh'd the corn. milton.
let your various creams incircled be
with swelling fruit, just ravish'd from the tree. king.
milk, standing some time, naturally separates into an oily
liquor called cream, and a thinner, blue, and more ponderous
liquor called skimmed milk. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. it is used for the best part of any thing; as, the cream of a
je/?.
to cream. v. n. [from the noun..] to gather cream.
there are a sort of men, whose visages
do cream and mantle like a standing pond;
and do a wilful stiffness entertain,
with purpose to be drest in an opinion -
of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit. shak. morch. of po.
to cream. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to skim off the cream.
2. to take the flower and quintessence of any thing: so used
somewhere by swift.
coco. adj. [ cream and faced. j pale; coward-
ooking.
§ . thou cream foc'd lown, -
where got's thou that goose-look. shakes?. marleth.
cream.y. adj. [from cream.j full of cream; having the ni-
ture of cream.
creance. n.s. [french.) is, in falconry, a fine finall line,
fastened to a hawk's leash when she is first lured. -
crease. m. s...[from creta, latin, chaik. skinner.] a mark
made by doubling any thing.
men of great parts are unfortunate in business, because
they
o
i.
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 519</div><p class="text">c r e
c r e
*
**
they go out of the common road: i once desired lord boling-
broke to observe, that the clerks used an ivory knife, with a
blunt edge, to divide paper, which cut it even, only requiring
a strong hand; whereas a sharp penknife would go out of the
crease, and disfigure the paper. swift.
to cre'ase. v. a. [from the noun.j. to mark any thing by
doubling it, so as to leave the impression.
to create. v. a. [creo, latin.]
1. to form out of nothing; to cause to exist.
• in the beginning god created the heaven and the earth. gen.
we having but imperfect ideas of the operations of our
minds, and much imperfecter yet of the operations of god,
run into great difficulties about free created agents, which rea-
son cannot well extricate itself out of. locke.
2. to produce ; to cause; to be the occasion of.
now is the time of help: your eye in scotland
would create soldiers, and make women fight. shakesp.
his abilities were prone to create in him great confidence of
undertakings, and this was like enough to betray him to great
errours and many enemies. king charles.
they eclipse the clearest truths, by difficulties of their
own creating, or no man could miss his way to heaven for
want of light. decay of piety.
none knew, 'till guilt created fear,
what darts or poison'd arrows were. roscommon.
must i new bars to my own joy create,
refuse myself what i had forc’d from fate? dryd. aurengz.
long abstinence is troublesome to acid constitutions, by
the uneasiness it creates in the stomach. arbuthnot.
3. to beget.
and the issue there create,
ever shall be fortunate. shakespeare.
4. to invest with any new character.
arise my knights of the battle: i create you
companions to our person, and will fit you
with dignities becoming your estates. shakesp. cymbeline.
5. to give any new qualities; to put anything in a new state.
the best british undertaker had but a proportion of three
thousand acres for himself, with power to create a manor, and
hold a court-baron. davies on ireland.
creation. m. s. [from create.]
1. the act of creating or conferring existence.
confider the immensity of the divine love, expressed in
all the emanations of his providence; in his creation, in his
conservation of us. taylor.
2. the aet of investing with new qualities or character: as, the
creation of peers.
3. the things created ; the universe.
as subjects then, the whole creation came ;
and from their natures adam them did name. denham,
such was the saint, who shone with ev'ry grace,
reflecting, moses like, his master's face:
god saw his image lively was express'd,
and his own work as his creation bless'd.
nor could the tender new creation bear
th’ excessive heats or coldness of the year. dryden's virgil.
in days of yore, no matter where or when,
before the low creation swarm'd with men.
4- any thing produced, or caused.
art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
to feeling as to fight : or art thou but
a dagger of the mind, a false creation,
proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain : shakes. macbeth.
creative. adj. [from create.]
ii. having the power to create.
- but come, ye generous minds, in whose wide thought,
of all his works, creative beauty burns
with warmest beam.
dryden’s fables.
parnel.
thomson's spring.
2. exerting the act of creation.
to trace the outgoings of the ancient of days in the first
instance, and of his creative power, is a research too great
for mortal enquiry. * south.
crea'tor. m.s. [creator, lat.] the being that bestows existence.
pen, ye heavens, your living doors ; let in
the great creator, from his work return'd
magnificent; his six days work, a world. milton.
when you lie down, close your eyes with a short prayer,
commit yourself into the hands of your faithful creator; and
when you have done, trust him with yourself, as you must do
when you are dying. taylor's guide to devotion.
creature. m. s. [creatura, low latin.]
1. a being not self-existent, but created by the supreme power.
were these persons idolaters for the worship they did not
give to the creator, or for the worship they did give to his
creatures. stillingfect.
2. any thing created.
god’s first creature was light. bacon's new atlantis.
imperfeot the world, and all the creatures in it, must be
acknowledged in many respects to be. tilotson.
3. an animal, not human.
the queen pretended satisfaction of her knowledge only
in killing creatures vile, as cats and dogs. shaft. cymbeline.
vc l. i.
4. a general term for man.
yet crime in her could never creature find;
but for his love, and for her own self-sake,
she wander'd had from one to other ind. spensar.
most cursed of all creatures under sky,
lo tantalus, i here tormented lye. spenser.
though he might burst his lungs to call for help,
no creature would assist or pity him. roscommon.
5. a word of contempt for a human being.
hence; home, you idle creatures, get you home;
is this a holiday ? shakesp. jul. caesar.
he would into the stews,
and from the common creatures pluck a glove,
and wear it as a favour. shakesp. rich. iii.
i’ve heard that guilty creatures, at a play
have, by the very cunning of the scene,
been struck so to the soul, that presentl
they have proclaim'd their malefactions. shakesp. hamlet.
northink to-night of thy ill nature,
but of thy follies, idle creature. prior.
a good poet no sooner communicates his works, but it is
imagined he is a vain young creature, given up to the ambi-
tion of fame, pope.
6. a word of petty tenderness. . .
and then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand;
cry, oh sweet creature, and then kiss me hard. shakesp.
ah, cruel creature, whom do'st thou despise
the gods, to live in woods, have left the skies. -
dryden's virgil.
some young creatures have learnt their letters and syllabies
by having them pasted upon little tablets. watts.
7. a person who owes his rise or his fortune to another.
he sent to colonel massey to send him men, which he,
being a creature of essex's, refused. clarendon.
the duke's creature he desired to be esteemed. clarendon.
great princes thus, when favourites they raise,
to justify their grace, their creatures praise. dryden.
the design was discovered by a person whom every bod
knows to be the creature of a certain great man. swift.
cre’aturely. adj. [from creature.] having the qualities of
a creature.
the several parts of relatives, or creaturely infinites, may
have finite proportions to one another. cheyne's phil. prin.
cre'britude. m. s. [from creber, frequent, latin.] frequent-
ness. dic?.
cre'brous. adj. [from creber, latin.] frequent. idic7.
cretpence, n.s.. [from credo, lat. credence, norman, fr.]
1. belief; credit.
* ne let it seem, that credence this exceeds;
for he that made the same was known right well,
to have done much more admirable deeds;
"it merlin was. spenser.
- love and wisdom,
approv’d so to your majesty, may plead
for ample credence. shakespeare.
they did not only underhand give out that this was the
true earl, but the friar, finding some credence in the people,
took boldness in the pulpit to declare as much. bacon.
2. that which gives a claim to credit or belief.
after they had delivered to the king their letters of credence,
they were led to a chamber richly furnished. hayward.
crede'nda. m. s. [latin.] things to be believed; articles
of faith; distinguished in theology from agenda, or practical
duties.
these were the great articles and credenda of christianity,
that so much startled the world. south.
cred ent. adj. [credens, latin.] *
1. believing ; easy of belief.
then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,
if with too credent ear you list’ his songs. shakesp. hamlet.
2. having credit; not to be questioned. less proper.
my authority bears a credent bulk, -
that no particular scandal once can touch, -
but it confounds the breather. shakesp. meas for meas.
credential. m. s. [from credens, latin.] that which gives
a title to credit; the warrant upon which belief or authority
is claimed.
a few persons of an odious and despised country could not
have filled the world with believers, had they not shown un-
doubted credentials from the divine person who sent them on
such a message. addison on the christian religion.
credib (lity. n.s.. [from credible.] claim to credit; possibi-
lity of obtaining belief; probability.
the first of those opinions i shall shew to be altogether in-
credible, and the latter to have all the credibility and evidence
of which a thing of that nature is capable. tillotson.
calculate the several degrees of credibility and conviction,
by which the one evidence surpasseth the other. atterbury.
cre'dible. adj. [credibilis, latin.] worthy of credit; de-
serving of belief; having a just claim to belief.
the ground of credit is the credibility of things credited;
and things are made credile, either by the known condition
5 y and<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 520</div><p class="text">c. r. e.
c. r. e.
and quality of the utterer, or by the manifest likelihood of
truth in themselves. hooker.
none can demonstrate to me, that there is such an island as
jamaica; yet, upon the testimony of credible persons, i am
free from doubt. tillotson.
credibleness. m. s. [from credible.] credibility; worthiness
of belief; just claim to belief. .
the credibleness of a good part of these narratives has been
confirmed to me by a practiser of physick. boyle.
cre'dibly. adv. [from credible.] in a manner that claims
belief.
this, with the loss of so few of the english as is scarce
credible, being, as hath been rather confidently than credibly
reported, but of one man, though not a few hurt. bacon.
cret)|t. m. s. [credit, french.]
1. belief of ; faith yielded to another.
when the people heard these words, they gave no credit
unto them, nor received them. i mac. x. 46.
i may give credit to reports. addison's spectator.
some secret truths, from learned pride conceal’d,
to maids alone and children are reveal’d :
what though no credit doubting wits may give,
the fair and innocent shall still believe. pope.
2. honour; reputation. -
i published, because i was told i might please such as it was
a credit to please. pope.
3. esteem ; good opinion.
there is no decaying merchant, or inward beggar, hath so
many tricks to uphold the credit of their wealth, as these empty
persons have to maintain the credit of their sufficiency. bacon.
his learning, though a poet said it,
before a play, would lose no credit. swift.
yes, while i live, no rich or noble knave,
shall walk the world in credit to his grave. pope's hor.
4. faith; testimony ; that which procures belief.
we are contented to take this upon your credit, and to
think it may be. . . hooker.
. the things which we properly believe, be only such as are
received upon the credit of divine testimony. hooker.
. . the author would have done well to have left so great a
paradox only to the credit of a single assertion. locke.
5. trust reposed; with regard to property: correlative to debt.
credit is nothing but the expcctation of money, within
some limited time. locke.
6. promise given.
they have never thought of violating the publick credit,
or of alienating the revenues to other uses than to what they
have been thus assigned. addison.
7. influence; power not compulsive ; interest. -
she employed his uttermost credit to relieve us, which was
as great as a beloved son with a mother. sidney.
they sent him likewise a copy of their supplication to the
king, and desired him to use his credit that a treaty might be
entered into. clarendon.
having credit enough with his master to provide for his own
interest, he troubled not himself for that of other men. claren.
to cre'dit. v. a. [credo, latin.]
i. to believe.
now i change my mind,
and partly credit things that do presage. shakes. jul. cos.
to credit the unintelligibility both of this union and mo-
tion, we need no more than to consider it. glanville,
2. to procure credit or honour to any thing.
may here her monument stand so,
to credit this rude age; and show
to future times, that even we
some patterns did of virtue see. l/aller.
it was not upon design to credit these papers, nor to com-
pliment a society so much above flattery. glanville.
at present you credit the church as much by your govern-
ment, as you did the school formerly by your wit. south.
3. to trust; to confide in.
4. to admit as a debtor.
cre ditable. adj. [from credit.]
1. reputable ; above contempt.
he settled him in a good creditable way of living, having
procured him by his interest one of the best places of the
country. - - arbuthnot's john bull.
2. honourable; estimable
the contemplation of things, that do not serve to promote
our happiness, is but a more specious sort of idleness, a more
pardonable and creditable kind of ignorance. tillotson.
cre/ditable n ess. n.s.. [from creditable.] reputation ; esti-
• islation. . .
among all these snares, there is none more entangling than
, the credicalleng's and repute of customary vices. decay of piety.
cr dit ally. adv. [from creditable.] reputably; without
disgrace,
many will chuse rather to negle&amp;t their duty safely and
creditably, than to get a broken pate in the church's service,
only to be rewarded with that which will break their hearts
to q. south.
cre’ditor. m. s. screditor, latin.]
1. he to whom a debt is owed; he that gives credit:
tive to debtor.
there came divers of anthonio's creditors in my com
to venice, that swear he cannot chuse but break, $o.
i am so used to consider myself as creditor and d.o.o.
i often state my accounts after the same manner, with * that
to heaven and my own soul. audios.
no man of honour, as that word is usually understood o
ever pretend that his honour obliged him to be chaffe or. id
perate, to pay his creditors, to be useful to his country .
good to mankind, to endeavour to be wise or learned, to 0
gard his word, his promise, or his oath. s to-
2. one who credits, one who believes. not used. wift,
many sought to feed
the easy creditors of novelties, -
by voicing him alive. shoeffor
credu'lity. m. s. [credulite, french; credulitas, latin, ; o ro.
ness of belief; readiness of credit. j tail.
the poor plangus, being subject to that only disal,…,
of honest hearts, credulity, was persuaded by him. so
the prejudice of creaulity may, in some measure, 1j.
by learning to set a high value on truth. //atts's l, ic
creidulous. adj. [credulus, latin.] apt to believe. i.
suspecting ; easily deceived. - y uli-
a credulous father, and a brother noble,
whose nature is so far from doing harm, -
that he suspects none. shakosheare's king lar
who now enjoys thce credulous all gold, s “wis
who always vacant, always amiable,
hopes thee, of flattery gales
unmindful, hapless he,
to whom thou untry'd seem'st fair. milton
crebuloussess. n.s. [from credulous.] aptness to boi.
credulity. &gt;
creed. m. s. [from credo, the first word of the apofiles creed.]
i. a form of words in which the articles of faith
hended.
the larger and fuller view of this foundation is set down in
the creeds of the church. hammond on fundamentals,
will they, who decry creeds and creedmakers, say that one
who writes a treatise of morality ought not to make in it any
collection of moral precepts : fiddes's sermon.
2. any solemn profession of principles or opinion.
for me, my lords,
i love him not, nor fear him; there's my creed.
to creek.
noise.
correla.
are compre-
shaits.
v. a. [see to creak.] to make a hash
shall i stay here,
creeking my shoes on the plain masonry.
creek. m. s. scnecca, kreke, dutch..]
i. a prominence or jut in a winding coast.
as streams, which with their winding banks do play,
stopp'd by their creeks, run softly through the plain. david,
they on the bank of jordan, by a creek,
where winds with reeds and offers whisp'ring play,
their unexpected loss and plaints outbreath’d.
2. a small port; a bay ; a cove.
a law was made here to stop their passage in every port and
creek. davies on ireland.
3. any turn, or alley.
a back-friend, a shoulder-clapper ; one that commands
the passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands, shafft.
cref ky. adj. [from creek. j full of creeks; unequai;
winding.
who, leaning on the belly of a pot,
pour'd forth a water, whose outgushing flood
ran bathing all the creeky shore a-flot,
whereon the trojan prince spilt turnus' blood. sponsor.
to creep. v. n. [pret, crept; crypan, sax. krepan, germ.j
1. to move with the belly to the ground without legs; as a
woi in a
shalosure.
mill0?,
+
ye that walk '.
the earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep! milton,
and every creeping thing that creeps the ground. milton.
if they cannot distinguish creeping from flying, let them lay
down virgil, and take up ovid de ponto. dryden,
2. to grow along the ground, or on other supports.
the grottos cool, with shady poplars crown'd,
and creeping vines on arbours weav'd around. dryden,
3. to move forward without bounds or seaps; as inse&amp;s.
4. to move slowly and feebly.
to-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
to the last syllable of recorded time. '
why should a man
sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice
by being pcevish shakespeare's ziser chant of wenice.
he who creeps after plain, dull, common sense, is safe from
committing absurditics; but can never reach the excellence of
wit. dryden's tyrannick love.
5. to move secretly and clandestinely. - i’ll
shakesp. macloth,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 521</div><p class="text">c r e
c r e
to:-
r
i'll crop up into the chimney. - - *
—there they always use to discharge their birding-pieces:
crop into the kiln-hole. shakesp. merry wives of iłindsor.
whate'er you are,
that in this desart inaccessible, -
under the shade of melancholy boughs,
lose and neglect the creeping hours of time.
of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead cap-
tive filly women. 2 tim. iii. 6.
- thou makest darkness, and it is night wherein all the beasts
of the forest do creep forth. psal. civ. 2c.
now and then a work or two has crept in to keep his first
design in countenance. atterbury.
6. to move timorously without soaring, or venturing into dangers.
paradise lost is admirable; but am i therefore bound to
maintain, that there are no flats amongst his elevations, when
it is evident he creeps along sometimes for above an hundred
lines together ? dryden.
we here took a little boat, to creep along the sea-shore as
far as genoa. addison on italy.
. to come unexpe&amp;ted; to steal forward unheard and unseen.
by those gifts of nature and fortune he creps, may he flies,
into the favour of poor silly women. - sidney.
it seems, the marriage of his brother's wife
has crept too near his conscience.
—no, his conscience -
has crept too near another lady. shakes. henry viii.
necessity enforced them, after they grew full of people, to
spread themselves, and creep out of shinar, or babylonia.
raleigh's history.
none pretends to know from how remote corners of
those frozen mountains, some of those fierce nations first crept
gut. temple.
it is not to be expc&amp;ted that every one should guard his un-
derstanding from being imposed on, by the sophistry which
creeps into most of the books of argument. ilocke.
8. to behave with servility; to fawn ; to bend.
they were us’d to bend,
to send their smiles before them to achilles,
to come as humbly as they us’d to creep
to holy altars. shakesp. troilus and crossida.
cre’eper. n.f. [from creep.] -
1. a plant that supports itself by means of some stronger body.
plants that put forth their sap hastily, have bodies not pro-
portionable to their length ; therefore they are winders or
creepers; as ivy, briony, and woodbine. baton.
2. an iron used to slide along the grate in kitchens.
3. a kind of patten or clog worn by women.
cree'phole. m. s. [creep and hole.]
1. a hole into which any animal may creep to escape danger.
2. a subterfuge; an excuse.
cree'pingly. adv. [from creeping.] slowly ; after the man-
ner of a reptile.
the joy, which wrought into pygmalion's mind, was even
such as, by each degree of zelmane's words, crepingly entered
into philoclea's. sidney.
cree'ple. n.s.. [from creep.]. a lame person, a cripple.
she to whom this world must itself refer
as suburbs or the microcosm of her,
she, she is dead, she's dead when thou know'st this,
thou know'st how lame a creeple this world is.
cremation. m. s. [crematio, latin.] a burning.
c re mor. m.s. [latin.] amilky substance; a soft liquor re-
sembling cream. -
the food is swallowed into the stomach, where, mingled
with dissolvent juices, it is reduced into a chyle or cremar. ray.
cre'nated. adj. [from crena, latin j. notched; indented.
the cells are prettily crenated, or notched quite round the
edges; but not straited down to any depth. woodward.
cre'pane. m. s. [with farriers..] an ulcer seated in the
midst of the forepart of the foot. farrier's dic.
t. cre'pitate. v. n. [crepito, latin.] to make a small
crackling noise.
crepit aotion. n s [from crepitate.] a small crackling noise.
cre'pt. particip. [from creep.]
there are certain men crept in unawares. jude.
this fair vine, but that her arms surround
her marry’d elm, had crept along the ground. . . poe.
crepu'scule. n. s. screpusculum, lat..] twilight. dic.
crepu'sculous. adj. [crepusculum, latin.] glimmering; in a
state between light and darkness.
a close apprehension of the one, might perhaps afford a
glimmering light and crepusculous glance of the other. brown.
the beginnings of philosophy were in a cropusculous obscu-
rity, and it is yet scarce past the dawn. glanville's scepsis.
cre'scent. adj. [from crosco, latin.] increasing; growing;
in a state of increase.
i have seen him in britain: he was then of a crestent
in o (c. shakspeare's cyrabeline.
donne.
with these in troop
came astoreth, whom the phoenicians call’d
astarte, queen of heaven, with crosent horns.
assion.
shakespeare."
cre'scent. m. s. [crosens, lat.] the moon in her flate of
increase; any similitude of the moon increasing.
my pow'r's a crostent, and my auguring hope
says it will come to th’ full. shakesp. ant. and cleoff.
or bactrian sophy; from the horns
of turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond -
the realm of aladule, in his retreat. a filton.
jove in dusky clouds involves the skies, -
and the faint crescent shoots by fits before their eyes. dryd.
and two fair crescents of translucent horn, -
the brows of all their young increase adorn. pope's odyssey,
cre'scive. adv. [from cresa, latin.] increasing; growing.
so the prince obscur'd his contemplation
under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt;
grew like the summer-grass, fastest by night, , ,
unseen, yet crescive in his faculty. shakesp. henry v.
cress. n.s. [perhaps from crosco, it being a quick grower,
naslurtium, lat..] . an herb.
its flower consists of four leaves, placed in form of a cross:
the pointal arises from the center of the flower-cup, and be-
comes a roundish smooth fruit, divided into two cells, and
furnished with seeds, generally smooth. amiller,
his court with nettles and with cress stor'd,
with soups unbought, and fallads, blest his board. pope.
cre'sset. n.s.. [crossete, fr. because beacons had crosses an-
ciently on their tops.] a great light set upon a beacon, light-
house, or watch-tower. hanmer. they still raise armics
in scotland by carrying about the fire-cross.
- at my nativity
the front of heav'n was full of firy sparks,
of burning crossets. shakesp. henry iv,
from the arched roof,
pendent by subtle magick, many a row
of starry lamps, and blazing cressets, fed ,
with naphtha and asphaltus, yielded light
as from a sky. . . .
crest. n.s.. [crisia, latin.] -
i. the plume of feathers on the top of the ancient helmet, the
helmet. . - -
his valour, shewn upon our cross to-day,
hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds, - -
ev’n in the bosom of our adversaries. shakes). henry iv.
2. the comb of a cock; whence milton calls him crested.
others, on ground
walk'd firm; the crested cock, whose clarion sounds -
the filent hours. milton's paradise left.
3. the ornament of the helmet in heraldry.
of what esteem cross were, in the time of king edward
the third's reign, may appear by his giving an eagle, which he
himself had formerly born, for a cry? to williaun montacute,
earl of salisbury. - camden's remains:
- -
milton's parads; loft.
the horn;
it was a cross ere thou wast born:
thy father's father wore it. shakesp. a you like it.
4. any tuft or ornament on the head; as some which the poets
assign to serpents.
their cres's divide, " . . - -
and, tow'ring o'er his head, in triumph ride. dryd. virgil,
5. pride; spirit; fire; courage; loftiness of mien.
...when horses should endure the bloody spur,
they fall their crosis. ,
cre'st ed. adj. [from cres?; crisiatus, latin.]
1. adorned with a plume or crest.
the bold ascalonites, -
then grov'ling soil'd their cre/ed helmets in the dust, mik.
at this, for new replies he did not stay;
shaksar,
but lac'd his crested helm, and strode away. dryden,
2. wearing a comb. -
the crested bird shall by experience know, - -
jove made not him his master-piece below. dryden.
crest-fallen. adj. [cres and fall.]
spirited ; cowed; heartless; spiritless.
i warrant you, they would whip me with their fine wits,
'till i were as cross-fallen as a dried pear. -
shakespeare's merry wives of windsor,
they prolate their words in a whining kind of querulous
tone, as if they were still complaining and crest-fall.n. howel.
cre'st less, adj. [from cres?..] not dignified with coat-ar-
mour ; not of any eminent family.
his grandfather was lionel duke of clarence,
third son to the third edward king of england,
sprung crossles, yeomen from so deep a root. shałoszars.
creta(ceous. adj. [creta, chalk, lat.] -
i. having the qualities of chalk; chalky.
what gives the light, seems hard to say ; whether it be the
cretaceous salt, the nitrous salt, or some igneous particles. grew.
2. abounding with chalk.
n or from the sable ground expect success,
nor from cretaceous, stubborn and jejune. philips.
creta or ed. adj. [cretatus, latin.) rubbed with chalk. dicł.
cre'vice. n. s. [from crever, fr. cropare, latin, to burst.] a
crack ; a cleft ; a narrow opening.
7 i pried
dejected ; sunk; di-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 522</div><p class="text">i pried me through the crevice of a wall, - -
when for his hand he had his two sons heads. shakesp.
i thought it no breach of good-manners to peep at a crevice,
and look in at people so well employed. addison's spectator.
to cre'vice. v. a. ifrom the noun.j. to crack; to flaw.
so laid they are more apt in swagging down to pierce with
their points, than in the jacent posture, and so to crevice the
wall. wotton's architecture.
crew, n.s. [probably from crub, saxon.] -
1. a company of people associated for any purpose; as gallant
crew, for troops. chevy-chase.
there a noble crew
of lords and ladies stood on every fide, -
which with their presence fair, the place much beautify’d.
spenser.
2. the company of a ship. . . .
the anchors drop'd, his crew the vessels moor. dryd. æn.
3. it is now generally used in a bad sense.
one of the banish’d crew,
i fear, hath ventur'd from the deep, to raise
new troubles. milton's paradise left.
he, with a crew, whom like ambition joins
with him, or under him to tyrannize,
marching from eden tow’rds the west, shall find
the plain. milton's paradise loft.
the last was he, whose thunder slew
the titan race, a rebel crew. addison.
crew. [the preterite of crow.] the cock crew. bible.
cre'wel. n.s. [klewel, dutch..] yarn twisted and wound on
a knot or ball.
take silk or crewel, gold or filver thread, and make these
fast at the bent of the hook. walton's angler.
crib. m. s. [cnybbe, sax. crib, german.]
1. the rack or manger of a stable.
let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the
king's messe. shakespeare's hamlet.
the steer and lion at one crib shall meet,
and harmless serpents lick the pilgrim's feet.
2. the stall or cabbin of an ox.
3. a small habitation ; a cottage.
- why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoakey cribs,
upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
than in the perfum’d chambers of the great? shakespeare.
to crib. v. a. [from the noun..] to shut up in a narrow ha-
bitation; to confine ; to cage. -
now i’m cabbin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in
to saucy doubts and fears. shakespeare's macbeth.
cri'bbage. m. s. a game at cards. -
cr 1'bble. n.s.. [cribrum, latin.] a corn-sieve. dic7.
cribration. n.s. [cribro, latin.] the act of fifting, or
separating by a sieve.
crick. m. s.
1. [from cricco,
pope.
italian.] the noise of a door.
2. [from cryce, saxon, a stake..] a painful stiffness in the
neck. .
cr1'cket. n.s. [krekel, from kreken, to make a noise, dutch.]
1. an insect that squeaks or chirps about ovens and fireplaces.
didst thou not hear a noise
—i heard the owl scream, and the crickets cry. shakesp.
far from all resort of mirth,
save the cricket on the hearth. milton.
the solemn death-watch click'd the hour she dy’d,
and shrilling crickets in the chimney cry’d. gay.
2. [from cryce, saxon, a stick..] a sport, at which the con-
tenders drive a ball with sticks in opposition to each other.
: the judge, to dance, his brother serjeant call;
the senator at cricket urge the ball.
3. [from kriechen, germ. to creep.] . a low seat or stool.
cr1 cketing apple. n. s. a small species of apple.
cr1 er. m. s. [from cry..] the officer whose business is to
cry or make proclamation.
he openeth his mouth like a crier. ecclus, xx. 15.
the criers command silence, and the whole multitude pre-
fent stand in a suspence. brerewood on languages.
the crier calls aloud
our cla nobility of trojan blood,
... who gape among the crowd for their precarious food. dryd.
crime. m. s. [crimen, lat. crime, french..] an act contrary
to right; an offence; a great fault; an act of wickedness.
high god be witness, that i guiltless am;
but if yourself, sir knight, ye guilty find,
or wrapped be in loves of former dame,
pope.
spenser.
with crime do not it cover, but disclose the same.
undergo with me one guilt, one crime,
of tasting. milton.
like in punishment
as in their crime. milton.
no crime was thine, if 'tis no crime to love. pope.
crimeful. adj. [from crime and full.] wicked; criminal ;
faulty in a high degree; contrary to duty; contrary to virtue.
you proceeded not against these feats,
so crimeful and so capital in nature.
shakesp. hamlet.
cri'moss, adj. [from crime.] innocent; without crime,
my foes could not procure me any scathe,
so long as i am loyal, true, and crimeless.
• * , shakespeare's he
criminal. adj. [from crime.]. sp nry vi,
#. faulty ; contrary to right; contrary to duty; contrary to
law. -- , - -
live thou, and to thy mother dead attest,
that clear she died from blemish criminal. spensor
what we approve in our friend, we can hardly be indi.
to think criminal in ourselves. rogers,
2. guilty; tainted with crime; not innocent. -
the neglect of any of the relative duties, render uscriminal
in the fight of god. rogers
3. not civil : as a criminal prosecution; the criminal law. -
criminal. m. s. [from crime.]
i. a man accused.
was ever criminal forbid to plead
curb your ill-manner'd zeal. dryden's spanish fyor,
2. a man guilty of a crime.
all three persons, that had held chief place of authority in
their countries; all three ruined, not by war, or by any other
disaster, but by justice and sentence, as delinquents and ori.
minals. bacon,
c#1'minally. adv. [from criminal.] not innocently; wi.
kedly ; guiltily,
as our thoughts extend to all subjects, they may be crimi.
nally employed on all. rogers.
criminalness. n.s. [from criminal.] guiltiness; want of
1nn occ in ce.
crimination. m. s. scriminatio, latin.] the aet of accusing;
accusation; arraignment; charge.
criminatory... adj. [from crimina, latin.] relating to ac-
cusation ; accusing; censorious.
cri'm inous. adj.
enormously guilty.
the punishment that belongs to that great and criminous
guilt, is the forfeiture of his right and claim to all mercies,
which are made over to him by christ. hammond.
criminqusly. adv. [from criminous.] enormously; very
wickedly. -
some particular duties of piety and charity, which were
most criminously omitted before. hammond.
criminous n ess. n.s.. [from criminous.] wickedness; guilt;
cil sne.
i could never be convinced of any such criminousnes; in him,
as willingly to expose his life to the stroke of justice and ma-
lice of his enemies. ring charles.
cri'mosin. adj. [crimosino, italian, commonly written as it is
pronounced, crimson.] a species of red colour.
upon her head a crimosin coronet,
with damask roses and daffadilies set, ,
bay-leaves between, -
and primroses green,
embellish the white violet.
crimp. adj. [from crumble, or crimble.]
i. friable; brittle ; easily crumbled; easily reduced to powder.
now the fowler, warn'd
by these good omens, with swift early steps,
treads the crimp earth, ranging through fields and glades.
philips.
spenser's pastorali.
2. not consistent; not forcible: a low cant word.
the evidence is crimp; the witnesses swear backwards and
forwards, and contradict themselves ; and his tenants stick by
him. arbuthnot's john bull.
to cri'mple. v. a. [from rumple, crumple, crimple.] to con-
tract; to corrugate; to cause to shrink or contract.
he passed the cautery through them, and accordingly crim-
pled them up. wijeman's surgery.
crimson. m. s. [cremosino, italian.]
i. red, somewhat darkened with blue.
as crimson seems to be little else than a very deep red, with
an eye of blue ; so some kinds of red seem to be little else
than heightened yellow. boyle on colours.
why does the soil endue
the blushing poppy with a crimson hue?
2. red in general.
can you blame her then, being a maid yet rosed over with
the virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the appearance of
a naked blind boy, in her naked seeing self? shakes. henry v.
beauty's ensign yet
is crimson in thy lips, and in thy checks.
the crimson stream distain’d his arms around,
and the disdainful soul came rushing through the wound.
dryden's doneii.
w
prizr.
shakespeare.
to cr1'mson. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to dye with crimson.
pardon me, julius.-here wast thou bay’d, brave hart:
here didst thou fall; and here thy hunters stand
sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy lethe. shakesp.
crincum. m. s. la cant word.] a cramp ; a contraction ;
whimsy.
for
scriminosus, latin.] wicked ; iniquitous;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 523</div><p class="text">g r i
c r f
.
for jealousy is but a kind
of clap and crincum of the mind. hudibras.
crings. n.f. [from the verb.] bow; servile civility.
let me be grateful; but let far from me
befawning cringe, and false dissembling looks. philips.
t2 cringe. v. a. [from kriechen, german.] to draw to-
gether; to contract. -
whip him, fellows,
*till, like a boy, you see him cringe his face,
and whine aloud for mercy. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
yo cring e. v. n. [kriechen, german.] to bow; to pay court
with bows ; to fawn; to flatter.
flatterers have the flexor muscles so strong, that they are
always bowing and cringing. arbuthnot.
the cringing knave, who seeks a place
without success, thus tells his case. swift.
crin1"gerous, adj. [crimiger, latin.] hairy ; overgrown
with hair. dic.
t. cri'nkle. v. n. [krinckelen, dutch.) to go in and out;
to run in flexures: diminutive of crankle.
unless some sweetness at the bottom lie,
who cares for all the crinksing of the pye
t, cr1'nkle. v. a. to mould into inequalities.
cri's ki.e. n.s.. [from the verb..] a wrinkle; a sinuosity.
crinose. adj. [from crinis, latin.] hairy. dic7.
crino's 1ty. n.s.. [from crinose.] hairiness. dic7.
cripple. m. s. [crypel, sax. krepel, dutch..] a lame man;
one that has lost or never enjoyed the use of his limbs. donne
with great appearance of propriety writes it creeple, from
creep. -
he, poor man, by your first order dite,
and that a winged mercury did bear:
some tardy cripple had the countermand, -
that came too lag to see him buried. shakespeare.
i am a cripple in my limbs; but what decays are in my
mind, the reader must determine. dryden.
among the rest there was a lane crit: le from his birth,
whom paul commanded to stand upright on his feet. bently.
see the blind beggar dance, the cripple sing,
the sot a hero, lunatick a king. pope.
to cr1'pple, v. a. [from the noun..] to lame; to make
lame; to deprive of the use of limbs.
knots upon his gouty joints appear,
and chalk is in his crippled fingers found. dryden.
tettyx, the dancing master, threw himself from the rock,
but was crippled in the fall. addison.
cr1'pfleness. n.s.. [from cripple..] lameness; privation of
the limbs. t
cri'sis. n.s. [x:frts.] - .
1. the point in which the disease kills, or citanges to the
better. \-
wise leeches will not vain receipts obtrude,
deaf to complaints, they wait upon the ill, " .
*till some safe crisis authorize their skill,’ dryden.
2. the point of time at which any affair comes to the height.
this hour's the very crisis of your fate;
your good or ill, your infamy or fame,
and all the colour of your life depends
on this important now. dryden’s spanish fryar.
the undertaking, which i am now laying down, was en-
tered upon in the very crisis of the late rebellion, when it was
the duty of every briton to contribute his utmost assistance to
the government, in a manner suitable to his station and abi-
king's cookery.
lities. addison's freeholder.
crisp. adj. [crispus, latin.]
1. curled. o - o
- bulls are more crisp on the forehead than cows. bacon.
the ethiopian black, flat nosed, and crisp haired. lale.
2. indented ; winding.
you nymphs, call’d naiads, of the winding brooks,
with your sedg’d crowns, and ever harmless looks,
leave your crisp channels, and on this green land
answer your summons, juno does command.
3. brittle ; friable.
in frosy weather, musick within doors soundeth better ;
which may be by reason not of the disposition of the air, but
of the wood or string of the instrument, which is made more
crisp, and so more porous and hollow. bacon's nat. hisł.
to cr 13p. v. a. [crispo, latin.]
1. to curl: to contract into knots or curls.
severn, affrighted with their bloody looks,
ran fearfully among the trembling reeds, -
and hid his crisp'd head in the hollow bank. shak. hen. iv.
young i'd have him too,
yet a man, with crisped hair,
cast in thousand spares and rings, -
for love's fingers, and his rings. bon, joon.
‘spirits of wine is not only unfit for inflammations in ge-
neral, but also crisps up the vessels of the dura mater and
brain, and sometimes produces a gangrene. sharp's surgeoy.
2, to twist.
vol. i.
shakesp.
\ dici. --
along the crished shades and bow'rs,
... revels the spruce and jocund spring. milton.
3. to indent; to run in and out. * *
from that sephine fount the crisped brooks,
rolling on orient pears and sands of gold,
ran nectar, visiting each plant. milton.
crispation. m. s. [from criff.]
1. the aet of curling.
2. the state of being curled.
some differ in the hair and feathers, both in the quantity,
crispation, and colours of them; as he lions are hirsute, and
have great manes; the she's are smooth, like cats. bacon.
cri's pisg: pin. n.s...[from crisp..] a curling-iron.
the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping-pins. - ls. iii. 22.
crisp1 sulca nt. adi, [orispisukans, latin.] waved, or un-
dulating; as lightning is represented. dic?.
cr1's pn ess. n.s.. [from crisp..] curledness.
cr1's py. adj. [from crisp.j. curled.
so are those crispy snaky locks, oft known
to be the dowry of a second head. shakesp. as reh. of ven.
crite'rios. m. s. sorrow.] a mark by which any thing is
judged of, with regard to its goodness or badness.
mutual agreement and endearments was the badge of pri-
mitive believers; but we may be known by the contrary cri-
terion. glanville's scopsis.
we have here a sure infallible criterion, by which every
man may discover and find out the gracious or ungracious
disposition of his own heart. - south.
by what criterion do ye eat, d'ye think, - -
if this is priz'd for sweetness, that for stink? pope's hor.
critick. m. s. [xcitiz;..] - -
1. a man skilled in the art of judging of literature; a man able
to distinguish the faults and beautics of writing. -
this settles truer ideas in men's minds of several things,
whereof we read the names in ancient authors, than all u;
large and laborious arguments of criticks. - looke.
now learn what morals criticks ought to show, -
for 'tis but half a judge's task to know.
2. an examiner; a judge.
but you with pleasure own your errours past,
and make each day a critio on the last.
3. a snarler ; a carper; a caviller.
criticks i saw, that other names deface, -
and fix their own with labour in their place. pope.
where an author has many beauties consistent with virtue,
piety, and truth, let not little criticks exalt themselves, and
shower down their ill-nature. //atts.
4. a censurer; a man apt to find fault. -&gt;
my chief design, next to seeing you, is to be a severe cri-
tick on you o: neighbour. swift.
cr 1st ick. adj. critical; relating to criticism; relating to the
art of judging of literary performances.
thence arts o'er all the northern world advance,
but critick learning flourish'd most in france.
cr1"tick. m. s.
1. a critical examination; critical remarks; animadversions.
i should be glad if i could persuade him to continue his
good offices, and write such another critick on any thing of
mine. - , dryden.
i should as soon expect to see a critique on the poesy of a
ring, as on the inscription of a medal. addison on medals.
2. science of criticism. -
if ideas and words were distinetly weighed, and duly con-
sidered,they would afford us another sort of logick and critick
than what we have been hitherto acquainted with. locke.
what is every year of a wise man's life, but a censure and
pope.
o
pop.,
pope.
critique on the past pope.
not that my quill to criticks was confin'd,
my verse gave ampler lessons to mankind. pope.
to critick. v. m. [from £itics.] to play the critick; to
criticise.
they do but trace over the paths that have been beaten by
the antients ; or comment, critick, and flourish upon
them. 7 on le.
cri't1c al. adj. [from critick.] -
1. exact; nicely judicious; accurate; diligent.
it is submitted to the judgment of more critical ears, to
direet and determine what is graceful and what is not. holder.
virgil was so critical in the rites of religion, that he would
never have brought in such prayers as these, if they had not
been agreeable to the roman customs. stillingfieet.
2. relating to criticisin: as, he wrote a critical dissertation on the
lost play. -
3. captious; inclined to find fault. -
what wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise
me —
—o, gentle lady, do not put me tot;
for i am nothing, if not critical. shakespeare's othello.
4. [from crisis.] comprising the time at which a great event is
determined.
5 z
the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 524</div><p class="text">c r o
c r o
the moon is supposed to be measured by sevens, and the
critical or decretory days to be dependent on that number.
brown's vulgar errours.
5. decifive , nice. - - - -
opportunity is in respoet to time, in some sense, as time is
in respect to eternity: it is the small moment, the exact point,
the critical minute, on which every good work so much de-
pends. - spratt's sermons.
the people cannot but resent to see their apprehensions of
the power of france, in so critical a juncture, wholly laid
aside. swift.
6. producing a crisis or change of the disease: as a critical sweat.
criotic ally. adv. [from critical.]
1. in a critical manner; exactly; curiously.
difficult it is to understand the purity of english, and
critically to discern good writers from bad, and a proper stile
from a corrupt one. dryden.
–these shells which are digged up out of the earth, several
hundreds of which i now keep by me, have been nicely and
critically examined by very many learned men. woodward.
2. at the exact point of time.
cr1'rical ness. n. s. [from critical.] exactness; accuracy;
nicety; incidence at a particular point of time.
to cri'ticise. v. n. [from critick.]
1. to play the critick; to judge; to write remarks upon any
performance of literature; to point out faults and beauties.
they who can criticise so weakly, as to imagine i have
done my worst, may be convinced, at their own cost, that i
can write severely with more ease than i can gently. drydon.
know well each ancient's proper character,
without all this at once before your eyes,
cavil you may, but never criticise.
2. to animadvert upon as faulty.
nor would i have his father look so narrowly into these ac-
counts, as to take occasion from thence to criticise on his ex-
pences. - locke.
to cri'ticise. v. a. [from critick.] to censure; to pass
judgment upon.
nor shall i look upon it as any breach of charity to criticise
... the author, so long as i keep clear of the person. addison.
criticis m. m. s. [from critick.]
1. criticism, as it was first instituted by aristotle, was meant a
... standard of judging well. dryden's innocence, prof.
2: remark; animadversion ; critical observations.
there is not a greek or latin critick who has not shewn,
- even in the stile of his criticisms, that he was a master of all
, the eloquence and delicacy of his native tongue. addison.
to croak. v. n. [cnacezzan, saxon; crocare, italian; croci-
tare, latin.]
1. to make a hoarse low noise, like a frog.
the subtle swallow flies about the brook,
and querulous frogs in muddy pools do croak, may's virgil.
so when jove's block descended from on high,
loud thunder to its bottom shook the bog,
and the hoarse nation croak'd.
blood, stuff'd in skins, is british christians food;
and france robs marshes of the croaking brood.
2. to caw or cry as a raven or crow.
the raven himself is hoarse,
that croaks the fatal entrance of duncan
under my battlements.
the hoarse raven, on the blasted bough,
by croaking from the left, presag'd the coming blow. dryd.
at the same time the walk of elms, with the croaking of the
ravens, looks exceeding solemn and venerable. addison.
3. it may be used in contempt for any disagreeable or offensive
inurmur.
their understandings are but little instructed, when all their
whole time and pains is laid out to still the croaking of their
own bellies. locke.
croak. n.s.. [from the verb.] the cry or voice of a frog or
isa wen.
the swallow skims the river's watry face,
the frogs renew the croaks of their loguacious race. dryd.
was that a raven's croak, or my son's voice
no matter which, i'll to the grave and hide me. lee.
cro'ceous. adj. [croceus, latin.] consisting of saffron ; like
saffron. dicf.
crocitation. n. s. [crocitatio, latin.] the croaking of
frogs or ravens. - dic.
crock. n.s. [kruick, dutch..] a cup; any vessel made of
earth.
crock ery... n.s. earthen ware.
cro'codile. n.s.. [from xpaxgp, saffron, and 3sixwy, fearing.]
an amphibious voracious animal, in shape resembling a
lizard, and found in egypt and the indies. it is covered with
very hard scales, which cannot, without great difficulty, be
pierced; except under the belly, where the skin is tender. it
has a wide throat, with several rows of teeth, sharp and sepa-
rated, which enter one another. it runs with great swift-
ness; but does not easily turn itself. it is long lived, and is
pope.
shakespeare.
said to grow continually to its death. some are fifteen or
eighteen cubits long. crocodiles lay their eggs, resemblin,
goose-eggs, sometimes amounting to sixty, near the wate:
fide, covering them with the sand, that the heat of the sun
may hatch them. calmet
gloster's show -
beguiles him ; as the mournful cro-odile,
with sorrow, snares relenting passengers. shakesp. hon. vi
crocodils were thought to be peculiar unto the nile. o
brown's pulgar errouri,
caesar will weep, the crocodile will weep. dryden
enticing crocodiles, whose tears are death; -
syrens, that murder with enchanting breath. granvill,
crocodile is also a little animal, otherwise called inx, ver,
much like the lizard, or small crocodile. it lives by land and
water; has four short small legs, a very sharp muzzle, and 3.
short small tail. it is pretty enough to look at, being covered
all over with little scales of the colour of silver, intermixt with
brown, and of a gold colour upon the back. it always.
mains iittle. trevoux
croscopiline. adj. [crocodilinus, lat.] like a crocodile. d.
cr o'cus. n.s. a flower. -
fair-handed spring unbosoms every grace,
throws out the snow-drop and the crocus first. thomson,
cr of t. n. s. scnopt, saxon.] a little close joining to a house
that is used for corn or pasture. 2
this have i learn'd,
tending my flooks hard by, i' th' hilly crosis
that brow this bottom glade. milton,
crois a‘de. { n. s. croisade, fr. from croix, a cross.] a holy
crois a'do. § war; a war carried on against infidels under the
banner of the cross. -
see that he take the name of urban, because a pope of that
name did first institute the crossado; and, as with an holy
trumpet, did stir up the voyage for the holy land.
crosis es. n.s. -
i. pilgrims who carry a cross.
2. so who fight against infidels under the banner of the
ciois. -
cronk, n.s.. [citone, sax, according to versiegan; ironie, dut.
according to skinner.]
1. an old eve.
fresh herrings plenty michel brings,
with fatted crones, and such old things.
2. in contempt, an old woman.
take up the bastard, -
take’t up, i say givest to thy crone. shakes. winter's tal.
the crone being in bed with him on the wedding-night
and finding his aversion, endeavours to win his affection §
reason. - dryden.
cro"nef; n. s. the hair which grows over the top of an
horse's hocf.
cro'ny. m. s. [a cant word.] an old acquaintance; a compa-
nion of long standing.
so when the scots, your constant cronies,
th’espousers of your cause and monies,
to oblige your crony swift,
bring our dame a new year's gift.
strange, an astrologer should die,
without one wonder in the sky
not one of all his crony stars,
to pay their duty at his herse: ;
crook. n. s. [croc, french..]
i. any crooked or bent instrument. ".
2. a sheephook. o
i sing the man who judah's sceptre bore,
in that right hand which held the crook before.
he left his crook, he left his flocks, \
and wand'ring through the lonely rocks
he nourish’d endless woe. • prior.
bacon.
taser.
audibras,
swift.
swift.
cowly,
3. any thing bent; a meander.
there fall those saphire-colour’d brook
which, conduit like, with curious crooks,
sweet islands make in that sweet land. *
to crook. v. a. [crocher, french.] a
1. to bend ; to turn into a hook. \
it is highly probable, that this disease proceeds from a re-
dundant acidity, because vinegar will soften and crook tender
bones. arbuthnot on diet.
2. to pervert from rectitude; to divert from the original end.
whatsoever affairs pass such a man's hands, he crooketh
them to his own ends; which must needs be often occentrick
to the ends of his master or state. * bacon.
to crook. v. n. to be bent; to have a curvature.
their shoes and pattens are snouted and piked id: than a
finger long, crooking upwards. | camden.
cro'okback. n.s.. [crook and back.] a term of reproach for
a man that has gibbous shoulders. s
ay, crookhack, here i stand to answer thee,
or any he the proudest of thy sort. shakes. henry wi.
cro'okbacke d, adj. having bent shoulders. |
s&gt;\
sidney,
*
t
a dwarf
o<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
|
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 525</div><p class="text">c r o
c r o
o
sa
!
:
a dwarf as well may for a giant pass,
as negroe for a swan; a crookback'd lass
be call'd europa. dryden's juvenal.
there are millions of truths that a man is not, or may not
think himself, concerned to know ; as, whether our king
richard iii. was crookbacked or no. locke.
crooked. adj. [crocher, french.] -
1. bent; not strait; curve.
a bell or a cannon may be heard beyond a hill, which in-
tercepts the fight of the sounding body; and sounds are pro-
pagated as readily through crooked pipes as through straight
on cs. newton's opt.
mathematicians say of a straight line, that it is as well an
index of its own restitude as of the obliquity of a crooked
one. jwoodward's natural history.
2. winding; oblique; anfractuous.
' a man shall never want crooked paths to walk in, if he thinks
that he is in the right way, where-ever he has the footsteps of
others to follow. locke.
among the crooked lanes, on every hedge,
the glow-worm lights his gem. thomson's summer.
3. perverse; untoward; without restitude of mind; given to
obliquity of conduct.
they have corrupted themselves: they are a perverse and
crooked generation. deut. xxxii. 5.
hence, heap of wrath; foul, indigested lumps
as crooked in thy manners as thy shape. shakesp. henry vi.
we were not born crooked; we learned those windings and
turnings of the serpent. south.
croo’kedly. adv. [from crooked.]
1. not in a strait line.
2. untowardly; not compliantly.
if we walk perversely with god, he will walk crookedly
towards us. taylor's rule of living h.ly.
croo’ke dness. n.s.. [from crooked.]
1. deviation from straitness ; curvity; the state of being in-
fle&amp;ted ; infle&amp;tion.
he that knoweth what is straight, doth even thereby dis-
cern what is crooked; because the absence of straightness, in
bodies capable thereof, is crookedness. hooker.
2. desormity of a gibbous body.
when the heathens offered a sacrifice to their false gods,
they would make a severe search to see if there were any
crookedness or spot, any uncleanness or deformity, in their
sacrifice. taylor's worthy communicant.
crop. n.s. [crop, saxon.] the craw of a bird; the first
stomach into which her meat descends.
in birds there is no mastication or comminution of the
meat in the mouth; but in such as are not carnivorous, it is
immediately swallowed into the crop or craw. ray.
but flutt’ring there, they nestle near the throne,
and lodge in habitations not their own, ;
by their high crops and corny gizzards known. dryden.
cro'pfull. adj. [crop and full.] satiated; with a full belly.
he stretch'd out all the chimney's length,
basks at the fire his hairy strength;
and, crop-full, out of door he flings,
ere the first cock his matin rings. milton.
croopsick. adj. [crop and sick.] sick with repletion; sick
with excess and debauchery.
strange odds ! where crop-sick drunkards must engage
a hungry foe, and arm'd with sober rage. tate's juv.
crop. m. s. scnoppa, saxon.]
1. the highest part or end of any thing; as the head of a tree,
the ear of corn.
2. the harvest; the corn gathered off a field; the product of
the field.
and this of all my harvest hope i have,
nought reaped but a weedy crop of care. spenser's pas?.
lab'ring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop,
corn, wine, and oil. milton's paradise loft.
the fountain which from helicon proceeds,
that sacred stream, should never water weeds,
nor make the crop of thorns and thistles grow. roscommon.
nothing is more prejudicial to your crop than mowing of it
too soon. mortimer's husbandry.
3. any thing cut off. -
guiltless of steel, and from the razor free,
it falls a plenteous crop reserv'd for thee. dryden's fables.
to crop. v. a. [from the noun.] o
1. to cut off the ends of any thing; to mow; to reap ; to
iop.
p crop'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms;
of england's coat, one half is cut away. shakes. hen. vi.
he, upon whose side
the fewest roses are crop'd from the tree,
shall yield the other in the right opinion. shakes. hen. vi.
all the budding honours on thy crest
i'll crop, to make a garland for my head. shakes. hen. iv.
i will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender
cne, 2nd will plant it upon an high mountain. ezek. xvii. 22.
there are some tears cf trees, which are combed from the
beards of goats; for when the goats bite and crop them, espe-
cially in the mornings, the dew being on, the tear cometh
forth, and hangeth upon their beards. bacon’s nat. hist.
no more, my goats, shall i behold you climb
the steepy cliffs, or crop the flow'ry thymel dryd. virgil.
2. to gather before it falls.
o fruit divine !
sweet of thyself, but much more sweet thus crop'd milton.
age, like ripe apples, on earth's bosom drops;
while force our youth, like fruits, untimely crops. denham.
death destroys
the parent's hopes, and crops the growing boys. creech.
to cr op. v. n. to yield harvest.
royal wench
she made great caesar lay his sword to-bed;
he plough'd her, and she cropt. shakesp. anth. and cleopatra.
cropper. n.s. [from crop.] a kind of pigeon with a large
crop.
there be tame and wild pigeons; and of tame there be
croppers, carriers, runts. walton's angler.
crossie r. m. s. [croiser, fr. from croix, a cross.] the pasto-
ral staff of a bishop, which has a cross upon it.
when prelates are great, there is also danger from them;
as in the times of anselmus and thomas becket, who, with
their crosiers, did almost try it with the king's sword. bacon.
grievances there were, i must confess, and some incon-
gruities in my civil government; wherein some say the crosier,
some say the distaff, was too busy. howel's england's tears.
her front erect with majesty she bore,
the crosier wielded, and the mitre wore.
cro's let. n. s. [crois-let, french.]
1. a small cross.
then una ’gan to ask, if aught he knew,
or heard abroad, of that her champion true,
that in his armour bare a croslet red. spensor.
here an unfinish'd di'mond croslet lay,
to which soft lovers adoration pay. gay's fan.
2. it seems to be printed in the following passage, by mistake,
for corselet. -
the crosset some, and some the cuishes mould,
with silver plated, and with ductile gold. dryden’s afn.
cross. m. s. [croix, fr. croce, ital. crux, latin.]
1. one strait body laid at right angles over another; the instru-
ment by which the saviour of the world suffered death.
they make a little cross of a quill, longways of that part of
the quill which hath the pith, and crossways of that piece of
the quill without pith. bacon's natural history.
you are first to confider seriously the infinite love of your
saviour, who offered himself for you as a sacrifice upon the
cross. taylor's guide to the penitent.
2. the ensign of the christian religion.
her holy faith and christian cross oppos'd
against the saxon gods. rowe.
3. a monument with a cross upon it to excite devotion; such
as were anciently set in market-places.
she doth stray about
by holy crosses, where she kneels and prays.
4. a line drawn through another.
5. any thing that thwarts or obstructs; misfortune; hindrance;
vexation; opposition; misadventure; trial of patience. `
wishing unto me many crosses and mischances in my love,
whensoever i should love. sidney.
then let us teach our trial patience,
because it is a customary cross. shakespeare.
heaven prepares good men with crosses; but no ill can hap-
pen to a good man. ben. johnson's discoveries.
a great estate hath great crosses, and a mean fortune hath
but small ones, taylor's rule of living holy.
6. money so called, because marked with a cross,
he was said to make soldiers spring up out of the very
earth to follow him, though he had not a cross to pay them
salary. howel's vocal forest.
whereas we cannot much lament our loss,
who neither carry'd back nor brought one cross. dryden.
7. cross and pile, a play with money; at which it is put to
chance whether the side, which bears a cross, shall lie upward,
or the other.
whacum had neither cross nor pile;
his plunder was not worth the while.
this i humbly conceive to be perfeoł boys play; cross, i
win, and pile, you lose ; or, what's yours is mine, and what's
mine is my own. swift.
8. church lands in ireland.
the absolute palatines made their own judges, so as the
king's writ did not run in those counties, but only in the
church lands lying within the same, which were called the
cross; wherein the king made a sheriff: so in each of these
counties palatines there was one sheriff of the liberty, and
another of the cross. sir j. davies.
cross. adj. [from the substantive.]
1. transverse; falling a-thwart something else.
whatsoever penumbra should be made in the circles by the
cross
dryden,
shakespeare.
hudibras.
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 526</div><p class="text">c r o -
c r o
cross refraction of the second prism, that penumbra would be
conspicuous in the right lines which touch those circles. newt.
the sun, in that space of time, by his annual contrary
motion eastward, will be advanced near a degree of the eclip-
tick, cross to the motion of the equator. holder on time.
the ships must needs encounter, when they either advance
towards one another in direet lines, or meet in the intersection
of cros; ones.
2. oblique; lateral.
- was this a face, ,
to stand against the deep dread bolted thunder *
in the most terrible and nimble stroke
of quick cross lightning f
3. adverse ; opposite: often with to.
we're both love's captives; but with fate so cross,
shakoff. king lear.
one must be happy by the other's loss. dryden.
cross to our interests, curbing sense and fin;
oppress'd without, and undermin'd within,
it thrives through pain. - - dryden.
it runs cross to the belief and apprehension of the rest of
mankind; a difficulty, which a modest and good man is scarce
able to encounter. afterbury.
4. perverse; untractable.
when, through the cross circumstances of a man’s temper
or condition, the enjoyment of a pleasure would certainly
expose him to a greater inconvenience, then religion bids him
quit it. - - saath.
5. peevish ; fretful ; ill-humoured. -
did ever any man upon the rack afflict himself, because he
had received a cross answer from his mistress taylor.
all cross and distasteful humours, and whatever else may
render the conversation of men grievous and uneasy to one
another, must be shunned. tillaison.
6, contrary; contradictory.
the mind blings ail the ends of a long and various hypo-
thesis together ; sees how one part coheres with, and depends
upon another; and so clears off all the appearing contrarieties
and contradictions, that seemed to lie cross and uncouth, and
to make the whole unintelligible. south.
7. contrary to wish ; unfortunate. - -
we learn the great reasonableness of not only a contented,
but also a thankful acquiescence in any condition, and under
the crosoft and severest passages of providence. south.
i cannot, without some regret, behold the cross and un-
lucky issue of my design; for by my dislike of disputes, i am
engaged in one. - glanv.
8. interchanged.
- evarchus made a cross marriage also with dorilaus's sister,
and shortly left her with child of the famous pyrocles. sidney.
cross marriages, between the king's son and the archduke's
daughter; and again, between the archduke's son and the
king's daughter. bacon’s henry vii.
cross, prep. -
1. a-thwart; so as to intersed any thing; transversely.
the enemy had, in the woods before them, cut down
great trees cross the ways, so that their horse could not possibly
pass that way. - knolles.
betwixt the midst and these, the gods assign'd
two habitable seats of human kind;
and cross their limits cut a sloaping way,
which the twelve signs in beauteous order sway. dryd. wing.
cross his back, as in triumphant scorn,
the hope and pillar of the house was born.
2. over ; from side to side.
a fox was taking a walk one night cross a village.
to cross. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to lay one body, or draw one line, a-thwart another.
this forc’d the stubborn'it, for the cause,
to cross the cudgels to the laws;
that what by breaking them't had gain'd, *
by their support might be maintain'd. hitohras.
o the loxia, or cross-bill, whose bill is thick and strong,
with the tips crossing one another, with great readiness breaks
open fir-cones, apples, and other fruit, to come at their ker-
nels; as if the crossing of the bill was designed for this
service. derham's physico-theology.
i shall most carefully observe, not to cross over, or deface
the copy of your papers for the future, and only to mark in
the margin. pope.
a hunted hare treads back her mazes, and crofts and con-
dryd. falles.
founds her former track. jo atts.
2. to sign with the cross.
- fry’rs
resort to farmers rich, and bless their halls,
and exercise the beds, and cross the walls. dryin.
3. to cancel : as, to cross an article.
4. to pass over.
he conquercd this proud turk as far as the hellespont,
which he crosod, and made a visit to the greek emperor at
constantinople. temple.
we found the hero, for whose only sake -
we sought the daik abodes, and cross d the bitter lake, d'y.
bently.
l’esor.”
5. to move laterally, obliquely, or a-thwart; not in oppos-
tion; not in the same line. -
but he them spying, 'gan to turn aside,
for fear, as seem’d, or for some feined loss;
more greedy they of news, fast towards him do cross. spens.
6. to thwart; to interpose obstruction; to embarrass; to ob-
struct; to hinder; to counteract. -
still do i cross this wretch, whatso he taketh in hand. hacker.
the king no longer could endure
thus to be cross'd in what he did intend. daniel.
he was so great an enemy to digby and colepeper, who
were only present in debates of the war with the officers, that
he craffod all they proposed. clarendon.
bury'd in private, and so suddenly
it cross's my design, which was to allow
the ritcs of funeral fitting his degree. dryden.
swell'd with our late successes on the foe,
which france and holland wanted pow'r to cros,
we urge an unseen fate.
- the firm patriot there,
though still by faction, vice, and fortune croft,
shall find the generous labour was not lost. addison's cats.
7. not to concur; to be inconsistent with.
then their wills clash with their unde, standings, and their
appetites cros, their duty. locke.
8. to contravene ; to hinder by authority; to countermand.
no governour is suffered to go on with any one course,
but upon the least information he is either stopped and crossed,
or other courses appointed him from hence. spenser on ireland.
it may make my case dangerous, to cross this in the
smallest. shakesp. a seasure for measure.
9. to contradict. -
in all this there is not a syllable which any ways crossib
l!s. hocker.
it is certain, howsoever it cross the received opinion, that
founds may be created without air. bacon's natural history.
io. to debar ; to preclude.
from his loins no hopeful branch shall spring,
dryden,
to cross me from the golden time i look for. shako.
to cross. v. n. - -
i. to lye a-thwart another thing.
2. to be inconsistent.
men's actions do not always cros; with reason. sidney:
cross. bar-shot. n.s. a round shot, or great bullet, with
a bar of iron put through it. - harris.
to cross-exa mine. v. a. [cross and examine.] to try the
faith of evidence by captious questions of the contrary party.
if we may but cross-examine and interrogate their actions
against their words, these will soon confess the invalidity of
their solemnest confessions. decay of piety.
the judges shall, as they think fit, interrogate or cross-
examine the witnesses. speciator.
cro'ss-st aff. m. s. [from cros; and soft.] an instrument
commonly called the forestaff, used by seamen to take the
meridian altitude of the sun or stars. harris.
4 crossbite. m. s. [cros; and bite.] a deception; a cheat.
the fox, that trusted to his address and manage, without
so much as dreaming of a cross-lite from so filly an animal,
fell himself into the pit that he had digged for another. l’eir.
to crossbit e. v. a. [from the noun.] to contravene by
deception. -
no rhetorick must be spent against cross-biting a country
evidence, and frighting him out of his senses. collier.
that many knotty points there are, -
which all discuss, but few can clear;
as nature flily had thought fit,
for some by-ends, to cross-lite wit. prior.
crossbow. n.s [cross and bow.] a missive weapon formed
by placing a bow a thwart a stock.
gentlemen suffer their beasts to run wild in their woods
and waste ground, where they are hunted and killed with cross-
bow; and pieces, in the manner of decr. carew of cornwal.
the master of the cross-bows, lord rimbures. shop.
testimony is like the shot of a long bow, which owes its
efficacy to the force of the shooter; argument is iike the shot
of the cross-bow, equally forcible whether discharged by a
giant or a dwarf. . hoye.
cross bow ers. m. s. [from crossbow.] a shooter with a
cross-bow.
the french assisted themselves by land with the crosłowers
of genoa against the english. raleigh's assays.
crossg rain fd adj. [cross and grain.]
1. having the fibres transverse or irregular.
if the stuff proves crossrained in any part of its length,
then you must turn your stuff to plane it the contrary way,
so far as it runs cross-grained. 440xon.
2. perverse; troublesome ; vexatious.
we find in fullen writs,
and cross grained works of modern wits,
the wonder of the ignorant. hudibrar.
the spirit of contradiction, in a cross-grained woman, is
incurable, - l'eorange.
- 6 she
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 527</div><p class="text">c r o
*
-
-:
o
she was none of your cross-grained, termagant, scolding
jades, that one had as good be hanged as live in the house
with. arbuthnot's john bull.
but wisdom, peevish and cross grain'd,
must be oppos'd, to be sustain'd.
crossly. adv. [from cross.]
1. a-thwart ; so as to interfect something else.
2. cppositely ; adversely; in opposition to.
he that provides for this life, but takes no care for eternity,
is wife for a moment, but a fool for ever; and acts as un-
towardly, and crossly to the reason of things, as can be ima-
gined. . tilson.
3. unfortunately.
cross ness. n.f. [from cros; j
1. transverseness; intersection.
2. perverseness; peevishness. -
the lighter sort of malignity turneth but to a crosoft, or
aptness to oppose ; but the deeper fort, to envy, or mere mis-
chief. bacon.
i deny nothing, fit to be granted, out of crosh's or hu-
mour. king charles.
who would have imagined, that the stiff crashes of a
poor captive should ever have had the power to make haman's
seat so uneasy to him l'estrange.
they help us to forget the crosses of men and things,
compose our cares and our passions, and lay our disappoint-
ments asleep. callier of the entertainment of books.
cro'ssrow. m. s. [cros; and row.] alphabet; so named be-
cause a cross is placed at the beginning, to shew that the end
of learning is piety.
he hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
and from the crossrow plucks the letter g;
and says a wizard told him, that by g
his issue disinherited should be. shakesh. richard iii.
cro'sswis d. n. f. [cross and wind.] wind blowing from the
right or left. -
the least unhappy persons do, in so fickle and so tem-
pestuous a sea as this world, meet with many more either
crosswinds or stormy gusts than prosperous gales. boyle.
cr o'ssway. m. s. [cross and way.] a small obscure path inter-
se&amp;ting the chief road.
damn’d spirits all,
that in crossways and floods have burial,
already to their wormy beds are gone.
cro'sswor t. n.s.. [from cross and wort.]
it hath soft leaves, like the ladies bedstraw, srom which it
differs in the number of leaves, that are produced at every
joint; which in this are only four, disposed in form of a cross.
miller.
prior.
shakespeare.
crotch. m. s. [croc, french j a hook or fork.
there is a tradition of a dilemma, that moreton used to
raise the benevolence to higher rates; and some called it his
fork, and some his crotch. bacon's henry vii.
save elme, ash, and crab-tree for cart and for plough,
save step for a stile of the crotch and the bough. tuscr.
cro'orchet. n.s.. [crochet, french.]
1. [in musick.]"one of the notes or characters of time, equal
to half a minim, and double a quaver. chambers.
as a good harper, stricken far in years,
into whose cunning hands the gout doth fall,
all his old crotchets in his brain he bears,
but on his harp plays ill, or not at all. davies.
2. a support; a piece of wood fitted into another to support a
building. [from croch, a fork.]
a stately temple shoots within the skies,
the crotchets of their cot in columns rise. dryden.
3. [in printing.] hooks in which words are included [thus.]
4. a perverse conceit ; an odd fancy.
all the devices and crotchets of new inventions, which crept
into her, tended either to twich or enlarge the ivy. howel.
the horse smelt him out, and presently a crotchet came in
his head how he might countermine him. l'estrange.
to crouch. v. n. [crochu, crooked, french.]
1. to stoop low; to lye close to the ground; as the lion crouches to
his master.
2. to fawn; to bend servilely; to stoop meanly. -
every one that is left in thine house, shall come and crouch
to him for a piece of silver and a morel of bread. i sa. ii. 36.
at his heels,
leasht in like hounds, should famine, sword and fire,
crouch for employment. shakespeare's henry v.
they sawn and crouch to men of parts, whom they cannot
ruin; quote them, when they are present; and, when they
are absent, steal their jests. - dryden.
too well the vigour of that arm they know ;
they lick the dust, and crouch beneath their fatal foc. dryd.
your shameful story shall record of me,
the men all crouch'd, and left a woman free.
croup. n.s.. [crolife, french.j
1. the rump of a fowl.
2. the buttocks of a horse.
co n.j. [from croup.] higher leaps than those of
wol. i.
dryden.
corvets, that keep the fore and hind quarters of the horse in an
equal o so that he trusies his logs under his belly with.
out yerking. parrier's dict,
crow. m. s. scrape, saxon; corvus.]
i. a large black bird that feeds upon the carcasses of beasis.
the crows and choughs, that wing the midway air,
show scarce so gross as beetles. shakespeare's king lear.
to crow; he like impartial grace affords,
and thoughs and daws, and such republick birds. dryden,
2. to pluck a crow, is to be induitrious or contentious about
that which is of no value.
if you dispute, we must even pluck a crow about it.
resolve before we go,
that you and i must pull a crow. hudibras.
3. a piece of iron used as a lever; as the latin, called , i.
c27oolts.
the cow is used as a lever to list up the ends of great
heavy timber, and then they thrust the claws between the ground
and the timber; and laying some stuff behind the crow, the
draw the other end of the shank backwards, and so raise the
timber. - - - 4/22 on’s mech. exer.
u get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
nto my cell. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
against the gate employ your crows of iron. southern.
-4. [from **] . the voice of a cock, or the noise which he
makes in his gaiety.
cr9 w foot. n.s.. [from crow and foot; in latin, ranunculus.]
a flower. -
crowfoot... n.s. [from crow and foot..] a caltrop or piece of
iron with four points, two, three, or four inches long ; so
..., whatever way it falls, one point is up. it is used in
co- o, or incommoding the cavalry. a4ilitary dici.
****ow: *, n. preterit. i crew, or crowed; i have or...
[cnapan, saxon.]
1. to make the noise which a cock makes in gaiety, or de-
fiance.
but even then the morning cock crew loud. shakesp. ham.
diogenes called an ill physician, cock. why faith he.
pome answered, because when you crow, men use to
i 11t.
l'eir.
• " bacon.
that the lion trembles at the crowing of the cock, ao.
james, upon trial, found to be fabulous. iłakewis.
within this homestead liv'd, without a peer
§. loud, the noble chanticleer,
o hight her cock. dryden’ le.
2. to boast; to bully; to vapour; to bluster; to o *re.
selby is crowing, and though always defeated by his wife
still crowing on. grand ...
crowd. n.s. scruis, saxon.] sons
1. a multitude confusedly pressed together.
2. a promiscuous medley, without order or distincion,
he could then compare the confusion of a multitude to that
tumult he had observed in the icarian sea, dashing and break-
ing among its crowd of islands.
3. the vulgar; the populace. pope.
b o: * with the erowd to see a shrine,
utfed us, by the way, with food divine, den’s f.
4. [from crwth, wi. ”a fiddle. dryden's fables,
hark how the minstrels 'gin to shrill aloud
their merry musick that resounds from far,
the pipe, the tabor and the trembling croud,
that well agree withouten breach or jar. spenser's epith
his fiddle is your proper purchase, - -
won in the service of the churches;
and by your doom must be allow'd
to be, or be no more, a crowd. hudibras.
to crow d. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fill with confused multitudes.
a mind which is ever crowding its memory with things
which it learns, may cramp the invention itself. watti.
2. to press close together. \
the time misorder'd, doth in common sense
crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form,
to hold our safety up. shakesp. henry iv.
it seems probable, that the sea doth still grow narrower
from age to age, and sinks more within its channel and the
bowels of the earth, according as it can make its way into
all those subterraneous cavities, and crowd the air out of
them. burnet's theory.
as the mind itself is thought to take up no space, so its
actions seem to require no time ; but many of them seem to
be crowded into an instant. - locłe.
- then let us fill
this little interval, this pause of life,
with all the virtues we can crowd into it.
3. to incumber by multitudes. -
how short is life why will vain courtiers toil,
and crowd a vainer monarch for a smile * granville.
4. to crow d sail. [a sea phrase.] to spread wide the sails
upon the yards.
to crow d. v. n.
1. to swarm; to be numerous and confused,
6 a
addison's cato.
they
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 528</div><p class="text">c r o w
c r u
they follow their undaunted king; -
crowd through their gates; and in the fields of light, ...
the shocking squadrons meet in mortal fight. dryd. wirg.
2. to thrust among a multitude: -
a mighty man, had not some cunning sin, - - -
amidst so many virtues, crowded in. cowley's davideis.
cr own er. m. s. [from crowd.] a fiddler.
chevy-chase sung by a blind crowder.
croswk ef per. m. s. [crow and keep.] a scarecrow.
- that fellow handles his bow like a crowkeeper. shakespeare.
crown. m. s. [couronne, fr. kroone, dut. corona, latin.]
-1. the ornament of the head which denotes imperial and regal
dignity.
if thou be a king, where is thy crown 2
—my crown is in my heart, not on my head:
my crown is call’d content;
a crown it is that seldom kings enjoy. shakesp. henry vi.
look down, you gods,
and on this couple drop a blessed crown. shakesp. tempts.
i would the college of the cardinals
would chuse him pope, and carry him to rome,
and set the triple crown upon his head. shakesp. henry vi.
is it not as great a presumption in us to become. god’s
sons; and to inherit kingdoms, and to hope for crowns, and
thrones and sceptres, as it is to sit down with him as his
guests 2 - * kettl well.
2. a garland.
receive a crown for thy well-ordering of the feast. ecclus.
3. reward; honorary distinetion.
they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incor-
ruptible. i cor. ix. 25.
let merit crowns, and justice laurels give,
but let me happy by your pity live. dryden’s episoles.
4. regal power; royalty.
the succession of a crown in several countries, places it on
different heads. locke.
5. the top of the head in a contemptuous sense.
if he awake,
from toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches;
make us strange stuff. shakespeare's tempts?.
while his head was working upon this thought, the toy
took him in the crown to send for the songsler. l’estrange.
behold l if fortune, or a mistress frowns,
some plunge in business, others shave their crowns.
6. the top of any thing ; as, of a mountain.
upon the crown o' th' cliff, what thing was that,
which parted from you ? shakesp. king lear.
huge trunks of trees, fell’d from the steepy crown
of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down. dryden’s afn.
7. part of the hat that covers the head.
, i once opened a remarkable atheroma: it was about as big
as the crown of a man's hat, and lay underneath the pectoral
muscle. sharp's surgery.
.8. a piece of money, anciently stamped with a crown; five
shillings. -
trust not to your servants, who may misinform you, by
which they may perhaps gain a few crowns. bacon.
but he that can eat beef, and feed on bread which is so
brown, -
may satisfy his appetite, and owe no man a crown. suckling.
an ounce of silver, whether in pence, groats, or crown-
pieces, stivers or ducatoons, or in bullion, is, and eternally
will be, of equal value to any other ounce of silver. locke.
. honour; ornament; decoration; excellence; dignity.
much experience is the crown of old men. ecclus. xxv. 6.
therefore my brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for, my
joy and crown, stand fast in the lord. philip. iv. 1.
10. completion ; accomplishment.
crow n-imperial. m. s. [corona imperialis, lat.] a plant.
to cr own. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to invest with the crown or regal ornament.
had you not come upon your cue, my lord,
william lord hastings had pronounc'd your part ;
i mean your voice for crowning of the king. shakesp. r. iii.
her who fairest does appear,
crown her queen of all the year.
2. to cover, as with a crown.
umbro, the priest, the proud marrabians led,
and peaceful olives crown'd his hoary head. dryden’s afn.
3. to dignify ; to adorn ; to make illustrious.
thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast
, crowned him with glory and honour. ps. viii. 5.
she shall be, to the happiness of england,
an aged princess ; many days shall see her,
sidney.
pope.
dryden.
and yet no day without a deed to crown it. shakespeare.
4. to reward; to recompense.
urge your success; deserve a lasting name,
she'll crown a grateful and a constant flame. roscommon.
5. to complete; to perfect.
the lasting and crowning privilege, or rather property of
friendship, is constancy. south.
6. to terminate ; to finish.
* - t
all these a milk-white honeycomb surround,
which in the midst the country banquet crown'd. dr.
crow nglass. m. s. the finest sort of window-glass. jaen.
crownpost. n.s. a post, which, in some buildings stand
upright in the middle, between two principal rafters. y s
cr ownsc a p. m. s. a stinking filthy scab, that breeds round
about the corners of a horse's hoof, and is a concerous and
painful sore. farrier', i.
crow n-thistle. m. s. [corona imperialis.] a flower. “
crow nwheel. m. s. the upper wheel of a watch me
balance, which is driven by it.
crown works. n. s. [in fortification.] bulwarks a
towards the field to gain some hill or rising ground.
crow net. n. s. [from crown.]
1. the same with coronet.
2. in the following passage it seems to signify chief end, last
purpose ; probably from finis coronat opus. &gt;
... oh, this false soul of egypt this gay charm
whose eye beck'd forth my wars, and call'd them home;
whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end; &gt;
like a right gipsy bath, at fast and loose,
beguil'd me to the very heart of loss. -
shakespeare's anthony and cl
crow toe. n.f. [crow and toe.] % plant. “patra,
bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies,
xt the
dvanced
harris,
the tufted crow-toe and pale jessamine. milton
cr o' ylstone. m. s. crystallized cauk. in this the cross
are small. //oodward's fifth,
cru'cial. adj. [crux, crucis, latin.] transverse; intersectin
one another. - s
whoever has seen the protice of the crucial incision, must
be sensible of the false reasoning used in its favour. sharp
to cru'ciatf. v. a. scrucia, latin.] to torture; too.
ment; to excruciate.
cru'cible. m. s. scrucibulum, low latin.]. a chymist's melt-
ing pot, made of earth ; so called, because they were formerly
marked with a cross. -
take a quantity of good filver, and put it in a crucible or
melting cruse, and set them on the fire, well covered round
about with coals. peacham on drawing.
cruci fekous. adj. [ crux and sero, latin.] bearing th:
cross. "d.
cru'cifier. n.s.. [from crucij.] he that inflias the punish.
ment of crucifixion.
visible judgments were executed on christ's crucifiers. him.
cru'cifix. n.s.. [crucifixus, latin.] a representation in pic-
ture or statuary of our lord's passion.
there stands at the upper end of it a large crucifix, very
much esteemed. the figure of our saviour represents him in
his last agonies of death. addison an italy.
cru cifi’s ion, n.s.. [from crucifixus, latin.] the punish-
ment of nailing to a cross.
this earthquake, according to the opinion of many learned
men, happened at our saviour's crucifixion. addison on italy.
cru'ciform. adj. [crux and forma, latin.] having the form
of a cross.
to cru'cify. v. a. scrucifigo, latin.] to put to death by
nailing the hands and feet to a cross set upright.
they crucify to themselves the son of god afresh, and put
him to an open shame. hob. vi. 6.
but to the cross he nails thy enemies,
the law that is against thee, and the fins
of all mankind, with him there crucio’d. milton,
crucigerous. adj. [cruciger, latin.] bearing the cross.
crud. m. s. [commonly written curd. see curd.] a concre.
tion of any liquid into hardness or stiffness; coagulation.
crude. adj. [crudus, latin.]
1. raw ; not subdued by fire.
2. not changed by any process or preparation.
common crude salt, barely dissolved in common aquafrtis,
will give it power of working upon gold. boyle.
fermented liquors have quite different qualities from the
plant itself; for no fruit, taken crude, has the intoxicating qua-
lity of wine. arbuthnot on aimint,
3. harsh; unripe.
a juice so crude as cannot be ripened to the degree of nou.
rishment. bacon’s natural history.
4. unconco&amp;ted; not well digested in the stomach.
while the body, to be converted and altered, is too strong
for the efficient that should convert or alter it, whereby it
holdeth fast, the first form or consistence, it is crude and in-
concoet 3 and the process is to be called crudity and incon-
coction. bacon's natural history,
5. not brought to perfeotion; unfinished; immature.
n a moment up they turned
wide the celestial soil; and saw beneath
th' originals of nature, in their crude
conception.
6. having indigested notions.
deep vers'd in books, and shallow in himself,
crude, or intoxicate, colle&amp;ting toys.
7. indigested; not fully concocted in the intellect.
milton's paradis. loft,
milton,
others,
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 529</div><p class="text">c r u
c r u
-
* * *
---
oi,
a :
others, whom meer ambition fires, and dole
of provinces abroad, which they have feign'd
t., their crude hopes, and i as amply promis'd. ben. johnson.
what peradventure may seem full to me, may appear very
crude and maimed to a stranger. digby on the soul.
absurd expresiidns, crude abortive thoughts,
all the lewd legions of exploded faults. roscommon.
cru’d ely. adv. [from crude..] unripely ; without due pre-
paration.
th’ advice was true; but fear had seiz'd the most,
and all good counsel is on cowards lost:
the question crudely put, to shun delay,
'twas carry'd by the major part to stay. dryden.
cru'de ness. n.s.. [from crude..] unripeness; indigestion.
cru'dity.. n.s.. [from crude.]
1. indigestion; inconcoction.
they are very temperate, whereby they prevent indigestion
and crudities, and consequently putrescence of humours. brown.
a diet of viscid aliment creates flatulency and crudities in
the stomach. arbuthnot.
2. unripeness; want of maturity.
to cru'dl.e. v. a. [a word of uncertain etymology.] to
coagulate; to congeal.
i felt my crudled blood
congeal with fear; my hair with horrour stood. dryd. an.
the gelons use it, when, for drink and food,
they mix their crualed milk with horses blood. dryd. wing.
cru’dy. adj. [from crud.]
1- concreted; coagulated.
his cruel wounds with crudy blood congeal’d,
they binden up so wisely as they may. spensor.
2. [from crude..] raw ; chill.
sherris sack ascends into the brain; dries me there all the
foolish, dull, and crudy vapours which environ it, shakespeare.
cru'el. adj. [cruel, french ; c. ud, lis, latin.]
1. pleased with hurting others; inhuman ; hard hearted; void
of pity; wanting compassion ; savage; barbarous ; unrelenting.
if wolves had at thy gate howl d that stern time,
thou should'it have said, go, porter, turn the key ;
all cruel’s else subscrib'd. shakesp. king lear.
if thou art that cruel god, whose eyes
delight in blood, and human sacrifice. dryden's ind. emp.
2. [of things.] bloody; mischievous; destructive ; causing pain.
consider mine enemies; for they are many, and they hate
me with cruel hatred. ps. xxv. 19.
we beheld one of the crueles' fights between two knights,
that ever hath adorned the most martial story. sidney.
cru'elly. adv. [from cruel.]
1. in a cruel manner; inhumanly ; barbarously.
he relies upon a broken reed, that not only basely fails, but
... also cruelly pierces the hand that rests upon it. south.
since you deny him entrance, he demands
his wife, whom cruelly you hold in bands. dryd. aurengz.
2. painfully ; mischievously.
the scottish arrows being sharp and slender enter into a
man or horse most cruelly, notwithstanding they are shot forth
weakly. spenser on ireland.
brimstone and wild fire, though they burn cruelly and are
hard to quench, yet make no such fiery wind as gun-powder.
bacon.
cru'elness. n.s.. [from cruel.] inhumanity; cruelty.
but she more cruel, and more savage wild,
than either lion or the lioness, -
, shames not to be with guiltless blood defil’d ;
she taketh glory in her crueness. spenser.
cru'elty. m. s. [cruaute, french.]
1. inhumanity; savageness ; barbarity; delight in the pain or
misery of others.
the cruelty and envy of the people,
permitted by our dastard nobles,
have suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be
whoop'd out of rome. shakesp. coriolanus.
2. act of intentional affliction.
there were great changes in the world by the revolutions
of empire, the cruelties of conquering, and the calamities of
enslaved nations. temple.
cru’entate. adj. [cruentatus, latin.] smeared with blood.
atomical aporrideas pass from the cruentate cloth or weapon
to the wound. glanville's scepsis.
cru'e.t. n.f. [aruicke, dutch..] a vial for vinegar or cyl,
... with a stopple.
within thy reach i set the vinegar !
and fill'd the cruct with the acid tide,
while pepper-water worms thy bait supply'd,
cru'is e. n. s. [aruicke, dutch..] a small cup.
i have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel, and
a little oil in a cruise. 1 kings.
the train prepare a cruise of curious mold,
a cruise of fragrance, form'd of burnish'd gold. pope's odyss.
a cruise. m. s. [croise, fr. from the original cruisers, who
bore the cross, and plundered only infidels.] a voyage in
jearch of plunder.
swift.
- • * ,
7ocruise, v. n. [from the noun..] to rove over the faii
search of opportunities to plunder; to wander on the sea
without any certain course.
cru's er. n.s.. [from cruise.] one that roves upon the sea in
search of plunder.
amongst the fruisers it was complained, that their surgeons
co" active in amputating fractured members. //iseman."
crumb - : /1. e so saxon ; kruyme, dutch ; *.
1. the soft part of bread; not the crust.
take of manchet about three ounces, the crumb only thin
cut ; and let it be boiled in milk 'till it grow to a pulp. bacon.
2. a small particle or fragment of bread.
more familiar grown, the table crums
attract his slender feet. thomson's ip?nter.
to cr 9 muto. v. a. [from crumb.] to break into small
pieces ; to comminute.
flesh is but the glass which holds the dust
that measures all our time, which also shall
be crumbled into dust.
he with his bare wand can unthread thy joints,
and crumble all thy finews. milton.
by frequest parcelling and subdividing of inheritances, in
process of time they became so divided and crumbled, that
there were few persons of able estates. hale's law of eng.
at the same time we were crumbled into various factions
and parties, all aiming at by-interests, without any sincere
regard for the publick good. atterbury.
the bill leaves three hundred pounds a year to the mother
church; which they can divide likewise, and crum, as low
as their will and pleasure will dispose of them. swift
to cru'mble. v. m. to fall into small pieces. e
there is so hot a summer in my brain, - -
that all my bowels crumble up to dust. shakesp. k. john.
nor is the profit small the peasant makes,
who smooths with harrow, or who pounds with rakes,
the crumbling clods. dryden's georg.
ambition sigh’d: she found it vain to trust
the faithless column, and the crumbling bust. pope.
if the stone is brittle, it will often crumble, and pass in the
form of gravel. - arbuthnot on diet.
what house, when its materials crumble, -
must not inevitably tumble swift,
for the little land that remains, provision is made by a.
- late act against popery, that it will daily crumble away. swift.
cru'menal.. n.j. [from crumena, latin.j a purse. -
i the o that woonnt ligye in the stall,
s now fast stalled in her crumenal. spensor' -
$o. adj. [from crum.] soft. . . pensor's pastorals.
mp. adj, scrump, saxon; krom. dutch: ar
crooked . * ...” &gt; &gt; - ; krumm, germ.]
, when the workman took measure of him, he was crump
shouldered, and the right side higher than the left. l’estrange,
* qrumphe. v. a. [from crump; or corrupted from rumple,
!"pelen, dutch..] to draw into wrinkles, to crush together
in complications. •
sir roger alighted from his horse, and exposing his palm to
two or three that stood by him, they crumpled it into all shapes,
and diligently scanned every wrinkle that could be made. addis.
srh'mpling. m. s. a small degenerate apple. o
to crunk.
to cru’nkle. dic7;
cou?per. n.s.. [from croupe, fr. the buttocks of the horse.]
that part of the horseman's furniture that reaches from th:
saddle to the tail.
clitophon had received such a blow, that he had lost the
reins of his horse, with his head well nigh touching the crup-
per of the horse.
where have you left the money that i gave you ?
oh–sixpence, that i had a wednesday last,
hair.
*
{ v. n. to cry like a crane.
sidney.
to pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper. shakespeare.
full oft the rivals met, and neither spar'd
his utmost force, and each forgot to ward:
the head of this was to the saddle bent, -
the other backward to the crupper sent. dryden.
cru'ral. adj. [from crus, cruris, latin.] belonging to the leg.
the sharpness of the teeth, and the strength of the crol
muscles in lions and tygers, are the cause of the great and
habitual immorality of those animals. arbuthnot.
crusa/de. see c
§: n. s. see crois ade.
1. an expedition against the infidels.
2. a coin stamped with a cross.
believe me, i had rather have lost my purse -
- full of crusadees. shakespeare's othelio.
cru's e. see cruis e.
cru's et. n.s. a goldsmith's melting pot.
to crush. v. a. secraser, french.] . . .
1. to press between two opposite bodies; to squeeze; to force
by compression. -
the ass thrust herself unto the wall, and crushed balaam’s
foot against the wall. muoi, xxii. 25.
codd'
philips.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 530</div><p class="text">c r u
c r y o
cold causes rheums and defluxions from the head and some
astringent plaisters crush out purulent matter. bacon.
he crushed treasure out of his subjects purses by forfeitures
upon penal laws. bacon.
bacchus that first, from out the purple grape,
crush'd the sweet poison of misused wine. milton.
i fought and fell like one, but death deceiv'd me:
i wanted weight of feeble moors upon me,
* to crush my soul out. dryden's don sebastian,
2. to press with violence.
you speak him far
i don’t extend him, fir: within himself
crush him together, rather than unfold
his measure fully. shakespeare's cymbeline.
when loud winds from diff'rent quarters rush,
vast clouds encount’ring, one another crush.
3. to overwhelm ; to beat down.
put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,
that they may crush down, with a heavy fall,
th' usurping helmets of our adversaries shakes. rich. iii.
vain is the force of man, and heav'n's as vain,
to crush the pillars which the pile sustain. dryden's afn.
4. to subdue ; to conquer beyond resistance.
they use them to plague their enemies, or to oppress and crush
some of their own too stubborn freeholders. spenser on ireland.
- mine emulation
hath not that honour in't it had ; for
i thought to crush him in an equal force,
true sword to sword. shakespeare's coriolanus.
this q&amp;t -
shall bruise the head of satan, crush his strength, -
defeating fin and death, his two main arms. milton.
what can that man fear, who takes care to please a being
that is so able to crush all his adversaries a being that can
divert any misfortune from befalling him, or turn any such
misfortune to his advantage 3 addison's guardian.
t, crush. v n. to be condensed ; to come in a close body.
cr us h. n.s.. [from the verb..] a collision ; the act of rush-
ing together.
thou shalt flourish in immortal youth,
unhurt amidst the war of elements,
the wrecks of matter, and the crush of worlds. addison's cato.
crust. m. s. [crosła, latin.]
1. any shell, or cxternal coat, by which any body is enveloped.
i have known the statue of an emperor quite hid under a
crust of dross. addison on medals.
2. an incrustation; colle&amp;tion of matter into a hard body. .
were the river a confusion of never so many different bo-
dies, if they had been all actually dissolved, they would at
least have formed one continued crust; as we see the scorium
of metals always gathers into a solid piece. addison on italy.
the viscous crust stops the entry of the chyle into the
lacteals. - arbuthnot on aliments.
3. the case of a pye made of meal, and baked.
he was never suffered to go abroad, for fear of catching
cold: when he should have been hunting down a buck, he
was by his mother's side learning how to season it, or put it in
cruff. addison's speciator.
4. the outer hard part of bread.
th’ impenetrable crust thy teeth defies,
and petrify'd with age, securely lies.
5. a waste piece of bread.
y’ are liberal now ; but when your turn is sped,
waller.
dryden's juv.
you'll wish me choak'd with every crust of bread. dryden.
men will do tricks, like dogs, for crusis. l’estrange.
to crust. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to envelop; to cover with a hard case.
why gave you me a monarch's soul,
and crusted it with base plebeian clay. dryden.
nor is it improbable but that, in process of time, the whole
surface of it may be crusted over, as the islands enlarge them-
selves, and the banks close in upon them. addison on italy.
and now their legs, and breasts, and bodies stood
crushed with bark, and hard'ning into wood. addison.
in some, who have run up to men without education, we
may observe many great qualities darkened and eclipsed; their
minds are crt/fed over, like diamonds in the rock. felton.
2. to foul with concretions.
if your master hath many musty, or very foul and crussed
bottles, let these be the first you truck at the alehouse. swift.
to crust. v. n. to gather or contract a crust; to gain a
hard covering.
i contented myself with a plaister upon the place that was
burnt, which cry?ed and healed in very few days. temple.
crusta'ceous. adj. [from crosla, lat..] shelly, with joints;
not testaceous; not with one continued uninterrupted shell.
lobster is crustaceous, oyster testaceous.
it is true that there are some shells, such as those of lobsters,
crabs, and others of crosłacecus kinds, that are very rarely
found at land. 1/30award's natural history.
crusta'ceous's ess. m. s. [from crylaceous...] the quality of
having jointed fliclls. -
cru'stily. adv. [from crusly.) peewish!y; snappishly;
cru's tin ess. n.s.. [from %. y; inappist.) hao.
1. the quality of a crust.
2. peevishness ; moroseness. -
cru's ty. adj. [from crus?...]
1. covered with a crust. -
the egg itself deserves our notice: its parts within, and its
. so without, are admirably well fitted for the business
of incubation. derham's physica.
2. sturdy; morose; snappish: a low word. yico theology.
crutch. m. s. [aroccia, ital. croce, fr. crucłe, germ.]
1. a support used by cripples. -
ah, thus king henry throws away his crutch,
before his legs be firm to bear his body.
shakespeare’s h. r
hence, therefore, thou nice crutch : off henry vi,
a scaly gauntlet now, with joints of steel,
must glove this hand. shakesp. henry iv
on these new crutches let them learn to walk. dryd. eo.
this fair defect, this helpless aid call'd wife, -
the bending crutch of a decrepit life. dryden.
rhyme is a crutch that lifts the weak along, -
supports the feeble, but retards the strong. smith,
the dumb shall fing, the lame his crutch forego,
and leap exulting like the bounding roe. pop.'. as
2. it is used for old age. c ope's mosiah.
beauty doth varnish age, as if new born, -
and gives the crutch the cradle's infancy. shakespeare.
to crutsh. v. a. [from crutch..] to support on crutefles a
a cripple. -
i haslen og and doeg to rehearse,
two fools that crutch their feeble sense on verse.
to cry. v. n. [crier, french.]
1. to speak with vehemence and loudness.
mo. i heard a voice cry, fleep no more 1
acbeth, doth murther sleep the innocent sleep. a's so a
while his falling tears . stream o p. shafts?
thus mourning to his mother goddess cry’d. dryden’s wirg.
2. to call importunately.
i cried, by reason of mine affliction, unto the lord, and he
heard me. jon. ii. 2.
3. to talk eagerly or incessantly; to repeat continuals. -
they be idle; therefore they cry, saying let us go. ex- v. 8.
4. to proclaim ; to make publick.
go and cry in the ears of jerusalem.
5. to exclaim.
yet let them look they glory not in mischief,
nor build their evils on the graves of great men;
for then, my guiltless blood must cry against them. shafft.
what's the matter,
that in the several places of the cit
you try against the noble senate. shakespeare's coriolanus,
if dressing, mistressing, and compliment,
take up thy day, the sun himself will cry -
against thee. - herbert,
lysimachus having obtained the favour of seeing his ships
and machines, surprised at the contrivance, cried out that they
were built with more than human art. arbuthnot on coins.
6. to utter lamentations,
we came crying hither:
thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air,
we wawle and cry. shakespeare's king lear.
behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart; but ye
shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of
spirit. - ls. lxv. 14.
when any evil has been upon philosophers, they groan as
pitifully, and cry out as loud, as other men. tillotson.
7. to squall, as an infant.
should some god tell me, that should i be born,
dryden,
jer. ii. 2.
and cry again, his offer i should scorn. denham.
thus, in a starry night, fond children cry -
for the rich spangles that adorn the sky. j/aller.
he struggles first for breath, and cries for aid s
then helpless in his mother's lap is laid. dryden's fables.
the child certainly knows that the wormseed or mustard-
seed it refuses, is not the apple or sugar it cries for. locke.
8. to weep; to shed tears. -
her who still weeps with spungy eyes,
and her who is dry cork, and never cries. denne.
9. to utter an in articulate voice, as an animal.
he giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens
which cry. psalm czlvii. g.
the beasts of the field cry also unto thee. joel, i. 2c.
10. to yelp, as a hound on a scent.
he cried upon it at the meerest loss;
trust me, i take him for the better dog. shakespeare.
7ocry. v. a. to proclaim publickly something lost or found,
in order to its recovery or restitution.
she seeks, she fighs, but no where spies him:
love is lost, and thus she cries him. crosław.
to cry down. v.a. -
1. to blame; to depreciate ; to decry.
bavius'
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 531</div><p class="text">c r y
c r y
o
bavius cries down an admirable treatise of philosophy, and
says there's atheism in it. j/atts.
men of dissolute lives cry down religion, because they would
not be under the restraints of it. tillason.
2. to prohibit.
by all means cry down that unworthy course of late times,
that they should pay money. bacon to williers.
3. to overbear.
i'll to the king,
and from a mouth of honour quite cry down
this ipswich fellow's insolence. shakesp. henry viii.
t. cry out. v. n.
1. to exclaim ; to scream ; to clamour.
they make the oppressed to cry; they cry cut by reason of
the arm of the mighty. job.
with that susanna cried with a loud voice, and the two
elders cried out against her. sus, xxiv.
2. to complain loudly.
we are ready to cry out of an unequal management, and to
blame the divine administration. atterbury.
3. to blame; to censure : with of, agains, upon.
are these things then necessities f
then let us meet them like necessities; -
and that same word even now cries out on us. shakespeare.
giddy censure
will then cry out of marcius: oh, if he
had borne the business. shakespeare's coriolanus.
behold, i cry cut of wrong, but i am not heard. job, xix. 7.
cry out upon the stars for doing
ill offices, to cross their wooing. hudibras.
epiphanius cries out upon it as rank idolatry, and destructive
to their souls who did it. - stillingfleet.
tumult, sedition and rebellion, are things that the followers
of that hypothesis cry out agains. locke.
i find every se&amp;t, as far as reason will help them, make use
of it gladly ; and where it fails them, they cry out it is matter
of faith, and above reason. locke.
4. to declare loud.
5. to be in labour.
what! is she crying out?
so said her woman; and that her suffrance made
each pang a death. shakesp. henry viii.
t. cry up. v. a.
1. to applaud ; to exalt ; to praise.
instead of crying up all things which are brought from be-
yond sea, let us advance the native commodities of our own
kingdom. bacon to williers.
the philosopher deservedly suspe&amp;ted himself of vanity,
when cried up by the multitude. glanville's scepsis.
the astrologer, if his predictions come to pass, is cried up
to the stars from whence he pretends to draw them. south.
they slight the strongest arguments that can be brought for
religion, and cry up very weak ones against it. tillotson.
he may, out of interest, as well as conviction, cry up that
for sacred, which, if once trampled on and profaned, he him-
self cannot be safe, nor secure. locke.
poets, like monarchs on an eastern throne,
confin'd by nothing but their will alone,
here can cry up, and there as boldly blame,
and, as they please, give infamy or fame. isalsh.
those who are fond of continuing the war, cry up our con-
stant success at a most prodigious rate. swift.
2. to raise the price by proclamation.
all the effect that i conceive was made by crying up the
pieces of eight, was to bring in much more of that species,
instead of othersy current here. temple.
cry. m. s. scri, french.]
i . lamentation; shriek ; scream.
and all the first-born in the land of egypt shall die, and
these shall be a great cry throughout all the land. exodus.
2. weeping; mourning,
3. clamour; outcry.
amazement seizes all; the general cry
proclams laocoon justly doom'd to die. dryden's virg.
thes, narrow and selfish views have so great an influence in
this cry; that there are several of my fellow freeholders who
forcy the church in danger upon the rising of bank-stock. add.
4. exclimation of triumph or wonder, or any other passion.
in sopsh countries some impostor cries out, a miracle 1 a
miracle 1 to confirm the deluded vulgar in their errours; and
so the cry goes round, without examining into the cheat. swift.
5. proclamation.
• the hawkers proclamation of wares to be sold in the street:
* the cries of london.
7 feclamation; popular favour.
the cry went once for thee,
...and still it might, and yet it may again.
8. w., utterance; manner of vocal expression.
| sounds also, besides the distinet cries of birds and beasts,
*e modified by diversity of notes of different length, put to-
other, which make that complex idea called tune. . locke.
9 on portunate call.
vol. i,
shakesheare.
pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer
for them. er. vii. 13.
io. yelping of dogs.
he scorns the dog, resolves to try
the combat next; but if their cry
invades again his trembling ear,
he strait resumes his wonted care. waller.
11. yell; inarticulate noise.
there shall be the noise of a cry from the fishgate, and an
howling from the second, and a great crashing from the hills.
zeph. i. 10.
12. a pack of dogs. -
- about her middle round,
a cry of hell-hounds never ceasing bark'd.
you common cry of curs, whose breath i hate
as reek o' th' rotten fens; whose loves i prize
as the dead carcasses of unburied men,
that do corrupt my air. shakespeare's coriolanus.
cry'al. m. s. the heron. ainsworth.
cryer. see crier.
cryer. m. s. a kind of hawk called the falcon gentle, an
enemy to pigeons, and very swift, ainsworth.
cryptical. r adj. [xponso, j hidden; secret; occult; pri-
cryptick. ; vate; unknown ; not divulged.
the students of nature, conscious of her more cryptick
ways of working, resolve many strange effects into the near
efficiency of second causes. glanville's apology.
speakers, whose chief business is to amuse or delight, do
not confine themselves to any natural order, but in a cryptical
or hidden method adapt every thing to their ends. //atts.
cryptically. adv. [from cryptical.] occultly; secretly:
perhaps in the following example, the author might have
written critically.
we take the word acid in a familiar sense, without crypti-
cally distinguishing it from those sapors that are a kin to
it. boyle.
crypto"graphy. m. s. [xo~10 and y:422.]
1. the aet of writing secret characters.
2. secret characters; cyphers. -
cryptology. m. s. [x;solo and asy®.] honigmatical lan-
guage.
crystal. m. s. [xts;zxxgp.] o
1. crystals are hard, pellucid, and naturally colourless bodies,
of regularly angular figures, composed of simple, not fila-
mentous plates, not flexile or elastick, giving fire with steel,
not fermenting with acid menstrua, and calcining in a strong
fire. there are many various species of it produced in dif-
ferent parts of the globe. hill on fossils.
island crystal is a genuine spar, of an extremely pure, clear,
and fine texture, seldom either blemished with flaws or spots,
or stained with any other colour. a remarkable property of
this body, which has much employed the writers on opticks,
is its double refraction ; so that if it be laid over a black line,
drawn on paper, two lines appear in the place of one. hill.
water, as it seems, turneth into crystal; as is seen in divers
caves, where the crystal hangs in sillicidiis. bacon.
if crystal be a stone, it is not immediately concreted by the
efficacy of cold, but rather by a mineral spirit. brown.
crystal is certainly known, and distinguished by the degree of
its diaphaneity and of its refraction, as also of its hardness,
which are ever the same. - woodward.
2. crystal is also used for a faetitious body cast in the glass houses,
called also crystal glass, which is carried to a degree of per-
fection beyond the common glass; though it comes far short
of the whiteness and vivacity of the natural crystal. chambers.
3. crystals [in chymistry] express salts or other matters shot or
congealed in manner of crystal. chambers.
if the menstruum be overcharged, within a short time
the metals will shoot into certain crystals. bacon,
cry's tal. adj.
1. consisting of crystal.
then, jupiter, thou king of gods,
thy crystal window ope, look out. shakesp. cymbeline.
2. bright; clear; transparent; lucid ; pellucid.
in groves we live, and lie on mossy beds
by crysial streams, that murmur through the meads. dryden,
cry'st alline. adj. [crystallinus, latin.] -
1. consisting of crystal.
mount eagle to my palace crystalline. shakesh. cymbeline.
we provided ourselves with some small receivers, blown of
crystalline glass. boyle.
2. bright; clear; pellucid ; transparent. o
the clarifying of water is an experiment tending to the
health; besides the pleasure of the eye, when water is cry’al-
line. it is effected by casting in and placing pebbles at the
head of the current, that the water may strain through them.
bacon's natural hi/ory.
he on the wings of cherub rode sublime
on the crystalline sky, in saphir thron’d
illustrious far and wide. milton.
cry's talline humour. m. s. the second humour of the eye,
that lies immediately next to the aqueous behind the uvea,
6 b - opposite
milton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 532</div><p class="text">c u b
c u c
opposite to the papilla, nearer to the forepart than the back-
part of the globe. it is the least of the humours, but much
more solid than any of them. its figure, which is convex on
both sides, resembles two unequal segments of spheres, of
which the most convex is on its backside, which makes a small
cavity in the glassy humour in which it lies. it is covered
with a fine coat, called aranea.
the parts of the eye are made convex, and especially
the crystalline humour, which is of a lenticular figure, convex
on both sides. ray on the creation,
crystallization. m. s. [from crystallize.]
1. congelation into crystals, -
such a combination of saline particles as resembles the
form of a crystal, variously modified, according to the nature
and texture of the salts. the method is by dissolving any
saline body in water, and filtering it, to evaporate, ’till a film
appear at the top, and then let it stand to shoot; and this it
does by that attractive force which is in all bodies, and parti-
cularly in salt, by reason of its solidity: whereby, when the
menstruum or fluid, in which such particles flow, is sated
enough or evaporated, so that the saline particles are within
each other's attractive powers, they draw one another more
than they are drawn by the fluid, then will they run into cry-
stals. and this is peculiar to those, that let them be ever so
much divided and reduced into minute particles, yet when
they are formed into crystals, they each of them reassume
their proper shapes; so that one might as easily divest them of
their saltness, as of their figure. this being an immutable and
perpetual law, by knowing the figure of the crystals, we may
understand what the texture of the particles ought to be,
which can form those crystals; and, on the other hand, by
knowing the texture of the particles, may be determined the
figure of the crystals. &amp;uincy.
2. the mass formed by congelation or concretion.
* all natural metallick and mineral crystallizations were ef-
fe&amp;ted by the water, which first brought the particles, whereof
each consists, out from amongst the matter of the strata.
j/oodward’s natural history.
% cry'st allize. v. a. [from crystal.] to cause to congeal
or concrete in crystals.
if you dissolve copper in aqua fortis, or spirit of nitre, you
may, by crystallizing the solution, obtain a goodly blue. boyle.
to crystallize. v. n. to coagulate ; congeal ; concrete;
or shoot into crystals. * - -
recent urine will crystallize by inspissation, and afford a salt
neither acid nor alkaline. arbuthnot on aliments.
cub. m. s. [of uncertain etymology.] --- . . .
1. the young of a beast; generally of a bear or fox.
i would outstare the sternest eyes that look,
pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear. shakespeare.
this night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
the lion, and the belly pinched wolf,
keep their fur dry. shakespeare's king lear.
in the eagle's destroying one fox's cubs, there's power exe-
cuted with oppression. l’estrange.
2. the young of a whale, perhaps of any viviparous fish.
two mighty whales, which swelling seas had tost,
one as a mountain vast, and with her came -
a cub, not much inferior to his dame. waller.
3. in reproach or contempt, a young boy or girl.
o thou dissembling cub / what wilt thou be,
when time hath sow'd a grizzle on thy case ?
or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
that thine own trip shall be thine overthrow shakespeare.
o most comical fight ! a country squire, with the equipage
of a wife and two daughters, came to mr. snipwel's shop last
night; but, such two unlicked cubs / congreve.
to cu b. v. a. [from the noun..] to bring forth: used of
beasts, or of a woman in contempt. -
cub’d in a cabbin, on a mattress laid,
on a brown george with lousy swabbers fed;
dead wine, that stinks of the borrachio, sup
from a foul jack, or greasy mapple cup. dryden's pers.
cubation. m. s. scubatio, lat.] the act of lying down. dici.
cubatory. adj. [from cubo, lat.] recumbent. idic?.
cu’bature. m. s. [from cube.] the finding exactly the solid
content of any proposed body. harris.
cube. n. s. [from xvcos, a die.]
1. [in geometry.] a regular solid body, consisting of six square
and equal faces or sides, and the angles all right, and therefore
equal. chambers.
2. [in arithmetick.] see cubick number.
all the master planets move about the sun at several dis-
tances, as their common center, and with different velocities.
this common law being observed in all of them, that the
squares of the times of the revolutions are proportional to the
cubes of their distances. grew's cosmol.
cu be root. }" s. the origin of a cubick number; or a
cu'bick root. § number, by whose multiplication into itself,
and again into the product, any given number is formed :
thus two is the cube-root of eight. chambers.
cu’bbb. m. s. a small dried fruit resembling pepper, but some-
what longer, of a greyish-brown colour on the surface. it
has an aromatick smell, and is acrid to the taste. cubets of
brought from java. i.
aromaticks, as cubels, cinnamon, and nutmegs, are usual
ly, put into crude poor wines, to give them more oily
fpirits. *yer on the hon.
cu’bical. j.
cu'bick. -
1. having the form or properties of a cube, -
a close vessel, containing ten cubical feet of air, will slo
suffer a wax-candle of an ounce to burn in it above an ho t
before it be suffocated. //iskins's math. as l!!
it is above a hundred to one, against any particular throw.
that you do not cast any given set of faces with four also
dice; because there are so many several combinations of o
six faces of four dice. bentley’s so.
2. it is applied to numbers. ***i.
the number of four, multiplied into itself, produced, the
fouare number of fixteen ; and that again multiplied by four
produceth the cubic nomber of sixty-four. if we shots.
pote a multitude actually infinite, there must be infinite i.
and square and cubick numbers; yet, of necessity, the root .
but the fourth part of the square, and the fixteenth part of the
cubick number. hale's origin of mani.
the number of ten hath been as highly extolled, as .
taining even, odd, long and plain, quadrate and alj
numbers. brown's wulgar errour,
cu'bic als ess. m. s. [from cubical.] the state or quality d
being cubical.
cubiocul ary. adj. [cubiculum, latin.] fitted for the posture
of lying down. - 4.
custom, by degrees, changed their cubiculary beds into dison.
bitory, and introduced a fashion to go from the baths ullto
these. £rown's pugar errau,
cu’bifor.m. adj [from cube and form.] of the shape of a
cube.
cut31t. n. s. [from culitus, latin.] a measure in use among
the ancients; which was originally the distance from the
elbow, bending inwards, to the extremity of the middle
finger. this measure is the fourth part of a well propor-
tioned man’s stature. some fix the hebrew cubit at twenty
-inches and a half, paris measure; and others at eighteen.
calmet.
from the tip of the elbow to the end of the long finger, is
half a yard and a quarter of the stature, and makes a lis
the first measure we read of, the ark of noah being film.
and measured by cubits. hole on time.
measur’d by cubit, length, and breadth, and height, mih.
the jews used two sorts of cubits; the sacred, and the pro-
fane or common one. arbuthnot on moira.
when on the goddess first i cast my fight,
scarce seem’d her stature of a cubit height. pope,
cu'bital. adj. [cubitalis, latin.] containing only the length
of a cubit. - **
the watchmen of tyre might well be called pygmies, the
towers of that city being so high, that, unto men below, they
appeared in a cubital stature. * brown's sugar errori,
cuckingsrool. n.s. an engine invented for the punish-
ment of scolds and unquiet women, which, in ancient times,
was called tumbrel. . . . cowel,
these mounted on a chair-curule, -
which moderns call a cucking-slool, *.
march proudly to the river's side. \, hudibras.
cu'ckold. m. s. [cocu, fr. from coułod.] one that is mar-
ried to an adultess; one whose wife is faffe to his bed.
but for all the whole world; why, who would not make
her husband a cuckold, to make him a monarch should ven-
ture purgatory for’t. shakespeare's olhollo,
{a}. [from cube, j
there have been,
or i am much deceiv'd, cuckold; ere now ;
and many a man there is, ev’n at this prescint,
now while i speak this, holds his wife by th
that little thinks she has been sluic'd in’s absore. shais).
for though the law makes null th’ adulterer’s deed
of lands, to her the cuckold may succeed. dajith's juv.
ever since the reign of king charles ii. the ao -
made a cuckold, the deluded virgin is debauched, and adultery
and fornication are committed behind the scenes. swift.
to cu'cko l.d. v. a. - -
1. to corrupt a man's wife; to bring upon a man the repoach of
having an adulterous wife; to rob a man of his wife's fidelity:
if thou cans cuckold him, thou do'st thyself a pleasurie, and
me a sport. - shakespeare's (jihl,
2. to wrong a husband by unchastity.
but suffer not thy wife abroad to roam,
nor strut in streets with amazonian pace; |
for that's to cuckold thee before thy face. dryd. oftw.
cu’ckoldly. adj. [from cuckold.] having the qualitics or "
cuckold; poor; mean ; cowardly; sneaking. .
poor cuckoldly knave, i know him not: yet i wrong him."
call him poor; they say the jealous knave hath masse of
money. shakesp. merry wives of windsor,
cu'ckolp-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 533</div><p class="text">c u d
c u f
o-
-
3 t.
..
cuckold maker. m. s. [cuckold and make..] one that makes
a practice of corrupting wives.
'if i spared any that had a head to hit, either young or old,
he or she, cuckold or cuckoldmaker, le: me never hope to fee
a chine again. shako. henry viii.
one hernando, cuckoldmaker of this city, contrived to steal
her away. dryden’s spanish fryar.
cu’ckoldom. n.s. (from cuckold.]
1. the act of adultery.
- she is thinking on nothing but her colonel, and conspiring
cuckoldom against me. dryden's spanish fryar.
2. the state of a cuckold.
it is a true saying, that the last man of the parish that
knows of his cuckoldom, is himself. arbuthnot's j. bull.
cu'ckoo. m. s. (cuculus, lat. cwccw, welsh; cocu, fr. koc-
£ock, dutch..] -
1. a bird which appears in the spring ; and is said to suck the
eggs of other birds, and lay her own to be hatched in their
place; from which practice, it was usual to alarm a husband at
the approach of an adulterer by calling cuckoo, which, by mis-
take, was in time applied to the husband. this bird is re-
markable for the uniformity of his note, from which his name
in most tongues secrus to have been formed.
finding mopsa, like a cuckoo by a nightingale, alone with
pamela, i came in. sidney.
the merry cuckoo, messenger of spring,
his trumpet shrill hath thrice already sounded. spensor.
the plainsong cuckoo gray,
whose note full many a man doth mark,
and dares not answer, nay. shakes are.
take heed, have open eye; for thieves do foot by night:
take heed ere summer comes, or cuckoo birds affright. shak.
i deduce,
from the first note the hollow cuckoo sings,
the symphony of spring; and touch a theme
unknown to fame, the passion of the grove.
2. it is a name of contempt.
why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so for
thomson.
running?
—a horseback, ye cuckoo; but a-foot, he will not budge
a foot. shakesp. henry iv.
cuckoo-bud. n. s. [cardaminus, lat..] the name of a
8::::::::::::: flower. -
when daizies pied, and violets blue,
and cuckoo-buds of yellow hue,
ljo paint the meadows much bedight.
nettles, cuckoo slowers,
darnel, and all the idle weeds.
cuckoo-sp1ttle. m. s. [cuckoo and sittle.] -
cuckoo spittle, or woodseare, is that spumous dew or exuda-
tion, or both, found upon plants, especially about the joints
of lavender and rosemary; observable with us about the lat-
ter end of may. brown's wugar errours.
cu'cull ate. {a}. [cucullaius, hooded, lat.]
shakespeare.
shakesp. k. lear.
cu'cu llated.
1. hooded; covered, as with a hood or cowl.
2. having the resemblance or shape of a hood.
they are differently cuculated, and capuched upon the head
and back. - prown's wulgar erraurs.
cuscuxiber. n.f. [cucumis, latin.] the name of a plant,
and also of the fruit of that plant. -
it hath a flower consisting of one fingle leaf, bell-shaped,
and expanded toward the top, and cut into many segments;
of which some are male, or barren, having no embryo, but
only a large style in the middle, charged with the farina :
others are female, or fruitful, being fastened to an embryo,
which is afterwards changed into a fleshy fruit, for the most
part oblong and turbinated, which is divided into three or
four cells, inclosing many oblong seeds. the species are,
1. the common cucumber. 2. the white cucumber. 3. the
long turky cucumber. - alfiller.
how cucumbers along the surface creep, -
with crooked bodies and with bellies deep. dryden's wirgil.
cucurbita(ceous. adj. [from cucurbita, latin, a gourd.]
cucurbitaceous plants are those which resemble a gourd ;
such as the pumpion and melon. chambers.
cucurbit e. m. s. [ciscarbita, latin.] a chymical vessel,
commonly called a body, made of earth or glass, in the shape
of a gourd, and therefore called cucurbite. &amp;#incy.
i have, for curiosity's sake, distilled quicksilver in a cucurbite,
fitted with a capacious glass-head. boyle on colours.
let common yellow sulphur be put into a cucurbite glass,
upon which pour the strongest aqua fortis. amortimer.
cud. m. s. scue, saxon.] that food which is reposited in the
first stomach in order to rumination, or to be chewed again.
many times, when my master's cattle came hither to chew
their cud in this fresh place, i might see the young bull testify
his love. - sidney.
you range the pathless wood,
while on a flow'ry bank he chews the cud.
§:4% s.
cu’ddy.
dryden.
s. [without etymology.] a clown; a stupid
rustick; a low dolt: a low bad word.
the slavering cudden, propp'd upon his staff,
stood ready gaping with a grinning laugh.
to cu’ddle. z. m.
logy.]
- dryden,
--- [a low word, i believe, without etymo-
to lye close ; to squat.
have you mark'd a partridge quake,
viewing the tow'ring faulcon high :
she cuddles low behind the brake;
nor would she stay, nor dares she fly.
cut)gel. m. s. soft, dutch.]
1. a stick to strike with, lighter than a club, shorter than a
pole.
vine twigs, while they are green, are brittle; yet the wood,
dried, is extreme tough; and was used by the captains of ar-
prior.
mics, amongst the romans, for their cudel. bacon.
do not provoke the rage of stones
and cudgess to thy hide and bones.
tremble and vanish. hudibras.
the ass was quickly given to understand, with a good
cudgel, the difference betwixt the one playfellow and the
other... - - l'eorange.
his surly officer ne'er fail'd to crack
his knotty cudgel on his tougher back. dryden's javana.
this, if well reflected on, would make people more wary
in the use of the rod and the cudgel. locke.
the wise cornelius was convinced, that these, being pole-
mical arts, could no more be learned alone than fencing or
culgel-playin $', - arbuthnot and pope.
2. 7 a cross the cudge is, is to forbear the contest, from the
practice of cudgel-players to lay one over the other.
it is much better to give way than it would be to contend
at first, and then cither to cross the cu...'s, or to be bashed in
the conclusion, l'astrange.
to cuopo el. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to beat with a stick.
my lord, he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul-mouth'd
man, as he is; and said he would cudgel you. shakesp. h. iv.
the ass courting his master, just as the spaniel had done,
instead of being stroked and made much of, is only rated of
and cudge!ed for all his courtship,
--- - south.
three ducks he fought, thrice ventur'd his life;
went home, and was cudgell d again by his wife. swift.
2. to beat in general.
cu gel thy brains no more about it; for your dull ass will
not mend his pace with beating. shakespeare's hamlet.
a good woman happened to pass by as a company of young
fellows were cudgelling a walnut-tree, and asked them what
they did that for. - l'estrange.
cudgel-p roof. adj. able to resist a stick, -
his doublet was of sturdy buff,
and though not sword, yet cudge!-proof. hudibras.
cu dle. n.s. a small sea-fish.
of round fish there are brit, sprat, cudles, eels.
cu’d we ed. m. s. [from cud and weed.] a plant.
cuf. n.f. [queue, a tail, french.]
1. the tail or end of any thing; as, the long curl of a wig.
2. the last words of a specch which the player who is to an-
swer catches, and regards as intimation to begin.
pyramus, you begin: when you have spoken your speech,
enter into that brake ; and so every one according to his
cue. shakesp. midsummer might's dream.
3. a hint; an intimation; a short dire&amp;ion. -
what's hecuba to him, or he to hecuba, -
that he should weep for her what would he do,
had he the motive and the cue for passion
that i have? he would drown the stage with tears. shakesh.
let him know how many servants there are, of both exo,
who expect vails; and give them their cue to attend in two
lines, as he leaves the house. s
4. the part which any man is to play in his turn.
hold your hands,
both you of my inclining, and the rest:
were it my cue to fight, i should have known it
without a prompter. shakespeare's othelio.
neither is otto here a much more taking gentleman :
nothing appears in his cue to move pity, or any way make the
audience of his party. rymer's tragedies of the ly: age.
5. humour; temper of mind: a low word.
cue’rpo, n.s. [spanish..] to be in cuerpo, is to be without
the upper coat or cloke, so as to discover the true shape of
the cuerpo or body.
expos'd in cuerpo to their rage,
without my aims and equipage. hudibrar.
cuff. m. s. [zuffa, a battle; zuffare, to fight, italian.]
1. a blow with the fist ; a box ; a stroke.
the priest let fall the book,
and as he stoop'd again to take it up,
the mad-brain’d bridegroom took him such a cuff,
that down fell priest and book, and book and priest, shaf.
there was no money bid for argument, unless the poet
and the player went to cuff; in the question. shakespeare.
he gave her a cuff on the ear, and she would prick him
with her knitting-needle. arbuthnot's john bull,
their
carew.
44iller.
o
s wo/ f.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 534</div><p class="text">c u l
c u l
their own se&amp;s, which now lic dormant, would be soon
at aff; again with each other about power and prefer-
neilt. swift.
2. it is used of birds that fight with their talons.
7, cuff. v. n. [from the noun..] to fight; to scuffle.
clapping farces acted by the court,
while the peers coff, to make the rabble sport. dryd. juv.
t, cuff. v. a. -
1. to strike with the fish.
l’il after him again, and beat him.
—do, cuff him soundly; but never draw thy sword. shakes.
were not you, my friend, abused and cuffed, and kicked 2
congreve's old batchelor.
2. to strike with talons. -
those lazy owls, who, perch’d near fortune's top,
sit only watchful with their heavy wings -
to cuff down new-fledg’d virtues, that would rise
'fo nobler heights, and make the grove harmonious. otway.
the dastard crow, that to the wood made wing,
with her loud kaws her craven kind does bring,
who, safe in numbers, cuff the noble bird. dryden.
they with their quills did all the hurt they cou’d,
and cuff'd the tender chickens from their food. dryden.
3. to flrike with wings. this seems improper.
how'ring about the coasts they make their moan,
and cuff the cliffs with pinions not their own. dryd. æn.
cuff. n. f. [coffe, french..] part of the sleeve.
he railed at fops; and, instead of the common fashion, he
would visit his mistress in a morning-gown, band, short cuffs,
and a peaked beard. arbuthnot.
cu'1n ag e. n.s. the making up of twine into such forms, as
it is commonly framed into, for carriage to other places. cowel.
cutrass. m. s. [cuirase, fr. from cuir, leather; coraccia, ital.]
a breastplate.
the lance pursu'd the voice without delay,
and pierc’d his cuiras, with such fury sent,
and sign'd his bosom with a purple dint. dryden.
cuira'ssier. m. s. [from cuirass.] a man at arms; a soldier
in armour.
the field all iron, cast a gleaming brown,
nor wanted clouds of foot, nor on each horn
cairoffers, all in steel, for standing fight. milton.
the picture of st. george, wherein he is described like a
cuirasier, or horseman completely armed, is rather a symbo-
lical image than any proper figure. brown's vulgar errours.
cuish. m. s. [cuise, french.] the armour that covers the
thighs. -
i saw young harry, with his beaver on,
his cuishes on his thighs, gallantly arm’d,
rise from the ground like feather'd mercury. shak, hen. iv.
the croslet some, and some the cuishes mould,
with silver plated, and with ductile gold. dryden's an.
but what had our author to wound aeneas with at so cri-
tical a time and how came the cuishes to be worse tempered
than the rest of his armour? dryden.
cu’ldees. n.s. [coidei, latin.] monks in scotland.
cu'lerage. m. s. the same plant with arse-smar t. ainsw.
cu’ll nary. adj. [culina, latin.] relating to the kitchen;
relating to the art of cookery.
great weight may condense those vapours and exhalations,
as soon as they shall at any time begin to ascend from the sun,
and make them presently fall back again into him, and by that
action increase his heat; much after the manner that, in our
carth, the air increases the heat of a culinary fire. newton.
to those, who, by reason of their northern exposition, will
be still forced to be at the expence of culinary fires, it will
reduce the price of their manufacture. arbuthnot.
to cull. v. a. [cucillir, french..] to sele&amp;t from others; to
pick out of many.
the best of every thing they had, being culled out for
themselves, if there were in their flocks any poor diseased
thing not worth the keeping, they thought it good enough for
the altar of god. hooker.
our engines shall be bent
against the brows of this resisting town:
call for our chiefest men of discipline,
to cull the plots of best advantage. shakesh. king john.
like the bee, culling from ev’ry flow'r,
our thighs are packt with wax, our mouths with honey. sh.
i do remember an apothecary
in tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
colling of simples. shakesp. romeo and julict.
then in a moment fortune shall cull forth,
oot of one side, her happy minion. shakesp. king john.
the choicest of the british, the roman, saxon, and nor-
man laws, being called, as it were, this grand charter was ex-
traded. - howel's parly of beasis.
when false flow’rs of rhetorick thou would'st cull,
trust nature, do not labour to be dull. dryden.
from his herd he cul's,
for slaughter, four the fairest of his bulls. dryd. wirg.
when the current pieces of the same denomination are of
different weights, then the traders in money cull ou
heavier, and melt them down with profit. } the
with humble duty and officious haste, 2:ke.
i'll cull the farthest mead for thy repast. pr;
the various off'rings of the world appear: rior.
from each she nicely culls with curious tol,
and decks the goddess with the glitt'ring spoil.
cu'ller. m. s. [from cull.] one who picks of chooses, ‘’”
cutllion. m. s. [coglione, a fool, ital. or perhaps from
tion. it seems to import meanness rather than folly.] o
drel; a mean wretch. - oun-
such a one as leaves a gentleman,
and makes a god of such a cullion. shak. tam, of the shr
up to the breach, you dogs; avaunt, you cullions. .
cu'llionly, adj. . [from cullion.] having the qualities ..".
cullion; mean; base. 2
i'll make a sop o' th' moonshine of you : you whor
lionly, barber-monger, draw. *i); #:
cullu mbine. m. s. [more properly spelt columbine.j 1.
flowers of this plant are beautifully variegated with blo. .
ple, red, and white. j.
her goodly bosom, like a strawberry-bed; -
her neck, like to a bunch of cullumbies.
cut.l.y. m. s. scaglione, ital, a fool.] a man deceive
posed upon ; as by sharpers or a strumpet.
why should you, whose mother wits
are furnish'd with all perquisits,
b' allow'd to put all tricks upon
sponsor.
dorim-
our cully sex, and we use none * hudibrat
yet the rich cullies may their boasting spare: 4.
they purchase but sophisticatcd ware. dryden.
he takes it in mighty dudgeon, because i won't let'.
make me over by deed as his lawful cully. arbuthnot,
to cully. v. a. [from the noun..] to befool; to chea. to
trick ; to deceive ; to impose upon. &gt;
culmi ferous, adj. [culmus and fero, latin.]
culmiferous plants are such as have a smooth jointed stalk,
and usually hollow ; and at each joint the stalk is wrapped
about with single, narrow, long, sharp-pointed leaves, and
their seeds are contained in chaffy husks. &amp;uincy.
there are also several sorts of grasses, both of the cyprus
and culmiferous kinds; some with broader, others with ilar-
rower leaves. //oodward on fossil.
the properest food of the vegetable kingdom is taken from
the farinaceous or mealy seeds of some culmiferous plants; as
oats, barley, wheat, rice, rye, maize, panic, millet. arbuthn.
7% co'lminate. v. m. sculmen, latin.] to be verticis,
to be in the meridian.
far and wide his eye commands:
for fight no obstacle found here, or shade,
but all sunshine; as when his beams at noon
culminate from th' equator. azilton's paradis, loft.
culmination. m.s.. [from culminate.] the transit of a pil-
net through the meridian.
culpability. m. s. [from culpable.] blameableness,
cutlpable. adj. [culpabilis, latin.]
1. criminal.
proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle glo'ster,
than from true evidence of good esteem,
he be approv’d in practice culpable. shakosh. henry vi.
2. guilty: with of.
these being perhaps culpable of this crime, or favourers of
their friends. spenser's state of ireland.
3. blameable; blameworthy.
the wisdom of god setteth before us in scripture so many
admirable patterns of virtue, and no one of them, without
somewhat noted wherein they were culpable, to the end that
to him alone it might always be acknowledged, thou only art
holy, 7 hou only art jus!. hocker.
all such ignorance is voluntary, and therefore culpable; for as
much as it was in every man's power to have prevented it. south.
cu’l p a bleness. n.s. from culpable.] blame; guilt.
cu'lpably. adv. [from culpable.] blameably; criminally.
if we perform this duty pitifully and culpably, it is not to
be expected we should communicate holily. taylor.
cu'lprit. m. s. [about this word there is great dispute. it is
used by the judge at criminal trials, who, when the prisoner
declares himself not guilty, and puts himself upon his trial,
answers ; culprit, god send thee a good deliverance. it is likely
that it is a corruption of qu'il paroit, my it so appear, the
wish of the judge being that the prisoner may be found inno-
cent.]. a man arraigned before his judge.
the knight appear'd, and filence they proclaim;
then first the culprit answer'd to his name;
and, after forms of law, was last requir’d
to name the thing that woman most desir’d. dryden,
an author is in the condition of a culprit ; the publick are
his judges: by allowing too much, and condescending too far,
he may injure his own cause; and by pleading and asserting
too boldly, he may displease the court. prior's pres, to solomon.
cu'lter. m. s. [culter, latin.] the iron of the plow per-
pendicular to the share. it is commonly written coulter.
her
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 535</div><p class="text">c u m .
c u n
- her fallow lees
the darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
doth root upon; while that the culter rusts,
that should deracinate such savagery.
t, cu'ltivate. v. a. [cultiver, krench j
1. to forward or improve the product of the earth, by manual
industry. -
those excellent seeds implanted in your birth, will, if cul-
tivated, be most flourishing in production; and, as the soil is
good, and no cost nor care wanting to improve it, we must
entertain hopes of the richest harvest. felton on the claff. as.
2. to improve; to meliorate.
were we but less indulgent to our faults,
and patience had to cultivate our thoughts,
shakes. hen. v.
our muse would flourish. waller.
to make man mild and sociable to man,
to cultivate the wild licentious savage
with wisdom, discipline, and liberal arts,
th’ embellishments of life. addison's cato.
cultiva"rio n. m. s. [from cultivate.]
1. the art or practice of improving soils, and forwarding or
meliorating vegetabies.
2. improvement in general ; promotion ; melioration.
an innate light discovers the common notions of good and
evil, which, by cultivation and improvement, may be ad-
vanced to higher and brighter discoveries. south.
a foundation of good sense, and a cultivation of learning,
are required to give a seasoning to retirement, and make us
taste the blessing. dryden.
cultivator. m. s. [from cultivate.] one who improves,
promotes, or meliorates; or endeavours to forward any ve-
getable product, or any thing else capable of improvement.
it has been lately complained of, by some cultivators of
clover-grass, that from a great quantity of the seed not any
grass springs up. boyle.
cutlture. a. s. [cultura, latin.] - -
1. the act of cultivation; the act of tilling the ground;
tillage.
give us seed unto our heart, and culture to our understand-
ing, that there may come fruit of it. 2 esd. viii. 6.
these three last were slower than the ordinary wheat of
itself, and this culture did rather retard than advance. bacon.
the plough was not invented 'till after the deluge; the
earth requiring little or no care or culture, but yielding its in-
crease freely, and without labour and toil. woodward.
where grows 2–where grows it not? if vain our toil,
we ought to blame the culture, not the soil.
fix'd to no spot is happiness fincere. pope.
they rose as vigorous as the sun;
then to the culture of the willing glebe. thomson.
2. art of improvement and melioration.
one might wear any passion out of a family by culture, as
skilful gardeners blot a colour out of a tulip that hurts its
beauty. tatler.
to cullor ure v. a. [from the noun..] to cultivate; to ma-
nure; to till. it is used by thomson, but without authority.
cu'lver. n.s. [columba, culpre, sax.] a pigeon. an old word.
had he so done, he had him snatch'd away,
more light than culver in the faulcon's fist.
whence, borne on liquid wing,
the sounding culver shoots. thomson's spring.
cu’lv erin. m. s. [colouvrine, french.] a species of ordnance:
originally an hawk. -
a whole cannon requires for every charge, forty pounds
of powder, and a bullet of sixty-four pounds; a culverin, six-
teen pounds of powder, and a bullet of nineteen pounds; a
demi-culverin, nine pounds of powder, and a bullet of twelve
pounds. wilkins's math. magic.
here a well polish'd mall gives us the joy
to see our prince his matchless force employ:
no sooner has he touch'd the flying ball,
but 'tis already more than half the mall;
and such a fury from his arm 't has got,
as from a smoaking culverin 'twere shot.
cu’lv er key. m. s. a flower. -
looking down the meadows i could see a girl cropping
culverkeys and cowslips, to make garlands. walton's angler.
to cu’mblr. v. a. [kommeren, komberen, to disturb, dutch..]
1. to embarrass ; to entangle; to obstruct.
why asks he, what avails him not in fight,
and would but cumber, and retard his flight,
in which his only excellence is plac'd
you give him death, that intercept his haste. dryd. fables.
hardly his head the plunging pilot rears,
clog’d with his cloaths, and cumber'd with his years. dryd.
the learning and mastery of a tongue, being uneasy and
unpleasant enough in itself, should not be cumbered with any
other difficulties, as is done in this way of proceeding. locke.
2. to croud or load with something useless. -
let it not cumber your better remembrance. shakesp. timon.
the multiplying variety of arguments, especially frivolous
ones, is not only lost labour, but cumbers the memory to no
purpose. docke.
vol. i.
spenser.
jwaller.
cumbersox. e. adj. [from cumber.]
3. to involve in difficulties and dangers; to distress.
domestick fury, and fierce civil strife, -
shall cumber all the parts of italy. shakesp. jul. caesar.
4. to busy; to distract with multiplicity of cares.
martha was cumbered about much serving.
5. to be troublesome in any place. -&gt;
poth the bramble cumber a garden it makes the better
hedge ; where, if it chances to prick the owner, it will tear
the thief. grew's cosmos.
cu'mber. m. s. [komler, dutch.) vexation; buildensomeness;
embarrassment; obstruction; hindran, e. disturbance; distress.
by the occasion thereof i was brought to as great cumber
and danger, as lightly any might escape - sidney.
thus fade thy helps, and thus thy cumbers spring. spenser.
the greatest ships are least serviceable, go' very docș in
water, are of marveilous charge and fearful conver. raleigh.
luke.
i. troublesome ; vexatious.
thinking it too early, as long as they had any day, to
break of so pleasing a company, with going to £erform a
cumbersome obedience. -
2. burthensome 3 embarraffing.
i was drawn in to write the first part by accident, and to
write the second by some defects in the first: these are the co-
bersome perquisites of authors. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. unwieldy; unmanageable.
very long tubes are cumbersome, and scarce to be readily
managed. newton's opt.
cu'm ber somely, adj. [from cumbersome.] in a troublesome
manner; in a manner that produces hindrance and vexation.
cumbersom eness. m. s. [from cumbersome.] encumbrance;
hindrance; obstruction.
cu'mbran ce. m. s. [from cumber.] burthen ; hindrance; im-
pediment.
extol not riches then, the toil of fools,
the wise man's cumbrance, if not snare; more apt
to slacken virtue, and abate her edge,
than prompt her to do aught may merit praise.
cu'mbrous. adj. [from cumber.]
1. troublesome ; vexatious; disturbing.
a cloud of cumbrous gnats do him molest;
all striving to infix their feeble stings,
that from their noyance he no where can rest.
2. oppressive; burthen some.
henceforth i fly not death, nor would prolong
life much bent rather, how i may be quit,
fairest and easiest, of this cumbrous charge.
they rear'd him from the ground,
and from his cumbrous arms his limbs unbound;
then lanc'd a vein.
possession's load was grown so great,
he sunk beneath the cumborous weight.
3. jumbled; obstructing each other.
swift to their several quarters hasted then
the cumb’rous elements, earth, flood, air, fire.
cu'mfrey. m. s. [consolida.] a medicinal plant. -
cumin. m. s. scuminum, latin.] a plant. miller.
rank-smelling rue, and cumin, good for eyes. spensor.
to cu'mulate. v. a. [cumulo, latin.j to heap together.
. a man that beholds the mighty shoals of shells, bedded and
cumulated heap upon heap, amongst earth, will scarcely con-
ceive which way these could ever live. //oodward.
cumulation. m. s. the aet of heaping together. dic?.
cunctation. m. s. [cumciatio, latin.] delay; procrastina-
tion; dilatoriness. -
it is most certain, that the english made not their best im-
provements of these fortunate events; and that especially by
two miserable errours, cunclation in prosecuting, and haste in
departure. hayward.
the swiftest animal, conjoined with a heavy body, implies
that common moral, festina lente; and that celerity should
always be contempered with cunciation. brown.
cunctator. m. s. [latin.] one given to delay; a lingerer;
an idler; a sluggard. not in use.
others, being unwilling to discourage such cundators, al-
ways keep them up in good hope, that, if they are not yet
called, they may yet, with the thief, be brought in at the last
hour. hammond on fundamentals.
to cund. v. n. [from konnen, to know, dutch..] to give no-
tice: a provincial or obsolete word. see cox der.
they are direeted by a balker or huer on the cliff, who,
discerning the course of the pilchard, cundeth, as they call it,
the master of each boat. carew's survey of cornwal.
cu'neal. adj. [cuneus, latin.] relating to a wedge ; having
the form of a wedge. -
cuneated. adj. [cuneus, latin.] made in form of a wedge. *
cu'neifor m. adj. [from cuneus and forma, lat. j having the
form of a wedge.
cunei for m. boxes. n.s. the fourth, fifth, and sixth bones
of the foot; thus calcd from their wedge-like shape, being
large above and narrow below. dici.
cu’nner. m. s. [lepas.] a kind of fish less than an oyster, that
sticks close to the rocks. ainsworth
6 c cu'nning
sion y.
milton.
stesir.
milton.
dryden,
swift.
milton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 536</div><p class="text">c u p
c u p
cu'nning. adj. [from connan, sax. honnen, dut, to know..]
1. skilful; knowing; well instructed; learned.
schoolmasters will i keep within my house,
fit to instruct her youth.--to cunning men
i will be very kind ; and liberal
to mine own children, in good bringing up. shakoffeare.
i do present you with a man of mine,
cunning in musick and the mathematicks,
to instruct her fully in those sciences. shakespeare.
wherein is he good, but to taste sack and drink it? wherein
cunning, but in craft # wherein crafty, but in villainy
shakespeare's henry iv.
send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and
in silver, and that can skill to cut and to grave. 2 chron.
when pedro does the lute command,
she guides the cunning artist’s hand. prior.
2. performed with skill; artful.
and over them arachne high did lift
her cunning web, and spread her subtile net,
enwrapped in foul smoak, and clouds more black than jet.
spenser.
and there beside of marble stone was built
an altar, carv'd with cunning imagery;
on which true christians blood was often spilt,
and holy martyrs often done to die. spensor.
once put out thy light,
thou cunning's pattern of excelling nature,
i know not where is that promethean heat
that can thy light relumine. shakesp. othello.
3. artfully deceitful; fly ; designing ; trickish; full of fetches
and stratagems; subtle; crofty; subdolous.
these small wares and petty points of cunning are infinite,
and it were a good deed to make a list of them; for nothing
doth more hurt than that cunning men pass for wise. bacon.
men will leave truth and misery to such as love it; they are
resolved to be cunning: let others run the hazard of being
sincere. south.
. acted with subtilty. - -
the more he protested, the more his father thought he dis-
sembled, accounting his integrity to be but a cunning face of
falshood. sidney.
cu’nning. m. s. [cunninge, saxon.] -
1. artifice; deceit: slyness; sleight; craft ; subtilty ; dissimula-
tion; fraudulent dexterity.
what if i be not so much the poet, as even that miserable
subject of his cunning, whereof you speak. sidney.
we take cunning for a finister or crooked wisdom; and
certainly there is great difference between a cunning man and
a wise man, not only in point of honesty, but in point of
ability. bacon.
discourage cunning in a child; cunning is the ape of wis-
dom. locke.
2. art; skill; knowledge.
cu'nn in g.i.y. adv. [from cunning. j artfully ; flily; sub-
tily ; by fraudulent contrivance; craftily.
amongst other crimes of this nature, there was diligent
enquiry made of such as had raised and dispersed a bruit and
rumour, a little before the ficki fought, that the rebels had the
day, and that the king's army was overthrown, and the king
fled ; whereby it was supposed, that many succours were cun-
ningly put off and kept back. . bacon's henry vii.
i must meet my danger, and destroy him first ;
but cunningly and closely. denham's sophy.
when stock is high, they come between,
making by second-hand their offers ;
then cunningly retire unseen,
with each a million in his coffers. swift.
cu’nning man. m. f. [cunning and man.] a man who pretends
to tell fortunes, or teach how to recover stolen goods.
he sent him for a strong detachment
of beadle, constable, and watchmen,
to attack the cunningman, for plunder
committed faitly on his lumber. hudibras.
cu'nning ness. n.s.. [from cunning..] deceitfulness ; slyness.
cup. m. s. [cup, sax. kop, dut. coupe, french.]
1. a small vessel to drink in.
thou shalt deliver pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the
former manner when thou wast his butler. genesis.
ye heav'nly pow'rs, that guard
the british ifles, such dire events remove
far from fair albion ; nor let civil broils
ferment from social cups.
2. the liquor contained in the cup; the draught.
which when the vile enchanteress perceiv'd,
with cup thus charm’d, imparting she deceiv'd.
all friends shall taste
the wages of their virtue, and all foes -
the cups of their deservings. shakesp. king lear.
wil’t please your lordship, drink a cup of sack. shakesp.
they that never had the use
of the grape's surprising juice,
to the first delicious eup
all their reason render up.
7
philips.
spensor.
h'ailer.
the best, the dearest favorite of the sky,
must taste that cup ; for man is born to die. pope',0;
3. social entertainment; merry bout, [in the plural.] as.
- then shall our names,
familiar in their mouth as houshold words,
be in their flowing cups freshly remember'd. shows h. w.
let us suppose that i were reasoning, as one friend o:
another, by the fireside, or in our cups, without care .
any great affection to either party. &gt; kn .
it was near a miracle to see an old man silent, fince o
is the disease of age; but amongst cups, makes fully a wo.
ben, johnson's d; ar.
thence from cups, to civil broils | y /*'s discoveria,
amidst his cups with fainting shiv'ring seiz'd,
his limbs disjointed, and all o'er diseas'd,
his hand refuses to sustain the bowl. dryden's pors,
4. anything hollow like a cup; as, the husk of an acoin *
bell of a flower. , the
a pyrites of the same colour and shape, placed in the cavit
of another of an hemispherick figure, in much the sam l
ner as an acorn in its cup. //oodward on fift;
5. cup and can. familiar companions. the can is the so
vessel, out of which the cup is filled, and to which it is a c e
stant associate. on-
you boasting tell us where you din'd,
and how his lordship was so kind;
swear he's a most facetious man;
that you and he are cup and can:
you travel with a heavy load,
and quite mistake preferment's road. swift
6, [cooper, french, to scarify.] a glass to draw the bloof.
scarification.
hippocrates tells you, that in applying of cups, the sca.
rification ought to be made with crooked initruments. at
to cup. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to supply with cups. this sense is obsolete,
plumpy bacchus, with pink eyne,
in thy vats our cares be drown'd :
with thy grapes our hairs be crown'd
cup us, ’till the world go round. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra,
2. [cooper, to cut, fr.] to fix a glass-bell or cucurbite upon
the skin, to draw the blood in scarification.
the clotted blood lies heavy on his heart,
corrupts, and there remains in spite of art:
nor breathing veins, nor cupping will prevail;
all outward remedies and inward fail. dryden's falls,
you have quartered all the foul language upon me, that
could be raked out of the air of billingsgate, without know-
ing who i am; or whether i deserve to be cupped and scarified
at this rate. spetiator,
blistering, cupping, and bleeding are seldom of use but to
the idle and intemperate. addison's spitiator.
him the damn'd doctors and his friends immur'd;
they bled, they cupp'd, they purg'd; in short they cur’a, pot.
cupbe'arer. m. s.
1. an officer of the king's houshcla,
there is conveyed to mr. villiers an intimation of the
king's pleasure to wait and to be sworn his servant, and short-
ly after his cupbearer at large; and the summer following he
was admitted in ordinary. //otton,
2. an attendant to give wine at a feast.
this vine was said to be given to tros, the father of
priam, by jupiter, as a recompence for his carrying away his
son ganymede to be his cuphearer. brooms,
cu pboard. m. f. [cup and bond, a case or receptacle, saxon j
a case with shelves, in which victuals or earthen ware is placed.
some trees are best for planchers, as deal; some for tables,
cupboards, and desks, as walnut. bacon’s natural history,
codrus had but one bed; so short to boot,
that his short wife's short legs hung dangling out:
his cupboard's head six earthen pitchers grac'd,
beneath them was his trusty tankard plac'd. dryden's jo,
yet their wine and their victuals these curmudgeon-
lubbards,
lock up from my fight, in cellars and cupboards. swift,
78 cu'pboard. v. a. [from the noun..] to treasure in a cup-
board; to hoard up.
the belly did remain
i' th' midst o' th' body, idle and unactive,
still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
like labour with the rest. shakespeare's corioknoi.
cup1’ pity. m. s. [cupiditas, latin.] concupiscence; unlaw.
ful or unreasonable longing.
cu'pol.a. m. s. [italian j a dome; the hemispherical summit
of a building.
nature seems to have designed the head as the cupola to the
most glorious of her works; and when we load it with super-
enumrary ornaments, we destroy the symmetry of the human
figure. adaison's speciator.
cu'ppfl. m. s. see coppel.
there be other bodies fixed, as we see in the stuff whereof
cuffels are made, which they put into furnaces, upon which
fire worketh not. bacon's natural hijio,
cu'pper,
sillon.
c man-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 537</div><p class="text">c u. r.
c u r.
--
cu’rrer. n.f. [from cap.] one who applies cupping-glasses;
a scarifier. - -
cup f iso-glass. m. s. [from cap and glass.] a glass used by
scarifiers to draw out the blood by rarefying the air.
a bubo, in this case, ought to be drawn outward by cup-
ping glassis, and brought to suppuration. - joseman.
cj. preous, adj. [cupreus, latin. j. coppery ; consisting of
copper. -
having, by the intervention of a little sal armoniack,
made copper inflammable, i took some small grains, and put
then under the wick of a burning candle, whereby they were
with the melted tallow so kindled, that the green, not blue,
flame of the cupreous body did burn. boyle.
cur. m. s. [korre, dutch. see curtal.]
1. a worthless degenerate dog.
'tis a good dog.
—a cur, fir. - -
—sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog. shakespeare.
here's an old drudging cur turned bff to shift for himself,
for want of the very teeth and heels that he had lost in his
master's service. - l’estrange.
o a cur may bear
the name of tiger, lion, or whate'er -
denotes the noblest or the fairest beast. dryden's juv.
2. a term of reproach for a man. . .
what would you have, ye curs,
that like not peace nor war shakesp. coriolanus.
this knight had occasion to inquire the way to st. anne's-
lane; the person, whom he spoke to, called him a young popish
car, and asked him, who made anne a saint. addison.
cu'rab le. adj. [from cure.] that admits a remedy; that
may be healed. * . . . .
a consumption of the lungs, at the beginning, herein dif-
fers from all other curable diseases, that it is not to be worn
away by change of diet, or a chearful spirit. harvey.
a desperate wound must skilful hands employ,
but thine is curable by philip's boy. dryden's juvenal.
cu'rablen ess. n.s.. [from curable.] possibility to be healed.
cu’racy. m. s. [from curate.] employment of a curate, dis-
tinet from a benefice; employment which a hired clergyman
holds under the beneficiary.
they get into orders as soon as they can, and, if they be
very fortunate, arrive in time to a curacy here in town. swift.
cu’rate. m. s. [curator, latin.]
1. a clergyman hired to perform the duties of another.
he spar'd no pains; for curate he had none;
nor durst he trust another with his care. dryden's fables.
2. a parish pricst.
bishops and curates, and all congregations. comm. prayer.
i thought the english of curate had been an ecclesiastical
hireling. no such matter; the proper import of the word
fignifies one who has the cure of souls. collier on pride.
cu'rateship. n.s.. [from curate.] the same with curacy.
cu’rative. adj. [from cure.] relating to the cure of dis-
eases; not preservative.
the therapeutick or curative physick, we term that which
restores the patient unto sanity. brown's pulgar errours.
there may be taken proper useful indications, both preser-
vative and curative, from the qualities of the air. arbuthnot.
curator. m. s. [latin.] -
1. one that has the care and superintendence of any thing.
the curators of bedlam assure us, that some lunaticks are
persons of honour. swift.
2. a guardian appointed by law.
a minor cannot appear as a defendant in court, but by his
guardian and curator. ayliffe's parergon.
curb. n.f. [courber, to bend, french.]
1. a curb is an iron chain, made fast to the upper part of the
branches of the bridle, in a hole called the eye, and running
over the beard of the horse. farrier’s dic.
the ox hath his bow, the horse his curb, and the faulcon
his bells; so man hath his desire. shakesp. as you like it.
so four fierce coursers, starting to the race,
scow'r through the plain, and lengthen ev'ry pace;
nor reins, nor curbs, nor threat'ning cries they fear. dryd.
2. restraint ; inhibition; opposition; hindrance.
the roman state, whose course will on
the way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
of more strong links asunder, than can ever
appear in your impediment.
we remain
in strictest bondage, though thus far remov’d,
under th’ inevitable curb, rcserv'd ".
his captive multitude. milton's paradis. loft.
by these men, religion, that should be
the curb, is made the spur to tyranny. denham's sophy.
even they who think us under no other tie to the true in-
terest of our country, will allow this to be an effectual curb
upon us. atterbury.
. a curb is a hard and callous tumour, which runs along the
infide of a horse's hoof; that is, on that part of the hoof that
is opposite to the leg of the lame si. e.
shakespeare's coriolanus.
farrier's dici.
to curb. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to guide or restrain a horse with a curb. - - -
part wield their arms, part curb the foaming fleed. mit.
2. to restrain; to inhibit; to check; to confine; to hold back.
were not the laws planted amongst them at the first, and
had they not governours to curb and keep them still in awe and
obedience - speyer on ireland.
then thou, the mother of so sweet a child,
her false imagin'd loss cease to lament, -
and wisely learn to curb thy sorrows wild. milton.
if sense and learning are such unsociable imperious things,
he ought to keep down the growth of his reason, and curb fis
- intellectuals. - collier on pride.
knowing when a muse should be indulged
in her full flight, and when she should be curbed. roscommon.
at this she curb’d a groan, that else had come;
and pausing, view'd the present in the tomb. dryd, fables.
'till force returns, his ardour we restrain -
and curb his warlike wish to cross the main. dryden.
some poor cottage on the mountain's brow
where pinching want must curb thy warm desires,
and houshold cares suppress thy genial fires. prior.
nature to all things fix’d the limits fit,
and wisely curb’d proud man's pretending wit. pope.
2. sometimes with from.
yet you are curb’d from that enlargement by ,
the consequence of the crown. shakesp. cymbeline.
3. in the following passage it signifies, i think, as in fr. to bend.
though the course of the sun be curbed between the tro-
pics, yet are not those parts direetly subject to his perpendi-
cular beams unhabitable or extremely hot. ray.
curd. m. s. [see crudle.] the coagulation of milk; the
concretion of the thicker parts of any liquor. -
milk of itself is such a compound of cream, curds, and
whey, as it is easily turned and dissolved. bacon.
: this night, at least, with me forget your care;
chesnuts and curds, and cream shall be your fare. dryden.
let sporus tremble.—what that thing of fijk -
sporus, that mere white curd of ass’s milk? pope.
7. curb. v. a. [from the noun..] to turn to curds; to cause
to coagulate.
maiden, does it curd thy blood, -
to say i am thy mother shakesp. all's well that end, well.
7% cu. rple. v. n. [from card.] to coagulate ; to shoot to-
gether ; to concrete. .* - -
powder of mint, and powder of red roses, keep the milk
... somewhat from turning or curdling in the stomach. bacon.
some to the house,
the sold and dairy, hungry bend their flight,
sip round the pail, or taste the curdling cheese. thoms. sum,
to cuor dle. v. a. to cause to coagulate 3 to force into con-
cictlon s.
his changed powers at first themselves not felt,
till curdled cold his courage 'gan t’ affail. . spenser,
mixed with the fixth part of a spoonful of milk, it burnt
to the space of one hundred pulses, and the milk was curdled.
- bacon's natural history.
- my soul is all the same,
unmov’d with fear, and mov’d with martial fame;
but my chill blood is curdled in my veins,
and scarce the shadow of a man remains. dryden's virgil.
ev’n now a fatal draught works out my soul;
ev’n now it curdles in my shrinking veins
the lazy blood, and freezes at my heart. smith.
there is in the spirit of wine some acidity, by which
brandy curdles milk. - floyer.
cu'rdy. adj. [from curd.] coagulated ; concreted; full of
curds; curdled.
it differs from a vegetable emulsion, by coagulating into a
curdy mass with acids. arbuthnot on aliments.
cure. m. s. [cura, latin.]
1. remedy; restorative.
this league that we have made,
will give her sadness very little cure,
brother of england, how may we content
this widow lady ? shakesp. king john.
cold, hunger, prisons, ills without a cure,
all these he must, and guiltless oft, endure. dryd. falls.
now we're ador'd, and the next hour displease;
at first your cure, and after your disease. granville.
horace advises the romans to seek a seat in some remote
part, by way of a cure for the corruption of manners. swift.
2. act of healing.
i do cures to-day, and to-morrow. like xiii. 32.
3. the benefice or employment of a curate or clergyman.
if his cure lies among the lawyers, let nothing be said against
entangling property, spinning out causes, squeezing clients,
and making the laws a greater grievance than those who break
them. collier.
to cure. v. a. [caro, latin.]
1. to heal; to restore to health 5 to remedy; to recover: with
of before the disease. used of patients or diseases.
. . - the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 538</div><p class="text">c u r
c u r
the bones, in sharp colds, wax brittle ; and therefore all
contusions of bones, in hard weather, are more difficult to
«217'e. bacon's natural history.
• here the poor lover, that has long endur’d -
some proud nymph’s scorn, of his fond passion's cur'd. waller,
i never knew any man cured of inattention. swift.
hear what from love unpractis'd hearts endure,
from love, the sole disease thou canst not cure. pope.
2. to prepare in any manner, so as to be preserved from cor-
ruption. -
the beef would be so ill chosen, or so ill cured, as to stink
many times before it came so far as holland. temple.
cu'reless. adj. i cure and less. j without cure ; without
remedy. -
bootless are plaints, and curels are my wounds;
no way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight. shak. h.vi.
repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall -
to cureless ruin. shakesp. merchant of venice.
if, said he,
your grief alone is hard captivity,
for love of heav'n, with patience undergo
a cureless ill, since fate will have it so. dryden's fables.
cu’rer. m. s. [from cure.] a healer; a physician.
he is a curer of souls, and you a curer of bodies: if you
should fight, you go against the hair of your professions. shak.
the indexterity and worse success of the most famous of
our consumption curers, do evidently demonstrate their dim-
ness in beholding its causes. harvey on consumptions.
cu’ rf ew. n. f. [couvre foot, french..] an evening-peal, by
- which the conqueror willed, that every man should rake up
his fire, and put out his light; so that in many places at this
day, where a bell is customarily rung towards bed time, it is
said to ring curfew. cowel.
you whose pastime
is to make midnight mushrooms, that rejoice
to hear the solemn curfew. shakespeare's tempes?.
oft on a plat of rising ground,
i hear the far off curfew sound,
over some wide-water'd shoar,
swinging slow with sullen roar.
2. a cover for a fire; a fireplate.
- but now for pans, pots, curfews, counters and the like,
the beauty will not be so much respected, so as the compound
stuff is like to pass. bacon.
curia/lity.. n.s.. [from curialis, latin.] the privileges,
prerogatives, or perhaps retinue of a court.
the court and curiality.
curio's 1ty. m. s. [from curious j
1. inquisitiveness ; inclination to enquiry.
2. nicety; delicacy.
• when thou was in thy gilt, and thy perfume, they mockt
thee for too much curiosity; in thy rags thou knowest none,
but art despised for the contrary. shakespeare's timon.
3. accuracy; exactness.
qualities are so weighed, that curiosity in neither can make
choice of either’s moiety. shakespeare's king lear.
our senses, however armed or assisted, are too gross to dis-
cern the curiosity of the workmanship of nature. ray.
4. an act of curiosity; nice experiment. . . .
there hath been practised also a curiosity, to set a tree upon
the north-side of a wall, and, at a little height, to draw it
through the wall, and spread it upon the south-side; con-
ceiving that the root and lower part of the stock should enjoy
the freshness of the shade, and the upper boughs and fruit, the
comfort of the sun; but it sorted not. bacon's natural history.
5. an object of curiosity; rarity.
we took a ramble together to see the curiosities of this great
town. addison's freeholder.
cu'r1ous. adj. [curiosus, latin.]
1. inquisitive ; desirous of information ; addicted to enquiry.
be not curious in unnecessary matters; for more things are
shewn unto thee than men understand. ecclus, iii. 23.
even then to them the spirit of lies suggests,
that they were blind, because they saw not ill;
and breath'd into their uncorrupted breasts
a curious wish, which did corrupt their will.
if any one too curious should enquire
after a victory which we disdain,
then let him know the belgians did retire
before the patron saint of injur'd spain.
reader if any curious stay
to ask my hated name,
tell them, the grave that hides my clay
conceals me from my shame. , wesley.
2. attentive to ; diligent about: sometimes with after.
it is pity a gentleman so very curious after things that were
elegant and beautiful, should not have been as curious as to
their origin, their uses, and their natural history. woodward.
3. sometimes with of
then thus a senior of the place replies,
well read, and curious of antiquities.
4. accurate; careful not to mistake.
*till arianism had made it a matter of great sharpness and
- i
milton.
bacon to williers.
davies.
jdryden.
dryden's fables.
subtlety of wit to be a found believing christian, men wer
not curious what syllables or particles of speech they used .
5. difficult to please; solicitous of perfection; n * +127&amp;.
full of care. - -
a temperate person is not curious of fancies and
ness; he thinks not much, and speaks not often of
drink. -
6. exact; nice; subtle.
both these senses embrace their objecis at greater distance
with more variety, and with a more curious discrimination, th &gt;
the other sense. • islan
of negligent;
delicious.
meat and
or’
zaylor,
7. artful; not negle&amp;ful ; not fortuitous. holder,
a vaile obscur'd the sunshine of her eyes,
the rose within herself her sweetness closed;
each ornament about her seemly lies,
by curious chance, or careless art, composed. fairfax
8. *. neat ; laboured ; finished.
nderstanding to devise curious works, to work i
9. rigid ; lo. o kin gold, e.,
for curious i cannot be with you,
signior baptista, of whom i hear so weli.
cu'riously. adv. [from curious.]
1. inquisitively; attentively; studiously.
he looked very curiously upon himself, sometimes fetchin 3.
little skip, as if he said his strength had not yet forsaken him,
at first i thought there had been no light roads:
the water in that place ; but observing it more curiously, 1 saw
within it several smaller round spots, which appeared mo,
blacker and darker than the rest. mewton's optici;
2. elegantly ; neatly. -
nor is it the having of wheels and springs, though never
so curiously wrought, and artificially set, but the winding of
them up, that must give motion to the watch. south
3. artfully ; exactly. o
4. captiously.
curl. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a ringlet of hair.
she apparelled herself like a page, cutting off her hair
leaving nothing but the short curls to cover that noble head. si.
just as in act he stood, in clouds enshrin'd, -
her hand she fasten’d on his hair behind;
then backward by his yellow curls she drew
to him, and him alone confess'd in view. dryden's falli,
2. undulation ; wave ; sinuosity; flexure.
thus it happens, if the glass of the prisms be free from
veins, and their sides be accurately plain and well polished,
without those numberless waves or curls, which usually arise
from the sand holes. newton's opticii.
to curl. v. a. [krollen, dut. cyrnan, sax. krille, dan.]
1. to turn the hair in ringlets.
what hast thou been 2–
-a serving man, proud in heart and mind, that curled my
hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the luft of my mistress's
heart, and did the aet of darkness with her. . shaksp. k. liar.
2. to writhe ; to twist.
3. to dress with curls.
- lf she first meet the curled antony,
he'll make demand of her a kiss.
they, up the trees
climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks
that curl’d megaera. azilton's paradis, loft,
4. to raise in waves, undulations, or finuosities.
the visitation of the winds,
who take the ruflian billows by the top,
curling their monstrous heads. shakesh. henry iv.
seas would be pools, without the brushing air
to curl the waves. dryden's falki,
to curl. v. n.
1. to shrink into ringlets. -
those slender aerial bodies are separated and stretched out,
which otherwise, by reason of their flexibleness and weight,
would flag or curl. boyle,
2. to rise in undulations.
to every nobler portion of the town,
the curling billows roul their restless tide;
in parties now they straggle up and down,
as armies, unoppos'd, for prey divide. dryden,
while cursing smoaks from village tops are seen. pope,
3. to twist itself.
then round her slender waist he curl’d,
and stamp'd an image of himself, a sov’reign of the world,
dryden's fable.
shaloftsar,
shakespeare,
cu’rlew. m. s. scourieu, fr. aroata.]
1. a kind of water-fowl, with a large beak of a grey colous,
with red and black spots.
amongbirds we reckon creysers, curlews and puffins. carow,
2. a bird larger than a partridge, with longer legs. it runs very
swiftly, and frequents the cornfields in spain, in sicily, and
sometimes in france. treecux.
curmutdgeon. n.s. [it is a vitious manner of pronouncing
carur mechant, fr. an unknown correspondent.] an avarious
churlish fellow ; a miser; a niggard; a churl; a grip.cr. and
m<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 539</div><p class="text">c u r
and when he has it in his claws,
he'll not be hide-bound to the cause ;
nor shalt thou find him a curmudgeon,
if thou dispatch it without grudging. hudibra;.
a man's way of living is commended, because he will give
any rate for it; and a man will give any rate rather than pass
for a poor wretch, or a penurious curmitogeon. locke.
cu's mudg eon ly. adj. [from curmudgeon.] avaritious ; co-
vetous; churlish ; niggardly.
in a country where he that killed a hog invited the neigh-
bourhood, a curmudgeonly fellow advised with his companions
how he might save the charge. i’estrange.
cu’rrant. m. s. (ribo, lat.]
1. the tree hath no prickles; the leaves are large: the flower
consists of five leaves, placed in form of a rose : the ovary,
which arises from the center of the flower-cup, becomes a
globular fruit, produced in bunches,
2. a small dried grape; properly written corinth.
they butter'd currants on fat veal bestow'd,
and rumps of beef with virgin honey stew’d ;
insipid taste, old friend, to them who paris know,
where rocombole, shallot, and the rank garlick grow. king.
cu’rrency. n.s.. [from current.]
1. circulation ; power of passing from hand to hand.
the currency of those half-pence would, in the universal
opinion of our people, be utterly destructive to this king-
dom. - swift.
2. general reception : as the report had a long currency. -
3. fluency; readiness of utterance; easiness of pronunciation.
2. continuance; constant flow; uninterrupted course.
the currency of time to establish a custom, ought to be
with a continuando from the beginning to the end of the term
prescribed. ayliff’s parergon.
5. general esteem; the rate at which any thing is vulgarly
valued.
he that thinketh spain to be some great over-match for this
estate, assisted as it is, and, may be, is no good mintman, but
takes greatness of kingdoms according to their bulk and
currency, and not after intrinsick value. . bacon;
6. the papers stamped in the english colonies by authority, and
passing for money. - -
cu'rrent. adj. [currens, latin.]
1. circulatory; pasting from hand to hand. -
shekels of silver, current money with the merchant. gen.
that there was current money in abraham's time is past
doubt, though it is not sure that it was stampt; for he is said
to be rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold. arbuthnot.
2. generally received; uncontradicted ; authoritative. ...
many strange bruits are received for current. sidney.
because such as openly reprove supposed disorders of state,
are taken for principal friends to the common benefit of all,
under this fair and plausible colour, whatsoever they utter
asseth for good and current. hooker.
i have colle&amp;ed the facts, with all possible impartiality, from
the current histories of those times. swift.
3. common; general. . . . . . -
they have been trained up from their infancy in one set
of notions, without ever hearing or knowing what other opi-
nions are current among mankind. hatts.
about three months ago we had a current report of the
king of france's death. . . - - - addison.
4. popular ; such as is established by vulgar cstimation.
we are also to confider the difference between worth and
merit, strictly taken; that is, a man's intrinsick; this, his
zorrest value; which is less or more, as men have occasion for
him. grew's cosmol.
5. fashionable; popular.
oft leaving what is natural and fit,
the current folly proves our ready wit:
and authors think their reputation safe,
which lives as long as fools are pleas'd to laugh.
6. passable; such as may be allowed or admitted.
fouier than heart can think thee, thou canst make
no excuse current, but to hang thyself. shakesp. rich. iii.
7. what is now passing: what is at present in its course : as,
the current year. -
cu’rrent. n.s.
1. a running stream.
the current, that with gentle murmur glides,
thou know'st, being stopp'd, impatiently doth rage;
but his fair course is not hindered ;
he makes sweet musick with th' enamel'd stones. shakes?.
these incqualitics will vanish in one place, and presently
appear in another, and seem persectly to move like waves,
succecding and destroying one another; save that their motion
oftentinics seems to be quickett, as if in that vast sea they
were carried on by a current, or at least by a tide. boyle.
heav'n her eridanus no more shall boast,
whose fame in thine, like lesier currents lost;
thy nobler streams shall visit jove's abodes,
to shine among the stars, and bathe the gods. .
not fabled po more swclls the poet's lays,
while through the sky his shining current strays.
* vol. i,
pope.
denham.
pope.
2. [in navigation.] currents are certain progressive motions of
the water of the sea in several places, either quite down to the
bottom, or to a certain determinate depth; by which a ship
may happen to be carried more swiftly or retarded in her
course, according to the direction of the current, with or
against the way of the ship. płarris.
3. course; progression.
the castle of cadmus was taken, and thebes invested by
phebidas the lacedemonian insidiously, which drew on a re-
furprize of the castle, a recovery of the town and a current of
the war even into the walls of sparta.
cu'rrently. adj. [from current.]
1. in a constant motion.
2. without opposition. -
the very cause which snaketh the simple and ignorant to
think they even see how the word of god runneth currently
on your side, is, that their minds are forestalled, and their
conceits perverted beforehand. i looker, preface.
3. popularly ; fashionably; generally.
4. without ceasing.
cu'rrentn ess. n.s.. [from current.]
1. circulation.
2. general reception. - -
. easiness of pronunciation. . . - -
when substantialness combineth with delightfulness, and
currentness with stayedness, how can the language sound other
than most full of sweetness camden's remains.
cu'rrier. n.s. scoriarius, latin.] one who dresses and pares
leather for those who make shoes, or other things.
a currier bought a bearskin of a huntsman, and laid him
down ready money for it. . . . . l'//trange.
warn’d by frequent ills, the way they found
to lodge their loathsome carrion under ground;
for useless to the currier were their hides,
nor could their tainted flesh with ocean tides
}}e free’d from filth. dryden's wirgi'.
cu'rr1s h. adj. [from cur.] having the qualities of a dege-
"nerate dog brutal ; four ; quarrelsome 3 malignant; churlish;
uncivil ; untraciable; impracticable.
bacon.
sweet speaking oft a carrish heart reclaims. sidney.
no care of justice, nor no rule of reason,
did thenceforth ever enter in his mind, -
but cruelty, the sign of currish kind. hubberd's tale.
in fashions wayward, and in love unkind;
for cupid deigns not wound a currish mind. fairfax."
i would she were in heaven, so she could , -
entreat some pow'r to change this currish jew. shakspeare.
she says your dog was a cur; and tells you, currish thanks
is good enough for such a present. shakespeare.
to cu'rry. v. a. scorium, leather, latin.]
1. to dress leather, by beating and rubbing it.
2. to beat; to drub 3 to thresh; to chastise.
a deep design in to divide
the well affected that confide;
by setting brother against brother,
to claw and curry one another. hudibras.
i may expect her to take care of her family, and curry her
hide in case of refusal. addison's speciator.
3. to rub a horse with a scratching instrument, so as to smooth
his coat, and promote his flesh.
frictions make the parts more fleshy and full; as we seco
both in men, and in the currying of horses: the cause is, for
that they draw a greater quantity of spirits and blood to the
parts. bacon.
4. to scratch in kindness; to rub down with flattery; to tickle.
if i had a suit to master shallow, i would humour his men;
if to his men, i would curry with master shallow. shakesp.
5. to curry favour. to become a favourite by petty offi-
ciousness, slight kindnesses, or flattery.
he judged them still over-abjectly to fawn upon the hea-
thens, and to curry favour with infidels. iiooker.
this humour succeeded so with the puppy, that an ass
would go the same way to work to curry favour for himself.
l'esrange.
cu'rry.com b. m. s. [from curry and comb.] an iron instrument
used for currying or cleaning horses. -
he has a clearer idea from a little print than from a long
definition; and so he would have of sirigil and sisłrum, if,
instead of a currycomb and cymbal, he could see stamped in
the margin small pictures of these instruments. locke.
to curse. v. a. [cunrian, saxon.]
1. to wish evil to ; to execrate; to devote.
cuise me this people ; for they are too mighty for me.
numbers.
after solyman had looked upon the dead body, and bitterly
cused the same, he caused a great weight to be tied unto it,
and so cast unto the sea. knolles.
what, yet again! the third time hast thou curs?me:
this imprecation was for laius' death,
and thou hast wished me like him.
2. to mischief; to afflict; to torment.
on impious realms and barb'rous kings impose
thy plagues, and curse 'em with such sons as those. pope.
y plag j 6 jd o,
dryden and lee.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 540</div><p class="text">c u r
c u r
to curse. v. m. to imprecate; to deny or affirm with im-
precation of divine vengeance. -
the filver about which thou cursed?, and speakest of also in
my ears, behold the filver is with me. jud. xvi. 2.
curse. n.s.. [from the verb.]
i. malediction; wish of evil to another.
neither have i suffered my mouth to fin, by wishing a curse
to his soul. - job.
i never went from your lordship but with a longing to re-
turn, or without a hearty curse to him who invented ceremo-
nies, and put me on the necessity of withdrawing. dryden.
2. affliction ; torment; vexation.
curse on the stripling! how he apes his sire
ambitiously sententious ! addison's cato.
cu’rse d. participial adj. [from curse.]
1. deserving a curse; hateful; detestable; abominable; wicked.
merciful pow'rs
restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
gives way to in repose. shakespeare's macbeth.
2. unholy ; unsanetified; blasted by a curse.
come lady, while heav'n lends us grace,
let us fly this cursed place,
lest the sorcerer us entice
with some other new device;
not a waste or needless sound,
*till we come to holier ground. milton.
3. vexatious ; troublesome.
this cursed quarrel be no more renew'd ;
be, as becomes a wife, obedient still ;
though griev’d, yet subject to her husband's will. dryden.
one day, i think, in paradise he liv'd ;
destin'd the next his journey to pursue,
where wounding thorns and cuised thistles grew. prior.
cu'rsedly. adv. [from cursed.] miserably; shamefully: a
low cant word.
satisfaction and restitution lies so cursedly hard on the giz-
zards of our publicans. l’estrange.
sure this is a nation that is cursedly afraid of being over-run
with too much politeness, and cannot regain one great genius
but at the expence of another. pope.
cu'r's edn ess. n.s.. [from cursed.] the state of being under a
curse.
cu'rs hip. m. s. [from cur.] dogship ; meanness ; scoundrel-
ship.
p how durst he, i say, oppose thy curship,
'gainst arms, authority, and worship. hudibras.
cu'rsitor. m. s. [latin.] an officer or clerk belonging to
the chancery, that makes out original writs. they are called
clerks of course, in the oath of the clerks of chancery. of
these there are twenty-four in number, which have certain
shires allotted to each of them, into which they make out
such original writs as are required. they are a corporation
among themselves. cowel.
then is the recognition and value, signed with the hand-
writing of that justice, carried by the cursitor in chancery for
that shire where those lands do lie, and by him is a writ of
covenant thereupon drawn, and ingrossed in parchment. bacon.
cu'rsor ary. adj. [from cursos, latin.] cursory ; hasty; care-
less. a word, i believe, only found in the following line.
i have but with a cursorary eye
o'erglanc'd the articles. shakesp. henry v.
cu'rsor ily. adv, [from cursory..] hastily; without care;
without solicitous attention. -
this power, and no other, luther disowns, as any one that
views the place but cursorily must needs see. atterbury.
cu'rsor in ess. n.s.. [from cursory. j slight attention.
cu’rsory. adj. [from cursorius, latin.] hasty; quick; in-
attentive ; careless.
the first, upon a cursory and superficial view, appeared
like the head of another man. - addison.
curst. adj. froward ; peevish ; malignant; mischievous ;
malicious ; snarling. -
mr. mason, after his manner, was very merry with both
parties, pleasantly playing both with the shrewd touches of
many curs! boys, and with the finall discretion of many lewd
schoolmasters. ascham's schoolmaster.
curst cows have short horns. proverb.
i pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
let her not hurt me: i was never curs?;
i have no gift at all in shrewishness:
i am a right maid, for my cowardice;
let her not strike me. shakesp. midsummer night's dream.
i’ll go see if the bear be gone from the gentleman, and
how much he hath eaten : they are never curs but when they
are hungry. shakespeare's winter's tale.
her only fault, and that is fault enough,
is, that she is intolerably city',
and shrewd and forward, so beyond all measure,
that, were my state far worser than it is,
i would not wed her for a mine of gold.
when i dissuaded him from his intent,
and found him pight to do it with cursi speech,
i threaten’d to discover him. shakespeare's king lear.
3
shakespeare.
and though his mind
be ne'er so curst, his tongue is kind. crosław
cuorsos. on s, [from cisi.j. peewishness; frow.
malignity. . . . - s;
- then, noble partners,
touch you the sow’rest points with sweetest terms,
nor cursinos; grow to the matter. shakesp. ant, and c,
her mouth she writh'd, her forehead taught to frown ‘p,
her eyes to sparkle fires to love unknown; y
her fallow cheeks her envious mind did shew,
and ev'ry feature spoke aloud the cursiness of a shrew.
curt: adj. [from curius, latin.] so os; w. dryd,
to cut&amp;tail. v. a. scurio, latin. it was anciently written
curtal, which perhaps is more proper; but dogs that had the
tails cut, being called curtal dogs, the word was vulgarly con.
ceived to mean originally to cut the tail, and was in time writ.
ten according to that notion.]
1. to cut off; to cut short ; to shorten.
i, that am curtail'd of all fair proportion,
deform’d, unfinish'd, sent before my time
into this breathing world. shakes). richard iii
then why should we ourselves abridge, -
and curtail our own privilege hudibrar
scribblers send us over their trash in prose and verse, wo
abominable curtailings and quaint modernisms. swift
this general employ, and expence of their time, would o
assuredly curtail and retrench the ordinary means of know-
ledge and erudition, as it would shorten the opportunities of
vice. j/oodward.
perhaps this humour of speaking no more than we mo
has so miserably curtailed some of our words; and, in fami,
writings and conversations, they often lose all but their first
syllables. adaison's spediator,
2. it has of before the thing cut off.
the count assured the court, that fa&amp; his antagonist had
taken a wrong name, having curtaied it of three letters; for
that his name was not fact, but faction. addison.
curtail dog. m. s. a dog lawed, or mutilated, according to
the forest laws, whose tail is cut off, and who is therefore
hindered in coursing. perhaps this word may be the original
of cur.
i, amazed, ran from her as a witch; and i think, if my
breast had not been made of faith, and my heart of steel, sh:
had transformed me to a curtail dog, and made mc turn to th’
wheel. shaospeare's comedy of erzur.
cu'rtain. m. s. scortina, latin.]
i. a cloath contracied or expanded at pleasure, to admit or ex-
clude the light; to conceal or discover any thing; to shade a
bed; to darken a room.
their curtains ought to be kept open, so as to renew the
air. arbuthnot on diet,
so through white curtains shot a tim’rous ray,
and op'd those eyes that must eclipse the day. pope.
thy hand, great dulness let’s the curtain fall,
and universal darkness buries all. pope.
2. to draw the curtain. to close it so as to shut out the
light, or conceal the object.
i must draw a curtain before the work for a while, and
keep your patience a little in suspence. burnet's theory,
once more i write to you, and this once will be the last:
the curtain will soon be drawn between my friend and me,
and nothing left but to wish you a long good night. pope.
3. to open it so as to discern the object.
so soon as the all cheering sun
should in the farthest east begin to draw
the shady curtain from aurora's bed. soakes, rom, and jul,
let them sleep, let them sleep on,
*till this stormy night be gone;
and th' eternal morrow dawn,
then the curtain will be drawn. crashaw,
4. [in fortification.] that part of the wall or rampart that lies
between two bastions. military diff.
the governour, not discouraged, suddenly of timber and
boards raised up a curtain tweive foot high, at the back of
his soldiers. kolk.
cu rtain-lect ure. m. s. [from curtain and leisure.] a re-
proof given by a wife to her husband in bed.
what endless brawls by wives are bred
the curtain-lediure makes a mournful bed. dryden's juv,
she ought to exert the authority of the curtain-losure, and,
if she finds him of a rebellious disposition, to tame him. addis,
to cu'rtain. v. a. [from the noun..] to inclose or accom-
modate with curtains.
now o'er one half the world
nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
the curtain'd sleep. shakspeare's matiith
the wand'ring prince and dido,
when with a happy storm they were surpriz'd,
and curtain'd with a counsel-keeping cave.
but in her temple's last reccis inclos'd,
on dulness' lap th’ anointed head repos'd :
him close she curtain'd round with vapours blew,
and soft besprinkled with cimmerian dew. pope.
cu'rtate,
shakespeare,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 541</div><p class="text">c us
-**
cu's rate distance. n.s. [in astronomy..] the distance of a
planet's place from the sun, reduced to the ecliptick.
cus tation. m. s. [from curto, to shorten, latin.] the in-
terval between a planet's distance from the sun and the curtate
distance. chambers.
cu'rtel ass e.
cu'r'telax.
cu'rtsy. see court esy. .
cu'rvated. adj. [curvatus, latin.] bent; crooked.
curvation. n.f. [curvo, latin.] the act of bending of
crooking.
cu'ry ature. m. s. [from curve.] crookedness; inflexion;
manner of bending.
it is bent after the manner of the catenarian curve, by
which it obtains that curvature that is safest for the included
narrow. cheyne's phil. prin.
flaccid it was beyond the activity of the muscle, and
, curvature of the officies, to give it a due tension. holder.
cur ve. adj. [curvus, latin.] crooked; bent; infle&amp;ted; not
streight. . . . . . . - - -
unless an intrinsick principle of gravity or attraction, may
make it describe a curve line about the attracting body. bentley.
curve. n. s. anything beat ; a flexure or crookedness of any
particular form. -
and as you lead it round, in artful curve;
with eye intentive mark the springing game. thomson.
to curv e. v. a. scurvo, latin.] to bend; to crook; to
inflect.
and the tongue is drawn back and curved.
to curve't. v. m. scorvettare, italian.]
1. to leap; to bound.
cry, holla to thy tongue, i pr’ythee: it curvets unsea-
sonably. - shakespeare's as you like it.
himself he on an earwig set,
yet scarce he on his back could get,
so oft and high he did curvet, * - -
'ere he himself could settle. drayton's nymphid.
seiz'd with unwonted pain, surpriz'd with fright,
the wounded steed curvets; and, rais'd upright,
lights on his feet before: his hoofs behind
spring up in air aloft, and lash the wind.
2. to frisk; to be licentious.
curv et. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. a leap ; a bound.
2. a frolick; a prank. -
curvili'near. adj. [curvus and linea, lat.]
1. consisting of a crooked line. -
the impulse continually draws the celestial body from its
rectilinear motion, and forces it into a curvilinear orbit; so
that it must be repeated cvery minute of time. cheyne.
2. composed of crooked lines.
cu'rv1t y. n.s.. [from curve..] crookedness.
the joined ends of that bone and the incus receding, make
a more acute angle at that joint, and give a greater curvity to
the posture of the officles. holder on speech.
cu'shion. n.s. [kusen, dutch; cousin, french..] a pillow
for the seat ; a soft pad placed upon a chair. - *
call claudius, and some other of my men;
i’ll have them sleep on ershions in my tent. shak. j. caesar.
if you are learn'd,
be not as common fools; if you are not,
let them have cushions by you. shakespeare's coriolanus.
but ere they sat, officious baucis lays
two cushions stuff d with straw, the seat to raise; -
coarse, but the best she had. dryden's fables.
an eastern king put a judge to death for an iniquitous sen-
tence; and ordered his hide to be stuffed into a cushion, and
placed upon the tribunal, for the son to fit on.
cu’s hioned. adj. [from cushion.]
ported by cushions.
many, who are cushioned upon thrones, would have re-
mained in obscurity. differtation on parties.
cusp. n.s. [cuspis, latin.] a term used to express the points
or horns of the moon, or other luminary. harris.
cu’s pated. adj. [from cuspis, latin.] a word expressing
cu's pidated. ; the leaves of a flower ending in a point.
quincy.
cu’s tard. m. s. [cw/lard, welsh.] a kind of sweetmeat
made by boiling eggs with milk and sugar ’till the whole
thickens into a mass. it is a food much used in city feasts.
he cram'd them, 'till their guts did ake,
with cawdle, cuffard, and plumb cake. hudibras.
now may’rs and shrieves all hush'd and satiate lay;
yet eat, in dreams, the cy?ard of the day.
cu’s tody. m. s. [custodia, latin.]
1. imprisonment; restraint of liberty.
the council remonstranced unto queen elizabeth the con-
spiracies against her life, and therefore they advised her, that
ihe should go less abroad weakly attended; but the queen an-
twered, she had rather be dead than put in custody. bacon.
for us enslav'd, is cosłody severe,
and stripes, and arbitrary punishment
inflicted 2 milton's paradise lost.
! see cutlass.
holder.
dryden's aeneis.
seated on a cushion; sup-
pope.
swift.
2. care; guardianship; charge. - - * .
under the custody and charge of the sons of merari, sail
be the boards of the tabernacle. num. iii. 36.
we being strangers here, how dar's thou trust
so great a charge from thine own custody. shakespeare.
an offence it were, rashly to depart out of the city com-
mitted to their custody. knoles.
there is generally but one coin stampt upon the occasion,
which is made a present to the person who is celebrated on it:
% this means the whole fame is in his own custody. addison.
efence; preservation; security.
there was prepared a fleet of thirty ships for the custody of
the narrow seas. bacon,
cu'stom. n.f. [cous/ume, french.]
1. habit; habitual practice.
blood and destruction shall be so in use, -
that mothers shall but smile, when they behold
their infants quarter'd by the hands of war; -
all pity choak'd with custom of fell deeds. shak. jul. caesar.
custom, a greater power than nature, seldom fails to
make them worship. - locke.
2. fashion; common way of a&amp;ting.
and the priest's custom with the people was, that when any
man offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while tie flesh
was in stething, with a flesh-hook of three teeth in his hands.
i samuel, ii.
3.
3. established manner. . . -
according to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was to
burn incense when he went into the temple of the lord. loke, i.
4. praciise of buying of certain reroons.
you say he is affodilous in his calling, and is he not grown
rich by it let him have you won, but not your votes. id.l.
5. application from buyers: as, this to a or has gova custon.
6. [in law. j. a law or right, not written, which, being esta-
blished by long use, and the con ent of coor on e^ors, has been,
and is, daily practised. we cannot say that this or that is a
custom, excep, we can justify that it hath contino so one
hundred years; yet, because that is hard to prove, it is enough
for the proof of a custom, if two or more can denose that they
heard their fathers say, that it was a custom all their time; and
that their fathers heard their fathers also sav, that it was like-
wise a custom in their time. if it is to be proved by record,
the continuance of a hundred years will serve. custom is
either general or particular: general, that which is current
through england ; particular is that which belongs to this of
that county ; as gavelkind to kent, or this or that lordship,
city, or town. custom differs from prescription ; for custom is
common to more, and prescription is particular to this or
that man : prescription may be for a far shorter time than
custom. - cowel.
7. tribute; tax paid for goods imported, or exported.
the residue of these ordinary finances be casual or uncer-
tain, as be the escheats and forfeitures, the customs, butlerage,
and imposts. a c27?.
those commodities may be dispersed, after having paid the
customs, in england. temple.
customs to steal is such a trivial thing,
that 'tis their charter to defraud their king. dryden,
strabo tells you, that britain bore heavy taxes, especially
the customs on the importation of the gallick trade. arbuthnot.
cu'stom house. m. s. the house where the taxes upon goods
imported or exported are collected.
some customhouse officers, birds of passage, and oppressive
thrifty squires, are the only thriving people amongst us. swift.
cu's tomable. adj. [from custom. j common; habitual ;
frequent.
cu's tom able ness. n.s.. [from customable.]
1. frequency; habit.
2. conformity to custom. - - - -
cu's tom ably. adv. [from customable.] according to custom.
kingdoms have customably been carried away by right of
succession, according to proximity of blood. hayward.
cu's tom arily. adv. [from customary.) habitually; commonly.
to call god to witness truth, or a lye perhaps, or to ap-
peal to him on every trivial occasion, in common discourse,
customarily without consideration, is one of the highest indig-
nities and affronts that can be offered him. ray.
cu'stomariness. n. s. [from customary..] frequency; com-
monness; frequent occurrence.
' a vice, which, for its guilt, may justify the sharpest, and
for its customarines; the frequentest invectives, which can be
made against it. government of the tongue.
cu’s tom ary. adj. [from custom.]
1. conformable to established custom; according to prescription.
pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices,
that i may be consul: i have here the customary gown. shakes.
several ingenious persons, whose assistance might be con-
ducive to the advance of real and useful knowledge, lay under
the prejudices of education and customary belief. glanv. scops.
2. habitual.
we should avoid the profane and irreverent use of god's
name, by cursing, or customary swearing, and take heed of the
neglect of his worship, or any thing belonging to it. tillotson.
3. usual;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 542</div><p class="text">o c u t
c u t.
3. usual; wonted.
- ev’n now i met him
with customary compliment, when he, ...
wafting his eyes to th’ contrary, and falling
a lip of much contempt, speeds from me. shakes care.
cu's romed. adj. [from custom.] usual; common; that to
which we are accustomed.
- no nat'ral exhalation in the sky,
no common wind, no customed event,
but they will pluck away its nat'ral cause,
and call them meteors, prodigies, and signs. shak. k. john.
cu's romer. m. s. [from custom.]
1. one who frequents any place of sale for the sake of purchasing.
one would think it overdone's house; for here be many
old customers. shakesp. measure for measure.
a wealthy poet takes more pains to hire
a flatt’ring audience, than poor tradesmen do
to persuade customers to buy their goods. roscommon.
lord strut has bespoke his liveries at lewis baboon's shop :
, don't you see how that old fox steals away your customers, and
turns you out of your business every day. arbuthnot.
those papers are grown a necessary part in coffeehouse
furniture, and may be read by customers of all ranks for curio-
sity or amusement. swift.
i shewed you a piece of black and white stuff, just sent from
the dyer, which you were pleased to approve of, and be my
customer for. swift,
2. a common woman. this sense is now obsolete.
i marry her —what, a customer ? pr’ythee, bear some cha-
rity to my wit: do not think it so unwholsome. shakes. othell.
cu’s trel. m. s.
1. a buckler-bearer.
2. a vessel for holding wine. - ainsworth.
to cut. pret. cut ; part, pass. cwt. [probably from the french
couteau, a knife.]
1. to penetrate with an edged instrument; to divide any con-
tinuity by a sharp edge. -
ah, cut my lace asuader, -
that my great heart may have some scope to beat,
or else i swoon with this dead killing news. shakes. r. iii.
and when two hearts were join’d by mutual love,
the sword of justice cuts upon the knot,
and severs 'em for ever. dryden's spanish fryar.
• some i have cut away with scissars. //seman's surgery.
2. to hew. -
thy servants can skill to cut timber in lebanon. 2 chro. ii.
3. to carve; to make by sculpture.
why should a man, whose blood is warm within,
sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster : shakespeare.
the triumphal is defaced by time; but the plan of it is
neatly cut upon the wall of a neighbouring building. addison.
4. to form any thing by cutting.
and they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
wires. ex. xxxix. 3.
5. to divide by passing through. -
before the whistling winds the vessels fly,
with rapid swiftness cut the liquid way,
and reach gerestus at the point of day.
6. to pierce with any uneasy sensation.
the man was cut to the heart with these consolations. addis.
7. to divide packs of cards. -
supine they in their heav'n remain,
exempt from passion and from pain;
and frankly leave us, human clves,
pope's odyssey.
to cut and shuffle for ourselves. prior.
we sure in vain the cards condemn, -
ourselves both cut and shuffled them. prior.
take a fresh pack, nor is it worth our grieving
who cuts or shuffles with our dirty leaving. granville.
8. to intersect; to cross: as, one line cuts another at right
angles.
9. or down. to fell ; to hew down.
all the timber whereof was cut down in the mountains of
cilicia. knolles.
io. to cut down. to excel; to overpower: a low phrase.
so great is his natural eloquence, that he cuts down the finest
orator, and destroys the best contrived argument, as soon as
ever he gets himself to be heard. addison's count tariff.
# 1. to cut off. to separate from the other parts by cutting.
and they caught him, and cut off his thumbs. jud. i. 6.
12. to cut off. to destroy ; to extirpate ; to put to death
untimely. -
all spain was first conquered by the romans, and filled
with colonies from them, which were still increased, and the
native spaniards still cut off. spenser on ireland.
were i king,
i should cut off the nobles for their lands. shakesp. macbeth.
this great commander was suddenly cut off by a fatal stroke,
given him with a small contemptible instrument. howel.
irenaeus was likewise cut off by martyrdom. addison.
ill-fated prince too negligent of life
cut off in the fresh, ripening prime of manhood,
even in the pride of life. philips's distres? mother,
13. to cut off. to rescind; to separate; to take away.
7
fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
how to cut off some charge in legacies. shakes. jul c.
- he that cuts off twenty years of life, jul, cas
cuts off so many years of fearing death. shakes). fol.
#. ... thy god, o, he be: sh jul cofir,
thee he regards not, owns not, hath cut off
quite from his people. milton', 4.
the proposal of a recompence from men, cuts off the so
of future rewards. . . so.
14. to cut off. to intercept; to hinder from union *
ieturn. - • "...r 4,
the king of this island, a wise man and a great worris,
handled the matter so, as he cut off their land forces from o
ships. - - - bacon,
. his party was so much inferior to the enemy, that it wojo
infallibly be cut off.
15. to cut off. to put an end to ; to obviate.
to cut off contentions, commissioners were appointed to
- make certain the limits. . . . . . - --- hayward
to cut off all further mediation and interposition; the ki.
* conjured him to give over all thoughts of excuse. clarini.
it may compose our unnatural feuds, and cut off frequent
occasions of brutal rage and intemperance. addison,
16. to cut off. to withold. -
we are concerned to cut off all occasion from those who
seek occasion, that they may have whereof to accuse us. rogar,
17.7% cut off. to preclude. o” or
every one who lives in the pracice of any voluntary sm
. astually cuts himself off from the benefits and profession o
christianity. - aadon,
this only object of my real care, -
cut off from hope, abandon'd to despair,
... ..in some few posting fatal hours is hurl’d
from wealth, from pow'r, from love, and from the world.p.
why should those who wait at altars be cut off from par-
taking in the general benefits of law, or of nature. swift,
18. ho cut off. to interrupt; to silence.
it is no grace to a judge to shew quickness of conceit in
cutting off evidence or counsel too short. - bacon,
19. to cut off. to apostrophise; to abbreviate.
no vowel can be cut off before another, when we cannot
sink the pronunciation of it. - - dryden,
20. to cut out. to shape; to form.
by the pattern of mine own thoughts i cut out
the purity of his. - shakesh. winter'; 7.,
i, for my part, do not like images cut out in juniper, or
other garden stuff: they be for children. aus),
o “there is a large table at montmorancy cut out of the thick-
ness of a vine-stock. - timple.
the antiquaries being but indifferent taylors, they wrange
prodigiously about the cutting out the toga. arbuthnot on coins.
they have a large forest cut out into walks, extremely thick
and gloomy. addison,
21. to cut out. to scheme; to contrive. o
having a most pernicious fire kindled within the very
bowcls of his own forest, he had work enough cut him out to
extinguish it. - howel,
every man had cut out a place for himself in his own
‘thoughts: i could reckon up in our army two or three lord-
treasurers. addison,
22. to cut out. to adapt.
… you know i am not cut out for writing a treatise, nor have
a genius to pen any thing exactly. rymer,
23. to cut out. to debar.
. . . i am cut out from any thing but common acknowledgments,
or common discourse. pope,
24. to cut out. to excel; to outdo.
c.
arendon,
25. to cut short. to hinder from proceeding by sudden in-
terruption.
thus much he spoke, and more he would have said,
but the stern heroe turn’d aside his head, -
and cut him short. dryden's 42ntii,
achilles cut him short; and thus replied,
my worth allow'd in words, is in effect deny’d. dryden.
26. to cut short. to abridge: as, the soldiers were cut short
of their pay.
27. to cut up. to divide an animal into convenient pieces.
the boar’s intemperance, and the note upon him after-
wards, on the cutting him up, that he had no brains in his
head, may be moralized into a sensual man. l’estrange.
28. to cut up. to eradicate.
who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper-roots for
their meat. -
this doctrine cuts up all government by the roots.
to cut. v. n. -
1. to make way by dividing; to divide by passing through,
when the teeth are ready to cut, the upper part is rubbed
with hard substances, which infants, by a natural instine,
affect. arbuthnot.
2. to pcroorm the operation of lithotomy. -
he saved the lives of thousands by his manner of culting
for the stone. pope.
3. to interfere: as, a horse that cuts.
cut. part. adj. prepared for use : a metaphor from hewn into
cos
lock.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 543</div><p class="text">c u t
c u t
o
sets of phrases, cut and dry, ~ :
evermore thy tongue supply. swift.
. m. s. [from the noun.] -
o: ao of a sharp or edged instrument; the blow of an
ax or sword. - -
2. the impression or separation of continuity, made by an edge
or sharp instrument; distinguished from that made by perfo-
ration with a pointed instrument.
3. a wound made by cutting. -
sharp weapons, according to the force, cut into the bone
many ways, which cuts are called sodes, and are reckoned
among the fractures. //iseman's surgery.
4. a channel made by art. - • * * *
this great cut or ditch sesostris the rich king of egypt,
and long after him ptolomeus philadelphus, purposed to have
made a great deal wider and deeper, and thereby to have let
in the red sea into the mediterranean. knolles.
5. a part cut off from the rest. -
suppose a board to be ten foot long, and one broad, one cut
is reckoned so many foot. mortimer's husbandry.
6. a small particle; a shred. -
it hath a number of short cuts or shreddings, which may
be better called wishes than prayers. hooker.
7. a lot made by cutting a stick.
my lady zelmane and my daughter mopsa may draw cuts,
and the shortest cut speak first. sidney.
a man may as reasonably draw cuts for his tenets, and re-
gulate his persuasion by the cast of a die. - locke.
8. a near passage, by which some angle is cut off. -
the ignorant took heart to enter upon this great calling,
and instead of their cutting their way to it through the know-
ledge of the tongues, the fathers and councils, they have
taken another and a shorter cut. . south.
there is a shorter cut, an easier passage.
the evidence of my sense is simple and immediate, and
therefore i have but a shorter cut thereby to the assent to
the truth of the things so evidenced. hale's origin of asankind.
but the gentleman would needs see me part of my way,
and carry me a short cut through his own ground, which saved
me half a mile’s riding. swift's examiner.
9. a picture cut or carved upon a stamp of wood or copper,
and impressed from it. . - -
in this form, according to his description, he is set forth in
the prints or cuts of martyrs by ceyallerius. brown.
it is, i believe, used improperly by addison. -
madam dacier, from some old cuts of terence, fancies
that the larva or persona of the roman actors was not only a
wizard for the face, but had false hair to it. addison on italy.
io. the stamp on which a picture is carved, and by which it is
impressed.
11. the act or practice of dividing a pack of cards.
how can the muse her aid impart,
unskill'd in all the terms of art
or in harmonious numbers put
the deal, the shuffle, and the cut. swift.
12. fashion; form; shape; manner of cutting into shape.
their cloths are after such a pagan cut too,
that, sure, they’ve worn out christendom. shakes h. viii.
his tawny beard was th' equal grace
both of his wisdom and his face;
in cut and dye so like a tile, -
a sudden view it would beguile. - hudibras.
they were so familiarly acquainted with him as to know
the very cut of his beard. - stillingfleet.
children love breeches, not for their cut or case, but be-
cause the having them is a mark or step towards manhood. locke.
a third desires you to observe well the toga on such a re-
verse, and asks you whether you can in conscience believe the
sleeve of it to be of the true roman cut. addison.
sometimes an old fellow shall wear this or that sort of cut
in his cloaths with great integrity. addison's spectator.
wilt thou buy there some high heads of the newest cut for
my daughter. - arbuthnot's history of john bull.
13. it seems anciently to have signified a fool or cully. to cut
still signifies to cheat, in low language. .
send her money, knight: if thou has her not in the end,
call me cut. . . . shakespeare's twelfth night.
14. cut and long tail. a proverbial expression for men of all
kinds; it is borrowed from dogs,
he will maintain you like a gentlewoman.—
ay, that i will, come cut and long tail, under the degree of a
squire. - shakespeare's merry jwives of //indsor.
- at quintin he, -
in honour of this brid altee,
hath challeng’d either wide countee:
come cut and long tail; for there be
six batchelors as bold as he. ben. johnson's underwood.
cut a neous, adj. [from cutis, latin.) relating to the skin.
this ferous, nutritious mass is more readily circulated it to
the cutaneous or remotest parts of the body. floyer on humours.
some sorts of cutaneous eruptions are occasioned by fecdin
much on acid unripe fruits and farinaceous substances. arliton.
* *
**
vol. i.
decay of piety.
cut1cle. m. s. [cuticula, latin.]
1. the first and outermost covering of the body, commonly
called the scarf-skin. this is that soft skin which rises in a
blisler upon any burning, or the application of a blistering-
plaister. it sticks close to the surface of the true skin, to
which it is also tied by the vessels which nourish it, though
they are so small as not to be seen. when the scarf skin is
examined with a microscope, it appears to be made up of
several lays of exceeding small scales. souincy.
in each of the very fingers there are bones and gristles, and
ligaments and membranes, and muscles and tendons, and
neves and arteries, and veins and skin, and cuticle and
nail. " - bently’s sermons.
2. a thin skin formed on the surface of any liquor.
when any saline liquor is evaporated to cuticle, and let
cool, the salt concretes in regular figures; which argues that
the particles of the salt, before they concreted, floated in the
liquor at equal distances in rank and file. newton's opt.
cut i'cular, adj. [from cutis, latin.] belonging to the skin.
cuth, signifies knowledge or skill. so cuthwin is a knowing
conqueror; cuthred a knowing counseltor; cuthbert, famous
for skill. much of the same nature are sophocles and so-
phianus. gib. camden.
cu'tlass, n. s. scoutela, french. this word is written some-
times, cutlace, sometimes cuttleax : in shakespeare, curtleaxe ;
and in pope, cutlash.] a broad cutting sword: the word is
much in use among the seamen.
were’t not better
that i did suit me all points like a man?
a gallant curtlax upon my thigh,
a boar-spear in my hand. shakes. as you like it.
to the lodgments of his herd he run,
where the fat porkets slept beneath the sun;
of two his cutlash launch'd the spouting blood,
. . these quarter'd, fing'd, and fix'd on forks of wood. pope.
cut ler. m. s. [coutelier, french..] one who makes or sells
knives. * -
a paultry ring
that she did give, whose poesy was
for all the world like cutler's poetry
upon a knife; love me, and leave me not. shakespeare.
in a bye outler's shop he bought a tenpenny knife: so cheap
was the instrument of this great attempt. j/otton.
he chose no other instrument than an ordinary knife, which
he bought of a common cutler. clarendon.
cutpurse. m. s. scut and purs...] one who steals by the
method of cutting purses: a common practice when men wore
their purses at their girdles, as was once the custom. a thief;
a robber.
to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is
necessary for a cutpurse. shakspeare's j/inter's tale.
a vice of kings,
a cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
that from a shelf the precious diadem stole,
and put it in his pocket. -shakoffeare’s hamlet.
was there no felony, no bawd, -
cutpurse, nor burglary abroad hudibras.
if we could imagine a whole nation to be cutburses and
robbers, would there then be kept that square dealing and
equity in such a monstrous den of thieves. bentley's sermons.
cutter. m. s. [from cut j
1. an agent or instrument that cuts any thing.
2. a nimble boat that cuts the water.
3. [incisores.] the teeth that cut the meat.
the molares, or grinders are behind, nearest the center of
motion,because there is a greater strength or force required to
chew the meat than to bite a piece; and the cutters before,
that they may be ready to cut off a morsel from any solid
food, to be transmitted to the grinders. ray on the creation.
4. an officer in the exchequer that provides wood for the tal-
lies, and cuts the sum paid upon them; and then casts the
same into the court to be written upon. cowel.
cut-throat. n.f. [cut and throat.] a ruffian; a murderer;
a butcher of men; an assassin.
will you then suffer these robbers, cut-throats, base people,
gathered out of all the corners of christendom, to waste your
countries, spoil your cities, murder your people, and trouble
all your seas - knolles.
perhaps the cut throat may rather take his copy from the
parisian massacre, one of the horridest instances of barbarous
inhumanity that ever was known. south.
the russian robbers by no justice aw’d,
and unpaid cut-throat soldiers are abroad;
those venal souls, who, harden’d in each ill,
to save complaints and prosecution, kill. dryden's juv.
cu’r-thr oa.t. adj. cruel; inhuman; barbarous,
if to take above fifty in the hundred be extremity, this in
truth can be none other than cut throat and abominable
dealing. carew's survey of cornwall.
cu’, ‘r ing. m. s. [from cut.] a piece cut off; a chop.
the burning of the cuttings of vines, and casting them upon
land, doth much good. bacon's natural hisory.
6 e many<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 544</div><p class="text">c y m
c z a
many are propagated above ground by slips or cuttings. ray.
cu' ttle, n s. [spie.j a film, which, when he is pursued
by a fish of prey, throws out a black liquor, by which he
darkens the water and escapes.
it is somewhat strange, that the blood of all birds and
beasts, and fishes, should be of a red colour, and only the
blood of the cuttle should be as black as ink. bacon.
he that uses many words for the explaining any subject,
doth, like the cuttle fish, hide himself for the most part in his
own ink. ray on the creation.
cutti.e. n.s.. [from cuttle..] a foul-mouthed fellow ; a fel-
low who blackens the chara&amp;ler of others. hanmer.
away, you cutpurse rascal ; you filthy bung, away : by
this wine i'll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps, if you
play the saucy cuttle with me. shakesp. henry iv.
cycie. m. s. soyclus, latin; xxxg2.]
1. a circle.
2. a round of time; a space in which the same revolutions
begin again ; a periodical space of time.
we do more commonly use these words, so as to stile a
lesser space a cycle, and a greater by the name of period; and
you may not improperly call the beginning of a large period
the epocha thereof. holder on time.
3. a method, or account of a method continued 'till the same
course begins again.
we thought we should not attempt an unacceptable work,
if here we endeavoured to present our gardeners with a com-
plete cycle of what is requisite to be done throughout every
month of the year. evelyn's kalendar.
4. imaginary orbs; a circle in the heavens.
how build, unbuild, contrive
to save appearances ; how gird the sphere
with centrick and excentrick, scribl’d o'er
cycle and epicycle, orb in orb milton.
cycloid. m. s. [from xv-xcion;, of xvkxe and ogp, shape.]
a geometrical curve, of which the genesis may be conceived
by imagining a nail in the circumference of a wheel: the line
which the nail describes in the air, while the wheel revolves
in a right line, is the cycloid.
cycloidal. adj. [from cycloid..] relating to a cycloid; as
the cycloidal space, is the space contained between the cycloid
and its substance. - chambers.
cyclop ædi’a. n. s. [xoxx@p and tziess...] a circle of know-
ledge; a course of the sciences.
cy'gnet. n.s.. [from cycnus, latin.] a young swan.
i am the cygnet to this pale faint swan,
who chaunts a doleful hymn to his own death. sh. k. join. -
so doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
keeping them pris’ners underneath her wings. shak. h. vi.
cygnets, from grey, turn white. . . bacon's natural history.
young cygnets are good meat, if fatted with oats; but fed
with weeds, they taste fishy. mortimer's husbandry.
cy"linder. m. s. [xsawłow.] a body having two flat surfaces
and one circular.
the quantity of water which every revolution does carry,
according to any inclination of the cylinder, may be easily
found. //ilkins.
the square will make you ready for all manner of com-
partments, bases, pedistals, plots, and buildings; your cylin-
der for vaulted turrets, and round buildings. peacham.
cyli'ndr1cal. r adj. [from cylinder.] partaking of the na-
cyli'n drick. ; ture of a cylinder ; having the form of a
cylinder.
minera ferri stalactitia, when several of the cylindrick striae
are contiguous, and grow together into one sheaf, is called
brushiron ore. j/oodward's natural history.
obstructions must be most incident to such parts of the
body where the circulation and the elastick fibres are both
smallest, and those are glands, which are the extremities of
arteries formed into cylindrical canals.
cy ma'r. m. s. [properly written sular.] a slight covering; a
scarf.
her comely limbs composed with decent care,
her body shaded with a slight cymar; }
her bosom to the view was only bare. dryden.
cyma ttum. m. s. [lat. from xv. 3riov, a little wave..] a
member of architecture, whereof one half is convex, and the
other concave. there are two sorts, of which one is hollow
below, as the other is above. harris.
in a cornice the gola, or cymatium of the corona, the
coping, the modillions, or dentelli, make a noble show by
their graceful projections. spectator.
r
arbuthnot on aliments. .
cy'mbal. m. s. symbalum, latin.]. a musical instrument
the trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes, ----
tabors and cymbals, and the shouting romans,
make the sun dance. shakespeare's coriolin;
if mirth should fail, i’ll busy her with cares, 4711.
silence her clamorous voice with louder wars;
trumpets and drums shall fright her from the throne
as sounding cymbals aid the lab’ring moon. dod. *.
cyna'n thropy. n. s. [xvoy ovv62, and 2,9627&amp;’.] a specisio
madness in which men have the qualities of dogs. o
cynarcto'machy, [xvov, 25%los, p.2x?..] a word coin'd b
butler, to denote bear-baiting with a dog. y
that some occult design doth lye
in bloody cynarelomachy,
is plain enough to him that knows,
how saints lead brothers by the nose. hudibra,
cyn ege"ticks. n.s. [avoixx.] the art of hunting : u.
art of training and hunting with dogs. o 2.
there are extant in greek, four books of cynegotifs, or ve.
nation. brown's wulgar erreur,
§:::::::: [xyvix@..] having the qualities of a do..
cynick. currish; brutal; snarling; satirical.
he doth believe that some new fangled wit (it is his conial
phrase) will some time or other find out his art. j/ilkins
cynick, n. s. [xisvix@p.]. a philosopher of the snailing or cus.
rish sort; a follower of diogenes; a rude man; a snarlers
a misanthrope. &gt;
how vilely doth this cynick rhime 2–
get you hence, firrah; saucy fellow, hence. shakespeare
without these precautions the man degenerates into a 9.
mick, the woman into a coquette; the man grows sullen and
morose, the woman impertinent and fantastical. addison.
cynosu re. m. s. [from kosovoz.] the star near the north.
pole, by which sailors steer.
towers and battlements it sees
bosom'd high in tufted trees,
where perhaps some beauty lies,
or -
c -
the cynosure of neighbouring eyes. . moon
cyon. see cion. -
gather cyons for graffs before the buds sprout. evelyn.
cypress-tree. [cupresus, latin.]
1. the opress is a tall strait tree, produced with great diff.
culty. its fruit is of no use : its leaves are bitter, and the
very smell and shade of it are dangerous. hence the romans
looked upon it to be a fatal tree, and made use of it at fune-
rals, and in mournful ceremonies. the cypress-tree is always
green, and never either rots or is worm-eaten. calmet.
in ivory coffers i have stufft my crowns;
in cypres; chests my arras counterpanes. shakespears,
he taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengthentifi
for himself among the trees of the forest. j. kiiv. 14.
poplars and alders ever quivering play’d,
and nodding opres; form'd a fragrant shade, pope's 0}s.
2. being anciently used in funerals, it is the emblem of
mourning.
- poison be their drink,
their sweetest shade a grove of cypres; trees. shak, hon.vi.
cyprus. n.s. [i suppose from the place where it was made;
or corruptly from cypress, as being used in mourning.] a
thin transparent black stuff.
lawn as white as driven snow,
cyprus black as e'er was crow.
a cyprus, not a bosom,
hides my poor heart 1 shakespeare.
cyst. { m. s. [xvors.] a bag containing some morbid
cy'stis. v matter.
in taking it out the cysis broke, and shewed itself by its
matter to be a meliceris. jwiseman's surgery.
there may be a consumption, with a purulent spitting,
when the vomica is contained in a cyst or bag; upon the
breaking of which the patient is commonly suffocated.
arbuthnot on diet,
cy'stick. adj. [from cys', a bag..] contained in a bag.
the bile is of two sorts; the cystick, or that contained in
shakosh. winter's tak.
the gall-bladder, a sort of repository for the gall; or the hepa-
tick, or what flows immediately from the liver. a, buthnot.
cysto tomy. m. s. [xssis and rigwo.] the aet or pracice of
opening incysted tumours, or cutting the bag in which any
morbid matter is contained.
czar. m. s. [a sclavonian word, written more properly
tzar.] the title of the emperour of russia.
czarina, n.s.. [from czar.] the empress of russia,

alphasectend
