
<div class="page"><div class="seq">page 895</div><p class="text">g.
g a d
has two sounds, one from the greek t, and the
latin, which is called that of the hard g, because
it is formed by a pressure somewhat hard of the
forepart of the tongue against the upper gum. this
sound g retains before a, o, u, l, r, as, gate, go, gull.
the other sound, called that of the soft g, resembles that of
j, and is commonly, though not always, found before e, i ;
as, gem, gibbet. before n, at the end of a word, g is com-
monly melted away; as in the french, from which these words
are commonly derived: thus, for benign, malign, condign, we
pronounce benine, maline, condine. it is often filent in the
middle of words before h; as, might. the saxon is, 3, seems
to have had generally the sound of y consonant; whence gate
is by rusticks still pronounced yate.
ga bar pine. m. s. [gavardina, italian.] a coarse frock; any
mean dress.
my best way is to creep under his gabardine; there is no
other shelter hereabout. shakespeare's tempest.
you call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog,
and spit upon my jewish gabardine, shakesp. mer. of venice.
the knight did straight submit,
and laid his weapons at her feet:
next he disrob'd his gabardine,
and with it did himself resign. hudibras.
ta gabble. v. n. [gallare, italian ; gabberen, dutch..]
1. to make an inarticulate noise.
when thou could'st not, savage,
shew thine own meaning, but would'st gabble like
a thing most brutish, i endow'd thy purposes
with words that made them known. shakes). temps.
flocks of fowl, that when the tempests roar,
with their hoarse gabbling seek the filent shoar. dryd. æn.
2. to prate loudly without meaning.
have you no wit, manners, nor honesty, but to gabble like
tinkers at this time of night : do ye make an alehouse of my
lady's house? shakespeare's twelfth night.
which made some think, when he did gabble,
th’ had heard three labourers of babel. hudibras.
such a rout, and such a rabble,
run to hear jack pudding gabble. swift.
ga’bbi.e. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. inarticulate noise like that of brute animals.
not to know what we speak one to another, so we seem to
know, is to know straight our purpose: chough's language,
gabble enough, and good enough. shak. all's well that ends well.
2. loud talk without meaning.
forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud
among the builders; each to other calls,
not understood. milton's paradise lost.
ga'bbler. m. s. [from gabble.] a prater; a chattering
fellow.
ga'bel. n. s. [gabelle, french ; gabello, italian ; 3apel, saxon,
a tribute.] an excise; a tax. -
the gabels of naples are very high on oil, wine, and to-
bacco. addison on italy.
ga bion. m. s. [french.j. a wicker basket which is filled
with earth to make a fortification or intrenchment.
his battery was defended all along with galions, and casks
filled with sand. knolles.
ga'ble. n. s. [gaval, welsh; gable, french.] the sloping
roof of a building.
take care that all your brick-work be covered with the
tiling, according to the new way of building, without gable
ends, which are very heavy, and very apt to let the water into
the brick-work. mortimer's husbandry.
gad. n.s. [zab, saxon; gaddur, islandick, a club.]
1. a wedge or ingot of steel.
flemish steel is brought down the rhine to dort, and other
parts, some in bars, and some in gads; and therefore called
flemish steel, and sometimes gad steel. moxon's mech. exer.
2. it seems to be used by shakespeare for a stile or graver, [from
3ab, saxon, a goad.]
i will go get a leaf of brass,
• and with a gad of steel will write these words. shakesp.
to gad. v. n. [derived by skinner from gadfly; by junius
from gadaw, welsh, to forsake; thought by others only the
preterite of the old word agaan, to go..] . to ramble about
without any settled purpose; to rove looiely and idly.
how now, my headstrong, where have you been gadding?
—where i have learnt me to repent.
- shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
give the water no passage, neither a wicked woman liberty
to gad abroad. ecclus, xxv. 25.
the lesser devils arose with ghastly rore,
and thronged forth about the world to gad;
each land they fill’d, river, stream and snore. fairfax.
envy is a gadding passion, and walketh the streets, and aoth
not keep home.
gad not abroad at ev'ry quest and call
of an untrained hope or passion;
to court each place or fortune that doth fall,
is wantonness in contemplation. herbert.
thee, shepherd, thee the woods and desart caves,
with wild thyme and the gadding vine o'ergrown,
and all their echo's moan. - milton.
a fierce loud buzzing breeze; their flings draw blood,
and drive the cattle gadding through the wood. dryden.
she wreaks her anger on her rival's head;
with furies frights her from her native home,
and drives her gadding, round the world to roam. dryden.
there's an ox lost, and this coxcomb runs a gadding after
wild fowl. l’estrange.
no wonder their thoughts should be perpetually shifting
from what disgusts them, and seek better entertainment in
more pleasing objects, after which they will unavoidably be
gadding. locke.
gal der. n. s. [from gad.] a rambler: one that runs much
abroad without business.
a drunken woman, and a gadder abroad, causeth great an-
ger, and she will not cover her own shame. exclus. xxvi. 8.
ga'ddingly. adv. [from gad.]. in a rambling, roving man-
ner. * .
ga(dfly. m. s. [gad and fly; but by skinner, who makes it the
original of gad; it is called goadfly. supposed to be originally
from goad, in saxon 3ab, and fly.] a fly that when he stings
the castle makes them gad or run madly about; the breese.
the fly called the gadfly breedeth of somewhat that swimmeth
upon the top of the water, and is most about ponds. bacon.
light fly his slumbers, if perchance a flight
of angry gadflies fasten on the herd. thomson's summer.
gaff. n. s. a harpoon or large hook. ainsworth.
gaff er. m. s. [3erene, companion, saxon.] a word of
respect now obsolete, or applied only in contempt to a mean
erson.
p for gaffer treadwell told us by the bye,
excessive sorrow is exceeding dry.
ga(ffles. n. s. [3apelucar, spears, saxon.]
1. artificial spurs put upon cocks when they are set to fight.
2. a steel contrivance to bend cross-bows. ainsworth.
to ga.g. v. n. [from gaghel, dutch, the palate, minshew.) to
stop the mouth with something that may allow to breathe, but
hinder to speak.
he's out of his guard already : unless you laugh and mini-
ster occasion to him, he is gagg'd. shakesp. twelfth night,
there foam'd rebellious logick, gagg'd and bound. pope.
gag. n.s.. [from the verb.] something put into the mouth to
hinder speech or eating.
some, when the kids their dams too deeply drain,
with gags and muzzles their soft mouths restrain. dryden.
your woman would have run up stairs before me; but i
have secured her below with a gag in her chaps. dryden.
gage. m. s. [gage, french.]
1. a pledge; a pawn ; a caution ; any thing given in security.
he, when the shamed shield of slain sansfoy
he spy'd, with that same fairy champion's page,
he to him leapt ; and that same envious gage,
of victor's glory from him snatcht away.
there i throw my gage
disclaiming here the kindred of a king, -
and lay aside my high blood's royalty. , , shakoff. rich. ii.
there is my gage, the manual seal of death,
that marks thee out for hell. shakesp. rich. ii.
they from their mothers breasts poor orphans rend,
nor without gages to the needy lend. sandys.
i am made the cautionary pledge, .
the gage and hostage of your keeping it. southern's *::::
ut
bacon.
gay's pastorals,
fairy queen.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 896</div><p class="text">g a i
g. a. i
but fince it was decreed, auspicious king, .
in britain's right that thou should'st wed the main,
heav'n, as a gage, would cast some previous thing,
and therefore doom'd that lawson should be slain. prydo.
in any truth, that gets not posseshon of our minds by self-
evidence or demonstration, the arguments, that gain it assent,
are the vouchers and gage of its probability. locke.
2. a measure; a rule of measuring.
one judges, as the weather dictates, right
the poem is at noon, and wrong at night;
another judges by a surer gage,
an author's principles, or parentage. 1%ung.
to ga.g.e. v. a. [gager, french.] -
1. to wager; to depone as a wager; to impawn; to give as a
caution, pledge, or security.
a moiety competent
was gaged by our king. shakespeare's hamlet.
he found the turkish merchants making merry : unto
these merchants he gave due salutations, gaging his faith for
their safety, and they likewise to him. knolles's history.
2. to bind by some caution or surety; to engage.
my chief care
is to come fairly off from the great debts
wherein my time, something too prodigal,
hath left me gaged. shakespeare.
3. to measure; to take the contents of any vessel of liquids par-
ticularly. more properly gauge. see gauge.
we shall see your bearing.
—nay, but i bar to-night: you shall not gage me
by what we do to-night. shakesp. merchant of venice.
to ga. ggle. v. n. [gagen, gagelen, dutch..] to make noise
like a goose. -
birds prune their feathers, geese gaggle, and crows seem to
call upon rain; which is but the comfort they receive in the
relenting of the air. bacon's natural history.
may fat geese gaggle with melodious voice,
and ne'er want gooseberries or apple-sauce. king.
gatly. adv. [from gay.]
1. airily; cheerfully.
2. splendidly. see gayly.
gain. n.s. [gain, french.]
1. profit; advantage: contrary to loss.
but what things were gain to me, those i counted loss for
chris’. phil. iii. 7.
besides the purpose it were now, to teach how victory should
be used, or the gains thereof communicated to the general
content. raleigh's effays.
havock and spoil, and ruin are my gain. amilton.
it is in praise of men as in gettings and gains; for light
gains make heavy purses; for light gains come thick, whereas
great come but now and then. bacon's essays.
this must be made by some governor upon his own private
account, who has a great stock that he is content to turn that
way, and is invited by the gains. temple.
compute the gains of his ungovern'd zeal,
ill suits his cloth the praise of railing well. dryden.
folly fights for kings or dives for gain. pope.
2. interest; lucrative views.
that, sir, which serves for gain,
and follows but for form,
will pack, when it begins to rain,
and leave thee in the storm. shakespeare's king lear.
3. unlawful advantage.
did i make a gain of you by any of them whom i sent unto
you ? 2 cor. xii. 17.
if pride, if envy, if the lust of gain,
if mad ambition in thy bosom reign, :
thou boast'st, alas! thy sober sense in vain. fitzgerald.
4. ou. in a comparative computation; any thing opposed
to iols.
to gain. v. a. [gagner, french.]
1. to obtain as profit or advantage.
egypt became agained ground by the muddy and limeous
matter brought down by the nilus, which settled by degrees
into a firm land. brown's vulgar errours.
he gains, to live as man,
higher degree of life. milton.
hatreinforcement we may gain from hope. milton.
2. to win ; not to lose.
a leper once he lost, and gain’d a king. milton.
3. to have the overplus in comparative computation.
if you have two vessels to fill, and you empty one to fill the
other, you gain nothing by that. burnet's theory of the earth.
4. to obtain; to procure; to receive.
i acceptance found, which gain'd
this answer from the gracious voice divine. milton.
that side some small refle&amp;ion gains
qf glimm'ring air, less vex'd with tempest loud. milton.
lf such a tradition were endeavoured to be set on foot, it is
**asy to imagine how it should at first gain entertainment;
but much more difficult to conceive however it shouji.
to be universally propagated. tillotson's sermons.
for fame with toil we gain, but i -
sure some to vex, but . ill to o ease,
5. to obtain increase of any thing allotted.” pot.
i know that ye would gain the time, because ves he ki
is gone from me. y j. “sin
6. to obtain whatever, good or bad. an. ii. 8,
ye should not have loosed from crete,
harm and loss.
7. to win against opposition.
they who were sent to the other pass,
ance, gained it.
and have gained this
oi, xxvii, 21.
after a short resist-
fat fees from the defended umbrian draws, clarendon,
and only gains the wealthy client's cause, doo,
q love! for sylvia let me gain the prize, olo pes
and make my tongue victorious as her eyes. p
8. to draw into any interest or party. oft,
come, with presents, laden from the port,
to gratify the queen and gain the court. dryden', wirril
if pyrrhus must be wrought to pity, &amp; “
no woman does it better than yourself:
if you gain him, i shall comply of course. 4. philip,
9. to obtain as a wooer. -
he never shall find out fit mate, but such
* as some misfortune brings him, or mistake,
or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
through her perversen’’, but shall see her gain a
by a far worse. o milion
io. to reach ; to attain. --------,
the west still glimmers with some streaks of day:
now spurs the lated traveller apace,
to gain the timely inn. shakosheare's macht,
death was the post, which i almost did gain:
shall i once more be tost into the main : waller,
sun sound his praise
in thy eternal course, both when thou climb's,
and when high noon hait gain'd, and when thou fall's,
milton,
we came to the roots of the mountain, and had a very
troublesome march to gain the top of it. addison on ias,
thus sav'd from death, they gain the phestan shores,
with shatter'd vessels and disabled oars. pope's 0ds,
11. to gain over. to draw to another party or interest.
the court of hanover should have endeavoured togain over
those who were represented as their enemies. swift.
to gain. v. n.
1. to grow rich; to have advantage; to be advanced in inte-
rest or happiness.
thou hast taken usury and increase, and thou has greedily
gained of thy neighbours by extortions. ezek. xxii. 11.
2. to encroach; to come forward by degrees: with on.
when watchful herons leave their wat'ry fland,
and mounting upward with eleeed flight,
gain on the skies, and soar above the fight. dryd. firs.
so on the land while here the ocean gains,
in other parts it leaves wide sandy plains. po,
3. to get ground; to prevail against: with on. - -
the english have not only gained upon the venetian into
levant, but have their cloth in venice itself. adijon,
4. to obtain influence with: with on.
my good behaviour had gained so far on the emperor, *
i began to conceive hopes of liberty. -
gain, adj. [an old word now out of use..] handy,”
dexterous. prijate to the accidence.
ga'1ner. m. s. [from gain.] one who receives profit or ad-
vantage. -
". client, besides retaining a good conscience." o
a gainer, and by no means can be at any loss, * seeing, if: .
composition be overhard, he may relieve himselfo
to his oath. bacon's off of alienatio
lf what i get in empire '; sophy
i lose in fame, i think myself no gainer. donlani .
he that loses anything, and gets wisdom by *,” o
by the loss. l *:::
by trade, we are as great gainers by the commodio. o
countries as of our own nation. addison's frobias.
ga'1nful. adj. [gain and full.]
1. advantageous; profitable. • * ---&gt; -
he o dazzle his eyes, and bait him in * o
proposal of some gainful purchase, some rich match, 0 south.
tageous project. f
2. lucrative; productive of money. of hardio,
nor o he merchants gainful caro. dryden's hard
maro's muse commodious precepts g”
instructive to the swains, nor wholly bent
on what is gainsid: sometimes she diverts philipi.
from solid counsels. bly; advant”
govel». adv. [from gainful.] profitably;
oull w.
gourses. n. s. [from gainful..] pro o:
ga'ingiving. n. j. [gains and give.] .. in use, i.
ing; a giving against; as gainsaying, which is harmor.
saying against, or contradisting. 1 lf
*** **
o!'s,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 897</div><p class="text">g a l
g a l
it is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as
would, perhaps, trouble a woman. shakespeare's hamlet.
ga'1nless. adj. [from gain.] unprofitable; producing no ad-
vantage.
ga(inlessness. m. s. [from gainless.] unprofitableness; want
of advantage. -
the parallel holds too in the gainlessnes; as well as labori-
ousness of the work: miners, buried in earth and darkness,
were never the richer for all the ore they digged ; no more is
the insatiable miser. decay of piety.
ga(inly, adv. [from gain.] handily; readily; dexterously,
out of use.
to ga'insay...v. a. ['gainst and say.]
1. to omnia, to oppose; to controvert with ; to dispute
agal ills.
*she which gainsay one another, must of necessity be
applied both unto one and the same subject. hooker.
too facile then, thou didst not much gainsay;
nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss. amilton.
2. to deny any thing.
i never heard yet
that any of those bolder vices wanted
less impudence to gainsay what they did,
than to perform it first. shakespeare's i/inter's tale.
gains a y er. m. s. [from gainsay..] opponent; adversary.
such as may satisfy gainsayers, when suddenly, and besides
expectation, they require the same at our hands. hooker.
we are, for this cause, challenged as manifest gainsayers of
scripture, even in that which we read for scripture unto the
people. hooker.
it was full matter of conviction to all gains.yers. hammond.
others sought themselves a name by being his gainsayers,
but failed of their purpose. fell.
'gainst. prep. [for agains?..] see against.
tremble, ye nations ! who, secure before,
laugh’d at those arms, that 'gains ourselves we bore. dryd.
to ga. instand... v. a. [gains and sland.] to withstand; to
oppose; to resist. a proper word, but not in use.
love proved himself valiant, that durst with the sword of
reverent duty gainstand the force of so many enraged de-
fires. sidney.
gatrish. adj. [;eannian, to dress fine, saxon.]
1. gaudy; showy ; splendid; fine.
three or four will outrage in apparel, huge hose, monstrous
hats, and garish colours. aftham.
i call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen,
the presentation of but what i was ;
a mother, only mock'd with two fair babes;
a dream of what thou wast, a gairish flag,
to be the aim of every dangerous shot. shakesp. rich. iii.
there in close covert by some brook,
where no profaner eye may look,
hide me from day's gairish eye. amilton.
2. extravagantly gay; flighty.
fame and glory transports a man out of himself: it makes
the mind loose and gairish, scatters the spirits, and leaves a
kind of dissolution upon all the faculties. south.
gatrishnfss. n.s.. [from gairish.]
1. finery; flaunting gaudiness.
2. flighty or extravagant joy.
let your hope be without vanity, or garishness of spirit, but
sober, grave, and silent.
gair. n.s. (gat, dutch..] .
1. a way: as, gang your gait.
good youth, address thy gait unto her;
be not denied access, stand at her door.
2. march ; walk.
nought regarding, they kept on their gait,
and all her vain allurements did forsake. fairy queen.
thou art so lean and meagre waxen late,
that scarce thy legs uphold thy feeble gait. hubb. tale.
3. the manner and air of walking.
great juno comes; i know her by her gait. shakesp.
he had in his person, in his aspect, the appearance of a
great man, which he preserved in his gait and motion. claren.
a third, who, by his gait
and fierce demeanour, seems the prince of hell. milton.
taylor's rule of living holy.
shakspear6.
leviathans -
wallowing, unwieldy, enormous in their gait. milton.
i describ'd his way, -
bent all on speed, and mark'd his airy gait. milton.
gala ge. m. s. a shepherd's clog. not in use.
my heart-blood is well nigh fronne, i feel;
and my galage grown fast to my heel. . . spensor.
gala's cat... n. s. [gglarge, french.] a medicinal root.
the lesser galangal is in pieces, about an inch or two long,
of the thickness of a man's little finger; a brownish red, co-
lour, extremely hot and pungent. the larger galangal is in
pieces, about two inches or more in length, and an inch in
thickness: its colour is brown, with a faint cast of red in it: it
has a disagreeable, but much less acrid and pungent taste. hill.
galaxy. n.f. [yox2.ez; galaxie, fr.] the milky way; a
stream of light in the sky, consisting of many small stars.
vol. i.
a broad and ample road, whose dust is gold,
and pavement stars, as stars to thee appear,
seen in the galaxy. milton's paradis? loft.
a brown, for which heaven would disband
the galaxy, and stars be tann'd.
several lights will not be seen,
if there be nothing else between ;
men doubt, because they stand so thick i' th' sky,
cleaveland.
if those be stars that paint the galaxy. cowley,
we dare not undertake to shew what advantage is brought
to us by those innumerable stars in the galaxy. bently.
galbanum. n.s.
we meet with gallanum sometimes in loose granules, called
drops or tears, which is the purest, and sometimes in large
masses. it is soft, like wax, and ductile between the fingers;
of a yellowish or reddish colour: its smell is strong and disa-
greeable. it is of a middle nature between a gum and a resin,
being inflammable as a resin, and soluble in water as a gum,
and will not dissolve in oil as pure resins do. it is the produce
of an umbelliferous plant. hill's materia medica.
i yielded indeed a pleasant odour, like the best myrrh; as
galbanum. ecclus. xxiv. 15.
gal e. m. s. spahling, hasty, sudden, german.] a wind not
tempestuous, yet stronger than a breeze.
what happy gale
blows you to padua here, from old verona shakespeare.
winds
of gentlest gale arabian odours fann'd -
from their soft wings, and flora's earliest smells. milton.
fresh gales and gentle air. milton.
umbria's green retreats,
where western gales eternally reside. addison.
'ga'leated. adj. [galeatus, latin.]
1. covered as with a helmet. -
a galeated eschinus copped, and in shape somewhat more
conick than any of the foregoing. woodward on fossils.
2. [in botany.] such plants as bear a flower resembling annel-
met, as the monkshood.
galer is cul ate. adj. [from galerus, latin.] covered as with
a hat.
ga'liot. m. s. [galiotte, french..] a little galley or sort of
brigantine, built very slight and fit for chase. it carries but
one mast, and two or three pattereroes. it can both sail and
row, and has sixteen or twenty seats for the rowers, with one
man to each oar. dic7,
barbarosła sent two notable pyrates with thirty gallots, who,
landing their men, were valiantly encountered, and forced
again to their gallots. knolles's history.
gall. m. s. [3eala, saxon; galle, dutch..] -
1. the bile, an animal juice remarkable for its supposed bitter-
ness.
come to my woman's breast,
and take my milk for gall, you murthering ministers 1
shakespeare.
a honey tongue, a heart of gall, -
is fancy's spring, but sorrow's fall. shakespeare.
this position informs us of a vulgar errour, terming the
gall bitter, as their proverb implies it's as bitter as gall;
whereas there's nothing gustable sweeter; and what is most
unctuous must needs partake of a sweet savour. harvey.
gall is the greatest resolvent of curdled milk: boerhaave
has given at a time one drop of the gall of an eel with success.
arbuthnot on diet.
2. the part which contains the bile.
the married couple, as a testimony of future concord, did
cast the gall of the sacrifice behind the altar. brown.
3. anything extremely bitter.
thither write, my queen,
and with mine eyes i’ll drink the words you send,
though ink be made of gall. shakespeare's cymbeline.
poison be their drink |
gall, worse than gall, the daintiest meat they taste shakesp.
she still insults, and you must still adore;
grant that the honey's much, the gall is more. dryd, juv.
4. rancour; malignity.
they did great hurt unto his title, and have left a perpetual
gall in the mind of the people. spenser on ireland.
5. anger; bitterness of mind.
suppose your hero were a lover,
though he before had gall and rage;
he grows dispirited and low,
he hates the fight, and shuns the blow. prior.
6. a flight hurt by fretting off the skin. [from the verb.]
this is the fatalest wound; as much superior to the former,
as a gangrene is to a gall or scratch. gov. of tongue.
7. [from galla.] -
galls or galnuts are preternatural and accidental tumours,
produced on trees; but those of the oak only are used in me-
dicine. we have oriental and european galls: the oriental
are brought from aleppo, of the bigness of a large nutmeg,
with tubercles on their surface, of a very firm texture, and a
disagreeable, acerb, and astringent taste. the european galls
are of the same size, with perfectly smooth surfaces: they are
1o b light,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 898</div><p class="text">g a l
g a l
light, often spongy, and cavernous within, and always of a
1. texture. they have a less austere taste, and are of much
less value than the first sort. the general history of galls is
this: an insect of the fly kind wounds the branches of the
trees, and in the hole deposites her egg: the lacerated vessels
of the tree discharging their contents, form a tumour or woody
case about the hole, where the egg is thus defended from all
injuries. this tumour also serves for the food of the tender
maggot, produced from the egg, which, as soon as it is in its
winged state, gnaws its way out, as appears from the hole
found in the gall; and where no hole is seen, the maggot, or
its remains, are sure to be found within. it has been observed,
that the oak does not produce galls in cold countries: but this
observation should be confined to the medicinal galls; for all
those excrescencies which we call oak apples, oak-grapes, and
oak-cones, are true galls, though less firm in their texture.
hill.
besides the acorns, the oak bearcth galls, oak-apples, and
oak-nuts. bacon's natural history.
malpighi, in his treatise of galls, under which name he
comprehends all preternatural and morbose excrescences, de-
monstrates that all such excrescences, where any infects are
found, are excited by some venenose liquor, which, together
with their eggs, such inscots shed. ray on the creation.
the aleppo galls, where with we make ink, are no other
than cases of insects, which are bred in them. derham.
t, gall. v. a. [galer, french.]
1. to hurt by foctring the skin.
i'll touch my point
with this contagion, that, if i gall him slightly,
it may be death. shakespeare's hamlet.
his yoke is easy, when by us embrac'd,
but loads and galls, if on our necks 'tis cast. denham.
a carrier, when he would think of a remedy for his galled
horse, begins with casting his cye upon all things. locke.
on the monarch's speech achilles broke,
and furious thus, and interrupting spoke,
tyrant, i well deserv'd thy galling chain.
2. to impair ; to wear away.
he doth object, i am too great of birth;
and that my state being gall'd with my expence,
i seek to heal it only by his wealth. shakes care.
if it flould fall down in a continual stream like a river, it
would gall the ground, wash away plants by the roots, and
overthrow houses. ray on the creation.
3. to teaze; to fret ; to vex.
in honour of that action, and to gall their minds who did
not so much commend it, he wrote his book. hocker.
what they seem contented with, even for that very cause
we reject ; and there is nothing but it pleaseth us the better,
if we espy that it galleth them. hooker.
when i shew justice,
i pity those i do not know ;
which a dismiss'd offence would after gall.
all studies here i solemnly defy,
save how to gall and pinch this bolingbroke. shak. h. iv.
no man commits any fin but his conscience snites him,
and his guilty mind is frequently galled with the remembrance
of it. tiloson.
4. to harass; to mischief; to keep in a state of uneasiness.
the helots had gotten new heart, and with divers forts of
shot from corners of streets and house-windows galled them.
sidney.
pope’s iliad.
shakespeare.
light demilances from afar they throw,
fasten’d with leathern thongs, to gall the foe. dryd. æn.
in our wars against the french of old, we used to gall them
with our long bows, at a greater distance than they could shoot
their arrows. addison.
to gall. v. n. to fret.
i have seen you gecking and galling at this gentleman twice
or thrice. . shakespeare.
gost. adj. [galant, french, from gala, fine dress, spa-
nish.]
1. gay ; well dressed; showy ; splendid; magnificent.
a place of broad rivers, wherein shall go no gally with
oars, neither shall gallant ships pass thereby. if xxxiii. 21.
the gay, the wise, the gallant, and the grave,
subdu'd alike, all but one passion have. jvaller.
2. brave; high spirited; daring; magnanimous.
scorn, that any should kill his uncle, made him seek his
revenge in manner gallant enough. sidney.
but, fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth. shakoff care.
a gallant man, whose thoughts fly at the highest game, re-
quires no further insight. digby on the soul.
3. fine; noble; specious.
there are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
but hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
make gallant shew and promise of their mettle. shakesp.
4. courtly with respect to ladies.
he discoursed, how gallant and how brave a thing it would
be for his highness to make a journey into spain, and to fetch
home his mistress." clarendon,
when first the soul of love is sent
the gay troops begin
in gallant thought to plume their pai -
gao. m. s. [from o: joj inted wings. to
1. a gay, sprightly, airy, splendid man.
the new proclamation.
—what is't for :
—the reformation of our travell’d -
that fill the court with quarrels, o lor
the gallants and lufty youths of naples o o
themselves unto vattius. knolei's hijio, .. o
the gallants, to protea the lady's right, } of the iuri,
their fauchions bandish'd at the grisly spright, d
gallants, look to t, you say there are no spri o - tydon,
but i’ll come dance about your beds at o: "p
2. a whoremaster, who carefles women to debuch the -
one, worn to pieces with age, shews himself, m,
abroad,
anjo,
lant. shakespeare's merry iso yo gal.
she had left the good man at home, ...? br. o:
gallant. addison', spe o
3. a wooer; one who courts a woman for mats. |
two latter senses it has commonly the accent on the o:
lable. at syl-
gall antly. adv. [from gallant.]
1. gayly; splendidly.
2. bravcly ; nobly ; generously.
you have not dealt so gallantly with us as we did with
in a parallel case : last year a paper was brought here wol
- - - nom
england, which we ordered to be burnt by the common hang-
in all. swift
ga'll antry. m. s. [galanterie, french.]
1. splendour of appearance; show ; magnificence; glitting
grandeur; oftentatious finery. o
make the sea shine with gallantry, and all
the english youth flock to their admiral. jwir
2. bravery ; nobleness; generosity. -
the eminence of your condition, and the gallantry of
principles, will invite gentlemen to the useful and conn
study of nature.
3. a number of gallants.
hector, deiphobus, and all the gallantry of troy, i would
have arm'd to day. shahjari,
4. courtship ; refined address to women. -
the martial moors, in gallantry refin'd,
invent new arts to make their charmers kind. granvil,
5. vicious love; lewdness; debauchery.
it looks like a sort of coopounding between virtue and
vice, as if a woman were allowed to be vicious, provided she
be not a profligate; as if there were a certain point where
gallantry ends, and infamy begins. swift.
galleass. m. s. [galeas, french.] a heavy low built wool,
with both sails and oars. it carries three masts, but they can-
not be lowered, as in a galley. it has thirty-two seats for
rowers, and six or seven slaves to each. they carry three
tire of guns at the head, and at the stern there are two tire of
guns. diff.
the venetians pretend they could set out, in case of get
necessity, thirty men of war, a hundred galleys, and teng-
lofts. addison on lids,
my father hath no less
than three great argolies, besides two galeoso,
and twelve tight gallies. shakesp. taming of th: shrow,
galle'os. m. s. [galion, french..] a large ship with four of
sometimes five decks, now in use only among the spaniards.
i assured them that i would flay for them at trinidado, and
that no force should drive me thence, except wo so."
set on fire by the spanish galloons. raleigh's dog,
the number of vesis were one hundred and to
whereof galleases and galloons seventy-two, goodly ship, lso
floating towers or castles. bacon's war with spain.
your
bling
glanv. stops. posis,
gallery. m. s. [galerie, french ; derived by du co from
galeria, low latin, a fine room.] - - -
1. a kind of wikiong the floor of a house, into wo".
doors of the apartments open ; in general, any building of
which the length much exceeds the breadth. s
in most past there had been framed by art such o
arbors, that, one answering another, they boo” . ." y
aloft from tree to tree, almost round about, which *:::
a perfeot shadow. 1&amp;nty,
high lifted up were many lofty towers,
and goodly galleries fair overlaid.
your gallery shao
have we pass'd through, not without much o &amp;
the row of return on the banquet side, let “ be a o:
galleries, in which galleries let there be three cupolas, bo
a private gallery 'twixt th' apartments led, denham,
not to the foe yet known. - o:
nor is the shape of our cathedrals propose "' !. i.
auditories, but rather the figure of an amphith". ..o.
leries gradually overlooking each othes; for into this c
sosr.
- - a's
the parish churches of london are driving apaso "...
by the many galleries every day built in them. . these
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 899</div><p class="text">g a l
g a l
o,
-
o
there are covered galleries that lead from the palace to five
different churches. addison on italy.
2. the seats in the playhouse above the pit, in which the meaner
people fit.
while all its throats the gallery extends,
and all the thunder of the pit ascends. pope.
ga'll btyle. m. s. i suppose this word has the same import
with gallipot. -
make a compound body of glass and galletyle; that is, to
have the colour milky like a chalcedon, being a fluff between
a porcellane and a glass. bacon's phys. rem.
gat.l.e.y. m. s. [galea, italian; galere, french ; derived, as
some think, from galea, a helmet, pictured anciently on the
prow ; as others from y2xsorno, the wordfish; as others from
galloon, expressing in syriac men exposed to the sea. from
galley come galleds, galleon, galliot.]
1. a vessel driven with oars, much in use in the mediterranean,
but found unable to endure the agitation of the main ocean.
great neptune grieved underneath the load
of ships, hulks, gallies, barks and brigandines. fairfax.
in the ages following, navigation did every where greatly
decay, by the use of gallies, and such vessels as could hardly
brook the ocean. bacon's new atlantis.
jason ranged the coasts of asia the less in an open boat, or
kind of galley. raleigh's history.
on oozy ground his gallies moor;
their heads are turn'd to sea, their sterns to shore. dryden.
2. it is proverbially confidered as a place of toilsome misery, be-
cause criminals are condemned to row in them.
the most voluptuous person, were he tied to follow his
hawks and his hounds, his dice and his courtships every day,
would find it the greatest torment that could befal him: he
would fly to the mines and the gallies for his recreation, and
to the spade and the mattock for a diversion from the misery of
a continual uninterrupted pleasure. south.
galley-slav f. m. s. [galley and slave..] a man condemned
for some crime to row in the gallies.
as if one chain were not sufficient to load poor man, he
must be clogged with innumerable chains: this is just such
another freedom as the turkish galley-slaves do enjoy. bramh.
hardened galley-slaves despise manumission. decay of piety.
the surges gently dash against the shore,
flocks quit the plains, and galley-slaves their oar. garth.
ga'lliard. m. s. [gaillard, french ; imagined to be derived
from the gaulish ard, genius ; and gay.]
1. a gay, brisk, lively man; a fine fellow.
selden is a galliard by himself. cleaveland.
2. an active, nimble, spritely dance. it is in both senses now
obsolete.
i did think by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was
form'd under the star of a galliard. shakesp. twelfth night.
there's nought in france
that can be with a nimble galliard won : . -
you cannot revel into dukedoms there. shakesp. henry v.
if there be any that would take up all the time, let him
find means to take them off, and bring others on ; as musi-
cians use to do with those that dance too long galliards. bacon.
the tripla’s and changing of times have an agreement with
the changes of motion; as when galliard time and measure
time are in the medley of one dance. bacon.
galliardise. m. s. [french..] merriment; exuberant
gaiety. not in use.
at my nativity my ascendant was the watry sign of scor-
pius: i was born in the planetary hour of saturn, and i think
i have a piece of that leaden planet in me: i am no way fa-
cetious, nor disposed for the mirth and galliardise of com-
pany. brown’s rel. ased.
ga'licism.. n. s. [gallicisne, french; from gallicus, latin.]
a mode of speech peculiar to the french language: such as,
he figured in controversy; he held this conduct; he held the
same language that ancther had held before : with many other
expressions to be found in the pages of bolingbroke.
in english i would have gallicisms avoided, that we may
keep to our own language, and not follow the french mode
in our speech. felton on the classicks.
ga'llic askins. m. s. [caligae gali-pastonion. skinner.]
large open hose. not used but in ludicrous language.
my galligaskins, that have long withstood
the winter's fury, and encroaching frosts,
by time subdu'd, what will not time subdue, ----
an horrid chasm disclose. phillips.
gallim/tia. m. s. [galimathias, french..] nonsense; talk
without meaning.
gal limau’fry. m. s. [galimafrec, french.]
1. a hoch-poch, or hash of several forts of broken meat; a
medley. hanmer.
they have made of our english tongue a gallimaufry, or
hodge-podge of all other speeches. spenser.
2. any inconsistent or ridiculous medley. -
they have a dance, which the wenches say is a gallimatify
of gambols, because they are not in't. shakesp. //inter’s tale.
the painter who, under pretence of divcrting the eyes,
would fill his pieture with such varieties as alter the truth of
history, would make a ridiculous piece of painting, and a
mere gallimaufry of his work. dryden's dufreshoy.
3. it is used by shakespeare ludicrously of a woman. -
sir john affects thy wife.
—why, fir, my wife is not young. -
-he wooes both high and low, both rich and poor;
he loves thy gallimaufoy, friend. shakespeare.
gatkiqt. "...s. igallotte, french..] a small swift gales.
barbarosla deporting out of hellespontus with eighty gallies,
and certain galliots, shaped his course towards italy. knolles.
gatlipot. n.s. [glyc, dutch, shining earth. somer. the
true derivation is from gala, $.". gala, or gally-
pot, is a fine painted pot.] a pot painted and glazed, com-
monly used for medicines. -
plato said his master socrates was like the apothecary’s gal-
lipots, that had on the outsides apes, owls, and satyrs; but
within, precious drugs. bacon's apophth.
here phia's in nice discipline are set;
there gallipots are rang'd in alphabet. - garth.
alexandrinus thought it unsafe to trust the real secret of his
phial and gallipot to any man. - spectator.
thou that do'st af sculapius deride, -
and o'er his gallipots in triumph ride. fenton.
ga't los. m. s. igels, low latin.] a liquid measure of our
quarts.
beat them into powder, and boil them in a gallon of wine,
in a vessel close stopped. wiseman's surgery.
galloos. m. s. [galen, french.] a kind of close lace, made
of gold or silver, or of silk alone.
to gat.lop. v. n. [galoper, french. derived by all the
etymologists, after budaeus, from xzxzosw; but perhaps it
comes from gant, all, and loopen, to run, dutch; that is, to
go on full speed.]
1. to move forward by leaps, so that all the feet are off the
ground at once.
i did hear
the galloping of horse: who was’t came by ? shak. macb.
his steeds will be restrain'd,
but gallop lively down the western hill. donne.
in such a shape grim saturn did restrain
his heav'nly limbs, and flow’d with such a mane,
when half surpriz'd, and feating to be seen, - -
the leacher gallop'd from his jealous queen. dryden's wirgil.
2. to ride at the pace which is performed by leaps.
seeing such streams of blood as threatned a drowning life,
we galloped toward them to part them. sidney.
they 'gan espy -
an armed knight towards them gallop fast, -
that seem'd from some feared foe to fly. fairy queen.
he who fair and softly goes steadily forward, in a côurse
that points right, will sooner be at his journey’s end than he
that runs after every one he meets, though he gallop all day
full speed. locke.
3. to move very fast.
the golden sun
gallops the zodiack in his glist’ring coach. shac. tit. audr.
whom doth time gallop withal
—with a thief to the gallows. shakesp. as yet, like it.
he that rides post through a country may, from the tran-
fient view, tell how in general the parts lie: such superficial
ideas he may collect in galloping over it. locke.
gai. lop. m. s. [from the verb.] the motion of a horse when
he runs at full speed; in which, making a kind of a leap for-
wards, he lifts both his forelegs very near at the same time;
and while these are in the air, and just upon the point of
touching the ground, he lifts both his hindlegs almost at
once. farrier's dic7.
galloper: n, s...[from gallop.] -
1. a horse that gallops. .
mules bred in cold countries are much better to ride than
horses for their walk and trot; but they are commonly rough
gallopers, though some of them are very fleet. mortim. hush.
2. a man that rides fast, or makes great haste.
ga'llow ay. m. s. a horse not more than fourteen hands
high, much used in the north; probably as coming originally
from galloway, a shire in scotland.
to ga. llow. v. a. sagaelpan, to fright, saxon.] to terrify;
to fright.
the wrathful skies
gallow the very wand’rers of the dark, -
and make them keep their caves. shakespeare's king lear.
ga'llow glasses. m. s. -
1. it is worn likewise of footmen under their shirts of mail, the
which footmen the irish call gallowglasses: the which name
doth discover them also to be ancient english; for gallagla fig-
nifies an english servitor or yeoman. and he being so armed
in a long shirt of mail, down to the calf of his leg, with a
long broad ax in his hand, was then pedes gravis armatura ;
and was instead of the footman that now weareth a corslet,
before the corslet was used, or almost invented.
spensor on ireland.
2. [ hammer,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 900</div><p class="text">g a m
g a m
2. [hammer, otherwise than spensor.] soldiers among the wild
irish, who serve on horseback.
a puissant o: pow'r
allowglasses and stout kernes,
fo in proud array. shakesp. henry vi.
ga'llow. un. s. [it is used by some in the singular; but by
ga'llows. ! more only in the plural, or sometimes has another
plural gallowses. gaga, gothick; zeal;a, saxon ; galge,
dutch; which some derive from gabalus, furca, latin; others
from h5) high; others from gallu, welsh, power: but it is
probably derived like gallow, to fright, from agaelpan, the
gallows, being the great object of legal terrour.]
1. a beam laid over two posts, on which malefactors are hanged.
this monster sat like a hangman upon a pair of gallows:
in his right hand he was painted holding a crown of laurel, 111
his left hand a purse of money. sidney.
i would we were all of one mind, and one mind good; o,
there were desolation of gaolers and gallowses. shakesp. cymbel.
i prophesied, if a gallows were on land,
this fellow could not drown. shakespeare's tempest.
he took the mayor afide, and whispered him that execu-
tion must that day be done, and therefore required him that
a pair of gallows should be erected. hayward.
a poor fellow, going to the gallows, may be allewed to feel
the smart of wasps while he is upon tyburn road. swift.
2. a wretch that deserves the gallows.
cupid hath been five thousand years a boy.
—ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too. shakespeare.
ga'llowsfree. adj. [gallows and free.] exempt by destiny
from being hanged.
let him be gallowsfree by my consent,
and nothing suffer, since he nothing meant. dryden.
ga'llow tree. m. s. [gallows and tree.] the tree of terrour ;
the tree of execution.
he hung their conquer'd arms, for more defame,
on gallowtrees, in honour of his dearest dame. spensor.
a scot, when from the gallowtree got loose,
drops into styx, and turns a soland goose. cleaveland.
gam bate. un. s. [gamba, italian, a leg.] spatterdashes;
gamba'do. } boots worn upon the legs above the shoe.
the pettifogger ambles to her in his gambadoes once a week.
dennis's letters.
ga'mbler. m. s. [a cant word, i suppose, for game organgster.]
a knave whose practice it is to invite the unwary to game
and cheat them.
ga'mbog e. m. s.
gamboge is a concreted vegetable juice, partly of a gummy,
partly of a resinous nature, heavy, of a bright yellow colour,
and scarce any smell. it is brought from america, and the
east indies, particularly from cambaja, or cambogia. hill.
to ga mbol. v. n. [gamhiller, french.]
1. to dance; to skip; to frisk; to jump for joy; to play merry
frolicks.
bears, tigers, ounces, pards,
gambol'd before them. milton's paradis. loft.
the king of elfs, and little fairy queen,
gambol'd on heaths, and danc'd on ev'ry green. dryden.
the monsters of the flood
gambol around him in the wat'ry way,
ald heavy whales in aukward measures play. pope.
2. to leap ; to start.
'tis not madness
that i have utter'd ; bring me to the test,
and i the matter will record, which madness
would gambol from. shakespeare's hamlet.
ga'mrol. n. s. [from the verb.]
i. a skip ; a hop; a leap for joy.
a gentleman had got a favourite spaniel, that would be still
toying and leaping upon him, and playing a thousand pretty
gambols. l’estrange.
bacchus through the conquer'd indies rode,
and boasts in gambols frisk'd before their honest god. dryden.
2. a frolick; a wild prank.
for who did ever play his gambols,
with such unsufferable rambies : hudibras.
gambrel. m. s. [from gamba, gambarella, italian.] the leg
of a horse.
... what can be more admirable than for the principles of the
fibres of a tendon to be so mixed as to make it a soft body,
and yet to have the strength of iron as appears by the weight
which the tendon, lying on a horse's gambrel, doth then com-
ol, when he rears up with a man upon his back. gro.
game. n.s. [gaman, a jest, islandick.]
1. sport of any kind. -
we have had pastimes here, and pleasing game. shakes.
2. jest; opposed to earnest or ... g g sp
then on her head they set a garland green,
and crowned her 'twixt earnest and twist game. spenser.
3. insolent merriment; sportive insult. -
do they not seek occasion of new quarrels,
on my refusal, to distress me more;
9, make a game of my calamities. milton's agonistes.
4. a single match at play.
5. advantage in play.
mutual vouchers for our fame we stand
and play the game into each other's hand. d
6. scheme pursued; measures planned. tydin,
this seems to be the present game of that
they will begin no other 'till o; see an end ... o o
7. field sports: as, the chace, falconry. 4 emple,
if about this hour he make his way,
under the colour of his usual game,
he shall here find his friends with horse and men,
to set him free from his captivity. shakes,…,
what arms to use, or o: o: offeare', hong vi.
wild beasts to combat, or to tame,
with all the myst’ries of that game.
wall
some sportsmen, that were abroad upon game, oo
pany of bustards and cranes. it.
8. animals pursued in the field; animals appropria
sportsmen.
hunting, and men, not beasts, shall be his game
with war, and hostile snare, such as refuse 3.
subjection to his empire tyrannous. milton's par loft
there is such a variety of game springing up bo. i.
that i know not which to follow. dryden's fallo po
a bloodhound will follow the person he pursues, i. i
hounds the particular game they have in chace.
go, with thy cynthia hurl the pointed spear
at the rough bear, or chace the flying deer;
i and my chloe take a nobler aim,
at human hearts we fling, nor ever miss the game.
proud nimrod first the bloody chace began,
a mighty hunter, and his prey was man:
ted to ki
arbuthni,
prior,
qur haughty norman boasts that barb'rous name,
and makes his trembling slaves the royal game. p},
shorten my labour, if its length you blame,
for, grow but wise, you rob me of my game. toung,
9. solemn contests, exhibited as spectacles to the people. o
the games are done, and caesar is returning. shais,
milo, when ent'ring the olympick game,
with a huge ox upon his shoulders came, denham,
to game. v. n. [xaman, saxon.]
1. to play at any sport.
2. to play wantonly and extravagantly for money.
gaming leaves no satisfaction behind it: it no way profit
either body or mind. loft,
game cock. m. s. [game and cock.] cocks bred to fight,
they manage the dispute as fiercely as two gamesos in the
pit. lock.
ga me-egg. m. s. [game and egg.] eggs from which fighting
cocks are bred.
thus boys hatch game-eggs under birds of prey,
to make the fowl more furious for the fray. garth.
ga'mekeeper. m. s. [game and keep.] a person who looks
after game, and sees it is not destroyed. -
ga'meso m.e. adj. [from game.] frolicksome; gay; sportive;
playful; sportful. -
geron, though old, yet gamesome, kept one end with o:
idity,
i am not gamesome; i do lack some part
of that quick spirit that is in antony. shaft. jul cesar,
the gamesome wind among her tresses play, -
and curleth up those growing riches short. fift.
belial, in like gamesome mood. milton,
this gamosome humour of children should other be .
raged, to keep up their spirits and improve their frong". "
health, than curbed or restrained. - * loth,
ga mesom en ess. n. /.. [from gamesome.] sportivenels; mes.
riment. -
ga'mesomely. adv. [from gamesome.] merrily.
ga mest er. m. s. [from game.]
1. one who is vitiously addicted to play. from his
keep a gamesler from the dice, and a good student . r
book, and it is wonderful. shak. merry ision of o:
a gamesler, the greater master he is in his aro *:::
man he is. to wo
gamesoers for whole patrimonies play;
the steward brings the deeds, which must son" tral
the whole estate. dryden's jo : |
could we look into the mind of a common so .
should see it full of nothing but trumps and o:
slumbers are haunted with kings, queens and kn" 1)
all the superfluous whims relate,
that fill a female gamesler's pate;
what agony of soul she feels swift,
to see a knave's inverted heels. - or, a min
her youngest daughter is run away with .."...". supe.
of great beauty, who in dressing and dancing * law.
riour.
2. one who is engaged at play. -
when j cruelty play for ..".‘s. h.w.
the gentler gamesler is the soonest winn": see no mos"
a man may think, if he will, that two “ this,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 901</div><p class="text">g. a n
g a p
o
o
o
than one; or that a gamesler seeth always more than a looker-
on : but, when all is done, the help of good counsel is that
which setteth business strait. bacon.
3. a merry frolicksome person.
you're a merry gamesler,
my lord sands. y gamester,
4. a prostitute. not in use.
she's impudent, my lord,
and was a common gamesler to the camp. shakespeare.
gammer. n.s. [of uncertain etymology; perhaps from grand
mere, and therefore used commonly to old women.] the
sompellation of a woman corresponding to gaffer: as, gammer
gurton's needle. an old play.
ga'mm9n. m. s. [gambone, italian.]
1. the buttock of an hog salted and dried; the lower end of
the flitch.
ask for what price thy venal tongue was sold:
a rusty gammon of some sev’n years old. dryden's juv.
gammons, that give a relish to the taste,
and potted fowl, and fish, come in so fast,
that ere the first is out, the second stinks. dryden's pers:
2. a kind of play with dice.
the quick dice,
in thunder leaping from the box, awake
the sounding gammon. thomson's autumn.
ga'mut. n.s. (gama, italian.] the scale of musical notes.
madam, before you touch the instrument,
to learn the order of my fingering,
i must begin with rudiments of art,
to teach you gamut in a briefer sort.
when by the gamut some musicians make
a perfect song, others will undertake,
by the same gamut chang'd, to equal it:
things simply good can never be unfit. donne.
long has a race of heroes fill'd the stage,
that rant by note, and through the gamut rage;
in songs and airs express their martial fire,
combat in trills, and in a feuge expire. addison.
*gan, for began, from 'gin for begin.
the noble knight 'gan feel
his vital force to faint. spensor.
to ganch. v. a. [ganciare, from gancio, a hook, italian ;
gamche, french.] to drop from a high place upon hooks by
way of punishment: a practice in turkey, to which smith
alludes in his pocockius.
cohors catenis qua pia stridulis
gemunt onusti, vel sude trans sinum
luctantur acti, pendulive
sanguineis trepidant in uncis. - muse angl.
ga'nder. m. s. [3anbna, saxon.) the male of the goose.
as deep drinketh the goose as the gander. camden's rem.
one gander will serve five geese. mortimer's husbandry.
to gang. v. n. [gangen, dutch ; ;angan, saxon; gang, scot-
tish..] to go; to walk: an old word not now used, except
ludicrously.
shakoff. henry viii.
shakespeare.
but let them gang alone,
as they have brewed, so let them bear blame. spensor.
your flaunting beaus gang with their breasts open. arbuthn.
gang. m. s. [from the verb.] a number herding together; a
troop ; a company; a tribe; a herd. it is seldom used but in
contempt or abhorrence.
oh, you panderly rascals there's a knot, a gang, a pack,
a conspiracy against me. shakoff. merry isives of iłindsor.
as a gang of thieves were robbing a house, a mastiff tell a
barking. l’estrange.
admitted in among the gang, -
he acts and talks as they befriend him. prior.
ganghon. [french..] a kind of flower. ainsworth.
ga'n glion. n.s. [yzsyxsov.] a tumour in the tendinous and
nervous parts.
bonesetters usually represent every bone dislocated, though
possibly it be but a ganglion, or other crude tumour or preter-
natural protuberance of some part of a joint. isosoman.
to gang renate. v. a. [from gangrene.] to produce a gan-
grene; to mortify. -
parts cauterized, gangrenated, siderated, and mortified, be-
come black, the radical moisture or vital sulphur suffering an
extinction. brown's wulgar errours.
gangrene. n.s. [gangrene, fr. gangraona, lat.] a mor-
tification; a stoppage of circulation followed by putrefaction.
this experiment may be transferred unto the cure of gan-
grenes, either coming of themselves, or induced by too much
applying of opiates. bacon’s natural history.
she saves the lover, as we gangrenes stay,
by cutting hope, like a lopt limb, away. jwaller.
a discolouring in the part was supposed an approach of a
gangrene. - isosoman's surgery.
if the substance of the soul is festered with these pations,
the gangrene is gone too far to be ever cured: the inflamma-
tion will rage to all eternity. addison's speciator.
to gangrene. v. a. [gangrener, french ; from the noun.]
to corrupt to mortification.
vol. 1.
in cold countries, when men's noses and ears are mortified,
and, as it were, gangrened with cold, if they come to a fire
they rot off presently; for that the few spirits that remain in
those parts, are suddenly drawn forth, and so putrefaction is
made complete. bacon's natural history.
gangren'd members must be lop'd away, -
before the nobler parts are tainted to decay. drydon.
to gangrene. v. n. to become mortified.
wounds immedicable
rankle and fester, and gangrene
to black mortification.
as phlegmons are subject to mortification, so also in fat
bodies they are apt to gangrene after opening, if that fat be
not speedily digested out. o: surgery.
gangrenous, adj. [from gangrene..] mortified; producing
or betokening mortification.
the blood, turning acrimonious, corrodes the vessels, pro-
ducing haemorrhages, pustules red, lead-coloured, black and
gang renous. arbuthnot on aliments.
gang way, n. s. in a ship, the several ways or passages from
one part of it to the other. dic7.
ga'ngweek. m. s. [gang and week.] rogation week, when
processions are made to lustrate the bounds of parishes. diff.
;:::::::::: s: [gantlet is only corrupted from gantelope,
ga'n't let. gant, all ; and loopen, to run, dutch..] a mi-
litary punishment, in which the criminal running between the
ranks receives a lash from each man.
but would'st thou, friend, who hast two legs alone,
would'st thou to run the gantlet these expose,
to a whole company of hob nail'd shoes dryden's juv.
young gentlemen are driven with a whip, to run the gantlet
through the several classes. locke.
ga'nza. m. s. [gansa, spanish, a goose..] a kind of wild
goose, by a flock of which a virtuoso was fabled to be carried
to the lunar world.
they are but idle dreams and fancies,
and favour strongly of the ganza's. hudibrar.
gaol. m. s. sgeol, weish ; geole, french..] a prison; a place
of confinement. it is always pronounced and too often writ-
ten jail, and sometimes goal.
then am i the prisoner, and his bed my gaol. sh. k. lear.
have i been ever free, and must my house
be my retentive enemy, my gaolo shakespeare's timon.
if we mean to thrive and do good, break open the gaols,
and let out the prisoners. shakespeare's henry vi.
to gaol. v. a. [from the noun.] to imprison; to commit
to gaol.
gaoling vagabonds was chargeable, pesterous, and of no
open example. bacon.
ga'ol. de livery. m. s. [gaol and deliver.] the judicial pro-
cess, which by condemnation or acquittal of persons confined
evacuates the prison.
then doth th' aspiring soul the body leave,
which we call death; but were it known to all,
what life our souls do by this death receive,
men would it birth or gaoldelivery call. davies.
these make a general gaoldelivery of souls, not for punish-
ment. south.
ga'ol er. n.s.. [from gaol.] keeper of a prison; he to whose
care the prisoners are committed.
this is a gentle provost; seldom, when
. the steeled gaoler is the friend of men.
i know not how or why my surly gaoler,
hard as his irons, and insolent as pow'r
when put in vulgar hands, cleanthes,
put off the brute. dryden's cleomenes.
from the polite part of mankind she had been banished and
immured, 'till the death of her gaoler. tatler.
gap. m. s. [from gape.]
1. an opening in a broken fence.
behold the despair,
by custom and covetous pates, - -
by gaps and opening of gates. tusser's husbandy.
with terrours and with furies to the bounds
and crystal wall of heav'n ; which, opening wide,
roll'd inward, and a spacious gap disclos'd
into the wasteful deep. milton's paradise loft.
bushes are most lasting of any for dead hedges, or to mend
gaps. - mortimer's husbandry.
1 sought for a man, says god, that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gap before me, for the land that i
should not destroy it. aogers.
2. a breach.
the loss of that city concerned the christian commonweal:
shakespeare.
manifold miseries afterwards ensued by the opening of that gap -
to all that side of christendom. knolles.
3. any passage. - - - -
- so stands the thracian herdsman with his spear
full in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear,
and hears him rustling in the wood. dryden.
4. an avenue ; an open way. -
the former kings of england passed into them a great p.
10 c o
milton's agonisles.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 902</div><p class="text">g a p
g a r
of their prerogatives; which though then it was well intended,
and perhaps well deserved, yet now such a gap of mischief lies
open thereby, o i could wish it were well stopt. sponsor.
: : a deficiency. -
5. *: violently o against him, mistaking his purpose,
it would make a great gap in your honour. shakoff. king lear.
nor is it any botch or gap in the works of nature. more.
6. any interstice; a vacuity. -
each one demand, and answer to his part
perform'd in this wide gap of time since first -
we were diffever'd. shakespeare's is inter’s tale.
that i might sleep out this great gap of time my an-
tony is away. shakespeare's antony and cleopatra.
to make 'twixt words and lines huge gaps, -
wide as meridians in maps. hudibras.
one can revive a languishing conversation by a sudden fur-
prising sentence; another is more dexterous in seconding ; a
third can fill the gap with laughing. . . swift
7. an opening of the mouth in speech during the pronunciation
of two successive vowels.
the hiatus, or gap between two words, is caused by two
vowels opening on each other. - pope.
8. to slop a gap, is to escape by some mean shift : alluding to
hedoes mended with dead bushes, ’till the quicksets will grow.
his policy consists in setting traps, - -
in finding ways and means, and slopping gaps. swift.
9. to sand in the gap. to make defence; to expose himself
for the protection of something in danger.
what would become of the church, if there were none
more concerned for her rights than this who would stand
in the gap * - lesley.
gap-toor hed. adj. [gap and tooth.] having interstices be-
tween the teeth.
the reeve, miller, and cook, are distinguished from each
other as much as the mincing lady prioress and the broad
speaking gap-toothed wife of bath. dryden's falles, proface.
to gape. v. n. [eapan, saxon.]
1. to open the mouth wide ; to yawn.
some men there are love not a gaping pig;
some, that are mad, if they behold a cat. shakespeare.
gaping or yawning, and stretching, do pass from man to
man; for that that causeth gaping and stretching is when the
spirits are a little heavy by any vapour. arbuthnot.
she stretches, gapcs, unglues her eyes,
and asks if it be time to rise.
2. to open the mouth for food, as a young bird.
as callow birds,
whose mother's kill'd in seeking of the prey,
cry in their nest, and think her long away ;
and at each leaf that stirs, each blast of wind,
gape for the food which they must never find.
as in a drought the thirsty creatures cry,
and gape upon the gather'd clouds for rain,
o then first the martlet meets it in the sky,
and with wet wings joys all the feather'd train.
3. to desire earnestly ; to crave: with for.
to her grim death appears in all her shapes;
the hungry grave for her due tribute gapes.
to thy fortune be not thou a slave;
for what hast thou to fear beyond the grave
and thou, who gap's for my estate, draw near ;
for i would whisper somewhat in thy ear. dryden's pers.
4. with after.
what shall we say of those who spend their days in gaping
after court-favour and preferments : l'estrange.
5. with at.
many have gaped at the church revenues; but, before they
could swallow them, have had their mouths stopped in the
church-yard. south.
| 6. to open in fissures or holes.
if it assume my noble father's person,
i'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
and bid me hold my peace. shakespeare's hamlet.
may that ground gape, and swallow me assive,
where i shall kneel to him that slew my father. sh. h. vi.
the great horse-mussel, with the fine shell, doth gape and
shut as the oysters do. bacon's natural history.
the reception of one is as different from the admision of
the other, as when the earth falls open under the incisions of
the plough, and when it gapes and greedily opens itself to drink
in the dew of heaven, or the refreshments of a shower. south.
the mouth of a little attery and nerve gapes into the cavity
of these vesicles. cheyne's phil. princ.
7. to open with a breach.
the planks, their pitchy coverings wash'd away,
now yield, and now a yawning breach display :
the roaring waters, with a hostile tide, -
rush through the ruins of her gaping side. dryden.
i hat all these actions can be performed by aliment, as well
**, *dicines, is plain ; by observing the effects of different
*nces upon the fluids and solids, when the vessels are open
and gape by a w; nq. arbuthnot,
swift.
drydon.
dryden.
denham.
8. to open ; to have an hiatus,
t here is not, to the best of my remembrance
gaping on another for want of a caesurai
9. 1 o make a noise with open throat.
and, if my muse can through or
that noisy, nauseous, gaping o .." see,
io. to stare with hope or expectation. - komm,
others will gape t'anticipate
the cabinet designs of fate;
apply to wizards, to foresee
what shall, and what shall never be.
11. to stare with wonder.
parts of different species jumbled together
mad imagination of the dawber; and the on
o: : a very monster in a bartholomew fair, for the
gape at. dryden's d
where elevated o'er the gaping croud, offsho,
clasp'd in the board the perjur'd head is bow'd
betimes retreat. *
12. to stare irreverently.
they have gaped upon me with their mouth.
ga'per. m. s. [from gape.]
1. one who opens his mouth.
2. one who stares foolishly.
3. one who longs or craves.
the golden shower of the dissolved abbey-lands mino well
near into every gaper's mouth. carew's survey of como
gar, in saxon, signifies a weapon: so eado is . .
weapon; ethelgar, a noble weapon. cio
to gar. v. a. [giera, islandick.] to cause; to make, c.
solete. it is still in use in scotland.
tell me, good hobbinol, what gar; thee greet?
what i hath some wolf thy tender lambs ytorn?
or is thy bagpipe broke, that sounds so sweet?
or art thou of thy loved lass forlorne, sponsor's poskra,
garb. m. s. [garbe, french.] -
1. dress; cloaths; habit.
thus belial, with words cloath'd in reason's garb,
counsel’d ignoble ease and peaceful sloth. miliff,
he puts himself into the garb and habit of a professor of
physick, and sets up. l'estrango,
2. fashion of dress.
horace's wit, and virgil's state,
he did not steal, but emulate;
and when he would like them appear,
their garb, but not their cloaths, did wear.
3. exteriour appearance.
- - this is some fellow,
who, having been prais'd for bluntness, doth affeit
a saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
quite from his nature. shakespeare's king liar,
ga'rbag e. m. s. [garhear, spanish. this etymology is vess
doubtful.]
1. the bowels; the offal; that part of the inwards which is
separated and thrown away.
the cloyed will,
that satiate, yet unsatisfy'd defire, that tub
both fill'd and running, ravening first the lamb, -
longs after for the garbage. shakespeare's comlins,
lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
will sate itself in a celestial bed,
and prey on garbage. shaloftsar’s harlo,
a flam more senseless than the rog’ry
of old aruspicy and aug'ry,
that out of garbages of cattle
- * one y
n this poem, p.
hudha,
according to the
d of all iii. to
gay's trivia,
joxi, 16.
denham,
presag'd th' events of truce or battle. hudibras,
who, without aversion, ever looki
on holy garbage, though by homer cook'd? rosorror.
when you receive condign punishment, you ". your
c dryas,
confessor, that parcel of guts and garbage. . . buily
gar bel. m. s. a plank next the keel of a ship. allo,
garbidg e. n.s. corrupted for garbage. and garlis'
all shavings of horns, hoofs of cattle, blood, jo,
is good manure for land. mortimer's husband).
gar pists. n.s. corrupted from garbage. - -
in newfoundland they improve their ground wo o
lish of fish. joino.
to garble. v. a. [garbellare, italian.] to fift; to palo
to separate the good from the bad... .
but you who fathers and traditions to: dryden,
and garble some, and some you quite †. t .
had our author set down this command, wit ": mo
as god gave it, and joined mother to father, it loft.
dire&amp;ly against him. - h
†. understanding works to collate, o
*image name, demo
ga'rbler. m. s. [from gar
from another.
a farther secret in this clause may
projectors, or at least the garbler; o' "
i..] he who separa" one past
discovered by th:
best be . examinor,
i
ga're01.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 903</div><p class="text">g a r
o
--"
---
ga's boil. m. s. [garbouille, french; garbuglio, italian.] dis.
order; tumult; uproar. fianmer.
look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read
what garboils she awak'd. shak. ant, and cleopatra.
garp. m. s. [garde, french.] wardship; care; custody.
ga'rden. n.s. igardd, welsh ; jardin, french ; giardino,
italian.] -
1. a piece of ground inclosed, and cultivated with extraordi-
nary care, planted with herbs or finits for food, or laid out
for pleasure.
thy promises are like adonis' gardens,
which one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next. shakesp.
my lord of ely, when i was last in holbourn,
i saw good strawberries in your garden there. shakesp. r. iii.
in the royal ordering of gardens, there ought to be gardens
for all the months in the year. bacon's essays.
in every garden should be provided flowers, fruit, shade and
water. temple.
my garden takes up half my daily care,
and my field asks the minutes i can spare. pharte.
2. a place particularly fruitful or delightful.
i am arriv'd from fruitful lombardy,
the pleasant garden of great italy. shak. tam. of the shrew.
3. garden is often used in composition for hortensis, or be-
longing to a garden.
4. garden-mould. mould fit for a garden.
they delight most in rich black garden-mould, that is deep
and light, and mixed rather with sand than clay. mortimer.
5. garden-tillage. tillage used in cultivating gardens.
peas and beans are what belong to garden-tillage as well as
that of the field. mortimer's husbandry.
6. garden-ware. the produce of gardens.
a clay bottom is a much more pernicious soil for trees and
garden-ware than gravel. mortimer’s husbandry.
to ga. rden. v. n. [from the noun..] to cultivate a garden;
to lay out gardens.
at first, in rome's poor age,
when both her kings and consuls held the plough,
orgarden'd well. ben. johnson's catiline.
when ages grow to civility and elegancy, men come to
tuild stately, sooner than to garden finely ; as if gardening
were the greater perfeotion. bacon.
ga'rd ener. m. s. [from garden.] he that attends or cultivates
gardens.
our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are
gardeners; so that, if we will plant nettles, or sow lettuce, the
power lies in our will. shakespeare's othello.
gardeners tread down any loose ground, after they have
sown onions or turnips. bacon’s natural history.
the gardener may lop religion as he pleases. howel.
the life and felicity of an excellent gardener is preferable
to all other diversions. evelyn's kalendar.
then let the learned gard’ner mark with care
the kinds of stocks, and what those kinds will hear. dryd.
ga'rdening. m. s. [from garden.] the act of cultivating or
planning gardens.
my compositions in gardening are after the pindarick man-
ner, and run into the beautiful wildness of nature, without
affecting the nicer elegancies of art. speciator.
gar e. n.s. coarse wool growing on the legs of sheep. dict.
ga'ro aris m. n.s.. [yzoyzoos gargarisme, french.j. a
liquid form of medicine to wash the mouth with. quincy.
apophlegma;isms and gargarisons draw the rheum down by
the palate. bacon's natural hisłory.
to gargar1'ze. v. a. [yo.:72:32; gargariser, french..] to
wash the mouth with medicated liquors.
vinegar, put to the nostrils, or gargarized, doth ease the
hiccough ; for that it is astringent, and inhibiteth the motion
of the spirit. - bacon's natural history.
this being relaxed, may make a shaking of the larynx;
as when we gargarize. holder's elements of speech.
ga'r get. n. j. a distemper in cattle. - -
the garget appears in the head, maw, or in the hinder
parts. amortimer's husbandry.
t, gargle. v. a. [gargouiller, french ; gargogliare, ital.
gurgel, german, the throat.) - - - -
1. to wash the throat with some liquor not suffered immedi-
ately to descend.
gargle twice or thrice with sharp oxycrate. harvey.
the excision made, the bleeding will soon be stopt by
gargling with oxycrate. iłoseman's surgery.
they comb, and then they order ev'ry hair; •
next gargle well their throats. - dryden's pers.
2. to warble; to play in the throat. an improper use.
those which only warble long,
and gargle in their throats a song: - jwaller.
so charm'd you were, you ceas'd a while to doat
on nonsense gargl’d in an eunuch's throat. fenton.
gargle. n.s. [from the verb.] a liquor with which the
throat is washed. -
his throat was washed with one of the gargles set down in
... the method of cure. i/jcman's surgery.
ga'rc lion. m. s: an exsudation of nervous juice from a
bruise, or the like, which indurates into a hara immoveable
tumour. &amp;uincy,
ga's gol. n.s. a disemper in hogs. -
the signs of the ga'gol in hogs are, hanging down of the
head, moist eyes, itaggering, and loss of appetite. mortimer.
garland, n.s. [garlande, guirland, f rench.]
i. a wreath of branches or flowers.
strephon, with leavy twigs of laurel-tree,
a garland made, on temples for to wear ;
for he then chosen was the dignity
of village-lord that whitsuntide to bear.
...a reeling world will never stand upright,
*till richard wear the garland of the realin.
-how wear the garland! do'st thou mean the crown
-ay, my good lord. shakespeare's richard iii.
then party-colour'd flow’rs of white and red
she wove, to make a garland for her head. dryden's fables.
vanquish again; though she be gone,
whose garland crown'd the victor's hair,
and reign ; though she has left the throne,
sidney.
who made thy glory worth thy care. prior.
her gods and godlike heroes rise to view,
and all her faded garlands bloom anew. pope.
2. the top; the principal ; the thing most prized.
with every minute you do change a mind,
a. call him noble, that was now your hate,
im vile, that was your garland. shakespeare.
ga'rlick. m. s. [3an, saxon, a lance; and leek, the soft o
shoots up in blades. skinner. allium, lat.] -
it has a bulbous root, consisting of many small tubercles
included in its coat ; the leaves are plain: the flowers confist
of six leaves, formed into a corymbus on the top of the stalk;
and are succeeded by subrotund fruit, divided into three cells
which contain roundish seeds. mino
garlick is of an extremely strong smell, and of an acrid
and pungent tase. it is extremely active, as may be proved
by applying plaisters of garlick to the feet, which will give a
strong smell to the breath. "hij.
garlick has, of all our plants, the greatest strength, affords
most nourishment, and supplies most spirits to those who eat
little flesh. temple,
'tis mortal sin an onion to devour;
each clove of garlick is a sacred pow'r:
religious nations sure, and blest abodes, -
where ev'ry orchard is o'er-run with gods. tate's juv.
ga'r lick pear-tree. n. s.
this tree is pretty common in jamaica, and several other
places of america, where it usually rises to the height of
thirty or forty feet, and spreads into many branches. when
the flowers fall off the pointal, it becomes a round fruit
which, when ripe, has a rough brownish rind, and a mely
sweet pulp, but a strong scent of garlick. miller.
ga'r lick isild. m. s. a plant.
gar lick eater. m. s. [garlick and eat..] a mean fellow,
you've made good work,
you and your apron men, that flood so much
upon the voice of occupation, and
the breath of garlicoraters. shakespeare's coriolanus.
ga'rment. m. s. [guarniment, old foj any thing by
which the body is covered ; cloaths; dress.
hence, rotten thing, or i shall shake thy bones
out of thy garments. shakesh. coriolanus.
our leaf, once fallen, springeth no more; neither doth the
sun or summer adorn us again with the garments of new leaves
and flowers. raleigh's history.
fairest thing that shines below,
why in this robe dost thou appear
would'st thou a while more perfect show,
thou must at all no garment wear. cowly.
three worthy persons from his side it tore,
and dy'd his garment with their scatter'd gore. j/aller.
the peacock, in all his pride, does not display half the
colours that appear in the garments of a british lady, when
she is dressed. addison's speciator.
let him that sues for the coat, i. e. the shirt, or inner gar-
ment, take the cloak also, is a proverbial phrase too; for in
the truth of the letter, a shirt is no likely matter of a law-
suit, and signifies an uncontesting sufferance of such small
losses. kettlewell.
ga(rner. m. s. [grenier, french..] a place in which threshed
grain is stored up.
earth's increase, and foyson plenty, -
barns and garners never empty. shakoffeare's tempesi,
for sundry foes the rural realm surround;
the fieldmouse builds her garner under ground:
for gather'd grain the blind laborious mole,
in winding mazes, works her hidden hole. dryden's wirgil.
to ga'rner. v. a. [from the noun..] to store as in gar-
in cis,
there, where i have garner'd up my heart,
where either i must live, or bear no life. shakesp. ohells.
ga rx r.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 904</div><p class="text">g a r
g a s
ga'rnet. n.f. [garnato, italian ; granatus, low latin; from its
resemblance in colour to the grain of the pomegranate.]
the garnet is a gem of a middle degree of hardness, be:
tween the saphire and the common crystal. it is found of
orious sizes." its surfaces are not so smooth or polise as those
of a ruby, and its colour is ever of a strong red, with a plain
admixture of blueish: its degree of colour is very different,
and it always wants much of the brightness of the ruby. hill.
the garnet seems to be a species of the carbuncle of the
ancients: the bohemian is red, with a slight cast of a flame-
colour; and the syrian is red, with a slight cast of purple.
isoodward's met. fossils.
7, ga'rnish. v. a. [garnir, french.]
1. to decorate with ornamental appendages. - -
there were hills which garnished their proud heights with
stately trees. - sidney.
all within with flowers was garnishid,
that, when mild zephyrus amongst them blew,
did breathe out bounteous smells, and painted colours shew.
spenser.
with taper light
to seek the beauteous eye of heav'n to garnish,
is wasteful and ridiculous excess. shakesp. king john.
paradise was a terrestrial garden, garnished with fruits, de-
lighting both the eye and taste. raleigh.
all the streets were garnished with the citizens, standing in
their liveries. bacon's henry vii.
2. to embellish a dish with something laid round it.
with what expence and art, how richly drest'
garnish'd with 'sparagus, himself a feast ! dryden's juv.
no man lards salt pork with orange-peel,
or garnishes his lamb with spitchcok'd ecl. king's cooktry.
3. to fit with feters. a cant term.
ga(rn is h. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. ornament; decoration ; embellishment.
so are you, sweet,
ev’n in the lovely garnish of a boy. shak. merch. of penice.
matter and figure they produce ;
for garnish this, and that for use ;
they seek to feed and please their guests. prior.
2. things strewed round a dish.
3. [in gaols.) fetters. a cant term: -
4. pensiuncula carceraria; an acknowledgment in money when
first a prisoner goes into a gaol. ainsworth.
garn is hment. n.s.. [from garnish.] ornament; embellish-
ment.
the church of saneta guistiniana in padoua is a sound piece
of good art, where the materia's being ordinary stone, without
any garnishment of sculpture, ravish the beholders. //atton.
ga'rnit ure. m. s. [from garnish..] furniture ; ornament.
they conclude, if they fall short in garniture of their knees,
that they are inferiour in furniture of their heads. gov. of t.
plain sense, which pleas'd your fires an age ago,
is lost, without the garniture of show. granville.
as nature has poured out her charms upon the female part
of our species, so they are very asiduous in bestowing upon
themselves the finest garnitures of art. addison's spefator.
ga'rous. adj. [from garum.] resembling pickle made of fish.
in a civet-cat an offensive odour proceeds, partly from its
food, that being especially fish ; whereof this humour may be
a garous excretion, and olidous separation. brown.
garran. m. s. [erse. it imports the same as gelding. the
word is still retained in scotland.]. a small horse; a hobby.
a highland horse, which, when brought into the north of
england, takes the name of galloway.
when he comes forth he will make their cows and garrans
to walk, if he doth no other harm to their persons. spenser.
every man would be forced to provide winter-fodder for
his team, whereas common garrans shift upon grass the year
round ; and this would force men to the encloiing of grounds,
so that the race of garrans would decrease. - temple.
ga rret. n.s. [garite, the tower of a citadel, french.j
1. a room on the highest floor of the house.
the mob, commission'd by the government,
are seldom to an empty garret sent. dryden’s juv. sat.
john bull skipped from room to room ; ran up stair and
down stairs, from the kitchen to the garret. arbuthn. j. bull.
on earth the god of wealth was made
sole patron of the building trade;
leaving the arts the spacious air,
with licence to build castles there :
and 'tis conceiv'd their old pretence, -
to lodge in garrets, comes from thence. swift.
2. rotten wood. not in use.
the colour of the shining part of rotten wood, by day-
light, is in some pieces white, and in some pieces inclining
to red, which they call the white and red garret. bacon.
so, n.s.. [from garret.] an inhabitant of a garret.
garrison. m. s. [garnison, french.]
1. soldiers placed in a fortified town or castle to defend it. .
how oft he said to me,
thou art no soldier fit for cupid's garrison. sidney.
2. fortified place stored with soldiers.
whom the old roman wall so ill confin'd
with a new chain of garrisons you bind 3.
3. the flate of being placed in a for ificati.
tion for wallr,
- - - in for
some of them that are laid in garris, ts def
ence,
- n will d -
to the enemies. s o no great hut
to ga r r1son. v. a. sf. poser on irelani
tresses. [from the noun..] to lecure by f:
others those forces join,
which garrison the conquests near the rhi
gao. } . or. doyd jo.
o incontinence of tongue; inability to keep a
let me here
expiate, if possible, my crime,
shameful garrulity. fle--"- a .
2. the quality of talking too much; used.”4-ft.
some vices of speech must carefully be avoid. first of all
loquacity or garrulity. - ray on the c. *
ga'rrulous. adj. [garrulus, latin.] prattling; talk ilo.
old age looks out, i laikative,
and garrulous recounts the feats of youth. th
gatter. m. s. [gardus, welsh; jartier, french: omsm,
welsh, the binding of the knee.] y
1. a string or ribband by which the stockin
leg.
let their heads be sleekly comb'd, their blue coats brush'd
and their garters of an indifferent knit. shak, tam. of the shre: 1.
when we rest in our cloaths we loosen our garter; †
other ligatures, to give the spirits free passage. 'o.
handsome garters at your knees. - so
there lay three garters, half a pair of gloves, y”
and all the trophies of his former loves, pope
2. the mark of the order of the garter, the highest order o
english knighthood.
now by my george, my garter.
-the george, profan'd, hath lost his holy honour;
the garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue, s.r.iii,
you owe your ormond nothing but a son,
to fill in future times his father's place,
and wear the garter of his mother's race. dryden,
3. the principal king at arms.
to ga rter. v. a. [from the noun..] to bind with a garter.
he, being in love, could not see to garter his hose, shako.
a person was wounded in the leg, below the gartois
place. - wiseman's surgery.
garth. m. s. sas if girth, from gird..] the bulk of the body
measured by the girdle.
g3 s. m. s. [a word invented by the chymists.] it is used by
van helmont, and seems designed to signify, in general, aspirit
not capable of being coagulated: but he uses it *; in
many senses. arris.
gof. n. s. [french; from gaston, a nation emion:
for boasting.] a boast; a bravado.
was it a gastonade to please me, that you said your fortune
was increased to one hundred a year since i left you? swift,
to gasco na’s e. v. n. [from the noun..] to boast; to brig;
to bluster.
to gash. v. a. [from hacher, to cut, french. sinner.] to
cut deep so as to make a gaping wound; to cut with a blunt
instrument so as to make the wound wide.
where the englishmen at arms had been defeated, many
of their horses were found grievously gashed or gored ho
ayward.
wit is a keen instrument, and every one can cut so gash
with it; but to carve a beautiful image requires art. tillotson,
see me gash'd with knives,
or sear'd with burning steel. row', royalso
streaming with blood, all over gash'd with wool.
he reel'd, he groan'd, and at the altar sell, 4 philipi.
gas h. m. s. [[rom the verb.]
i. a deep and wide wound.
he glancing on his helmet, made a large
and open gash therein; were not his targo,
that broke the violence of his intent, •
the weary soul from thence it would discharge. o
a perilous gas, a very limb lopt off. shao!” ho! :
hamilton drove newton almost to the end of the "" o:
newton on a sudden gave him such a gas” on the o o:
therewith he fell to the ground. hajw
but th' ethereal substance o
not long divifible; and from the gosh
a so notarous humour issuing flow'd, milton,
2. the mark of a wound. i know not if this * * be?"
i was fond of back-sword and o o o:
in my body many a black and blue gash and '9" r 1 as w.
go. . j. 'f from gascoigne. ... soo. go”
wide hose; wide breeches. an old . word.
if one point break, the other will o'; sight,
or, if both |. your gaffins fall. sodies. twohno.
7% gas p. v. n. [from gape, skinner; . from gosso,
sob, junius.] - i, to
fronn §ar,
g is held upon the
anith, to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 905</div><p class="text">g a t
1. to open the mouth wide; to catch breath with labour.
the sick for air before the portal gasp. dryden's firgil.
they rais'd a feeble cry with trembling notes;
but the weak voice deceiv'd their gashing throats. dryden.
the gasping head flies off; a purple flood
flows from the trunk. dryden's afn.
the ladies gasp'd, and scarcely could respire;
the breath they drew no longer air, but fire. dryden.
a scantling of wit lay gasping for life, and groaning be-
neath a heap of rubbish. dryden's spanish fryar.
the rich countrymen in austria were faint and gasping for
breath. brown's travels.
pale and faint,
he gasps for breath; and, as his life flows from him,
demands to see his friends. addison's cato.
2. to emit breath by opening the mouth convulsively.
i lay me down to gasp my latest breath;
the wolves will get a breakfast by my death.
he staggers round, his eyeballs roll in death,
...and with short sobs he gaspi away his breath. dryden's abn.
3. to long for. this sense is, i think, not proper, as nature
never expresses desire by gasping. -
the castilian and his wife had the comfort to be under the
same master, who, seeing how dearly they loved one another,
and gasped after their liberty, demanded a most exorbitan:
price for their ransom. spectator.
gasp. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the act of opening the mouth to catch breath.
2. the short catch of breath in the last agonies.
his fortunes all lie speechless, and his name
is at last gasp. shakespeare's cymbeline.
ah, warwick, montague hath breath’d his last :
and to the latest gasp cry’d out for warwick. shak. h. vi.
if in the dreadful hour of death,
if at the latest gasp of breath,
when the cold damp bedevs your brow,
you hope for mercy, shew it now. addison's rosamond.
to gast. v. a. [from zarz, saxon. see aghast.] to
. aghast; to fright; to shock; to terrify ; to fear; to
affray.
‘when he saw my best alarmed spirits,
bold in the quarrel's right, rous’d to th’ encounter,
or whether gasted by the noise i made,
fuli suddenly he fled. shakespeare's king lear.
a strick, adj. [from ya; ne.] belonging to the belly.
gas." ro'raphy, n. s. 72% and £3.12.) in strictness of
etymology signifies no more than sewing up any wound of
the belly; yet in common acceptation it implies, that the
wound of the belly is complicated with another of the in-
testine. sharp's surgery.
gast roto my. n.s. [72; ne and rerop. 2..] the act of cutting
open the belly.
gat: , the preterite of get.
moses gat him up into the mount.
gate. m. s. [...eac, saxon.]
1. the door of a city, castle, palace, or large building.
open the gate of mercy, gracious god
my soul flies through these wounds to seek thee.
gates of monarchs
are arch'd so high, that giants may jet through,
and keep their impious turbands on, without
good-morrow to the sun. shakespeare's cymbeline.
2. a frame of timber upon hinges to give a passage into inclosed
grounds.
know'st thou the way to dover ?
both stile and gate, horseway and footpath.
3. an avenue; an opening. - - - -
auria had done nothing but wisely and politickly, in setting
the venetians together by the ears with the turks, and open-
ing a gate for a long war. knolles's history.
gatevein. m. s. the vena porta. -
being a king that loved wealth, he could not endure to have
trade sick, nor any obstruction to continue in the gatevein
which disperseth that blood. - bacon's henry vii.
gateway. m. s. [gate and way.] a way through gates of
inclosed grounds. -
gateways between inclosures are so miry, that they cannot
cart between one field and another. mortimer's husbandry.
to gather. v. a. s.3abenan, saxon.]
i. to colle&amp;t ; to bring into one place.
gather stones—and they took stones and made an heap. gen.
2. to get in harvest. - -
the seventh year we shall not sow, nor gather in our in-
crease. - lev. xxv. 20.
3. to pick up ; to glean.
his opinions -
have satisfied the king for his divorce, . . . . -
gather'd from all the famous colleges. shakesp. henry viii.
salt up the highway, gather out the stones." is skii. 16.
. i will spend this preface upon those from whom i have
gathered my knowledge; for i am but a gatherer. j/otton.
vol. i.
dryden.
ex. xxiv. 18.
shakesp.
shakesp.
to pay the creditor, that lent him his rent,
up money by degrees.
4. to crop; to pluck.
what have i done * -
to see my youth, my beauty, and my love
no sooner gain'd, but slighted and betray'd ;
and like a rose just gather'd from the flaik,
but only smelt, and cheaply thrown aside,
5 to: on the ground ! dryden's spanish fryar.
they have gathered themselves together against me. }.}.
all the way we went there were gathered some
both sides, standing in a row.
6. to heap up ; to accumulate. a
he that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance,
shall gather it for him that will pity the poor.
7. to select and take.
save us, o lord, and gather us from among the heathen,
to give thanks unto thy holy name. o ps, cvi. 47.
8. to sweep together.
the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net that was cast
into the sea, and gathered of every kind. asat. xiii. 47.
9. to collect charitable contributions.
io. to bring into one body or interest.
i will gather others to him, besides those that are gathered
unto him. - ms. lvi. 8.
11. to draw together from a state of diffusion ; to compress;
to contract.
- immortal tully shone,
the roman rostra deck'd the consul’s throne;
gath'ring his flowing robe he secm'd to stand,
in act to speak, and graceful stretch'd his hand.
he must gather
locke.
&gt; people on
bacon's new atlantis.
proverbs.
pope.
12. to gain. p
he gathers ground upon her in the chace;
now breathes upon her hair with nearer pace.
dryden.
13. to pucker needlework. -
14. to collect logically ; to know by inference.
that which, out of the law of reason or of god, men pro-
bably gathering to be expedient, they make it law. hooker.
the reason that i gather he is mad,
is a mad tale he told to day at dinner,
of his own door being shut against his entrance. shakoff.
after he had seen the vision, we endeavoured to get into
macedonia, assu.edly gathering that the lord had called us. a.ii.
from this doctrine of the increasing and lesiening of fin in
this respect, we may gather, that all fins are not alike and
equal, as the stoicks of ancient times, and their followers,
have falsely imagined. perkins.
return’d
by night, and listening where the hapless pair
sat in their sad discourse, and various plaint,
thence gather'd his own doom. a silton's paradis, lost.
madamoiselle de scudery, who is as old as sibyl, is trans-
lating chaucer into french: from which i gather that he has
formerly been translated into the old provencal. dryden.
15. to draw together in needlework. y
16. to gather breath. [a proverbial expression.] to have
respite from any calamit -
the luckless lucky maid
a long time with that savage people staid,
to gather breath, in many miseries.
s £72/c/".
to gather. v. n. p so
i. to be condensed; to thicken.
if ere night the gath'ring clouds we fear, -
a song will help the beating storm to bear. dryden's pass.
when gath'ring clouds o'ershadow all the skies,
and shoot quick lightnings, weigh, my boys! he cries. dry.
when the rival winds their quarrei try,
south, east and west, on airy coursers born,
the whirlwind gathers, and the woods are torn.
think on the storm that gathers o'er your head,
and threatens every hour to burst upon it. addison's cato.
2. to grow larger by the accretion of similar matter.
their snow-ball did not gather as it went ; for the people
came in to them. bacon's henry vii.
3. to assemble. * * *
there be three things that mine heart feareth ; the slander
of a city, the gathering together of an unruly multitude, and
a false accusation. ecclus, xxvi. 5.
4. to generate pus or matter. - o, .
ask one, who by repeated restraints hath subdued his fia.
tural rage, how he likes the change, and he will tes you 'tis
no less happy than the ease of a broken imposthume after the
painful gathering and filling of it. decay of piety.
gather. m. s. [from the verb.] pucker; cloth drawn toge-
ther in wrinkles. -
give laws for pantaloons,
the length of breeches, and the gathers,
dryden.
part cannons, perriwigs and feathers. hudibras,
gather er. m. s. [from gather.]
1. one that gathers; one that ceilests; a collector.
io d i will<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 906</div><p class="text">g a v
g a y
- d this preface about those from whom i have ga-
joo. for i am but a gatherer and disposer of
other mens stuff. isotton's preface to elem, of architecture.
2. one that gets in a crop of any kind: -
i was a herdman and a gatherer of sycamore fruit. amos.
nor in that land
do poisonous herbs deceive the gatherer's hand. may's wirg.
ga’rheking. m. s. [from gather..] collection of charitable
contributions.
let every one lay by him in store, that there be no gather-
ings when i come. 1 cor. xvi. 2.
ga’rren-trf e. m. s. a species of cornelian cherry.
gaude. m. s. [the etymology of this word is uncertain :
skinner imagines it may come from gaude, french, a yellow
flower, yellow being the most gaudy colour, junius, accord-
ing to his custom, talks of 3,2,3"; and mr. lye finds gaude,
in douglass, to signify deceit or fraud, from gwawdio, welsh,
to cheat. it seems to me most easily deducible from gaudium,
latin, joy; the cause of joy; a token of joy : thence aptly
applied to any thing that gives or expresses pleasure. in scot:
land this word is still retained, both as a showy bawble, and
the person fooled. it also in scotland denotes a yellow flower.]
an ornament; a fine thing; any thing worn as a sign of joy.
it is not now much used. '
he stole th’ impression of her fantasy,
with bracelets of thy hair, rings, gaudes, conceits,
knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats. shakespeare.
the sun is in the heav'n, and the proud day,
attended with the pleasures of the world,
is all too wanton, and too full of gaudes,
to give me audience. shakespeare's king lear.
my love to hermia
is melted as the snow; seems to me now
as the remembrance of an idle gaude,
which in my childhood i did doat upon. shakespeare.
some bound for guiney, golden sand to find,
bore all the gaudes the simple natives wear;
some for the pride of turkish courts design'd,
for folded turbants finest holland bear. dryd. ann. mirab.
7% gaude. v. a. [gaudeo, latin.] to exult; to rejoice at
any thing.
go to a gossip's feast, and gaude with me,
after so long grief such nativity. shakespeare.
ga’u dfry. m. s. [from gaude..] finery; ostentatious luxury
of dress.
the triumph was not pageants and gaudery, but one of the
wisest and noblest institutions that ever was. bacon's essays.
age, which is but one remove from death, and should have
nothing about us but what looks like a decent preparation for
it, scarce ever appears, of late, but in the high mode, the
flaunting garb, and utmost gaudery of youth, with cloaths as
ridiculously, and as much in the fashion, as the person that
wears them is usually grown out of it. south.
a plain suit, since we can make but one,
is better than to be by tarnish’d gaud'ry known. dryden.
ga'udily. adv. [from gaudy..] showily.
gaudin ess. n.s.. [from gaudy..] showiness; tinsel appearance.
ga'u dy. adj. so gaude..] showy 3 splendid; pompous;
ostentatiously fine.
costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, .
but not exprest in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
for the apparel oft proclaims the man.
fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess,
as thick and numberless
as the gay motes that people the sun-beams. milton.
a goldfinch there i saw, with gaudy pride
of painted plumes, that hopp'd from side to side. dryden.
the bavarian duke his brigades leads,
gallant in arms, and gaudy to behold. phillips.
a man who walks direetly to his journey's end, will arrive
thither much sooner than him who wanders aside to gaze at
every thing, or to gather every gaudy flower. watts.
h is much to be lamented, that persons so naturally qualified
to be great examples of piety, should, by an erroneous edu-
cation, be made poor and gaudy spectacles of the greatest va-
nity, law.
gao by. m. s. [gaudium, latin.] a feast; a festival; a day
of plenty. a word used in the univerfity.
he may surely be content with a fast to-day, that is sure of
a ga udy to-morrow. cheyne,
gave. the preterite of give.
thou can'st not every day give me thy heart;
if thou can't give it, then thou never gav's it:
lovers riddles are, that though thy heart depart,
w it stays at home, and thou with losing saw'st it. donne,
ga vel. n; s. a provincial word for ground.
z let it lie upon the ground or gavel eight or ten days. mort.
o. n. s. [in law.] a custom whereby the lands of
. .. divided at his death amongst all his sons,
if he i. 1. i. o equally divided among the brothers,
divers places &amp; . of his own. this custom is of force in
ngland, but especially in kent, cowel.
shakesp. hamlet.
among other welsh customs he aboli
whereby the heirs female were o that of
bastards did inherit as well as the le
very irish gavelkind.
to gaugf. v. a. [gauge, jauge, a measuring . ireland.
1s pronounced, and often written, gage.] • french. it
1. to measure with respect to the contents of a vessel
2. to measure with regard to any proportion. cl.
the vanes nicely gauged on each fide, bro
and narrow on the other, both which min. to the pr
1c dtu-
gressive motion of the bird. derham'
there is nothing more persedly ...o.
artful manner in homer, of taking measure or o anth.
roes by each other, and thereby elevating the o; his he.
person by the opposition of it to some other he i er of one
excel. pope's essay on ho to
gauge. "...s. [from the verb.] a measure; a so attle,
this plate must be a gage to file your woma. o -
equal breadth by. moxon's % o; to
if money were to be hired, as land is, or to . o ...
the owner himself, it might then be had at the mo
which would be a constant gauge of your trade and wealth o
timothy proposed to his mistress, that she should em. o,
no servant that was above four foot seven inches high; o:
that purpose had prepared a gage, by which they wo. to :
measured. arbuthnot's hisory of john bull
gau’o er. m. s. [from gauge.] one whose boss.
sure vessels or quantities. shta-
those earls and dukes have been privileged with royali
risdiction ; and appointed their special officers, as heir .
miral, gauger, and escheator. carew mo
gaunt, adj. [as if gewant, from zepanian, to lesson saxon.]
thin ; slender ; lean; meagre. 2 -
oh, how that name befits my compositions
old gaunt, indeed, and gaunt in being old:
within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;
and who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
for sleeping england long time have i watch'd;
watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:
the pleasure that some fathers feed upon,
is my strict fast; i mean my childrens looks;
and therein fasting, thou hast made me gaunt:
gaunt am i for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones. sh, r.i.
two mastiffs, gaunt and grim, her flight pursu'd,
and oft their fasten’d fangs in blood embru'd. dryd. follo,
gox. adv. [from gaunt.) leanly; slenderly; mea.
gerly.
ga'untlet. n.s. [gantelet, french..] an iron glove used for
defence, and thrown down in challenges. it is sometimes
in poetry used for the costus, or boxing glove,
a scaly gauntlet now, with joints of steel,
must glove this hand. shaloft. henry iv,
feel but the difference, soft and rough;
this a gauntlet, that a muff. clawtland.
some shall in swiftness for the goal contend,
and others try the twanging bow to bend; … "
the strong with iron gauntlets arm'd shall stand,
oppos'd in combat, on the yellow sand. dryd, pirg,
who naked wrestled best, besmear'd with oil;
or who with gauntlets gave or took the soil. dryd, falli,
the funeral of some valiant knight
may give this thing its proper light:
view his two gauntlets; these declare -
that both his hands were us’d to war. prior,
so to repel the vandals of the stage,
our vet’ran bard resumes his tragick rage;
he throws the gauntlet otway us’d to wield,
and calls for englishmen to judge the field. southern,
gavor. n.f. [gavetic, french.j a kind of dance;
the disposition in a fiddle to play tunes in prelude, sara-
bands, jigs and gavots, are real qualities in the into
arbuthnot and pope's mart. scribiri,
gauz e. m. s. a kind of thin transparent filk, , , h
silken cloaths were used by the ladies; and , . of
were thin, like gauze. arbuthnot on como
brocadoes and damasks, and tabbies and £4o
are lately brought over.
gawk. n. s. [xcac, saxon.]
1. a cuckow. -
2. a foolish fellow. in both senses it is retained in *.
gawn. n. s. [corrupted for gallon.] a small tub, or
vessel. a provincial word. which
ga(wntree. m. s. [scottish.]. a wooden frame on
beer-casks are set when tunned.
gay. adj. [gay, french.j
1. airy; chearful; merry; frolick. lay;
smooth flow the waves, the zephyrs gently play; pot.
belinda smil'd, and all the world was go.
ev’n rival wits did voiture's fate deplo pot.
and the gay mourn'd, who newer mour" d before.
2. fine ; showy. a virgin
gavelt;
y, excluded, and o
stimate, which is the
ad on one fide,
saft,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 907</div><p class="text">g a z
g e l
ga’zeful. adj. [gaze and full.] looking intently.
**"..., 7
a virgin that loves to go goy. bar. vi. 9.
gay. m. s. [from the adjective..] an ornament; an embes.
lishment.
morose and untractable spirits look upon precepts in em-
blem, as they do upon gays and pictures, the fooleries of so
many old wives tales. l’estrange,
ga’s etx. m. s. [gayete, french; from gay.] 3/?rang
1. chearfulness; airiness; merriment.
2. a&amp;ts of juvenile pleasure.
and from those gay?ties our youth requires
to exercise their minds, our age retires. denham.
3. finery; show.
qur gayety and our gilt are all besmirch'd,
with rainy marching in the painful field. shakesp. h. v.
ga'yly. adv.
1. merrily ; chearfully; airily.
2. splendidly; pompously; with great show.
the ladies, gayly dress'd, the mall adorn
with curious dies, and paint the sunny morn. gay.
like some fair flow'r, that early spring supplies,
that gayly blooms, but ev'n in blooming dies. pope.
go”. m. s. [from gay..] gayety; finery. not much in
use.
to gaze. v. n. [27&amp;cer3a*, or rather 3erean, to see, sax.]
to look intently and earnestly ; to look with eagerness.
what see'st thou there king henry's diadem,
inchas'd with all the honours of the world:
if so, gaze on. shakespeare's henry iv.
from some she cast her modest eyes below ;
at some her gazing glances roving flew. fairfax.
gaze not on a maid, that thou fall not by those things that
are precious in her. ecclus, ix. 5.
a lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind. shakespeare.
high stations tumults, but not bliss create;
none think the great unhappy, but the great,
fools gaze and envy; envy darts a sting,
which makes a swain as wretched as a king. toung.
7% gaze. v. a. to view stedfastly.
strait toward heav'n my wond'ring eyes i turn'd,
and gaz'd a while the ample sky.
gaze. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. intent regard; look of eagerness or wonder; fixed look.
being lighten’d with her beauty's beam,
and thereby fill'd with happy influence,
and lifted up above the worldis gaze,
to sing with angels her immortal praise.
do but note a wild and wanton herd, -
if any air of musick touch their ears,
you shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze,
by the sweet power of musick. shakesp. merchant of venice.
not a month
*fore your queen dy'd, she was more worth such gazes
than what you look on now. shakesp. winter's tale.
with secret gaze,
or open admiration, him behold,
on whom the great creator hath bestow'd
worlds. milton's paradise lost.
pindar is a dark writer, wants connexion as to our under-
standing, soars out of fight, and leaves his readers at a gaze.
dryden's preface to ovid.
after having stood at gaze before this gate, he discovered
an inscription. addison's freeholder.
2. the object gazed on.
i must die
betray'd, captiv'd, and both my eyes put out;
made of my enemies the scorn and gaze;
to grind in brazen fetters, under task,
with my heav'n-gifted strength.
ga'zel. n. s. an arabian deer.
gazer. n.f. [from gaze.] he that gazes; one that looks
intently with eagerness or admiration.
in her cheeks the vermil red did shew,
like roses in a bed of lilies shed;
the which ambrosial odours from them threw,
and gazers sense with double pleasure fed. fairy queen.
i'll slay more gazers than the basilisk. shakesp. hen. vi.
bright as the sun, her eyes the gazers strike;
and, like the sun, they shine on all alike. .. • pope.
his learned ideas give him a transcendent delight; and yet,
at the same time, discover the blemishes which the common
gazer never observed. jwatts's logick.
milton.
spenser.
milton's agonisłes.
the brightness of her beauty clear,
the ravisht hearts of gazeful men might rear . . .
to admiration of that heavenly light. spensor on beauty.
gazehound. m. s. [gaze and hound; ranit agafous, skinner.]
a hound that pursues not by the scent, but by the eye.
see'st thou the gazehound ! how with glance severe
from the close herd he marks the destin'd deer!
gazette. n.f. [gazetta is a venetian halfpenny, the price
of a newspaper, of which the first was published at venice.]
tickel.
a paper of news ; a paper of publick intellige is as-
cented indifferently on the first or last ors. it is ag
and sometimes when the loss is small,
and danger great, they challenge all;
print new additions to their feats,
and emendations in gazettes. hudibrar.
an english gentleman, without geography, cannot weii
understand a gazette. - locke,
one cannot hear a name mentioned in it that does not
bring to mind a piece of the gazette. addison's guardian.
all, all but truth, falls dead-born from the press;
like the last gazette, or the last address. , - pope.
gazette‘fr. n.s. [from gazette.] -
i. a writer of news. - -** - -
2. an officer appointed to publish news by authority, whom
steele calls the lowest minister of state. - - -
satire is no more: i feel it die:
z no gazetteer more innocent than i. pope,
ga zingstock. . m. s. [gaze and stock.] a person gazed at
with scorn or abhorrence. - - - ----
these things are offences to us, by making us gazingstocks
to others, and objects of their scorn and derision. -
gazo'n. n.s. [french..] in fortification, pieces of fresh earth
covered with grass, cut in form of a wedge, about a foot long
and half a foot thick, to line parapets and the traverses of
galleries. - harris.
gear. m. s. [3%rian, to cloath; geapne, furniture, saxon.]
1. furniture; accoutrements; dress; habit; ornaments.
array thyself in her most gorgeous gear. ... fairy queen.
when he found her bound, stript from her gear,
and vile tormentors ready saw in place, . . . . . .
- -
he broke through. fairfax.
when once her eve - - - - - -
hath met the virtue of this magick dust, *
i shall appear some harmless villager, -
whom thrift keeps up about his country gear. milton.
i fancy every body observes me as i walk the street, and
long to be in my old plain gear again. addison's guardian.
to see some radiant nymph appear
in all her glitt'ring birthday gear,
you think some goddess from the sky -
descended, ready cut and dry. swift.
2. the traces by which horses or oxen draw. - *
apollo's spite pallas discern'd, and flew to tydeus' son;
his scourge reacht, and his horse made fresh; then took her
angry run - * - - - - o
at king eumelus, brake his gears. chapman's iliad.
the frauds he learn'd in his fanatick years
made him uneasy in his lawful gears.
3. stuff. hanmer.
if fortune be a woman, she is a good wench for this gear.
shakespeare's merchant of venice.
4. [in scotland.] goods or riches: as, he has gear enough.
5. the furniture of a draught-horse. , -
ge'ason. adj. [a word which i find only in spenser.] won-
derful. ... * *
it to leeches seemed strange and geason. hubberd's tale.
geat. m. s. [corrupted from jett..] . the hole through which
the metal runs into the mold. moxon's mech. exer.
geck. n. s. [zeac, a cuckow ; geck, german, a fool; gawk,
offs a bubble easily imposed upon. hanmer. obsolete.
why did you suffer jachimo to taint his noble heart and
brain with needless jealousy, and to become the geck and scorn
o' th' other's villainy shakespeare's cymbeline.
why have you suffer'd me to be imprison'd,
and made the most notorious geck and gull
that e'er invention play'd on 3 shakesp. twelfth night.
7, geck. v. a. [from the noun..] to cheat; to trick.
gee. a term used by waggoners to their horses when they
would have them go faster.
ge ese. the plural of goose.
ge'lable. adj. [from gelu, latin.] what may be congealed
or concreted into a gelly.
ge'latin e. adj. [gelatus, latin.] formed into a gelly;
3:...; viscous; stiff and cohesive.
that pellucid gelatinous substance is an excrement cast off
from the shoals of fish that inhabit the main. //oodward.
you shall always see their eggs laid carefully up in that
spermatick gelatine matter, in which they are reposited. derh.
to geld. v. a. preter. gelded or gelt; part. pass gelded or gelt.
[gelten, german.] ---
1. to castrate; to deprive of the power of generation.
geld bull-calf and ram-lamb as soon as they fall. toffer.
lord say hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it an
eunuch. - shakesp. henry vi.
2. to deprive of any essential part. :-
he bears his course, and runs me up
with like advantage on the other side,
gelding th' oppos'd continent as much
as on the other fide it takes from you. shakft. henry iv.
3. to deprive of any thing immodest, or liable to objection.
they were diligent enough to make sure work, and to geld
7 it.
dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 908</div><p class="text">g e m
g e n
it so clearly in some places that they took away the very man-
hood of it. dryden’s preface to cleomenes,
gelder. m. s. [from geld.] one that performs the act of
castration.
geld later with gelders, as many one do, -
and look of a dozen to geld away two. tussor.
no sow golder did blow his horn -
to geld a cat, but cry’d reform. hudibras.
golper. rose. n. s. [i suppose brought from guelderland.]
the leaves are like those of the maple-tree: the flowers
consist of one leaf, in a circular rose form. miller.
the golder-rose is increased by suckers and cuttings. mort.
geoloing. m. s. (from geld.] any animal castrated, particu-
larly an horse.
though naturally there be more males of horses, bulls or
rams than females; yet artificially, that is, by making geld-
ings, oxen and weathers, there are fewer. graunt.
the lord lieutenant may chuse out one of the best horses,
and two of the best geldings; for which shall be paid one hun-
dred pounds for the horse, and fifty pounds a-piece for the
geldings. temple.
ge'lll). adj. [gelidus, latin.] extremely cold.
from the deep ooze and gelid cavern rous'd,
they flounce. thomson's spring.
geli"dity. n.s.. [from gelid.]. extreme cold. dici.
ge'lidness. m. s. [from gelid.]. extreme cold. diff.
ge'lly. m. s. [gelatus, latin.] any viscous body; viscidity;
glue; gluey substance.
my best blood turn
to an infected gelly.
the tapers of the gods,
the sun and moon, became like waxen globes,
the shooting stars end all in purple gellies,
and chaos is at hand. dryden and lee's oedipus.
the white of an egg will coagulate by a moderate heat,
and the hardest of animal solids are resolvable again into
gellies. arbuthnot on aliments.
gelt. n. s. [from geld..] a castrated animal; gelding. not
used.
the spaved gelts they esteem the most profitable. mortimer.
gelt. m. s. [corrupted for the sake of rhyme from gilt.] tin-
sel; gilt surface.
won her with a girdle of gel,
embost with bugle about the belt.
gelt. the participle passive of geld.
let the others be gelt for oxen.
gem. n.s. [gemma, latin.]
1. a jewel ; a precious stone of whatever kind.
love his fancy drew;
and so to take the gem urania sought. sidney.
i saw his bleeding rings,
their precious gems new lost, became his guide,
led him, begg'd for him, sav'd him from despair. shakesp.
it will seem a hard matter to shadow a gem, or well pointed
diamond, that hath many fides, and to give the lustre where
shakes). ip'inter's tale.
spensor's pasłorals.
mortimer’s husbandry.
it ought. peacham on drawing.
stones of small worth may lie unseen by day;
but night itself does the rich gem betray. cowley.
the basis of all gems is, when pure, wholly diaphanous,
and either crystal or an adamantine matter; but we find the
diaphaneity of this matter changed, by means of a fine metal-
lick matter. //oodward.
2. the first bud.
from the joints of thy prolifick stem
a swelling knot is raised, call'd a gem;
whence, in short space, itself the cluster shows. denham.
embolden'd out they come,
and swell the gems, and burst the narrow room. dryden.
to gem. v. a. spemma, lat.] to adorn, as with jewels or buds.
to gem. v. n. [gemmo, latin.] to put forth the first buds.
last rose, in dance, the stately trees, and spread
their branches, hung with copious fruit; or gemm'd
- their blossoms. milton's paradis loft.
go; lliparous. adj. [gemelli and pario, latin.] bearing
wins. dic.
t2 geminate. v. a. [gemino, latin.] to double. dic.
gemination. m. s. [from geminate.] repetition; redupli-
cation.
be not afraid of them that kill the body: fear him, which,
after he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell: yea, i say
into you, with a gemination, which the present controversy
shews not to have been causeless, fear him. boyle.
ge'min.y. m. s. [gemini, latin.] "twins; a pair; a brace; a
couple. -
i have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for
you, and your couch fellow, nim; or else you had looked
through the grate, like a geminy of baboons. shakeshcare.
. a geminy of asses split, would make just four of you. congr.
ge *nos. adj. [geminus, latin.] double.
christians have baptized these geminous births, and double
onascencies, with several names, as conceiving in them a
distinetion of souls. brown's pulgar errours.
ge'mmary. adj. [from gem.] pertaini
the principle and gemmary affection
for irradiancy, which is found in many
verable in this.
ge's meous. adj. [gemmeus, latin.]
1. tending to gems.
sometimes we find them in the gemmezu,
2. resembling gems.
o sity. m. s. [from gem.] the quality of being a
ge mote. m. s. a meeting; the court of the hund d diff,
solete. red. ob-
gender. m. s. [genus, latin ; gendre, french.]
1. a kind; a sort. not in use.
our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills a -
deners; so that if we will supply it with one gender o :
. o it with o, the power and corrigible o:
of this 11ts in our will. s} *
the other motive, hakespeare's othell.
why to a o: court i might not go,
is the great love the general gender b
2. a sex. § g &lt;&gt; are me. shaft. hinh.
3. [in grammar.]. a denomination given to nouns from thei
being joined with an adjective in this or that termination. c.
cubitus, sometimes cubitum in the neutral gender, fi mi.
the lower part of the arm on which we lean. o:
ulysses speaks of nausicaa, yet immediately chings t
words into the masculine gender.
to ge'nder. v. a. [engendrer, french.]
1. to beget.
2. to produce ; to cause.
foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they
"go gems orjewel,
* its translucency. o
gems, it is not disco-
brown's pulgar error
matteritself. woodw,
broom.
do gender strife. 2 tim, ii. 23.
to ge'nder. v. n. to copulate; to breed.
a cistern for foul toads
to gender in. shakoffeare'. othell,
thou shalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind,
lev. xix. i9.
genea to gical. adj. [from genealogy.) pertaining to descents
or families; pertaining to the history of the successions of
houses.
genea logist. m. s. [yovszaoyiw; genealogisle, french.) he
who traces descents.
geneatlogy. m. s. [ysvia and x6,6}..] history of the
succession of families; enumeration of descent in order of suc-
cession; a pedigree.
the ancients ranged chaos into several regions; and in that
order successively rising one from another, as if it was a pedi-
gree or genealogy. burnet'; thur).
generable. adj. [from genero, latin.] that may be pro-
duced or begotten.
general. adj. [general, french; generalis, latin.]
1. comprehending many species or individuals; not special; not
particular.
to conclude from particulars to general is a false way of
arguing. brom,
2. lax in signification; not restrained to any special or particu-
lar import.
where the author speaks more striclly and particularly on
any theme, it will explain the more loose and general expts,
sions. isasis on the mind.
3. not restrained by narrow or distinetive limitations.
a general idea is an idea in the mind, considered there as
separated from time and place, and so capable to *p*
any particular being that is conformable to it. o
4. relating to a whole class or body of men, or a who"
of any being. - - ial
they, because some have been admitted with.”
make that fault general which is particular. whitgift.
5. publick; comprising the whole. -
now would we deign him burial of his men,
till he disbursed at saint colmeskill isle, sailiff
ten thousand dollars to our gen'ral use. shais.) atbf{!).
nor fail'd they to express how much they pr" d,
that for the general safety he despis'd
his own.
6. not directed to any single object. l
if the same thing be peculiarly evil, that go”
will be turned into a particular hatred against it.
7. having relation to all.
the wall of paradise upsprung,
which to our general fire gave prospes large milton,
into his nether empire neighb'ring round.
8. extensive, though not universal.
9. common; usual.
milan's paradio loft,
aversion
spratt,
i've been bold,
for that i knew it the most general way.
10. general is appended to several offices: *
solicitor general, vicar general.
general. m. s. -
1. the whole; the totality; the main,
particulars. that
shakes. timon,
attorney gent",
without insiding"
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 909</div><p class="text">g. e. n
g. e. n.
o
"... --
that which makes an action fit to be commanded or for-
bidden, can be nothing else, in general, but its tendency to
promote or binder the attainment of some end. norris.
in particulars our knowledge begins, and so spreads itself
by degrees to generals. locke.
i have considered milton's paradise lost in the fable, the
characters, the sentiments, and the language; and have shewn
, that he excels, in general, under each of these heads. addison.
an history painter paints man in general; a portrait painter,
a particular man, and consequently a defective model. reynolds.
2. the publick; the interest of the whole. not in use.
neither my place, nor aught l heard of business,
hath raised me from my bed; nor doth the general
take hold on me; for my particular grief
ingluts and swallows other sorrows. shakespeare's othello.
the vulgar. not in use.
the play, i remember, pleased not the million; 'twas ca-
viare to the general: but it was, as i received it, and others,
whose judgment in such matters cried in the top of mine, an
excellent plov shakspeare's hamlet.
4. [general, fr.] one that has the command over an army.
a general is one that hath power to command an army. locke.
the generals on the enemy's side are inferior to several that
once commanded the french armies. addison on the war.
- the war's whole art each private soldier knows,
and with a gen'ral’s love of conquest glows. addison.
gene rali'ss imo. m. s. [generalisime, french, from general.]
the supreme commander. it is often rather a title of honour
than olice.
commission of generalisimo was likewise given to the prince.
clarendon.
pompey had deserved the name of great; and alexander, of
the same cognomination, was generalisimo of greece. brown.
genera'lity. m. s. [generalite, french ; from general.]
1. the state of being general; the quality of including species
or particulars.
because the curiosity of man's wit doth with peril wade
farther in the search of things than were convenient, the same
is thereby restrained unto such generalities as, every where of
fering themselves, are apparent to men of the weakest con-
ceit. hooker.
these certificates do only in the generality mention the par-
ties contumacies and disobedience. ayliffe's parergon.
2. the main body; the bulk; the common mass.
necessity, not extending to the generality, but resting upon
private heads. raleigh's essays.
by his own principles he excludes from salvation the gene-
rality of his own church; that is, all that do not believe upon
his grounds. tillotson.
the generality of the english have such a favourable opinion
of treason, nothing can cure them. addison.
they publish their ill-natured discoveries with a secret pride,
and applaud themselves for the fingularity of their judgment,
which has found a flaw in what the generality of mankind ad-
mires. addison.
the wisest were distracted with doubts, while the generality
wandered without any ruler. fogers.
ge'ner all y. adv. [from general.] - - - - -
1. in general; without specification or exact limitation.
i am not a woman to be touch'd with so many giddy fancies
as he bath generally taxed their whole sex withal., shakespeare,
generally we would not have those that read this work of
sylva sylvarum, account it strange that we have set down par-
ticulars untried. bacon's natural history.
2. extensively, though not universally.
3. commonly; frequently. -- -
4. in the main; without minute detail; in the whole taken to-
ether.
generally speaking, they live very quietly. addis, guardian.
generals, speaking, they have been gaining ever since, though
with frequent interruptions. - swift.
genergy speaking, persons designed for long life, though
in their former years they were small eaters, yet find their
appetites encrease with their age. - blackmore.
geoneraln ess. n. s. [rom general.] wide extent; though
short of universality; frequency; commonness. . .
they had, with a general consent, rather springing by the
generalis, of the cause than of any artificial practice, set them-
selves in arms. sidney.
ge's fra1 ty. m. s. [from general.] the whole; the totality.
the municipa laws of this kingdom are of a vast extent,
and include in their generally all those several laws which are
allowed as the rule of justice and judicial proceedings. hale.
ge'nerant. m. s. [gentrans, latin.] the begetting or pro-
ductive power.
some believe the soul made by god, some by angels, and
some by the generant: whether, it be immediately created or
traduced bath been the great ball of contention. glanv sceps.
in such pretended generations the generant or active prin-
ciple is supposed to be the sun, which, being an inanimate
body, cannot act otherwise than by his heat. ray,
to geanerate. v. a. [genero, latin.]
vol. i,
5. an age.
1. to beget; to propagate.
those creatures which being wild generate seldom
tame, generate often. 5
2. to produce to life; to procreate,
god created the great whales, and each
soul living, each that creet, which plenteously
the waters generated by their kinds. amilton
or find some other way to generate -
mankind.
3. to cause; to produce.
sounds are generated where there is no air at all. bacon
whatever generates a quantity of good chyle, must likewise
g :... o o - f: [f arbuthnot on aliments.
- • ?!. /- from generate ; generation. f
1. the act of begetting or producing. generation, french.]
seals make excellent impressions; and so it may be thought
of founds in their first generation; but then the jo.
. without any new sealing, shews they calnot be im.
presilons. bacon's nat s?....,
he longer will delay, to hear thee tell * natural history.
his generation, and the rising birth
qf nature from the unapparent deep. milton
if we deduce the several races of mankind in the several
parts of the world from generation, we must imagine the first
numbers of them, who in any place agree upon any civil con-
stitutions, to assemble as so many heads of families whom they
represent.
2. a family; a race. temple.
* being
bacon's natural history,
milton's paradise lo/f.
y’are a dog.
d h-ty mother's of my generation: what's she, if i be a
o hear-.”. “to
3- pony, offspring. shakespeare's timon.
the barb'rous scythian,
or he that makes his generation messes,
to gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
be as well neighbour’d. shakespeare's king lear
4. a single succession; one gradation in the scale of genealogical
descent. c
this generation shall not pass 'till all these things be ful-
filled. - 4/att. xxiv. 34.
in the fourth generation they shall come hither again, 6.
a marvellous number were excited to the conques: of p.
lestine, which with singular virtue they performed, and held
that kingdom some few generations. raio, essays.
by some of the ancients a generation was fixed at an hun-
dred years; by others at an hundred and ten ; by others at
thirty-three, thirty, twenty-five, and twenty: but it is re-
marked, that the continuance of generations is so much longer
as they come nearer to the more ancient times. calmet.
every where throughout all generations and ages of the
christian world, no church ever perceived the word of god
to be against it. hooker
geoner at ive. adj. [generatif, french, from genero, latin.j'
1. having the power of propagation.
he gave to all, that have life, a power generative, thereb
to continue their specics and kinds. raleigh's h. zory.
in grains and kernels the greatest part is but the nutriness:
of that generative particle, so disproportionable unto it. brown
2. prolifick; having the power of production; fruitful. -
if there hath been such a gradual diminution of the gene-
rative faculty upon the earth, why was there not the like de-
cay in the production of vegetables bentley.
genera tor. m. s. [from genero, latin.] the power which
begets, causes, or produces.
imagination assimilates the idea of the generator into the
reality in the thing engendered. brown's pulgar errours.
generical, ladj. [generique, french; from genus, latin.]
gene’rick. } that which comprehends the genus, or
distinguishes from another genus, but does not distinguish the
species.
the word consumption being applicable to a proper, and
improper to a true and bastard consumption, requires a gene-
rical description quadrate to both. harvey on consumptions.
though wine differs from other liquids, in that it is the
juice of a certain fruit; yet this is but a general or generick
difference; for it does not distinguish wine from cyder or
perry: the specifick difference of wine, therefore, is its pres-
sure from the grape. jwatts's logick.
gene’rically, adv. [from generick.] with regard to the
genus, though not the species.
these have all the essential characters of sea-shells, and
shew that they are of the very same specifick gravity with
those to which they are so generically allied. woodward.
generossity. m. s. [generosite, french; generositas, latin.]
the quality of being generous ; magnanimity; liberality.
can he be better principled in the grounds of true virtue
and generosity than his young tutor is locke on education.
it would not have been your generosity, to have passed by
such a fault as this. - locke.
ge'nerous. adj. [generosus, latin; genereux, french.]
1. not of mean birth; of good extraction.
1o e 2. noble<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 910</div><p class="text">g. e. n
2, noble of mind; magnanimous ; open of heart.
a generous virtue of a vigorous kind,
pure in the last recesses of the mind. dryden.
that gen’rous boldness to defend
an innocent or absent friend. swift.
the gen’rous critick fann'd the poet's fire,
and taught the world with reason to admire. pope.
such was roscommon, not more learn'd than good,
with manners generous as his noble blood. pope.
the gen’rous god who wit and gold refines,
and ripens spirits as he ripens mines. pope.
his gen’rous spouse, theano, heav'nly fair,
nurs'd the young stranger with a mother's care. pope.
pray for others in such forms, with such length, impor-
tunity, and earnestness, as you use for yourself; and you will
find all little ill-natured passions die away, your heart grow
great and generous, delighting in the common happiness of
others, as you used only to delight in your own. law.
3. it is used of animals. spritely; daring; courageous.
so the imperial eagle does not stay
till the whole carcase he devour,
as if his gen’rous hunger understood
that he can never want plenty of food,
he only sucks the tasteful blood. cowley.
a&amp;ason spies
his op'ning hounds, and now he hears their cries:
a gen’rous pack. addison.
4. liberal ; munificent.
when from his vest the young companion bore
the cup the gen’rous landlord own'd before,
and paid profusely with the precious bowl,
the stinted kindness of this churlish soul. parnel.
fast by the margin of her native flood,
whose wealthy waters are well known to fame,
fair as the bordering flowers the princess stood,
and rich in bounty as the gen’rous stream.
heigh on pharaoh's daughter.
5. strong; vigorous. - -
having in a digestive furnace drawn off the ardent spirit
from some good sack, the phlegm, even in this generous wine,
was copious. boyle.
those who in southern climes complain,
from phoebus rays they suffer pain,
must own that pain is well repaid,
by gen’rous wines beneath a shade. swift.
ge'nerously. adv. [from generous.]
1. not meanly with regard to birth.
2. magnanimously ; nobly.
when all the gods our ruin have foretold,
yet generously he does his arms withold. dryd. ind. emp.
2. liberally; munificently. - -
geonerousness. n.s. [from generous.] the quality of being
generous. -
is it possible to conceive that the overflowing generousness of
the divine nature would create immortal beings with mean
or envious principles: collier on kindness.
ge'nesis. m. s. [y viri: ; genes, french.) generation ; the
first book of moss, which treats of the production of the world.
genet, n.s. [french. the word originally signified a horse;
man, and perhaps a gentleman or knight..] a small sized
well proportioned spanish horse. .
you'li have your nephews neigh to you; you'll have
coursers for cousins, and genets for germanes. shakesp. othello.
it is no more likely that frogs should be engendered in the
clouds than spanish genets be begotten by the wind. ray.
he shews his statue too, where plac'd on high,
the genet underneath him seems to fly. - - dryd. juv.
genethii'acal. adj. [yevisxizo’.] pertaining to nativities
as calculated by astronomers; shewing the configurations of
at any birth.
too. imoire, before he was slighting the art of
those foolish astrologers, and genetoliacal ephemerists, that use
the horoscope of nativities. howel's jocal forest.
gen thl'acks. n.s.. [from zivion.] the science. of cal-
culating nativities, or predicting the future events of life from
the stars predominant at the birth.
gogolia’rick, n. s. [ytvio...] he who calculates na-
les.
o truth of astrological predictions is not to be referred
to the constellations: the genethliaticks conjecture by the dis.
to pry into
position, temper, and complexion of the person. drummond.
gene’v a. m. s. [a corruption of genevre, french, a juniper-
berry.]
r d to keep a distilled spirituous water of juniper in
a.o. at o: only a to: kind is distilled from the
juniper-berry : what is commonly sold is made with no better
!. ingredient than oil of turpentine, put into the still, with
a little common salt and the coarsest spirit. hill's mat. med.
ge/nial. adj. [genialis, latin.] .
1. that which contributes to propagation.
higher of the genial bed by far,
and with mysterious reverence i deem. milton.
creator venus, genial pow'r of love
the bliss of men below and gods above
2. that gives chearfulness or supports life.
nor will the light of life continue ion,
but yield; to double darkness mio.
so much i feel my genial spirit, i. milo. ift
71 €s,
dryden', fall,
3. natural; native.
it chiefly proceedeth from natural i -
disposition. as incapacity,
genially. adv. [from genial.]
1. by genius; naturally.
some men are genially disposed to s - -
rally as averse to others. p one o in slatu-
2. gayly ; chearfully. "vil' soft.
geniculated. adj. [geniculatus, lat.] knotted, in
s a piece of some geniculated plant seeming to o
-- : 0
g ogo.o. - - - woodward on fo
eniculation. n. s. [geniculatio, latin.] knottines." j.
go." in plants of having knots or joints. s; the
en19. m. s. [genia, italian; genius, latin.
ticular turn of mind. 3 g &gt; latin.] a man of a pi;.
some genios are not capable of pure affaion,
and genial;
brown' isl-
wn's pulgar en.
- - - - and
is born with talents for it as much as for poetry o: as, o
science. y #.
aller,
ge'nitals. m. s. [genitalis, lat.] parts belonging to geners
ham is conceived to be jupiter, who waith: i o
who is said to have cut off the genitals of his father. ‘. 0s,
ge'niting. n. s. [a corruption of janeton, french o
jane or janet, having been so called in honour of oil |.
of that name; and the scottish diale&amp;t calls them janit apple
which is the same with janeton ; otherwise supposed .
rupted from juncting..] an early apple gathered in june s-
in july come early pears and plumbs in fruit, genitin on:
codlins. #. -
ge'nitive. adj. [genitivus, latin.] in grammar, the o:
of a case, wo among other relations, signifies one begot.
teo, as, the father of a son; or one begetting, asso i.
ge’nius. n. s. #: genie, french.] g, asion of after.
1. the protecting or ruling power of men, places, or things
there is none but he 5**
whose being i do fear: and, under him,
my genius is rebuk’d ; as it is said
antony's was by caesar. shakespeare's milth,
the genius and the mortal instruments”
are then in council ; and the state of man,
like to a little kingdom, suffers then. shakoff. jul. cesar.
and as i awake, sweet musick breathe,
sent by some spirit to mortals good,
or th’ unseen genius of the wood. milton,
and the tame demon that should guard my throne,
shrinks at a genius greater than his own. dryden,
to your glad genius sacrifice this day;
let common meats respectfully give way. djin,
2. a man endowed with superiour faculties.
there is no little writer of pindarick who is not mentioned
as a prodigious genius. addison,
3. mental power or faculties.
the state and order does proclaim
the genius of that royal dame. jwiller,
4. disposition of nature by which any one is qualified for some
peculiar employment.
a happy genius is the gift of nature. dryden's duff:ffff;
your majesty's sagacity, and happy genius for natural his.
tory, is a better preparation for enquiries of this kind than all
the dead learning of the schools. burnet'; theory, profice.
one science only will one genius fit; - - -
so vast is art, so narrow human wit. pope on critism.
the romans, though they had no great genius for to
yet were not entirely neglectful of it. arbuthnot on clini,
5. nature ; disposition.
studious to please the genius of the times,
with periods, points and tropes he slurs his crimes. do".
another genius and disposition improper for philosopho
contemplations is not so much from the narrowness of the
understanding, as because they will not take time to extend
them. burnet's theory, profit.
he tames the genius of the stubborn plain. po.
gent. adj. [gent, old french.) elegant; soft; gentle; polite.
a word now disused.
vespasian, with great spoil and rage,
forewasted all: 'till genuisa gent
persuaded him to cease.
she that was noble, wise, as fair and gent, -
cast how she might their harmless lives preserve. fiji,
gente'el. adj. [gentil, french.]
1. polite; elegant in behaviour; civil. - -
he had a genteeler manner of binding the chains of this
kingdom than most of his predecessors. swift to go!.
their poets have no notion of genteel comedy, and illino
the most filthy double meanings when they have." mind to
make their audience merry. alison on left
2. graceful in mien. so
fairy 3om.
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 911</div><p class="text">g e n
g e n
-
*
so spruce that he can never be genteel. tatler.
3. elegantly dressed.
several ladies that have twice her fortune, are not able to be
always so genteel, and so constant at all places of pleasure and
expence. law.
gente'elly. adv. [from genteel.]
1. elegantly ; politely.
those that would be genteehy learned, need not purchase it
at the dear rate of being atheists. glanv. sceps. preface.
after a long fatigue of eating and drinking, and babbling,
he concludes the great work of dining genteelly. south.
2. gracefully; handsomely.
gente'elness. m. s. [from genteel.]
1. elegance; gracefulness; politeness.
he had a genius full of genteelness and spirit, having nothing
that was ungraceful in his posture and dresses. dryd. dufresh.
parmegiano has dignified the genteeings of modern effemi-
nacy, by uniting it with the simplicity of the ancients and
the grandeur and severity of michael angelo. reynolds.
2. qualities befitting a man of rank.
ge'ntian. m. s. [gentiane, french; gentiana, latin.] felwort
or baldmony.
the root of gentian is large and long, of a tolerably firm
texture, and remarkably tough: it has a faintish and disa-
greeable smell, and an extremely bitter taste. hill's mat. med.
if it be fistulous, and the orifice small, dilate it with gentian
roots. //iseman's surgery.
gentiane'll a. m. s. a kind of blue colour.
gentile. n.s. [gentilis, latin.]
1. one of an uncovenanted nation; one who knows not the
true god.
tribulation and anguish upon every soul that doeth evil, of
the jew first, and also of the gentile. rom. ii. 2.
gentiles or infidels, in those actions, upon both the spiritual
and temporal good, have been in one pursuit conjoined. bacon.
2. a person of rank. obsolete.
fine basil desireth it may be her lot
to grow, as a gilliflower, trim in her pot;
that ladies and gentiles, for whom we do serve,
may help him as needeth, poor life to preserve. tussor.
gentilesse. m. s. [fr.] complaisance; civility. not used.
she with her wedding cloaths undresses
her complaisance and gentilesses. hudibras.
ge'ntilis m. m. s. [gentilisme, french ; from gentile.] hea-
thenism ; paganism.
if invocation of saints had been introduced in the aposto-
lical times, it would have looked like the introducing of gen-
tilism again. stillingfleet.
gentilitious. adj. [gentilitius, latin.]
1. endemial; peculiar to a nation.
that an unfavory odour is gentilitious, or national unto the
jews, reason or sense will not induce. brown.
2. hereditary; entailed on a family.
the common cause of this distemper is a particular and
perhaps agentilitious disposition of body. arbuthnot.
gent 1.1.1 y. n.s. [gentilite, french ; from gentil, french; gen-
tilis, latin.]
1. good extraction; dignity of birth.
2. elegance of behaviour; gracefulness of mien ; nicety of taste.
3. gentry; the class of persons well born.
gavelkind must needs, in the end, make a poor gentility.
davies on ireland.
4. paganism; heathenism.
when people began to espy the falshood of oracles, where-
upon all gentility was built, their hearts were utterly aversed
from it. hooker.
gentle. adj. [gentilis, latin.]
1. well born; well descended; ancient, though not noble.
they entering and killing all of the gentle and rich footion,
for honesty sake broke open all prisons. sidney.
these are the studies wherein our noble and gentle youth
ought to bestow their time. milton on education.
of gentle blood, part shed in honour's cause,
each parent sprung.
2. soft; bland; mild; tame; meek; peaceable. -
i am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil himself
with curtesy. shakoff. twelfth night.
her voice was ever soft,
gentle and low; an excellent thing in woman.
as gentle, and as jocund, as to jest, -
go i to fight. shakesp. richard ii.
a virtuous and a good man, reverend in conversation, and
gentle in condition. - 2 mac. xv. 12.
the gently; heart on earth is prov’d unkind. fairfax.
your change was wife : for, had she been deny'd,
a swift revenge had follow'd from her pride:
you from my gentle nature had no fears;
all my revenge is only in my tears. dryden's ind. emp.
he had such a gentle method of reproving their faults, that
thew were not so much afraid as ashamed to repeat them. atterb.
3. soothing ; pacifick. -
and though this sense first gentle musick found,
her proper ouject is the speech of men.
pope.
shakespeare.
davies.
ge'ntle. n.s. -
1. a gentleman ; a man of birth.
gentles, do not reprehend;
if you pardon, we will mend.
where is my lovely bride :
. . how does my father? gentles, methinks you frown. shakesp.
2. a particular kind of worm.
he will in the three hot months bite at a flagworm, or at a
green gentle. - jwalton's angler.
7*.gentle. v. a. to make gentle; to raise from the vulgar.
obsolete.
. . he to-day that sheds his blood with me,
shall be my brother; be he never so vile, -
. this day shall gentle his condition. shakesp. henry v.
gentlef9ik, n j. tentle and solo.] persons distinguished
by their birth from the vulgar.
the queen's kindred are made gentlefolk. shakes. rich.iii.
gentlofolks will not care for the remainder of a bottle of
wine; therefore set a fresh one before them. swift.
gentleman. n.s. [gentilhomme, french; gentilhuomo, ital.
that is, homogentilis, a man of ancestry. all other deriva-
tions seem to be whimsical.]
i. a man of birth ; a man of extraction, though not noble.
a civil war was within the bowels of that state, between
the gentleman and the peasants. -
i freely told you all the wealth i had
ran in my veins; i was a gentleman. shak. merch. of venice.
he hither came a private gentleman,
but young and brave, and of a family
ancient and noble.
you say a long descended race
makes gentlemen, and that your high degree
is much disparag’d to be match'd with me. dryden.
2. a man raised above the vulgar by his character or post.
inquire me out some mean-born gentleman,
whom i will marry strait to clarence daughter. shakesp.
he is so far from desiring to be used as a gentleman, that
he desires to be used as the servant of all. law.
3. a term of complaisance: sometimes ironical.
the same gentlemen who have fixed this piece of morality on
the three naked siders dancing hand in hand, would have
found out as good a one had there been four of them fitting
at a distance, and covered from head to foot. addison.
4. the servant that waits about the person of a man of rank.
sir thomas more, the sunday after he gave up his chan-
cellorship, came to his wife's pew, and used the usual words
of his gentleman usher, madam, my lord is gone. camden.
let be call'd before us
that gentleman of buckingham's in person. shak. h. viii.
5. it is used of any man however high.
the earl of hereford was reputed then
in england the most valiant gentleman. shakesp. henry iv.
the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar. shakesp.
gent lemanli'ke. adj. [gentleman and like..] becoming a
gent i. emanly. } man of birth.
he holdeth himself a gentleman, and scorneth to work,
which, he faith, is the life of a peasant or churl; but enureth
himself to his weapon, and to the gentlemanly trade of stealing.
spenser on ireland.
pyramus is a sweet-fac'd man ; a proper man as one shall
see in a summer's day; a most lovely gentlemanlike man. shak.
you have train'd me up like a peasant, hiding from me all
gentlemanlike qualities. shakesp. as you like it.
two clergymen stood candidates for a freeschool, where a
gentleman procured the place for the better scholar and more
gentlemanly person of the two. swift.
ge(ntlen ess. n.s.. [from gentle.]
1. dignity of birth; goodness of extraction.
2. softness of manners; sweetness of disposition; meekness;
tenderness.
now out of use.
shakespeare:
sidney.
otway's orphan.
my lord sebastian,
the truth, you speak, doth lack some gentleness.
your brave and haughty scorn of all,
was stately and monarchical;
all gentlenos with that esteem’d,
a dull and slavish virtue seem’d.
still she retains
her maiden gentlenos, and oft at eve
visits the herds. milton.
the perpetual gentlenes; and inherent goodness of the or-
mond family. dryden's fables, dedication.
changes are brought about silently and insensibly, with all
imaginable benignity and o, woodward's nat. hist.
masters must correct their servants with gentleness, pru-
dence, and mercy. rogers.
women ought not to think gentlenes of beart despicable in
a man. clariffa.
3. kindness; benevolence. obsolete. -
the gentlenes of all the gods go with thee. shakespeare.
ge'ntleship. n.s.. [from gentle..] carriage of a gentleman.
obsolete.
some in france, which will needs be gentlemen, have more
gentleship in their hat than in their head. aftham's schoolmaster.
ge'ntlewoman.
shakesp.
cowley.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 912</div><p class="text">g. e. o
g e o
ge'ntlewoman. n.s. [gentle and woman. see gent le-
man.]
1. a woman of birth above the vulgar; a woman well de-
scended.
the gentlewomen of rome did not suffer their infants to be
so long swathed as poorer people. abbot’s descr. of the world.
doth this sir protheus
often resort unto this gentlewoman * shakeshcare.
gentlewomen may do then selves much good by kneeling
upon a cushion, and weeding. bacon's natural history.
2. a woman who waits about the person of one of high rank.
the late queen's gentlewoman, a knight's daughter,
to be her mistress’ mistress shakesp. henry viii.
her gentlewomen, like the nereids, -
so many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
and made their bends adorings. shakoff. ant, and cleopatra.
3. a word of civility or irony.
now, gentlewoman, you are confessing your enormities; i
know it by that hypocritical down-cast look. dryden.
genti.y. adv. [from gentle.]
1. softly; meekly; tenderly; inoffensively; kindly.
my mistress gently chides the fault i made. jdryden.
the mischiefs that come by inadvertency, or ignorance,
are but very gently to be taken notice of. locke.
2. softly ; without violence.
fortune's blows,
when most struck home, being gently warded, craves
a noble cunning. shakeshcare's coriolanus.
a sort of great bat, as men lie asleep with their legs naked,
will suck their blood at a wound so gently made as not to
awake them. grew’s museum.
ge'ntry. n.s. [gentlery, gentry, from gentle.]
1. birth ; condition; rank derived from inheritance.
you are certainly a gentleman,
clerk-like experienc'd, which no less adorns
our gentry than our parents' noble name,
in whose success we are gentle. shakesp. //inter’s tale.
2. class of people above the vulgar; those between the vulgar
and the nobility.
they slaughtered many of the gentry, for whom no sex or
age could be accepted for excuse. sidney.
let states, that aim at greatness, take heed how their nobi-
lity and gentry multiply too fast. bacon's ornam. ration.
how chearfully the hawkers cry
a satyr, and the gentry buy. swift.
3. a term of civility real or ironical.
the many-colour'd gentry there above,
by turns are rul’d by tumult and by love. prior.
4. civility; complaisance. obsolete.
shew us so much gentry and good-will,
as to extend your time with us a-while. shakes. hamlet.
genu fle’ction. m. s. [genuflexion, french ; genu and fiego,
latin.] the aet of bending the knee; adoration expressed
by bending the knee.
here use all the rites of adoration, genuflections, wax-candles,
incense, oblations, prayers only excepted. stillingfeet.
ge'nuine, adj. [genuinus, latin.] not spurious; not coun-
terfeit ; real; natural ; true.
experiments were at one time tried with genuine materials,
and at another time with sophisticated ones. boyle.
the belief and remembrance, and love and fear of god,
have so great influence to make men religious, that where any
of these is, the rest, together with the true and genuine effects
of them, are supposed to be. tillotson.
a sudden darkness covers all ;
true genuine night: night added to the groves. . . dryden.
genu'in eiy. adv. [from genuine.] without adulteration ;
without foreign admixtures; naturally.
there is another agent able to analize compound bodies
less violently, more genuinely, and more universally than the
fire. boyle.
genu'ineness, n.s.. [from genuine.] freedom from any thing
counterfeit; freedom from adulteration ; purity; natural
state.
it is not essential to the genuinenes of colours to be durable.
b oyle. -
genus. m. s. [latin.] in science, a class of being, ‘compre-
hending under it many species: as quadruped is a genus com-
hending under it almost all terrestrial beasts. - -
a general idea is called by the schools genus, and it is one
common nature agreeing to several other common natures:
so animal is a genus, because it agrees to horse, lion; whale,
and butterfly. watts's logick.
if minerals are not convertible into another species, though
of the same genus, much less can they be surmised reducible
into a species of another genus. harvey on consumptions.
grocessor rick. adj. [yn and xivrpov; geocentrique, french.]
applied to a planet or orb having the earth for its centre, or
the same centre with the earth. harris.
geodafsia. m. s. [yoxiciz; geodosie, french.] that part
of geometry which contains the doctrine or ast of measuring
surfaces, and finding the contents of all plain figures. harris.
geodzorical. adj. [from £odosia,] relatin
measuring surfaces; comprehendin; or si
measuring land. -&gt; lo
ge ographer. m. s. [77, and ypopo, ;
one who describes the earth accord. t
different parts. §
a greater part of the earth hath e
hath been known or described by t ...” peopled thin
the bay of naples is called the cr. . brown,
} dits by the old
phers. geogra.
from sea to sea, from realm to real --
and grow a meer geographer by love.
geog r a phical. adj. [geographique, french: fr titial
relating to geography; belonging to geogh *
geographically. adv. [from go ;
phical manner; according to the rules of ge. ra * geogra.
minerva lets ulysses into the knowledge o o }.
she geographically describes it to him. broome ls .
geo’graphy. m. s. [y; and yow: geographie o o j.
in a strict sense, signifies the knowledge of th. * togra
earthly globe, and the situation of the various cles of the
earth. when it is taken in a little it.” ". .
l *ser sense, it includ
the knowledge of the seas also ; and in the largest sens cs
it extends to the various customs, habits . ...
of nations. &gt; 80vernments
olympus is extolled by the greeks as attaining untoh waiti.
but geography makes slight account hereof, who .
of andes or teneriff. brown's wol o:
according to ancient fables the argonauts o rrouri.
danube, and from thence passed intot. adriatick to: the
their ships upon their shoulders : a mark of great ..";
in geography. zio.
geo logy., n. s. [yo and 2.3%.] the joaine, i. o
the knowledge of the state and nature of the earth. rth;
ge'9mance r. m. s. so and work.] a fortreidler, a
caster of figures; a cheat who pretends to firstell isio
other means than the astrologer. y by
. fortunetellers, jugglers, geomancers, and the incantatory
impostors, though commonly men of inserior rank, dail
delude the vulgar. brown's pulgar im.
geomancy. m. s. [ya and uzorsz; geomano, french.]
the act of casting figures; the act of foretelling by in:
what shall happen. o
according to some there are four kinds of divination; hy-
dromancy, pyromancy, aeromancy, and geomany. aft,
geoman tick, adj. [from geomancy.] pertaining to the 1st
of casting figures.
two geomantick figures were display'd
above his head, a warrior and a maid;
one when direct, and one when retrograde. dyn.
ge'ometer. n. s. sysogirons; geometre, french..] one skild
in geometry; a geometrician.
he became one of the chief geometers of his age. will.
ge'ometral. adj. [geometral, french; from geometry..] per-
taining to geometry. disi.
geome’t rica l. : adj. [ytwo floods; geometrique, french; som
geo metrick. geometry.]
1. pertaining to geometry.
a geometrical scheme is let in by the eyes, but the demon.
stration is discerned by reason. more agains athon.
this mathematical discipline, by the help of goutral
principles doth teach to contrive several powers. wilji,
2. prescribed or laid down by geometry.
must men take the measure of god just by the same game-
trical proportions that he did, that gather'd the height and big-
ness of hercules by his foot ” sillingfied,
does not this wise philosopher assert,
that the vast orb, which casts so fair his beams,
is such, or not much bigger than he seems?
that the dimensions of his glorious face
two geometrick feet do scarce surpass : blackmort,
3. disposed according to geometry.
geometrick jasper seemeth of affinity with the lapisarguinai;
described by boetius; but it is certainly one sort of lapii tro-
ciformis. grew's museum,
geo me"r rica lly. adv. [from geometrical.] according to the
laws of geometry.
'tis possible geometrically to contrive such an artificial mo
tion as shall be of greater swiftness than the revolutions of the
heavens. isilkins's math. magic,
all the bones, muscles, and vessels of the body are com:
trived most geometrically, according to the stiaest rules of
mechanicks. ray on the croatia,
geomet ri'ci an. n.s. sysoporphs.] one skilled in geometo;
a geometer.
although there be a certain truth, geometricians would not
receive satisfaction without demonstration thereof, brown.
. how easily does an expert geometrician, with one glance"
his eye, take in a complicated diagram, made up of ool
lines and circles | iwatts on the mind.
to geo'metr1ze. v. n. [yeogasz, j. to act according 19
the laws of geometry. we
§ to the art of
*ing the art of
sosraphs, french
9 the position. ;
ddi
m i rove, joh,
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 913</div><p class="text">g e t
we obtained good store of crystals, whose figures were
differing enough, though prettily shaped, as if nature had at
once affected variety in their figuration, and yet confined her-
self to geometrize. boyle.
geo'metry. m. s. sysopsz; geometrie, french.] origi-
nally fignifies the art of measuring the earth, or any distances
or dimensions on or within it: but it is now used for the
'science of quantity, extension, or magnitude abstractedly con-
sidered, without any regard to matter.
geometry is usually divided into speculative and practical;
the former of which contemplates and treats of the properties
of continued quantity abstractedly ; and the latter applies
these speculations and theorems to use and practice. harris.
in the muscles alone there seems to be more geometry than in
all the artificial engines in the world. ray on the creation.
him also for my censor i disdain,
who thinks all science, as all virtue, vain;
who counts geometry and numbers toys, -
and with his foot the sacred dust destroys. dryd. pers.
geopo'nical. adj. [yn and ravo geoponique, french..] re-
lating to agriculture; relating to the cultivation of the ground.
such expressions are frequent in authors geoponical, or such
as have treated de re rustica. brown's vulgar errours.
geopo nicks. n. f. [y; and revô’.] the science of cultivat-
ing the ground ; the doctrine of agriculture.
geor ge. m. s. [georgius, latin.]
1. a figure of st. george on horseback worn by the knights of
the garter.
look on my george, i am a gentleman ;
rate me at what thou wilt. shakespeare's henry vi.
2. a brown loaf. of this sense i know not the original.
cubb’d in a cabbin, on a mattress laid,
on a brown george, with lousy swobbers, fed. dryd. pers.
geo'rg1ck. n. j. [ytopyov georgios, fr.] some part of
the science of husbandry put into a pleasing dress, and set of
with all the beauties and embellishments of poetry. addison.
geo'rg1ck. adj. relating to the doctrine of agriculture.
here i peruse the mantuan's georgick strains,
and learn the labours of italian swains. gay's rural sports.
geo tick. adj. [from 7%. j belong ng to the earth ; to -
restrial. d#. f.
ge’rent. adj. [gerens, latin.] carrying ; bearino. idzo.
ge'rfalcon. ii. s. a bird of prey, in size between a value
and a hawk, and of the greatest strength next to the “.
dily.
ge's man. m. s. spermain, french ; germanus, lat. brother ;
one approaching to a bro her in proximity of blood: thus the
children of brothers or sisters are called cousins german, the
only sense in which the word is now used. -
they knew it was their cousin german, the famous amphi-
alus. - sidney.
and to him said, go now, proud miscreant,
thyself thy message do to german dear. fairy queen.
vert thou a bear, thou wouldst be kill'd by the horse ;
wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seiz'd by the leopard ;
wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to the lion, and the
spots of thy kindred were juries on thy life. shakesp. timon.
you'll have your nephews neigh to you; you'll have coursers
for cousins, and genets for germans. shakesp. othello.
ge’r man. adj. [germanus, latin.] related. obsolete.
not he jone shall suffer what wit can make heavy, and
vengeance bitter; but those that are german to him, though
removed fifty times, shall come under the hongman. shakesp.
ge'rmander. m. s. [germandree, french; chamado, latin.]
a plant. - miller.
ge's me. n.s. [germen, latin.] a sprout or shoot; that part
which grows and spreads.
whether it be not made out of the germe, or treadle of the
egg, doth seem of lesser doubt. brown's vulgar errours.
germin. m. s. [germen, latin.] a shooting or sprouting
seed. out of use.
though palaces and pyramids do slope
their hoads to their foundations; though the treasure
of nature’s germins tumble all together,
even 'till destruction sicken ; answer me
to what i ask you. shakespeare's macbeth.
thou all shaking thunder,
strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world;
crack nature's mould, all germins spill at once ...
that make ungrateful man. shakespeare's king lear.
t., germinate. v. n. [germino, latin.] to sprout 3 to
shoot; to bud; to put forth. - - - -
this action is furthered by the chalcites, which hath within
a spirit that will put forth and germinate, as we see in chymical
trials. bacon'; natural history.
the seeds of all kinds of vegetables being planted near the
surface of the earth, in a convenient foil, amongst matter
proper for the formation of vegetables, would germinate, grow
up, and replenish the face of the earth. isoodward.
germina’tion. m. s. (germination, french, from germinate.]
the act of sprouting or shooting ; growth.
vol. i.
for acceleration of germination, we shall handle the subjec
of plants generally. bacon.
the duke of buckingham had another kind of germination;
and surely, had he been a plant, he would have been reckoned
among the sponte nascentes. jp'otton.
there is but little fimilitude between a terreous humidity
and plantal germinations. glanv. scops.
suppose the earth should be carried to the great distance of
saturn; there the whole globe would be one frigid zone;
there would be no life, no germination. bentley's sermons.
ge'rund. m. s. serundium, latin.) in the latin grammar, a
kind of verbal noun, which governs cases like a verb.
gest. m. s. [gesium, latin.]
i. a deed; an action ; an atchievement.
who fair them quites, as him beseemed best,
and goodly can discourse with many a noble gos!. spensor,
2. show; representation.
goffs should be interlarded after the persian manner, by ages,
young and old.
3. the roll or journal of the several days, and stages prefixed,
in the progresses of our kings, many of them being still ex-
tant in the herald's office. [from gifte, or gite, fr.] hammer.
i’ll give you my commission,
to let him there a month, behind the gest,
prefix'd for’s parting. shakespeare's iwinter's tale.
4. a stage; so much of a journey as passes without interruption.
in all senses obsolete.
he distinetly sets down the goffs and progress thereof. brown.
gest at10n. m. s. [goslatio, latin.] the act of beating the
young in the womb.
aristotle affirmeth the birth of the infant, or time of its
gesation, extendeth sometimes unto the eleventh month; but
hippocrates avers that it exceedeth not the tenth. brown.
why in viviparous animals, in the time of goslation, should
the nourishment be carried to the embryo in the womb, which
at other times goeth not that way ray on the creation.
to gesticulate. v. n. [gosticular, latin; gosłiculer, fr.]
to play antick tricks; to shew postgres. jdic7.
gest iculation. m. s. [gofficulatio, latin ; gosłiculation, fr.
from gos.iculate.] antick tricks ; various postures.
ge's ture. m. s. [gero, ge/um, la'in ; gosle, french.]
1. action or posture expressive of sentiment.
ah, my sister, if you had heard his words, or seen his
goslures, when he made me know what and to whom his love'
was, you would have matched in yourself, those two rarely
matched together, pity and delight. sidney.
when we make profession of our faith, we stand; when we
acknowledge our fins, or seek unto god for favour, we fall
down; because the gesture of constancy becometh us best in
the one, in the other the behaviour of humility. hooker.
to the dumbness of the gesture
one might interpret. shakespeare's timon of athens.
humble and reverend gestures in our approaches to god
express the inward reverence of our souls. duty of man.
2. movement of the body.
grace was in all her steps, heav’n in her eye,
in ev'ry gesture dignity and love milton's parad's loft.
every one will agree in this, that we ought either to lay
aside all kinds of gesture, or at least to make use of such only
as are graceful and expressive. addison's speciator.
to ge's ture. v. a. [from the noun..] to accompany with
action or posture.
our attire disgraceth it; it is not orderly read, nor gestured
as beseemeth. hooker.
he undertook so to gesture and muffle up himself in his
hood, as the duke's manner was, that none should discern him.
jootton.
to get. v. a. pret. i got, anciently gat; part, pass got, or
gotten. [setan, 3ettan, saxon.]
1. to procure; to obtain.
thine be the cosset, well hast thou it got. spensor.
of that which was our father's hath he gotten all this glory.
gen. xxxi. 1.
we gat our bread with the peril of our lives. sam. v. 9.
david gat him a name when he returned from smiting of
the syrians. 2 sam. viii. 13.
most of these things might be more exactly tried by the
torricellian experiments, if we could get tubes so accurately
blown that the cavity were perfectly cylindrical. boyle.
such a conscience, as has not been wanting to itself, in en-
deavouring to get the utmost and clearest information about
the will of god, that its power, advantages, and opportunities
could afford it, is that great internal judge, whose absolution
is a rational and sure ground of confidence. south.
he insensibly got a facility, without perceiving how; and
that is attributed wholly to nature, which was much more the
effect of use and practice. locke.
the man who lives upon alms, gets him his set of admirers,
and delights in superiority. addison's spectator.
sphinx was a monster that would eat
whatever stranger she could get,
1o f unless<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 914</div><p class="text">g e. t.
unless his ready wit disclos'd, -
the subtle riddle she propos'd. . addison's 777 ig examiner.
this practice is to be used at first, in order to get a fixed
habit of attention, and in some cases only. jwatts.
the word get is variously used: we say to get money, to get
in, to get off, to get ready, to get a stomach, and to get a cold.
- f/atts's logick.
2. to force; to seize.
such losels and scatterlings cannot easily, by any constable,
or other ordinary officer, be gotten, when they are challenged
for any such fact. spenser on ireland.
the king seeing this, started from where he sat,
out from his trembling hand his weapon gat, daniel.
all things, but one, you can restore;
the heart you get returns no more. jwaller.
3. to win by contest.
henry the sixth hath lost
all that which henry the fifth had gotten. shakoff. h. vi.
he gat his people great honour, and he made battles, pro-
te&amp;ting the host with his sword. 1 azac. iii. 3.
to get the day of them of his own nation, would be a most
unhappy day for him. 2 mac. v. 6.
auria held that course to have drawn the gallies within his
great ships, who thundering amongst them with their great
ordnance, might have opened a way unto his gallies to have
gotten a victory. knolles's history of the turks.
4. to have possession of ; to have. this sense is commonly in
the compound preterite.
then forcing thee, by fire he made thee bright;
nay, thou hast got the face of man.
5. to beget upon a female.
these boys are boys of ice; they’ll none of her: sure they
- are bastards to the english, the french never got them. shak.
women with fudy’d arts they vex:
- ye gods destroy that impious sex;
i. and if there must be some t'invoke
your pow'rs, and make your altars smoke,
- come down yourselves, and, in their place,
- get a more just and nobler race. //aller.
- children they got on their female captives. locke.
if you'll take em as their fathers got 'em, so and well; if
not, you must stay 'till they get a better generation. drydon.
has no man, but who has kill'd
iherbert.
. a father, right to get a child prior.
- let ev'ry married man, that's grave and wise,
o take a tartuff of known ability,
who shall so settle lasting reformation;
first get a son, then give him education. dorst.
o the god of day, descending from above,
mixt with the day, and got the queen of love.
- 6. to gain as profit.
though creditors will lose one fifth of their principal and
use, and landlords one fifth of their income, yet the debtors
and tenants will not get it. locke.
7. to gain as superiority or advantage.
if they get ground and 'vantage of the king,
then join you with them like a rib of steel. shakesp. h. iv.
8. to earn; to gain by labour.
having no mines, nor any other way of getting or keeping of
riches but by trade, so much of our trade as is lost, so much
of our riches must necessarily go with it. locke.
if it be so much pains to count the money i would spend,
what labour did it cost my ancestors to get it : locke.
. to receive as a price or reward.
any tax laid on foreign commodities in england raises their
price, and makes the importer get more for them ; but a tax
laid on your home-made commodities lesiens their price. locke.
10. to learn.
this defect he frequently lamented, it being harder with
him to get one sermon by heart than to pen twenty. fell.
get by heart the more common and useful words out of
some judicious vocabulary. watts.
11. to procure fo be.
i shall shew how we may get it thus informed, and after-
wards preserve and keep it so. south.
12. to put into any state. -
nature taught them to make certain vessels of a tree, which
granville.
they got down, not with cutting, but with fire. abbot.
take no repulse, whatever she doth say ;
for, get you gone, she doth not mean away. , shakespeare.
he who attempts to get another man into his absolute power,
docs thereby put himself into a state of war with him. ... locke.
before your ewes bring forth, they may be pretty well kept,
to get them a little into heart. mortimer.
helim, who was taken up in embalming the bodies, visited
the place very frequently: his greatest perplexity was how to
got the lovers out of it, the gates being watched. guardian.
13. to prevail on ; to induce. - -
though the king could not get him to engage in a life of
business, he made him however his chief companion. speciat.
14. to draw; to hook.
-
with much communication
o o get out thy secrets. ecclus. miling
y the marriage of his grandson ferd; “ius, xiii, ii.
o o kingdoms of bohemia and i. he gat 7. his
ter having got out of you e; s-- i - dison.
scorn to trespass. y *y thing you can : i
15. to betake ; to remove; implying guardin,
- haste ord
get you to bed on th’ instant; i will losio.
ith,
shahjaro, othel,
on. xxxi, 13,
t agains . -
got himself with his * !. 10,
will he tempt thee, andf
arise, get thee out from this land.
lest they join also unto our enemies and figh
and so get them up out of the land.” §
he with all speed
strong town of mega. $ to the
16. to remove by force or art. knolly’; hjor),
she was quickly got off the land again. knoll,
hollo,
the roving fumes of quicksilve: ; -
oftentimes o upon o of... would
him to much trouble to get them off from ... would put
when mercury is got by the help of the fire *: bijl,
or other mineral body, we may suppose this *i. a metal,
o a perfect body of its own kind, er o:
they would be glad to get out thos - poo,
hands have joi. and g. now i. o
to be easily extirpated. locke on #. so
17. to put. utulion,
get on thy boots; we'll ride all night. so
18. to get off. to sell or dispose of by o iv,
wood, to get his halfpence off, offered an hundred - d
in his coin for seventy in silver. o s
to get. v. n. wift,
1. to arrive at any state or posture by degrees wi -
of labour, effort, or dio. : used .. o
phalantus was entrapped, and saw round about in :
could not get out. so
you knew he walk'd o'er perils, on an edge it),
more likely to fall in than to get o'er. shaloft. henry iv,
the stranger shali get up above thee very high, and thou
shalt come down very low. noi. 43
the fox bragged what a number of shifts and devices i.
had to get from the hounds, and the cat said he had but one
which was to climb a tree. in.
those that are very cold, and especially in their feet, on.
not get to sleep. bacon's natural hish).
i utterly condemn the practice of the later times, thatson.
who are pricked for sheriffs, and were fit, should get out of
the bill. bacon's adviset, willior,
he got away unto the christians, and hardly escaped, knoll,
he would be at their backs before they could go out of
armenia. knollei's hiffery of the tri,
she plays with his rage, and gets above his ange.
donham,
the latitant air had got away in bubbles. bok.
there are few bodies whose minute parts stick so close to.
gether, but that it is possible to meet with some other body
whose small parts may get between, and so disjoin them, bji,
there was but an insensible diminution of the liquor upon
the recess of whatever it was that got through the cork. bol.
although the universe, and every part thereof, are object;
full of excellency, yet the multiplicity thereof is so various,
that the understanding falls under a kind of despondency of
getting through so great a task. halo's origin of manind
if there should be any leak at the bottom of the vessel, yet
very little water would get in, because no air could get out.
isolini's math. magick,
o heav'n, in what a lab’rinth am i led!
i could get out, but she detains the thread!
so have i seen some fearful hare maintain
a course, ’till tir’d before the dog she lay;
who, stretch'd behind her, pants upon the plain,
past pow'r to kill, as she to get away. dryden's ahn, mirdh
the more oily and light part of this mass would got above
the other, and swim upon it. burnt' thory,
having got through the foregoing passage, let us go on!"
his next argument. lok.
the removing of the pains we feel is the getting out of
misery, and consequently the first thing to be done, in of
to happiness, absent good. lot,
if, having got into the sense of the epistles, we will bit
compare what he says, in the places where he treats of th:
same subject, we can hardly be mistaken in his sense. lot.
i got up as fast as possible, girt on my rapier, and flood
up my hat, when my landlady came up to me. tailor,
bucephalus would let nobody get upon him but alexander
the great. addison on ho
imprison'd fires, in the close dungeons pent,
roar to get loose, and struggle for a vent;
eating their way, and undermining all,
dryden,
*till with a mighty burst whole mountains fall. aio,
when alma now, in diff'rent ages,
has finish'd her ascending stages, into
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 915</div><p class="text">g h o
into the head at length she gets,
and there in publick grandeur sits,
to judge of things. prior.
i resolved to break through all measures to get away. swift.
2. to fall; to come by accident.
two or three men of the town are got among them. tatler.
3. to find the way; to insinuate itself.
when an egg is made hard by boiling, since there is nothing
that appears to get in at the shell, unless some little particles
of the water, it is not easy to discover from whence else this
change proceeds than from a change made in the texture of the
parts. boyle,
he raves; his words are loose
as heaps of sand, and scatterring wide from sense:
so high he's mounted in his airy hopes,
that now the wind is got into his head,
and turns his brains to frenzy. dryden's spanish fryar.
a child runs to overtake and get up to the top of his sha-
dow, which still advances at the same rate that he does, locke.
should dressing, feasting, and balls once get among the
cantons; their military roughness would be quickly lost. zddis,
the fluids which surround bodies, upon the surface of the
globe, get in between the surfaces of bodies when they are at
any distance. cheyne's phil. princ.
4. to move; to remove.
get home with thy fewel made ready to set;
the sooner, and easier carriage to get.
5. to have recourse to.
the turks made great haste through the midst of the town
ditch, to get up into the bulwark to help their fellows. knolles.
lying is so cheap a cover for any miscarriage, and so much
in fashion, that a child can scarce be kept from getting into
it. locke.
6. to go; to repair.
they ran to their weapons, and furiously affailed the turks,
now fearing no such matter, and were not as yet all got into
the castle. knolles's history of the turks.
a knot of ladies, got together by themselves, is a very school
of impertinence. swift.
7. to put one's self in any state.
they might get over the river avon at stratford, and get
between the king and worcester. clarendon.
we can neither find source nor issue for such an excessive
mass of waters, neither where to have them ; nor, if we had
them, how to get quit of them. burmet's theory of the earth.
without his assistance we can no more get quit of our
affliction, than but by his permission we should have fallen
into it. iwake's preparation for death.
there is a sort of men who pretend to divest themselves of
partiality on both sides, and to get above that imperfect idea
of their subject which little writers fall into. pope on homer.
as the obtaining the love of valuable men is the happiest
end of this life, so the next felicity is to get rid of fools and
scoundrels. pope to swift.
8. to become by any act what one was not before.
the laughing sot, like all unthinking men,
bathes and gets drunk; then bathes and drinks again. dryd.
9. to be a gainer; to receive advantage.
like jewels to advantage set,
her beauty by the shade does get.
10. to get off. to escape.
the gallies, by the benefit of the shores and shallows, got
off. bacon's j/ar with spain.
whate'er thou dost, deliver not thy sword;
with that thou may'st get off, tho' odds oppose thee. dryd.
11. to get over. to conquer; to suppress; to pass without
being stopped in thinking or acting.
'tis very pleasant to hear the lady propose her doubts, and
to see the pains he is at to get over them. addison.
i cannot get over the prejudice of taking some little offence
at the clergy, for perpetually reading their sermons, swift.
to remove this difficulty, peterborough was dispatched to
vienna, and got over some part of those disputes. swift.
12. to get up. to rise from repose. -
sheep will get up betimes in the morning to feed against
rain. bacon's natural hisłory.
13. to get up. to rise from a seat.
14. to remove from a place.
get you up from about the tabernacle of koran, dathan,
and abiram. numb. xvi.
15. to get, in all its significations, both active and neutral, im-
plies the acquisition of something, or the arrival at some flate
or place by some means; except in the use of the preterite
compound, which often implies mere possession: as, he has
got a good offate, does not always mean that he has acquired,
b tharely that he possesses it. so we say the lady has got black
eyes, merely meaning that she has them.
getter. m. s. [from get.]
1. one who procures or obtains.
2. one who begets on a female. -
peace is a very lethargy, a getter of more baffard-children
than war's a destroyer of men. shakespeare's coriolanus.
getting.. n. s. [from get.]
tuffer.
1. act of getting; acquisition.
wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; and
with all thy getting get understanding.
2. gain; profit.
who hath a state to repair may not despise small things;
and it is less dishonourable to abridge a petty charge than to
stoop to petty gettings. bacon.
the meaner families return a small share of their gettings,
to be a portion for the child. swift.
growcaw. m. s. [8&lt;3ap, saxon; joyau, french..] a showy
trifle; a toy; a bauble; a splendid plaything.
that metal they exchanged for the mean&amp;# trifles and gew-
gaws which the others could bring. abbot’s descr. of the world.
prefer that which providence has pronounced to be the staff
of life, before. a glittering gewgaw that has no other value
than what vanity has set upon it. l’estrange.
as children, when they throw one toy away,
straight a more foolish gewgaw comes in play."
a heavy gewgaw, call'd a crown, that spread
about his temples, drown'd his narrow head,
and would have crush'd it. dryden's juvenal.
some loose the bands
of ancient friendship, cancel nature's laws
for pageantry and tawdry gewgaws. phillips.
the first images were fans, silks, ribbands, laces, and many
other gewgaws, which lay so thick that the whole heart was
nothing else but a toyshop. addison's guardian.
ge'wo aw. adj. splendidly trifling; showy without value.
let him that would learn the happiness of religion, see the
poor gewgaw happiness of feliciana. law's serious call.
gha'stful. adj. [3are and fulle, saxon.] dreary; dismal;
melancholy; fit for walking spirits. obsolete.
here will i dwell apart,
in ghas ful grave, ’till my last sleep
do close mine eyes:
help me, ye baneful birds, whose shrieking sound
is sign of dreary death. spenser's pasłoral.
gha's tliness. n.s.. [from ghastly..] horrour of countenance;
resemblance of a ghost; paleness.
gha'stly. adj. [3arz, or ghost, and like.]
1. like a ghost; having horrour in the countenance; pale ;
dreadful ; dismal.
why looks your grace so heavily to-day
—o, i have past a miserable night;
so full of ugly fights, of ghostly dreams,
so full of dismal terrour was the time. shakes. rich. iii.
envy quickly discovered in court solyman's changed coun-
tenance upon the great bassa, and began now to shew her
ghostly face. knolles's history of the turks.
death
grinn'd horrible a ghaftly smile, to hear
his famine should be fill’d. milton's paradis? lost.
those departed friends, whom at our last separation we saw
disfigured by all the ghasily horrours of death, we shall then
see assisting about the majestick throne of christ, with their
once vile bodies transfigured into the likeness of his glorious
body, mingling their glad acclamations with the hallelujahs
of thrones, principalities and powers. boyle.
he came, but with such alter'd looks,
so wild, so ghastly, as if some ghost had met him,
all pale and speechless. dryden's spanish fryar.
i did not for these ghasily visions send ;
their sudden coming does some ill portend. dryd. ind. emp.
2. horrible; shocking; dreadful.
to be less than gods
disdain’d ; but meaner thoughts learn'd in their flight,
mangled with ghasily wounds through plate and mail. milt.
i who make the triumph of to-day,
may of to-morrow's pomp one part appear,
ghaftly with wounds, and lifeless on the bier' prizr.
gha's t n ess. n.s.. [from 3art, saxon.] ghastliness; horrour
of look. not used.
look you pale, mistress -
do you perceive the ghasiness of the eye shakesh. othello.
gh’erk in. m. s. [from gurcke, german, a cucumber.) a
small pickled cucumber. skinner.
to ghess. v. n. [see to guess. ghes is by criticks con-
sidered as the true orthography, but guss has universally pre-
vailed.] to conjecture.
ghost. n.s. [3arz, saxon.]
1. the soul of man.
vex not his ghost: o, let him pass! he hates him,
that would upon the rack of this rough world
stretch him out longer. shakespeare's king lear.
often did i strive
to yield the ghost; but still the envious flood, • , ,
kept in my soul. shakoff. rich. iii.
2. a spirit appearing after death.
the mighty ghosts of our great harrys rose,
and armed edwards look'd with anxious eyes,
to see this fleet among unequal foes, -
by which fate promis'd them their charles should o
ryacht.
jwaller.
8 3. 7,
prov. iv. 7.
dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 916</div><p class="text">g i a
o g i b
3. 7% give up the ghost. to die; to yield up the spirit into
the hands of god. -
their shadows seem
a canopy most fatal, under which
our army lies ready to give up the ghost. shakes, jul. cas:
4. the third person in the adorable trinity, called the holy
ghost.
7% ghost. v. m. [from the noun..] to yield up the ghost; to
die. not in use.
euryalus taking leave of lucretia, precipitated her into such
a love-fit, that within a few hours she ghosted. sidney.
7% ghost. v. a. to haunt with apparitions of departed men.
obsolete.
- julius caesar -
who at philippi the good brutus ghosted,
there saw you labouring for him. shakesh. ant. and cleopat.
ghoost lin ess. n.s. [from ghostly..] spiritual tendency; qua-
lity of having reference chiefly to the soul.
ghostly. adj. [from ghost.] -
1. spiritual; relating to the soul ; not carnal; not secular.
save and defend us from our ghosily enemies. comm. prayer.
our common necessities, and the lack which we all have,
as well of ghostly as of earthly favours, is in each kind so easily
known, but the gifts of god, according to these degrees and
times, which he in his secret wisdom seeth meet, are so di-
versely bestowed, that it seldom appeareth what all receive,
what all stand in need of, it seldom lieth hid. hooker.
the graces of the spirit are much more precious than
worldly benefits, and our ghostly evils of greater importance
than any harm which the body feeleth. hooker.
to deny me the ghosily comfort of my chaplains, seems a
greater barbarity than is ever used by christians. king charles.
2. having a character from religion ; spiritual.
hence will i to my ghossly friar's close cell,
his help to crave, and my dear hap to tell. sh. ro. andjul.
the ghostly father now hath done his shrift. shakesp. h. vi.
gia lalina. m. s. [italian.] earth of a bright gold colour,
found in the kingdom of naples, very fine, and much valued
by painters. isoodward's met. foss.
g1a(mbeux. m. s. [jambes, french.] legs, or armour for
legs; greaves.
the mortal steel dispiteously entail'd,
deep in their flesh, quite through the iron walls,
that a large purple stream adown their giamleux falls. spensor.
giant. m. s. [geant, french; gigas, latin.) a man of size
above the ordinary rate of men ; a man unnaturally large. it
is observable, that the idea of a giant is always associated with
pride, brutality, and wickedness.
now does he feel his axle
hang loose about him, like a giant's robe.
upon a dwarfish thief. shakespeare's macbeth.
gates of monarchs
are arch'd so high that giants may jet through,
and keep their impious turbands on, without
good-morrow to the fun. shakoffeare's cymbeline.
- - woman's gentle brain
could not drop forth such giant rude invention ;
such ethiop words. shakesp. as you like it.
fierce faces threat’ning wars,
giants of mighty bone, and bold emprise ! milton.
those giants, those mighty men, and men of renown, far
exceeded the proportion, nature, and strength of those giants
remembered by moses of his own time. raleigh's history.
the giant brothers, in their camp, have found
i was not forc’d with ease to quit my ground. dryden's 42n.
by weary fleps and flow
the groping giant with a trunk of pine
explor’d his way.
neptune, by pray’r repentant, rarely won,
afflicts the chief to avenge his giant son,
great polypheme of more than mortal might. pope.
gi’antess. m. s. [from giant.] a she-giant ; a woman of un-
natural bulk and height. -
i had rather be a giants, and iie under mount pelion. shak.
were this subject to the cedar, she would be able to make
head against that huge giants. howel.
gi’ant like.
gi’antly. ; bulky. - -
single courage has often, without romance, overcome gi-
antly difficulties. - decay of piety.
notwithstanding all their talk of reason and philosophy,
which they are deplorably strangers to, and those unaniwer-
able doubts and difficulties, which, over their cups, they pre-
tend to have against christianity; persuade but the covetous
man not to deify his money, the proud man not to adore him-
self, and i dare undertake that all their giantlike objections
against the christian religion shall presently vanish and quit
the field. - south.
goantship. m. s. [from giant.j quality or character of a giant.
his gianship is gone somewhat crest, fallen,
stalking with less unconscionable strides, ...
and lower looks. 4milton's agonisłes.
addison.
adj. [from giant and like..] gigantick; vast;
gisbbe; m. s. any old worn-out animal -
- for who that's but a queen, fair ober ... hanmir,
would from a paddock, from a bat. arii wise,
such dear concernings hide : 2 §. -
to giobber. v. n. [from jabber.] to spe .. offeare', hamli,
-- the sheeted dead pea marticulately.
did squeak and gibber in the roma
giobbe r1s h. m. s. [derived by §. *.
cheat ; by others conjectured to be formed o -
jabber. but as it was anciently written o from
derived from the chymical cant, and 3. o to probab
jargon of geier and his tribe.] cant; . . implied the
of rogues and gipseys ; words without mo |wate language
some, if they happen to hear an old word ld
tural and significant, cry out straitway that w o it very m.
lish, but gibberish. * lilat we * eng.
some of both sexes writing down pensor,
as it came into their heads; upon lo. jo
which the men had wrote sounded like high 5. o that
other by the women like italian. teh, and the
g1 bbet. m. s. [gibet, french.]
1. a gallows; the post on which malef.
which their carcises ar. exposed. actors are hanged, or on
when was there ever cursed athe; r
unto the gibbet, but he did adore eist brought
that bleiled pow'r which he had set at nough,
you scandal to the stock of verse, a o
able to bring the gibbet in disgrace. cla:
haman suffered death himself upon the very to:
had provided for another. " * if: at he
papers lay such principles to the tories, as, if o:
true, our next business should be to erect gills; in ever o
and hang them out of the way. jo o 1
2. any traverse beams. wift.
to g1 rbet. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. to hang or expose on a gibbet.
i'll gillet up his name. oldham
2. to hang on any thing going traverse: as the beam of:
gibbet.
he shall come off and o - roll
the brewer's bucket. n swifter o #. o
gi bb/er. m. s. [french.] game; wildfowl, y iv.
these imposts are laid on all butcher's meat, while, a de
sometime, the fowl and gibbier are tax free. aio.
gib bo $1ty. m. s. [giblosite, fr. from gillous.j convexis,
prominence ; protuberance. !
when ships, sailing contrary ways, lose the fight one of
another, what should take away the fight of ships someo
other, but the gibbosity of the interjacent water; ry,
głłło u.s. adj. [gibbus, latin; gibbeux, french.]
1. convex; protuberant; swelling into inequalities,
the bones will rise, and make a gillous member. isono,
a pointed flinty rock, all bare and black, j.
grew gillous from behind the mountain's back. dolo.
the sea, by this access and recess, shuffling the emptysiel,
wears them away, reducing those that are concave and gillo,
to a flat. j/oodward's natural history,
2. crookbacked.
i demand how the camels of bacoria came to have two
bunches in their back, whereas the camels of arabia have but
one how oxen, in some countries, began and continuegil-
beus, or hunch-backed brown.
gi bhous n ess. n.s.. [from gillous.] convexity; prominence.
to make the convexity of the earth discernible, suppose a
man lifted in the air, that he may have a spacious horizon;
shaloft. haml.
* french, to
swiff,
davis.
but then, because of the distance, the convexity and gillous-
nes, would vanish away, and he would only see a great circular
flat. bently's stroni,
g1 bcat. m. s. [gib and cat..] an old worn-out cit.
i am as melancholy as a gibcat, or a lugg’d bear. shao.
to g|b.e. v. n. [gaber, old french, to sncer, to ridicuk.)
to sneer ; to join censoriousness with contempt,
they seem to imagine that we have erected of late a some
of some new religion, the furniture whereof we should not
have borrowed from our enemies, left they should afterwards
laugh and gibe at our party. - or.
when he saw her toy, and gibe, and geer,
and pass the bounds of modest merry-make,
her dalliance he despis'd. soft,
why that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
whose influence is begot of that loose grace -
which shallow laughing hearers give to vols. shałowo,
thus with talents well endu'd
to be scurrilous and rude,
when you pertly raise your snout, -
fleer and gibe, and laugh and flout. soft,
to gib e. v. a. to reproach by contemptuous hints; "
flout; to scoff; to ridicule; to treat with scorn; to into "
taunt.
when rioting in alexandria, you
did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
did gibe my misfive out of audience. so, fit. *.
sa
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 917</div><p class="text">g i d
g i f
i. draw the beasts as i describe them,
from their features, while i gibe them. swift.
o gibe: "...s. (from the verb.] sneer; hint of contempt by word
or look; scoff; act or expression of scorn; taunt,
mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns
that dwell in ev'ry region of his face. shakesp. othello.
o the rich have still a gibe in store,
and will be monstrous witty on the poor. dryden's juv.
if they would hate from the bottom of their hearts, their
aversion would be too strong for little gibes every moment.
o - - a - - - - spectator.
- - but the dean, if this secret should come to his cars,
o will never have done with his gibes and his jeers. swift.
g1'ber. m.s.. [from gibe..] a sneerer; one who turns others
- - - - - - - -
to ridicule by contemptuous hints; a scoffer; a taunter.
o, you are well understood to be a more perfect giber of the
table, than a necessary bencher of the capitol. shakesp. cor.
--&gt; * he is a giber, and our present business
is of more serious consequence. ben. johnson's catiline.
g1 bingly. adv...[from gibe..] scornfully; contemptuously.
his present portance,
gibingly and ungravely he did fashion
- after th’ inveterate hate he bears to you. shakesp. coriolanus.
o groblets. n.s. [according to minshew from gobbet, gobblet:
according to junius more probably from gibier, game, fr.]
the parts of a goose which are cut off before it is roasted.
'tis holyday; provide me better cheer:
'tis.holyday; and shall be round the year:
shall i my houshold gods and genius cheat,
to make him rich who grudges me my meat
that he may loll at ease; and pamper'd high,
, , . when i am laid, may feed on giblet pie? dryden's pers.
gisgstaff. n.s.
1. a long staff to gage water, or to shove forth a vessel into the
deep.
2. a weapon used formerly to fight beasts upon the stage. dici.
gi’ddily. adv. [from giddy.]
1. with the head seeming to turn round.
2. inconstantly ; unsteadily.
to roam
giddily, and be every where but at home,
such freedom doth a banishment become. donne.
3. carelesly; heedlesly; negligently.
the parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her, -
tell her, i hold as giddily as fortune. shak. twelfth night
g1 ddiness. n.s.. [from giddy.]
1. the state of being giddy or vertiginous; the sensation which
- - - we have when every thing seems to turn round.
o . . megrims and giddiness are rather when we rise after long
-- sitting, than while we sit. bacon's natural history.
--" this blessed thistle, which is so sovereign a medicine against
--- the giddiness of the brain; 'tis this will settle it. holyday.
vain show and noise intoxicate the brain,
begin with giddiness, and end in pain. 1%ung.
2. inconstancy; unsteadiness; mutability; changeableness.
there be that delight in giddiness, and count it a bondage
to fix a belief. bacon.
3. quick rotation; inability to keep its place. -
, - * the indignation of heaven rolling and turning us, 'till at
length such a giddines, seized upon government, that it fell into
the very dregs of sectaries. - south.
-- 4. frolick; wantonness of life.
thou, like a contrite penitent,
charitably warn'd of thy fins, do's repent
these vanities and giddinesses. donne.
gi’ddy. adj. [xibis, saxon. i know not whether this word
may not come from gad, to wander, to be in motion, gad,
gid, giddy.] - - -
1. vertiginous; having in the head a whirl, or sensation of cir-
cular motion, such as happens by disease or drunkenness.
them rev'ling thus the tentyrites invade,
by giddy heads and stagg'ring legs betray'd. , tate's juvenal.
2. rotatory; whirling ; running round with celerity.
as ixion fix'd, the wretch shall feel.
the giddy motion of the whirling mill.
* -- 3. inconstant; mutable ; unsteady : changeful.
our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
- more longing, wavering, sooner lost and won, ...
* * than womens are. shakespeare's twelfth night.
it may be gnats and flies have their imagination more mu-
- pope.
table and giddy, as small birds likewise have. bakon.
thanks to giddy chance, which never bears
that mortal blits should last for length of years,
she cast us headlong from our high estate,
and here in hope of thy return we wait. dryden's fables.
- the giddy vulgar, as their fancies guide,
. . with noise say nothing, and in parts divide. dryden's aon.
--" you are as giddy and volatile as ever, the reverse of pope,
- who hath always loved a domestick life. swift to gay.
4. that which causes giddiness.
. . . the frequent errors of the pathless wood,
the giddy precipice, and the dang'rous flood.
vol. i.
prior,
the sylphs through mystick mazes guide their way,
through all the giddy circle they pursue. pope.
5. heedless; thoughtless; uncautious ; wild.
too many giddy foolish hours are gone,
and in fantastick measures danc'd away. rowe's ja. shore.
how inexcusable are those giddy creatures, who, in the same
hour, leap from a parent's window to a husband's bed. claris.
6. tottering; unfixed.
as we have pac'd along
upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
methought that &amp;#. stumbled. shakespeare's rich.iif.
7. intoxicated i. elated to thoughtlesness; overcome by any over-
powering inticement.
art thou not giddy with the fashion too, that thou hast
shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion? shakesp.
like one of two contending in a prize,
that thinks he hath done well in people's eyes;
hearing applause and universal shout,
giddy in spirit, gazing still in doubt,
whether those peals of praise be his or no. shakespeare.
to gisbox. v. n. [from the noun..] to turn quick.” ob-
solete.
a sodaine north-wind fetcht,
with an extreame sea, quite about againe,
our whole endeavours; and our course constrain
to giddie round. chapman.
gozano. adj. [giddy and brain.] careless; thought-
cis.
turn him out again, you unnecessary, useless, giddobrain'd
ass! otway's wenice preserved.
g1 ppy headed, adj. [giddy and head.] without thought or
caution; without steadiness or constancy.
and sooner may a gulling weather spy,
by drawing forth heav'n's scheme descry
what fashion'd hats or ruffs, or suits, next year,
our giddyheaded antick youth will wear, donne.
that men are so misaffected, melancholy, giddyheaded, hear
the testimony of solomon. burton an amelancholy,
gora ced. adj. [giddy and pace.] moving without regu-
as 1(v.
'more than light airs, and recolle&amp;ted terms,
of these most brisk and giddypaced times. shakespeare.
g1 er-eagle. m. s. [sometimes it is written jer-eagle.j an
eagle of a particular kind. -
these fowls shall not be eaten, the swan and the pelican,
and the gier-eagle. , - zev. xi. 18.
gift. n.s.. [from give, j
i. a thing given or bestowed; something conferred without
price.
they presented unto him gifts, gold, and frankincense and
myrrh. a4at. ii. 11.
recall your gift, for i your pow'r confess;
but first take back my life, a gift that's less. dryd. aureng.
2. the aet of giving.
creator bounteous, and benign
giver of all things good, but fairest this
of all thy gifts, nor envyest. milton.
thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
by gift. milton.
3. the right or power of bestowing.
they cannot give ;
for had the gift been theirs, it had not here
thus grown. milton.
no man has any antecedent right or claim to that which
comes to him by free gift. south.
4. oblation; offering.
many nations shall come with gifts in their hands, even
gifts to the king of heaven. tob. xiii. 1 i.
5. a bribe.
thou shalt not wrest judgment, thou shalt not respect per-
sons, neither take a gift ; for a gift doth blind the eyes of the
wise. - deut. xvi. 19.
6. power; faculty. -
and if the boy have not a woman's gift,
to rain a shower of commanded tears,
an onion will do well for such a shift. shakespeare.
she was lovely to attract
thy love, not thy subjection, and her gifts
were such as made government well seem'd
unseemly to bear rule. milton,
he who has the gift of ridicule, finds fault with any thing
that gives him an opportunity of exerting his talent. addison.
g1'fte d. adj. [from gift.]
1. given; bestowed.
made of my enemies the scorn and gaze,
to grind in brazen fetters, under task,
with my heav'n gifted strength.
2. endowed with extraordinary powers.
ironically. -
two of their gifted brotherhood, hacket and coppinger,
got up into a pease-cart, and harangued the people to dispose
them to an insurreotion. ixryden.
io g there
milton's agonisłes.
it is commonly used
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 918</div><p class="text">g i l
g i m
there is no talent so pernicious as eloquence, to those who
have it not under command: women, who are so liberally
gifted by nature in this particular, ought to study the rules of
female oratory. doison's freeholder.
gig. n.s. ietymology uncertain.].
1. anything that is whirled round in play.
playthings, as tops, gigs, battledores, should be procured
them. locke.
2. [gigia, islandick. j . a fiddle. now out of use.
giga'ntick. adj. [gigantes, latin.] suitable to a giant; big;
bulky; enormous ; likewise wicked ; atrocious.
others from the wall defend
with dart and jav'lin, stones, and sulphurous fire;
on each hard slaughter and gigantick deeds : milton.
i dread him not, nor all his giant-brood,
though fame divulg'd him father of five sons,
all of gigantick size, goliah chief. milton's agonisies.
the son of hercules he justly seems,
by his broad shoulders and gigantick limbs. dryden's aon.
the cyclopean race in arms arose;
a lawless nation of gigantick foes. pope's odyssey.
to gi'ggle. v. n. [gichelen, dutch..] to laugh idly; to
titter; to grin with merry levity. it is retained in scotland.
we shew our present, joking, giggling race ;
true joy consists in gravity and grace. garrick’s epilogue.
g1'ggler. m. s. [from giggle.] a laugher; a titterer; one
idly and foolishly merry.
a sad wise valour is the brave complexion,
that leads the van, and swallows up the cities:
the giggler is a milk-maid, whom infection,
or the fir’d beacon, frighteth from his ditties. pherbert.
g1'glet. n. s. [xagl, saxon; geyl, dutch ; gillet, scottish, is
still retained.] a wanton; al. scivious girl. now out of use.
young talbot was not born
to be the pillage of a giglet wench. shakesp. henry vi.
the fam’d cassibelan was once at point,
oh giglet fortune! to master caesar's sword. shak. cymbel.
away with those giglets too, and with the other confederate
companion. shakespeare's measure for measure.
gigot. n.s. [french.) the hip joint. it seems to mean in
chapman a joint for the spit.
the inwards slit,
they broil'd on coales, and eate: the rest, in gigots cut,
they split. chapman.
t. gild. v. a. pret. gilded, or gilt. [31]ban, saxon.]
1. to wash over with gold ; to cover with foliated gold.
the room was large and wide,
as it some gilt or solemn temple were :
many great golden pillars did uprear -
the massy roof. spenser.
to gild refined gold, to paint the lily, -
to throw a perfume on the violet. shakespeare's k. john.
and the gilded car of day
his glowing axle doth allay
in the steep atlantick stream. ' ' milton.
purchasing riches with our time and care,
we lose our freedom in a gilded snare.
when britain, looking with a just disdain
. upon this gilded majesty of spain,
and knowing well that empire must decline,
whose chief support and finews are of coin. //aller.
her joy in gilded chariots, when alive; -
and love of ombre after death survive. pope.
2. to cover with any yellow matter.
- thou did'st drink
the stale of horses and the gilded puddle,
which beasts would cough at. shakesp. ant, and cleopatra.
3. to adorn with lustre. -
no more the rising sun shall gild the morn,
nor ev'ning cynthia fill her silver horn. pope's mosiah.
, to brighten; to illuminate. - - -
the lightsome passion of joy was not that trivial, vanish-
ing, superficial thing, that only gild; the apprehension and
plays upon the turface of the soul. south.
5. to recommend by adventitious ornaments.
- for my part, if a lie may do thee grace:
i'll gild it with the happiest terms i have. shakesp. hen. iv.
yet, oh! th’ imperfect piece moves more delight ;
'tis gilded o'er with youth, to catch the fight. dryd. auren.
gilder. n.s.. [from gild.]
... one who says gold on the surface of any other body.
gilders use to have a piece of gold in their mouth, to draw
the spirits of the quick silver. bacon's natural history.
we have here a gilder, with his anvil and hanmer. broome.
from one shilling and six pence, to two shillings. phil.
i am bound -
to persia, and want gilders for my voyage. shakespeare.
gilping. n.f. [from gild.] gold laid on any surface by way
of ornament. - -- - - -
silvering will fully and canker more than gilding, which,
if it might be corrected with a little mixture of gold, there is
bacon's phys. rem.
roscommon.
2. a coin,
profit,
- - the church of the annunciat
is covered with statues, ...” ohe corner of it
could laureate dryden pimp and fo addis, **
and i not strip the gilding off a knave yr engage,
unplac'd, unpension'd, no man's heir slav
gill. n.s.. [agulla, spanish; gula, latin f ave? pope
1. the apertures at each fide of a fish's head -
stretch'd lik the leviathan, -
retc ike a promontor -
and seems a moving land o o
draws in, and at his trunk spouts out #.
fishes perform respiration under water by the ... milo,
he hath two gill-fins; not behind the gill, gill. . raj.
but before them. » as in most fishes,
*till they, of farther passage qui wall,
- - - - - quite b o,
were in the mesh with gill, entangl’d i.o fo
|btrman,
2. the flaps that hang below the bea; of
c a fowl.
the turkeycock hath great and swij, and the fi
cn
hath less. bacon's n
3. the flesh under the chin. **atural hip
in many there is no paleness at all : - -
ness a. cheeks . gills, # o '. o o red.
of spirits in an appetite to revenge. ho ending forth
like the long bag of flesh hanging down's to hilo,
the people in piedmont. ioin *:::
4. [gilla, barbarous latin.] a m - - off,
the fourth part of a ...] easure of liquids containing
every bottle must be rinced with wine: -
taken thrift, will rince a dozen ... o of mis.
wine at every second bottle: a gill may be enou h ing to
5. a kind of measure among the tinners. gh. swift,
a o measure their block-tin by the gill, which o
6. in the northern counties it is half a pint of limi drew,
7. [from gillian, the old english wo of o:
juliana.] the appellation of a woman in o o ot
guage. us last-
i can, for i will,
here at burley o' th' hill,
e. }. all your fill,
ach jack with his gill. ben. 7. an a
8. [chelidonium.] the name of a plant; too.
9. malt liquor medicated with ground-ivy. -
gi’ll house. m. s. [gill and house..] a house where gilliso
thee shall each alehouse, thee each gillhouse ion -
and answ'ring ginshops sourer fighs return. #.
gillyflow er: n. s. [either corrupted from jul, flower, or
from giroffee, french.]
gillyflowers, or rather julyffowers, so called from the month
they blow in, may be reduced to these sorts; red and white,
purple and white, scarlet and white. mortimer'; huffalo.
in july come gillyflowers of all varieties. basin,
fair is the gillyflow'r of gardens sweet,
fair is the marygold, for pottage meet. gay's poiral.
gilt. m. s. [from gild.]. golden show; gold laid on the sur.
face of any matter. now obsolete.
our gayness and our gilt are all besmirch'd,
with rainy marching in the painful field, shaloft, hon.v.
when thou wast in thy gilt, and thy perfume, they mockt
thee for too much curiosity: in thy rags thou know'st mone,
but art despis'd for the contrary. shakesh. timonof athin,
gilt. the participle of gild, which see.
where the gilt chariot never mark'd its way, po,
g1 l the ad. n.s. [gilt and head.]
1. a sea fish. dia,
2. a bird. 1. *
he blended together the livers of gilthead, the brains of
pheasants and peacocks, tongues of phenicopters, and the
melts of lampres. ** halewill.
gilt-tail. n.s. [gilt and tail.] a worm so called from his
yellow tail. -- - - -
gim. adj. [an old word.] neat; spruce; well dressed,
g1mcrack. m. s. [supposed by skinner to be ludicrouslysomo
from gin, derived from engine.] a flight or trivial mechi-
nism. * -
for though these gimcracks were away,
however, more reduc’d and plain,
the watch would still a watch remain;
but if the horal orbit ceases, -
the whole stands still, or breaks to pieces. prior,
... what's the meaning of all these trangrams and gin-rath f
jumping over my master's hedges, and running your linesco
his grounds arbuthnot. his off. bal
gi’m let. n.s. [gioclet, guimbelt, french.] a borer with
screw at its point.
the gimlet hath a worm at the end of its bit. . . mo"
g1mmal. n.s. [supposed by stinner and ainsworth too.
rived from gimellus, latin, and to be used only of something
consisting of correspondent parts, or double. it seem’"
to be gradually corrupted from geometry orgumetrial. any";
done by occult means is vulgarly said to be done bygo.
some little quaint devices or pieces of machinery. #.
thin
?? on laj,
7.
l,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 919</div><p class="text">g i n
g i r
's
-
s
~.
i think by some odd gimmals or device
their arms are set like clocks, still to strike on,
else they could not hold out so as they do, shakes, hen. vi.
gi’mmer. m. s. [see g1mmal...] movement; machinery.
the holding together of the parts of matter has so con-
founded me, that i have been prone to conclude with myself,
that the gimmers of the world hold together not so much by
geometry as some natural magick. . . more's divine dialogues.
gimp. n.s. [see gim. gimp, in old english, is neat, spruce.]
a kind of silk twist or lace. - -
gin, n. s. [from engine.]
1. a trap; a snare.
as the day begins,
with twenty gins we will the small birds take,
and pastime make. - sidney.
which two, through treason and deceitful gin,
hath slain sir mordant. spenser.
so strives the woodcock with the gin; -
so doth the coney struggle in the net. shakesp. henry vi.
be it by gins, by snares, by subtilty. shakesp. hen. vi.
if those, who have but sense, can shun
the engines that have them annoy’d ;
little for me had reason done,
if i could not thy gins avoid.
i know thy trains,
though dearly to my cost, thy gins and toils;
no more on me have pow'r, their force is null'd,
he made a planetary gin,
which rats would run their own heads in,
and come on purpose to be taken,
ben. johnson's forest.
milton.
without th’ expence of cheese and bacon. hudibras.
keep from flaying scourge thy skin,
and ankle free from iron gin. hudibras.
2. anything moved with screws, as an engine of torture.
typhaeus' joints were stretched on a gin. spenser.
3. a pump worked by rotatory sails. - -
the delfs would be so flown with waters, it being impos-
fible to make any adits or soughs to drain them, that no gins
or machines would suffice to lay and keep them 'ry. ray.
a bituminous plate, alternately yellow and bla k, formed
by water driveling on the outside of the gin pump of mostyn
coalpits. jwoodward on fossils.
4. [contracted from genew a, which see.] the spirit draw
by distillation from juniper berries. *
this calls the church to deprecate our fin,
• and hurls the thunder of our laws on gin.
gin shops sourer fighs return. -
ginger. m. s. [zinziber, latin; gingero, italian.] -
the flower consists of five leaves, shaped somewhat like
those of the iris: these are produced in the head or club, each
coming out of a separate leafy scale. the ovary becomes 3.
triangular fruit, having three cells which contain seeds. miller.
the root of ginger is of the tuberous kind, knotty, crooked
and irregular ; of a hot, acrid, and pungent taste, though
aromatick, and of a very agreeable smell. the indians eat
both the young shoots of the leaves and the roots themselves.
hill's mat. medica.
or wafting ginger round the streets to go, -
and visit alehouse where ye first did grow, pope's dunciad.
g1'nger bread. n.f. [ginger and bread..] a kind of farina-
ceous sweetmeat made of dough, like that of bread or biscuit,
... sweetenca with treacle, and flavoured wo ginger and some
aromatick seeds. it is sometimes gilt.
oo:: i had but one penny in the world, thou should's have
it to buy gingerbread. shakespeare's love's labour lost.
he currans there and gooseberries were spread,
with the enticing gold of gingerbread. king's cookery.
'tis a loss you are not here, to partake of three weeks
frost, and eat gingerbread in a booth by a fire upon the
thames. - swift.
gogerly. adv. [i know not whence derived.] cautiously;
nicely.
pope.
pope.
- what is't that you
took up so gingerly p shakoffeare's two gent, of verona.
gronger ness. n.s. niceness; tenderness. dicf.
gongival. adj. [gingiva, latin.] belonging to the gums.
whilst the italians strive to cut a thread in their pronun-
ciation between d and t, so to sweeten it, they make the
occluse appulse, especially the gingival, sotor than "o do,
giving a little of perviousness. holder's elements of speech.
to gi'ngle. v. n. - - - -
1. to utter a sharp clattering noise; to utter a sharp noise in
quick succession. - - - - 2.
." the foot grows black that was with dirt embrown d. .
and in thy pocket gingling halfpence sound. gay's trivia.
once, we confess, beneath the patriot's cloak,
from the crack'd bag the dropping guinea spoke,
andgingling down the backstairs, told the crew, , ...
old cato is as great a rogue as you. pope's epistles.
2. to make an affected sound in periods of cadence: -
7, gongo, j. a. to shake so that a sharp thrill clattering
noise should be made.
--
–2. to put on so as to surround or bind.
: her infant grandame's whistle next it gre
. . the bells she gingled, and the whistle .."
g1 ngle. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a shrill resounding noise,
2: affectation in the sound of periods,
g1'ngly moid, adj. [7.7%up.g and #3gp.]
ginglymus 3, approaching to a ginglymus.
the malleus lies along, fixed to the tympanum, and on the
9ther end is joined to the incus by a double or ginglymoid
joint. holder's elements of speech.
gi'ngly mus. n.s. a mutual indenting of two bones into each
9ther's cavity, of which the elbow is an instance. joseman.
g1'nnet. n.f syswo’.] a nag ; a o a degenerated
breed. hence, according to some, but, i lieve, erroneously,
a spanish gennet, improperly written for ginnet.
g1'nseng. m. s. [i suppose chines...] a root brought lately
into europe, of a brownish colour on the outside, and some-
what yellowish within ; and so pure and fine, that it seems
almost transparent. it is of a very agreeable and aromatick
smell, though not very strong. its taste is acrid and aro-
natick, and has somewhat bitter in it. we have it from
china and america. the chinese value this root at three
times its weight in silver. hill.
to 915: v. a. to take out the guts of herrings, bailey.
git’sy. m. s. [corrupted from egyptian; for when they first
appeared in europe, they declared, and perhaps truly, that they
were driven from egypt by the turks. they are now mingled
with all nations.]
1. a vagabond who pretends to foretell futurity,
palmestry or physiognomy.
the butler, though he is sure to lose a knife, a fork, or a
spoon every time his fortune is told him, shuts himself up in
pope,
resembling a
commonly by
the pantry with an old gipsy for above half an hour. addison.
a frantick gipsy now, the house he haunts,
and in wild phrases speaks dissembled wants. prior.
in this still labyrinth around her lie -
spells, philters, globes, and spheres of palmistry; .
a figil in his hand the gipsy bears, -
in th’ other a prophetick sieve and sheers. garth's dispensat.
i, near yon stile, three sallow gypsies met;
upon my hand they cast a poring sook,
bid me beware, and thrice their heads they shook.
2. a reproachful name for a dark complexion.
laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen-wench; dido a
dowdy : cleopatra a gipsy; helen and hero hildings and
harlots. shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
3. a name of slight reproach to a woman.
the widow play'd the gypsy, and so did her confidant too,
gay.
in pretending to believe her. l’estrange.
a slave i am to clara's eyes:
the gipsy knows her pow'r, and flies. prior.
g1'rasole. n. s. [girasol, french.]
1. the herb turnsol.
2. the opal stone.
to gird., v. a. pret, girded, or girt. [x;nban, saxon.]
1. to bind round.
they sprinkled earth upon their heads, and girded their
loins with sackcloth. 2 mac. x. 3.
cords of the bigness of packthread were fastened to ban-
dages, which the workmen had girt round my neck. swift.
3. to fasten by binding.
he girt his warlike harness about him.
1 mac. iii. 25.
my bow and thunder, my almighty arms -
gird on, and sword upon thy puissant thigh. amilton.
no, let us rise at once, gird on our swords,
and, at the head of our remaining troops,
attack the foe. addison's cato.
the combatant too late the field declines,
when now the sword is girded to his loins. prior.
4. to invest.
stoop then, and set your knee against my foot;
and in reguerdon of that duty done,
i gird thee with the valiant sword of york. shakoff. h. vi.
the son appear'd, -
girt with omnipotence.
milton's paradise loft.
5. to dress; to habit; to clothe.
i girded thee about with fine linen, and i covered thee with
silk. ezek. xvi. 10. ,
tysiphone there keeps the ward, * - - - -
girt in her sanguine gown, by night and day,
observant of the souls that pass the downward way. dryd.
-
6. to cover round as a garment.
these, with what skill they had, together sow'd,
to gird their waist: vain covering, if it hide
their guilt, and dreaded shame! milton's paradis? loft.
7. to furnish; to equip.
so to the coast of jordan he direets
his easy steps, girded with snaky wiles. milton.
8. to inclose; to incircle.
that nyseian isle,
girt with the river triton, where old cham hid
i
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 920</div><p class="text">g i r.
ihid amalthea, and her florid son -
young bacchus, from his stepdame rhea's eye. milton.
9. to reproach; to gibe.
being mov’d, he will not spare to gird the gods. shakesp. .
t, gird. j. n. [of this word in this sense i know not the
original; it may be formed by a very customary transposition
from gride or cut.] to break a scornful jest; to gibe; to
sneer.
this wondred error growth
at which our criticks gird. drayton.
men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me: the brain of
this foolish compounded clay, man, is not able to invent any
thing that tends to laughter more than i invent, or is invented
on me: i am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit
is in other men. shakespeare's henry iv.
gird. n.s.. [from the verb.] a twitch; a pang; it may come
from the sensation caused by a bandage or girdle drawn hard
suddenly. this word is now seldom used, unless the former
etymology be admitted:
sweet king ! the bishop hath a kindly gird:
for shame, my lord of winchester, relent. -
shakespeare's henry vi.
conscience by this means is freed from many fearful girds
and twinges which the atheist feels. illotson.
he has the glory of his conscience, when he doth well, to
set against the checks and girds of it when he doth ami's.
goodman’s winter evening com.
g1'rder. m. s. [from gird..] in archite&amp;ture, the largest piece
of timber in a floor. its end is usually fastened into the sum-
mers, or breast summers, and the joists are framed in at one
arm to the girders. harris.
the girders are also to be of the same scantling the sum-
mers and ground-plates are of, though the back girder need
not be so strong as the front girder. moxon's mech. exer.
these mighty girders which the fabrick bind,
these ribs robust and vast in order join'd.
girdle. m. s. [xynbel, saxon.]
1. anything drawn round the waist, and tied or buckled.
there will i make thee beds of roses,
with a thousand fragrant posies;
a cap of flowers, and a girdle,
embroider'd all with leaves of myrtle. shakespeare.
many conceive there is somewhat amiss, until they put on
their girdle. brown's /ulgar errours.
on him his mantle, girdle, sword and bow,
on him his heart and soul he did bestow. cowley.
2. enclosure; circumference.
suppose within the girdle of these walls
are now confin'd two mighty monarchies. shakoff. h. v.
3. the zodiack.
great breezes in great circles, such as are under the girdle
of the world, do refrigerate. bacon.
to g1'rlle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to gird; to bind as with a girdle.
ay the gentle babes, girdling one another
within their innocent alabafter arms. shakso. rich. iii.
2. to inclose; to shut in ; to environ. -
those sleeping stones,
that as a waist do girdle you about. shakes. king john.
let me look back upon thee, o thou wall,
that girdly in those wolves | shakespeare’s timon.
g1'rdlebel.t. n. s. [girdle and belt..] the belt that incircles
the waist.
nor did his eyes less longingly behold
the girdlebelt, with nails of burnish’d gold. dryden's an.
g1'rdler... n. s. [from girdle.] a maker of girdles.
gire. m. s. [gyrus, latin.] a circle described by any thing in
motion. see gy re. -
g! rl. m. s. [about the etymology of this word there is much
question : meric casaubon, as is his custom, derives it from zapm
of the same signification ; minshew from garrula, latin, a
prattler, or girella, italian, a weathercock; junius thinks
that it comes from herlodes, welsh, from which, says he,
harlot is very easily deduced. skinner imagines that the saxons,
who used ceorl for a man, might likewise have ceorla for a
woman, though no such word is now found. dr. hickes de-
rives it most probably from the islandick karlinna, a woman.]
a young woman, or female child.
in those unfledg'd days was my wife a girl. shakes care.
i will love thee ne'er the less, my girl. shakespeare.
the foole amphimachus, to field brought gold to be his
blackmore.
wracke,
proude girle like, that doth ever beare her dowre upon her
backe. chapinan.
a weather-beaten lover, but once knowg,
is sport for every girl to practise on. - donne.
tragedy should blush as much to stoop
to the low mimick follies of a farce,
as a grave matron would to dance with girls. roscommon.
a boy, like thee, would make a kingly line;
- but oh! a girl, like her, must be divine: dryden.
gl'roish. adj..[from girl..] suiting a girl; youthful.
in her girlish o she kept sheep on the moor. car#9.
gior lishly. adv. [from girlish.] in a girlish manner
to girn. v. n. it seems to be a corruption.
used in scotland, and is applied to a too." still
, or pee-
vish person.
gior rock. m. s. saeus major.] a kind of fish -
girt. part, pass...[from to gird.] - diff.
to girt. v. a. [from gird..] to gird
circle. not proper.
in the dread ocean, undulating wide
beneath the radiant line that girt; the
girt. n.s.. [from the verb.] &amp; globe. thomson,
- 1 - -
i o by which the saddle or burthen is fixed upon the
here lies old hobson, death hath br is air.
and here, alas ! hath laid him in the o: his girt; mi
2. a circular bandage. illn,
the most common way of bandage is b -
which girt hath a o: in the o o: giri,
tacked firmly together. wiseman's s s are
girth. n.s.. [from gird.] urgery,
1. a band by which the saddle is fixed upon the horse
or the saddle turn'd round, or the girths brake.
#. o on the ground, woe for his sake, &gt;
he law is found. ben. hohnson' -
nor pegasus could bear the load, johnson's underwis,
along the high celestial road;
the steed oppress'd, would break his girth,
to raise the lumber from the earth. swift
mordanto gallops on alone; -
the roads are with his foll’wers strown;
this breaks a girth, and that a bone. swift,
2. the compass measured by the girdle, or enclosing bandige.
he's a lusty jolly fellow that lives well, at leas three yards
in the girth. addison's freeholder,
to girth. v. a. to bind with a girth.
to gise ground. v. a. is when the owner of it does not foci
it with his own stock, but takes in other cattletograze. baily.
g1's le. among the english saxons, fignifies a ledge: thus,
fredgisle is a pledge of peace; gislebert an illustrious pledge,
like the greek homerus. gilson's camden,
gith: m. s. snigella.] an herb called guinea pepper.
to give v. a. preter, gave; part, pass, given. [span, saxon.)
"... bestow 3 to confer without any price or reward; not to
i had a master that gave me all i could ask, but thoughtfit
3 to encompass; toen.
to take one thing from me again. tompk.
constant at church and change; his gains were sure,
his givings rare, save farthings to the poor. po,
while tradesmen starve these philomels are gay;
for gen’rous lords had rather give than pay. turg,
half useless doom'd to live,
pray'rs and advice are all i have to give. hart,
2. to transmit from himself to another by hand, speech, or
writing ; to deliver.
the woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me
of the tree, and i did eat. gen. iii. 11.
they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage. mait. xxiv.3%
those bills were printed not only every week, but also
general account of the whole year was given in on to
1 hursday before christmas. graunt's bill of morial.
we shall give an account of these phenomena. . .”
aristotle advises not poets to put things evidently false and
impossible into their poems, nor gives them licence too.""
into wildness. - broomi,
3. to put into one's possession; to confign; to impart; **
municate.
give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone ou
nature gives us many children and friends,
t, matt. xxv,
to take them
away; but takes none away to give them us again. s:
give me, says archimedes, where to stand firm, * o
remove the earth. - ne's
if the agreement of men first gave a sceptre into . o it;
hands, or put a crown on his head, that almost must dist isi.
conveyance. - ****
4. to pay as price or reward, or in exchango. ob ii 4.
as that a man hath will he give for his lo jili.
if you did know to whom i gave the ring,
if you did know for whom i gave the sing:
and would conceive for o gave the ring,
and how unwillingly i left the ring, .. -
you would abate o of your dio.o.
he would give his nuts for a piece of metal, o laa.
his sheep for shells, or wool for a sparkling pebble.
. to yield; not to withhold. - isosits
5 §. alexander's father, gave senteno o o:
what time he was drowsy, and seemed to give o: i appa:
the prisoner, after sentence was poo, al o appo
the king, somewhat stirred, said, t o whom - o no ear, 19
the prisoner answered, from philip, who ho zołko.
philip, when he shall give ear. . . i. finane!
constantia accused herself for having so o soto
to the proposal. ads 6. to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 921</div><p class="text">g i v .
g i v
s
o
-
-
o:
o
6. to quit; to yield as due.
give place, thou stranger, to an honourable man. ecclus.
. to confer; to impart.
i will bless her, and give thee a son also of her. gen. xvii.
nothing can give that to another which it hath not itself.
- bramh, against hobbes.
what beauties i lose in some places, i give to others which
had them not originally. dryden's fables, preface.
8. to expose ; to yield without retention.
all clad in skins of beasts the javlin bear;
give to the wanton winds their flowing hair. dryd. æn.
9. to grant; to allow.
i
'tis given me once again to behold my friend. rowe.
he has not given luther fairer play. atterbury.
io. to yield ; not to deny.
i gave his wise proposal way;
nay, urg'd him to go on; the shallow fraud
will ruin him. rowe's ambitious stepmother.
1. to afford; to supply.
this opinion abated the fear of death in them which were
, so resolved, and gave them courage to all adventures. hooker.
give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sa-
crifice unto the lord. ex. x. 25.
2. to empower; to commission.
prepare
the due libation and the solemn pray’r:
then give thy friend to shed the sacred wine. pope's odyss.
13 to enable.
god himself requireth the lifting up of pure hands in
prayers; and hath given the world to understand, that the
wicked, although they cry, shall not be heard. hooker.
give me to know -
how this foul rout began, who set it on. shakesp. othello.
so some weak shoot, which else would poorly rise,
jove's tree adopts, and lifts into the skies;
through the new pupil fostring juices flow,
thrust forth the gems, and give the flow’rs to blow. tickel.
14. to pay.
the applause and approbation i give to both vour speeches.
shak. troil, and cressida.
15. to utter; to vent; to pronounce.
--
so you must be the first that gives this sentence,
and he that suffers. shakesp. measure for measure.
'the rhodians seeing their enemies turn their backs, gave
a great shout in derision of them. knzlles's hijiory.
let the first honest discoverer give the word about, that
wood's halfpence have been offered, and caution the poor
people not to receive them. swift.
16. to exhibit; to shew.
this instance gives the impossibility of an eternal existence
in any thing essentially alterable or corruptible. ale.
17. to exhibit as the product of a calculation.
the number of men being divided by the number of ships,
gives four hundred and twenty-four men a-piece. arbuthnot.
18. to do any act of which the consequence reaches others.
i
as we desire to give no offence ourselves, so neither shall
we take any at the difference of judgment in others. burnet.
9. to exhibit; to send forth as odours from any body.
in oranges the ripping of their rind giveth out their smell
more. bacon.
2c. to addict ; to apply.
.the helots, of the other side, shutting their gates, gave
themselves to bury their dead, to cure their wounds, and rest
their wearied bodies. sidney.
after man began to grow to number, the first thing we read
they gave themselves into, was the tilling of the earth and the
feeding of cattle. - hooker.
groves and hill-altars were dangerous, in regard of the
secret access which people superstitiously given might have
always thereunto with ease. hooker.
the duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given,
to dream on evil, or to work my downfal. shakespeare.
fear him not, caesar, he's not dangerous :
he is a noble roman, and well given. shakespeare.
his name is falstaff: if that man should be lewdly given,
he deceives me; for, harry, i see virtue in his looks. shakesp.
huniades, the scourge of the turks, was dead lorg before;
so was also mathias: after whom succeeded others, given all to
pleasure and ease. knollo's history.
though he was given to pleasure, yet he was likewise or
firous of glory. bacon's henry vii:
he that giveth his mind to the law of the most high, will
seek out the wisdom of all the ancients. ecclus xxxix., 1.
he is much given to contemplation, and the viewing of this
theatre of the world. more against atheism.
they who gave themselves to wallike action and enterprises,
went immediately to the palace of odin. temple.
men are given to this licentious humour of scoffing at per-
sonal blemishes and defects. l’estrange.
besides, he is too much given to horseplay in his rallery;
and comes to battle, like a dictator from the plough. dryden.
vol. i.
i have some business of importance with her; but her hus-
band is so horribly given to be jealous. dryd. spanish fryar.
what can i refuse to a man so charitably given o' dryden.
2 i , to resign; to yield up.
finding ourselves in the midst of the greatest wilderness of
waters, without victual, we gave ourselves for lost men, and
prepared for death. bacon's new atlantis.
who say, i care not, those i give for lost;
and to instruct them will not quit the cost. herbert.
virtue giv'n for lost,
deprest and overthrown, as seem'd
like that self-begott’n bird -
from out her ashy womb now teem'd. milton's agonister.
since no deep within her gulph can hold
immortal vigour, though oppress'd and fall'n,
i give not heaven for lost. milton's paradise lost.
for a man to give his name to christianity in those days,
was to list himself a martyr. south.
ours gives himself for gone; you've watch'd your time,
he fights this day unarm'd, without his rhyme. drydon.
the parents, after a long search for the body, gave him for
drowned in one of the canals. addison's spediator.
as the hinder feet of the horse stuck to the mountain, while
the body reared up in the air, the poet with great difficulty
kept himself from sliding off his back, in so much that the
-
&gt;
people gave him for gone. addison's guardian.
22. to conclude; to suppose.
whence came you here, o friend, and whither bound -
all gave you lost on far cyclopean ground. garth's ovid.
23. to give away. to alienate from one's self; to make over
to another; to transfer.
the more he got, the more he shewed that he gave away
to his new mistress, when he betrayed his promises to the
former. sidney.
if you shall marry,
you give away this hand, and that is mine;
you give away heav'n's vows, and those are mine;
you give away myself, which is known mine. shakespeare.
honest company, i thank you all,
that have beheld me give away myself
to this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife. shakespeare.
i know not how they sold themselves; but thou like a kind
fellow, gav's thyself away gratis, and i thank thee for thee.
shakespeare's henry iv.
love gives away all things, that so he may advance the in-
terest of the beloved person. taylor's rule of living holy.
but we who give our native rights away,
and our enslav'd posterity betray,
are now reduc’d to began alms, and go
on holidays to see a puppet-show. dryden's juvenal.
alas, said l, man was made in vain how is he given away
to misery and mortality addison.
theodosius made a private vow never to inquire after con-
stantia, whom he looked upon as given away to his rival, upon
the day on which their marriage was to have becn solemnized.
r addison.
whatsoever we employ in charitable uses, during our lives,
is given away from ourselves: what we bequeath at our death,
is given from others only, as our nearest relations. atterbury.
24. to give back. to return; to restore.
their vices perhaps give back all those advantages which
their victories procured. atterbury.
25. to give forth. to publish ; to tell.
soon after it was given forth, and believed by many, that
the king was dead. hayward.
26. to give the hand. to yield pre-eminence, as being sub-
ordinate or inferior.
lessons being free from some inconveniences, whereunto
sermons are more subject, they may in this respest no less
take than in others they must give the hand, which betokeneth
pre-eminence. hooker.
27. to give over. to leave; to quit; to cease.
let novelty therefore in this give over endless contradictions,
and let ancient customs prevail, hooker.
it may be done rather than that be given over. hooker.
never give her o’er;
for scorn at first makes after love the more. shakespeare.
if desdemona will return me my jewels, i will give over
my suit, and repent my unlawful solicitation.
shakespeare's othello.
all the soldiers, from the highest to the lowest, had solemnly
sworn to defend the city, and not to give it over unto the last
tnam. knoller's history of the turks.
those troops which were levied, have given over the pro-
secution of the war. clarendon.
but worst of all to give her over, -
*till she's as desperate to recover. hudibras.
a woman had a hen that laid every day an egg: she fancied
that upon a larger allowance this hen might lay twice a day;
but the hen grew fat, and gave quite over laying. l'estrange.
many have given over their pursuits after fame, either from
1o h the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 922</div><p class="text">g i v
g i v
the disappointments they have met, or from their experience
of the little pleasure which attends it. addison's speciator.
28. to give over. to addict ; to attach to. -
zelmane, govern and direct me; for i am wholly given over
unto thee. - sidney.
when the babylonians had given themselves over to all man-
ner of vice, it was time for the lord, who had set up that
empire, to pull it down. -
j used one thing ill, or gave myself so much over to it as to
neglect what i owed either to god or the world. temple,
29. to give over. to conclude lost.
since it is lawful to practise upon them that are forsaken
and given over, i will adventure to prescribe to you. suckling.
'tis not amiss, e'er y' are giv'n o'er,
to try one desp'rate med'cine more ;
and where your case can be no worse,
the desp'ratest is the wisest course. hudibras.
the abbess, finding that the physicians had given her over,
told her that theodosius was just gone before her, and had sent
her his benediclion. addison's spectator.
her condition was now quite desperate, all regular physi-
cians, and her nearest relations, having given her over. arbuth.
yet this false comfort never gives him o'er,
that, whilst he creeps, his vig'rous thoughts can soar. pope.
not one foretells i shall recover ;
but all agree to give me over.
30. to give over. to abandon.
the duty of uniformity throughout all churches, in all man-
ner of indifferent ceremonies, will be very hard, and there-
fore best to give it over. hooker.
abdemelech, as one weary of the world, gave over all, and
swift.
betook himself to a solitary life, and became monk. knolles.
sleep hath forsook, and giv'n me o'er
to death's benuming opium, as my only cure... milton.
o the cause for which we fought and swore
so boldly, shall we now give o'er p hudibras.
o 31. to give out. to proclaim; to publish; to utter.
the fathers give it out for a rule, that whatsoever christ is
said in scripture to have received, the same we ought to ap-
ply only to the manhood of christ. hooker.
it is given out, that, sleeping in my orchard,
o a serpent stung me. so the whole ear of denmark
o is, by a forged process of my death,
o rankly abused. shakespeare's hamlet.
| one that gives out himself prince florizel,
i son of polixenes, with his princess. shak. winter's tale.
it hath been given out, by an hypocritical thief, who was
the first master of my ship, that i carried with me out of .
|. england twenty-two thousand pieces of twenty-two shillings
per piece. raleigh's apology.
he gave out general summons for the assembly of his council
for the wars. knolles's history.
the night was distinguished by the orders which he gave
out to his army, that they should forbear all insulting of their
- enemies. . addison.
o 32. to give out. to show in false appearance.
his givings out were of an infinite distance
from his true meant design. shakesp. meas for measure.
she that, so young, could give out such a seeming,
to seal her father's eyes up close as oak. . . shakoff. othell.
33. to give up. to resign; to quit; to yield.
the people, weary of the miseries of war, would give him
up, if they saw him shrink. sidney.
- he has betray'd your business, and given up
for certain drops of salt your city rome. sha'. coriolanus.
the fun, breaking out with his cheerful beams, revived
comfort to them all. knolles's history.
the giving up of arundel-castle. clarendon.
let us give ourselves wholly up to christ in heart and desire.
taylor's rule of living holy.
&gt; such an expectation will never come to pass; therefore i'll
*** give it up, and go and fret myself. collier agains. despair.
i can give up to the historians of your country the names of
so many generals and heroes which crowd their annals. dryd. .
he declares himself to be now satisfied to the contrary, in
which he has given up the cause. dryden.
the leagues made between several states disowning all claim
to the land in the other's possession, have, by common con-
sent, given up their pretences to their natural right. locke.
if they give them up to their reasons, then they with them
give up all truth and farther enquiry, and think there is no
such thing as certainty. - locke.
we should see him give up again to the wild comm...?
*ture, whatever was more than would supply the convenien-
cies of life. locke
wo surrender, fince his father's death,
ould give up africk into caesar's hands,
and make him lord of half the burning zone. addis. cats.
grew's cosnol.
many, before ready to give up the ghost for cold, and gave
. he found the lord hopton in trouble for the loss of the re-
giment of foot at alton, and with the unexpected assurance of .
learn to be honest men, w;
give up your .
and pardon shall descend o all ... *; *
a popish priest threatened to excommunicate o
berland squire, if he did not give up to him the to:
ands,
he saw the celestial deities acting in a *:::::::
y again
him, and immediately gave up a cau -
from all possibility of {{... p se %;
an old gentleman, who had been engaged in o .*.
with the emperor, upon his friend's telling him he .
he would give up the question when he ha bett undered
never ashamed, says he, to be confuted by one who o o
of fifty legions. - addison's s .. tf
he may be brought to give up the cleares. t; o
the constant health and longevity of men moj fterb.
also, as a groundless conceit. “:
have the physicians giv'n up all their hopes? thil),
cannot they add a few days to a monarch; r
these people were obliged to demand peace, and kow.
to the romans all their possessions in sicily. y o
every one who will not ask for the condua of g. : o:
study of religion, has just reason to fear he shift be ..
$od, and given up a prey to a thousand prejudio, that h
shall be consigned over to the follies of his own her #.
give yourselves up to some hours of leisure. - -
34. to give up. to abandon. hat.
if any be given up to believe lyes, some must be first given
up to tell them. stillingfia
our minds naturally give themselves up to every division
which they are much accustomed to; and we always find that
play, when followed with affiduity, engrosses the whose wo.
iilan. addison's guardian,
a good poet no sooner communicates his works, butti,
imagined he is a vain young creature given up to the ambition
of fame. pope,
i am obliged at this time to give up my whole application o
homer. ope.
persons who, through misfortunes, chuse not to dress, shook
not, however, give up neatness. clarift.
35. to give up. to deliver. -
and joab gave up the sum of the number of the people to
the king. 2 sam, xxiv,
his accounts were confused, and he could not then go
them up. swift.
36. to give way. to yield; not to resist; to make room for.
private respects, with him, gave way to the common good.
carew's survey of cornwal.
perpetual pushing and assurance put a difficulty out of coun-
tenance, and make a seeming impossibility give way. cilir,
scarce had he spoken when the cloud gave way;
the mists flew upward, and dissolv’d in day. dryd. en
his golden helm gives way with stony blows,
batter'd and flat, and beaten to his brows. dryden' e.
37. the word give is used with great laxity, the general ideals
that of transmitting floun one to another.
to give. v. n.
1. to rush; to fall on ; to give the assault. “aphro mirtly
french, and not worthy of adoption.
your orders come too late, the fight's begun;
the enemy gives on with fury led. dyin' ind. bo
hannibal gave upon the romans. howie's ram. hist,
2. to relent; to grow moist; to melt or soften; to thaw,
some things are harder when they come from the fire, and
afterwards give again, and grow soft ; as to crust of bead,
bisket, sweatmeats, and salt. bacon'; natural hijio,
only a sweet and virtuous soul,
like season'd timber, never gives;
but though the whole world turn to coal, - hort
then chiefly lives. …to
unless it is kept in a hot house, it will so give *s". 4
it will be little better than raw malt. - *.
before you carry your large cocks in, open them #.
spread them: hay is apt to give in the cock. amortillis/-
3. to move. a french phrase. . . .
up and down he traverses his ground, d;
then nimbly shifts a thrust, then lends ". c. war,
now back he gives, then rushes on aman. danies: o
4. to give in. to go back; to give way. no. in "in the
the charge was given with so well governed ury, hayw.
leftcorner of the scots battalion was enforce!" *...
5. to give in to. [a french phrase.j. to o the poets,
this is a geography particular to the mo s is us wo
however, have sometimes given in to it, *:::: on mill,
very good lights for the explication of . addison
, - o
- - - - ove into th
this consideration may induce a translator to go" us las-
ined a veneration.""
general phrases, which have attal oft,
guage from being used in the old teflamen; idly negligen”
the whole body of the people are eit * stupi o polio
or else giving in with all their might to those very saft,
that are working their destruction.
6. to give off. to cease; to sorbear. the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 923</div><p class="text">g l a
g l a
the punishment would be kept from being too much, if
we gave off as soon as we perceived that it reached the mind. i.
. to give over. to cease; to aca no more,
if they will speak to the purpose, they must give over, and
stand upon such particulars only as they can shew we have
either added or abrogated, otherwise than we ought, in the
matter of church polity. hooker.
neither hath christ, thro' union of both natures, incurred
the damage of either; lest, by being born a man, we should
think he hath given over to be god, or that because he con-
tinued god, therefore he cannot be man also. hooker.
give not o'er so; to him again; intreat him,
kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
you are too cold. shakespeare's measure for measure.
the state of human adions is so variable, that to try things
of; and never to give over, doth wonders. bacon's nat. hj.
. demetrius, king of macedon, had a petition offered him
divers times by an old woman, and still answered he had no
leisure; whereupon the woman said aloud, why then give
over to be king. bacon's apophthegms.
so satan, whom repulse upon repulse
met ever, and to shameful filence brought,
yet gives not o'er, though desperate of success. milton.
shall we kindle all this flame
only to put it out again?
and must we now give o'er,
and only end where we begun ?
in vain this mischief we have done,
if we can do no more. denham.
it would be well for all authors, if they knew when to give
over, and to desist from any farther pursuits after fame. addis.
he coined again, and was forced to give over for the same
reason. swift.
8. to give out. to publish; to proclaim.
simon bewitched the people of samaria, giving out that him-
self was some great one. ae's viii. 9.
julius caesar laid asleep pompey's preparations, by a fame
that he cunningly gave out how caesar's own soldiers loved him
in ot. - bacon.
your ill-wishers will give out you are now going to quit
your school. swift.
9. to give out. to cease; to yield. .
-- - we are the earth; and they,
like moles within us, heave and cast about:
and ’till they foot and clutch their prey;
to never cool. much less give out. herbert.
adam, i always believ'd you so stout,
that for twenty denials you would not give out. swift.
gi’ver. m. s. [from give..] one that gives; donor; bestower;
distributer; granter.
well we may afford - 2.
our givers their own gists. milton's paradise loft.
by thee how fairly is the giver now
repaid but gratitude in thee is lost
long since. milton's paradise regain'd.
i have not liv'd since first i heard the news;
the gift the guilty giver doth accuse. dryden's aurengzebt.
both gifts destructive to the givers prove; -
alike both lovers fail by those they love. pope.
gives. n. s. fetters or shackles for the feet.
g1(zz ard. m. s. [gester, french ; gigeria, latin.] it is some-
times called gizzern.
1. the strong musculous stomach of a fowl.
fowls have two ventricles, and pick up stones to convey
them into their second ventricle, the gizzerne. more.
in birds there is no mastication in the mouth; but in such
as are not carnivorous, it is immediately swallowed into the
crop, a kind of antestomach, where it is moistened by some
proper juice from the glandules distilling in there, and thence
transferred into the gizzard, or musculous stomach. ray.
they nestle near the throne,
by their high crops and corny gizzard, known. dryden.
2. it is proverbially used for apprehension or conception of mind:
as, he frets his gizzard, he harasses his imagination.
but that which does them greatest harm,
their spiritual gizzards are too warm ;
which puts the overheated sots
in fevers still. hudibras,
satisfaction and restitution lie so cursedly hard upon the
gizzards of our publicans, that their blood is not half so dear .
to them as the treasure in their coffers. l’estrange.
gla brity. m. s. [from glaber, latin.] smoothness; bald-
ness. dic7.
gla’cial. adj. [glacial, french ; glacialis, latin.] icy; made
of ice; frozen.
to gla’ciate. v. m. [glacies, latin ; glacer, french..] to
turn into ice. - - -
glaciation. n. s. [from glaciate.] the aet of turning into
ice; ice formed. -
ice is plain upon the surface of water, but round in hail,
which is also a glaciation, and figured in its gutsulous descent
from the air. brown's vulgar errouri.
gla'erous. adj. [glacio, latin.] icy; resembling ice.
although exhaled and placed in cold conservatories, it will
crystallize and shoot into glacious bodies. brown', pulg. err.
glacis. n.s. [french.] in fortification, a sloping back. it
is more especially taken for that which range:h from the pa-
rapet of the covered way to the level on the side of the fied.
harris.
glad, adj. [3]+o, saxon; glad, danish.]
1. cheerful; gay ; in a state of hilarity.
they blessed the king, and went into their tents joyful and
glad of heart. 1 kings viii. 6.
glad we return'd up to the coasts of light. amilton.
the wily adder blithe and glad. milton.
thither they
hasted with glad precipitance. - milton.
2. wearing a gay appearance; fertile; bright; showy.
the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them,
and the desart shall rejoice and blossom as the rose. if xxxv.
then first adorn'd
with their bright luminaries, that set and rose, -
glad ev’ning and glad morn crown'd the fourth dav.
milton.
3. pleased; elevated with joy. it has generally of, sometimes
at or with before the cause of gladness: perhaps of is most
proper, when the cause of joy is something gained or poss-fled;
and at or with, when it is some accident befallen himself or
another.
i am glad to see your worship. shakespeare's henry iv.
he hath an uncle in mesfina will be very much glad of it.
shakespeare's much ado.
he that is glad at calamities shall not be unpunished. prov.
he glad
qf her attention, gain'd with serpent tongue,
is fraudulent temptation thus began. milton.
if he be my enemy, let him triumph; if he be my friend,
he will be glad of my repentance. dryden's fables, prof.
the gaping wound gush'd out a crimson flood;
the trojan, glad with sight of hostile blood,
his fauchion drew. dryden's aon.
glad of a quarrel strait i clap the door. pope.
4. pleasing; exhilarating. -
her conversation
more glad to me than to a miser money is. sidney.
5. expresfing gladness.
hark! a glad voice the lonely desert cheers:
prepare the way, a god, a god appears pope's moffah.
6. it is used in a familiar sense, approaching to ludicrousness.
i would be glad to learn from those who pronounce that the
human soul always thinks, how they know it. locke.
to glad. v. a. [from the adjective.] to make glad; to
cheer; to exhilarate. - -
he saw rich nectar-thaws release the rigour
of th' icy north ; from frost-bound atlas hands
his adamantine fetters fall: green vigour
gladding the scythian rocks, and lybian sands. crashaw.
- it glads me
to see so many virtues thus united,
to restore justice and dethrone oppression. otway.
each drinks the juice that glads the heart of man. pope.
if justice philips' costive head
some frigid rhymes disburses,
they shall like persian tales be read,
and glad both babes and nurses. swift.
to gla'dden. v. a. [from glad..] to cheer; to delight; to
make glad; to exhilarate.
oh, he was all made up of love and charms |
delight of every eye' when he appear'd,
a secret pleasure gladden’d all that saw him. addison's cato.
a kind of vital heat in the soul cheers and gladdens her,
when she does not attend to it. addison's spediator.
gla’dder. m. s. [from glad..] one that makes glad; one that
gladdens; one that exhilarates.
thou gladder of the mount of cytheron,
have pity, goddess. - dryden.
glade. ic [from 3!opan, to be hot, or to shine; whence
the danish glod, and the obsolete english gleed, a red hot
coal.] a lawn or opening in a wood. lucus. it is taken
for an avenue through a wood, whether open or shaded, and
has therefore epithets of opposite meaning.
so flam'd his eyen with rage and rancorous ire ;
but far within, as in a hollow glade,
those glaring lamps were set, that made a dreadful shade.
- spenser.
lo where they spy'd, how in a gloomy glade
the lion so o in secret shade. hubberd's tale.
- o might i here
in solitude live savage, in some glade,
obscur'd, where highest woods, impenetrable
to star or sun-light, spread their umbrage broad, .
and brown as evening. milton's paradise loft.
when any, favour'd of high jove,
chances to pass through this adventurous glade, swift<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 924</div><p class="text">g. l. a
g l a
swift as a sparkle of a glancing star -
i shoot from heav'n to give him safe convoy. milton.
for noonday's heat are closer arbours made,
and for fresh ev'ning air the op'nerglade. dryd. innocence.
there, interspers'd in lawns and opening glades,
thin trees arise that shun each other's shades. pope.
by the heroes armed shades,
glitt'ring through the gloomy glades ;
by the youths that dy'd for love,
wand'ring in the myrtle grove,
restore, restore eurydice to life
oh, take the husband, or restore the wife pope's st. cecil.
she smil'd, array'd
with all the charms of sun shine, stream and glade,
new drest and blooming as a bridal maid. harte.
gla de n. l n.s.. [from gladius, latin, a sword.] swordgrass:
3:...} a general name of plants that rise with a broad
blade like sedge. junius.
gladful ness. n.f. [glad and fulness.] joy; gladness, ob-
solete.
and there him rests in riotous suffisance
of all his gladfulness, and kingly joyance. spenser.
glad1a tor. m. s. [latin; gladiateur, fr.] a swordplayer;
a prizefighter.
then whilst his foe each gladiator foils,
the atheist, looking on, enjoys the spoils.
besides, in gratitude for such high matters,
know i have vow'd two hundred gladiators. dryden's pers
gladly. adv. [from glad..] joyfully ; with gayety; with
merriment; with triumph ; with exultation.
for his particular, i'll receive him gladly;
but not one follower. shakespeare's king lear.
you are going to set us right; and ’tis an advantage every
body will gladly see you engross the glory of blount to pope.
denham.
gla'6ness. n.s. [from glad.] checifulfiels; joy; exultation.
by such degrees the spreading gladness grew
in every heart, which fear had froze before :
the flanding streets with so much joy they view,
that with less grief the perish'd they deplore. dryden.
glapsom e. aff. [from glad.]
1. pleased ; gay delighted.
the highest angels to and fro descend,
from highest heaven in gladsome company.
the gladsome ghost in circling troops attend,
and with unweary'd eyes behold their friend. dryden.
2. causing joy ; having an appearance of gayety.
each morn they wak'd me with a sprightly lay;
of opening heav'n they sung and gladsome day. prizr.
gowo. adv. [from gladsome.] with gayety and de-
ight.
gosts. n: s [from gladsome.] gayety; showiness;
delight.
glaire. m. s. [3]an, saxon, amber; glar, danish, glass; glaire,
french; glarea, latin.]
1. the white of an egg.
take the glaire of eggs, and strain it as short as water.
peacham on drawing.
2. a kind of halbert. dici.
to glaire. v. a. s glairer, french; from the noun..] to
smear with the white of an egg. this word is still used by
the bookbinders. -
glance. m. s. [glantz, german, glitter.]
1. a sudden shoot of light or splendour.
his off'ring soon propitious fire from heav'n
consum'd with nimble glance, and grateful steam:
the other's not ; for his was not fincere. milt. par. lost.
2. a stroke or dart of the beam of fight.
the aspects, which procure love are not gazings, but sud-
den glances and dartings of the eye. ... bacon's nat. history.
there are of those sort of beauties which last but for a
moment; some particularity of a violent passion, some grace-
ful action, a smile, a glance of an eye, a disdainful look, and
a lock of gravity. - dryden's dufresnoy.
boldly she look'd, like one of high degree;
yet never seem'd to cast a glance on me ; -
at which i inly joy'd, for, truth to say, -
i felt an unknown awe, and some dismay. harte.
3. a snatch of fight; a quick view. ,
the ample mind takes a survey of several objects with one
glance. - jwatts on the mind.
to glan ce. v. n. [from the noun..] : -
1. to sooo; a sudden ray of fplendour. - - - -
he double blows about him fiercely laid,
that glancing fire out of the iron play'd
as sparkles from the anvil use, j “2
wo heavy hammers on the wedge are sway’d. spenser.
on through the gloom the glancing lightnings fly,
fairy queen.
heavy the rattling thunders roll on high. - rowe.
2. to fly off in on oblique direction.
he has a little gall'd me, i confess;
#: **he jest did glance away from me,
is ten to one it maim'd you two outright. shakespeare.
3. to i. . o
through paris' shield the forceful
his corset pierces, and his garment o went,
and glancing downwards near his flank defend,
4. to view with a quick cast of the eye; to phyti
o' th' sudden up they rise and dance, y the eye.
then sit again, and figh and glance;
then dance again, and kiss. sucks;
mikhty dulness crown'd, uching
shall take through grub-street her trium
and her parnasius glancing o'er at once, phant round ;
behold a hundred sons, and each a dunce. 't i).....:
5. to censure by oblique hints. pope's dunia
how can'st thou thus, for shame, titania +
glance at my credit with hippolita, &gt;
knowing i know thy love to theseus shakes or
some men glance and dart at others, by justifying the o
by negatives; as to say, this i do not. i vcs
i have never glanced upon the late designed procession o:
holiness and his attendants, notwithstanding it might o:
afforded matter to many ludicrous speculations, ad; ve
he had written verses, wherein he glanced at a cer jo,
verend doctor, famous for dulness. swi
to glan.cf. v. a. to move nimbly; to shoot obliquel ji,
glancing an eye of pity on his losses, }.
enough to press a royal merchant down. skał, mr. of war
gla'ncing ly. adv. [from glance.] in an oblique bloko.
ner; transiently.
sir richard jawkins hath done something in this kind, but
brokenly and glancingly, intending chiefly a discourse of his
own voyage. . . hałevillon przio,
gland. m. s. [glans, latin; gland, french.]
all the glands of a human body are reduced to two so,
pot,
tain sc-
viz. conglobate, and conglomerate. a conglobite good
a little smooth body, wrapt up in a fine skin, by which it is
separated from all the other parts, only admitting an artery
and nerve to pass in, and giving way to a vein and excretory
canal to come out: of this sort are the gland; in the brain, th:
labial glands, and testes. a conglomerate gland is composed
of many little conglobate gland, all tied together, and wript
up in the common tunicle or membrane. £hing,
the abscess begun deep in the body of the gland, wojour,
the glands, which o'er the body spread,
fine complicated clues of nervous thread,
involv’d and twisted with th’ arterial duct, -
the rapid motion of the blood obstruct. blacimir,
glanders. n. s. [from gland.] . in a horse is the running of
corrupt matter from the nose, which differs in colour accurl-
ing to the degree of the malignity, being white, yellow, gon
or black. - - farrier's diff,
his horse is possest with the glanders, and like to most in
the chine. shakespeare's taming of the siro,
gland1 fe rous. adj. [glans and fire, latin.) boaring to
bearing acorns, or fi uit like acorns. -
the beech is of two sorts, and numbered amongst to
gland serous trees. … . mortimer's hiro
glandule. n.s. [glandu'a, latin; glanduk, fr.] a sml
gland serving to the secretion of humours. - - -
nature hath provided several glandules to separate shojo
from the blood, and no less than four pair of channe's to com-
vey it into the mouth, which are called diffusalvali. ko
gla ndu lo'sity. n. s. [from glandulous.) a colleaion of
glands. - - -
in the upper parts of worms are ; , iz.
oval glandulosities. brown'; vulgar #:
gla's bulous. adj. [glandulosus, latin; gland.” i. o
glandule.) pertaining to the glands; subsisting in the galles;
having the nature of glands. -
the beaver's bags are no testicles,
neration, but glandulous substances,
emunetories.
such constitutions must be subject
and ruptures of the lymphaticks.
to glare. v. n. [glaren, dutch.]
1. to shine so as to dazzle the eyes. into the dark, ".
after great light, if you come suddenly into t o o
contraiwise, out of the dark into a glaring "9" *:::
dazzled for a time, and the fight o: ell u-
his claring eyes with anger's venon "*", irfix,
and i: ao of foul oia. flame. . ...
he is every where above conceits of...; "...i.
and gross hyperboles: he maintains majesty so without
plainness; he shines, but glares not; and is stately drya".
ambition. 'd to sight;
the court of cacus stands reveal d to "g b lo';**
the cavernora, with new admitted "g" *
alas, thy dazzled eye,
beholds this man in a false glaring light,
which conquest and success have thiows,
2. to look with fierce piercing eyes.
thou has no speculation in those ”soft. middh
which thou do's glare with. - lovk
found certain white ind
or parts official unio.
that hold the natus" of
brown'; pulgar broo
to glandului o
arjuthnot an ain"
! .
foll
|
upon him. -
§
4
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 925</div><p class="text">g …
l a
--&gt;
look, how pale he glares / shakes?: hamlet.
now friends no more, nor walking hand in hand;
but when they met they made a surly stand,
and glar'd, like angry lions, as they pass'd,
and wish'd that ev'ry look might be their last, dryd. fables.
3. to shine offentatiously, or with too much laboured lustre.
the most glaring and notorious passages are none of the
finest, or most correct. felton on the clafficks.
to glare. v. a. to shoot such splendour as the eye cannot
bear.
one spirit in them rul’d, and every eye
glar'd lightning, and shot forth permicious fire
among th' accurst, that wither'd all their strength. milton.
glare. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. overpowering lustre; splendour, such as dazzles the eye.
the frame of burnish’d steel that cast a glare,
from far, and seem'd to thaw the freezing air. dryd. fab.
i have grieved to see a person of quality gliding by me in
her chair at two o'clock in the morning, and looking like a
spectre amidst a glare of flambeaux. addison's guardian.
here in a grotto, shelter'd close from air,
and screen'd in shades from day’s detested glare, -
she sighs for ever. - pope's rape of the lock.
2. a fierce piercing look.
about them round,
a lion now he stalks with fiery glare. milt. par. loft.
goa'requs. adj. iglaireux, fr. glarepsis, latin; from glair...]
consisting of viscous transparent matter, like the white of an
egg. -
glaring. adj. applied to any thing notorious: as, a glaring
crime.
glass. m. s. solor, saxon ; glas, dutch, as pezon imagines
from glas, british, green. in erse it is called klann, and this
primarily signifies clean or clear, being so denominated from
its transparency.]
1. an artificial substance made by fusing fixed salts and flint or
sand together, with a vehement fire.
the word glass cometh from the belgick and high dutch:
glass, from the verb glansen, which signifies amongst them to
shine; or perhaps from glacies in the latin, which is ice,
whose colour it resembles. peacham on drawing.
glass is thought so compact and firm a body that it is
indestructible by art or nature, and is also of so close a tex-
ture that the subtlest chymical spirits cannot pervade it. boyle.
show’rs of grenadoes rain, by sudden burst
disploding murd’rous bowels, fragments of steel
and stones, and glas, and nitrous grain adust. phillips,
2. a glass vessel of any kind.
i'll see no more
and yet the eighth appears, who bears a glas;
which shews me many more. shakesp. macbeth.
3. a looking-glass ; a mirrour.
he was the mark and glass, copy and book,
that fashion'd others. shakesp. henry iv.
he spreads his subtile nets from sight,
with twinkling glasses, to betray
the larks that in the meshes light. dryden's horace.
4. an hour gla'ss. a glass used in measuring time by the flux
of sand.
were my wife's liver
inse&amp;ed as her life, she would not live
the running of one glass. shakoff. winter's tale.
5. the destinca time of man's life. -
no more his royall self did live, no more his noble sonne,
the golden mieleager now, their glasses all were run.
chapman.
6. a cup of glass used to drink in.
to this last costly treaty,
that swallow’d so much treasure, and like a glas,
did break i' th' rinsing. shakesp. henry viii.
when thy heart
dilates with fervent joys, and eager soul
prompts to pursue the sparkling glas, besure
'tis time to shun it. - - phillips.
7. the quantity of wine usually contained in a glass ; a
draught.
while a man thinks one glass more will not make him
drunk, that one glass hath disabled him from well discerning -
his present condition. taylor's rule of living holy.
the first gloss may pass for health, the second for good-
humour, the third for our friends ; but the fourth is for our
enemies. - - temple.
8. a perspe&amp;tive glass. -
the moon whose orb
through optick gloss the tuscan artist views. milton.
like those who survey the moon by glasses, i tell of a
shining world above, but not relate the glories of the place.
dryden.
glass, adj. vitreous; made of glass.
get thee glass eyes;
and, like a scurvy politician, seem
to see the things thou do'st not.
vol. i.
shakesp. king lear.
.6%ft, bottles are more fit for this second fining than those
of wood. !------&gt;
to glass. v. a. 44ortimer’s hus,andry.
1. to see as in a
not in use. -
a * o partaker of thy passion, -
nd in thy case do glas; min - - - -
2. to case in o: glass mine own debility. sidney.
methought all his senses were lockt in his eye
as jewels in crystal for some prince to buy; &gt;
who o their own worth, from whence they were
glast,
pid point out to buy them, alon, as v -
3. to cover with glass ". size. ong as you past. shakesp.
|have observed little grains of filver to lie hid in the small
savities, perhaps glassed over by a vitrifying heat, in crucibles
wherein silver has been long kept in fusio. boyle.
gla ******** *s. igles and surnace.] a furnace in who
glass is made by liquefittian.
|four dreamer pleases to try whether the glowing heat of a
glossurnace be barely a wandering imagination in a drowsy
man's fancy, by putting his hand into it, he may perhaps be
awakened into a certainty that it is something more than bare
imagination. - locke.
gla'ssgazing. off. [glas and gazing.] finical; often con.
templating himself in a mirrour.
a whorson, glasgazing, finical rogue. shakesp.
gla'ssgrinder. n.s. loos and grinder.] one whose trade
is to polish and grind glass.
the glosgrinders complain of the trouble they meet with.
boyle.
gla'ss house. n.s. [glas; and */?..] a house where glass is
manufactured.
i remember to have met with an old roman mosaic,
composed of little pieces of clay half vitrified, and prepared
at the glas houses. addison on italy.
gla'ss man. m. s. [glas; and on.] . one who sells glass.
the profit of glasses consists only in a small present made
by the glassman. - swift.
gla'ss metal. m. s. [glas; and metal.] glass in fusion.
let proof be made of the incorporating of copper or brass
with glasnetal. bacon’s phys. rem.
gla'sswork, n. s. [glas, and work.] manufactory of glass.
the crystalline venice glass is a mixture, in equal portions,
of stones brought from pavia, and the ashes of . weed called
kali, gathered in a desert between alexandria and rosetta;
by the egyptians used first for fuel, and then they crush the
ashes into lumps like a stone, and so fell them to the venetians
for their glassworks. bacon's natural history.
gla'sswort, n. s. [salicornia, or saltwort.]
it hath an apetalous flower, wanting the empalement; for
the flamina, or chives, and the embryoes grow on the extreme
part of the leaves : these embryoes afterward become pods or
bladders, which for the most part contain one seed. the
inhabitants near the sea-coast cut the plants up toward the
latter end of summer; and, having dried them in the sun,
they burn them for their ashes, which are used in making of
glass and soap. these herbs are by the country people called
kelp. from the ashes of these plants is extraj" the salt
called salkali, or alkali, by the chymists. amiller.
for the fine glass we use the purest of the fines: sand, and
the ashes of chali or glasswort; and for the coars, or green
sort, the ashes of brake or other plants. brown', wulgar err.
gla'ssy. adj. [from glass.] -
1. made of glass; vitreous. -
in the valley near mount carmel in judea there is a sand,
which, of all others, hath most affinity with glass ; insomuch
as other minerals laid in it turn to a glassy substance. bacon.
2. resembling glass, as in smoothness or iustre, or brittleness.
man proud man
drest in a little brief authority,
most ignorant of what he's most assur’d:
his glossy essence, like an angry ape,
plays such fantastick tricks before high heav'n,
as makes the angels weep. shakesp. mea itre for measure,
there is a willow grows asant a brook,
that shews his hoary leaves in the glassy stream. shakesp.
the magnet attracteth the shining or glossy powder brought
fiom the indies, usually employed in writing dust. bron.
whose womb produc’d the glas, ice who bred
the hoary frosts that fall on winter's head sandys.
the glas; deep. dryden’s assn.
gla's ton bury thorn. m. s. a species of medlar.
this species of thorn produces some bunches of flowers in
winter, and flowers again in the spring. miller.
glauco'ma. m. s. [yxzekopo, ; glaucone, french..] a fault
in the eye, which changes the crystalline humour into a
greyish colour, without detriment of fight, and therein differs
sroni what is commonly understood by suffusion. $2%incy.
the glaucoma is no other disease than the cataract. ... sharp.
glave. n.s. [glaive, french ; glais, a hook, welsh.] a
broad sword; a falchion.
io i two
glass; to represent as in a glass or mirrour.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 926</div><p class="text">g l e
g l e
two hundred greeks came o: in fight well try'd,
arm'd in steel or iron strong, -
i. o glave had pendant by his side. fairfax,
when zeal, with aged clubs and glaves, -
gave chace to rockets and white staves. hudibrar.
to glav er. v. no [glave, welsh, flattery; 3'ipan, saxon, to
flatter. it is still o in scotland.] to flatter ; to
. a low word.
"... have their distempers, intermissions, and, paro-
xysms, as well as natural bodies; and a glavering council o as
dangerous as a wheedling priest, or a flattering physician. l eff.
7, glaze. v. a. [to glas, only accidentally varied.]
1. to furnish with windows of glass. - - -
let there be two delicate cabinets daintily paved, richly
hanged, and glazed with crystalline glass. bacon's essays.
2. to cover with glass, as potters do their earthen ware; [from
the french glaise, argilla.] - -
3. to overlay with something shining and pellucid.
sorrow's eye, glaz'd with blinding tears,
divides one thing entire to many objects. shakesp. r. ii.
the reason of one man operates on that of another in all
true oratory; wherein though with other ornaments he may
glaze and brandish the weapons, yet is it sound reason that
carries the stroke home. grew's cosm. sac.
white, with other strong colours, with which we paint
that which we intend to glaze, are the life, the spirit, and the
lustre of it. dryden's dufresnoy.
gla’zier. n.s. [corrupted from glasser, or glassier, of glass.]
one whose trade is to make glass windows. other manu-
facturers of glass are otherwise named.
into rabbets the several panes of glasswork are set, and
fastened by the glazier. moxon's mech. exer.
the dext'rous glazier strong returns the bound,
and gingling sashes on the penthouse sound. gay's trivia.
and then, without the aid of neighbour's art,
perform'd the carpenter's and glazier's part. harte.
gleam. m. s. [3elioma, saxon.] sudden shoot of light;
lustre; brightness.
then was the fair dodonian tree far seen
upon seven hills to spread his gladsome gleam;
and conquerors bedecked with his green,
along the banks of the ausonian stream. spensor.
at last a gleam
of dawning light turn'd thitherward in haste
his travell’d steps. milton's paradis. loft.
as i bent down to look just opposite,
a shape within the wat'ry gleam appear'd,
bending to look on me. milton's paradise loft.
mine is a gleam of bliss, too hot to last;
wat'ry it shines, and will be soon o'ercast. dryd, aurengz.
we ken them from afar; the setting sun
plays on their shining arms and burnish'd helmets,
and covers all the field with gleams of fire. addison's cato.
in the clear azure gleam the flocks are seen,
and floating forests paint the waves with green. pope.
nought was seen, and nought was heard,
but dreadful gleams,
fires that glow.
to glea m. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to shine with sudden coruscation.
observant of approaching day,
the meek-ey'd morn appears, mother of dews,
at first faint gleaming in the dappled east. thoms. summer.
2. to shine.
on each hand the gushing waters play,
and down the rough cascade white dashing fall,
or gleam in lengthen’d vistas through the trees. ... thomson.
gle amy. adj. [from gleam.] flashing; darting sudden corus-
cations of light.
in brazen arms, that cast a gleamy ray,
swift through the town the warriour bends his way. pope.
to glean. v. a. [glaner, french, as skinner thinks, from
granum.]
1. to gather what the gatherers of the harvest leave behind.
she came and gleaned in the field after the reapers. ruth ii.
cheap conquest for his following friends remain’d ;
he reap'd the field, and they but only glean'd. dryden.
the precept of not gathering their land clean, but that
something should be left to the poor to glean, was a secondary
offering to god himself. nelson.
she went, by hard necessity compell'd,
to glean palaemon's fields. thomson's autumn.
2. to gather any thing thinly scattered.
ather -
$9 much as from occasions you may glean,
if aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus. shakesp. hamlet.
that goodness
qf gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
into your own hands, card'nal, by extortion. shak. h. viii.
they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men.
judges xx. 45.
pope's st. cecilia.
but argive chiefs, and agame . . . .
when his refulgent arms n. i. § -
fied from his well-known face with wonted f ady plain,
as when his thund'ring sword and pointed s ear;
drove headlong to their ships, and glean'd the * rear !
dryden', ae,
tent to glo
since we cannot
grasp at a time who,
nature and prope:
look,
iousj
in the knowledge of bodies we must be can
what we can from particular experiment.
from a discovery of their real effences, &gt;
sheaves, and in bundles comprehend the
of whole species together.
gle an. m. s. [from the verb.1 colleai -
by slow #. j edion made labor
plains, meads, and orchards all the day he plies:
the gleans of yellow thyme distend his io tes;
he spoils the saffron. poor.
gle'a ne r. m. s. [from glean.] yden's piol
i. ono after the reapers.
or still the world prevail'd, and its dr
which scarce the firm philosopher can o,
should his heart own a gleaner in the field."
2. one who gathers any thing slowly and laboriously
an ordinary coffee-house gleaner of the city -
statesman.
gle aning. m. s. [from glean.] the ad of gleaning, or
gleaned. c?
there shall be as the shaking of an olive-tree, and as the
gleaning of grapes when the vintage is done. y bill:
the orphan and widow are members of the same com
family, and have a right to be supported out of the incomes
o, i. o: jews had to gather the gleaning; o,the rich
glebe. m. s. [gleba, latin.j herluy.
1. turf; soil; ground.
this, like the moory plots, delights in sedgy bowers;
the grassy garlands loves, and off attir'd with flowers x
of rank and mellow glebe. drayton,
fertile of corn the glebe, of oil and wine, y
with herds the pastures throng'd, with flocks the hills, mil.
mark well the flow'ring almonds in the wood;
if od’rous blooms the bearing branches load,
the glebe will answer to the sylvan reign,
great heats will follow, and large crops of grain. don.
sleeping vegetables lie,
till the glad summons of a genial ray
unbinds the glebe, and calls them out to-day. garth,
2. the land possessed as part of the revenue of an ecclesiastical
benefice.
the ordinary living or revenue of a parsonage is of the
sorts: the one in land, commonly called the globe; another in
tythe, which is a set part of our goods rendered to god; the
third, in other offerings bestowed upon god and his church
by the people. spilman,
a trespass done on a parson's globe land, which is a freehold,
toso,
is an arrant
lois,
thing
cannot be tried in a spiritual court. aliff's parro.
many parishes have not an inch of globe. soft
gle'bous. adj. [from glebe.] turfy. dia,
gle'ry. adj. [from globe.] turfy; perhaps in the following
passage fat or fruitful, if it has indeed any meaning,
pernicious flatt'ry! thy malignant seeds
in an ill hour, and by a fatal hand
sadly diffus'd o'er virtue's gleby land,
with rising pride amidst the corn appear, -
and choke the hopes and harvest of the year. prior,
gled e. n.s. [3]ibaglibe, saxon.] a kind of hawk.
ye shall not eat the glede, the kite, and the vulture, *
glee. n.s.. [slige, saxon.] joy; merriment; ..
anciently signified musick played at feasts. it is notho.
except in ludicrous writing, or with some mixturo of irons
and contempt. -
she marcheth home, and by her takes the knight,
whom all the people follow with great glo. o:
many wayfarers make themselves glee, by vexing :
bitants; who again foreslow not to baign. them. wit i.
fume. carew's survey of c*
is blouzelinda dead farewel my glee" . , pasiri,
no happiness is now reserv'd for me: , , . *
the poor man then was rich, and li" d with glee;
each barley-head untaxt, and day-light free,
gleed. n.s.. [from glopan, saxon, to glow.]
ing coal. a provincial and obsolete word. heerful. not
gle’eful. adj. [glee and full.] gay; mory; *
used.
orff,
a hot glow"
my lovely aaron, wherefore lookoh", sad, tort,
wo ja. doth make a gleeful boast so
gleek. n. s. [3].33e, saxon.] musick; or "...out. i
what wil you give us?—no ...'. o, and julis.
will give you the minstrel. shaloft.*
to gleek. v. a. so i. is a sm
1. to sneer; to gibe; to droll upon. taht'; drto,
i can gleek o occasion. shakoff. mids. night': i hay?
- j| 1
imick os a dro “.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 927</div><p class="text">o
--
**
i have seen you gleeking or galling at this gentleman twice
or thrice. shakespeare's henry v.
2. in scotland it is still retained, and signifies to fool. spend
time idly, with something of mimickry or drollery.
to gleen. v. n. to shine with heat or polish. i know not
the original notion of this word: it may be of the same race
with glow or with gleam. i have not remarked it in any other
lace.
p those who labour
the sweaty forge, who edge the crooked scythe,
bend stubborn steel, and harden gleening armour,
acknowledge vulcan's aid. - prio”.
gleet. n.s. [it is written by skinner glitt, and derived from
globan, saxon, to run softly..] a sanious ooze ; a thin ichor
running from a sore.
a hard dry eschar, without either matter or gleet.
- jwiseman's surgery.
to gleet. v. n. [from the noun.] is. gery
1. to drip or ooze with a thin sanious liquor.
his thumb being inflamed and swelled, i made an incision
into it to the bone: this not only bled, but gleeted a few
drops. wiseman's surgery.
2. to run slowly.
vapours raised by the sun make clouds, which are carried
up and down the atmosphere, ’till they hit against the moun-
tainous places of the globe, and by this concussion are con-
densed, and so gleet down the caverns of these mountains,
whose inner parts, being hollow, afford them a bason.
- cheyne's phil. princ,
gleety. adj. [from gleet.] ichory; thinly sanious.
if the flesh lose its ruddiness, and the matter change to be
thin and gleety, you may suspect it corrupting. wiseman.
glen. n.f. [gleann, eise.] a valley; a dale; a depression
between two hilis.
from me his madding mind is start, -
and wooes the widow's daughter of the glen. spensor.
glew. m. s. [gluten, latin.] a viscous cement made by dis-
solving the skins of animals in boiling water, and drying the
gelly. see glue. -
glib. adj. [from asso. skinner.]
1. smooth; slippery; so formed as to be easily moved.
liquid bodies have nothing to sustain their parts, nor any
thing to cement them: the parts being glib and continually in
motion, fall off from one another, which way soever gravity
inclines them. burnet's theory.
habbakkuk brought him a smooth strong rope, compactly
twisted together, with a noose that slipt as glib as a birdcatcher's
gin. arbuthnot.
2. smooth; voluble.
i want that glib and oily art -
to speak and purpose not, since what i well intend,
i’ll do't before i speak. shakespeare's king lear.
there was never so much glib nonsense put together in well
sounding english. locke.
now curl his shop from rubbish drains;
three genuine tomes of swift's remains:
and then, to make them pass the glibber, -
revis’d by tibbald, more and cibber. swift.
be sure he's a fine spoken man; -
do but hear on the clergy how glib his tongue ran. swift.
b. 77. /. -
gli #son have from the scythians mantles and long glib, ;
which is a thick curled bush of hair hanging down over their
eyes, and monstrously disguising them. spenser on ireland.
to gl1b. v. a. [from the adjective.] to castrate.
i'll gold them all: fourteen they shall not see,
to bring false generations; they are coheirs,
and i had rather glib myself than they
should not produce fair issue. shakes. jointer's tale.
gl1(bly. adv. [from glib.] smoothly; volubly.
many who would startle at an oath, whose stomachs as well
as consciences recoil at an obscenity, do yet slide glibly into a
detrastion. government of the tongue.
gl1(bn ess. m. s. [from glib.] smoothness; slipperiness.
- a polish'd ice-like glibness doth enfold
the rock. chapman's odyssey.
the tongue is the most ready for motion of any member,
needs not so much as the flexure of a joint, and by access of
humours acquires a glibneft too, the more to facilitate its
moving. government s the tongue.
7% glide. v. n. [3]iban, saxon ; gljden, dutch.
1. to flow gently and silently. - -
by east, among the dusty vallies, glide
the silver streams of jordan's crystal flood. fairfax.
broke by the jutting land on either fide,
in double streams the briny waters glide. dryden's afn.
just before the confines of the wood, &gt;
the gliding lethe leads her filent flood. dryden's aon.
where stray the muses, in what lawn or grove?
in those fair fields where sacred isis glides,
or else where cam his winding vales divides.
pope.
2. to pass on without change of step,
3. transitory lustre.
...**sng ghosts, permit me to relate
he mystick wonders of your silent state.
3. to move swiftly and smoothly along,
if one of mean affairs
may plod it in a week, why may not i -
glide thither in a day; shakespeare's cymbeline.
shoals of fish, with fins and shining scales;
glide under the green wave. milton.
he trembl’d every limb, and felt a smart -
a: if cold steel had guided through his heart. dryd. faller.
all things are beheld as in : hasty motion, where the
dryden.
f passing
dodo's æs.
objects only glide before the eye and disappear.
tide. n.s.. [from the verb.] lapse; act or mannero
smoothly.
- about his neck
a green and gilded snake had wreath'd itself,
who, with her head nimble in threats, approach'd
the opening of his mouth, but suddenly
seeing orlando it unlink'd itself,
and with indented glides did slip away -
- into a bush. - shakosheare's a you like it.
girder. n.s.. [from glide.] one that glides.
the glaunce into my heart did glide;
h; ho the glider;
herewith my soul was sharply gride,
such wounds soon waxen wides.
grike. m. s. [3]ix, saxon, see gleek.]
a flout. not now in use.
where's the bastard's braves, and charles his glikes 2 shak.
to gl1(mmer. v. n. [glimmer, danish, to shine; glimmen,
dutch, to glow.]
i. to shine faintly. - -
the west yet glimmers with some streaks of day. shakes.
the truth appears so naked on my side,
that any purblind eye may find it out.
-and on my side it is so well apparel'd,
so clear, so shining, and so evident,
spensor's pastoral.
a sneer; a scoff;
that it will glimmer through a blind man's eye. shakespeare.
for theire no twilight of the sun's dull ray
glimmers upon the pure and native day. cowley.
oft in glimmering bowers and glades
he met her. milton.
seest thouyon' dreary plain, forlorn and wild,
the seat of desolation, void of li ht,
save what the glimmering of jo flames , . -
casts pale and dreadful? milton's paradise left.
the sacred influence
9f light appears, and from the walls of heav'n
shoots far into the bosom of dim night - -
a glimmering dawn. milton's paradis, loft.
through these sad shades this chaos in my soul,
some seeds of light at length began to roll;
the rising motion of an infant ray -
sh9tglimm'ring through the cloud, and promis'd day. prior.
oft by the winds, extinet the signal lies;
or smother'd in the glimm'ring socket dies. gay's trivia.
when rosy morning glimmer'd o'er the dales,
he drove to pasture all the lusty males. pope's odyssey.
2. to be perceived imperfectly; to appear faintly.
on the way the baggage post-boy, who had been at court,
got a glimmering who they were. wotton.
the pagan priesthood was always in the druids; and there
was a perceivable glimmering of the jewish rites in it, though
much corrupted. swift.
gli'mmer. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. faint splendour; weak light.
2. a kind of fossil. - -
the lesser masses that are lodged in sparry and stony bodies,
dispersedly, from their shining and glimmering, were an in.
ducement to the writers of fossils to give those bodies the
name of mica and glimmer. woodward on fossils.
stones which are composed of plates, that are generally plain
and parallel, and that are flexible and elastick: talc, catsilver,
or glimmer, of which there are three sorts, the yellow of
golden, the white or silvery, and the black. , woodward.
glimpse, n.s. [glimmen, dutch, to glow.]
1. a weak faint light.
such vast room in nature,
only to shine, yet scarce to contribute
each orb a glimpse of light, convey’d so far
down to this habitable, which returns -
light back to them. milton.
thousands of things, which now either wholly escape our
apprehensions, or which our shortfighted reason having got
some faint glimpse of, we, in the dark, grope after. locke.
2. a quick flashing light. -
light as the lightning glimpse they ran milton.
my thoughtless youth was wing'd with vain desires;
my manhood, long misled by wand'ring fires,
follow'd false lights; and when their glimpse was gone,
my pride struck out new spangles of her own. dryden.
there<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 928</div><p class="text">g l o
g l o
there no dear glimps of the sun's lovely face
strikes through the solid darkness of the place, cowley.
if s, celestial fire, in aught
have serv'd thy will, or gratified thy thought,
one glimps of glory to my issue give 3 3.
g .. for the little time he has to live. dryden's fables.
. short fleeting enjoyment. -
4. if, while this weary'd flesh draws fleeting breath,
not satisfy'd with life, afraid of death,
if hap’ly be thy will that i should know
glimpse of delight, or pause from anxious woe:
from now, from instant now, great fire, dispel -
the clouds that press my soul. prior.
5. a short transitory view.
o friends ! i hear the tread of nimble feet
hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern -
ithuriel, and zephon, through the shade. milton.
some god punishesh exemplarily in this world, that we
might have a taste or glimpse of his present justice. hakewill.
a man used to such sort of reflections, sees as much at one
glimpse as would require a long discourse to lay before another,
and make out in one entire and gradual deduction. locke.
what should i do while here i was enchain'd,
no glimps of godlike liberty remain'd. dryden's wirgil.
6. the exhibition of a faint resemblance.
no man hath a virtue that he has not a glimpse of shakesp.
to gl1'sten. v. n. [glittan, german.] to shine; to sparkle
with light.
the bleating kind
eye the bleak heaven, and next the gliftening earth,
with looks of dumb despair. thomson's i/inter.
the ladies eyes glishened with pleasure. richardson's pamela.
to gli's ter. v. m. [glittan, german; gli/ieren, dutch..] to
shine; to be bright.
the wars flame most in summer, and the helmets glisler
brightest in the fairest sunshine. spenser on ireland.
'tis better to be lowly born,
and range with humble livers in content,
than to be perk'd up in a glishering grief,
and wear a golden sorrow. shakespeare's henry viii.
the golden sun -
gallops the zodiack in his gift ring coach. shakespeare.
all that gli/iers is not gold. shakesp. merch, of venice.
you were more the eye and talk
of the court to-day, than all
else that glisler'd in whitehall. . . ben. johns. underwoods.
when the sun shone upon the shields of gold and brass,
the mountains gli/iered there with, and shined like lamps of
fire. 1 mac. vi. 39.
it consisted not of rubies, yet the small pieces of it were
of a pleasant redish colour, and gloered prettily. boyle.
gosster. m. s. [properly written cylor, from xx{{...] sce
clyster. it is written wrong even by brown.
now enters bush with new state airs,
his lordship’s premier minister;
and who, in all profound affairs,
js held as needful as his gloser. swift.
choler is the natural gifter, or one excretion whereby na-
ture oxcludeth another; which, descending daily unto the
bowels, extimulates those parts, and excites them unto ex-
pulsion. brown's wulgar errours.
72 g1 tter. v. m. [...]itinian, saxon.)
1. to shine; to exhibit lustre; to gleam.
steel glosses are more resplendent than the like plates of
brass, and so is the glittering of a blade. bacon's phys. rem.
before the battle joins, from afar
the field yet glitters with the pomp of war. dryden's jorg.
scarce had it thou time to unsheath thy conqu'ring blade;
it did but glitter, and the rebels fled. granville.
2. to be specious; to be striking.
qo the one hand set the most glittering temptations to dis-
cord, and on the other the dismal effects of it. decay of piety.
in glitt'ring scenes, o'er her own heart, severe;
~ in crowds, collected; and in courts sincere. young.
g. ****, *s, [from the verb.j lustre; bright show; splen-
ous.
--. clad
with what permissive glory since his fall
was left him, or false glitter. azilton's paradis. loft.
flourish not too much upon the glitter of fortune, for fe::
those should be too much alloy in it. collier on pride.
- take away this measure from our dress and habits, and all
is turned into such paint and glitter, and ridiculous ornaments,
as are a real shame to the wearer. law.
gorokasp. shining; sparking. a participle used b
chaucer and the old en lish poets. this . . . . ; by
* - a- - - - participial termina-
tion is still retained in scotland.
sort eringly. adv. [from glitter.] with shining lustre.
‘t3 g19 ar. v. a. [gl:eren, dutch...]
1. to squint; to look askow. skinner.
2. in scotland, to state: as, what a gloarand quean,
to gloat. v. n. [this word i conceiv - -
written for gloar.] to cast side io. o be ignorant
teach every grace to smile in your too loves.
and her deluding eyes to gloat for you. roo
glo'bard. m. s. so £ool. a glow-worm "we's ja. s.r.
glo'bated. adj. [from globe..] formed in a
spherical ; so j *in of , o,
globe. m. s. [glake, french; globus, latin.]
1. a sphere ; a ball ; a round body: a bod; of w
part of the surface is at the same distance from i.
2. the terraqueous ball.
- the youth, whose fortune the vast głł *
fo royal enemy betray'd, * e obey'd,
wept at his fall.
where god declares his intention to give o -
meant that he would make a species of creatures that; ne
have dominion over the other species of this terrestrial o old
3. a sphere in which the various regions of the em. *. l.
graphically depicted, or in which the cons.
down according to their places in the sky. tions are laid
the astrologer who spells the stars,
mistakes his globe, and in her brighter eye
interprets heaven's physiognomy.
these are the stars,
but raise thy thought from sense, northink to find
such figures there as are in globe, design'd. - crush
4. a body of soldiers drawn into a circle. fish,
him round
a globe of fiery scraphim inclos'd,
with bright imblazoning, and horrent arms, milton
globe anaranth, or everlying fower. m. s. samaranthia.)
a flower. miller
globe daisy. n. s. a kind of flower. -
globe fish, n. s. a kind of orbicular fish,
globe ranunculus. m. s. shelleboro-ranunculu..] a plant is,
globe thisile. n. s. [carduus orbiculatus.j a plant. miller.
globo'se. adj. [globosus, latin.) spherical; round.
regions, to which
all thy dominion, adam, is no more
than what this garden is to all the earth,
and all the sea; from one entire
stretch'd into longitude.
then form'd the moon
gloose, and ev'ry magnitude of stars. . . milton's par. l.
globo’sir y. m. s. [from globose.] sphericity; sphericalness,
why the same eclipse of the sun, which is seen to them that
live more easterly, when the sun is elevated six degrees above
the horizon, should be seen to them that live one degree more
westerly, where the sun is but five degrees above the horizon,
and so lower and lower proportionably, 'till at last it appear
not at all : no account can be given, but the ghosty of the
earth. ray on the creation,
glo'bous. adj. [globosus, latin. when the accent is intended
to be on the last syllable, the word should be written ghos,
when on the first globcus: i have transferred hither a passage
of milton, in which this rule has been neglected.) sohol-
cal ; round.
wide over all the plain, and wider far
than all this globos earth in plain outspread,
hich ever
centre,
colini.
*
milton's parad; lol.
such are the courts of god milon,
the brazen instruments of death discharge
horrible flames, and turbid streaming clouds;
large globows irons fly, of dreadful hiss, philip;,
singeing the air. -
glo'ouis r. adj. [globulus, latin.] having the son " '
small sphere; round; spherical. - b
the figure of the atoms of all visible fluids someo." :
go!olar, there being no other figure so wo fo o *
making of fluidity. oo::
globula ria. m. s. (latin; globulaire, french.] a:
lous flower. - so
glo gule. m. s. [globule, french ; globulus, o ust .
small particle of matter as is of a globular or so :
as the red particles of the blood, which swim in ** #.
serum, and are easily discovered by the "...i.
will attract one another when they come within * due . l,
and unite like the spheres of quicksilver. in thei .
the hailstones hive opaque globules of snow." .
to intercept the light within the halo. . newto
blood consists of red globules, swimming ill break; the
called serum; the red goules are elastick, and wi o th:
vessels which admit the smaller globalo. “” o
greater without a disease. arbuthnot sphere;
globulous. adj. [from globule.
round. - m the
the whiteness of such globulous particlo proceeds *
air included in the froth. - is
to gloomerate. v. a. [glomero, latin) to o: d
ball or sphere. a filamentous substano 3. are ongo
is said to be glomerated, but discontinuous po"
bated. glomeratio"
] in form of a small
in a thin liquor
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 929</div><p class="text">g l o
gloostration. m. s. [glomeratio, latin.j
1. the act of forming into a ball or sphere.
2. a body formed into a ball.
the rainbow, consisteth of a glomeration of small drops,
which cannot fall but from the air that is very low. bacon.
glo'morous. adi. [glomerosus, latin.] gathered into a ball
or sphere, as a ball of thread.
gloom. m. s. szlomang, saxon, twilight.]
1. imperfect darkness; dismalness; obscurity; defect of light.
glowing embers through the room, --&gt;
teach light to counterfeit a gloom. milton.
this the seat,
that we must change for heav'n this mournful gloom,
for that celestial light? o
the still night, not now, as ere men fell,
wholsome, and cool, and mild; but with black air
accompany'd : with damps, and dreadful gloom. milton.
now warm in love, now with'ring in thy bloom,
lost in a convent's solitary gloom. pope.
2. cloudiness of aspect; heaviness of mind; sullenness.
to gloom. v. n. [from the noun.]
i. o obscurely, as the twilight. this sense is not now
i il l11c,
his glist’ring armour made
a little glooming light much like a shade. spensor.
scarcely had phoebus in the glooming east
yet harnessed his fiery footed team. spensor.
2. to be cloudy; to be dark.
. to be melancholy; to be sullen.
loo'mily. adv. [from gloomy.]
1. obscurely; dimly ; without perfeot light; dismally.
2. sullenly; with cloudy aspect; with dark intentions; not
cheerfully.
see, he comes: how gloomily he looks i dryden.
gloomily retir'd the spider lives. thomson.
gloo'min ess. n. s. [from gloomy.]
1. want of light; obscurity; imperfeoł light; dismalness.
2. want of cheerfulness; cloudiness of look; heaviness of mind;
melancholy.
negle&amp;t spreads gloomines; upon their humour, and makes
them grow fullen and unconversable. collier of the spleen.
the gloomines; in which sometimes the minds of the best
men are involved, very often stands in need of such little in-
citements to mirth and laughter as are apt to disperse melan-
choly. addison.
gloo'my. adj. [from gloom.]
1. obscure; imperfectly illuminated; almost dark; dismal for
want of light.
these were from without
the growing miseries, which adam saw
already in part, though hid in gloomies? shade,
to sorrow abandon'd. amilton's paradise lost.
deep in a cavern dwells the drowsy god,
whose gloomy mansion nor the rising sun,
nor setting visits, nor the lightsome noon. dryden’s fables.
the surface of the earth is clearer or gloomier, just as the
sun is bright or more overcast. pope's letters.
2. dark of complexion.
that fair field
of enna, where proserpine gathering flow’rs,
herself a fairer flow'r, by gloomy dis
was gather'd. milion's paradis. loft.
3. sullen; melancholy; cloudy of look; heavy of heart.
glo'ried. adj. [from glory.] illustrious ; honourable ; deco-
rated with glory ; dignified with honours. not in use.
old respect,
as i suppose, toward your once glory'd friend,
my son, now captive, hither hath inform'd
your younger feet, while mine cast back with age
came lagging after. milton's a onisłes.
glorification. m. s. [glorification, french, from glorify.]
the act of giving glory.
at opening your eyes, enter upon the day with thanks-
giving for the preservation of you the last night, with the glo-
rification of god for the works of the creation. taylor.
to glorify. v. a. [glorifier, french ; glorifico, latin.]
1. to procure honour or praise to one.
two such silver currents, when they join, -
do glorify the banks that bound them in. shakoff. k. john.
justice is their virtue: that alone
makes them sit sure, and glorifies the throne. daniel.
2. to pay honour or praise in worship. -
god is glorified when such his excellency, above all things,
is with due admiration acknowledged." hooker.
this form and manner of glorifying god was not at that
time first begun; but received long before, and alleged at that
time as an argument for the truth. hooker.
good fellow, tell us here the circumstance,
that we for thee may goris, the lord. shakoff. henry vi.
all nations shall glorify thy name. ps. lxxxvi. 9.
our bodies with which the apostle commands us to glorify
god, as well as with our souls. duty of man.
vol. i.
milton's paradis: lost.
this is the perfection of every thing, to attain its tree and
proper end; and the end of all these gifts and endowments,
which god hath given us, is to glorify the giver. tillotson.
3. to praise; to honour; to extol. -
whomsoever they find to be most licentious of life, despe-
rate in all parts of disobedience and rebellious disposition, him
they set up and gloriff. speoser on ireland.
no chymist yet the elixir got,
but glorifies his pregnant pot,
if by the way to him befall,
some odoriferous thing, or medicinal. - donne.
4. to exalt to glory in heaven; to raise to celestial beatitude.
if god be glorified in him, god shall also glorij him in him-
self, and shall straightway glorify him. jo. xiii. 32.
whom he justified, them he also glorified. rom. viii. 30.
the members of the church remaining, being os
fanetified, shall be eternally glorified; then shall the whose
church be truly and perfectly holy. pearson.
the soul, being io. will, at some time or other, re-
some its body again in a glorified manner. ayliff's parergon.
glorious, adj. [gloriosus, latin; glorieux, french.j
i. boastful; proud ; haughty; ostentatious. -
glorious followers, who make themselves as trumpets of the
commendation of those they follow, taint business for want of
secrecy. bacon.
they that are glorious must needs be factious; for all bravery
stands upon comparisons. bacon.
2. noble ; illustrious ; excellent. it is frequently used by theo-
logical writers, to express the brightness of triumphant sanctity
rewarded in heaven.
... let them know that thou art lord, the only god, and glo-
rious over the whole world. dan. iii. 22.
he is glorious in respe&amp;t of the brightness and splendor of his
celestial body, still made more glorious and majestick by the
authority which his father hath committed to him of univer-
sal judge. nelson.
impartial justice holds her equal scales,
*till stronger virtue does the weight incline;
if over thee thy glorious foe prevails,
he now defends the cause that once was thine. prior.
let us remember we are cato's friends,
and act hke men who claim that glorious title. addison's cato.
she must stand amongst the first servants of god, and be
glorious amongst those that have fought the good fight. law.
if there be nothing so glorious as doing good, if there is no-
thing that makes us so like to god, then nothing can be so
glorious in the use of our money, as to use it all in works of
love and goodness. law.
glo riously. adv. [from glorious.] nobly; splendidly; il-
lustriously.
they inspire with those celestial flames, which shine so glo-
riously in their works. dryden's dufresnoy.
great wits sometimes may gloriously offend,
and rise to faults true criticks dare not mend. pope.
glo'ry. m. s. [gloire, french ; gloria, latin. among the old
poets it was used sometimes as one syllable, glore.]
1. praise paid in adoration.
glory to god in the highest. luke ii. 14.
2. the felicity of heaven prepared for those that please god.
thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterwards re-
ceive me into thy glory. psal. lxxiii. 24.
then enter into glory, and resume
his seat at god's right hand, exalted high
above all names in heav'n. milton's paradise loft.
it is hardly possible for you to beseech and intreat god to
make any one happy in the highest enjoyments of his glory to
all eternity, and yet be troubled to see him enjoy the much
smaller gifts of god, in this short and low state of hurnan
life. law.
3. honour; praise; fame; renown; celebrity.
think it no glory to swell in tyranny. sidney.
glory is like a circle in the water,
which never ceaseth to enlarge itself,
*till by broad spreading it disperse to nought. shak, h. vi.
and with that word and warning soon was dight,
each soldier longing for near coming glory. fairfax.
israel's bright sceptre far less glory brings,
there have been fewer friends on earth than kings. cowley.
can we imagine that neither the ambition of princes, or in-
terest, or gain in private persons, or curiosity and the desire of
knowledge, or the glory of discoveries, could ever move them
in that endless time to try their fortunes upon the sea. burnet.
your sex's glory 'tis to shine unknown,
of all applause, be fondest of your own. 1%ung.
4. splendour; magnificence. -
solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of
these. - - matt. vi. 29.
treated so ill, chas'd from your throne,
returning, you adorn the town;
and with a brave revenge do show
their glory went and came with you. //aller.
aristotle says, that should a man under ground converse
1o k with<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 930</div><p class="text">g l o g l o
with works of art, and be afterwards brought up into the open it was the colour of devotion, givin a lust
- day, and see the several glories of the heaven and earth, he and a gloss to humility. giving a lustre to referento,
would pronounce them the works of god. addison's spectator. groves, fields, and meadows, are at any seas south.
5. lustre; brightness. look upon ; but never so much as in theo . 0n pleasant to
now sleeping flocks on their soft fleeces lie; when they are all new and fresh, with o: spring,
the moon, serene in glory, mounts the sky. pope's winter. them. }. soft upon
from opening skies may streaming glories shine, 3. an interpretation artfully specious; a specio on's spain.
and saints embrace thee with a love like mine. pope. this sense teems to partake of both the so *presentation,
6. a circle of rays which surrounds the heads of saints in poor painters oft with filly poets join cr.
picture. to fill the world with strange but win tone -
it is not a converting but a crowning grace; such an one one brings the stuff, the other flam s th it;
as irradiates, and puts a circle of glory about the head of him which breeds nought else but glosses o son, .
upon whom it descends. south’s sermons. it is no part of my secret meaning to draw it. h siho,
a smile plays with a surprising agreeableness in the eye, hatred, or to set upon the face of this o reby into
breaks out with the brightest distinction, an fits like a glory than the naked truth doth afford. - . fairer 3's
upon the countenance. collier of the apeof. he seems with forged quaint conceit or, pojo.
7. pride ; boastfulness; arrogance. to set a glass upon his bad intent, shakespear.'
by the vain glory of men they entered into the world, and the common gos, *peare's hinoy,
o therefore shall tney come shortly to an end. jwisd. xiv. i.4. of theologians. •)
on death-beds some in conscious glory lie, to gloss. v. n. [.../sor, french, from the noun.] miło,
since of the doctor in the mode they die. young. 1. to comment. -
8. generous pride. thou detain's briseis in thy bands
the success of those wars was too notable to be unknown by priestly glassing on the gods command. dryd, f
to your ears, to which all worthy fame hath glory to come 2. to make sly remarks. ryu, falls,
unto. sidney. her equals first observ'd her growing zeal
to glo'ry. v. n. [glorior, s.a.r.] to boast in ; to be proud of. and laughing gloss'd, that abra serv'd so wo pr;
- with like judgment glorying when he had happened to do to gloss. v. a. - rior,
a thing well, as when he had performed some notable mischief. 1. to explain by comment.
*t-1 - - - - - - - sidney. in parchment then, large as the fields, he draws
they were wont, in the pride of their own proceedings, to assurances, big as gloss'd civil laws. d
glory, that whereas luther did but blow away the roof, and 2. to palliate by specious exposition or representation witno,
zuoglius batter but the walls of popish superstition, the last ls this the fasadise, in description whereof, moh,
and hardest work of all remained, which was to raze up the and deceiving eloquence hath been spent hoor', .
- very ground and foundation of popcry. hooker. do i not reason wholly on your conduct? drosions,
let thern look they glory not in mischief, you have the art to gloss the foulest cause. philip', bri,
nor build their eos on the graves of great men ; 3. to embellish with superficial lustre. f whi,
: for then my guiltless blood must cry against then. shakes. but thou, who lately of the commonstrain
| your glorying is not good. 1 cor. v. 6. wert one of us, if o thou dost retain
thou hast seen mount at 1s, the same ill habits, the same follies too,
! while storms and tempests thunder on its brow, gloss'd over only with a saint-like show,
| and occans break their billows at its feet, then i resume the freedom which i gave,
- it stands unmov’d, and glories in its height. addis. cato. still thou art bound to vice, and still a slave. dolo pes
this title of freeholder is what i most glory in, and what gloss ary. m. s. [glossarium, latin; goshire french.] .
most effectually calls to my mind the happiness of that govern- dictionary of obscure or antiquated words. y
ment under which i live. addison's freeholder. according to varro, when delubrum was applied to a place
if others may glory in their birth, why may not we, whose it signified such a one, in quo dei simulathrum dedicatum o
parents were called by god to attend on him at his altar atter. and also in the old gossaries. simi.
. no one is out of the reach of misfortune; no one there- i could add another word to the glossory. lo.
fore should glory in his prosperity. clarissa. gloss a ror. m. s. [g'ssateur, french, from gloss.) a writes of
t2 glose. v. a. to flatter; to collogue. hammer. see to glosses; a commentator.
* gooze. z the reason why the assertion of a single judge does no
gloss. n.s. [yxorrz; glos, french.] prove the existence of judicial acts, is because his office is to
i • a scholium ; a comment. pronounce judgment, and not to become an evidence: but
i hey never hear entence, which mentioneth the word or why may not the same be said of two judges? therefore, in
scripture, but forthwith their glosses upon it are the word this respect, the glassitor's opinion must be false. ajiji,
preached, the scripture explained, or delivered unto us in ser- glo'sser. m. s. [glassirius, latin.]
in ons. hooker. i. a scholiast , a commentator.
if then all souls, both good and bad, do teach, 2. a polisher.
wo gen'ral voice, that souls can never die; glo'ssis ess. n.s.. [from gloff.] smooth polish; superficiallust',
y sis no man's sitting gloss, but nature's speech, their surfaces had a smoothness and glosings; much surpas-
which, like god’s oracles, can never lie. davies. sing whatever i had observed in marine or common all. djo.
some mutter at certain passages therein, by putting ill gloss glossog rapher. m. s. [??orra and y;3f4.j a scholast;
upon the text, and taking with the left hand what i offer with a coinmentator. &gt; -
the right. . . - howel. glossog raphy. m. s. [yoraz and y:z:x.] the writing of
all this, without a glos, or comment, - commentaries.
he could unriddle in a moment. hudibras. glossy, adj. [from gloss.] shining; smoothly polished. ...
in many places he has perverted my meaning by his glasses, there came towards us a person of place: he ho" him.
and interpreted by words into blasphemy and bawdry, of which a gown with wide sleeves, of a kind of water-camblet, of an
they were not guily. dryden’s fables, preface. excellent azure colour, far more gloss than outs. boo,
i hey give the scandal, and the wife discern; the rest entire r: 1
their gloss teach an age too apt to learn. dryden. shone with a gloss; scurf. milor,
- explaining the text in short glosses, was accursius's method. his surcoat was a bearskin on his back;
inden • - baker on learning. his hair hung long behind, and gloss raven black. drydo.
l.; so nants, articles they draw, myself will search our planted grounds *o, pirgi'.
thin o i s o and larger far for downy peaches and the gloss; plum. f o
2. superficiall sodes with all their gloss are. pope. glove. n.s. ixio, e, saxon, from alift, danish,
oposa ustre. in this sense it seems to have another de- cover of the hands.
rivation; it has perhaps some affinity to glow. they flew about like chaff i' th' wind;
wo o grown with rust, for haste some left their masks behind, drayton,
whose list. atn enve opod with gold, some could not stay their gloves to find. . . head
gottering gloss dark'ned with filthy dust. spenser. white gloves were on his hands, and on his hea in
- you are a sectary, a wreath of laurel do
that's the plain truth: y - wreat is to 1. s with a go"
to men o ... painted gloss discovers, to glove. v. a. [from the noun.] to cover a
golden opinions o *. and weakness. shakes). - my limbs, 'd with grief,
which wo be so all sorts of people, weaken'd with grief, being now enrag ". is crutti; ;
the doubt will be .. in o newest gloss. shakesp. are thrice themselves: hence o o
glosses are more resplendent o 1t . polish so well; for steel a scaly gauntlet now, with joints of o o: aro's ho iv, |
w. t o p jo brass. bacon. must glove this hand. . so...of - *
the virgins wore: th a † wind did toss the next he preys on is her palm, -
fin dio oft e youths, woven coats, that cast a that almoner of transpiring blin;
like that of oil $12/52 - so soft, 'tis air but once to d;
- - chapman's_iliad. tender as 'twere a jelly good.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 931</div><p class="text">g l o
g l u
glover. m. s. [from glove..] one whose trade is to make or
sell gloves.
does he not wear a great round beard like a glover's paring
knife 2 shakesp. alsorry jwives of windsor.
to glout. v. n. [a low word of which i find no etymology.]
to pout; to look sullen. it is still used in scotland.
she lurks in midst of all her den, and streaks
from out a ghastly whirlpool all her necks,
--- where, glowting round her rock, to fish she falls. chapman.
o glouting with fullen spight, the fury shook
her clotted locks, and blatted with each look. garth.
to glow. v. n. [3]opan, saxon; goeyen, dutch..]
1. to be heated so as to shine without hame.
o but sithence filence lesseneth not my fire,
but told it flames, and hidden it does glow,
i will reveal what ye so much desire. spensor.
his goodly eyes,
that o'er the files and musters of the war
have glow'd like plated mars, now bend, now turn
their office upon a tawny front. shakes). ant. and cleop.
kunigund, wife to the emperor henry ii. to show her in-
nocency, did take seven glowing ions, one after another, in
-
her bare hands, and had thereby no harm. hakewill.
- not all parts like, but all alike inform'd
o with radiant light, as glowing iron with fire. milton.
2. to burn with vehement heat.
nor would you find it easy to compose
the mettled steeds, when from their nostrils flows
the scorching fire that in their entrails glows. addis. ovid.
how op'ning heav'ns their happy regions show,
and yawning gulphs with flaming vengeance glow. smith.
fires that glow,
shrieks of woe. pope.
3. to feel heat of body.
did not his temples glow
in the same sulty winds and scorching heats addis. cato.
the cord slides swiftly through his glowing hands. gay.
4. to exhibit a strong bight colour.
with smile that glow’d
celestial rosy red, love's proper hue. milton.
clad in a gown that glows with tyrian rays. dryden.
a malicious joy,
whose red and fiery beams cait through your visage
a glowing pleasure. dryden and lee's oedipus.
from the mingled strength of shade and light,
a new creation rises to my fight;
such heav'nly figures from his pencil flow,
so warm with life his blended colours glow,
amidst the soft variety i'm lost. addison.
like th' ethereal glow'd the green expanse. savage.
fair ideas flow,
strike in the sketch, or in the picture glow. pope.
not the fair fruit that on yon branches glows,
with that ripe red th’ autumnal sun bestows,
- can move the god. pope.
---- each pleasing blount shall endless smiles bestow,
and fair belinda's blush for ever glow. pope.
here clearer stars glow round the frozen pole. pope.
5. to feel passion of mind, or activity of fancy.
you strive in vain
to hide your thoughts from him, who knew too well
the inward glowings of a heart in love. addison's cato.
forc'd compliments and formal bows
- will shew thee just above neglect ;
* the fire with which thy lover glows,
- will settle into cold respect. prior.
did shadrach's zeal my glowing breast inspire
- to weary tortures, and rejoice in fire. prior.
-&gt; , let the gay conscience of a life well spent
:-- calm ev’ry thought, inspirit ev'ry grace,
- glow in thy heart, and smile upon thy face. pope.
with furies surrounded,
- despairing, confounded.
or he trembles, he glows,
o amidst rhcdope’s shows. - pope.
. . so perish all, whose breasts ne'er learn'd to glow
...” for others good, or melt at others woe. pope.
to praise is always hard, -
when real virtue fires the glowing bard. lewis.
6. to rage or burn as a passion.
a fire which every windy passion blows;
with pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows. dryden.
when crept into aged veins,
o love slowly burns, and long remains ;
- it glows, and with a sullen heat,
like fire in logs, it warms us long. shadwell.
t., glow. v. a. to make hot so as to shine. not in use.
on each side her
stocd pretty dimpled boys, like smiling cupids,
with divers colour'd fans, whose wind did seem
to glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool. shakoff.
glow, n. s. [from the verb.]
1. shining heat.
2. vehemence of passion.
3. brightness or vividness of colour.
the pale complexion of true love,
and the red glow of scorn and proud disdain.
a waving glow his bloomy beds display,
blushing in bright diversities of day. pope,
such as suppose that the great stile night happily be blended
with the ornamental, that the fimple, grave, and majestic
dignity of raffaelle could unite with the glow and tuftic of a
paulo, or tinto ct, are totally mistaken. reynolds.
glowworm. m. s. sov and worm.] a small creeping infect
with a luminous faii.
the honey bags steal from the humble becs,
and for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs,
and light them at the fiery glowworm's eyes. shakes care.
the glowworm shews the mattin to be near,
and 'gins to pale his ineffectual fire. shakes). hamlet.
a great light drowneth a smaller that it cannot be seen; as
the fun that of a glowworm. lacon's natural history.
the man, who first upon the ground
a glowworm spy’d, supposing he had found
a moving diamond, a breathing stone;
for life it had, and like those jewels shone:
he held it dear, 'till by the springing day
inform’d, he threw the worthless worm away. l/aller.
to gloze. v. n. [...leran, saxon.]
1. to flatter; to wheedle; to insinuate; to fawn.
man will hearken to his glozing lies,
and easily transgress. milton's paradise loft.
so glaz'd the tempter, and his proem tun'd :
into the heart cf. eve his words made way. milton.
a false glazing parasite would call his foolhardiness valour,
and then he may go on boldly, because blindly, and by mis-
taking himself for a lion, come to perish like an ass. sooth.
now for a going speech,
fair protestations, specious marks of friendship. philips.
2. to comment. this should be gloss.
which sa'ique land the french unjustly gloze
to be the realm of france. shakespeare's henry v.
g1 oz. e. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. flattery; insinuation.
now to plain dealing ; lay these glazes by. shakoff care.
2. specious show ; gloss. not used.
precious couches full oft are shaked with a fever;
if then a bodily cvil in a bodily gloze be not hidden,
shall such morning dews be an ease to the heat of a love's
fire * sidney.
glooze n. m. s. [from glaze.] a flatterer.
glue. m. s. [glu, fr. gluten, lat. glad, welsh.] a viscous body
commonly made by boiling the skins of animals to a gelly;
any viscous or tenacious matter by which bodies are held one
to another; a cement.
water, and all liquors, do hastily receive dry and more
terrestrial bodies proportionable; and dry bodies, on the other
side, drink in waters and liquors: so that, as it was well said
by one of the ancients of earthly and watery substances, one
is a glue to another. bacon's natural history.
the driest and most transparent glue is the best. moxon.
to build the earth did chance materials chuse,
and through the parts cementing glue diffuse. blackmore.
the flowers of grains, mixed with water, will make a sort
of glue. arbuthnot on aliments.
to glue. v. a. [from the roun.]
1. to join with a viscous cement.
i fear thy overthrow
more than my body's parting with my soul: .
my love and fear glu'd many friends to thee. shak. h. vi.
whoso teacheth a fool is as one that glueth a potsherd to-
gether. eccles. xxii. 7.
the custom of crowning the holy virgin is so much in
vogue among the italians, that one often sees in their churches
a little tinsel crown, or a circle of stars, glued to the canvass
over the head of the figure. addison on saly.
most wounds, if kept clean, and from the air, the flesh
will glue together with its own native balm. derham.
2. to hold together. -
the parts of all homogeneal hard bodies, which fully touch
one another, stick together very strongly ; and for explaining
how this may be, some have invented hooked atoms, which is
begging the question; and others tell us their bodies are glued
together by rest; that is, by an occult quality, or rather by
nothing. newton's opt.
3. to join ; to unite ; to inviscate. - ~ *
those wasps in a honeypot are sensual men plunged in their
lus's and pleasures; and when they are once glued to them,
'tis a very hard matter to work themselves out. lorange.
intemperance, sensuality, and fleshly lusts, do debate mens
minds and clog their spirits; sink us down into sense, and gile
us to those low and inferior things. tillos.”.
she curb’d a groan, that else had come :
and pausing, view'd the present in the tomb :
shakespeare.
then
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 932</div><p class="text">g l u
g n a
then to the heart ador'd devoutly glu’d -
her lips, and, raising it, her speech renew’d. dryden.
i hear thee, view thee, gaze o'er all thy charms,
and round thy phantom glue my clasping arms. pope.
glu'e boile r. m. s. [glue and boil,j one whose trade is to
make glue. -
glu'er. r. s. [from glue.] one who cements with glue.
glur1, adj. [a low cant word formed by corrupting gloom.]
sullen ; stubbornly grave.
some, when they hear a story, look glum, and cry, well,
what then guardian.
to go!, ut. v. a. sengloutin, french ; glutio, lat. to swallow;
yxo~..]
1. to swallow ; to devour.
'till gram'd and gorg’d, nigh burst
with suck'd and glutted offal. milton's paradis. loft.
2. to cloy; to fill beyond sufficiency; to sate ; to disgust.
the ambassador, making his oration, did so magnify the
king and queen, as was enough to glut the hearers. bacon.
love breaks friendship, whose delights
feed, but not glut our appetites. denham.
what way remove
his settled hate, and reconcile his love,
that he may look propitious on our toils,
and hungry graves no more be glutted with our spoils. dryd.
no more, my friend;
here let our glutted execution end.
i found
the fickle ear soon glutted with the sound,
condemn'd eternal changes to pursue,
dryden’s afn.
tir'd with the last, and eager of the new. prior.
3. to feast or delight even to satiety.
with death's carcase glut the grave. milton.
his faithful heart, a bloody sacrifice,
torn from his breast, to glut the tyrant's eyes. dryden.
a sylvan scene, which, rising by degrees,
leads up the eye below, nor glots the fight
with one full prospect; but invites by many,
to view at last the whole. dryden.
4. to overfill; to load.
he attributes the ill success of either party to their glitting
the market, and retailing too much of a bad commodity at
once. arbuthnot's art of polite lying.
5. to saturate.
the menstruum, being already glutted, could not ad power-
fully enough to dissolve it. boyle.
glut, n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. that which is gorged or swallowed.
disgorging foul
their devilish glut, chain'd thunderbolts, and hail
of iron globes. milton's paradis. loft.
2. plenty even to loathing and satiety.
so death
shall be deceiv'd his glut ; and with us two
be forc'd to satisfy his rav’nous maw. millon's par. lost.
let him but set the one in balance against the other, and he
shall find himself miserable, even in the very glut of his de-
lights. l’estrange.
a glut of study and retirement in the first part of iny life,
cast me into this; and this will throw me again into study
and retirement. pope to swift.
3. more than enough ; overmuch.
if you pour a glut of water upon a bottle, it receives jittle
of it. ben. johnson's discoveries.
4. any thing that fills up a passage.
the water some suppose to pass from the bottom of the sea
to the heads of springs, through certain subterranean conduits
or channels, until they were by some glut, stop, or other
oils, arrested in their passage. j/oodward.
gloutinou.s. adj. [choino, french ; from gluten, latin.]
guy ; viscous; tenacious.
the cause of all vivification is a gentle and proportionable
heat, working upon a glutinous and yielding substance; for the
heat doth bring forth spirit in that substance, and the substance
being glutinous, produceth two effects: the one, that the spirit
is detained, and cannot break forth ; the other, that the mat-
ter, being gentle and yielding, is driven forwards by the motion
of the spirits, after some swelling, into shape and members.
bacon's natural hisory.
next this marble venom'd seat, s'ory
§mead with gums of glamous hot. amilton.
nourishment too viscid and glutinous to be subdued by the
vital force. arbuthnot on alinents.
o 7. / [from glutinous.] viscosity ; tena-
there is a resistance in fluids, which may arise from their
elasticity, glutinosoft, and the friction of their parts. cheyne.
go jo. * f [gotton, french; from glutio, latin, to swal-
ow.
1. one who indulges himself too much in eating.
the chinese eat horseflesh at this day, and some gluttons
have used to have catssoff, i.ej. bacow’s natural history.
through macer's gullet she runs
while . vile o: ... down,
and, void of modesty and thought,
she follows bibo's endless draught.
if a glutton was to say in exci. of his glutton prior.
only eats such things as it is lawful to eat, fi. wo o that he
good an excuse for himself as the greedy, co. like is
tradesman, that should say, he only deals in so
els,
2. one eager of any thing to excess, law,
the rest bring home in state the happy pair
to that last scene of bliss, and leav. them there:
all those free joys insatiably to prove, &gt;
with which rich beauty feafts the glutton love c
gluttons in murder, wanton to destroy - owl),
their fatal arts so impiously employ. 2
7% glut ton1'se. v. n. [from glutton.] to play th
to be luxurious.
glu's tonous. adj. [from glutton.] g
ing; delighted overmuch with food.
when they would smile and fawn upon his debts
and take down th’ interest in their glutonous maws s f
the exceeding luxuriousness of this gluttonous age wo -
we press nature with overweighty burdens, and fio. :
strength defective, we take the work out of her imo
commit it to the artificial help of strong waters. so
well observe §ll.
the rule of not too much, by temperance taught
in what thou eat'st and drinkist; seeking from thence
due nourishment, no gluttonous delight. milton
gluttonously. adv. [from gluttonous...] with the wiri,
of a glutton.
glutton y. m. f sglutonnie, french; from glutton.] exces,
of eating ; luxury of the table.
gotto, a vice in a great fortune, a curs in a small,
olday.
their sumptuous gluttonies and gorgeous feasts, holyday
on citron tables or atlantick stone. milton,
well may they fear some miserable end,
whom gluttony and want at once attend. drydo, jiv.
the inhabitants of cold moist countries are generally more
fat than those of warm and dry; but the most commo.
is too great a quantity of food, and too small a quantity of
motion; in plain english, gluttony and laziness, arhi,
gius. adj. [from glue.] viscous, tenacious; glutinous,
it is called balsamick mixture, because it is a gluy spumous
in atter. harvey on cos.
with guy wax some new foundations lay
of virgin combs. dryden's ann, miral.
whatever is the composition of the vapour, let it have but
one quality of being very gluy or viscous, and it will mecha.
nically solve all the phanomena of the grotto. adijn,
gov. n.s.. [irish; gleann, glyn, plur. erse; glinn, scottish]
a hollow between two mountains.
though he could not beat out the irish, yet he did shut
them up within those narrow corners and gyns under the
mountain's foot. spessor's state of ireland.
to gnar. q. v. m. [3nynnan, saxon; norro, dutch..] to
to §.; growl; to murmur ; to snarl.
when he 'gan to rear his bristles strong,
and felly gnar, until day's enemy
did hio. y sponsor,
thus is the shepherd beaten from thy fide,
and wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first, shaoff.
gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite 7
the man that mocks at it, and sets it light. shakoff, r. ii.
the gnarring porter durst not whine for doubt; . .
still were the furies while their sovereign spoke. o
gna'rled. adj. [grar, mar, or nurr, is in staffordshire a has
knot of wood which boys drive with sticks.] knotty.
merciful heav'n'
thou rather with thy sharp and sulph'rous bolt
split it the unwedgeable and guarkd oak, masort
than the soft myrtle. shaky?. more for o:
7% gnash. v. a. [angshen, dutch..] to strike tog”
clash.
the seer, who could not yet o wo o
row'd his green eyes, that spark]'d with his ***, r*.
and loss teeth. dodo's pig
to gn as h. v. m.
i. to grind or collide the teeth.
he shall grass, with his teeth, and melt away.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. -
2. to rage even to collision of the teeth; to fume;
his great iron teeth he still did gin, in sons,
and grimly gnash, threatning .." val p. xxxv. 16.
they gnosed upon me with their teeth.
they him said
gnoshing for anguish, and despite and sham", ashto,
to find himself not matchless. *
with boiling rage atrides burn d;
and foam betwixt his giashing grinders ch
granvil,
o glution;
ven to excessive fol.
p. cxi, so
matth, wit.
to growl.
'd, dro.
us ii gna s.
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 933</div><p class="text">g o
g o
to gn aw. v. n.
gnat, n. s. [xnaez, saxon.]
1. a small winged stinging insect. . - -
her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film;
her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat.
2. any thing proverbially small.
ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat and swallow a
camel. matt. xxiii. 24.
gnatflow er, n. s. [gnat and flower.] a flower, otherwise
called the beeflower.
gnatsnapper. m. s. ignat and snap.] a bird so called, be-
cause he lives by catching gnats.
they deny that any bird is to be eaten whole, but only the
gnatsnapper. hakewill on providence.
to gn aw. v. a. sonagan, saxon; knaghen, dutch.]
1. to eat by degrees; to devour by slow corrosion.
a knowing fellow, that would gnaw a man
like to a vermine, with his hellish braine,
and many an honest soule, even quick had slain. chapman.
to you such scabb'd harsh fruit is giv'n, as raw
young soldiers at their exercisings gnaw. dryden's juv.
2. to bite in agony or rage.
alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip
some bloody passion shakes your very frame. shak. othello.
they gnawed their tongues for pain. rev. xvi. 1 o.
he comely fell, and dying gnaw'd the ground. dryden.
3. to wear away by biting.
gnawing with my teeth my bonds asunder,
i gain'd my freedom. shakesp. comedy of errours.
like rotten fruit i fall, worn like a cloth,
gnawn into rags by the devouring moth. sandys.
a lion, hampered in a net, called to a mouse to help him
out of the snare: the mouse gnawed the threads to pieces, and
set the lion at liberty. l’estrange.
4. to fret; to waste; to corrode.
5. to pick with the teeth.
his bones clean pick'd ; his very bones they gnaw. dryd.
to exercise the teeth. it is now used ac-
shaiskar.
tively.
i fight well, like the spaniel, gnaw upon the chain that
ties me; but i should sooner mar my teeth than procure li-
berty. sidney.
see the hell of having a false woman: my bed shall be abused,
my coffers ransacked, my reputation gnawn at. shakespeare.
i thought i saw a thousand fearful wrecks,
a thousand men that fishes gnaw’d upon. shakoff. r. iii.
gna’w er. n. s. [from gnaw.]. one that gnaws. ..
gno'mor. m. s. szvozzy..] the hand or pin of a dial. -
the gnomon of every dial is supposed to represent the axis
of the world, and therefore the two ends or extremities there-
of must directly answer to the north and south pole. harris.
there were from great antiquity sun-dials, by the shadow
of a style or gnomon, denoting the hours of the day. brown.
gno'mosicks. m. s. [ywooowo.] . a science which makes a
part of the mathematicks: it teaches to find the just propor-
tion of shadows for the construction of all kinds of fun and
moon dials, and for knowing what o' clock it is by incarns
thereof; as also of a gnomon or stile, that throws off the sha-
dow for this purpose. trevaux.
t, go. v. n. pret. i went; i have gone. [.5an, saxon. this
was probably changed to gone, or gang, then contracted to go.
ipomi is the preterite of the old verb wend.]
1. to walk; to move step by step.
you know that love
will creep in service where it cannot go. shakspeare.
after some months those muscles become callous ; and,
having yielded to the extension, the patient makes shift to go
c
upon it, though lamely: jwiseman's surgery.
2. to move ; not stand still.
rise, let us o:
k solemnly.
3. to. be . for the church to go forth in solemn pro-
cession, his whole family have such business come upon them
that no one can be spared. hooker.
4. to walk o o sun.
2 to ni in
_o im to him; for thou hast staid so long, that
going will scarce serve the turn. shakespeare.
5. to march or walk a-foot.
i will only go through on my feet.
6. to travel; to journey.
from them [go,
matt. xxvi. 46.
num. xx. 19.
this uncouth errand sole. milton.
7. to proceed; to make a progress. .
thus others we with defamation wound,
while they stab us; and so the jest goes round. dryden.
8. to remove from place to place.
i am in blood d
stept in so far, that, should i wade no more,
i. were as tedious as go o’er. shakesh. macbeth.
9. to depart from a place; to move from a place; the opposite
of to come.
vol. 1.
i hope it be not gone, to tell my lord
that i kiss aught but him.
at once, good-night:
stand not upon the order of your going,
but go at once. shakespeare's macbeth,
and when she had so said she went her way. jo. xi. 28.
i will let you go, that ye may sacrifice, only you shall not
go very far away. ex. viii. 28.
colchester oysters are put into pits, where the sea goeth and
cometh. bacon's natural history.
shakespeare's cymbeline,
- a young tall squire
did from the camp at first before him go.
then i concur to let him go for greece,
and wish our egypt fairly rid of him.
go first the master of thy herds to find,
true to his charge, a loyal swain and kind. pope's odyssey.
io. to move or pass in any manner, or to any end.
though the vicar be bad, or the parson be evil,
go not for thy tything thyself to the devil. tussor.
she may go to bed when she list; all is as she will. shakoff.
you did wish that i would make her turn;
sir, she can turn and turn, and yet go on. shakesp. othello.
i am glad to see your lordship abroad: i heard say your
lordship was sick: i hope your lordship goes abroad by advice.
shakespeare's henry iv.
the mourners go about the streets. eccl. xii. 5.
the fun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall
be dark over them. mac. iii. 6.
put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from
gate to gate throughout the camp. ex. xxxii. 27.
the sun, which once did shine alone,
hung down his head, and wish'd for night,
when he beheld twelve suns for one
going about the world, and giving light.
this seen, the rest at awful distance stood,
as if they had been there as servants set,
to stay, or to go on, as he thought good,
and not pursue, but wait on his retreat. dryd. ann. mir.
turn not children going, 'till you have given them all the
satisfaction they are capable of. - locke.
history only acquaints us that his fleet went up the elbe, he
having carried his arms as far as that river. arbuthnot.
the last advice i give you relates to your behaviour when
you are going to be hanged, which, either for robbing your
master, for housebreaking, or going upon the highway, may
very probably be your lot. swift's directions to the footman.
those who come for gold will go off with pewter and brass,
rather than return empty. swift.
11. to pass in company with others.
thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go
forth in the dances of them that make merry. jer. xxxi, 4.
away, and with thee go, the worst of woes,
that seek'st my friendship, and the gods thy foes. chapman.
he goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and
walketh with wicked men. job xxxiv. 8.
whatever remains in story of atlas, or his kingdom of old,
is so obscured with age or fables, that it may go along with
those of the atlantick islands. temple.
12. to proceed in any course of life good or bad.
and the levites that are gone away far from me, when
israel went astray, which went attray away from me after their
idols, they shall even bear their iniquity. ezek. xliv. 10.
13. to proceed in mental operations.
if i had unwarily too far engaged myself for the present
publishing it, truely i should have kept it by me 'till i had
once again gone over it. digby on the soul, dedication.
thus i have gone through the speculative consideration of
the divine providence. hale's origin of azankind.
i hope, by going over all these particulars, you may receive
some tolerable satisfaction about this great subject. south.
if we go over the laws of christianity, we shall find that,
excepting a few particulars, they enjoin the same things, only
they have made our duty more clear and certain. tillotson.
in their primary qualities we can go but a very little way.
lococ.
i go over some parts of this argument again, and enlarge a
little more upon them. - locke.
they are not able all their life-time to reckon, or regularly
go over any moderate series of numbers. locke.
14. to take any road. - - -
i will go along by the highway; i will neither turn to the
right hand, nor to the left. deut. ii. 27.
who shall bemoan thee : or who shall go aside to ask how
thou doest ? jer. xv. 5.
his horses go about
is nories g shakosheare's macbeth.
cowlty.
dryden.
herbert.
almost a mile. - ... • -
i have endeavoured to escape into the case and freedom of
a private scene, where a man may go his own way and his
own pace. temple.
15. to march in a hostile or warlike manner.
you were advis'd his flesh was capable
jo i, of<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 934</div><p class="text">- g o
of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit
would lift where most trade of danger rang'd :
yet did you say go forth. - shakespeare's henry iv.
we be not able to go up against the people ; for they are
fronger than we. ----- numb. xiii. 31.
let us go down after the philistines by night, and spoil
them until the morning light. i sa. xiv. 36.
thou art able to go against this philistine to fight with
him. i sa. xvii. 33.
the remnant of jacob shall be among the gentiles as a lion
among the beasts of the forest; who, if he go through, both
treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.
- mic. v. 8,
16. to change state or opinion for better or worse.
we will not hearken to the king's words to go from our
religion. 1 mac. ii. 22.
the regard of the publick state, in so great a danger, made
all those goodly things, which went so to wreck, to be lightly
accounted of in comparison of their lives and liberty. knolles.
they look upon men and matters with an evil eye; and are
best pleased when things go backward, which is the worst
property of a servant of a prince or state. bacon.
all goes to ruin, they themselves contrive
to rob the honey, and subvert the hive. dryden's wirgil.
landed men, by their providence and good husbandry, ac-
commodating their expences to their income, keep themselves
from going backwards in the world. locke.
cato, we all go into your opinion. addison.
17. to apply one's self.
seeing himself confronted by so many, like a resolute ora-
tor, he went not to denial, but to justify his cruel falsehood.
- sidney.
because this atheist goes mechanically to work, he will not
offer to affirm that all the parts of the embryon could, accord-
ing to his explication, be formed at a time. bently,
18. to have recourse to.
dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to
law before the unjust, and not before the saints : i cor.
19. to be about to do.
so extraordinary an example, in so degenerate an age, de-
serves for the rarity, and, i was going to say, for the incredibi-
lity of it, the attestation of all that knew him, and confidered
his worth. locke.
20. to shift; to pass life not quite well.
every goldsmith, eager to engross to himself as much as he
could, was content to pay high for it, rather than go with-
out. locke.
cloaths they must have ; but if they speak for this stuff, or
that colour, they should be sure to go without it. locke.
21. to decline ; to tend towards death or ruin. this sense is
only in the participles going and gone.
he is far game, and, truly, in my youth,
i suffer'd much extremity for love,
very near this.
22. to be in party or design.
they with the vanquish'd prince and party go,
and leave their temples empty to the foe. dryden.
23. to escape.
timotheus himself fell into the hands of dostheus and
sosipater, whom he besought with much craft to let him go
with his life. 2 alsac. xii. 24.
24. to tend to any act.
there be some women, silvius, had they mark'j him
in parcels as i did, would have gone near
to fall in love with him. shakes. a you like it.
25. to be uttered.
his disciples personally appeared among them, and ascer-
tained the report which had gone abroad concerning a life so
full of miracles. addison on the christian religion.
26. to be talked of; to be known.
it has the greatest town in the island that goes under the
name of ano-caprea, and is in several places covered with a
very fruitful soil. addison on italy.
27. to pass; to be received.
because a fellow of my acquaintance set forth her praises in
verse, i will only repeat them, and spare my own tongue, since
she goes for a woman. sidney.
and the man went among men for an old man in the days
of saul. - i sa. xvii. 12.
a kind imagination makes a bold man have vigour and en-
terprize in his air and motion: it stamps value upon his face,
shakespeare's hamlet.
and tells the people he is to go for so much. collier.
clipping should be finally stopped, and the money which
remains should go according to its true value. locke.
28. to move by mechanism.
this pope is decrepid, and the bell goeth for him. bacon.
clocks will go as they are set; but man,
irregular man's never constant, never certain. otway.
&gt; --- - -
tis with our judgments as our watches, none
go just alike, yet each believes his own, pope
29. to be in motion from whatever cause.
the weyward fisters hand in han
posters of the sea and son, n hand,
thus do go about, about. sh 3. -
clipt and washed money goes about, jo,
weighty lies hoarded up. * entire and
30. to move in any direction. hall,
doctor, he is a curer of souls, and
if you should fight, you go agains of of bodies:
fessions. shakespeare's m. your pro-
shall the shadow go .. ten ..o.
degrees • * g. bickton
3i. to flow ; to pass; to have a course. 2 king: xx, 9,
the god i am, whose yellow w
around these fields, and }. :*
tyber my name. -
32. to have any tendency.
athenians, know r
against right reason all your counsels go;
this is not fair, nor profitable that, “’
nor t'other question proper for debate.
33. to be in a state of compact or partnership.
as a lion was bestriding an ox that he had newly pl
down, a robber passing by cried out to him o
you should go your snip, says the lion, if you wo not o:
ward to be your own carver. #, ot-
there was a hunting match agreed upon to:
i. ass, and a fox, and they were to go equal shares i.
ooty. y
34. to be regulated by any method; to proceed o:
where the multitude beareth sway, laws this. o
the preservation of that state must make common smaller off o
to go by lot, for fear of strife and divisions likely to arise. i.
we are to go by another measure. so
the principles i there went on, i seeno reason to alter, fo.
the reasons that they went upon were very specium
probable. bentl
35. to be pregnant. j,
great bellied women,
that had not half a week to go,
the fruit she goes with,
i pray that it good time and life may find. shahs. h.viii,
of living creatures some are a longer time in the womb,
and some shorter; women go commonly nine months, the
cow and the ewe about six months. baton,
some do go with their young the fixth part of a year, or
two over or under, that is, about fix or nine weeks; and
dryden' [..
dodo
shaks, henry viii,
the whelps of these see not 'till twelve days. brown,
and now with second hopes she goes,
and calls lucina to her throws. miło,
36. to pass; not to remain.
she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.
judges xvi. 1,
when our merchants have brought them, if our commo.
dities will not be enough, our money must go to pay for i.
ost,
37. to pass, or be loosed; not to be retained.
then he lets me go,
and, with his head over his shoulder turn'd,
he seem'd to find his way without his eyes,
shahjart's hamid,
let go the hand of that arch heretick. shaiso. k. joh.
38. to be expended. -
scholars are close and frugal of their words, and not will.
ing to let any go for ornament, if they will not serve to so;
filion on the class...}.
39. to be in order of time or place. -
we must enquire farther what is the connexion of his son.
tence with those that go before it, and those who so.""
watt's logo.
40. to reach or be extended to any degree. . . -
can another man perceive that i am conscious of" thing,
when i perceive it not myself? no man's knowledge her: o
go beyond his experience. look,
41. to extend to consequences.
it is not one master that eit -
these : it goes a great way barely to permit them.
42. to reach by effects. ight to fit-
confidering the cheapness, so much money m'e jo
ther than a sum ten times greater could do now. wilkins,
. to extend in meaning. -
43 his amorous exprefions go no further than vist, o
allow. dryden's ovid, po
44. to spread; to be dispersed; to reach. 'nous f
whose flesh, torn off by lumps, the ra”.". hal
in morsels cut, to make it farther go. fo
45. to have influence ; to be of weight; to be of va o fif
i had another reason to decline it, that * uses o is
with me upon all new inventions or expo":". w o
that the best trial of them is by time, and observing "... -
they live or no. - crnment o
'tis a rule that goes a great way in the 3" soles
her direes or takes notio of
l'ejio,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 935</div><p class="text">g o
sober man's life, not to put anything to hazard that may be
secured by industry, consideration, or circumspection. l'esir.
whatever appears against their prevailing vice goes for
nothing, being either not applied, or passing for libel and
slander. swift.
46. to be rated one with another; to be confidered with regard
to greater or less worth. :
i think, as the world &amp;ze, he was a good sort of man
enough. - arbuthnot.
47. to contribute; to conduce ; to concur; to be an ingre-
dient.
the medicines which go to the ointments are so strong,
that, if they were used inwards, they would kill those that
use them. bacon's natural history.
more parts of the greater wheels go to the making one part
of their lines. glanville's scepsis.
. there goes a great many qualifications to the compleating
this elation: there is no small share of honour and conscience
and sufficiency required. - collier of friendship.
i give the sex their revenge, by laying together the many
vicious characters that prevai in the mai. world, and shew-
ing the different ingredients that go to the making up of such
different humours and constitutions. addison.
something better and greater than high birth and quality
out go toward acquiring those demonstrations of publick
esteem and love. swift to pope.
48. to fall out, or terminate; to succeed.
your strong possession much more than your right,
or else it must go wrong with you and me. shakesp. k. john.
howe'er the business goes, you have made faust -
i' th' boldness of your speech. shakesp. winter’s tale.
i will send to thy father, and they shall declare onto him
how things go with thee. . . tob. x. 8.
in many armies, if the matter should be tried by duel be-
tween two champions, the victory shall go on the one side;
and yet, if it be tried by the gross, it would go on the other
side. bacon.
it has been the constant observation of all, that if a minister
had a cause depending in the court, it was ten to one but it
went against him. south.
at the time of the prince's landing, the father, easily fore-
seeing how things would go, went over, like many others, to
the prince. - - - - - swift.
whether the cause goes for me or against me, vou must pay
me the reward. watts's logick.
49. to be in any state. this sense is impersonal
it shall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle. job xx.
he called his name beriah, because it went evil with his
house. i chron. vii. 23.
50. to proceed in train or consequence.
how goes the night, boy
-the moon is down : i have not heard the clock $ -
and she goes down at twelve. shakespeare's macbeth.
i had hope,
when violence was ceas'd, and war on earth,
all would have then gone well. milton.
duration in itself is to be considered as going on in one
constant, equal, uniform course. locke.
51. to go about. to attempt ; to endeavour; to set one's
self to any business.
o dear father,
it is thy business that i go about. shakes care's king lear.
. i lost him ; but so found, as well i saw
he could not lose himself, but went about -
his father's business. milton.
which answer exceedingly united the vulgar minds to
them, who concurred only with them as they saw them like
to prevail in what they went about. clarendon.
some men, from a false persuasion that they cannot reform
their lives, and root out their old vicious habits, never so
much as attempt, endeavour, or go about it. . . south.
either my book is plainly enough written to be rightly un-
derstood by those who peruse it with attention and indiffe-
rency, or else i have writ mine so obscurely that it is in vain
to go about to mend it. - - locke.
they never go about, as in former times, to hide or palliate
their vices; but expose them freely to view. swift.
aside. to err; to deviate from the right. -
52. † § #. wife go aside, and commit a trespass against
him. numb. v. 12.
53. to go between. to interpose; to moderate between two.
i did go between them, as i said; but more than that, he
loved her ; for, indeed, he was mad for her. shakespeare.
54. to go by. to pass away unnoticed. . .
do not you come my tardiness to chide,
that laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
th’ important acting of your dread command? sh, hamlet.
so much the more our carver's o kes h
- some sixteen years, and makes her
x o so. y shakespeare's j/inter’s tale.
what's that to us? the time goes by ; away. soakespeare.
55. to go by. o find or get in the conclusion.
56. to go by. io observe as a rule.
57. to go down. to be swallowed
60. to go off, so die; to go out of life ; to decease
g o
in argument with men a woman ever
goes by the worse, whatever be her cause. milton.
he's sure to go by the worst that contends with an a
- - - dversary
that is too mighty for him.
l’estrange.
'tis not to be supposed, that by searchin
judge of the size and form of . stone;
quency of the fits, and violence of the sy
rule to go by.
gone can positively
and indeed the fre-
mptoms, are a better
2
sharp's surgery.
3 to be received, not re.
jected.
nothing so ridiculous, nothing so impossible, but it goes
down whole with him for truthamj earnest.
- - - - - l’estrange.
folly will not **fily go down in its own natural
- form with
discerning judges. dryden.
if he be hungry, bread will go down. locke.
ministers are so wise to leave too.
counted for by reasoners at a distance,
into the systems that do not only g
coffeehouse, but are supplies for pamp
proceedings to be ac-
who often mould them
o down very well in the
hlets in the present age.
- swift.
58. to go in and out. to do the business of life.
the lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in. ps:
59. to go in and out. to be a liberty.
he shall go in and out, and find pasture. john x. 9.
i would the friends we miss were of: arriv'd :
some must go off; and yet, by these i see,
so great a day as this is cheaply bought. shakesh. macbeth.
in this manner he went off, not like a man that departed out
of life, but one that returned to his abode. tatler.
61. to go off. . to depart from a post.
the leaders having charge from you to stand,
will not go off until they hear you speak. shakes. h. iv.
62. to go on. to make attack.
bold cethegus,
whose valour i have turn'd into his poison,
and prais’d so to daring, as he would
go on upon the gods. ben. johnson's catiline.
63. to go on. to proceed.
he found it a great war to keep that peace, but was fain to
go on in his story. - sidney.
he that desires only that the work of god and religion shall
go on, is pleased with it, whoever is the instrument. taylor.
i have escaped many threats of ill fits by these motions: if
they go on, the only poltice i have dealt with is wool from the
belly of a fat sheep. temple.
to look upon the soul as going on from strength to strength,
to consider that she is to shine for ever with no. accessions of
glory, and brighten to all eternity, is agreeable. addison.
go on chearfully in the glorious course you have under-
taken. addison.
copious bleeding is the most effectual remedy in the begin-
ning of the disease; but when the expectoration goes on suc-
cessfully, not so proper, because it sometimes suppreseth it.
- arbuthnot cn diet.
i have already handled some abuses during the late manage-
ment, and in convenient time shall go on with the rest. swift.
when we had found that design impracticable, we should
not have gone on in so expensive a management of it. swift.
many clergymen write in so diminutive a manner, with
such frequent blots and interlineations, that they are hardly
able to go on without perpetual hesitations, or extraordinary
expletives. swift.
i wish you health to go on with that noble work. berkley.
64. to go over. to revolt; to betake himself to another party.
in the change of religion, men of ordinary understandings
don’t so much consider the principles as the practice of those
to whom they go over. addison on italy.
power, which, according to the old maxim, was used to
follow, is now gone over to money. swift.
65. to go out. to go upon any expedition.
you need not have pricked me: there are other men fitter
to go out than i. shakespeare's henry iv.
66. to go out. to be extinguished.
think'st thou the fiery fever will go out,
with titles blown from adulation ? shakespeare's henry v.
spirit of wine burned ’till it go out of itsos, will bus so
more. bacon's natural history.
the care of a state, or an army, ought to be as costs.
as the chymist's fire, to make any great production; and if
it goes out for an hour, perhaps the whole operation fails. temp.
the morning, as mistaken, turns about 5
and all her early fires again go out. dryden's aurengzebe.
let the acquaintance be decently buried, and the flame ra-
ther go out than be smothered. collier of friendship.
my blood runs cold, my heart forgets to heave, •
and life itself goes out at thy displeasure. . addison's cato.
and at her felt approach and secret might, 3. -
art after art goes out, and all is night. pope's dunciad.
67. to go through. to perform throughly ; to execute.
finding pyrocles every way able to go through with {<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 936</div><p class="text">g o a
g o b
i
kind of life, he was as desirous for his sake as for his own to
enter into it. . . sidney.
if you can as well go through with the statute laws of that
land, i will think you have not lost all your time there. sponsor.
kings ought not to suffer their council to go through with
the resolution and direetion, as if it depended on them, but
take the matter back into their own hands. bacon,
he much feared the earl of antrim had not steadines, of
mind enough to go through with such an undertaking.
clarendon.
the amazing difficulty and greatness of his account will
rather terrify than inform him, and keep him from setting
heartily about such a task, as he despairs ever to go through
with it. south's sermons.
the powers in germany are borrowing money, in order
to go through their part of the expence. addison on the iwar.
68. j. go through. to suffer; to undergo.
i tell thee that it is absolutely necessary for the common
good that thou shouldst go through this operation. arbuthnot.
69. to go upon. to take as a principle.
this supposition i have gone upon through those ro
1/0/1.
7c. the senses of this word are very indistinet : its general in o-
tion is motion or progression. it commonly expresses passage
from a place, in opposition to come. this is often observable
even in figurative expressions. we say, the words that go be-
fore and that come after: to-day goes away and to-morrow comes.
go to. interj. come, come, take the right course. a scorn-
ful exhortation.
go to then, o thou far renowned son
of great apollo; shew thy famous might
in medicine. spensor.
go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow ;
let me be clear of thee. shakespeare's twelfth night.
my favour is not bought with words like these :
go to ; you’ll teach your tongue another tale. rowe.
go-by. m. s. delusion; artifice; circumvention; over reach.
except an apprentice is instructed how to adulterate and
varnish, and give you the go-ly upon occasion, his master may
be charged with neglect. collier on pride.
go-cart. m. s. [go and cart.] a machine in which children
are inclosed to teach them to walk, and which they push for-
ward without danger of falling.
young children, who are try’d in
go-carts, to keep their steps from sliding,
when members knit, and legs grow stronger,
make use of such machine no longer. prior.
goad. m. s. [...ao, saxon.] a pointed instrument with which
oxen are driven forward.
oft in his harden’d hand a goad he bears. pope.
to goad. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to prick or drive with the goad.
2. to incite ; to stimulate ; to instigate; to drive forward.
most dangerous
is that temptation, that doth goad us on
to fin in loving virtue. shakesp. a seasure for masore.
goaded with most sharp so 'sure f. s:
which lay nice manners by, i put you to
the use of your own virtues. shak. all's well that end, well.
of all that breathes the various progeny,
stung with delight, is goaded on by thee. dryden.
g9al. m. s. [gaule, french, a long pole set up to mark the
bounds of the race.]
1. the landmark set up to bound a race; the point marked out
to which racers run.
as at the olympian games, or pythian fields,
part curb their fiery steeds, or shun the goal
with rapid wheels. milton's parados. loft.
and the slope sun his upward beam
shoots against the dusky pole,
pacing toward the other goal. a silion.
2. the starting post.
hast thou beheld, when from the goal they start,
the youthful charioteers with heaving heart
rush to the race dryden's wirgil.
3. the final purpose; the end to which a design tends. o
- our poet has always the goal in his eye, which dire&amp;s him
in his race : some beautiful design, which he first establishes,
i. o ows: the means, which will naturally conduct
im to nis end. dryden.
each individual seeks a several goal; ryden
but heav'n's great view is one, and that the whole. pope.
so man, who here seems principal alone,
perhaps acts second to some sphere unknown;
touches some wheel, or verges to some goal;
'tis but a part we see, and not a whole. pope.
4. it is sometimes improperly written for gaol, or jail.
goa.r. m. s. [goror, welsh.] any edging sewed
strengthen it. 2 | y edging fewed upon o
goat, n.s. [3* saxon and scottish.] a ruminant animal
that seems * middle species between deer and sheep.
gall of goat, and slips of yew. shakesp. macbeth,
we cyclops care not for your coal-c -
nor other blest ones; we : "...s. jove,
you may draw naked boys riding and ph - chasman,
paper-mills upon goats, eagles, or dolphins ying with th:
the little bear that rock'd the mighty jove
the swan whose borrow'd shape conjo hi'i,
are grac'd with light; the nursing goat's repaid ve,
with heaven, and duty rais'd the pious mass
go a^t beard. n.f. [goat and beard; hard, co a croft,
goa'tch afer. m. s. an infect; a kind oft. plant,
goa't herd. m. s. [xaz and h;nb, saxon, a .
one whose employment is to tend goats.
is not thilk same gatherd proud,
that sits on yonder bank,
whose straying herd themself doth shrowd
among the bushes rank sponsor's p
they first gave the goatherd good conto o:
marquis and his servant chased the kid about the sho. #. the
go a^t marjora m. m. s. the same with goatso, jirin,
goats of 11.k. m. s. [goat and milk.] this is more rd,
two words. re properly
after the fever and such like accide
afies and goatsmilk may be necessary. 't sorn
go. n. s. s goat and milker.] a ao
called from sucking goats. o
goat's rue. n.s. [gale;a.] a plant. 4:17,
goat's rue has the reputation of being a o -
mick and sudorifick: the italians eat it nw fo
us it is of no esteem. 'i.
go atskin. m. s. [goat and skin.] ill-
then fill'd two goatskins, with her hands divine:
with water one, and one with sable wine. pools,
go ats-thorn. n.f. [goat and thorn.] an herb, |}.
gqat is h. adj. [from goat.] resembling a goat in any qua-
lity: as, rankness; lust. q
an admirable evasion of a whoremaster, man, to lay his
goatish disposition on the change of a star. shakesh, king lor
the last is notorious for its goatish smell, and tufts moon.
like the beard of that lecherous animal. more against atheism,
gob. m. s. igobe, french..] a small quantity. a low woj.
dost think i have so little wit as to part with such agal of
money ? l'estrange.
go'bbet. m. s. [gabe, french.j a mouthful; as much,
can be swallowed at once.
therewith she spew'd out of her filthy maw
a flood of poison, horrible and black,
full of great lumps of flesh and gcibet; raw, sosr,
by devilish policy art thou grown great,
and, like ambitious sylla, overgorg'd
with gallets of thy mother's bleeding heart. shos h.vi.
the cooks, slicing it into little gobbets, prick it on a prong
of iron, and hang it in a furnace. sandys’ travili,
the giant gorg'd with flesh, and wine, and blood,
lay stretch'd at length, and snoring in his den,
belching raw goblets from his maw, o'ercharg'd
with purple wine and cruddl’d gore confus'd, aift.
to go bbet. v. a. [from the noun.j. to swallow at a mouth-
ful. a low word.
down comes a kite powdering upon them, and got up
both together. l'eirao,
to go’bble. v. a. [gober, to swallow, old french. to
swallow hastily with tumult and noise, -
the sheep were so keen upon the acorns, that they gold
up now and then a piece of the coat along with them.
l'estrange,
*atham,
c. bailo,
der or tend. }
nts are diminished,
of last year's corn in barn great store; -
fat turkeys gobbling at the door. prior,
the time too precious now to waste,
and supper gobbled up in haste, -
again afresh to cards they run. - swift.
go's bie b. m. s. [from gobble.] one that devours in haste; a
gormand; a greedy cater. facts
go bet ween. m. s. [go and between.] one that trans. sl
business by running between two parties. commonly in 4
ill sense.
even as you came in to me, her * o:
arted from me: i say i shall be with her betwo
o: y shakoffrare's merry wives of o
goblet. m. s. [gobelet, french..] a bowl, or so that h9
a large draught. - -
‘my figur’d goblets for a dish of wood. o * ii,
we love not loaded boards, and goblets crow" p
but free from surfeits our repose is found. - *
crown high the goblets with a chearful "...p diff,
enjoy the present hour, adjourn the future thoug o re-
go'blis. m. s. [french ; gobeline, which o' r ederive
tained; writing it in three syllables. this word o whlin
from the go, a fiction in italy; so. or,
is guelph and gibelline, because the children o ... ut
were terrified by their nurses with the namo of i .. fac-
it appears that elf: is welsh, and much older than
- germans
tions. eiff uilhon, are ** of the night, and the jo
thha",
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 937</div><p class="text">g o d
o
likewise have long had spirits among them named golois,
from which gobelin might be derived.]
1. an evil spirit; a walking spirit; a frightful phantom.
angels and ministers of grace defend us!
be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damn'd,
bring with thee airs from heav'n, or blasts from hell? shak.
to whom the goblin, full of wrath, reply'd, -
art thou that traytor angel? milton's paradise loft.
always, whilst he is young, be sure to preserve his tender
mind from all impressions and notions of spirits and goblins,
or any fearful apprehensions in the dark. locke.
2. a fairy; an elf.
his son was elfinel, who overcame
the wicked gobbelines in bloody field;
but elfant was of most renowned fame,
who of all crystal did panthea build. spenser.
go, charge my goblins that they grind their joints
with dry convulsions; shorten up their firews
with aged cramps. shakespeare's tempest.
mean time the village rouzes up the fire,
while well attested, and as well believ'd,
heard solemn goes the goblin story round. thomson.
gqd. m. s. (50b, saxon, which likewise fignifies good. the
same word passes in both senses with only accidental variations
through all the teutonick dialects.]
1. the supreme being.
god is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit and in truth. john iv. 24.
god above
deal between thee and me. shakespeare's macbeth.
ali the churches of god are united into one by the unity of
discipline and government, by virtue whereof the same christ
ruleth in them all. pearson.
the supreme being, whom we call god, is necessary, self-
existent, eternal, immense, omnipotent, omniscient, and best
being ; and therefore also a being who is and ought to be
esteerned most sacred or holy. grew's cosmol.
2. a false god; an idol. -
he that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the lord only,
he shall be utterly destroyed. exod. xxii. 20.
as flies to wanton boys are we to the gods,
they kill us for their sport. shakespeare's king lear.
strong god of arms, whose iron sceptre sways
the freezing north, and hyperborean seas,
and scythian colds, and thracia's winter coast,
where stand thy steeds, and thou art honour'd most. dryd.
3. any person or thing deified or too much honoured.
whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly. phil. iii.
i am not licio,
but one that scorns to live in this disguise,
for such a one as leaves a gentleman,
and makes a god of such a cullion, shakespeare.
to god. v. as [from the noun..] to deify ; to exalt to divine
honours.
this last old man,
lov'd me above the measure of a father;
nay, godded me, indeed. shakespeare's coriolanus.
goodchild. n.s. [god and child.]. a term of spiritual rela-
tion; one for whom one became sponsor at baptism, and pro-
mised to see educated as a christian.
goddaughter. n.s. [god and daughter.]. a girl for whom
one became sponsor in baptism. a term of spiritual relation.
goddess. n.s.. [from god.]. a female divinity.
hear, nature, hear; dear goddess, hear a father! shakesp.
a woman i forswore; but i will prove,
thou being a goddess, i forswore not thec:
my vow was earthy, thou a heav'nly love. shakespeare.
i long have waited in the temple nigh,
built to the gracious goddess clemency;
but rev'rence thou the pow'r. dryden’s fables.
from his seat the goddess born arose,
and thus undaunted spoke. dryden's fables.
when the daughter of jupiter presented herself among a
crowd of goddess, she was distinguished by her graceful sta-
ture and superior beauty. addison.
modesty with-held the godds' train. pope's odyssey.
godd ess-lik e. adj. [goddess and like..] resembling a god-
dess.
then female voices from the shore i heard;
a maid amidst them goddess-like appear'd. pope's odyssey.
go'dfather. m. s. [god and father.] the sponsor at the font.
he had a son by her, and the king did him the honour as to
stand godfather to his child. bacon's henry vii:
confirmation, a profitable usage of the church, transcribed
from the apostles, consists in the child's undertaking in his
own name the baptismal vow ; and, that he may more solemnly
enter this obligation, bringing some godfather with him, not
now, as in baptism, as his procurator. hammond.
goodhead. n.s.. [from god.]
1. godship; deity; divinity ; divine nature.
of idols and of the true god.
vol. i.
it is used both
be content;
your low-laid son our godhead will uplift.
at the holy mount
of heav'n's high-seated top, th’ imperial throne
of godhead, fix’d for ever firm and sure,
shakes). cymbel,
the filial pow'r arriv'd. milton's paradis? loft,
so may thy godhead be confest,
so the returning year be blest. prior.
2. a deity in person; a god or goddess.
were your godhead to borrow of men, men would forsake
the gods. . shakespeare's timon.
adoring first the genius of the place,
- the nymphs and native godhead; yet unknown. dryd. an.
goodless. adj. [from god.]" without sense of duty to god ;
atheistical ; wicked; irreligious ; impious.
qf these two sorts of men, both godles, the one has utterly
no knowledge of god, and the other studies how to persuade
themselves that there is no such thing to be known. hooker.
- that godless crew
rebellious. - milton.
for faults not his, for guilt and crimes
qf godles men, and of rebellious times,
him his ungrateful country sent,
their best camillus, into banishment.
goplik f. adj. [ged and like..] divine; resembling
nity ; supremely excellent.
thus adam his illustrious guest besought,
and thus the godlike angel answer'd mild.
musing and much revolving in his breast,
how best the mighty work he might begin
of saviour to mankind, and which way first
publish his godlike office now mature. milton.
that prince shall be so wise and godlike, as, by established
laws of liberty, to secure protection and encouragement to the
honest industry of mankind. locke.
goose. h. s. [from god..] a little divinity; a diminutive
god.
dryden.
a divi-
milton.
thy puny godlings of inferior race,
whose humble statues are content with brass.
good liness. n.s.. [from godly.]
i. piety to god.
2. general observation of all the duties prescribed by religion.
virtue and godliness of life are required at the hands of the
minister of god. hooker.
gosply. adj. [from ged.]
1. pious towards god.
grant that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and
sober life. common prayer.
2. good; righteous; religious.
help. lord, for the godly man ceaseth, for the faithful fail
among the children of men. ps, xii. i.
the same church is really holy in this world, in relation
to all godly persons contained in it, by a real infused sanaity.
pearson,
goodly. adv. piously; righteously. by analogy it should be
godlily, but the repetition of the syllable is too harsh. -
the apostle st. paul teacheth, that every one which will
live godly in christ jesus must suffer persecution. hocker.
goodly head, n. s. [from godly..] goodness; righteousness.
an old word.
for this, and many more such outrage,
i crave your godlyhead to asswage
the rancorous rigour of his might. spensor.
go dmother. n.s. [god and mother.] a woman who has un-
dertaken sponsion in baptism. a term of spiritual relation.
goodship. m. s. [from god..] the rank or chara&amp;ler of a god;
deity; divinity.
discoursing largely on this theme,
o'er hills and dales their godships came. prior.
goodson. n.s. [god and son.] one for whom one has been
sponsor at the font.
what, did my father's godson seek your life 2
he whom my father named your edgar shakespeare.
go'dw ar d. adj. to godward is toward god. so we read,
hac arethusa tenus, for hacienus arethusa.
and such trust have we through christ to godward. 2 cor.
go' dw it. n.s. [30b, good, and plea, an animal.] a bird of
particular delicacy. -
nor ortelans nor godwits crown his board. cowley.
go'dyeld. u adv. [corrupted from god shield or protect.] a
go' dyi.e.l.d. } term of thanks. now not used.
herein i teach you,
how you should bid godyeld us for your pains,
and thank us for your trouble. shakespeare's macbeth.
goel. adj. [xolen, saxon.] yellow. an old word.
in march at the furthest, dry season or wet,
hop-roots so well chosen let skilful go set ;
the goeler and younger, the better i love;
dryd.juv.
well gutted and pared, the better they prove. tussor.
go'er. m. s. [from go.]
i. one that goes ; a runner.
goes ; 1o m i would
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 938</div><p class="text">g o l
g o m
-
i would they were in africk both together,
myself by with a needle, that i might prick . . . . .
the goer back. shakespeare's cymbeline.
such a man -
might be a copy to these younger times;
which, follow’d well, would now demonstrate them
but goers backward. shakesp. all's well that end: well.
nothing could hurt either of us so much as the intervening
officious impertinence of those goers between us, who in eng-
land pretend to intimacies with you, and in ireland to inti-
macies with me. pope to swift.
2. a walker; one that has a gait or manner of walking good
or bad.
the earl was so far from being a good dancer, that he was
no graceful goer. jwotton.
3. the foot. obsolete.
- a double mantle, cast
a'thwart his shoulders, his faire goers grac'st -
with fitted shoes. chapman.
to go"gcle. v. n. to look asquint. o
inflam’d all over with disgrace,
to be seen by her in such a place,
which made him hang his head, and scoul, -
and wink and goggle like an owl. - hudibras.
nor fighs, nor groans, nor goggling eyes did want. dryd.
go'cole-eyed. adj. [rcegle3en, saxon.] squint-eyed; not
looking strait.
they are deformed, unnatural, or lame; and very unseemly
to look upon, except to men that be goggle-eyed themselves.
ascham's schoolmaster.
go'ing.. n. s. [from go.]
1. the act of walking.
when nobles are their taylors tutors,
no hereticks burnt, but wenches suitors,
then comes the time, who lives to see’t,
that going shall be us'd with feet. shakoff. king lear.
2. pregnancy.
the time of death has a far greater latitude than that of our
birth; most women coming, according to their reckoning,
within the compass of a fortnight; that is, the twentieth part
of their going. grew’s cosinol, sacr.
3. departure. -
thy going is not lonely; with thee goes
thy husband; him to follow thou art bound. milton.
gol a. m. s. the same with cy matium.
in a cornice the gola, or cymatium of the corona, the
coping, the modillions or dentelli, make a noble show. spe.”.
gold. m. s. [30lb., saxon; golud, riches, welsh. it is
called gold in our english tongue, either of geel, as sca-
liger says, which is in dutch to shine; or of another dutch
word, which is gelten, and signifies in latin valere, in english
to be of price or value: hence cometh their ordinary word
gelt, for money. peacham on drawing.]
1. gold is the heaviest, the most dense, the most simple, the
most ductile, and most fixed of all bodies; not to be injured
either by air or fire, and seeming incorruptible. it is soluble
by means of sea-salt; but is injured by no other salt. gold is
frequently found native, and very rarely in a state of ore.
pure gold is so fixed, that boerhaave informs us of an ounce
of it set in the eye of a glass furnace for two months, with-
out losing a single grain. hill on fossils.
gold hath these natures: greatness of weight, closeness of
parts, fixation, pliantness or softness, immunity from rust,
and the colour or tincture of yellow. bacon's nat. history.
ah! buckingham, now do i ply the touch,
to try if thou be current gold indeed. shakesh. rich. iii.
we readily say this is gold, and that a filver goblet, only by
the different figures and colours represented to the eye by the
pencil. locke.
the gold fraught vessel, which mad tempests beat,
he sees now vainly make to his retreat. dryd. tyran. love.
2. money.
for me, the gold of france did not seduce,
although i did admit it as a motive
the sooner to effect what i intended. shakesp. henry v.
thou that so stoutly hast resisted me, -
give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold;
for i have bought it with an hundred blows. shakesp. h. vi.
3. it is used for anything pleasing or valuable. so among the
ancients xovan 29:03:tn; and animamque moresque aureos educit
in astra. orace.
the king's a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
a lad of life, an imp of fame. shakespeare's henry v.
good of pleasure. n: s [myagrum.] a plant.
go ld beater. n. s. [gold and beat..] one whose occupation
is to beat or foliate gold to gild other matter.
our goldbeaters, though, for their own profit sake, they are
wont to use the finest coined gold they can get, yet they scru-
p” not to employ coined gold; and that the mintonasters
*.*.*9 alloy with copper or filver, to make the coin more
stiff, and less ** to be wasted by attrition. boyle.
-
gold beater's skin. m. s. the intesti
which goldbeaters lay between the leav
they beat it, whereby the membran
made fit to apply to cuts or small fresh * 2nd
common practice. o, the
when your gillyflowers blow, if th #ing.
it with a o: each division, *:::: o: pod, open
burst it, and bind it about with an * flower has
- - - arrow sli y
skin, which moisten with your tongue, and o :::::::
num redum of
es of their metal
o is reduced thin
wounds, as is no
an ox,
while
to-
gether. martimer'; h
goold bou nd. adj. [gold and bound. hyland).
s #, air, cund.] encompo with gold,
thou other goldbound brow, is like the first,
go'lden. adj. [from gold.] first shałon, mo,
1. made of gold; consisting of gold.
o would to god that the inclusive verge
of golden metal, that must round my brow
were red-hot steel to sear me to the brain. 'subs r
nine royal knights in equal rank succeed th. r.iii.
each warrior mounted on a fiery fleed,
in golden armour glorious to behold;
the rivets of their arms were nail'd with gold
2. shining; bright ; splendid; resplendent. *"
so sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
to those fresh morning drops upon the rose;
nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
&gt;
djan,
through the transparent bosom of the dee -
'tis better to be lowly born *p. shahjari,
than wear a golden sorrow. shakespeare' r
heaven's golden winged herald late oil-vii
to a poor galilean virgin sent. crashaw
to her hard yoke you must hereafter bow, ow low-
howe'er she shines all golden to you now. dryden
and see the guardian angels of the good, -
reclining soft on many a golden cloud. rowe,
3. yellow ; of the colour of gold.
golden russeting hath a gold coloured coat under a rust
hair, and its flesh of a yellow colour. martimir.
4. excellent; valuable.
i have bought
golden opinions from all sort of people,
which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
not cast aside so soon. shakespeare's mathil,
that verse which they commonly call golden, has two sub-
stantives and two adjectives, with a verb betwixt them to
keep the peace. dryden.
thence arises that golden rule of dealing with others as we
would have others deal with us. hatti's logic.
5. happy; resembling the age of gold.
many young gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the
time carelesly, as they did in the golden world. shaissari,
gold en saxifrage. n.s.. [chrysplenium.] an herb.
go'ldenly. adv. [from golden.] delightfully; splendidly.
my brother jaques he keeps at school, and report speaks
goldenly of his profit. shakes). a you lit it.
goldfinch. m. s. [xolopinc, saxon.] a singing bid, so
named from his golden colour. this is called in staffordshire
a proud taylor. -
of finging birds they have linnets, golfincho, ruddock,
canary-birds, blackbirds, thrushes, and divers others. caro.
a goldfinch there i saw, with gaudy pride
of painted plumes, that hopp'd from side to side. po.
goldfin der. m. s. [gold and find.] one who findsgod. a
term ludicrously applied to those that empty jakes.
his empty paunch that he might fill,
he suck'd his vittels through a quill;
untouch'd it pass'd between his grinders, -
or’t had been happy for goldfinders, soft.
goold hammer. m. s. a kind of bird. #.
gol ding.. n.s. a sort of apple. - ;
go'ldney. m.s. a sort of fish, otherwise called githal f -
gold pleasure. m. s. an herb. *:
goldsize. n.s. a glue of a golden colour; glue use of
gilders. - -
the gum of ivy is good to put into you! goldiz, and so
colours. - podcham on draw"
golds mith. n.s. [3olo and rmit, saxon.]
1. one who manufactures gold. shaoffst
asspout.
neither chain nor goldsmith came too. . .
2. a banker; one who keeps money for others in his o: to
the goldsmith or scrivener, who take; all your o fol-
dispose of, when he has beforehand resolved to bre” wift,
lowing day, does surely deserve the gallows: lant
go'ldylocks. n.s. [ coma aurea, latin.] * 2n * or f.
goll. n. s. [corrupted, as skinner *"...i.w8,
whence pealban, to . manage.] hands; p
used in contempt, and obsolete, ong
they set ..., and mopsa put her . o:
them; and blind fortune, that saw no the colou sidney.
gave her the preheminence, heel bailis.
gome. n.s. the black grease of a caro" gojsph).
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 939</div><p class="text">g o o
g o o
*
gomphosis. m. s. a particular form of articulation.
gomphosis is the connexion of a tooth to its socket. jpism.
gondola. m. s. [gondale, french..] a boat much used in
venice; a small boat. -
he saw did swim
along the shore, as swift as glance of eye,
a little gondelay, bedecked trim -
with boughs and arbours woven cunningly. spensor.
in a gandala were seen together lorenzo and his amorous
jessica. - shakespeare.
as with gondolas and men, his
good excellence the duke of vehice -
sails out, and gives the gulph a ring. prior.
gospoli'er. n.s. [from gondola.] a boatman; one that rows
a gondola.
your fair daughter,
transported with no worse nor better guard,
but with a knave of hire, a gondolier,
to the gross clasps of a lascivious moor.
gone. part. preter. [from go. see to go.]
1. advanced ; forward in progress.
i have known sheep cured of the rot, when they have not
been far gone with it, only by being put into broomlands. mort.
the observator is much the brisker of the two, and, i
think, farther gone of late in lyes and impudence than his
presbyterian brother. swift.
2. ruined; undone.
he must know ’tis none of your daughter, nor my sister;
we are gone else. shakespeare's winter's tale.
3. past.
i'll tell the story of my life,
and the particular accidents gone by,
since i came to this isle.
4. lost; departed.
when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone,
they caught paul and silas. afts xvi. 19.
speech is confined to the living, and imparted to only those
shakesp. othello.
shakespeare's tempest.
that are in presence, and is transient and gone. holder.
5. dead; departed from life.
i mourn adonis dead and gone. oldham.
a dog, that has his nose held in the vapour, loses all signs
of life; but carried into the air, or thrown into a lake, reco-
vers, if not quite gone. addison on italy.
go"nfalon. n. s. [gonfanon, french ; gunfama, islandick,
go nfanon. : from gunn, a battle, and fani, a flag. mr. lye.]
an ensign; a standard.
ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanc'd,
standards and gonfalons, 'twixt van and rear,
stream in the air. - milton.
gonor rhoe’a. m. s. [yov(gp and few.] a morbid running of
venereal hurts.
rauty mummy or stone mummy grows on the tops of high
rocks: they powder and boil it in milk, and then give it to
{top gonorrhoeas. woodward on fossils.
good. adj. comp. better, superl. best. [30b, saxon ; goed,
dutch.]
1. having, either generally or for any particular end, such phy-
fical qualities as are expe&amp;ted or desired. not bad; not ill.
god saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very good. gen. i. 31.
. a universe of death ! which god by curse
created evil; for evil only good. milton.
resolv’d
from an ill cause to draw a good effect. dryden's fables.
notwithstanding this criticism the verses were good. speciat.
a man is no more to be praised upon this account, than
because he has a regular pulse and a good digestion. addison.
ah! ne'er so dire a thirst of glory boast,
nor in the critick let the man be lost
good nature and good sense must ever join ;
to err is human, to forgive, divine. pope.
2. proper; fit; convenient; right; not wrong. --- -
amongst a man's peers a man shall be sure of familiarity,
and therefore it is good a little to keep state; amongst a man's
inferiors one shall be sure of reverence, and therefore it is good
a little to be familiar. bacon.
if you think good, give martius leave. - - bacon.
it was a good time to comply with the importunity of the
gentlemen of sussex. clarendon.
3. conducive to happiness. ; : y q
it is not good that the man should be alone: , . gen. ii. 18.
we may as well pretend to obtain the good which we want
without god's assistance, as to know what is good for us with-
out his direetion. smalridge's sermons.
4. uncorrupted ; undamaged. -
he also bartered away plumbs, that would have rotted in a
week, for nuts, that would last good for his eating a whole
wear. - locke.
5. wholesome; salubrious.
a man first builds a country seat, -
then finds the walls not good to cat. prior.
6. medicinal; salutary.
9. useful; valuable.
11. legal ; valid ; rightly claimed or held.
the water of nilus is sweeter than other waters in tasie,
*nd it is excellent good for the stone and hypochondriacome!
lancholy. - bacon's natural history.
7. pleasant to the taste. -
eat thou honey, because it is god; and the honeycomb,
which is sweet. - - prov. xxiv. 13.
qf herbs and plants some are good to cat raw ; as lettuce,
endive, and purslane. bacon's natural history.
8. complete; full.
the protestant subjects of the abbey make up a good third
of its people. addison an italy.
all quality, that is good for any thing, is originally founded
upon merit. collier on envy.
we discipline betimes those other creatures we would make
useful and good for somewhat. 1.6-ke.
io. sound; not false; not fallacious,
he is resolved now to shew how flight the propositions were
which luther let go for good. atterbury.
according to military custom the place was good, and the
lieutenant of the colonel's company might well pretend to the
next vacant captainship in the same regiment. j%tton.
12. confirmed; attested; valid.
ha! am i sure she's wrong’d perhaps 'tis malice"
slave, make it clear, make good your accusation. sinith.
13. with as preceding. it has a kind of negative or inverted
sense; as good as, no better than.
therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as
dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude. heb. xi.
14. with as preceding. no worse.
he sharply reproved them as men of no courage, which,
being many times as good as in possession of the victorv, had
most cowardly turned their backs upon their enemies. knolls.
the master will be as good as his word, for his own busi-
ness. l’estrange.
15. well qualified; not deficient.
if they had held their royalties by that title, either there
must have been but one sovereign over them all, or else every
father of a family had been as good a prince, and had as good
a claim to royalty as these. - - locke.
16. skilful; ready; dexterous. -
flatter him it may, i confess; as those are generally good
at flattering who are good for nothing else. . south.
i make my way where e'er i see my foe; -
but you, my lord, are good at a retreat, dryden,
17. happy; prosperous.
behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity. - ps. cxxxiii. 1.
many good morrows to my noble lord -
–good morrow, catesby, you are early stirring. shaft.
good e'en, neighbours; -
good een to you all, good e'en to you all. shafs. corizon.
at my window bid good morrow. milton.
good motrow, portius' let us once embrace. addison.
18. honourable.
they cast to get themselves a name,
regardless whether good or evil fame. asilion.
silence, the knave's repute, the whore's good name,
the only honour of the wishing dame. pope.
19. cheerful; gay. joined with any words expressing temper
of mind.
they may be of good comfort, and ever go cheerfully about
their own affairs. 2 a sac. xi. 26.
quietness improves into cheerfulness, enough to make me
just so good humoured as to wish that world well. pope.
20. considerable; not small though not very great.
a good while ago god made choice that the gentiles by
my mouth should hear the word. acts xv. 7.
the plant, having a great stalk and top, doth prey upon
the grass a good way about, by drawing the juice of the earth
from it. - bacon's natural history.
mirtle and pomegranate, if they be planted, though a good
space one from the other, will mect. peacham on drawing.
the king had provided a good fleet, and a body of three
thousand foot to be embarked. clarendor.
we may suppose a great many degrees of littleness and
lightness in these earthy particles, so as many of them might
float in the air a good while, like exhalations before they fell
down. burmet's theory.
they held a good share of civil and military employments
during the whole time of the usurpation. swift.
21. elegant ; decent ; delicate: with breeding.
if the critick has published nothing but rules and observa-
tions in criticism, i then consider whether there be a pro-
priety and elegance in his thoughts and words, clearness and
delicacy in his remarks, wit and good breeding in his raillery.
- addison's guardian.
mankind have been forced to invent a kind of artificial
humanity, which is what we express by the word good breed-
• ??". . , - addison's spectator.
those among them, who return into their several countries,
as 3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 940</div><p class="text">g o o
g o o
are sure to be followed and imitated as the greatest patterns of
wit and good breeding. swift.
22. real; serious; not feigned. - -
love not in good earnest, nor no farther in sport neither,
than with safety of a pure blush thou may'st in honour come
off again. shakespeare's as you like it.
23. rich ; of credit; able to fulfil engagements. -
antonio is a good man: my meaning, in saying that he is a
good man, is to have you understand me that he is sufficient.
shakespeare's merchant of venice.
24. having moral qualities, such as are wished; virtuous; pious;
religious; applied both to persons and actions. not bad; not
evil.
for a good man some would even dare to die.
the woman hath wrought a good work upon me. 44att.
all man's works on me,
good or not good, ingraft my merit, these -
shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay. milton.
what reward
awaits the good, the rest what punishment. milton.
the only son of light
in a dark age, against example good, -
against allurement. milton.
such follow him, as shall be registred
part good, part bad, of bad the larger scroll. milton.
grant the bad what happiness they would,
one they must want, which is to pass for good. pope.
why drew marseilles' good bishop purer breath,
when nature sicken'd, and each gale was death pope.
such was roscommon, not more learn'd than good,
with manners gen’rous as his noble blood. pope.
no farther intercourse with heav'n had he,
but left good works to men of low degree. harte.
25- kind ; soft ; benevolent. -
matters being so turned in her, that where at first liking
her manners did breed good will, now good will became the
chief cause of liking her manners. sidney.
glory to god in the highest, and on earth peace and good
will towards men. luke ii. 14.
without good nature man is but a better kind of vermin.
bacon.
- here we are lov’d, and there we love;
good nature now and pasion strive
which of the two should be above,
and laws unto the other give. suckling.
'tis no wonder if that which affords so little glory to god,
hath no more good will for men. decay of piety.
when you shall see him, sir, to die for pity,
*twere such a thing, 'twould so deceive the world,
* 'twould make the people think you were good natur'd. denh.
to teach him betimes to love and be good natured to others,
is to lay early the true foundation of an honest man. locke.
good sente and good nature are never separated, though the
ignorant world has thought otherwise. dryden.
afiability, mildness, tenderness, and a word which i would
fain bring back to its original signification of virtue, i mean
good nature, are of daily use. dryden.
this doctrine of god's good will towards men, this com-
mand of mens proportionable good will to one another, is not
this the very body and substance, this the very spirit and life
of our saviour's whole institution ? spratt.
it was his greatest pleasure to spread his healing wings over
every place, and to make every one sensible of his good will to
mankind. calamy's sermons.
how could you chide the young good natur'd prince,
and drive him from you with so stern an air. addis. cato.
26. favourable; loving.
but the men were very good unto us, and we were not
hurt. i sa. xxv. 15.
truly god is good to israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart. ps. lxxiii. 1.
you have good remembrance of us always, defiring greatly
to see us, as we also to see you. i thess. iii. 6.
this idea must necessarily be adequate, being referred to
nothing else but itself, nor made by any other original but the
good liking and will of him that first made this combination.
- locke.
27. companionable; sociable; merry. often used ironically.
. though he did not draw the good fellows to him by drink-
ing, yet he eat well. clarendan.
not being permitted to drink without eating, will prevent
the custom of having the cup often at his nose, a dangerous
beginning and preparation to good fellowship. locke.
- it was well known, that sir roger had been a good fellow,
in his youth. arbuthnot.
28. it is sometimes used as an epithet of slight contempt, im-
plying a kind of negative virtue or bare freedom from ill.
y good man, as far from jealousy as i am from giving him
cause. shakespeare's merry wives of windsor.
she had left the good man at home, and brought away her
gallant. ofddison'
29. in a ludicrous sense. son's spectator.
rom. v. 7.
as for all other good women that
how handsome it is to louse themse
that have been but a while in irelan
30. hearty ; earnest; not dubious.
he, that saw the time fit for the de
love to do
lves in the
d can well
but littlew
ork
sunshine, i. -
witness, §ts,
livery he inten
unto us to follow him, which we both ded, called
willing by good will, obeyed. two or
the good will of the nation to the sidor.
present war has been
sinc
ccesses that have atte e
nded
t.
rength supplies, trol.
nies. dryden', falli,
but too much experienced by the su
1t.
good will, she said, my want of st
and diligence shall give what age de
31. in good time. not too fast.
in good time, replies another, you have heard th
against a vacuum in the schools. collier on #:
32. in good sooth. . really; seriously. man raft.
what, must i hold a candle to my shames?
d hey in#." good sooth, are too too fight shais,
. good [7% make.] to keep i to maintain. quaro,
33. to is. p; to maintain; not to swt up;
there died upon the place all the chieftains all mai;
the fight without any ground given. no, he o
he forced them to retire in spite of their o:
were placed there to make good their retreat. §.
since we claim a proper interest above others in .." o,
eminent rights of the houshold of faith, then to o
that claim, we are obliged above others to cons. o
proper manners and virtues that belong to this housh, t
m dispute
- - ld. spratt
he without fear a dangerous war pursues; sprat,
as honour made him first the danger chuse,
so still he makes it good on virtue's score. dryden
34. good [to make.] to confirm; to establish,
- i farther will maintain -
upon his bad life to make all this good. shahs. rio. ii
to make good this explication of the article, it a to:
cessary to prove that the church, which our saviour founded
and the apostles gathered, was to receive a confiant and
petual accession. o:
these propositions i shall endeavour to make god. smalrig.
35. good [to make.] to perform.
while she so far extends her grace,
she makes but good the promise of her face, isolhr,
36. good [to make.] to supply.
every distinct being has somewhat peculiar to itself, to mak
good in one circumstance what it wants in another. l'erano.
good. m. s. -
1. that which physically contributes to happiness; benefit; ad.
vantage; the contrary to evil or misery.
i fear the emperor means no good to us. shak, tit. andr,
let me play the lion too: i will roar, that i will do any
man's heart good to hear me. shak. midsum. mohr’s dream,
he wav'd indifferently 'twixt them, doing neither good nor
harm. shakhtar's coriolanus,
love with fear the only god,
merciful over all his works, with good
still overcoming evil. milion,
god is also in sleep, and dreams advise,
which he hath sent propitious, some great good
presaging. milton,
nature in man's heart her laws doth pen, -
prescribing truth to wit, and good to will. davies,
the lessening or escaping of evil is to be reckoned underth;
notion of good: the lessening or loss of good is to be roo
under the notion of evil. wii.
this caution will have also this good in it, that it will out
them upon considering, and teach them the necessity of exa-
mining more than they do. lok
good is what is apt to cause or increase pleasure, or diminish
pain in us; or else to procure or preserve us the possession of
any other good, or absence of any evil. lott,
refuse to leave thy destin’d charge too soon, -
and for the church's good defer thy own. prior.
works may have more wit than does them good, pot
as bodies perish through excess of blood. . . . les
a thirst after truth, and a desire of good, are p",
which still act with a great and universal force. rogeri,
2. prosperity; advancement.
if he had employ'd
those excellent gifts of fortune and of nature s, catilit
unto the good, not ruin of the state. b.jos. cato.
. earnest; not jest. . . . . -
3 the good woman never died after this, 'till the #:
for good and all. - - so
4. moral qualities, such as are desirable ; virtue; rig"
piety; the contrary to wickedness.
depart from evil, and do good. so
not only carnal good from evil does not justi "ho
good, no not a purposed good, can make evil 8o." j
o sons, like one of us is man become:
to know both good and evil, fince his taste
of that defended fruit, but let him boast
his knowledge of good lost, and evil go happies
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 941</div><p class="text">g o o
g o o
*
*
o
:
o
o
happier had it suffic'd him to have known -
good by itself, and evil not at all. milton.
empty of all good, wherein consists
woman's domestick honour, and chief praise. milton.
by good, i question not but good, morally so called, bonum
honosium ought, chiefly at least, to be understood; and that
the good of profit or pleasure the bonum utile, or jucundum,
hardly come into any account here. o south.
nor holds this earth a more deserving knight
for virtue, valour, and for noble blood,
truth, honour, all that is compriz'd in good. dryden.
5. good placed after had, with as, seems a substantive; but the
expression is, i think, vitious; and good is rather an adjective
elliptically used, or it may be confidered as adverbial. see
good, adv.
the pilot must intend some port before he steers his course,
or he had as good leave his vessel to the direction of the winds,
and the government of the waves. south.
without good nature and gratitude, men had as good live in
a wilderness as in a society. l’estrange.
good. adv.
1. well; not ill; not amiss.
2. as good. no worse.
was i to have never parted from thy side,
as good have grown there still a lifeless rib. o. milton,
says the cuckow to the hawk, had you not as good have
been eating worms now as pigeons : l’estrange.
good. interjection. well! right ! it is sometimes used iro-
nically.
good-conditioned. adj. without ill qualities or symptoms.
used both of things and persons, but not elegantly.
no surgeon dilates an abscess of any kind by injections,
when the pus is good-conditioned. sharp's surgery.
good-now. interjection. - -
1. in good time; a la bonne heure. a gentle exclamation of in-
treaty. it is now a low word.
good-now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
why this same watch shakesp. hamlet.
2. a soft exclamation of wonder. - -
good-now, good-now, how your devotions jump with mine !
dryden's spanish fryar.
goo'oliness. n. s. [from goodly..] beauty; grace; elegance.
she sung this song with a voice no less beautiful to his ears,
than her goodliness was full of harmony to his eyes. sidney.
the stateliness of houses, the goodliness of trees, when we
behold them, delighteth the eye. hooker.
goo’dly. adj. [from good.] - - -
1. beautiful; graceful , fine; splendid. now little in use.
a prince of a goodly aspect, and the more goodly by a grave
majesty, where with his mind did deck his outward graces. sidn.
a goody city is this antium. shakesp. coriolanus.
- patience and sorrow strove
which should express her goodliss' ... you have seen
- sunshine and rain at once. her smiles and tears
were like a wetter may. shakesp. king lear.
. here from gracious england have 1 offer
of goody thousands. shakesp. macbeth.
rebekah took godly raiment of her eldest son esau, and
put thcm upon jacob. gen. xxvii. 15.
there was not among the children of israel a goadier per-
son than he. i sam. ix. 2.
both yonger then they were ; of stature more;
and all their formes, much goodlier then before. chapman.
he had not made them any recompence for their goodly
houses and olive gardens, destroyed in the former wars. knolles.
the goodlies; man of men since born
his sons, the fairest of her daughters eve. …
of the fourth edward was his noble song;
fierce, goody, valiant, beautiful and young. waller.
not long fince walking in the field, - -- ,
my nurse and i, we there beheld. -
a goodly fruit, which, tempting me,
i would have pluck'd.
how full of ornament is all i view
in all is parts and seems as beautiful as new: - -
o goodly order'd work : q power divine!
of thee i am, and what i am is thine !
his eldest born, a goodly youth to view,
excell'd the rest in shape o outward. shew; 'd
fair, tall, his limbs with due proportion join'd, `
i. of a heavy, dull, degen'rate mind. dryden's fables.
2. bulky; swelling; affectedly turgid, . .
round as a globe, and liquor'd every chink,
goody and great he sails behind his link.
; desireable ; gay. -- - -
3- "... was a hole kingdom, and but lately inured to
the mild and goodly government of the confessor. . . . sponsor.
..we have many goodly days to see. shakesp. rich. iii.
goodly. adv. excellently. obsolete. -
there alma, like a virgin queen most bright,
doth flourish in all beauty excellent; -
and to her guests doth bounteous banquet dight,
attempered goody well for health and for delight. spensor.
vol. i.
milton.
jwaller.
dryden.
dryden,
2. a rustick term of compliment; gaffer.
gornoon. * / [from good}.] grace; goodness, ob-
olete,
but mote thy goodlyhood forgive it me,
to meet which of the gods i shall thee name.
goo'oman. m. s. [good and man.]
1. a slight appellation of civili'y: generally ironical.
how now, what's the matter? part.
-with you, goodman boy, if you please: come, i’l flesh ve.
shakesp. king lear.
spenser.
say, hear you, goodman delves. shakesp. hamlet.
but see the sun-beams bright to labour warn,
and gild the thatch of goodman hodge's barn.
old goodman dobson of the green,
remembers he the trees has seen. swift.
goodness. n.s. [from good.) desirable qualities either moral
or physical ; kindness; favour.
if for any thing he loved greatness, it was because therein
he might exercise his goodnes, sidney.
- there is in all things an appetite or desire, whereby ti.ey
incline to something which they may be; all which perfections
are contained under the general name of goodness. phooker.
all goodnes;
is poison to thy stomach.
—yes, that goodnes;
9f gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
into your own hands, cardinal, by extortion:
the goodness of your intercepted packets -
you writ to the pope against the king; your goodness,
since you provoke me, shall be most notorious. sh, h. viii,
there's no goodness in thy face. shak. ant. and cleopatra.
there is a general, or natural goodnes; in creatures, and a
more special or moral goodness. perkins.
the goodness of every thing is measured by its end and use,
and that's the best thing which serves the best end and pur-
pose. tillotson.
all made very particular relations of the strength of the
scots army, the excellent discipline that was observed in it,
and the goodness of the men. clarendon.
no body can say that tobacco of the same goodness is risen
in respect of itself: one pound of the same goodness will never
exchange for a pound and a quarter of the same goodness. locke.
goods. n. s. [from good.]
1. moveables in a house. -
that giv's to such a guest
as my poore selfe, of all thy goods the best.
2. personal or moveable estate.
that a writ be su'd against you,
to forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
castles, and whatsoever. shakespeare's henry viii.
this hinders nothing the proceedings of the civil courts,
which respect the temporal punishment upon body and good.
lesley,
3. wares; freight; merchandise.
her majesty, when the goods of our english merchants were
attached by the duke of alva, arrested likewise the goods of the
low dutch here in england. raleigh's essays.
sallee, that scorn’d all pow'r and laws of men, -
goods with their owners hurrying to their den. waller.
goo'dy. m. s. [corrupted from good wife.] a low term of civi-
lity used to mean persons. c -
soft, goody sheep, then said the fox, not so i
unto the king so rash you may not go. hubberd's tale,
swarm'd on a rotten stick the bees i spy'd,
which erst i saw when goody dobson dy’d. gay's pastorals,
plain goody would no longer down; - - - -
'twas madam in her grogram gown. swift.
goo dyship. m. s. [from goody..] the quality of goody. lu-
dicrous.
… . . . the more shame for her goodyship, -
. to give so near a friend the slip. hudibras.
goose, n.s. plural geese. [xor, saxon; goes, dutch; gawe,
erse, sing. gewey, plural.]
1. a large waterfowl proverbially noted, i know not why, for
- foolishness. * -
- thou cream-faced lown,
where got'st thou that goose look? shakesp. macbeth.
since i pluckt geese, play d truant; and whipt top, i knew
not what 'twas to be beaten till lately. shakespeare.
birds most easy to be drawn are waterfowl; as the goose and
swan. ; , … 3 w - peacham on drawing.
* - nor watchful dogs, nor the more wakeful gees,
disturb with nightly noise the sacred peace. dryd. fables,
2. a taylor's smoothing iron. . . - -
come in, taylor; here you may roast your goose. shakesp.
gooseberry. in. s.sgoose and berry, because eaten with young
geese as sauce.] . a berry and tree. the species are, i. the
- common gooseberry, 2. the large manured gooseberry.
3. the red, hairy gooseberry. 4. the large white dutch
gooseberry. , 5. the large amber gooseberry; 6. the large
agreen gooseberry. 7. the o '. †. ...
- leav seberry. 9. the striped-leaved gooseberry.
yellow-leaved gooseberry. 9 § miller.
io n august
gay's past.
- - -
chapman.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 942</div><p class="text">g o r
august has upon his arm a basket of all manner of ripe
fruits; as pears, plums, apples, gooseberries. peacham.
upon a gooseherry bush a snail i found;
for always snails near sweetest fruit abound. - gay.
goosecap. m. s...[from goos, and cap;]. a filly person.
goosefoot. n.s. schenopodium.] wild orach.
goose grass. m. s. clivers ; an herb.
goosgrass, or wild tansy, is a weed that strong clays are
very subject to. mortimer.
go'rbelly. m. s. [from zon, dung, and belly, according to
skinner and junius. it may perhaps come from gor, welsh,
beyond, too much ; or, as seems to me more likely, may be
contracted from gormand, or gorman's belly, the belly of a
glutton.] a big paunch ; a swelling belly. a term of re-
proach for a fat man. - - -
go rbellied. adj. [from gorbelly..] fat; bigbellied; having
welling paunches.
*::: o gorbellied knaves, are you undone no, ye fat
chuffs, i would your store were here. * shakesp. henry iv.
gord. m. s. an instrument of gaming, as appears from beau-
mont and fletcher. . . . warburton.
thy dry bones can reach at nothing now, but gords and
ninepins. * a beaumont and fletcher.
let vultures gripe thy guts; for gord, and fulham holds. sha.
gore., n.s. [39ne, saxon ; ger, welsh, sanious matter.]
1. blood effused from the body.
a griefly wound,
from which forth gush'd a stream of gore blood thick,
that all her goodly garment stain’d around,
and into a deep sanguine dy'd the grassy ground. spensor.
another's crimes the youth unhappy bore,
glutting his father's eyes with guiltless gore. dryden's aen.
2. blood clotted or congealed. : ,
the bloody faa o
will be aveng'd : though here thou see him die,
rolling in dust and gore. milton's paradis. loft.
his horrid beard and knotted tresses stood
stiff with his gore, and all his wounds ran blood. denham.
to gor.e. v. a. saebenlan, saxon.]
1. to stab ; to pierce.
oh, let no noble eye profane a tear
for me, if i be gor'd with mowbray's spear. shakesp. r. ii.
no weaker lion's by a stronger slain;
nor from his larger tusks the forest boar
commission takes his brother swine to gore. tate's juv.
for arms his men long pikes and jav'lins bore,
dryd.
miller.
and poles with pointed steel their foes in battle gore.
2. to pierce with a horn.
some toss'd, some gor'd, some trampling down he kill’d.
dryden.
he idly butting, feigns
his rival gor'd in every knotty trunk.
gorge. m. s. [ gorge, french.j
i. the throat; the swallow.
there were birds also made so finely, that they did not only
deceive the fight with their figures, but the hearing with their
songs, which the watry instruments did make their gorge de-
liver. * : sidney.
and now how abhorred in my imagination it is my gorge
rises at it. shakoffeare's hamlet.
her delicate tenderness will find itself abused, begin to
heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the moor. shakesp. othello.
2. that which is gorged or swallowed. not in use.
and all the way, most like a brutish beast,
thomson's spring.
**
-
he spewed up his gorge, that all did him detest. spensor.
to gorge. v. n. [gorger, french.]
1. to fill up to the throat; to glut; to satiate.
being with his presence glutted, gorg'd, and full. shakesp.
he that makes his generation messes,
to gorge his appetite. shakespeare's king lear.
gorge with my blood thy barbarous appetite. dryden.
i desire that they will not gorge the lion either with non-
sense or obscenity. addison.
nor would his slaughter'd army now have lain
9n africk's sands, disfigur'd with their wounds,
to gorge the wolves and vultures of numidia. addis cato.
the giant, gorg'd with flesh, and wine, and blood,
lay stretcht at length, and snoring in his den. addison.
2. to swallow : as, the fish has gorged the hook.
go'rged. adj. [from gorge.] haying a gorge or throat.
look up a height, the shrill £org’d lark so far
cannot be seen or heard. shakespeare.
3o'rgeous. adj. [gorgias, old french. skinner.] fine;
splendid; glittering in various colours; showy magnificent.
o, that deceit should dwell
in such a gorgeous palace shoff. romeo and juliet.
as full of spirit as the month of may,
and gorgeous as the sun at midsummer. shakesp. hen. iv.
he had them look upon themselve and upon their enemies
themselves dreadful, their enemies gorgeous and brave,
the gorgeous east, with rich it hand,
pours on her kings barbaric pearl and gold. milton.
with gorgeous wings, the marks of soy
9__ -
the two contending prince, j their o*gn sway,
gorgeously, adv. from &amp;***u.] splenidly o: fig.
&gt; d
cently; finely. gnifi.
the duke, one solemn day, gorza, lad i -
spread with diamonds, lost o: †: ad in a suit all over
o - ood value jw,
gorgeousness. n.s.. [from £97 geous, • *tton,
ficence; show. $our.] splendor } magni.
gorget. n.s.. [from gorge.] the iece
fends the throat. p” of armour to: de.
he with a palsy fumbling on his gorget,
shakes in and out the rive. "j. . troi
he did oftentimes spend the night . 3.*ndcrofth
ing, his headpiece, gorget, and gauntlets lying o
see how his gorget peers above his gown, kuli,
to tell the people in what danger he was, ben. 3.)
about his neck a threefold gorget, johnso,
as rough as trebled leathern target. hudl
googon; n.s. sy-ey....] a monie. with shaky i.
which the fight turned beholders to stone; anything ..
horrid. § ugly of
gorgons and hydras, and chymera's dire. milton
why did'st thou not encounter man for man
and try the virtue of that gorgon face y
to stare me into stature. drydm
go'rmand. n: s [gourmand, f rench.] a greedy &amp; ; :
ravenous luxurious feeder. 3.
to g9'rmandize. v. n. [from &amp;”and.] to eat prolo,
to feed ravenously. socculy;
sormandrzer. h. s. [from the *..]. a voracious eiter.
gorse. n.f. [xony, saxon.) furz; a thick prickly shrub that
bears yellow flowers in winter.
go ry. adj. [from gore.]
1. covered with congealed blood.
when two boars with rankling malicemet,
their gory fides the fresh wounds fiercely fret. spensor,
why do'st thou shake thy gory locks at me?
thou can’s not say i did it. shaoff, middh,
2. bloody murtherous; fatal. not in use.
the obligation of our blood forbids
agory emulation'twixt us twain. shot, toil and crs.
go's hawk. n.s. [xor, goose, and paroc, a hawk.] a ho
of a large kind.
such dread his awful visage on them cast;
so seem poor doves at goshawks fight aghast.
gosling. m. s. [from goose. j
* a young goose; a goose not yet full grown.
why do you go nodding and waggling so like a fool, as if
you were hipshot says the goose to her gossing, l'erange,
nature hath instructed even a brood of gossings to stick toge-
ther, while the kite is hovering over their heads. swift,
2. a katkin on nut-trees and pines.
gospel. m. s. szober rps, or god's or goodtidings; ivoy-
2.exiov; josees, stealsilach, happy tidings, eise.] -
i. god's word; the holy book of the christian revelation,
thus may the gospel to the rising sun *
be spread, and flourish where it fift begun. wallor,
all the decrees whereof scripture treatesh are conditions,
receiving christ as the gospel offers him, as lord and saviour ;
the former, as well as the latter, being the condition of
scripture-election, and the rejecting, or not receiving him
thus, the condition of the scripture-reprobation, hammond,
how is a good christian animated and cheered by a soft
belief of the promises of the gospel/ bently.
2. divinity; theology. - -
7o gospel. v. n. [from the noun.] to fill with sentiments
2f religion. this word in shakoffeare, in whom lone shoe
found it, is used, though so venerable in itself, with some k.
gree of irony: i suppose from the gospellers, who had long
been held in contempt.
are you so gospell’d - -
to pray for this good man, and for his issue, ? whakes
whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave: o,
gospeller. n.s.. [from gospel.] a name of the follows: s
wicklis, who first attempted a reformation from .
them by the papists in reproach, from their professing to follow
and preach only the gospel. -
these gospellers have had their golden days, '; 3. shore
have troden down our holy roman faith, rio o : d
go'ssa mer. m. s [gossipium, low latin.]. the :
plants; the long while cobwebs which fly in the ..";
funny weather, especially about the time of autumn.
a lover may bestride ...”
that idle; in the wanton summer air, id,
and yet not fall, so light is *: shakoff, rom, andjuld
four nimble gnats the horses were, 3. ld.
their harnesses . goffamere. drayton's month
fairfix,
the filmy gossamer now flits no more, d. virgil
nor halcyonsis; on the short sunny shore. o:
go'ssip. m. s. [from gob and ryb, relation, affinity,
1. one who answers for the child in bapism. go<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 943</div><p class="text">g o v
g o v
go to a gossip's feast and gaude with me,
after so long grief such nativity. shakespeare.
at the christening of george duke of clarence, who was
born in the castle of dublin, he made both the earl of kil-
dare and the earl of ormond his gosps, davies on ireland.
2. a tippling companion. - -
and sometimes lurk i in a gossip's bowl,
in very likeness of a roasted crib, -
and when she drinks against her lips i bob. shakespeare.
3. one who runs about tattling like women at a lying-in.
to do the office of a neighbour,
and be a gossip at his labour.
- 'tis sung in ev'ry street,
the common chat of gosps when they meet.
to go'ssip. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to chat ; to prate; to be merry.
go to a goffip's feast and gaude with me.
-with all my heart, i’ll gossip at this feast.
his mother was a votress of my order,
and, in the spiced indian air by night,
full often hath she gossipt by my side. shakespeare.
the market and exchange must be left to their own ways of
talking ; and gossipings not be robbed of their ancient pri-
vilege. locke.
he gives himself up to an idle gossiping conversation. law.
2. to be a pot-companion.
nor met with fortune, other than at feasts,
full warm of blood, of mirth of gossiping. shak. k. john.
go'ssipred. m. s. [gossipry, from goffip.j
gospred or compaternity, by the canon law, is a spiritual
affinity; and the juror, that was gossip to either of the par-
ties, might, in former times, have been challenged as not in-
different. davies on ireland.
go's tin g. m. s. [rubia.] an herb. ainsworth.
got. pret. [from the verb get.] -
titus lartius writes, they fought together; but aufidius
got off. shakespeare’s coriolanus.
if you have strength achilles' arms to bear,
though foul thersites got thee, thou shalt be -
lov’d and esteem’d. dryden's juvenal.
these regions and this realm my wars have got;
this mournful empire is the loser's lot. dryd. innocence.
when they began to reason about the means how the sea
got thither, and away back again, there they were presently in
the dark. j/oodward’s natural history.
got. part. pass of get.
- solyman commended them for their valour in their evil
haps, in a plot so well by them laid, more than he did the
victory of others got by good fortune, not grounded upon any
good reason. knolles's history.
a gentle persuasion in reasoning, when the first point of
submission to your will is got, will most times do. locke.
if he behaves himself so when he depends on us for his daily
bread, can any man say what he will do when he is got above
the world arbuthnot's john bull.
thou wert from aetna's burning entrails torn,
got by fierce whirlwinds, and in thunder born.
gotte n. part. pass of get.
wisdom cannot be gotten for gold. job xxviii. 15.
few of them, when they are gotten into an office, apply
hudibras.
dryden.
shakespeare.
pope.
their thoughts to the execution of it. temple.
goup. n.s. woad : a plant. dic7.
gove. n.s. a mow. tuffer.
to gove. v. n.
an old word.
load safe, carry home, follow time being fair,
gove just irrthe barn, it is out of despair. - tusser.
t, go’vern. v. a. [gouverner, french ; guberno, latin.]
1. to rule as a chief magistrate.
this inconvenience is more hard to be redressed in the go-
vernor than the governed; as a malady in a vital part is more
incurable than in an external. - spenser on ireland.
slaves to our passions we become, and then
it grows impossible to govern men.
2. to regulate; to influence; to direet. -
i am at present against war, though it puts the power into
my hands, and though such turbulent and naughty spirits as
you are, govern all things in times of peace. davenant.
the chief point, which he is to carry always in his eye,
to mow ; to put in a gove, goff, or mow.
*-
* * * * *
and by which he is to govern all his counsels, designs, and
actions.
3. to manage; to restrain.
go after her, she's desperate; govern her. shak. k. lear.
4. [in grammar.] to have force with regard to syntax: 'as, amo
governs the accusative case.
listen, children, unto me,
and let this your lesson be,
in our language evermore
words that govern go before. manger's french gram.
5. to pilot; to regulate the motions of a ship. -
7, go've r.n. v. n. to keep superiority; to behave with
haughtiness,
atterbury.
waller. ,
by that rule,
your wicked atoms may be working now
, to give bad counsel, that you still may govern. d yden,
go yernable, adj. [from govern..] submissive to authoity;
subject to rule; obedient; manageable.
the flexibleness of the former part of a man's age, not yet
grown up to be headstrong, makes it more governable and
safe. locke.
gover nance. n.s.. [from govern.]
1. government; rule; management.
jonathan took the governance upon him at that time, and
rose up instead of his brother judas. 1 mac. ix. 31.
2. control, as that of a guardian.
me he knew not, neither his own ill,
till through wise handling, and fair governance,
i him recured to a better will. spenser.
what! shall king henry be a pupil still, -
under the surly gloster's governance?. shakoff. hen. vi.
3. behaviour; manners. obsolete.
he likest is to fall into mischance
that is regardless of his governance. spenser's muiopot.
gover nant. n.s. [gouvernante, french.] a lady who has
the care of young girls of quality. the more usual and pro-
per word is governess.
gover ness. n.s. [gouverneresse, old french, from gove.]
i. a female invested with authority.
the moon, the governess of floods,
pale in her anger, washes all the air,
that rheumatick diseases do abound. shakespeare.
2. a tutoress; a woman that has the care of young ladies.
he presented himself unto her, falling down upon both his
knees, and holding up his hands, as the old governes of da-
nae is painted, when she suddenly saw the golden shower. sidn.
his three younger children were taken from the governess
in whose hands he put them. - clarendon.
3. a tutoress; an instructress; a directress.
great affliction that severe governess of the life of man
brings upon those souls she seizes on. more against atheism.
gover nmen r. n.s. [gouvernment, french.]
1. form of a community with respe&amp;t to the disposition of the
supreme authority. , , ; ro -
there seem to be but two general kinds of government in
the world: the one exercised, according to the arbitrary com-
mands and will of some single person ; and the other accord-
ing to certain orders or laws introduced by agreement or
custom, and not to be changed without the consent of many.
temple.
no government can do any act to limit itself: the supreme
legislative power cannot make itself not to be absolute. lesley,
2. an established state of legal authority.
there they shall found
their government, and their great senate chuse
through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws ordain'd. milton.
while he survives, in concord and content
the commons live, by no divisions rent; -
but the great monarch's death dissolves the government. dryd.
every one knows, who has considered the nature of go-
vernment, that there must be in each particular form of it an
absolute unlimited power. addison.
where any one person or body of men seize into their
hands the power in the last resort, there is properly no longer
a government, but what aristotle and his followers call the
abuse or corruption of one. swift.
3. administration of publick affairs.
safety and equal government are things -
which subjects make as happy as their kings. waller.
those governments which curb not evils, cause;
and a rich knave's a libel on our laws. 1%ung.
4. regularity of behaviour. not in use.
"you needs must learn, lord, to amend this fault;
though sometimes it shews greatness, courage, blood,
yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
defect of manners, want of government,
pride, haughtiness, opinion and disdain. shakesp. hen. iv.
'tis government that makes them seem divine;
the want thereof makes thee abominable. shakesp. h. vi.
5. manageableness; compliance ; obsequiousness.
thy eyes windows fall,
like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
. each part depriv'd of supple government,
shall stiff and stark, and cold appear, like death. shako.
6. management of the limbs or body. obsolete.
their god
shot many a dart at me with fierce intent;
but i them warded all with wary government.
7. [in grammar.] influence with regard to construction.
gover nour. m. s. [gouverneur, french.]
1. cne who has the supreme direction.
it must be confessed, that of christ, working as a creator
and a governour of the world by providence, all are partakers.
hooker,
they beget in us a great idea and veneration of the mighty
author
spenser.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 944</div><p class="text">g o w
-
g r a
author and governour of such stupendous bodies, and excite
and elevate our minds to his adoration and praise. bentley.
2. one who is invested with supreme authority in a state.
for the kingdom is the lord's, and he is the governor
among the nations. ps. xxii. 28.
the magistrate cannot urge obedience upon such potent
grounds as the minister, if so disposed, can urge disobedience:
is for instance, if my governour should command me to do a
thing, or i must die, or forfeit my estate ; and the minister
steps in and tells me, that i offend god, and ruin my soul, if
i obey that command, 'tis easy to see a greater force in this
persuasion. south.
3. one who rules any place with delegated and temporary
authority.
to you, lord governour,
remains the censure of this hellish villain. shakesp. othello.
4. a tutor; one who has care of a young man.
to eltam will s, where the young king is,
being ordain’d his special governour;
and for his safety there i'll best devise. shakesh. henry vi.
the great work of a governour is to fashion the carriage,
and form the mind; to settle in his pupil good habits, and the
principles of virtue and wisdom. locke.
during the minority of kings, the election of bishops, and
other affairs of the church, must be left in the hands of their
governors and courtiers. lesley.
5. pilot ; regulator; manager.
behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and
are driven of fierce winds, yet they are turned about with a
very small helm, whithersoever the governour lilleth. ja.. iii. 1.
gouge. n.f. [french.) a chiffel having a round edge, for
the cutting of such wood as is to be rounded or hollowed.
moxon.
go'ujeres. n.s.. [from gouje, french, a camp trull.]. the
french disease. hammer.
gourd. m. s. [gonharde, french.]
1. a plant. the fruit of some species are long, of others round,
or bottle shaped. amiller.
but i will haste, and from each bough and brake,
each plant, and juiciest gourd, will pluck such choice
to entertain our angel-guest. milton's paradis. loft.
gourd seeds abound so much in oil, that a sweet and pleasant
one may be drawn from then by expression: they are of the
four greater cold seeds, and are used in emulsions. hill.
2. a bottle [from gourt, old french. skinner.] the large
fruit so called is often scooped hollow, for the purpose of con-
taining and carrying wine, and other liquors: from thence
any leathern bottle grew to be called by the same name, and
so the word is used by chaucer. hanmer.
gou'rd in ess. n.s.. [from gourd.] a swelling in a horse's leg
after a journey. farrier's dic.
gou rnet. n. s. scuculus.] a fish.
gout. n. s. [goutte, french.)
1. the arthritis; a periodical disease attended with great pain.
the gout is a disease which may affect any membranous part,
but commonly those which are at the greatest distance from the
heart or the brain, where the motion of the fluids is the slowest,
the resistance, friction, and stricture of the solid parts the
greatest, and the sensation of pain, by the dilaceration of the
nervous fibres, extreme. aruuthnot on diet.
one that's sick o’ th’ gout, had rather
groan so in perplexity, than be cur'd
by th’ sure physician death. shakespeare’s cymbeline.
this very rev'rend lecher, quite worn out
with rheumatisms, and crippled with his gout,
forgets what he in youthful times has done
and swinges his own vices in his son. dryden's juvenal.
2. a drop. [goutte, french ; gutta, latin.] gut for drop is still
used in scotland by physicians.
i see thee still,
and on the blade o' th' dudgeon gouts of blood,
which was not so before. shakespeare's macbeth.
gout. n.s. [french..] a taste. an affected cant word.
catalogues serve for a direction to any one that has a goût
for the like studies. jwoodward on fiji.
gout wort. m. s. igout and wort, podagraria.] an herb.
ains: -
go'ury, adj. [from gout.] isworth
1. afflicted or diseased with the gout.
there dies not above one of a thousand of the gout, al-
though i believe that more die gouty. graunt.
knots upon his gouty joints appear,
and chalk is in his crippled fingers found. dryden's pers.
most common y a gouty constitution is attended with great
acuteness of parts, the nervous fibres, both in the brain and
the other extremities, being delicate. arbuthnot on diet
2. relating to the gout. -
alo other causes of blood-spitting; one is
gouty matter in the substance of the lungs.
blackmore,
gown. m. s. [gonna, italian; gwn, welsh and erse.] o
i. a long upper garment.
2. a woman's upper garment.
3. the long habit of a man dedicated to adsor peace
4. the dress of peace.
they make garments either short, as cloaks
long to the ground. abbot’s doripi. * is own,
if ever i said a loosebodied gown, i on of the h;
- ew me - -
of it, and beat me to death with a bottom of o in the skirts
i said a gown. shak on theid,
in length of train descends her *:::::::: shrew.
th,
and by her graceful walk the queen of . known, d
n, dy.
i despite your new gown, 'till i see you dressed init
poe,
nity, medicine, law. as divi.
¥h. benefices themselves are so mean in
they will not yield any competent mainten
minister, scarcely to buy him a gown.
girt in his gabin gown the hero sat.
yet not superior to her sex's cares,
the mode she fixes by the gown she wears,
of silks and china she's the last appeal; &gt;
in these great points she loads the commonweal
irish sounties, that
ance for any honest
spensor on ireland
dryden', £n,
foung,
he mars depos'd, and arms to gowns made wi
successful councils did him soon : ade yield;
as fit for close intrigues as open field,
gow ned. adj. [from gown.] dressed in a gown drydin,
a noble crew about them waited round ""
of sage and sober peers, all gravely gown'd. s
in velvet white as snow the troop was gown'd peso,
the seams with sparkling emeralds set around." drydon
gown m.a.n. m. s. [gown and man.]. a man devotes. the
arts of peace ; one whose proper habit is a gown.
let him with pedants
pore out his life amongst the lazy gownmen. r
thus will that whole bench, in an age or two, be *
posed of mean, fawning gownmen, dependants upon. o
for a morsel of bread. *
to gra’bble. v. n. [probably corrupted from grapple.] to
grope; to feel eagerly with the hands.
my blood chills about my heart at the thought of these
rogues, with their bloody, hands grabbling in my guts, and
pulling out my very entrails. arbuthnos'; joi
to gra'bble. v. a. to lie prostrate on the ground. aisa,
grace. n. s. [ grace, french; gratia, latin; graate, ers..]
1. favour; kindness.
if the highest love in no base person may aspire togram,
then may i hope your beauty will not be without pity. so,
o momentary grace of mortal men, v
which we more hunt for than the grace of god! so,
such as were popular,
and well deserving, were advanc'd by grace. daniil,
is this the reward and thanks i am to have for those many
acts of grace i have lately passed ? king charlo,
yet those remov’d,
such grace shall one just man find in his fight,
that he relents, not to blot out mankind, milton,
he receiv'd all the graces and degrees, the proaorship and
the doctorship could be obtained there. clarendin,
or each, or all, may win a lady's grace;
then either of you knights may well deserve
a princess born. dryden's falk,
none of us, who now your grace implore,
but held the rank of sovereign queen before. doli.
profer'd service i repaid the fair,
that of her grace she gave her maid to know
the secret meaning of this moral show. djit,
2. favourable influence of god on the human mind.
the grace of god, that passeth understanding, ko"
hearts and minds. common prost,
the evil of fin is that we are especially to pray go".
most earnestly begging of god, that he will, by thos”
of his grace, preserve us from falling into fin. duty of mao
prevenient grace descending had remov’d
the stony from their hearts, and made new * ,
regenerate grow instead. miło,
3. virtue; effect of god's influence.
within the church, in the publick profession and o:
communion thereof, are contained persons truly good o
sanetified, and hereafter saved; and together with them of
persons void of all saving grace, and hereafter to be o
post.
how van wants grace, who never wanted wit.
4. pardon ; mercy.
noble pity held -
his hand a while, and to their choice g” space wallor,
which they would prove, his valour or his £7o u
bow and sue for grace milton,
with suppliant knee.
5. favour conferred.
i should therefore esteem it great favo" and *p,
would you be so kind as to go in my place.
6. privilege.
but to return and view the chearful skies, drydo.
to few great jupiter imparts this go” 7. a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 945</div><p class="text">g r a
g r a
-
* *
-
7. a goddess, by the heathens supposed to bestow beauty,
- this forehead, where your verse has said.
the loves delighted and the graces play’d. * - prior.
8. behaviour, considered as decent or ufibecoming.” "
the same words in philoclea's mouth, as from one woman
to another, so as there were no other body by, might have
had a better grace, and perchance have found a gentler receipt.
- * * : * : * ... w 1. …; ; , * - - sidney.
have i reas n or good grace in what i do. * temple.
9. adventitious or artificial beauty; pleasing appearance.
one lilac only, with a statelier grace, of . . .
*
-
presum'd to claim the oak's and cedar's place; on
and, looking round him with a monarch's care,
spread his exalted boughs to wave in air. o harte.
her purple habit fits with such a grace . .
qn her smooth shoulders, and so suits her face. dryd. æn.
- . to write and speak correotly gives a grace, and gains a
favourable attention to what one has to say.. " locke.
lo. natural excellence. -
it doth grieve me, that things of principal excellency
should be thus bitten at by men whom god hath endued with
graces, both of wit and learning, for better purposes. hooker.
to some kind of men,
their graces serve them but as enemies.
in his own grace he doth exalt himself
more than in your advancement. shakesp. king lear.
the charming lausus, full of youthful fire,
to turnus only second in the grace
of manly mien, and features of the face.
11. embellishment; recominendation; beauty.
where justice grows, there grows the greater grace,
the which doth quench the brand of hellish smart. spensor.
set all things in their own peculiar place,
shak. as you like it.
dryden's afn.
and know that order is the greatest grace. dryden.
the flow'r which lasts for little space,
a short liv'd good, and an uncertain grace. dryden.
12. single beauty. - - - -
i pass their form and every charming grace. dryden.
13. ornament; flower; highest perfeotion. to
by their hands this grace of kings must die,
if hell and treason hold their promises. shakesp. henry v.
14. single or particular virtue. -- - - - -
the king-becoming graces,
as justice, verity, temp'rance, stableness,
devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
i have no relish of them. shakespeare's macbeth.
the graces of his religion prepare him for the most useful
discharge of every relation of life. - * : … . . rogers.
15. virtue physical.
o, mickle is the pow'rful grace that lies
in plants, herbs, stoncs and their true qualities. shakespeare. .
16. the title of a duke or archbishop ; formerly of the king,
meaning the same as your goodness, or your clemency.
here come i from our princely general,
to know your griefs; to tell you from his grace,
. that he will give you audience. shakesp. henry iv.
high and mighty king, your grace, and those your nobles
here present, may be pleased to bow your ears. bacon's h. vii.
according to the usual proceeding of your grace, and of
the court, with delinquents which are overtaken with error
in finplicity, there was yielded unto him a deliberate, patient,
and full hearing, together with a satisfactory answer to all his
main objections. white.
17. a short prayer said before and after meat.
your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,
their talk at table, and their thanks at end. shak. coriolan.
while grace is saying after meat, do you and your brethren
take the chairs from behind the company. swift.
then chearful healths, your mistress shall have place;
and what's more rare, a poet shall say grace. pope.
grace cup. n.s. [grace and cup.] the cup or health drank
after grace. -
the grace-cup serv'd, the cloth away, o
jove thought it time to shew his play. “o
to grace. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to adorn; to dignify; to embellish; to recommend; to de-
orate. -
c this they study, this they pradise, this they grace with a
wanton superfluity of wit." + - - - - - - hooker.
i do not think a braver o -
more daring, or more bold is now alive, -
to grace .# latter age with noble deeds. shakesp. hen. iv.
little of this great world can i speak, ''
and therefore little shall i grace my cause: , ,
in speaking for myself. . "
prior.
v.
dation and gracing, where causes are well handled. , , bacon.
rich crowns were on their royal scutcheons plac'd, i.
with saphires, diamonds, and with rubies grac'd, dryden.
by both his parents of descent divine;
great jove and phoebus grac'd his noble line,
vol. i.
* -- ~~~ shakespeare's othello.
there is due from the judge to the advocate some commen-o’
pope. .
though triumphs were to generals only due,
crowns were reserv'd to grace the soldiers too, pope.
2. to dignify or raise by an act of favour.
... . . he writes
** how happily he lives, how well belov’d,
*. and daily graced by the emperor. sh. two gent. of verona.
* . . he might at his pleasure grace or disgrace whom he would
* in court. * - - knolles.
- - - dispose all honours of the sword and gun,
grace with a nod, and ruin with a frown. dryden's juv.
3. to favour.
… when the guests withdrew,
... their courteous host saluting all the crew,
o regardless pass'd her o'er, nor grac'd with kind adieu. dryd.
gra’ce d. adj. [from grace.] -
1. beautiful; graceful. not in use.
he saw this gentleman, one of the properest and best graced
men that ever i saw, being of a middle age and a mean stature.
- - sidney.
2. virtuous; regular; chaste. not in use.
- epicurism and lust
make it more like a tavern or a brothel,
than a grac'd palace. shakesp. king lear.
gra’ce ful, adj. [from grace.] beautiful with dignity.
amid’ the troops, and like the leading god,
high o'er the rest in arms the graceful turnus rode. dryden.
matchless his pen, victorious was his lance;
bold in the lists, and graceful in the dance. {ope.
yet graceful ease, and sweetness void of pride,
might hide her faults, if belles had faults to hide. pope.
graceful to fight, and elegant to thought,
the great are vanquish'd, and the wise are taught. 1%ung.
goto. adv. [from graceful.] elegantly; with pleasing
ignity.
through nature and through art she rang'd,
and gracefully her subject chang'd. swift.
walking is the mode or manner of man, or of a beast;
but walking gracefully implics a manner or mode super-added
to that action. //atts's logick.
gra’ceful ness. n.s.. [from graceful.] elegance of manner;
dignity with beauty.
his neck, his hands, his shoulders, and his breast,
did next in gracefulness and beauty stand,
to breathing figures. dryden's ovid.
he executed with so much gracefulnes; and beauty, that he
alone got money and reputation. dryden's dufresnoy.
there is a secret gracefulness of youth which accompanies
his writings, though the staidness and sobriety of age be want-
ing. - . dryden's ovid, preface.
if hearers are amaz'd from whence
proceeds that fund of wit and sense,
which, though her modesty would shroud,
breaks like the sun behind a cloud;
while gracefulnes; its art conceals,
and yet through ev'ry motion steals. swift.
gra’c e l ess., adj. [from grace..] void of grace; wicked;
hopelesly corrupt; abandoned.
this graceless man, for furtherance of his guile,
did court the handmaid of my lady dear. spenser.
whose hap shall be to have her,
will not so graceles, be, to be ingrate. shakespeare.
in all manner of graceless and hopeless characters, some are
lost for want of advice, and others for want of heed. l’esir.
furnish’d for offence, he cross'd the way
betwixt the graceless villain and his prey. dryden.
gra’ces. n.s. good graces for favour is seldom used in the
singular. - • *
demand deliv'ry of her heart,...,
her goods and chattels, and good graces,
and person up to his embraces. ..., hudibras.
gra’cile. adj. [gracilis, latin.] slender ; small. dici.
gra’cilent. adj. [gracilentus, latin.] lean. dic7.
graci'lity. n.s. [gracilitas, latin.] slenderness; smallness.
gra’cious. adj, [gracieux, french.] ..
1. merciful; benevolent. . . . . . . . .
common sense and reason could not but tell them, that the
good and gracious god could not be pleased, nor consequently
worshipped, with anything barbarous or cruel. south.
to be good and gracious, and a lover of knowledge, are
two of the most amiable things. . burnet's zheory.
2. favourable;-kind.” **- : . . . .
so. - and the lord was gracious unto them, and had compassion
on them. o - 2 kings xiii. 23.
... . . . . . . . [inblam'd ulysses’ house, -
. . in which i finde receipt so gracious.
… . . . . . from now reveal, . . .
... j . a gracious beam of light; from now inspire -
my tongue to sing, my hand to touch the lyre. prior.
3. acceptable; favoured. - -
doarine is much more profitable and gracious by example
than by rule. so
chapman.
... 10 o<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 946</div><p class="text">g r a
g r a
he made us gracious before the kings of perfia, so that they
gave us food. - 1 esdr. viii. 8o.
goring, who was now general of the horse, was no more
gracious to prince rupert than wilmot had been. clarendon.
4. virtuous; good. - - - -
kings are no less unhappy, their issue not being gracious,
than they are in losing them when they have approved their
virtues. shakespeare's i/inter's tale.
5. excellent. obsolete. - .
the grievous abuse which hath been of councils, should
rather cause men to study how so gracious a thing may again
be reduced to that first perfeotion. hooker.
6. graceful; becoming. obsolete. ---
our womens, names are more gracious than their rutilia,
that is, red head. camden.
gra’ciously, adv. [from gracious.]
1. kindly ; with kind condescension. -
his testimony he graciously confirmed, that it was the best
of all my tragedies. dryden.
he heard my vows, and graciously decreed
my grounds to be restor'd, my former flocks to feed. dryd.
if her majesty would but graciously be pleased to think a
hardship of this nature worthy her royal confideration. swift.
2. in a pleasing manner.
graciousness. n.s.. [from gracious.]
1. kind condescension. -
the graciousness and temper of this answer made no im-
pression on them. clarendon.
2. pleafing manner. -
grada'tion. m. s. [gradation, french; gradus, latin.]
1. regular progress from one degree to another. -
the desire of more and more rises by a natural gradation to
most, and after that to all. l’estrange.
2. regular advance step by step.
from thence,
by cold gradation, and well balanc'd form,
we shall proceed with angelo. shakesp. megs, for meas.
the psalmist very elegantly expresseth to us the several gra-
dations by which men at last come to this horrid degree of
impiety. tillotson.
3. order; sequence; series.
- 'tis the curse of service;
preferment goes by letter and affection,
not, as of old, gradation, where each second
stood heir to th’ first. shakespeare's othell.
4. regular process of argument. -
certain it is, by a direct gradation of consequences from
this principle of merit, that the obligation to gratitude flows
from, and is enjoined by, the first dictates of nature. sooth.
grada to ry. n: s [gradus, latin.] steps from the cloisters
into the church. ainsworth.
gratient. adj. [gradiens, latin.] walking; moving by
steps.
amongst those gradient automata, that iron spider is espe-
cially remarkable, which, being but of an ordinary bigness, did
creep up and down as if it had becn alive. //ilkins.
grat) ual. adj. [gradual, french.j proceeding by degrees;
advancing itep by step; from one stage to another.
nobler birth
qf creatures animate with gradual life,
of growth, sense, reason, all summ'd up in man. ashan.
men still suppose a gradual natural progress of things; as
that, fion great, things and persons should grow greater, 'till
at length, by many steps and ascents they come to be at
greatest, - south.
gratua... n.s. (gradus, latin.] an order of steps.
before the gradual prostrate they ador’d,
the pavement kiss'd, and thus the saint implor’d. dryden.
graduality. m. s. [from gradual.] regular progreslion.
this some ascribe unto the mixture of the elements, others
to the graduality of opacity and light. brown.
gra busally. adv. [from gradual.]
i. by degrees; in regular progression.
when the moon passes over the fixed stars, and eclipses
them, your light vanishes; not gradually, like that of the
planets, but all at once. newton's optics.
the author of our being weans us gradually from our
fondness of life the nearer wo approach towards the end of
it. swift.
. human creatures are able to bear air of much greater density
in diving, and of much less upon the tops of mountains, pro-
vided the changes be made gradually. arbuthnot.
2. in degree.
human reason doth not 9nly gradually, but specifically dif.
for from the fantastick reason of brutes. grew.
t., graduate. ** [graduer, french ; gradus, latin.]
i. to dignify with a degree in the university.
- john tregonwes, graduated a docior and dubbed a knight,
did good service. carew's survey of cornwal.
oncerning columns and their adjuncts, architects make
such a noise as if the term. of architraves, frizes, and cornices
"***ough to graduate a master of this art. j/alton,
3. to raise to a higher place in the scal
gra'duate. n.s. [gradua, french; fr
gopus t ion. m. s. [graduation, french; from g
1. regular progression by succession of degrees.
3. the act of conferring academical degrees.
graf f. m. s. a ditch; a moat. see grave.
2. to mark with degrees.
the places were marked where the sp
verest cold and greatest heat, and accord
tions he graduates his thermometers.
- irits flood at the &amp;
ong to these obser.
derha
e of metals. am,
tersn. als: a chemical
the tineture was capable to transmute or
- - i'ddha; -
silver as equalled in weight that gold. &amp;raduate as much
4. to heighten; to improve. bjk,
not only vitriol is a cause of blackness, but it
tural bodies; and dyers advance and gr. ut the salts of na.
- duate thei
with salts. rown's w.] is colours
“%r errors,
- - - - - - 9th gradus, lati
man dignified with an academical degree, g latin, a
of graduates i dislike the learned rout
and chuse a female doctor for the gout. 2
bram 37,
*:
the graduation of the parts of the universe is likew;
cessary to the perfection of the whole, $ likewise me.
2. improvement; exaltation of qualities. grow,
greater repugnanc - - -
of g foy into reason is that which h. deli.
vers concerning its graduation, that heated in fi
extinguished in oyl of mars or iron, the load
an ability to extract a nail fastened in a was
to and often
one acquires
brown,
though the fortifications were not *gular, yet the will,
were good, and the graff broad and deep. clarendo
graf f. m. s. s greffz, french..] a small branchinserted into
graf t.
the stock of another tree, and nourished b
- - - is s.
but bearing its own fruit; a young cyon. y is lap,
god gave unto man all kind offeeds and graff of life; as
the vegetative life of plants, the sensual of beasts, the ration
of man, and the intellectual of angels. rakish
| "...o.o.o.o.o.otograft moth.
fruit, so in trees that bear no fruit it of make the greater
heaves. boon's natural history.
'tis usual now an inmate graff to see
with insolence invade a foreign tree. dryden's virgil
if you cover the top with clay and horse dung, in the me
manner as you do a graft, it will help to heel the looner. miri.
now the cleft find inserted graff; receives,
and yields an offspring more than nature gives. pop!,
% §. ; v. a. [groffer, french.]
'. to insert a cyon or branch of one tree into the flook of
another.
his growth is but a wild and fruitless plant;
i'll cut his barren branches to the stock,
and graft you on to bear. dryden's din soloffan.
with his pruning hook disjoin
unbearing branches from their head,
and graft more happy in their stead. dryden,
2. to propagate by insertion or inoculation.
now let me graff my pears, and prune the vine. dryden.
3. to infort into a place of body to which it did not originally
belong.
and they also, if they bide not still in unbelief, shall be
graffodin; for god is able to graff them in again. romani.
these are th' italian names which fate will join
with ours, and graff upon the trojan line. dryden's en.
4. to impregnate with in adscititious branch.
we've some old crab-trees here at home, that will not
be grosted to your relish. shakespeare's coriolanus,
t he noble isle doth want her proper limbs;
her royal stock graft with ignoble plants. shakoff, r.iii.
5. to join one thing so as to receive support from another.
this resolution against any peace with spain is a newing:
dent grafted upon the original quarrel, by the intrigues of a
faction among us. swift,
may one kind grave unite each hapless name,
and graft my love immortal on thy fame. post.
to graff. v., n. to practice insition.
in march is good graffing the skilful do know,
so long as the wind in the east do not blow: -
from moon being changed, 'till o be the prime,
for graffing and cropping is very good time. . *
to o i. in .. plenty the way is to graft, o
only upon young flocks, but upon divers boughs of an o
tree; for they will bear great numbers of fruit; wo
you graft but upon one stock, the tree can bear but few. bo
t!or,
toor
… t agato;
gratter. m. s. [from graffor graft.] one who prop's
fruit by grafting. -
i am informed, by the trials of the most o:
these parts, that a man shall seldom fail of having the
borne by his graft the same year in which the inition o:
grail. "...s. [from græle, fr.] small particles of all) kind.
hereof this gentle knight o; w2s,
and, lying down upon the sandy grails, offer,
drank of the stream as clear as crystal glass. soft
......"<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 947</div><p class="text">g r a
of
o:
grain. m. s. [graine, french; granum, latin; grano, italian,
has all the following significations.]
1. a single seed of corn.
look into the seeds of time, -
and say which grain will grow, and which will not. shakoff.
his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushes
of chaff. shakesp. merchant of venice.
let them pronounce the steep targeian death,
vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger
but with a grain a day, i would not bu -
their mercy at the price of one fair word. shak. coriolanus.
many of the ears, being fix inches long, had sixty grains in
them, and none less than forty. mortimer.
2. corn.
- as it ebbs, the seedsman
upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain, -
and shortly comes to harvest. shakoff. ant, and cleopatra.
pales no longer swell'd the teeming grain,
nor phoebus fed his oxen on the plain. dryden's pastorals.
'tis a rich soil, i grant you; but oftner covered with weeds
than grain. collier on fame.
3. the seed of any fruit.
4. any minute particle; any single body.
thou exist’s on many thousand grains
that issue out of dust. shao's for mafire.
by intoliigence
and proofs as clear as founts in july, when
we see each grain of gravel. shakes). henry viii.
5. the smallest weight, of which in physick twenty make a
scruple, and in troy weight twenty-four make a pennyweight;
a grain so named because it is supposed of equal weight with
a grain of corn. - -
unity is a precious diamond, whose grains as they double,
twice double in their value. holyday.
they began at a known body, a barley-corn, the weight
whereof is therefore called a grain; which ariseth, being mul-
tipied, to scruples, drachms, ounces and pounds. holder.
the trial being made betwixt lead and lead, weighing
severally seven drachms, in the air; the balance in the water
weigheth only four drachms and forty-one grains, and abateth
of the weight in the air two drachms and nineteen grains :
the balance kept the same depth in the water. bacon.
his brain
outweigh’d his rage but half a grain. hudibras.
6. any thing proverbially small.
for the whole world before thee is as a little train of the
balance. wisd. xi. 22.
it is a sincerely pliable, ductile temper, that negle&amp;is not
to make use of any grain of grace. hammond.
the ungrateful person lives to himself, and subsists by the
good nature of others, of which he himself has not the least
grain. south.
7. grain of allowance. something indulged or remitted ;
something above or under the exact weight.
he, whose very best actions must be seen with grains of al-
izvance, cannot be too mild, moderate, and forgiving. allis.
i would always give some grains of allowance to the sacred
science of theology. js atts on the a/ind.
8. the direction of the fibres of wood, or other fibrous matter.
knots, by the conflux of mecting sap,
infect the sound pine, and divert his grain
tortive and errant from his course of growth. shakosheare.
9. the body of the wood as modifica by the fibres.
the beech, the swimming alder, and the plane,
hard box, and inden of a foster grain. dryden.
10. the body considered with respect to the form or direction
of the constituent particles. -
the tooth of a sea-horse, in the midst of the solider parts,
contains a curdled grain not to be found in ivory. brown.
stones of a constitution so compact, and a grain so fine,
that they bear a fine polish. woodward.
11. died or stained substance.
how the red roses flush up in her cheeks,
and the pure snow with goodly vermil stain,
like crimson dy'd in grain. spensor.
over his lucid arms
a military vest of purple flow'd,
livelier than mclibacan, or the grain
of sarra, worn by kings and heroes old. milton.
come, pensive nun, devout and pure,
ah in a robe of darkest grain, - -
flowing with majestisk train. milton.
the third, his feet
shadow'd from either heel with feather'd mail,
sky-tinctur'd grain / milton's paradise lost.
12. temper; disposition ; inclination ; humour from the di-
rection of fibres. . . .
your minds, preoccupied with what -
you rather must do than with what you should do,
made you against the grain to voice him consul. shakesp.
quoth hudibras, it is in vain, ...
i see, to argue gainst the grain. hudibras.
old clients, weary'd out with fruities, care,
dismiss their hopes of eating, and despair;
though much against the grain, forc'd to retire,
- buy roots for supper, and provide a fire. dryden's juv,
13. the heart; the bottom.
the one being tractable and mild, the other stiff and im-
patient of a superior, they lived but in cunning concord, as
brothers glued together, but not united in grain. hayward.
14. the form of the surface with regard to roughness and
frnoothness. -
the smaller the particles of cutting substances are, the
smaller will be the scratches by which they continually fret and
wear away the glass until it be polished; but be the never so
small, they can wear away the glass no otherwise than by grat-
ing and scratching it, and breaking the piouberances; and
therefore polish it no otherwise than by bringing its roughness
to a very fine grain, so that the scratches and frettings of the
surface become too small to be visible. newton's optics.
gratnep. adj. [from grain..] rough; made less smooth.
though now this grained face of mine be hid
in sap consuming winter's drizzled snow,
yet hath my night of life some memory. shakespeare.
grains. n.s. [without a firigular.] the husks of mit ex-
hausted in brewing.
give them grains their fill,
husks, draff, to drink and swill. ben. johns. new inn.
grains of paradise. n.s.. [cardamomilm, latin.] "an indian -
spice.
gra’iny. adj. [from grain.]
1. full of corn.
2. full of grains or kernels. - -
grame’rcy. interj. [contracted from grant me mercy.] an
obsolete expression of surprise.
gramercy, sir, said he but mote i weet -
what strange adventure do ye now pursue 2 spensor.
grameroy, lovely lucius, what's the news shaft care.
gram i'n eous. adj. [gramineus, latin.] grassy. grami-
neous plants are such as have a long leaf without a footstalk.
gramini’vo rous. adj. [gramen and voro, latin.] grass-
eating ; living upon grass.
the ancients were versed chiefly in the dise&amp;tion of brutes,
among which the graminivorous kind have a party. coloured
choroides. sharp's surgery.
gratmmar. m. s. [grammaire, french ; granimatica, latin;
7:29.9 xor.]
1. the science of speaking correstly; the art which teaches the
relations of words to each other.
to be accurate in the grammar and idioms of the tongues,
and then as a rhetorician to make all their graces serve his
eloquence. a -ll.
we make a countryman dumb, whom we will not allow
to speak but by the rules of grammar. dryden's dufreshoy.
men, speaking language according to the grammar rules of
that language, do yet speak improperly of things. locke.
2. propriety or justness of speech; speech according to grammar.
parium &amp; mutabile semper femina, is the sharpest satire that
ever was made on woman; for the adjectives are neuter, and
animal must be understood to make them grammar. dryden.
3. the book that treats of the various relations of words to one
another.
grammar school. n. s. a school in which the learned lan-
guages are grammatically taught.
thou hast most traiterously corrupted the youth of the
realm in cre&amp;ting a grammar school. shakespeare's hen. vi.
the ordinary way of learning latin in a grammar school i
cannot encourage. locke.
gramma(rian. n.s. [grammairien, french ; from grammar.]
one who teaches grammar; a philologer.
many disputes the ambiguous nature of letters hath created
among the grammarians. holder's elements of speech.
they who have called him the torture of grammarians,
might also have called him the plague of translators. dryden.
gram m aorical. adj. [grammatical, fr. granimaticus, latin.]
1. belonging to grammar.
the beauty of virtue still being set before their eyes, and
that taught them with far more diligent care than grammatical
rules. sidney.
i shall take the number of consonants, not from the gram-
matical alphabets of any language, but from the diversity of
founds framed by single articulations with appuise. holder.
2. taught by grammar. - -
they seldom know more than the grammatical construction,
unless born with a poetical genius. dryden's dafoesnoy.
gramma"rica lly. adv. [from grammatical.] according to
the rules or science of grammar.
when a sentence is distinguished into the nouns, the verbs,
pronouns, adverbs, and other particles of speech which coin-
pose it, then it is said to be analysed grammatically. hatts.
as grammar teacheth us to speak properly, so it is the part
of rhetorick to instruct how to do it elegantly, by adding
beauty to that language that before was " o and gramma-
tically true. - baker on learning.
gr.a.!!!/ai s-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 948</div><p class="text">g r a
g r a
|
grammaticaster, n.s. [latin.] a mean verbal pedant;
a low grammarian. -
i have not vexed language with the doubts, the remarks,
and eternal triflings of the french grammaticasters. ... rymer.
gra’mple. m. s. a crab-fish. - ainsworth.
gra’mpus. n. s. a large fish of the cetaceous kind.
gra’nary. n.s. [granarium, latin.] a storehouse for threshed
coti), - - -
ants, by their labour and industry, contrive that corn will
keep as dry in their nests as in our granaries. addison.
the naked nations cloath,
and be th” exhaustless granary of a world. thomson's spring.
gra’nate. m. s. [from granum, latin.] a kind of marble lo
called, because it is marked with small variegations like grains.
otherwise granite.
grand. adj. [grand, french; grandis, latin.]
1. great ; illustrious; high in power or dignity. -
god had planted, that is, made to grow the trees of life
and knowledge, plants only proper and becoming the paradise
and garden of so grand a lord. raleigh's history.
2, great; splendid; magnificent.
a voice has flown
to re-enflame a grand design. • 1%ung.
3. principal; chief.
what cause
mow'd our grand parents, in that happy state,
favour'd of heav'n so highly, to fall off
from their creator. milton.
4. eminent; superiour: very frequently in an ill sense,
our grand foe, satan. milton.
so clomb this first grand thief into god's fold. milton.
5. noble ; sublime ; lofty; conceived or expressed with great
dignity. -
6. it is used to signify ascent or descent of consanguinity.
grand am. m. s. [grand and dam or damue.]
1. grandmother; my father's or mother's mother.
i meeting him, will tell him that my lady
was fairer than his grandam and as chaste
as may be in the wood. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
we have our forefathers and great grandames all before us,
as they were in chaucer's days. dryden.
thy tygress heart belies thy angel face:
too well thou shew'st thy pedigree from stone;
thy grandame's was the first by pyrrha thrown. dryden.
2. an old withered woman.
the women
cry’d, one and all, the suppliant should have right,
and to the grandane hag adjudg’d the knight. dryden.
grandchild. m. s. [grand and chill.] the son or daughter
of my son or daughter; one in the second degree of descent.
augustus caesar, out of indignation against his daughters
and agrippa his grandchild, would say that they were not his
sced, but imposthumes broken from him. bacon.
these hymns may work on future wits, and so
may great grandchildren of thy praises grow. donne.
he hoped his majesty did believe, that he would never make
the least scruple to obey the grandchild of king james. clarend.
fair daughter, and thou son and grandchild both ! milton.
he scaping with his gods and reliques fied,
and tow'ds the shore his little grandchill led. denham.
gra’s daughter. m. s. [grand and daughter.] the daughter
of a son or daughter.
grande. f. m. f. [grand, french ; grandis, latin.] a man of
great rank, power, or dignity.
they had some sharper and some milder differences, which
might easily happen in such an interview of grandees, both
vehement on the parts which they swayed. wotton.
when a prince of grandee manifests a liking to such a thing,
mco generally set about to make themselves considerable for
such things. south.
some parts of the spanish monarchy are rather for orna-
ment, than strength : they furnish out viceroyalties for the
grando, and posts of honour for the noble families. addison.
go asoo’vity. n. s. [from grandevus, latin.j great age 3
length of life. dic?.
grasprovous. adj. [grandevus, latin.] long lived; of
great age. dici.
grand eur. m. s. [french.] -
i. state ; splendour of appearance; magnificence.
* * magistrate or great officer, he locks himself from all
approaches by the multiplied formalities of attendance, by the
distance of ceremony and grandeur. south.
2. elevation of sentinient, language, or mien.
grand father... n. s. [grand and father.] the father of my
father or mother; the next above my father or mother in the
scale of ascent.
9ne, was saying that his great grandfather, and grandfather
and father died at sea; said another, that heard him, an’s were
* you, i would never come at sea. why, saith he, where
oil your great grandfather, and grandfather, and father die
he answered, where but in their bed; he answered, an' i
*** * you, i would never come in bed. - 'boo.
grand1 fick, adj. [grandis and facio, latin.] moo
so
grandity. m. s. [from grandis, latin,
gra’s pmoth er. m. s. [grand and mother.
grani'vorous. adj. [granum and voro, lat]
gra’nn am. n. s. [for grandam.] grandmother.
1. to admit that which is not yet proved;
our grandchildren will see a few
- raq.s. -
ster-hall, which cost an hundred . hung up in westmin.
- ions, whereof th
paying the arrears, and boast that the ty are
and great. ** grandfathers wer: rich
great,
granrinous, adj. [grando, latin.] full of hail: so
&gt; ! §
of hail.
ici,
deur; magnificence. an old word. §sam-
our poets excel in grandity and gravity, s
property, in quickness and briefness. g o
ihs,
] the father.
l greatness;
mother's mother.
thy grandmother lois, and thy mother eunice, 1 tini 5
grand's ire. m. s. [grand and fire.]
1. grandfather.
think'st thou, that i will leave my kingly throne
wherein my grandsire and my father fat? -&gt; slaig, h w]
thy grandsire, and his brother, to whom ... “”
gave, from two conquer'd parts o' th' world, their name
the wreaths his grandsire knew to reap denham.
by active toil and military sweat. prior
2. any ancestor, poetically.
why should a man, whose bloodtowam within
sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster? shakes, moss,
above the portal, carv'd in cedar wood, -
plac'd in their ranks, their godlike grandfires stood. don
so mimick ancient wits at best, juosi.
as apes our grandsires in their doublets dres.
poe,
grandsos. m. s. [grand and son.] the son of a &amp;
daughter.
almighty jove augment your wealthy flore,
give much to you, and to his grandson; more, drydon.
grandfathers in private families are not much obsoft,
have great influence on their grandsons, and, i believe, they
have much less among princes. swift.
grange. m. s. [grange, french.] a farm: generally a fin
with a house at a distance from neighbours.
one, when he had got the inheritance of an unlucky cli
grange, would needs sell it; and, to draw buyers, proclaimed
the virtues of it: nothing ever thrived on it, faith he; the
trees were all blasted, the swine died of the measles, the cattle
of the murrain, and the sheep of the rot; nothing was ever
reared there, not a duckling or a goose. ben, johnson's dijo,
at the moated grange resides this dejected marina, slits.
the loose unletter'd hinds,
when for their teeming flocks and grange; full
in wanton dance they praise the bounteous pan. milo.
if the church was of their own foundation, they might
chuse, the incumbent being once dead, whether they would
put any other therein; unless, perhaps, the said church his
people belonging to it; for then they must still maintain
curate: and of this sort were their grange; and priories. alff,
gra nit.e. n. s. [granit, fr. from granum, lat, becauseo
ing as it were of grains, or small distinct particles.]. a *
composed of separate and very large concretions, suolo.
pacted together; of great hardness, giving fire with fied; not
fermenting with acids, and imperfectly calcinable in a go
fire. . the hard white granite with black spots, commo
called moor-stone, forms a very firm, and though rude, §
beautifully variegated mass. it is found in immense so is)
ireland, but not used there. in cornwal it is found" o
digious masses, and brought to london, for the step. o,
lick buildings. hard red granite, variegated with **
white, now called oriental granite, is valuablo f its o:
hardness and beauty, and capable of a most o
alabaster, marble of divers colours, both simple o o
the opulites, porphyry, and the granite. o:
there are it's great pillars of granite, and o: laj,
of this ancient temple. im. grain;
living upon grain.
granivorous birds, as a crane, upon t
bills, can distinguish the qualities of hard bros.
sense of men discerns not without mastication. both for gro"
panick affords a soft demulcent nourishment, "...
ois.
- - - iqi oil aino
nivorous birds and mankind. arbuth, only us:
he first peck of their
d bodies, which to
in burlesque works.
oft my kind grannam told me, tim, take warml
ng, go!.
as] #5-
to grant. v. a. [from garantir, french, junio of it.”
- :-l. • “affilto
ner; perhaps, as minshow thinks, from go"
from gratia or gratificor.] to allow; toyo
to concede. followed
- s to be l'
they gather out of scripture general o, that we
in making laws; and so, in effect, they p a. . hots.
ourselves may lawfully make laws so too o: word wo
i take it for granted, that though the g1 wo
o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 949</div><p class="text">g r a
g r a
we translate saints, be in itself as applicable to things as per-
sons; yet in this article it signifieth not holy things, but holy
oiles. pearson.
grant that the fates have firm’d, by their decree,
the trojan race to reign in italy. dryden's afn.
suppose, which yet i grant not, thy defire
a moment elder than my rival fire,
o san chance of seeing first thy title prove dryden.
if he be one indifferent as to the present rebellion, they
may take it for granted his complaint is the rage of a disap.
pointed man. addison's freeholder.
-&gt;
2. to bestow something which cannot be claimed of right.
-- the god of israel grant thee thy petition that thou hast
o asked of him. 1 sam. xvii.
then hath god also to the gentiles granted repentance unto
life. acis xiii. 18.
o did'st thou not kill this king?
- i grant ye.
- - -do'st grant me, hedgehog? then god grant me too,
thou may'st be damned for that wicked deed. shak. r. iii.
he heard, and granted half his prayer;
the rest the winds dispers'd. pope.
grant. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. the act of granting or bestowing.
!. 2. the thing granted; a gift; a boon.
-- courtiers justle for a grant,
3. [in law.] a gift in writing of such a thing as cannot aptly
be passed or conveyed by word only; as rent, reversions, ser.
vices, advowsons in gross, common in gross, tithes, &amp;c. or
made by such persons as cannot give but by deed, as the king,
and all bodies politick; which differences be often in speech
neglected, and then is taken generally for every gift whatso-
ever, made of anything by any person; and he that granteth
it is named the grantor, and he to whom it is made the
grantee. a thing is said to be in grant which cannot be as-
signed without deed. cowel.
all the land is the queen's, unless there be some grant of
o: - any part thereof, to be shewed from her majesty. spensor.
- not only the laws of this kingdom, but of other places,
- and the roman laws, provide that the prince should not be
- deceived in his grants. davenant.
" - . 4. concession; admission of something in dispute.
o but of this so large a grant, we are content not to take
advantage. hooker.
this grant destroys all you have urg'd before. dryden.
gra’ntable. adj. [from grant.] that which may be granted.
the office of the bishop's chancellor was grantable for life.
ayliff's parergon.
grante'e. m. s. [from grant..] he to whom any grant is
made.
to smooth the way for popery in mary's time, the grantees
were confirmed by the pope in the possession of the abby-
lands. swift,
gra’ntor. n.s.. [from grant.] he by whom a grant is made.
a duplex querela shall not be granted under pain of suspen-
sion of the grantor from the execution of his office. ayliffe.
granular y. adj. [from granule.] small and compaci; re-
sembling a small grain or seed.
small-coal, with sulphur and nitre, proportionably mixed,
tempered, and formed into granulary bodies, do make up that
powder which is in use for guns. brown's wulgar errours.
o to gratnula 1 e. v. m. [granuler, fr. from granum, latin.]
o
to be formed into small grains.
- the juice of grapes, inspissated by heat, granulates into
sugar. spratt.
to granulate. v. a.
-*. 1. to break into small masses or granules.
o 2. to raise into small asperities.
i have observed, in many birds, the gullet, before its en-
-o
o-
o trance into the gizzard, to be much dilated, and thick set, or
… as it were granulated with a multitude of glandules, each
, -o whereof was provided with its excretory vessel. ray.
gra: ula tion. m. s. [granulation, french, from granulate.]
1. the act of pouring melted metal into cold water, so as it
may granulate or congeal into small grains: it is generally
done through a colander, or a birchen broom. gunpowder
... 2 and some salts are likewise said to be granulated, from their
o resemblance to grain or feed. &amp;incy.
- 2. the act of shooting or breaking in small masses.
tents in wounds, by resisting the growth of the little gra-
- nulations of the flesh, in process of time harden them, and in
that manner produce a fistula. sharp's surgery.
* granule. a. s. [from granium, latin.] a small compact
particle. -
with an excellent microscope, where the naked eye did see
but a green powder, the assisted eye could discern particular
o granules, some blue, and some yellow. boyle on colours.
gra'nulous. adj. [from granusc.] full of little grains.
grape. m. s. [grape, french ; arappe, dutch..] the fruit
- of the vine, growing in clusters; the fruit from which wine
; : is expressed. -
o vol. 1.
and when they break their friendship plead their want. dry. -
and thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shaft thou
£other every grape of thy vineyard; thou shaft ico them for
the poor and stranger. lev. xix. 10.
anacreon, for thy sake
i of the grape no mention make;
eremy anacreon by thee fell,
cursed plant, i lov'd thee weis. cowley.
here are the vines in early flow'r descry’d,
* froe,discolour'd on the sunny fide. popo's odyssy.
grape hyacinth, or grape flower. m. s. a flower. ~~
gra ******, *s, [grape and stone..] the stone or seed con-
tained in the grape.
a fl when obedient nature knows his will,
* hy; a grapestone, or a hair can kill. prior.
gra #1cal. adj. [yozo.] well delineated.
write with a needle, or bodkin, or knife, or the like, when
the fruit or trees are young; for as they grow, so the letters
will grow more large and graphical. bacon's natural history.
gra *a*y.,4&amp; [from graphical.] in a picturesque man-
ne: ; with good description or delineation.
the hyena odorata, or civet cat, is delivered and graphically
described by castellus. brown's vulgar errours.
gra pnfl. m. s. [grapin, french.]
* a small anchor belonging to a little vessel.
2. a grappling iron with which in fight one ship fastens on
another.
to gratple. v. n. [grabbelon, dutch; #rappeln, german.]
i. to contend by seizing each other, as wrestlers.
they must be also practised in all the locks and gripes of
wrestling, as need may often be in fight to tugg or grapple, and
to close. milton.
living virtue, all atchievements past,
meets envy, still to grapple with at last. waller.
does he think that he can grapple with divine vengeance,
and endure the everlasting burnings south.
antaeus here and stern alcides strive,
and both the grappling statues seem to live.
2. to contest in close fight.
i’ll in my standard bear the arms of york,
tograpple with the house of lancaster. shakes). hen. vi.
sometimes, from fighting squadrons of each fleet,
two grappling ætnas on the ocean meet,
and english fires with belgian flames contend.
to gratple. v. a.
1. to fosten; to fix; to join indissolubly. now obsolete.
grapple your minds to sternage of the navy,
and leave your england as dead midnight still. shak. h. v.
that business
graffler you to the heart and love of us. shakes. macbeth.
2. to seize ; to lay fast hold of.
for hippagines, vessels for the transporting of horse, we are
indebted to the salaminians; for grappling hooks to anachar-
sis. heylyn.
gra pple. m. s. [from the verb.]
i. contest hand to hand, in which the combatants seize each
other; the wrestlers hold.
as when earth's son, antaeus, strove
with jove's alcides, and, of foil'd, still rose
fresh from his fall, and fiercer grapple join'd,
throttled at length in th’ air, expir'd and fell. milton.
or did his genius
know mine the stronger demon, fear'd the grapple,
and, looking round him, found this nook of fate,
to skulk behind my sword. dryden's don sebastian.
2. close fight.
in the grapple i boarded them; on the instant they got clear
of our ship, so i alone became their prisoner. shakesp. hamlet.
3. iron instrument by which one ship fasters on another.
but cymon soon his crooked grapples cast,
which with tenacious hold his foes embrac'd, dryden.
gra’pplement. n. s. [from grapple..] close fight; hostile
embrace. not in use.
they catching hold of him, as down he lent,
him backward overthrew, and down him stay’d
with their rude hands and griefly grapplement. spenser.
gra’s hopper. m. s. [gros and hop.] a small insect that hops
in the summer grass. the cicada of the latins is often by
the poets translated grashopper, but improperly.
her waggon spokes made of long spinners legs,
the cover of the wings of grashoppers. shak. ro, andjul.
grasshoppers eat up the green of whole countries. bacon.
where filver lakes, with verdant shadows crown'd,
disperse a grateful chilness all around;
the grashopper avoids th’untainted air, -
nor in the midst of summer ventures there. addison.
the women were of such an enormous stature, that we ap-
peared as grashoppers before them. addison's speciator.
gra’s 1 er. see grazier.
t, grasp. v. a. [graspare, italian.]
1. to hold in the hand; to gripe. -
o fool that i am, that thought i could grasp water and bind
the wind. sidney.
io p in
addison.
dryden,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 950</div><p class="text">g r a
g r a
in his right hand -
graffing ten thousand thunders, which he sent
before him, such as in their souls infix 'd
plagues. milton's paradise lost.
kings, by grashing more than they could hold,
first made their subjects, by oppression, bold. . denham.
doom, as they please, my empire not to stand,
i'll grasp my sceptre with my dying hand.
grasp my scep y dy dryden's indian emperor.
2. to seize; to catch at. - -
this graffing of the militia of the kingdom into their own
hands, was desired the summer before. clarendon.
for what are men who grasp at praise sublime,
but bubbles on the rapid stream of time : 1%ung.
to grasp. v. m.
1. to catch; to endeavour to seize ; to try at.
so endless and exorbitant are the desires of men, that they
will grasp at all, and can form no scheme of perfect happiness
with less. - swift.
2. to struggle; to strive; to grapple. not now in use.
see, his face is black and full of blood;
his hands abroad display'd, as one that graspt
and tugg’d for life, shakspeare's henry vi.
3. to gripe; to encroach.
like a miser 'midst his store, -
who graft; and grasps 'till he can hold no more. dryden.
crasp. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the gripe or seizure of the hand.
nor wanted in his grasp
what seem'd both spear and shield. milton.
this hand and sword have been acquainted well ;
it should have come before into my grasp,
to kill the ravisher. dryden's don sebastian.
the left arm is a little defaced, though one may see it held
something in its grasp formerly. addison on italy.
2. posiesion ; hold.
i would not be the villain that thou think'st
for the whole space that's in the tyrant's graff,
and the rich east to boot. shakespeare's macbeth.
3. power of seizing.
within the direful grasp
of savage hunger, or of savage neat. milton.
. they looked upon it as their own, and had it even within
their grasp. clarendon.
gra’s per. m. s. [from grasp.] one that grasps, seizes, or
catchts at.
grass. m. s. [3raer, saxon.] the common herbage of the
field on which cattle feed ; an herb with long narrow leaves.
ye are grown fat as the heifer at grass, and bellow as
bulls. jer. i. 1 i.
the beef being young, and only grass fed, was thin, light,
and moist, and not of a substance to endure the salt. temple.
you'll be no mo:e your former you ;
but for a blooming nymph will pass,
just fifteen, coming summer's grass. swift.
gr ass of parnassis. m. s. [parnaffia, latin.] a plant.
this plant is called parnasia from mount parnasius, where
it was supposed to grow ; and because the cattle feed on it,
it obtained the name of grass, though the plant has no resem-
blance to the grass kind. miller.
to gr ass. v. n. [from the noun..] to breed grass; to become
pasture.
land arable, driven, or worn to the proof,
with oats ye may sow it, the sooner to grass,
more foon to be pasture, to bring it to pass. tosor.
gr ass-plot. m. s. [grass and plot...] a small level covered
with short grass.
here on this grass-plot, in this very place,
come and sport. shakoffeare's tempg/?.
the part of your garden next your house should be a par-
terre for flowers, or grass-plots bordered with flowers. temple.
they are much valued by our modern planters, to adorn
their walks and grass-plots. 4/ortimer.
grass-poly. m. s. a species of willow-wort. -
goose. n. j. [from grassy.] the state of abounding in
grats.
gra'ssy, adj. [from grass.] covered with grass; abounding
with grass.
ne did he leave the mountains bare unseen,
nor the rank grassy sens delights untry'd. spensor.
- rats'd of grassy turf
their table was, and mossy seats had round. milton
the most in fields, like herded beasts, lie down o
to dews obnoxious, on the grassy floor. 'drydon.
o: n. s. scrates, latin.]
i. a partition made with bars placed near t
crossing each other: such as * in o, or
i have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for
you, and your couch-fellow, nim; or else you had look’d
through the grates, like a geminy of baboons. shakespeare
out at a little grate his eyes he cast peare.
upon those bord'ring hills, and open plain.” daniel.
a fan has on it a nunnery of liv
are endeavouring to creep o: at ows vestals, who
2. the range of bars within which fires are made adjo,
my dear is of opinion that an old fa -
coals, but gives no heat.
t2 o: v. a. [gratter, french.] spoffo.
1. to rub or wear any thing by the - -
thereat the so his †. o of: rough body,
j...'..."id grate, "so.
ion swallow'd cities up poser,
o states characterless are good
to dusty nothing. shai ;1...
if the o . the putty were o o cosi.
the pitch, they would, by rolling up and down o sick fift in
the object metal, and fill'it full fitti.i.” "...";
2. to offend by anything harsh or vexatious. atwo,0s.
thereat enraged, soon he 'gan upstart,
o,...o.
* gospel, culled and cho.
those softer and more gentle dictates which should il out
and disturb them. e
just resentment and hard usage coin'd
th’ unwilling word; and, grating as it is
take it, for ’tis thy due. djo. don shao
this habit of writing and discours * 9tation,
- *-- c "courling, wherein i union.
nately differ from almost the whole kingdom, and ama
grate the ears of more than i could wish, was so to
my apprenticeship in london. ..";
3. to form a found by collision of asperities or hard to."
the grating shock of wrathful iron arms. shakoff r ii
on a sudden open fly, • iv, ii,
with impetuous recoil and jarring sound,
th’ infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
§§ thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
f erebus. milton' 's i.
to grate. v. n. illon's parals. lys,
1. to rub hard so as to injure or offend; to offend, as by op-
pression or importunity.
wherein have you been galled by the king?
what peer hath been suborn'd to grate on you,
that you should seal this lawless bloody book
of forg'd rebellion with a seal divine shaft. hon.iv.
i have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for
you, or else you had looked through the grates. slator,
paradoxing is of great use; but the faculty must be so ten-
derly managed as not to grate upon the truth and season of
things. l'eraft.
this grated harder upon the hearts of men. §::ff,
i never heard him make the least complaint, in a case that
would have grated sorely on some men's patience, and have
filled their lives with discontent. lik.
2. to make a harsh noise, as that of a rough body drawn over
another. -
we are not so nice as to cast away a sharp knife, becaus.
the edge of it may sometimes grate. sor,
grateful. adj. [gratus, latin.]
i. having a due sense of benefits; willing to acknowledge and
to repay benefits.
a grateful mind + r. 1
by owing owes not, but still pays. milo,
when some degree of health was given, he exerted all his
strength in a return of gratsal recognition to the author of o
fi -
shioned &amp;rate consumes
ss orale
decoy of pit),
years of service past,
from grateful souls exact reward at last.
2. pleasing; acceptable; delightful; delicious.
whatsoever is ingrate at first, is made grateful by co
but whatsoever is too pleafing at first, growo, os-
tiate. bacon's natural ho.
a man will endure the pain of hunger and this, also
fuse such meats and drinks as are mostgratsu!" o
if he be perswaded that they will endanger his ho o
this place is the more grateful to strangers o
it being a frontier town, and bordering upon dive: o
many languages are understood here. browo
now golden fruits on loaded brancho shine, post
and grateful clusters swell with floods of wine, ot.
gratefully. adv, [from grateful.]
1. with willingness to acknowledge an
due sense of obligation. *
he, as new wak'd, thus gratefully reply d.
enough remains for household oilago beside,
his wife and tender children to sustain, . drisi.
and gratefully to feed his dumb geogo. rji, pio
in cyprus long by men and god; o' c.o.
the lowers toil she gratefully repaid. --
2. in a pleasing manner.
study detains the mind by the perpetual 9 o' tion
thing new, which may graisilly trio the imagislatio"
gratefuln ess. n. s. [from gratiful.] •
1. gratitude; duty to benefactors. now i. with more
a laconian knight having someto; serve sao).
gratefulness than good courage defended him. blosing
dryden's fails,
d repay benefits; with
jsło,
e-
as occurrence of som
tu isaiti,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 951</div><p class="text">g r a
g r a
..
-
blesfings beforehand, ties of gratefulness,
the found of glory ringing in our ears. herbert.
2. quality of being acceptable; pleasantness.
grater. m. s. [gratoir, fr. from grate.] a kind of coarse file
with which soft bodies are rubbed to powder.
tender handed touch a nettle,
and it stings you for your pains,
grasp it like a man of mettle,
and it soft as filk remains.
so it is with common natures,
treat them gently they rebel,
but be rough as nutmeg-graters,
and the rogues obey you well.
grat if igation. m. s. [gratificatio, latin.j
1. the act of pleasing.
they are incapable of any design above the present gratifica-
tion of their palates. south.
2. pleasure; delight.
how hardly is his will brought to change all its desires and
aversions, and to renounce those gratifications in which he has
been long used to place his happiness? rogers.
3. reward; recompence. a low word.
to gratify. v. a. [gratificor, latin.]
1. to indulge; to grant by compliance.
you fleer between the country and the court,
nor gratiff whate'er the great desire,
not grudging give what publick needs require.
2. to delight; to please; to humour; to sooth.
but pride stood ready to prevent the blow ;
for who would die to gratify a foe dryden’s fables.
the captive generals to his car are ty'd ;
prior. }
the joyful citizens tumultuous tide
a palled appetite is humorous, and must be gratified with
as. hill.
dryden.
echoing his glory, gratify his pride.
sauces rather than food. tailer.
at once they gratify their scent and taste,
while frequent cups prolong the rich repast. pope.
a thousand little impertinencies are very gratifying to cu-
riosity, though not improving to the understanding. addison.
3. to requite with a gratification ; as, i'll gratify you for this
trouble.
gr aorts gly. adv. [from grate.] harshly ; offensively.
gratis. adv. [latin.] for nothing ; without a recompence.
the people cry you mock'd them ; and, of late,
when corn was given them gratis, you repin'd. shakesh.
they sold themselves; but thou, like a kind fellow, gav'st
thyself away gratis, and i thank thee for thee. shakespeare.
the taking of use, though he judged lawful, yet never ap-
proved by practice, but lent still gratis both to friends and
itrangers. fell.
kindred are no welcome clients, where relation gives them
a title to have advice gratis. l'e/irange.
i scorned to take my degree at utrecht or leyden, though
offered it graiis by those universities. arbuthnot's john bull.
gratitude. m. s. [gratitude, low latin.]
1. duty to benefactors.
forbid
that our renowned rome, whose gratitude
tow'rds her deserving children is enroll'd,
should now eat up her own shakespeare's coriolanus.
suspicious thoughts his pensive mind employ,
a sullen gratitude, and clouded joy. harte.
2. desire to return benefits.
the debt immense of endless gratitude. milton.
gratitude is properly a virtue, disposing the mind to an in-
ward sense and an outward acknowledgment of a benefit re-
ceived, together with a readiness to return the same, or the
like. south's sermons.
- gratuttous. adj. [gratuitus, latin; gratuit, fr. j
1. voluntary; granted without claim or merit.
we mistake the gratuitous blesiings of heaven for the fruits
of our own industry. l’estrange.
2. asserted without proof.
the second notive they had to introduce this gratuitous
declination of atoms, the same poet gives us. ray.
grat u’it ously. adv. [from gratuitous.]
1. without claim or merit.
2. without proof. * - -
i would know whence came this obliquity of direction,
which they gratuitously tack to matter: this is to ascribe will
and choice to these particles. cheyne's phil. prin.
grat uity. m. s. [gratuite, fr. from gratuitous...] a present or
acknowledgment; a free gift. -
they might have pretended to comply with ulysses, and
dismissed him with a snail gratuity. broome on the odyssey.
he used every year to present us with his almanack, upon
the score of some little gratuity we gave him. swift.
to gratulate. v. a. [gratular, latin.]
1. to congratulate ; to salute with declarations of joy.
to gratify the good andronicus,
and gratislate his safe return to rome,
the people will accept whom he admires. shakoff, tit, andr,
whither away so fast
—no farther than the tower,
to gratulate the gentle princes there. shakesp. rich. iii.
since nature could behold so dire a crime,
i gratulate at least my native clime,
that such a land, which such a monster bore,
so far is distant foom our thracian shore. dryden's falls,
2. to declare joy for ; to mention with expressions of joy.
yet give thy jealous subjects leave to doubt,
who this thy 'scape from rumour gratulate,
no less than if from peril; and devout,
do beg thy care unto thy after state. ben. johnson.
gratupation: n, s. strom gratulatio, latin.] salatations
made by expressing joy; expression of joy.
they are the first gratulations where with our lord and sa-
viour was joyfully received at his entrance into the world, by
such as in their hearts, arms, and bowels embraced him.
hooker.
the earth
gave signs of gratulation, and each hill. milton.
your enjoyments, according to the standard of a christian
desire, require no addition: i shall turn my wishes into gra-
tulations, and, congratulating their fulness, only wish their
continuance. south.
gratulatory. adj. [from gratulate.] congratulatory; ex-
pressing congratulation.
rave, a final syllable in the names of places, is from the
saxon 3raep, a grove or cave. gibson's camden.
grave. n.f. [anap, saxon.] the place in the ground in
which the dead are reposited.
now it is the time of night,
that the graves, all gaping wide,
every one lets forth his spright,
in the church-way paths to glide. shakespeare.
thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave. milton.
to walk upon the graves of our dead masters,
is our own security. denham's sophy.
a flood of waters would overwhelm all those fragments
which the earth broke into, and bury in one common grave
all the inhabitants of the earth, burnet.
they were wont once a year to meet at the graves of the
martyrs; there solemnly to recite their sufferings and tri-
umphs, to praise their virtues, to bless god for their pious
examples, for their holy lives and their happy deaths. nelson.
gra’ve-cloaths. n.s. [grave and cloaths.] the dress of the
dead.
but of such subtle substance and unsound,
that like a ghost he seem’d, whose grave-cloaths were un-
bound. spenser.
and he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot
with grave-cloaths. jo. xi. 44.
gra’v e.r. comp. of grave. see grave.
gra’v est. superl. of grave. see grave. - -
gra’v e-ston e. n.s. [grave and stone..] the stone that is laid
over the grave ; the monumental stone.
timon, presently prepare thy grave;
lye where the light foam of the sea may beat
thy grave-stone daily. shakespeare's timon.
to grave. v. a. preter. graved; part, pass, graven. [graver,
french ; yopo.] *
1. to insculp; to carve a figure or inscription in any hard sub-
stance.
cornice with bossy sculptures graven. moltzit.
later vows, oaths, or leagues can never blot out those for-
mer gravings or characters, which by just and lawful oaths were
made upon their souls. king charles.
thy sum of duty let two words contain;
o! may they graven in thy heart remain,
be humble and be just. - prior.
2. to carve or form.
what profiteth the graven image, that the maker thereof
hath graven it heb. ii. 18.
3. to copy paintings upon wood or metal, in order to be im-
prefied on paper. -
the gravers can and ought to imitate the bodies of the
colours by the degrees of the lights and shadows: 'tis im-
possible to give much strength to what they grave, after the
works of the schools, without imitating in some sort the co-
lour of the objects. dryden's dufresnoy,
4. [from grave.] to entomb. not in use.
there's more gold:
do you damn others, and let this damn you:
and ditches grave you all ! shakespeare's timon.
5. to clean, caulk, and sheath a ship. ainsworth.
to grave. v. n. to write or delineate on hard substances.
thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it.
ex. xxviii. 36.
gr ave. adj. [grave, french ; gravis, latin.] ---
1. solemn; serious; sober; not gay; not light or trifling.
to th’ more mature,
a glass that featur'd them; and to the grave, &gt; -
a child that guided dotards. shakespeare's *:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 952</div><p class="text">g r a
g r a
we should have else desir'd
your good advice, which still hath been both grave
and prosperous, in this day's council. shakesp. macbeth.
that grave awfulness, as in your best breed of maftives, or
elegancy and prettincts, as in your lesser dogs, are modes of
beauty. more agains atheisn.
even the grave and serious characters are distinguished by
their several sorts of gravity. dryden's fables, preface.
youth on silent wings is flown ;
graver years come rolling on. prior.
to laugh, were want of goodness and of grace;
and to be grave, exceeds all power of face. pope.
folly-painting humour, grave himself,
calls laughter forth. thomson.
they have as much reason to pretend to, and as much ne-
ceflity to aspire after, the highest accomplishments of a chris-
tian and solid virtue, as the graves? and wisest among christian
philosophers. law.
2. "of weight; not futile; credible. little used.
the roman state was of all others the most celebrated for
their virtue, as the graves? of their own writers, and of
{trangers, do bear them witness. - grew's cosmol.
3. not showy, not tawdry: as, a grave suit of cloaths.
4. not sharp of sound; not acute.
accent, in the greek names and usage, seems to have re-
garded the tone of the voice; the acute accent raising the
voice, in some syllables, to a higher, i. e. more acute pitch or
tone, and the grave depressing it lower, and both having some
emphasis, i. e. more vigorous pronunciation. holder.
gravel. m. s. [gravier, french ; graveel, dutch ; gravel,
armorick.]
1. hard sand; sand consisting of very small pebblestones.
gravel consists of flints of all the usual sizes and colours, of
the several sorts of pebbles; sometimes with a few pyritae,
and other mineral bodies, confusedly intermixed, and common
sand. jwoodward.
his armour, all gilt, was so well handled, that it shewed
like a glittering said and gravel, interlaced with silver rivers.
sidney.
proofs as clear as founts in july, when
we see each grain of gravel. shakespeare's henry viii.
providence permitted not the earth to spend itself in base
gravel and pebbles, instead of quarries of stones. more.
so deep, and yet so clear, we might behold
the gravel bottom, and that bottom gold. dryden.
the upper garden at kensington was at first nothing but a
gravel pit. speciator.
gravel walks are best for fruit-trees. mortimer's hoshandry.
2, [gravelle, french..] sandy matter concreted in the kidneys.
if the stone is brittle it will often crumble, and pass in the
form of gravel; if the stone is too big to pass, the best method
is to come to a sort of a composition or truce with it. arbuthnot.
to gra’ve l. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to pave or cover with gravel.
moss groweth upon alleys, especially such as lie cold, and
upon the north, as in divers terrasses; and again, if they be
much trodden, or if they were at the first gravelled. bacon.
2. to stick in the sand. -
william the conqueror, when he invaded this island,
chanced at his arrival to be gravelled; and one of his feet
stuck so fast in the sand, that he fell to the ground. camden.
3. to puzzle ; to stop; to put to a stand; to embarrass.
i would kiss before i spoke.
—nay, you were better speak first, and when you were gra-
vell'd for lack of matter you might take occasion to kiss. shak.
the disease itself will gravel him to judge of it; nor can
there be any prediction made of it, it is so sharp. howel.
what work do our imaginations make with eternity and
immensity ? and how are we gravelled by their cutting
dilemmas : glanville's scepsis.
mat, who was here a little gravell’d,
toft up his nose, and would have cavill’d. prior.
4. [in horsemanship.] to hurt the foot with gravel confined
by the shoe. -
graveless, adj. [from grave..] wanting a tomb; unburied.
my brave egyptians all,
by the discandying of this pelletted storm,
lie graveless. shakoff. antony and cleopatra.
gra’v elly, adj. [graveleux, french; from gravel.) full of
gravel; abounding with gravel; confifting of gravel.
there are some natural spring waters that will inlapidate
wood; so that you shall fee one piece of wood, whereof the
part above the water shall continue wood, and the part under
the water shall be turned into a gravelly stone. bacon’s n. hi/?.
if you live in a consumptive air, make choice of the more
open, high, dry, and gravelly part of it. harvey on consumpt.
gravely. adv. [from grave. j
i. solemnly; seriously; soberly; without lightness or mirth.
thou stand'st
gravely in doubt when to hold them wise. milton.
a girl longs to tell her confidant that she hopes to be mar-
ried in a little time,
and asks her ve *
have her to do. "y&amp;ravely what she would
wisdom's above suspecting wiles; sheilao.
the o: learning gravely smills. s
a formal story was very gravel, car; - wift,
by some zealous '...' &amp;”vey carried to his o
is’t not enough the blockhead so swift,
but must he wisely look, and ojo” y
2. without gaudiness or show. -
graven ess. m. s. [from grave..] seriousness,
sobriety of behaviour. -
you no less becomes
the light and careless livery that it wears
than settled . his sables, and his wee;
importing health and gravenes;, * = .....”
but yet beware of ‘... when jois-,
number makes long disputes indgravens; i r
graveoles t. adj. [graveolens, lat...] stro. son o
gra’v er. m. s. [graveur, french; from gravij itd, dia,
1. one whose business is to inscribe or taro on h
stances ; one who copies pictures upon wood . in ard sub-
impressed on paper. “tal to be
if he makes a design to be graved, he i
the gravers dispose . their j. as i. that
that, by consequence, he must take occasion of. th 0; and
of his design in the natural shadows of the figs. i.
has disposed to cause the effect. sures, which
2. the stile or tool used in graving.
with all the care wherewith i tried upon it the k
ways of softening gravers, i could not soften thi. nown
the toilsome hours in diff'rent labour slide,
some work the file, and some the graver guide. gay'; fan,
gravi'd ty. m. s. [gravidus, latin.] pregnancy
being with child.
women, obstructed, have not always the forementioned
symptoms: in those the signs of gravidity and obso. are
hard to be distinguished in the beginning, arbuthian dief
gra’v ing.. n. s. [from grave..] carved work, -
skilful to work in gold; also to grave any manner of
graving, and to find out every device which shill be put to
him. --- 20hrs, ii. 14.
to gravitate. v. m. [from gravis, latin.] to to .
the center of attraction.
those who have nature's steps with care pursu'd,
that matter is with active force endu'd,
that all its parts magnetick pow'r exert,
and to each other gravitate, assert. blackmore,
that subtie matter must be of the same substance with all
other matter, and as much as is comprehended within a parti-
cular body must gravitate jointly with that body. billy.
gravitation. m. s. [from gravitate.] aet of tending to the
centre.
the most confiderable phenomenon belonging to te restrial
bodies is the general action of gravitation, whereby all known
bodies, in the vicinity of the earth, do tend and press towards
foung,
solemnly and
son
* he
pydn' dojo,
bjk,
; state of
its centre. bently,
when the loose mountain trembles from on high,
shall gravitation cease, if you go by ? pop!,
gra’vity. m. s. [gravitas, latin; gravite, french.j
1. weight; heaviness; tendency to the centre.
that quality by which all heavy bodies tend towards the
centre, accelerating their motion the nearer they approach
towards it, true philosophy has shewn to be unsolveable by
any hypothesis, and resolved it into the immediate will of the
creator. of all bodies, considered within the confines of any
fluid, there is a twofold gravity, true and absolute, and vulgit
or comparative : absolute gravity is the whole force by with
any body tends downwards; but the relative or vulgar is to
excess of gravity in one body above the specifick gravity” to
fluid, whereby it tends downwards more than the amont
fluid doth. - §ios.
bodies do swim or sink in different liquors, according to the
tenacity or gravity of those liquors which are to suppoison.
w - brown's pagar errols.
though this increase of density may at great distances be
exceeding slow, yet if the elastick tone of this o:
exceeding great, it may suffice to impel bodies from the des. :
parts of the medium towards the rarer, with al th: o
which we call gravity. ! nowojo
2. atrociousness; weight of guilt.
no monoid . hot this reasonable, that o:
intended thereby only to punish the injury committed, fi.
ing to the gravity of the fact. o
. seriousness; solemnity. e hi
3 there is not a wo hair on your face bo o:
effect of gravity. soft. ho
our youths and wildness shall no whit aspoo, ;cesar,
but all be buried in his gravity. shakoff, just d gro-
for the advocates and council that pload, pat" *:::
vity of hearing is an essential part of justis. dryden' fo
great cato there, for gravity renown'd. ***.
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 953</div><p class="text">g r a
--
o
--
-
--
the emperors often jested on their rivals or predecessors,
but their mints still maintained their gravity. addison.
he will tell you with great gravity, that it is a dangerous
thing for a man that has been used to get money, ever to leave
it off. law.
gravy. m. s. the serous juice that runs from flesh not much
dried by the fire.
meat we love half raw, with the blood trickling down
from it, delicately terming it the gravy, which in truth looks
more like an ichorous or raw bloody matter. harv. on consump.
there may be a stronger broth made of vegetables than of
any gravy soup. arbuthnot on aliments.
gray adj. [znaez, saxon; grau, danish; graau, dutch.]
1. white with a mixture of black.
they left me then, when the gray headed even,
like a sad votarist in palmer's weed,
rose from the hindmost wheels of phoebus' wain. milton.
. these gray and dun colours may be also produced by mix-
ing whites and blacks, and by consequence differ from perfeot
whites, not in species of colours, but only in degree of lumi-
nousness. newton's optics.
2. white or hoary with old age.
living creatures generally do change their hair with age,
turning to be gray; as is seen in men, though some earlier and
some later; in horses, that are dappled and turn white; in old
squirrels that turn grisly, and many others. bacon's nat. hist.
thou hast neither forsaken me now i am become gray
headed, nor suffered me to forsake thee in the late days of
temptation. walton's life of bishop sanderson.
anon
gray headed men and grave, with warriors mix’d,
assemble. milton's paradise loft.
the restoration of gray hairs to juvenility, and renewing
the exhausted marrow, may be effected. glanville's scepsis.
gray headed infant and in vain grown old !
art thou to learn that in another's gold
lie charms resistless dryden's juvenal.
we most of us are grown gray headed in our dear master's
service. addison's speciator.
her gray hair'd synods damning books unread,
and bacon trembling for his brazen head. pope.
3. dark like the opening or close of day; of the colour of ashes.
our women's names are more gracious than their caesilia,
that is, gray eyed. camden's remains.
the gray ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
chequ'ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light. shakesp.
i'll say yon gray is not the morning's eye;
'tis but the pale reflex of cynthia's brow. shak. r. and jul.
soon as the gray ey'd morning streaks the skies,
and in he doubtful day the woodcock flies. gay's trivia.
gray. m. s. a gray colour.
down sunk the sun, the closing hour of day
came or word, mantled o'er with dusky grey. parnel.
gray. m. s. a bad er. ainsworth.
gray bea r d. m. s. [gray and leard.] an old man: in con-
tempo.
- youngling, thou can'st not love so dear as i.
–graybeard, thy love doth freeze. shakspeare.
have t in conquest stretcht mine arm so far,
to be afraid to tell greybeard; the truth? shakesp. jul. caes.
gra’yling. n.s.. [thymallus.] the umber, a fish.
the rayling lives in such rivers as the trout does, and is
usually taken with the same baits, and after the same manner:
he is of a fine shape, his flesh white, and his teeth, those little
ones that he has, are in his throat. he is not so general a fish
as the trout, nor so good to eat. walton's angler.
gra’yness. n.s. [from gray.] the quality of being gray.
to graze. v. n. [from grass.]
1. to eat grass; to feed on grass.
the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze, and my
lambs suck. shakesp. as you like it.
graze where you will, you shall not house with me. shak.
leaving in the fields his grazing cows,
he sought himself some hospitable house. dryden's fables.
the more ignoble throng
attend their stately steps, and slowly graze along. dryden.
2. to supply grass. - - -
physicians advise their patients to remove into airs which
are plain champaigns, but grazing, and not overgrown with
heath. bacon.
the sewers must be kept so as the water may not stay too
long in the spring; for then the ground continueth the wet,
whereby it will never graze to purpose that year. bacon.
a third sort of grazing ground is that near the sea, which
is commonly very rich land. mortimer's husbandry.
3. to move on devouring.
as every state lay next to the other that was oppressed, so
the fire perpetually grazed. bacon on the war with spain.
4. [from raser, french.j. to touch lightly; .
mark then a bounding valour in our english,
that being dead, like to the bullets grazing,
vol. i.
breaks out into a second course of mischief,
- killing in relapse of mortality. ha} t?.
fo graze. v. a. y shakesh. henry v,
1. to tend grazing cattle; to set cattle to feed on grass.
jacob graz'd his uncle laban's sheep. shakespeare.
o happy man, faith he, that, lo! i see sp
grazing his cattle in those pleasant fields, -
if he but know his good daniel's civil war,
2. to seed upon.
i was at first as other beasts, that graze
the trodden herb, of abject thoughts and low.
their steeds around,
free from their harness, graze the flow'ry ground. dryden.
some graze their land’till christmas, and some longer. mort.
this neptune gave him, when he gave to keep
his scaly flocks that graze the wat'ry deep. dryden's wirgil.
the lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead. pope.
3. to supply with grass.
he hath a house and barn in repair, and a field or two to
graze his cows, with a garden and orchard. swift.
go. n: s [from graze.] one that grazes or feeds on
grass.
milton.
his flock daily crops
their verdant dinner from the mossy turf
sufficient: after them the cackling goose,
close grazer, finds wherewith to ease her want.
gra’z.i.e.r. m. s. [from graze.] one who feeds cattle.
all graziers prefer their cattle from meaner pastures to bet-
ter. bacon.
gentle peace, which fillest the husbandman's barns, the
grazier's folds, and the tradesman's shop. howel.
his confusion increased when he found the alderman's father
to be a grazier. spectator.
of agriculture, the desolation made in the country by en-
grossing graziers, and the great yearly importation of corn
from england are lamentable instances under what discou-
ragement it lies. swift.
grease. n.s. [graise, french.]
1. the soft part of the fat; the oily or unetuous part of ani-
mals.
philips.
grease, that's sweaten
from the murth’rer's gibbet, throw
into the flame. shakespeare's macbeth.
to take out a spot of grease they use a coal upon brown
paper. bacon's natural history.
thou hop'st, with sacrifice of oxen slain,
to compass wealth, and bribe the god of gain
to give thee flocks and herds, with large increase;
fool to expect them from a bullock's grease. dryd. juv.
a girdle, foul with grease, binds his obscene attire. jdryd.
2. [in horsemanship.]. a swelling and gourdiness of the legs,
which happens to a horse after a journey, or by standing long
in the stable.
to grease. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to smear or anoint with grease.
2. to bribe; to corrupt with presents.
envy not the store -
of the greas'd advocate that grinds the poor. dryd. pers.
gre(asiness. n.s. (from grease..] o:liness; fatness.
upon the most of these stones, after they are cut, there
appears always, as it were, a kind of greasiness or unetuosity.
boyle.
gre’asy. adj. [from grease.] y
1. oily ; fat; unetuous.
the fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy reliques
of her o'ercaten faith. shakespeare.
2. smeared with grease.
even the lewd rabble
govern'd their roaring throats, and grumbled pity :
i could have hugg’d the greasy rogues; they pleas'd me. otw.
buy sheep, and see that they be big-boned, and have a soft,
greaff, well curled close wool. mortimer's husbandy.
3. fat of body; bulky; in reproach.
let's consult together against this greasy knight.
great. adj. [3meat, saxon; groot, dutch.]
1. large in bulk or number.
judas one of the twelve came, and with him a great mul-
titude with swords and staves. asat. xxvi. 47.
all these cities were fenced with high walls, gates and bars,
shaksp.
besides unwalled towns a great many. deut. iii. 5.
elemental air diffus'd
in circuit to the uttermost convex
of this great round. milton.
and god created the great whales. milton.
a dungeon horrible, on all sides round, -
as one great furnace flam'd. milton.
the tallest pine
hewn on norwegian hills, to be the mast
of some great admiral. milton.
2. having any quality in a high degree. -
there were they in great fear. ps, xiv. 5.
1o q. their<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 954</div><p class="text">g r e
g r e
their pow'r was great.
great triumph and rejoicing was in heav'n.
charms such as thine, iniuitably great
he only could express. - -
. having number or bulk, relative or comparative.
~
3.
reater is also clear, but it is but a comparative idea.
4. confiderable in exten; or duration.
a silon.
a silion.
brozone.
. the idea of so much is positive and clear: the idea of
locke.
thou has spoken of thy servants house for a great while to
conne,
5. important : weighty.
make sure
her favours to thee, and the great oath take
with which the blessed gods aslurance make.
many
2 sa. vii. 19.
chapman.
have broke their backs with laying manors on them,
for this great journey.
what is low raise and support,
that to the height of this great argument
i may assert eternal providence,
and vindicate the ways of god to men.
on some great charge employ'd
he scem’d, or fix’d in cogitation deep.
by experience of this great event,
in arms not worse.
after silence then,
and summons read, the great consult began.
shakespeare's henry viii.
milton.
milton.
milton.
milton.
and though this be a great truth, if it be impartially con-
sidered, yet it is also a great paradox to men of corrupt minds
and vitious practices.
6. chief; principal.
tillotson.
hear the king's pleasure, cardinal, who commands you
to render up the great seal presently. shakes?. henry viii.
7. venerable ; adorable ; awful.
thou first art wont god’s great authentick will,
interpreter, through highest heav'n to bring.
8. wonderful; marvellous.
great things, and full of wonder.
9. of high rank; of large power.
such men as he be never at heart's ease,
milton.
milton.
whilst they behold a greater than themselves. sh. jul. cas.
worthiest by being good,
far more than great or high. milton.
of all the great, how few
are just to heav'n, and to their promise true! pope's ods.
misfortune made the throne her seat,
and none could be unhappy but the great. rowe.
despise the farce of state, -
the sober follies of the wife and great. pope.
the marble tom s that rise on high,
whose dead in vaulted arches lie;
these, all the poor remains of state,
adorn the rich, or praise the great. parnel.
10. general ; extensive in consequence or influence.
prolifick humour softning all her globe,
fermented the great mother to conceive. milton.
i 1. illustrious; eminent ; noble ; excellent.
o lord, thou art great, and thy name is great in might.
er. x. 6.
the great creator thus reply'd. milton.
the great son return'd
victorious with his saints. milton.
fair angel, thy desire that tends to know
the works of god, thereby to glorify
the great work-master, tends to no excess
that reaches blame. milton.
great are thy works jehovah, infinite
thy pow'r what thought can measure thee, or tongue
relate thee! greater now in thy return,
than from the giant angels: thee that day
thy thunders magnified, but to create
is greater than created to destroy.
the great luminary,
aloof the vulgar constellations thick,
that from his lordly eye keep distance due,
dispenses light from far.
here cesar grac'd with both minervas shone,
cesar, the world's great master, and his own.
v . ." scipio,
great in his triumphs, in retirement great.
12. grand of aspect, of elevated mien.
such dido was ; with such becoming state,
milton.
milton.
pope.
pope.
amidst the crowd, she walks serenely great. dryd. wirgil,
13. magnanimous; generous; high minded.
in her every thing was goodly and stately; yet so, that it
"so seem that great mindedness was but the ancient-or
to the humbleness.
"4: opulent; sumptuous; magnificent.
not babylon,
nor great alcairo, such magnificence
*quali'd in all their glories.
sidney.
milton.
he disdained not to appear at great tables
tertainments.
15. intellectually great; sublime, aliorho
this new created world, how goo, -
answering his great idea. 2. good, how fair,
16. swelling ; proud, milon,
solyman perceived that vienna was
words, nor the defendants to be discoura
wherefore he began to batter the walls.
17. familiar; much acquainted. a low word
those that would not censure, or sp -
diately, will talk more boldly of those
and thereby wound their honour.
18. pregnant; teeming.
his eyes sometimes even great with tears, -
y their to. ars sidus,
with swelling vanity, bring forth deceit.
this fly, for most he stings in heat of day
from cattleg eat with young keep thou away, 'm ' wirr;
19. it is added in every step of ascending or do. o:
guinity: as great grandson is the son of my o 0nlan-
i dare not yet affirm for the antiquity of our high t, th:
our great-great-great grandfires tongue came out of o at
r camden' ins.
what we call great-great grandfather they also o:
camden’ -
their holy day-cloaths go from father to to:
worn out till the second or third generation; so to:
mon enough to see a countryman in the doublet and so.
of his great grandfather. allisin
20. hard ; difficult; grievous. a proverbial expression."
it is no great matter to live lovingly with good natured and
meek persons. - - - taylor's division,
great. n.s.. [from the adjective.] the whole; the gross;
the whole in a lump.
to let out thy harvest by great or by day,
let this by experience lead thee the way:
by great will deceive thee with ling ring it out,
by day will dispatch. tuft's hisland).
it were behoveful, for the strength of the navy, that no
ships should be builded by the great; for by daily experiend.
they are found to be weak and imperfect. raleighi effy,
he did at length so many slain forget,
and lost the tale, and took them by the great. doln,
carpenters build an house by the great, and are agreed for
the sum of money. moxon's moh, exor.
i set aside one day in a week for lovers, and interpret by the
great for any gentlewoman who is turned of fixty. also,
gre'atbelli ed. adj. [great and belly..] pregnant; terming,
greatbellied women,
that had not half a week to go, like rams
in the old time of war, would shake the press. shais,
a greatbellied woman, walking through the city in the day-
time, had her child struck out of her womb, and carried half
a furlong from her. holini's math. magio,
to greaten. v. a. [from great.] to aggrandize; to on.
large ; to magnify. a wo:d little used.
after they sought to greaten themselves in italy itself, using
strangers for the commanders of their armies, the turks by
degrees beat them out of all their goodly countries, raoh
a favourite's business is to please his king, a minister's to
greaten and exalt him. - - - - - ko,
greathe arted. adj. [great and heart.] high spirit";
undejected. -
the earl, as greathcarted as he, declared that he no
cared for his friendship, nor feared his hatred. clarendo,
great ly. adv. [from great.]
i. in a great degree.
thy sorrow i will greaty mul.jp'y.
2. nobly ; illustriously. -
yet london, empress of the northern clime, }s;
by an high fate thougreatly didst expire. dod. ann, sir,
3. magnanimously; generously; bravely.
where are these bold intrepid sons of war,
that greatly turn their backs upon the foe:
and to their general send a brave defiance
greatn ess. m. s. [from great.]
i • §: of quantity or number.
2. comparative quantity. -
o can ho oise idea of any space of *:
which is not made up of and commensurate to so. o wo
bers of feet or yards, or days or years, and w o:
judge of the greatness of these sort of quino. fiths,
all absent good does not, according to the . o
or is acknowledged to have, cause pain equal to o
as all pain causes desire equal to itself; because: *.
good is not always a pain, as the presence of pain."
3. high degree of any quality. -
zeal, in duties, should be proportioned
the reward, and the certainty. . ire
4. high place; dignity; power; influence; * the
and festival £n.
* to be won with
ged with greatlo.
kulli,
eak ill of a man imme.
hat are great with them,
bach.
sanci,
milo,
alison'; co.
aws of
to the gr #.
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 955</div><p class="text">g r e
g r e
s
the most servile flattery is lodged most easily in the grossest
capacity; for their ordinary conceit draweth a yielding to
greatness, and then have they not wit to discern the right de-
grees of duty. sidney.
farewel, a long farewel to all my greatness. shakespeare.
so many
as will to greatness dedicate themselves. shakesp. alsacbeth.
i beg your greatness not to give the law -
in other realms; but beaten, to withdraw. dryden's acn.
approaching greatness met him with her charms
of pow'r and future state;
he shook her from his arms. dryden.
themistocles raised the athenians to their greatness at sea,
which he thought to be the true and constant interest of that
commonwealth. swift.
5. swelling pride; affected state.
my lord would have you know, that it is not of pride or
greatness that he cometh not aboard your ships.
6. merit; magnaninity; nobleness of mind.
greatness of mind and nobleness their seat
build in her lovelics!.
7. grandeur; state; magnificence.
greatness with timon dwells in such a draught,
as brings all brobdignag before your thought.
greave. m. s. [anor, saxon.] a grove. speyer.
yet when there haps a honey-fall,
we'll lick the sirupt leaves,
and tell the bees that theirs is gall
to that upon the greaves. m. drayton.
greaves: n, s. [from graves, french.] armour for the legs;
a sort of boots. it wants the singular number.
he had greaves of brass upon his legs. 1 sa. xvii. 6.
a shield make for him, and a helm, fair greaves, and curets
such
as may renown thy workmanship, and honour him as much.
chapman's iliads,
gre'cis m. m. s. [gracismus, latin.] an idiom of the greek
language. -
gree. n.s. [gre, french; probably from gratia.] good will;
favour ; good graces.
and falling her before on lowly knee,
to her makes present of his service seen,
which she accepts with thanks and goodly gree. spensor.
gre ece. m. s. [corrupted from degrees. it is written likewise
greeze or grice..] a flight of steps. obsolete.
ev'ry greece of fortune
is smother'd by that below. shakoshcare.
after the procession, the king himself remaining seated in
the quire, the lord archbishop, upon the greece of the quire,
made a long oration. bacon's henry vii.
gre'edily. adv. [from greedy..] eagerly; ravenously; vora-
ciously; with keen appetite or desire.
bacon.
milton.
pope.
greedily she engorg'd without restraint. milton.
he swallow'd it as greedily
as parched earth drinks rain. . denham.
ev’n deadly plants, and herbs of pois'nous juice,
wild hunger seeks; and to prolong our breath,
we greedily devour our certain death. dryden.
greed1n ess. m. s. [from greedy..] ravenousness; voracity;
hunger; eagerness of appetite or desire.
fox in stealth, wolf in greedings. shakesp. king lear.
thither with all greedings of affootion are they gone, and
there they intend to sup. shakespeare's hinter's tale.
if thou wert the wolf, thy greedings; would afflict thee.
shakespeare's timon.
i with the same greedings did seck,
as water when i thirst, to swallow greek. denham.
greedy. adj. [...obiz, sax, graadig, dan, gretig, dutch..]
1. ravenous; voracious ; hungry. --
as a lion that is greedy of his prey. ps, xvii. 12.
be not unsatiable in any dainty thing, nor too greedy upon
meats. ecclus, xxxvii. 29.
he made the greedy ravens to be elias's caterers, and bring
him food. king charles.
2. eager; vehemently desirous. it is now commonly taken in
an ill sense. -
greedy to know, as is the mind of man, -
their cause of death, swift to the fire she ran. fo
the ways of every one that is greedy of gain. 1707).
stern took'd the fiend, as frustrate of his will,
not half suffic'd, and greedy yet to kill.
while the reaper fills his greedy hands, -
and binds the golden sheaves in brittle bands. dryd. pirg,
how fearful would he be of all greedy and unjust ways of
raising their fortune 7 law.
green. adj. [grun, german ; green, dutch..] ..
1. having a colour formed commonly by compounding blue and
yellow ; of the colour of the leaves of trees or herbs. the
green colour is said to be most favourable to the fight.
the general colour of plants is green, which is a colour that
no flower is of: there is a greenish primrose, but it is pale,
and scarce a green. bacon's natural history.
dryden.
groves for ever green.
2. pale ; sickly: from whence we call the maid’s disease the
green sickness, or chlorosis. like it is soo's xxogorsen wo,
- was the hope drunk &gt; o ---
wherein you drest yourself? hath it slept since?
and wakes it now to look so green and pale
at what it did so freely : shakespeare’s assocłeth.
these's never any of these demure boys come to any proof:
they foll into a kind of male greenfickness. shakoff. hen. iv.
'till the green fickness and love's force betray'd
to death's remorseless arms sho unhappy maid. garth.
3. flourishing; fresh ; undecayed: from tices in spring. -
lf i have any where said * @reen old age, i have virgil's
authority; sed cruda do viridisque jonesius." -&gt;
pope.
- --- dryden.
4. new i.fresh; as, a green wound. ryaen
&gt; 1 he door is open, sir; there lies your way:
you may be jogging while your boots are green. shakoff.
griefs are green;
and all thy friends, which thou must make thy friends,
have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out.
shak 's he •
in a vault, %akespeare's henry iv
where bloody tybalt, yet but green in earth,
lies festering in his blood. shakesp. romeo and yuliet.
a man that studieth revenge keepeth his own wound.'. ***1.
which otherwise would heal and do well. bacon's £o. -
i might dilate on the temper of the people, the power, arts,
and interest of the contrary party, but those are invidious
topicks, too green in our remembrance. dryden.
5. not dry.
if a spark of error have thus far prevailed falling even
where the wood was green, and farthest off from any inclina-
tion unto furious attempts; must not the peril thereof be
greater in men, whose minds are of themselves as dry fewel,
apt beforehand unto tumults hooker, dedication.
being an olive tree
which late he fell’d; and being greene, must be
made lighter for his manage. chapman.
of fragility the cause is an impotency to be extended, and
therefore stone is more fragil than metal, and so dry wood is
more fragil than green. bacon's natural history.
if you but consider a piece of green wood burning in a
chimney, you will readily discern, in the disbanded parts of it,
the four elements. boyle.
the green do often heat the ripe, and the ripe, so heated,
give fire to the green. 4%rtimer's husandy.
6. not roasted ; half raw.
under this head we may rank those words which signify
different ideas, by a fort of an unaccountable far-fetched aila-
logy, or distant resemblance, that fancy has introduced be-
tween one thing and another; as when we say the meat is
green, when it is half roasted. //atts’s logick.
7. unripe; immature; young; because fruits are green before
they are ripe.
my fallad days,
when i was green in judgment, cold in blood
o charming youth, in the first op'ning page;
so many graces in so green an age.
you'll find a difference
between the promise of his greener days,
and these he masters now. shakoff. henry v.
if you would fat green geese, shut them up when they are
about a month old. alsortimer’s husbandry.
stubble geese at michaelmas are seen
upon the spit, next may produces green.
green. n.s.
1. the green colour; green colour of different shades.
her mother hath intended,
that, quaint in green, she shall be loose enrob’d. shakoff.
but with your presence cheer'd, they cease to mourn;
and walks wear fresher green at your return. dryden.
cinnabar, illuminated by this beam, appears of the same
red colour as in daylight; and if at the lens you intercept the
green making and blue making rays, its redness will become
more full and lively. newton's optics.
let us but consider the two colours of yellow and blue: if
they are mingled together in any confiderable proportion, they
make a green. - j/atts's logick.
2. a grasly plain.
for this down-trodden equity, we tread
in warlike march these greens before your town.
o'er the smooth enamell'd green,
where no print of step hath been,
follow me as i fing.
the young aemilia, fairer to be seen
than the fair lilly on the flow'ry green.
3. leaves; branches ; wreaths. - -
with greens and flow’rs recruit their empty hives, -
and seek fresh forage to sustain their lives. - dryden’s wirg.
ev'ry brow with chearful green is crown'd ;
shakesh.
dryden.
king's cookery.
shakes, *
milton.
dryden's fables.
the feasts are doubled, and the bowls go round. dryden.
the fragrant greens i seck, my brows to bind. po
o o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 956</div><p class="text">g r e
g r e
t, green. v. a. [from the noun..] to make green. a low
word.
- great spring before
green’d all the year; and fruits and blossoms blush'd -
in social sweetness on the self-same bough. thoms. spring.
gre'enbroom. n.s. [ cytisogenisła, latin.] a shrub, miller.
gre'encloth. n.s., a. board, or court of justice held in the
counting-house of the king's houshold, for the taking cogni-
zance of all matters of government and justice within the
king's court-royal ; and for correcting all the servants that
shall offend. dic7.
for the greencloth law, take it in the largest sense, i have no
opinion of it. bacon's advice to williers.
gre'eneyed. adj. [green and eye.] having eyes coloured with
reen.
g doubtful thoughts, and rash-embrac'd despair,
and shudd'ring fear, and greeney’d jealousy. shakespeare.
gre'enfinch. n.s.. [chloris.] a kind of bird.
the chaffinch, greenfinch, dormouse, and other small birds,
are injurious to some fruits. mortimer.
gre'enfish, n. s. [asellus, latin.]. a kind of fish. ainsworth.
gre engage. m. s. a species of plum.
gre'enhouse. m. s. [green and house..] a house in which
tender plants are sheltered from the weather.
if the season prove exceeding piercing, which you may
know by the freezing of a moistened cloth set in your green-
house, kindle some charcoal. evelyn's kalendar.
sometimes our road led us into several hollow apartments
among the rocks and mountains, that look like so many na-
tural greenhouses, as being always shaded witb a great variety
of trees and shrubs that never lose their verdure. addison.
a kitchen garden is a more pleasant fight than the finest
orangery or artificial greenhouse. speciator.
gre'enish. adj. [from green.] somewhat green; tending to
reen.
g with goodly greenish locks, all loose, unty'd,
as each had been a bride. spensor.
of this order the green of all vegetables seems to be, partly
by reason of the intenseness of their colours, and partly be-
cause, when they wither, some of them turn to a greenish
yellow. newton's optics.
gre enly. adv. [from green.]
1. with a greenish colour.
2. newly ; freshly.
3. immaturely.
4. wanly; timidly. not in use.
kate, i cannot look greenly, nor gasp out my eloquence;
nor have cunning in prote station. shakspeare's henry v.
gre enness. n.s.. [from green.]
1. the quality of being green; viridity; viridness.
about it grew such sort of trees, as either excellency of
fruit, stateliness of growth, continual greemnos, or poetical
fancies have made at any time famous. sidney.
in a meadow, though the meer grass and greenness delights,
yet the variety of flowers doth heighten and b, autify. b. johns.
my reason, which discourses on what it finds in my phan-
tasy, can confider greennes by itself, or mellowness, or sweet-
ness, or coldness, singly and alone by itself. digby on bodies.
2. immaturity ; unripeness.
this prince, while yet the errors in his nature were ex-
cused by, the greenness of his youth, which took all the salt
upon itself, loved a private man's wife. sidney.
3. freshness; vigour.
take the picture of a man in the greemnos, and vivacity of
his youth, and in the latter date and declension of his droop-
ing years, and you will scarce know it to belong to the same
person. south.
4. newness.
greensickness. n. s. [green and sickness.] the disease of
maids, so called from the paleness whics, it produces.
sour eruciations, and a craving appetite, especially of ter-
restrial and absorbent substances, are the case of girls in the
greensickness. arbuthnot.
greensw'ard. } n: s [green and sward: of the same original
grees. word, $ with swath..] the turfon which grass grows.
this is the pretticst low-born lass that ever
ran on the greensword. shakespeare's jointer's tale.
after break their fast
9n greensword ground, a cool and grateful taste. dryden.
in shallow soils all is gravel within a few inches; and
sometimes in low ground a thin greensward, and sloughy un-
derneath ; which last turns all into bog. - swift.
greenweed. m. s. [green and weed.] dyers weed.
gre **** *s. i green and wood..] a wood considered as
**ppears in the spring or summer. it is sometimes used as
one word.
among wild herbs under the greenwood shade. fairfax.
it happen'd on a summer; holiday,
that to the greenwood shade he too. his way;
for cymon shunn'd the church.
7” sokołt. v. a. sigrator, latin. t -
i. to address at meeting. &gt; 5 &amp;neran, saxon.]
dryden.
3. to salute in kindness or respect,
to greet. v. n. to meet and salute.
grem (al... adj. [gromium, latin.) pertaining to the lip.
shell of fair water as hope to succeed.
gre ut. m. s. a kind of fossile body.
crystals, or sparks of spar, of the bigness of baysalt,
brown shining colour immersed therein. grew's
grew. the preterite of grow.
gre’y h u nd. m. s. [3].3hunb, saxon.] a t
chases in sight. first
i think if men, which in these place, i.
durst look in themselves, and ...;
they would like strangers greet j...'",
i would gladly 8’’, - donn,
to greet my pallas with such news below. o
2. to addess in whatever manner. ow, pryden', e,
ivy noble partner
you greet with present grace, and great * - -
to me you speak not. 3. g s o,
now, thomas mowbray, do i tus. to thee arleth,
and mark my greeting well; for what i speak n
my body shall make good. shakspeare', r:chard ii
my lord, the mayor of london comes to
~ w - greet you,
—god bless your grace with health and h
now the herald lark *ppy days, shais,
left his ground nest, high tow'ring to deser
the morn's approach, and greet he withi f
once had the early matrons run * long, miln,
to greet her of a lovely son.
the sea's our own ; and now all nations great milo.
with bending sails, each vessel of our flee." wallr
thus pale they meet, their eyes with fury burn: dilor,
none greets; for none the greeting will return;
but in dumb furliness, each arm'd with care,
his foe profesł, as brother of the war. dryden's fall,
4. to congratulate.
his lady, seeing all that channel from fir,
approacht in haste to greet his viclorie. soft
5. to pay compliments at a distance.
the king's a-bed,
and sent great largess to your officers;
this diamond he greets your wife withal,
by the name of most kind hostess. shakoshtar's mill.
6. to meet, as those do who go to pay congratulations. not
much in use.
your haste
is now urg'd on you.
we will greet the time.
shakespeare's king lar,
there greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
and sleep in peace. shaloftware,
such was that face on which i dwelt with joy,
ere greece assembled stem'd the tides to troy;
but parting then for that detested shore,
our eyes, unhappy! never greated more. pope';0is.
qreeter. m. s. [from the verb.] he who grees,
gre'eting. m. s. [from greet.] salutation at meeting, or
compliments at a distance.
i from him
sive you all greetings, that a king, as friend,
can send his brother. shakespeare's winter'; tal.
greeze. n. s. [otherwise written greer. see greecs, or
griezf, or grice; from degrees.] a fight of steps; a
step.
gre gal. adj. [grex, gregis, lat.] belonging to a flock. diff,
grega'rious. adj. [grearius, latin.] "going in flocks or
herds, like sheep or partridges.
no birds of prey are grecarious. ray on the croatin,
diff,
grena’de. n. s. [from pomum granatum, latin.) a its
hollow globe or ball of iron, or other metal, about two into
and a half in diameter, which, being filled with fine powdes,
is set on fire by means of a small fusee fostened to the touch-
hole; as soon as it is kindled, the case flies into many shoots,
much to the damage of all that stand near. hist
gre nadier. m. s. [grenadier, fr. from grenade.] a tal o:
soldier, of whom there is one company in every regiment;
such men being . to throw grenades.
peace allays the shepherd's fear * - d - so...
of wearing cap of grenadier. gay's poiral,
grena’do. m. s. see grenade.
yet to express a scot, to play that prize,
not all those mouth grenados can suffice. d
you may as well try to quench a flaming grono
clintlind.
with a
willi,
s, a congeries of
and of a
* moson.
a sort of tin ore, with its greut; that i
the pleasing task he sails not to renew;
soft and more soft at ev'ry touch it grew,
dryden's falks,
grey. adj. [gris, french. more properly writted gro.] se:
gray.
this ancient rufian fir, whose lise ispar'd at suit of his of
beard. shakespeare's king liar.
our green youth copies what grey fino act, drydo,
when venerable age commends the fact. all fleet dog to
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 957</div><p class="text">g r i
g r i
*** -
-
first may a trusty greyhound transform himself into a tyger.
sidney.
so on the downs we see, near wilton fair, -
a hast'ned hare from greedy greyhounds go. sidney.
th’ impatient greyhound, slipt from far, -
bounds o'er the glebe to catch the fearful hare. dryden.
gr1cf. m. s.
1. a little pig. gouldman.
2. a step or greeze.
- no, not a grice; -
this a step to love. shakespeare's twelfth night.
to gride. v. n. (gridare, italian.] to cut; to make way by
cutting. a word elegant, but not in use.
his poignant spear he thrust with puissant sway,
that through his thigh the mortal steel did gride. spensor.
so sore
the griding sword, with discontinuous wound,
pass'd through him : milton's paradise loft.
gr1'delin. adj. a colour mixed of white and red.
the ladies dress'd in rich symars were seen,
of florence satten, flower'd with white and green,
and for a shade betwixt the bloomy gridelin. dryden's fab.
gr1'diron. m. s. [grind, islandick, a grate, and iron...] a port-
able grate on which meat is laid to be broiled upon the fire.
he had added two bars to the gridiron. speciator.
grief. n. f. [from grieve; griff; welsh, probably from the
english.]
1. sorrow ; trouble for something past.
i will instruct my sorrows to be proud;
for grief is proud, and makes his owner stout. shakespeare.
wringing of the hands, knocking the breast, are but the
ceremonies of sorrow, the pomp and ostentation of an effemi-
-nate grief, which speak not so much the greatness of the mi-
sery as the smallness of the mind. south.
the mother was so afflicted at the loss of a fine boy, who
was her only son, that she died for grief of it. addison.
2. grievance ; harm. [grief, french..] not in use,
be facious for redress of all these grift,
and i will set this foot of mine as far
as who goes farthest.
- - the king hath sent to know
the nature of your griefs, and whereupon
you conjure from the breast of civil peace
| such bold hostility ? - shakesp. henry iv.
3. pain; disease. obsolete.
crie’v a.nce. m. s. [from grief.]
1. a state of uneasiness. out of use.
2. the cause of uneasiness. used of such causes as are the
effects of human conduct.
what remedy can be found against grievances, but to bring
religion into countenance, and encourage those who, from the
hope of future reward, and dread of future punishment, will
be moved to justice and integrity ? swift.
to grieve. v. a. [grever, french; griever, flemish; gra-
vis, latin.]
1. to afflict ; to hurt. -
, for he doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men. luke iii. 33.
forty years long was i grieved with this generation. psal.
it repented the lord that he had made man on the earth,
and it grieved him at his heart. gen. vi., 6.
griev'd at the thought, he vow'd his whole endeavour
should be to close those breaches. rowe.
shakoshcare.
~2. to make sorrowful.
when one man kills another, thinking that he killeth a
wild beast; if the same man remembreth afterwards what he
hath done, and is not grieved for the fast, in this case he hath
finned; because his not grieving is offensive unto god, though
the fact were merely besides his will. perkins.
t, gr1ev e. v. m. to be in pain for something past; to
mourn; to sorrow, as for the death of friends. it has some-
times at and sometimes for before the cause of grief: perhaps
at is proper before our misfortunes, and for before our faults.
do not you grieve at this. shakes). henry iv.
how didst thou grieve then, adam, to behold
the end of all thy offspring end so fad. millon.
with equal mind what happens let us bear ;
nor joy porgrieve too much for things beyond our care.
dryden's fables.
agrie’v1n gly. adv. [from grieve..] in sorrow ; sorrowfully.
grievingly, i think,
the peace between the french and us not values
the cost that did conclude it.
grievous. adj. [gravis, latin ; or from to grieve.j.
1. afflictive; painful; hard to be born. - -
to the flesh, as the apostle himself granteth, all affliction
is naturally grievous. hooker.
correotion is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way, and
he that hateth reproof shall die. prov. xv. 10.
2. such as causes sorrow.
to own a great but grievous truth, though they quicken
and sharpen the invention, they corrupt the temper. watts.
vol. i. - -
shakesp. henry viii. .
3. expressing a great degree of uneasiness. -
he durst not disobey, but sent grievous complaints to the
parliament of the usage he was forced to submit to. clarendia.
4. atrocious ; heavy. -
it was a grievous fault, :
and grievously hath caesar answer'd it. shakoff. 'ful. cesar.
crying sins i call those, which are so heinous, and in their
kind so grievous, that they hasten god's judgments and call
down for speedy vengeance upon the finner. perkins.
5. sometimes used adverbially in low language. -
he cannot come, my lord; he's grievous sick. shakes.
grie’vously. adv. [from grievous.]
1. painfully; with pain. -
wide was the wound, and a large lukewarm flood,
red as the rose, thence gushed grievously. soyor.
2. with discontent; with ill will. -
grittus perceiving how grievously the matter was taken,
with the danger he was in, began to doubt. knolles.
3. calamitously; miserably. - -
i see how a number of souls are, for want of right informa-
tion, oftentimes grievously vexed. hooker.
4. vexatiously; to a great degree of uneasiness.
houses built in plains are apt to be grievously annoyed with
mire and dirt. - - ray on the creation.
grie’vousness. n.s.. [from grievous.] sorrow; pain; calamity.
they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword and from
the bent bow, and from the grievousnes of war. is. xxi. 15.
gr1'ffin. }*s [this should rather be written gryfon, or gry-
gr1'ffon. ; , phon; gryps, yo! ; but it is generally written
griffon.] a fabled animal, said to be generated between the lion
and eagle, and to have the head and paws of the lion, and
the wings of the eagle.
of all bearing among these winged creatures, the griffin is
the most ancient. peacham on blazoning,
aristeus, a poet of proconesus, affirmed, that near the one-
eyed nations griffins defended the mines of gold. brown.
grig. m. s. [aricke, bavarian, a little duck.]
1. it seems originally to have fignified any thing below the
natural size.
2. a small eel. - -
3. so o creature. [supposed from greek; graculus fossivus,
at 111. -
hard is her heart as flint or stone,
she laughs to see me pale;
and merry as a grig is grown,
and brisk as bottle-ale. - swift.
to grill. v. n. [grille, a grate, french.] to broil on a
grate or gridiron.
gr1'llade. m. s. [from grill.] any thing broiled on the
gridiron.
to gr1'll y. v. a. [from grill.] this word signifies, as it
seems, to harass; to hurt: as we now say, to rod/? a man,
for to teaze him.
for while we wrangle here and jar,
w’ are grillied all at temple-bar.
grim. adj. [31,1mma, saxon.]
1. having a countenance of terrour; horrible; hideous; fright-
ful.
the innocent prey in haste he does forsake,
which quit from death, yet quakes in every limb,
with change of fear to see the lion look so grim. spensor.
grim saturn yet remains, r
bound in those gloomy caves with adamantine chains. drayt.
thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
bears a command in't. shakespeare's coriolanus.
- their dear causes
would to the bleeding and the grin alarm
excite the mortified man. shakespeare's macbeth,
what if the breath that kindled those grim fires,
awak'd, should blow them into sevenfold rage : milton.
- expert to turn the sway
of battle, open when and where to close
the ridges of grim war. milton's paradise loft,
he that dares to die,
may laugh at the grim face of law and scorn,
the cruel wrinkle of a tyrant brow. denham's sophy.
their swarthy hosts would darken all our plains,
doubling the native horrour of the war,
and making death more grim.
2. ugly; ill-looking.
strait stood up to him
divine ulysses; who with lookes exceeding grave and grim,
this better check gave. chapman.
grim visag’d war hath smooth'd his wrinkl’d front. shaft.
venus was like her mother; for her father is but grim. shak.
grima(ce. n. s. [french, from grim.] - - *- -
1. a distortion of the countenance from habit, affeotation, or
insolence.
he had not spar'd to shew his piques,
against th' haranguer's politicks,
with smart remarks of leering faces,
and annotations of grimate; " hudilrat.
1o r the
hudibrar,
addison's cats.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 958</div><p class="text">g r i
g r i
the favourable opinion and good word of men comes often-
times at a very easy rate; and by a few demure looks and af-
feated whims, set off with some odd devotional postures and
grimaces, and such other little arts of disfimulation, cunning
men will do wonders. south's sermons.
the buffoon ape, with grimaces and gambols, carried it
from the whole field. l’estrange.
the french nation is addicted to grimace. spectator.
2. air of affectation.
vice in a vizzard, to avoid grimace,
allows all freedom, but to see the face. granville.
grima’lkin. m. s. [gris, french, grey, and malkin, or little
moll.] grey little woman; the name of an old cat.
grimalkin, to domestick vermin sworn
an everlasting foe. with watchful eye
lies nightly brooding o'er a chinky gap,
protending her fell claws, to thoughtless mice
sure ruin. - phillips.
grime. n. s. [from grim.] dirt deeply insinuated; fullying
blackness not easily cleansed.
swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing so clean kept;
for why? she sweats: a man may go over shoes in the grime
of it. shakesp. comedy of errours.
collow is the word by which they denote black grime of
burnt coals or wood. i/oodward on fossils.
to grime. v. a. [from the noun..] to dirt; to fully deeply.
my face i’ll grime with filth, .
blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots. shakespeare.
gr1'mly. adv. [from grim.]
1. horribly; hideously; terribly. -
we've landed in ill time: the skies look grimly,
and threaten present blusters. shakspeare's jointer's tale.
so pluto, seiz'd of proserpine, convey’d
to hell's tremendous gloom th’ affiighted maid ;
there grimly smil’d pleas'd with the beauteous prize.
nor envy’d jove his sunshine and his skies. addison's cato.
2. sourly; sullenly.
- the augurs
say they know not; they cannot tell; look grimly,
and dare not speak their knowledge. shak. ant. and cleop.
goss. n. s. [from grim.] horror; frightfulness of
visage.
to grin. v. n. [xpennian, saxon; grinnen, grinden, dutch,
undoubtedly of the same origin with to grind, as we now say
to grind the teeth; grincer, french.]
1. to set the teeth together and withdraw the lips either in anger
or in mirth: -
death, death oh, aniable, lovely death !
come grin on me, and i will think thou smil'st. shakesp.
what valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
for one to trust his hand between his teeth,
when he might spurn him with his foot away? shakesh.
it was no unpleasant entertainment to me to see the various
methods with which they have attacked me; some with pite-
ous moans and outcries, others grinning, and only shewing
their teeth. stillingsleet.
a lion's hide he wears;
about his shoulders hangs the shaggy skin;
the teeth and gaping jaws severely grin. dryden’s afn.
they neither could defend, nor can pursue;
but grinn'd their teeth, and cast a helpless view. dryden.
madness, we fancy, gave an ill-tim'd birth
to grinning laughter and to frantick mirth. prior.
fools grin on fools, and stoiciike support,
without one figh, the pleasures of a court. 7%ung.
2. to fix the teeth as in anguish.
i like not such grinning honour as fir walter hath: give me
life, which if i can save, so ; if not, honour comes unlook'd
for, and there's an end. shakesp. henry iv.
grin. m. s. [from the verb.] the act of closing the teeth and
shewing them.
he laughs at him: in's face too.
-o you mistake him; ’twas an humble grin,
the fawning joy of courtiers and of dogs. dryden.
the muscles were so drawn together on each side of his
face, that he shewed twenty teeth at a grin. addison.
deisis are effectually beaten in all their combats at the wea-
pons of men, that is, reason and argument; and they would
now attack our religion with the talents of a vile animal, that
is, grin and grimace. j/atts on the mind.
what lords are those saluting with a grin 2
one is just out, and one is lately in. young.
grin. * / son, 5%rene, saxon.] a snare; a trap.
like a birde that hasteth to his głyn,
not knowinge the perile. chaucer.
the grin shall take him by the heel, and the robber shall
prevail against him. job xviii. 9.
7%, grtnd. v. a. preter. i ground, part. pass. ground...[anin-
**, 33runben, ground, saxon.] -
1. to reduce any thing to powder by friction; to comminute by
attrition. 5
and whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall beb
on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grindh f
he that will have a cake out of the wh
the grinding. shakesbear’, ‘t.’
what relation or affinity is :::::::::::: * croft,
and cogitation, any more than the greatest; is a o body
rain any wiser than the ocean ordo ... a mall drop of
into living and rational meal o
2. to sharpen or smooth by rubbing on someo soro,
meeting with time, slack thing, said § haid.
thy sithe is dull; whet it, for shame. "
no marvel, fir, he did reply,
if it at length deserve some blame;
but where one man would have negrind i.
twenty to one too sharp do find it. y
against a stump his tusk the monster grioi,
and in the iharpen d edge new *gour finds. dryd f
3. to rub one against another. 34. fulli,
- so up he ict him rise; who with grim look,
and count'nance stern, upstanding, 'gan to grind
his grated teeth for great disdain. c
harsh sounds, as of a saw when it is sharpened, an
ing of one stone against another, make a shivor.
in the body, and set the teeth on edge. bacon.
that the stomach in animals grind; the substances which it
receives, is evident from the diffection of animals, which has
swallowed meals, which have been found polishion the side
next the stomach. arbuthnot on aino,
4. to harass; to oppress. - ****-1
- some merchants and tradesmen, under colour of firship,
the colony with necessaries, may not grind them s, as shi
always keep them in poverty. bacon's akit to hillieri,
another way the spaniards have taken to grind the neipo-
litans, and yet to take off the odium from themselves. akiff.
5. in the following lines, i know not whether it be ilos cof-
ruptly used for griding, cutting.
not knowing 'twas my labour, i complain
of sudden shootings and of grinding pains,
my throws come thicker and my cries encreas'd. drill.
to grin d. v. m. j
1. to perform the at of grinding; to move a mill.
fetter'd they send thee
into the common prison, there to grind
among the slaves and asses,
2. to be moved as in the act of grinding.
shrinking finews start,
and smeary foain works o'er my grinding jaws. row,
grin der. m. s. [[rom grind.] -
1. one that grinds; one that works in a mill.
2. the instrument of grinding. -
his heart a solid rock, to fear unknown, -
and harder than the grinder's nether stone. sanji,
now exhort -
thy.hinds to exercise the pointed steel
on the hard rock, and give a wheely form
to the expected grinder. -
3. [innb-zooar.] the back teeth; the double teeth,
the teeth are in men of three kinds: sharp, as the fort.
teeth; broad, as the back-teeth, which we call the moor.
teeth, or grinders; and pointed tech, or canne, who
between both. - bacon's natural hijio,
he the raging lioness confounds,
the roaring lion with his javelin wounds;
scatters their whelps, their grinders breaks; so they
with the old hunter starve for want of prey. soft
the jaw-teeth or grinders, in latin molares, are made flat
and broad a top, and withal somewhat usicyon and sugged,
that, by their knobs and little cavities, they may th: bott
retain, grind, and commix the aliments. room the o
nature is at a great deal of labour to too.
into animal substances; therefore herb-eating animo” o
don’t ruminate, have strong grinders, and chew much, do
4. the teeth, in irony or contempt. -
one, who at sight of supper, open'd wide d, out
his jaws before, and whetted grinders try". dryd, jo,
both he brought ; -
he mouth'd them, and . his grinders o:
gr1'ndleston e. m. s. [from grind and one.] the *
gr1'n ds to n.e. ; which edged instruments are sharpened,
such a light and metall'd dance
saw you never yet in fo: -
and by the lead-men, for the nonco, bran,
that to. round like grindlestones. ben. j.o
literature is the grindhone to sharpen the o:
whet their natural faculties. hammond on o file
smiths that make hinges brighten to . o
them ; but grind them on a grindsiane 'till bright. -
gr1'nner. m. s. [from grin.] he that go”
the frightful’s grinner - * it?',
pe * wo. s - all;o o
gr1's ninoly. adv. [from grin.] with ****"...o.
- oken; ho
'm to powdor. % t
cat, must needs to
we grind in
holm,
soft,
d grind.
g or notor
s nat, hilo),
asilion's afts,
philji,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 959</div><p class="text">g r i
g r i
grip. m. s. a small ditch. - ainsworth.
to gripe. v. a. [greipan, gothick; gupan, saxon; grijpen,
dutch ; gripp, scottish.]
1. to held with the fingers closed; to grasp; to press with the
fingers.
* he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist,
whilst he that hears makes fearful action
with wrinkl’d brows.
2. to hold hard.
he seiz'd the shining bough with griping hold,
and rent away with ease the ling’ring gold. dryden's an.
3. [gripper, french..] to catch eagerly ; to seize.
you took occasion to be quickly wood,
to gripe the gen'ral sway into your hands. shakesp. h. iv.
a. to close ; to clutch.
unlucky welsted thy unfeeling master,
the more thou ticklest, gripes his hand the faster. pope.
5- to pinch; to press; to squeeze.
a wond’rous way it for this lady wrought,
from lion's claws to pluck the griped prey. spensor.
and first the dame came rushing through the wood; }
shakesp. k. john.
and next the famish'd hounds that sought their food,
and grip'd her flanks, and oftessay’d their jaws in blood.
dryden's fables.
6. to give a pain in the bowels.
thus full of counsel to the den she went,
grip'd all the way, and longing for a vent. dryden.
to gripe. v. n.
1. to feel the colick, to have the belly-ach.
many people would, with reason, prefer the griping of an
hungry belly to those dishes which are a feast to others. locke.
manna, by the bulk, figure, texture, and motion of its
parts, has a power to produce the sensations of sickness, and
sometimes of acute pains or gripings in us. locke.
2. to pinch; to catch at money meanly.
it is mean revenue, by being scattered, in the worst of times
growing upon him, when others that had great ones, by grip-
ing, made them less, and grew stark beggars. fell.
grupe. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. grasp; hold; seizure of the hand or paw.
therefore still on high
he over him did hold his cruel claws,
threatning with greedy gripe to do him dy. spenser.
they put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand. shak. macb.
should i
slaver with lips, as common as the stairs
that mount the capitol; join gripes with hands
made hardy with hourly falshood as with labour. shakesp.
he gave me his hand,
and, with a feeble gripe, says, dear, my lord,
command my service. - shakespeare's henry v.
i fell; and with my weight the helm constrain'd,
was drawn along, which yet my gripe retain'd. dryd. æn.
2. squeeze; pressure. -
fir’d with this thought, at once he strain'd the breast;
'tis true, the harden'd breast resists the gripe,
and the cold lips return a kiss unripe. dryden's fables.
3. oppression; crushing power.
i take my cause
out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it
to a most noble judge, the king my master. shak. h. viii.
4. affliction; pinching distress.
adam, at the news
heart-struck with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
that all his senses bound ! milton's paradis, loft.
can'st thou bear cold and hunger ? can these limbs,
fram’d for the tender offices of love,
endure the bitter gripes of smarting poverty otway.
5. [in the plural.] belly-ach ; colick.
in the jaundice the choler is wanting; and the iołerical have
a great fourness and gripes, with windiness. floyer.
griper. m. s. [from gripe.j. oppressor; usurer; extortioner.
others pretend zeal, and yet are professed usurers, gripers,
monsters of men, and harpies. burton on melancholy.
gr1'ping ly. adv. [from griping.] with pain in the guts.
clysters help, left the medicine stop in the guts, and work
gripingly. bacon's natural history.
g r i p1. e. 1. f a greedy snatcher; a griping miser. spenser.
gr is a mber. m. s. used by milton for ambergrise.
beasts of chase, or fowl of game,
in pastry built, or from the spit, or boil'd,
grisamber steam'd. milton's paradis. regain'd.
gr1s e. m. s. [see greece, as it should be written..] a step,
or scale of steps.
let me speak like ourself; and lay a sentence,
which, as a grift or step, may help these lovers
into your favour. - ... shakespeare's othello.
gr1's kin. m. s. [grisin, roast meat, irish..] the vertebrae of
a hog broiled. “. . .
gr1'six. adj. [onirlu, saxon.] dreadful; horrible; hideous;
frightful; terrible.
, his grift locks, long growen and unbound,
disordered hung about his shoulders round. spenser.
where i was wont to seek the honey bee,
the grisly toadstool grown there might i see. spensor.
my grisly countenance made others fly;
none durst come near, for fear of sudden death. sh. h. vi.
back step'd those two fair angels, half amaz'd
so sudden to behold the grisly king;
yet thus, unmov’d with fear, accost him soon. milton.
for that damn'd magician, let him be girt
with all the grisly legions that troop
under the sooty flag of acheron. milton.
the beauteous form of fight
is chang'd, and war appears a grisly fight. dryden's fables.
in vision thou shalt see his griff face,
the king of terrors, raging in thy race. dryd. innocence.
th us the grisly spectre spoke again. dryden's fables.
close by each other laid, they press'd the ground,
their manly bosoms pierc'd with many a griefly wound. dry.
so rushes on his foe the grisly bear. addison.
gr1st. m. s. sanife, saxon.]
1. corn to be ground.
get grift to the mill to have plenty in store, - -
lest miller lack water. tuscr's husbandy.
a mighty trade this lusty miller drove;
much griff from cambridge to his lot did fall,
and all the corn they us’d at scholar's hall. miller of tromp.
2. supply; provision.
matter, as wise logicians say,
cannot without a form subsist;
and form, say i, as well as they,
must fail, if matter brings no griff. swift.
3. gr1st to mill, is profit; gain.
the computation of degrees, in all matrimonial causes, is
wont to be made according to the rules of that law, because
it brings grift to the mill. ayliffe's parergon.
gri'stle. n.s. sourcle, saxon.] a cartilage; a part of the
body next in hardness to a bone.
no living creatures, that have shells very hard, as oysters,
crabs, lobsters, and especially the tortoise, have bones within
them, but only little griffles. bacon's natural history.
left thc asperity or hardness of cartilages should hurt the
ocsophagus or gullet, which is tender and of a skinny substance,
or hinder the swallowing of our meat, therefore the annulary
grisles of the windpipe are not made round, or intire circles;
but where the gullet touches the windpipe, there, to fill up
the circle, is only a soft membrane, which may easily give way
to the dilatation of the gullet. ray on the creation.
gr1's tly. adj. [from griffle.] cartilaginous; made of gristle.
at last they spit out pieces of their lungs; it may be small
grisly bits, that are eaten off from the lung-pipes, harvey.
she has made the back-bone of several vertebrae, as being
more fit to bend, more tough, and less in danger of breaking,
than if they were all one intire bone without these griftly
junetures. azare against atheism.
fins are made of griftly spokes, or rays connected by mem-
branes; so that they may be contracted or extended like wo-
mens fans. ray on the creation.
they have a louder and stronger note than-other birds of
the same bigness, which have only a griffly windpipe. grew.
each pipe, distinguish’d by its griftly rings,
to cherish life aerial pasture brings.
grit. m. s. [3]; cza, 3reot, saxon.]
1. the coarse part of meal.
2. oats husked, or coarsely ground.
3. sand; rough hard particles.
silesian bole, crackling a little betwixt the teeth, yet with-
out the least particle of grit, feels as smooth as soap. grew.
- the sturdy pear-tree here
will rise luxuriant, and with toughest root
pierce the obstructing grit and restive marle. phillips.
4. grits are fosfils found in minute masses, forming together a
kind of powder; the several particles of which are of no de-
terminate shape, but seem the rudely broken fragments of
larger masses; not to be dissolved or disunited by water, but
retaining their figure, and not cohering into a mass. one sort
is a fine, dull looking, grey grit, which, if wetted with salt-
water, into mortar or paste, dries almost immediately, and
coalesces into a hard stony mass, such as is not easily after-
wards disunited by water. this is the pulvis putcolonus of the
ancients, mixed among their cements used in buildings sunk
into the sea; and in france and italy an ingredient in their
harder plaisters, under the name of pozzolane. it is common
on the sides of hills in italy. another species, which is a
coarse, beautifully green, dull grit, is the chrysocossa of the an-
cients, which they used in soldering gold, long supposed a lost
fossil. it serves the purpose of soldering metals better, than
borax. the ferrugineous black glittering grit, is the black
shining sand employed to throw over writing, found on o
fhores of italy. - - hill on f.s.l.,
gr1'triness. n. s. [from gritty j sandiness; the quality of
abounding in grit.
blackmore.
- in
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 960</div><p class="text">g r o
g r o
in suller's earth he could find no sand by the microscope,
nor any grittings. - martiner's hosandry.
gorry. adj. [from grit..] full of hard particles; consisting
or - - -
*}...m. not discern the unevenness of the surface of the
powder, nor the little shadows let fall from the gritty particles
thereof. newton's opt.
grizelis. adj. [more properly gridelin. see gridelin.]
‘i he burgundy, which is a grizzlin or pale red, of all others,
is surest to ripen in our climatc. temple.
grizzle. h. f. [from gris, gray; grisaille, french..] a mix-
ture of white and black ; gray. -
o thou dissembling cub' what wilt thou be,
when time hath sow'd a grizzle on thy face : shakespeare.
gr1'zzle d. adj. [from grizzle.] interspersed with gray.
to the boy caesar, send this grizzled head. shakespeare.
his beard was grizzled: no. -
—it was as i have seen it in his life. shakesp. hamlet.
his hair just grizzled, -
as in a green old age. dryden and lee's oedipus.
those grizzled locks, which nature did provide
. in plenteous growth, their asses ears to hide. dryd, juv.
gr1'zzly. adj. [from gris, gray, french.j. somewhat gray.
living creatures generally do change their hair with age,
turning to be gray and white; as is seen in men, though some
earlier, some later; in horses that are dappled, and turn white;
and in old squirrels, that turn grizzly. bacon.
to groan. v. n. [znanan, saxon ; gromen, dutch..] to
breathe with a hoarse noise, as in pain or agony.
many an heir
of these fair edifices, for my wars,
have i heard groan and drop. shakespeare's coriolanus.
men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded
crieth out. job xxiv. 12.
repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit. jwisd. v. 3.
so shall the world go on,
to good malignant, to bad men benign,
under her own weight groaning. milton's paradis, loft.
nothing can so peculiarly gratify the noble dispositions of
humanity, as for one man to see another so much himself as
to figh his griefs and groan his pains. south.
on the blazing pile his parent hay,
or a lov’d brother groan'd his life away. pope's odyssey.
groan. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. breath expired with noise and difficulty, from pain, faint-
ness, or weariness.
alas poor country,
where sighs and greams, and shrieks that rend the air,
are made, not mark'd shakespeare's macbeth.
i led to flaughter, and to slaughter leave;
and ev’n from hence their dying groans receive. dryden.
hence aching bosoms wear a visage gay,
and stifled groans frequent the ball and play. 1%ung.
2. any hoarse dead sound.
such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
such groans of roaring wind and rain, i never
remember to have heard. shakesp. king lear.
gr9"anful. aft. [groan and fill.] sad; agonizing. not
used.
adown he kest it with so puisant wrest,
that back again it did aloft rebound,
and gave against his mother earth a groanful sound. spensor.
gr9a.t. m. s. [groot, dutch ; graft, italian.]
i. a piece valued at four pence.
2. a proverbial name for a small sum.
my mother was wont
to call them woolled vassals, things created
to buy and sell with groats. shakesp. coriolanus.
i dare lay a great,
a tertian ague is at least your lot. bryden’s fables.
imagine a person of quality to marry a woman much his
inferior, and without a groat to her fortune. swift.
3. groats. oats that have the hulls taken off. . ainsworth.
ro'cer. m. s. [this should be written grosser, from gross, a
large quantity; a grocer originally being one who dealt by
wholesale; or from graffis, a fig, which their present state
seems to favour.] -
a goor is a man who buys and sells tea, sugar and plumbs
and spices for gain. j/atts's logick.
but still the offspring of your brain shall prove
the grocer's care, and brave the rage of jove.
goo’ce ry. a. s. [from grocer.] groors ware,
fugar ; raisins; spice.
his troops, being now in a country where they were not
cxpected, met with many cart-loads of wine, grocery, and
tobacco. - clarendon.
goog *a*1.7 m. s. soros grain, french; grossogranus, low
gro'or am. patia. ainsworth.] stuff woven with large
gro gsas. woof and a rough pile.
oories they're neatly cloth'd: 'i of this mind am,
your only wearing is your grogeram. donne.
*asvia “iords great store of chamelots and grograms, sandys.
garth.
such as tea;
some men will say this habit of john's was .:
camel's skin nor any coarse texture of its hair .. neither of
finer weave of camelot, &amp;ragram, or the lik. "t rather some
the natural sweetness and innocence of he behavi rown,
'iqu
me through and through, and did more execution r shot
u
in grogram than the greatest beauty in town had ever o me
dol c. - one is
brocade addis,n's so.
plain goody would no longer down;
'twas madam in her grogram gown.
grot n. m. s. [of uncertain derivation. t
thigh. ] the part he
swift,
xt the
his l oo:: a sonne of priam, threw
is lance at ajax through the preas ich us -
and § -&gt; please, which wenty him,
on leucus, wise ulysses' friend: his groint it smote
- the fatal dart arrives, chapman,
and through the border of his buckler drives;
pass'd through and pierc'd his groin; the deadly wound
caft from his chariot, roll'd him on the ground. dod.
gro'mwell. n. s. [lithospermum, latin.) gromi or o:
mill. a plant. mill.
groom. m. s. [grom, dutch.] 41illor,
1. a boy; a waiter; a servant.
then called she a groom, that forth him led
into a goodly lodge. sosr
from egypt's king ambassadours they come;
to many a squire attends, and on a grum. fift.
hink them, my soul! that death is but a groom
which brings a taper to the outward room. donne
in the time of edward vi. lived sternheid, who to
henry his father had made groom of his chamber, for tumo
of certain of david's psalms into verse. pain.
would'st thou be touch'd -
by the presuming hands of saucy grooms 2 drydi don, staff,
amid the fold he rages, nor the sheep
their shepherds, nor the groom; their bulls can keep, dryd.
2. a young man.
i presume for to intreat this groom,
and silly maid, from danger to redeem.
3. a man newly married.
by this the brides are wak'd, their grooms are dres';
all rhodes is summon'd to the nuptial feast. dijk,
groove. n.s.. [from grave.]
i. a deep cavern, or hollow in mines.
he might, to avoid idleness, work in a grow, or mine pit
thereabouts, which at that time was little esteemed. byll,
2. a channel or hollow cut with a tool.
the screw-plate is a kind of steel well tempered, with
several holes in it, each less than other; and in those holes are
threads grooved inwards, which groove, fit the respective taps
that belong to them. moxon's meth, exer.
to grooy e. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut hollow. .
qf the box every joint was wellgroved. swift,
to grope. v. n. [japan, saxon.j [ofed where one ci-
not see.
my sea-gown scarf about me, in the dark
grop’d i, to find out them. shaishtar's haml.
we grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope * if we
had no eyes. | lix, 10.
they meet with darkness in the clearest light;
and grope at noon, as if involv’d with night. sando,
a boy was groping for eels, and laid his hand o:
frtist.
this, no doubt, is better for men than that they shoul o
the dark grope after knowledge; as st. paul tells us all no
did aster god. lot,
fifty,
he heard us in our course, --
and with his out stretch'd arms around him gro'd. aijin,
o truth divine ! enlighten’d by thy say, on't
i grope and guess no more, but see my way. 4.
to grope. v. g. to search by feeling in the dark; "'"
without being able to see.
how vigilant to grope mens thoughts,
what whereof they might complain. by twi-
they have left our endeavours to grope them out - #.
light, and by darkness almost to discover that: whose ‘. o
is evidenced by light. brown's wulgar tro"
and to pick outs”.
harvard.
but strephon, cautious, never meant sw).
the bottom of the pan to grope. in the dark,
gro per. n.s.. [from grope.] "one that searches in ".
gross. ad; soros, french; grass, italian; ros"
1. thick; bulky. : 1...as a
the crows and choughs, that wing the "...oft.
shew scarce so gros; as beetles. - to:
- - ty the
there are two gross volumes concerning t i. on learnio
2. shameful; unseemly; enormous.
he ripely considered how gross multi-
his quality, wife and grave men, hor,
tude, and to be tenants at will under theo. rayers, and
they can say that in doctrine, * in poo
a thing it were for men of
to live with such *
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 961</div><p class="text">g r o
g r o
!---
*
-
o
o
!
-o
.**
**
--
so
-
:*
in sacraments, the church of rome hath very foul and gross
corruptions. - hooker.
so far hath the natural understanding, even of sundry whole
nations, been darkened, that they have not discerned, no, not
gros iniquity to be fin. hooker.
there is a vain and imprudent use of their estates, which,
though it does not destroy like gross sins, yet disorders the
heart, and supports it in sensuality and dulness. law.
3. intellectually coarse; palpable; impure; unrefined.
to all sense ’tis gross
you love my son: invention is asham’d,
against the proclamation of thy passion,
to say thou do's not. shakesp. all’s well that ends well.
examples gross as earth exhort me. shakesp. hamlet.
helial came last, than whom a spirit more lewd
fell not from heaven, or more gross to love
vice for itself. milton's paradise lost.
is not religion so perfeołly good in itself, above all, in its
author, that, without the grosoft sensuality, we cannot but
admire it. spratt.
it is a gross mistake of some men, to think that our want
only and imperfections do naturally induce us to be benefi-
ccint. smalridge.
but she dares never boast the present hour,
so gross the cheat, it is beyond her pow'r.
4. inelegant; disproportionate in bulk.
the sun's oppressive ray the roseat bloom
of beauty blasting, gives the gloomy hue,
and feature gross. thomson's summer,
5. dense; not refined; not attenuated; not pure.
it is manifest, that when the eye standeth in the finer me-
gium, and the object is in the grossor, things shew greater;
but contrariwise, when the eye is placed in the grasser medium,
and the object in the finer. bacon’s natural history.
of elements,
the grosser feeds the purer; earth the sea,
earth aid the sea feed air. milton's parad's loft.
light fumes are merry, grossor fumes are sad ;
both are the reasonable foul run mad. dryden's fables.
or suck the mists in groffer air below,
1%ung.
or dip their pinions in the painted bow. pope.
6. stupid; dull.
if she doth then the subtile sense excel,
how gros are they that drown her in the blood davies.
and in clear dream and solemn vision,
tell her of things that no gros; ear can hear. milton.
some men give more light and knowledge by the bare
flating of the question with perspicuity and justness, than
others by talking of it in gross confusion for whole hours to-
gether. jwatts.
7. coarse; rough ; opposite to delicate.
fine and delicate sculptures are helped with nearness, and
gross with distance. j/otton’s archite&amp;ure.
8. thick; fat; bulky.
his stature was of just height and all proportionate dimen-
sions, avoiding the extremes of gross and meager. fell.
gross. m. s. [from the adjective.]
1. the main body; the main force.
the belgians hop'd, that with disorder'd haste
the deep cut keels upon the sands might run;
or, if with caution leisurely were past,
their numerous gros might charge us one by one. dryden:
several casuists are of opinion, that, in a battle, you should
discharge upon the gros of the enemy, without levelling your
piece at any particular person. addison's freeholder.
the gros of the people can have no other prospect in
changes and revolutions than of publick blesfings. addison.
2. the bulk; the whole not divided into its several parts.
certain general inducements are used to make saleable your
cause in gross. hooker.
there was an opinion in gross, that the soul was im-
mortal. ashot's description of the horld.
there is confession, that is, the acknowledging our fins to
god; and this may be either general or particular: the ge-
neral is, when we only confess in gross that we are sinful ; the
particular, when we mention the several sorts and acts of our
fins. duty of man.
remember, son,
you are a general : other wars require you ;
for see the saxon gros; begins to move. dryden's k. arthur:
notwithstanding the decay and loss of sundry trades and
manufactures, yet, in the gros, we ship off now one third
part more of the manufactures, as also lead and tin, than we
did twenty years past. child on trade.
3. not individual, but a body together.
he hath ribbons of all the colours i' th' rainbow; they come
to him by the gross. shakespeare's i/inter's tale.
i cannot instantly raise up the gross -
of full three thousand ducats. shakes. merchant of penice.
you see the united design of many persons to make up one
figure: after they have separated themselves in many petty
divisions, they rejoin one by one into a gross. dryden.
vol. i.
4. the chief part; the main mass. -
comets, out of question, have likewise power and effe:
over the gross and mass of things. bacon’s essays.
the articulate sounds are more confused, though the gros;
of the sound be greater. baron's natural history.
5. the number of twelve dozen: [grose, french.] -
it is made up only of that simple idea of an unite repeated;
and repetitions of this kind, joined together, make those dif-
tinct simple modes of a dozen, a gross, and a million. locke.
gro'ssly, adv. [from gross.]
i. bulkily; in bulky parts; coarsely: as, this matter is grossly
pulverized.
2. without subtilty; without art; without delicacy; without
refinement; coarsely ; palpably.
such kind of ceremenies as have been so grossly and shame-
fully abused in the church of rome, where they remain, are
scandalous. - hocker.
treason and murder ever kept together,
as two yoke devils sworn to others purpose;
working so grossly in a natural cause,
that admiration did not whoop at them. shakes. hen. v.
and thine eyes 4.
see it so grossly shown in thy behaviour,
that in their kind they speak it. shakespeare:
what! are we cuckolds ere we have deserv'd it?
-speak not so grossly. shakesp. merchant of venice.
what i have said has been forced from me, by seeing a
noble sort of poetry so happily restored by one man, and so
grossly copied by almost all the rest. dryden.
if i speak of light and rays as endued with colours, i would
be understood to speak not philosophically and properly, but
grossly, and according to such conceptions as vulgar people
would be apt to frame. newton's opt.
while it is so difficult to learn the springs and motives of
some facts, it is no wonder they should be so grossly misrepre-
sented to the publick by curious inquisitive heads. swift.
gro'ssness. m. s. [from gross.]
1. coarseness; not subtilty; thickness; spiffitude; density;
greatness of parts.
the purpose is perspicuous even as substance,
whose grossness little characlers sum up. shoshcare.
and i will purge that mortal grossness so,
that thou shalt like an airy spirit go. shakespeare.
the cause of the epilepsy from the stomach is the grashes;
of the vapours which lise and enter into the cells of the brain.
bacon's natural history.
then all this earthy grossness quit;
attir'd with stars we shall for ever sit,
triumphing over death. milton.
this being the first colour which vapours begin to reflect,
it ought to be the colour of the finest and most transparent
skies, in which vapours are not arrived to that graffies requi-
site to refle&amp;t other colours. newton's opt.
for envy'd wit, like sol eclips'd, was known
th' opposing body's grossness, not its own. pope.
2. inelegant fatness; unwieldy corpulence.
wise men, that be over-fat and fleshy, go to sojourn abroad
at the temperate diet of some sober man; and so, by little and
little, eat away the grassness that is in them. ascham.
3. want of refinement; want of delicacy; intelle&amp;ual coarseness.
i was three or four times in the thought they were not fai-
ries; and yet the guiltiness of my mind drove the grashes of
the foppery into a received belief that they were fairies. soak.
whatever beauties it may want, 'tis free at least from the
groshes of those faults i mentioned. dryden.
what a graffies is there in the mind of that man, who
thinks to reach a lady's heart by wounding her cars clariffa.
grot. m. s. [grotte, french ; grotta, italian.] a cave; a ca-
vern for coolness and pleasure.
in the remotest wood and lonely grot,
certain to meet that worst of evils, thought. prior.
awful see the egerian grot. pope.
grote’sque. adj. [grotesque, french; grottesco, italian.]
distorted of figure; unnatural; wildly formed.
the champaign head
of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
with thicket overgrown, grotesque and wild,
access deny'd. milton's parad's loft.
there is yet a lower sort of poetry and painting, which is
out of nature; for a farce is that in poetry which grotesque is
in a picture: the persons and actions of a farce are all unna-
tural, and the manners false, that is, inconsisting with the
charasters of mankind: grotesque painting is the just resem-
blance of this. dryden's dufresnoy.
an hideous figure of their foes they drew,
nor lines, nor looks, nor shades, nor colours true, ;
and this grotsue design expos'd to publick view. dryden.
palladian walls, venetian doors,
grotosco roofs, and stucco floors. - pope.
grotto. m. s. [grotte, french ; grotta, italian.] a cavernor
cave made for coolness. it is not used properly of a dark hor-
rid cavern. -
, 10 s - o their<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 962</div><p class="text">~
g r o
g r o
o
!
their careless chiefs to the cool grotto's run, -
the bow'rs of kings, to shade them from the fun. dryden.
this was found at the entry of the grotto in the peak.
j/oodward on fossils.
grove. m. s. [from grave..] a walk covered by trees meeting
above.
i look'd toward birnam, and anon methought
the wood began to move :
within this three mile may you see it coming; -
i say, a moving grove. shakespeare's macbeth.
fortunate fields, and groves, and flow'ry vales; -
thrice happy isles' milton.
she left the flow'ry field, and waving grove. blackmore.
banish’d from courts and love,
abandon'd truth seeks shelter in the grove.
can fierce passions vex his breast,
while every gale is peace, and every grove -
is melody ? thomson's spring.
7% groovel. v. n. [gruftle, islandick, flat on the face. it may
perhaps come by gradual corruption from ground fell.]
1. to lie prone; to creep low on the ground.
the steel-head passage wrought,
and through his shoulder pierc'd; wherewith to ground
he groveling fell, all gored in his gushing wound. spenser.
what see'st thou there? king henry's diadem,
inchas'd with all the honours of the world !
lf so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face,
until thy head be circled with the same.
shakespeare's henry iv.
oke-mast and beech, and cornell fruit they eate,
granville.
groveling like swine on earth, in fowlest sort. chapman.
now they lie
groveling and prostrate on yon lake of fire. milton.
upon thy belly graveling thou shalt go. milton.
let us then conclude that all painters ought to require this
part of excellence: not to do it, is to want courage, and not
dare to shew themselves: 'tis to creep and grovel on the
ground. dryden's dufreshoy.
2. to be mean ; to be without dignity or elevation.
i must disclaim whate'er he can express;
his groveling sense will show my passion less. dryden.
several thoughts may be natural which are low and gro-
veling. addison's speciatar.
ground. m. s. somunb, saxon ; grondi, danish.]
1. the earth, considered as superficially extended, and there-
fore related to tillage, travel, habitation, or almost any action.
the main mass of terrene matter is never called the ground.
we never distinguish the terraqueous globe into ground and
water, but into earth, or land, and water; again, we never
fly under earth, but under ground.
israel shall go on dry ground through the sea. ex. xiv. 16.
man to till the ground
none was, and from the carth a dewy mist
went up, and water'd all the ground. milton.
from the other hill
to their fix’d station, all in bright array,
the cherubim descended, on the ground
gliding meteorous. milton.
a black bituminous gurge
boils up from underground. milton.
and yet so nimbly he would bound,
as if he scorn'd to touch the ground. hudibras.
2. the earth as distinguished from air or water.
i have made man and beast upon the ground. jeremiah.
there was dew upon all the ground. judg. vi. 4o.
they summ'd their wings, and soaring th' air sublime,
with clang despis’d the ground. amilton.
too late young turnus the delusion found;
far on the sea, still making from the ground. dryden's zn.
3. land; country.
the water breaks its bounds,
and overflows the level grounds.
4. region; territory.
on heav'nly ground they stood, and from the shore
they view'd the vast immeasurable abyss. amilton.
with these came they, who from the bord'ring flood
qf old euphrates to the brook that parts
egypt from syrian ground, had general names
of baalim and ashtaroth. milton's paradise loft.
5. estate; possession.
uneasy still within these narrow bounds,
thy next design is on thy neighbour's grounds:
#. crop ". to full perfection grown; -
y own seems thin, because it is thy own. ?"}'4. 71/u.
6. land occupied. &gt; y ow dryd, ju
the sea o'erflow'd my ground,
and my best flanders mare was drown'd. milton.
7. the floor or level of the place.
wherefore should i smite thee to the ground? 2 sa. ii. 22.
pagon was fallen on his face to the ground. 1 sa. v. 4.
a multitude fit on the ground. asath. xv. 35.
some part of the month of june, the water of this i.i.
hudibras.
scends under ground, through "any great holes at the t
ottom.
-
rown's traveli,
8. dregs; lees; feces; that which settles at . bottom of .
quors.
set by them cyder, verjuice, four drink, or
some insist upon having had particula &gt;
gangrenes, from the use of the ground,
up with bread or oatmeal.
9. the first stratum of paint upon which the fi
wards painted.
we see the limner to begin with a r -
painter to lay his ground; with o the
when solid bodies, sensible to the feeling ind d o
placed on light and transparent ground, as, for o , are
heavens, the clouds and waters, and every other . “, the
is in motion, and void of different objeas; they o
more rough, and more distinguishable, than th: wi, o
they are encompassed. dryden's d which
10. the fundamental substance; that by which th: o
or accidental parts are supported. itional
o'er his head
a well wrought heav'n of silk and gold was spread
azure the ground, the fun in gold shone bright. 1. cowls.
indeed it was but just that the finest lines in nature so
be drawn upon the most durable ground. j
then, wrought into the soul, let virtues shine spt.
the ground eternal, as the work divine. y
11. the plain song; the tune on which descants are raise
get a prayer-book in your hand,
and stand between two churchmen, good my lord;
for on that ground i’ll build a holy destant. x
shakes eare' ohar
12. first hint; first traces of an invention; i. *::::::::
casion to the rest.
though jealousy of state th’ invention found,
yet love refin'd upon the former ground;
that way the tyrant had reserv'd to fly,
pursuing hate, now serv'd to bring two lovers high, dolo,
13. the first principles of knowlege. s
the concords will easily be known, if the fore ground, he
thoroughly beaten in. prosace to asident,
here statesmen, or of them they which can read,
may of their occupation find the ground. dome,
the ground are already laid whereby that is unquestionably
resolved ; for having granted that god gives sufficient grace,
yet when he cooperates most effectually, he doth it notite-
sistibly. hammond,
after evening repas's, 'till bed-time, their thoughts will be
best taken up in the easy grounds of religion, and the story of
scripture. milton on education.
14. the fundamental cause; the true reason; original principle.
he desired the steward to tell him particularly the groundand
event of this accident. sidney.
making happiness the ground of his unhappiness, and good
news the argument of his sorrow. sidney.
r si &amp;round. mr.
uccess in stoms.
of strong beer, o
sharp'; surgery,
sures are alter.
tong,
- the use and benefit of good laws all that live under them
may enjoy with delight and comfort, albeit the ground; and
first original causes from whence they have sprung to "so
known. hor.
in the solution of the sabbatizer's chie&amp;ion, my moto
shall be, to examine in the first place, the main gro."
principles upon which he buildeth. while,
thou could'st not have discern'd
fraud in the serpent, speaking as he spake,
no ground of enmity between us known. iso
nor did either of them ever think fit to make any *
relation of the ground of their proceedings, or to causes 0
their misadventures. - co.
sound judgment is the ground of writing well. rosomni,
love once given from her, and plac'd in yo", do
would leave no ground i ever would be true. . o o
it is not easy to imagine how any such tradition cou .
so early, and spread so universally, if these w* not 3
ground for it. l h o:
if it be natural, ought we not to conclude that rehath
some ground and reason for these fears, and that o:
not planted them in us to no purpose. ful in to.
thus it appears, that suits at law are not i. o
selves, but may lawfully be used, if there is h9* "...
the ground and way of management. d; of our quo
upon that prince's death, although the ground 9 let this
rel with france had received no manner 9 o:
lord thought fit to alter his sentiments. f christiani's
the miraculous increase of the o to a
was without any visible grounds and causes, airbus,
human probability and appearance.
15. the ficłd or place of action. se;
here was thy end decreed, when thes. o r0
and ev’n with theirs this act thy death did bring, danil.
or hasten’d at the least upon this gro, ht, advanco, *
16. the space occupied by an army as they fight,
retire. - a:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 963</div><p class="text">g r o
g r o
gr o'und-asfi, n.s.
at length the left wing of the arcadians began to lose
ground. sidney.
heartless they fought, and quitted soon their ground,
while our's with easy victory were crown'd. dryden.
he has lost ground at the latter end of the day, by pursuing
his point too far, like the prince of conde at the battle of
seneffe. dryden's fables, preface.
17. the intervening space between the flyer and pursuer.
ev’ning mist,
ris'n from a river, o'er the marish glides,
and gathers ground fast at the labourer's heels,
homeward returning. milton's paradis, loft.
superiors think it a detrastion from their merit to see ano-
ther get ground upon them, and overtake them in the pursuits
of glory. addison's speciator.
- even whilst we speak our conqueror comes on,
and gathers ground upon us every moment. addison.
18. the state in which one is with respect to opponents or com-
petitors.
had'st thou sway’d as kings should do,
giving no ground unto the house of york,
they never then had sprung. shakespeare's henry vi.
if they get ground and 'vantage of the king,
then join you with them like a rib of steel,
to make them stronger. shakespeare's henry iv.
he will stand his ground against all the attacks that can be
made upon his probity. atterbury.
whatever ground we may have gotten upon our enemies,
we have gotten none upon our vices, the worst enemies of the
two ; but are even subdued and led captive by the one, while
we triumph so gloriously over the others. atterbury.
19. state of progress or recession.
i have known so many great examples of this cure, and
heard of its being so familiar in austria, that i wonder it has
gained no more ground in other places. temple.
the squirrel is perpetually turning the wheel in her cage:
the runs apace, and wearies herself with her continual mo-
tion, and gets no ground. dryden's dufresnoy,
zo. the foil to set a thing off.
like bright metal on a sullen ground,
my reformation glittering o'er my fault,
shall shew more goodly, and attract more eyes,
than that which hath no foil to set it off. shakespeare.
to grou nd. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fix on the ground.
2. to found, as upon cause, reason, or principle.
wisdom groundeth her laws upon an insallible rule of com-
parison. hooker.
the church of england, walking in the good and old way
of the orthodoxal primitive fathers, groundeth the religious ob-
fervation of the lord’s-day, and of other christian holydays,
upon the natural equity, and not upon the letter of the fourth
commandment. ishite,
it may serve us to ground conjectures more approaching to
the truth than we have hitherto met with. boyle.
if your own actions on your will you ground,
mine shall hereafter know no other bound. dryd. aurengz.
some eminent spirit, having signalized his valour, be-
comes to have influence on the people, to grow their leader
in warlike expeditions; and this is grounded upon the prin-
ciples of nature and common reason, which, where prudence
and courage are required, rather incite us to fly to a single
person than a multitude. - swift.
3. to settle in first principles or rudiments of knowlege.
being rooted and grounded in love. eph. iii. 17.
ground. the preterite and part, pass of grind.
how dull and rugged, ere 'tis ground -
and polish'd, looks a diamond - hudibras.
grou nd is much used in composition for that which is next
the ground, or near the ground.
- a saplin of ash taken from the ground;
not a branch cut from a tree. -
a lance of tough groundash the trojan threw,
rough in the rind, and knotted as it grew. dryden': aem.
some cut the young ashes of about an inch above the
ground, which causes them to make very large traight shoots,
which they call groundash. mortimer s hussandry.
ground-bait. n.s.. [from ground and bait..] a bait made of
barley or malt boiled; which, being thrown into the place
where you design to angle, finks to the bottom, and draws
the fish to it.
take the depth of the place where you mean after to cast
your groundbait, and to fish. j/alton's angler.
'giosund-flook. n.s. (ground and floor.] the lower story of
a house. - .
ground-ivy. m. s. [ hedera terrosiris, latin.] alchoof, or
tunhoof. - - - -
alehoof or groundivy is, in my opinion, of the most excel-
lent use and virtue of any plants among us. - temple.
ground-oak. m. s. [ground and oak..] .
if the planting of oaks were more in use for underwoods,
it would spoil the coopers trade for the making of hoops,
either of hasel or ash; because one hoop made of the young
* shoots of a groundoak, would outlast fix of the best ash. mori.
gr9 und-p1ne. n.s. schamapitys, latin.] a plant.
the whole plant has a very lingular smell, resembling that
of resin; whence its name groundpine. it grows on dry and
barren hills, and in some places on the ditch banks by road-
sides. hill's mat. med.
gr9 und-plate. m. s. [in archite&amp;ture.] the outermost
pieces of timber lying on or near the ground, and framed into
one another with mortises and tennons. in these also are
mortises made to receive the tennons of the joists, the summer
and girders; and sometimes the trimmers for the flair.caf.
and chimney way, and the binding joist. harris.
in the orthographical schemes there should be a true deline.
, tion, if it be a timber-building, of the several sizes of the
groundplates, breast-summers, and beams. azartimer.
gr9 und-plot. n.s.
1. the ground on which any building is placed.
wretched gynecia, where can't thou find any small ground-
plot for hope to dwell upon -&gt;
a ground-plot square five hives of bees contains;
emblems of industry and virtuous gains. harte.
2: the ichnography of a building.
ground-rent. n.s. rent paid for the privilege of building
on another man's ground.
a foot in front, and thirty-three five sevenths deep, would
bring in a ground-rent of five pounds. arbuthnot on coins.
the site was neither granted him, nor giv'n :
'twas nature's, and the ground-rent due to heav'n. hartz.
ground-room. m. s. a room on the level with the ground.
i beseeched him hereafter to meditate in a ground-room; for
that otherwise it would be impossible for an artist of any other
kind to live near him. tatler.
groun dedly. adv. [from grounded.] upon firm principles.
sidney.
he hath given the first hint of speaking groundedly, and to
the purpose, upon this subject. glanville.
gr9 undless. adj. [from ground..] void of reason; wanting
ground.
but when vain doubt and grounds; fear
do that dear foolish bosom tear. prior.
we have great reason to look upon the high pretensions
which the roman church makes to miracles as groundless, and
to reject her vain and fabulous accounts of them. atterbury.
the party who distinguish themselves by their zeal for the
present establishment, should be careful to discover such a re-
yerence for religion, as may shew how groundles; that reproach
is which is cast upon them, of being averse to our national
worship. freeholder.
groundlessly. adv. [from groundles...] without reason;
without cause; without just reason.
divers persons have produced the like by spirit of vitriol,
or juice of lemons ; but have groundlessly ascribed the effect to
some peculiar quality of those two liquors. boyle on colours.
ground lessness. m. s. [from groundly..] want of just re--
son.
he durst not cite the words either of my book or sermons,
left the reader should have discovered the notorious faithood
and groundlessness of his calumny. tootson.
groundling. m. s. [from ground..] a fish which keeps at the
bottom of the water: hence one of the low vulgar. hammer.
it offends me to the soul, to hear a robusteous perriwig-
pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the
ears of the groundlings. soakespeare's hamlet.
groundly. adv. [from ground..] upon principles; solidly;
not superficially. not in use.
a man, groundly learned already, may take much profit
himself, in using by epitome to draw other mens works, for
his own memory fake, into shorter room. - aftham.
gr of undse l. m. s. [...runb and rule, the basis, sax. perhaps
from sella, latin.] the timber or raised pavement next the
ground. - -
the window-frame bath every one of its lights rabbetted on
its outside about half an inch into the frame; and all these
rabbets, but that on the grounds', are grooved square; but the
rabbet on the groundel is levelled downwards, that rain or
snow may the freelier fall off. afoxon's mech. exer.
gr of undse l. n.s.. [senecio, latin.] a plant.
gro'undwo r.k. n.s. [ground and work.]
1. the ground; the first stratum ; the first part of the whole;
that to which the rest is additional.
a way there is in heav'n's expanded plain,
which, when the skies are clear, is seen below,
and mortals by the name of milky know ;
the groundwork is of stars. dryden's filies.
2. the first part of an undertaking; the fundamentals.
the main skill and groundwork will be to temper then such
lectures and explanations, upon every opportunity, as may
lead and draw them in willing obedience. a/ilton.
3. first principle ; original reason. -
the groundwork thereof is nevertheless true and certain,
however they through ignorance disguise the same, or through
* &gt; *
vanity. 6 - speoser', state of *:::
11:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 964</div><p class="text">g r o
the morals is the first business of the poet, as being the
groundwork of his instruction. - dryden.
group. m. s. [grouppe, french; groppo, italian.] a croud; a
cluster; a huddle; a number thronged together.
in a picture, besides the principal figures which compose it,
and are placed in the midst of it, there are less groups or knots
of figures disposed at proper distances, which are parts of the
piece, and seem to carry on the same design in a more inferior
ina inner. dryden's dufresnoy.
i cannot doubt but the poet had here in view the picture of
zetus, in the famous group of figures which represents the
two brothers binding dirce to the horns of a mad bull. addison.
you should try your graving tools
on this odious group of fools. swift.
to group. v. a. s groupper, french..] to put into a croud;
to huddle together.
the difficulty lies in drawing and disposing, or, as the
painters term it, in grouping such a multitude of different
objects, preserving still the justice and conformity of style and
colouring. prior.
grouse. n. s. a kind of fowl; a heathcock.
the 'squires in scorn will fly the house
for better gaine, and look for grous?. swift.
gr out. m. s. [3hut, saxon. in scotland they call it groats.]
1. coarse meal; pollard.
king hardicnute, 'midst danes and saxons flout,
carous'd in nut-brown ale, and din’d on grout :
which dish its pristine honour still retains,
and when each prince is crown'd in splendour reigns. king.
2. that which purges off.
sweet honey some condense, some purge the grout;
the rest, in cells apart, the liquid neciar shout. dryden.
3. a kind of wild apple. [arizmelion, latin.]
to grow. v. n., preter, grew; part. pass. grown. [onopan,
saxon; grooyen, dutch..]
1. to vegetate; to have vegetable motion; to increase by vege-
tation.
it is not the growing of fruit that nourisheth man; but it
is thy word which preserveth them. j/ijd. xvi. 26.
he causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the
service of man. - ps, civ. 14.
2. to be produced by vegetation.
in this country groweth abundance of that wood, which
since is brought into europe to die red colours. abbot.
a bag, that groweth in the fields, at the first is hard like a
tennis-ball, and white; and after groweth of a mushroom-
colour, and full of light dust. bacon's natural history.
but say, where grows the tree? from hence how far milt.
in colder regions men compose
poison with art; but here it grows. waller.
those tow’rs of oak o'er fertile plains might go,
and visit mountains where they once did grow. j/aller.
3. to shoot in any particular form.
children, like tender offers, take the bow;
and as they first are fashion'd, always grow. dryden's juv.
4. to increase in stature.
i long with all my heart to see the prince ;
i hope he is much grown since last i saw him. shakesp. r. iii.
the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe-lamb, which
he had bought and leared up ; and it grew up together with
him and with his children. 2 sa. xii. 3.
5. to come to manhood from infancy: commonly followed by
1/f).
now the prince groweth up fast to be a man, and is of a
sweet and excellent disposition. bacon’s advice to williers.
the main thing to be considered, in every action of a
child, is how it will become him when he is bigger, and whi-
ther it it will lead him when he is grown up. locke.
we are brought into the world children, ignorant and im-
potent; and we grow up in vanity and folly. wake.
6. to issue, as plants from a foil, or as branches from the main
nk.
o, will seem not stuck into him, but growing out of
him. dryden's aen. dedication.
2. to increase in bulk; to become greater, or more numerous.
bones, after full growth, continue at a stay; as for nails,
they grow continually. bacon's natural history.
then their numbers swell,
and grow upon us. - denham.
divisions grow upon us, by neglect of prastick duties:, as
every age degenerated from primitive piety, they advanced in
nice enquiries. decay of piety.
8. to improve ; to make progress.
grzo in grace, and in the knowledge of our lord and
saviour jesus christ. - - . . . 2 pet. iii. 18.
he then dispensed his best of legacies, his blessings; most
passionately exhorting the young growing hopes of the o:
- £14.
as he grew forward in years he was trained up to learning;
under one pronapides, who taught the pelasgick letter invented
by linus. pope's essay on homer,
9. to advance to any state.
io. to come by degrees; to r
11. to come forward; to gather groun
12. to be changed from one state to a
16. to swell : a sea-term.
17. the general idea given by this word is proce:
nature, as it grows agai
• * to again tow -
h fashion'd for the journey dull †.
hey doubted whereunto this would o shalofton,
!. 4. -
the king, by this tim
- - o, was grown to to v, 2.
putation for cunning and policy, that ... *heights.
that went well was laid and in y accident.
- uted - and ev
but when to ripen'd no. ..o. i.
all grow,
- d d ”. fr. .
each any stat on's hol.
after they grew to rest upon no."
* §3. o ...” of place, ... than
3 and they grew in -, 14.1 - iversio
their battles. y g ore skilful in the orio;
verse, or the other harmon of acon'; e.
- o - r ‘lso,
died o o that they #. o: § long i.
come familiar to me. *bit, and be.
dryden'
the trespasses of people are grown up o: o prof.
fins are got beyond all restraints of law and o and their
r| y. r
d. £or;,
the greedy sailor shall the seas forego
some seeing the end of their
- - governm !,
blous practice growing up, which may ...” and trou.
next governour, will not attempt redres trouble to the
it was now the beginning of october, and g. on ireland.
grow fast on : great rain, with terribl. thunder .* to
and mighty tempests, then fell abundantly. ll o
nother: not.
better or worse; to turn. *; to becomedih,
a good man's fortune may gro
- - oy grow out at heels. -
* scipio nasica feared lest, if the dread of i. ene o
taken away, the romans would grow either to . were
civil dissention. idlene's or
hence, hence, and to some barb - atki,
which only brutes in human form so fly,
and man grows wild in nature's common fift dryan
the nymph grew pale, and in a mort. isit ryan,
spent with the labour of so long a flight. 2 dr.
patient of command * jan,
in time he grew ; and growing us’d to hand
he waited at his master's board for food.” dryden's e
we may trade and be busy, and grow poor by it o o
regulate our expences. y locit
you will grow a thing contemptible, unles, wo
- - u can s
the loss of beauty with more durable ao 2n §
delos, by being reckoned a sacred place, grew to be so.
port, where nations warring traded, as in a neutral country.
arbuthnot on c:
by degrees the vain, deluded elf, olis.
grew out of humour with his former self. harts,
13. to proceed as from a cause or reason.
what will grow out of such errours, as masked under is
cloak of divine authority, impossible it is that ever the wif
man should imagine, 'till time have brought forth the fruits of
them. hoer,
shall we set light by that custom of reading, from whence
so precious a benefit hath grown 2 hooker.
take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should da-
mage grow to the hurt of the king. ez. iv. 21,
hence grows that necessary distinetion of the saints on carth
and the saints in heaven; the first belonging to the militant,
the second to the triumphant church. parson.
the want of trade in ireland proceeds from the want of
people; and this is not grown from any ill qualities of the do
mate or air, but chiefly from so many wars. tinsli,
14. to accrue; to be forthcoming.
ev’n just the sum that i do owe to you,
is growing to me by antipholis. shakoff, com, of broui.
15. to adhere; to stick together.
honour and policy, like unsever'd friends, -
i” th' war do grow together. shahjart's colo
the frog's mouth grows up, and he continues o for at
least six months without eating. is allon's angir.
in burnings and scaldings the fingers would no.
grow together: the chin would grow to the breas, and s
arms to the sides, were they not hindered. isoftman'. so
mariners are used to the tumbling and rollingoso so
side to side, when the sea is never so little grown, ralso
flion or pillag”
from one state to another. it is always chango, but o:
ways increase; for a thing may grow loo, * well as $'
greater.
grow er. m. s. [from grow.] an increaso.
being the quick" grown of
will grow to a great bigness wor:
it will g co gneis, mosimir's hoso
any kind of elm.
to growl. v. n. [grallen, flemish.]
1. to snarl or murmur like an angry c*-
they roam amid’ the fury of their heart,
- so:
- - born!!!,
and growl their horrid loves. t] on mia,
dogs in this country are of the size of comf
'; so,
o are provoke -
and by nature never bark, but growl when they eli's so
2. to murmur ; to grumble. oth:lo,
s<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 965</div><p class="text">g r u
g r u
9:ho'o, neighbours—how he would roar about a foolish
handkerchief! and then he would growl so manfully. gay.
grown. the participle passive of grow.
1. advanced in growth.
2. covered or filled by the growth of any thing.
i went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of
the man void of understanding; and lo, it was all grown over
with thorns, and nettles had covered the face ther...f. prov.
3. arrived at full growth or stature.
i saw lately a pair of china shoes, which i was told were
for a grown woman, that would scarce have been big enough
for one of our little girls. locke.
growth... n. s. [from growth.]
1. vegetation; vegetable life; increase of vegetation.
deep in the palace, of long growth there stood
a laurel's trunk, a venerable wood. dryden's aon,
those trees that have the slowest growth, are, for that rea-
son, of the longest continuance. atterbury.
2. product; production; thing produced; act of producing.
forbidding every bleak unkindly fog
to touch the prosperous growth of this tall wood. mihon.
our little world, the image of the great,
of her own growth hath all that nature craves,
and all that's rare, as tribute from the waves. waller.
the trade of a country arises from the native growths of
the soil or seas. temple.
i had thought, for the honour of our nation, that the
knight's tale was of english growth, and chaucer's own. dry.
3. increase in number, bulk, or frequency.
what l have tried, or thought, or heard upon this subject,
may go a great way in preventing the growth of this disease,
where it is but new. - temple.
4. increase of stature ; advance to maturity.
they say my son of york
has almost overta'en him in his growth. shakesp. rich. iii.
the stag, now conscious of his fatal growth,
to some dark covert his retreat had made. denham.
though an animal arrives at its full growth at a certain age,
perhaps it never comes to its full bulk 'till the last period of
life. arbuthnot on aliments.
if parents should be daily calling upon god in a solemn,
deliberate manner, altering and extending their intercessions,
as the state and growth of their children required, such devo-
tion would have a mighty influence upon the rest of their
lives. - law.
5. improvement; advancement.
it grieved david's religious mind to consider the growth of his
own estate and dignity, the affairs of religion continuing still
in the former manner. hooker.
go. } n: s [from gros; or great head; capito, latin.]
1. a kind of fish.
2. an idle lazy fellow. obsolete.
though sleeping one hour refresheth his song,
yet trust not hobgrowthead for sleeping too long. toffor.
to grub. v. a. [graban, preter. grob, to dig, gothick.] to
dig up 3 to destroy by digging; to root out of the ground; to
cradicate by throwing up out of the soil.
a foolish heir caused all the bushes and hedges about his
vineyard to be grubbed up. l’estrange.
forest land,
from whence the surly ploughman grubs the wood. dryden.
the grubbing up of woods and trees may be very needful,
upon the account of their unthriftiness. amortimer.
ainsworth.
as for the thick woods, which not only virgil but homer -
mentions, they are most of them grubbed up, since the pro-
montory has been cultivated and inhabited. addison on italy.
gru b. m. s. [from grubbing, or mining.]
1. a small worm that eats holes in bodies.
there is a difference between a grub and a butterfly, and
yet your butterfly was a grub. shakespeare's coriolanus.
new creatures rise,
a moving mass at first, and short of thighs; -
*till shooting out with legs, and imp'd with wings,
the grubs proceed to bees with pointed stings. dryden,
the grub, -
oft unobserv'd, invades the vital core;
pernicious tenant ' and her secret o
enlarges hourly, preying on the pulp ----
- e. y, preying o phillips.
2. a short thick man; a dwarf. in contempt.
john romane, a short clownish grub, would bear the whole
carcase of an ox, yet never tugged with him. garew;
to gru’bbl.e. v. n. [.grubelen, german ; from grub.] to feel
in the dark. -
thou hast a colour;
now let me rowl and grubble thee:
blind men say white feels smooth, and black feels rough:
thou hast a rugged skin; i do not like thee. dryden.
gru'pstreet. n. s. originally the name of a street near moor-
fields in london, much inhabited by writers of small histo-
vol. i.
ries, dictionaries, and temporary ocins:
production is called ... y poems; whence any mean
3. xzi; iszx; #" 3:3x2, pois' &amp;ayta. trixpa.
arrario; 1;ov 332; irovouai. -
the first part, though calculated only for the meridian of
* was yo. notice of by the better sort. arbuthno
'd sooner ballads write, and grub/freet lays. gay.
7. grudge. v. 6...[from gruger, ::::::::: osium, win.
in french is to grind or eat in this on... say of one who
resents any thing secretly, he chews it. grwgnath, in welsh,
is to murmur; to grumble. grunigh, in scotland, denotes 4
grumbling morose countenance.] -
1. to envy; to see any *ontage of another with discontent.
what means this banishing me from your counsels? do you
love your sorrow so well, as to grudge me part of it? sidney.
'tis not in thee
to grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train. shak, k. lear.
he struggles into birth, and cries for aid ; -
then helpless in his mother's lap is laid: -*
he creeps, he walks; and, issuing into man,
grudges their life from whence his own began. dryden,
these clamours with disdain he heard, -
much grudg’d the praise, but more the rob’d reward. dryd.
o not, as some men, run upon the tilt, and taste of the
sediments of a grudging uncommunicative disposition. speciat.
let us consider the inexhausted treasures of the ocean; and
though some have grudged the great share that it takes of the
surface of the earth, yet we shall propose this too, as a con.
spicuous mark and charader of the wisdom of god. bentley.
i have often heard the presbyterians say they did not grudge
us our employments. swift.
2. to o: or take unwillingly.
et me at least a funeral marriage crave,
norgrudge my cold embraces in the grave., dryd, aurengz.
they have grudged those contributions, which have set our
... country at the head of all the governments of europe. addison.
to grudge. v. m.
i. to murmur ; to repine. - -
they knew the force of that dreadful curse, whereunto
idolatry maketh subject; nor is there cause why the guilty sus.
taining the same should grudge or complain of injustice. #.
we do not grudge or repine at our portion, but are con-
tented with those circumstances which the providence of god
hath made to be our lot. - nelson.
2. to be unwilling; to be reluctant. , - . .
many times they go with as great grudging to serve in his
majesty's ships, as if it were to be slaves in the gallies. raleigh.
you steer betwixt the country and the court,
nor gratify whate'er the great desire,
nor grudging give what publick needs require. dryd. fab.
to be envious.
grudge not one against another, brethren, left ye be con-
demned. ja. v. 9.
4. to wish in secret. a low word.
e’en in the most sincere advice he gave,
he had a grudging still to be a knave. dryden’s meadl.
5. to give or have any uneasy remains. i know not whether
, the word in this sense be not rather grogeons, or remains;
grooms being, the part of corn that remains after the fine
meal has passed the sieve.
my dolabella, -
hast thou not still some grudgings of thy fever? dryden.
grudge. m. s. [from the verb.]
i. old quarrel; inveterate malevolence; sullen malice.
* many countries about her were full of wars, which, for old
grudges to corinth, were thought still would conclude there,
sidney.
two housholds, both alike in dignity,
from ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. shakespeare.
let me go in to see the generals:
there is some grudge between 'em, 'tis not meet
they be alone. shakespeare's julius cæsar.
deep-fester'd hate;
a grudge in both, time out of mind, begun,
and mutually bequeath'd from fire to son,
2. anger; ill-will.
the god of wit, to shew his grudge,
clapt ass's ears upon the judge. swift.
3. unwillingness to benefit. -
those to whom you have -
with grudge preferr'd me. ben.johnson's catiline.
4. envy ; odium; invidious censure. -
5. remorse of conscience. - ainsworth.
6. some little commotion, or forerunner of a disease. ainsw.
gru'dgingly. adv. [from grudge..] unwillingly ; malignant-
ly; reluetantly. -
like harpies they could scent a plenteous board;
then to be sure they never fail'd their lord:
the rest was form, and bare attendance paid;
then drank and eat, and grudgingly obey'd. dryden.
io t' - gru'el.
tate's juv.
-m-,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 966</div><p class="text">g r u
t
gru'el. n.f. [gruau, gruelle, french.] food made by boiling
oatmeal in water; any kind of mixture made by boiling ingre-
dients in water. - -
finger of birth-strang!'d babe,
ditch deliver'd by a drab ;
make the gruel thick and slab.
was ever tartar fierce or cruel
upon the strength of water gruelo prior.
guel made of grain, broths, malt drink not much hopped,
offet-drinks, and in general whatever relaxeth. arbuthnot.
gruff. adj. [groff, dutch..] sour of aspect; harsh of man-
in cis.
around the fiend, in hideous order, sat
foul bawling infamy and bold debate,
gruff discontent, through ignorance misled. garth.
. the appellation of honour was such an one the gruff, such
an one the stocky. addison.
gru'ffly. adv. [from gruff..] harshly: ruggedly; roughly.
the form of mars high on a chariot stood,
all sheath'd in arms, and gruffy look'd the god. prydon.
gru'ff ness, n. s. [from gruff.] ruggedness of mien; harsh-
ness of look or voice.
grum. adj. [contracted from grumble.]
a low word.
nic looked sour and grum, and would not open his mouth.
- arbuthnot.
t, gru'mble. v. n. [grommelen, grommen, dutch-l
1. to murmur with discontent.
- a bridegroom,
a grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
shakespeare's macbeth.
sour; surly; severe.
shakoff.
thou grumbles and railest every hour on achilles, and thou grutch. n. s. [from the verb.]
art as full of envy at his greatness as cerberus is at proserpina's
beauty. shakoff. troilus and cressida.
th" accurs. philistian stands on th' other side,
crumbling aloud, and smiles 'twixt rage and pride. cowley.
gru'ntlin g. m. f. [from grunt.] a young h
to g r utch. v gnog.
... n. [corrupted for the sake
–
thy brinded boars may slumb -
or grant secure beneath #: o,
i he scolding quean to louder notes doth rise
! ---&gt;
to her full pipes the -
- . grunting hog replies;
the grunting hogs alarm the o
tool-
grun f. n. s. [from the verb.] the noise of a h swift,
02.
swine's snowts, swine's bodies, took they, bristles
• gruni,
ran cow and calf, and family of hogs china.
in panick horrour of -
- pursuing dogs;
with many a deadly grunt and doleful
poor swine, as if their pretty hearts wo
th from hence were heard
e grunts of bristled boars, and
and herds of howling .." groans of bears,
squeak,
uld break. dryden
gru’nter. m. s. [from grunt.] dryden', ei,
1. he that grunts.
2. a kind of fish. [xocol;..] -
lal: “i’’: ainsworth,
- of r!
grudge.] to envy to repine; to be io o
used.
the poor at the enclosure doth
because of abuses that fall, grutch,
a o: some men should have but too much
nd some again nothing at all. * ,
but what we're born for we must o histani),
our frail condition it is such, &gt;
that what to all may happen here,
if't chance to me, i must not grutch. benjihsin
- mali.e., ill-wis.”
in it he melted leaden bullets, *
to shoot at foes, and sometimes pullets;
to whom he bore so fell a grutch,
he ne'er gave x -
gave quarter to any such. hudibrar.
suitors, all but one, will depart grumbling, because they gry. m. s. [yo.] anything of little value; as, the pating of
2 3. *
miss of what they think their due. - south.
providence has allotted man a competency; all beyond it
is superfluous; and there will be grumbling without end, if
we reckon that we want this, because we have it not.
- l'estrange.
l'avare, not using half his store,
still grumbles that he has no more. prior.
2. to growl; to gnarl. - -
the lion, though he sees the toils are set,
yet, pinch'd with raging hunger, scours away :
hunts in the face of danger all the day; -
at night, with sullen pleasure, grumbles o'er his prey. dryd.
3. to make a hoarse rattle.
- thou grumbling thunder join thy voice.
like a storm
that gathers black upon the frowning sky,
and grumbles in the wind. rowe's royal convert.
vapours foul
dash on the mountains brow, and shake the woods
that grumbling wave below. thomson's i/inter.
gru’meler. m. s. [foom grumbl..] one that grumbles; a
murthures ; a discontented man. -
the half-pence are good half pence, and i will stand by it:
if i made them of silver, it would be the same thing to the
grumbler. - - swift.
gou'mbling. m. s. [from grumble.] a murmuring through
discontent; a grudge.
i have serv'd
motteux.
without or grudge or grumbling” shakesp. tempest.
latin.] a thick
grume. n.s. [grumco, french ; grumus,
viscid consistence of a fluid : as the white of an egg, or clotted
like cold blood. $2uincy.
goly, adv. [from grum.] sulle
comous. adj. [from gruntol thick; clotted.
the blood, when let, was black, grumous, the red part
without a due consistence, the serum saline, and of a yel-
lowish green. arbuthnot on diet.
gru'mousness. n. s. [from grumous.] thickness of a coagu-
lated liquor.
the cause may
serum, or gramoists of the blood.
gru'nsel. n.s. [more usually groun
to preserve the saxon &amp;nunb.) the grou
of the building.
next came one
who mourn'd in earnest, whom the captive ark
maim'd his brute image: head and hands lopp'd off
in his own temple, on the grunsel edge, . -
where he fell flat, and sham” his worshippers. milton.
t, grunt. ‘u, 77. [grunnio, latin.] to murmur like
to §§§ e3 a hog. -
and neigh, and bark,
like horse, hound, hog, bear,
lament, ye swine! in gruntings -
for you, like me, have lost your sole relief.
ullenly; morosely.
be referred either to the coagulation of the
isosoman's surgery;
dil, unless milton intended
ndfil; the lower part
and grunt, and roar and burn,
fire, at every turn. shakesh.
spend your grief;
gay's past.
the nails. diff
guaia’cu m. m. s. lo,
guaiacum. is attenuant and aperient. it is excellent in
many chronick cases, and was once famous for curing the
venereal disease, which it still does singly in warmer climits
but with us we find it insufficient. we have arcinois, m.
properly called gum guaiacum. 'i
guarante'e. m.s.. [guarant, french.] a power who un-
dertakes to see stipulations performed. -
god, the great guarantee for the peace of mankind, wher:
laws cannot secure it, may think it the concern of his provi.
dence. south,
a prince distinguished by being a patron of protestants, and
guarantee of the westphalian treaty. aison on the isar,
an oath is a promise made to god, and god is our supo.
rior, superior to kings. and he is also the guarano and
avenger of all breach of faith and injustice. loso,
t. goranty. v. a. igarantir, french.) to underto"
secure the performance of any articles.
t, guard. j. a. [garder, french; from our wo the
w being changed by the french into g; as galle; for wali.
1. to watch by way of defence and security.
2. to protect; to defend.
naked the graces guarded you from all
dangers abroad, and now your thunder shall. woo.
your pow'r you never use, but for defence,
to guard your own or others innocence. dyson,
fix'd on defence, the trojans are not slow t
to guard their shore from an expected foe. dyl",
nst the storms,
~ - ill guarded agai
the port of genoa is very ill guarded ag also onlu.
3. to preserve by caution. *
one would take care to guard one's ""
cular imperfection, because it is that whi
strongly inclines us to.
4. to provide against objections: - h cau-
homer has guarded every circumstance with as mo
tion as if he had been aware of the objection. broom? ".
... to adorn with lists, laces, or ornamental boro
solete.
self against this pist.
ch our nature "t"
addison's sjur.
give him a livery
more guarded than his fello”
see a fellow
in a long motley, guard” with yello
to guard. v. n. #: be in a state of c if he into
there are cases, in which ** must guard, if * cliff,
to keep fair with the world, and turn the . to acquis:
to guard against such mistakes, it is “ ary -
- isalts' logo
- ith words. -
ourselves a little w teutonick.]
- woo &amp; j - i., french; ward, - -
o o, # § .# men, whose business is to watch by wo
of defence or prevention.
the guard bare them,
guard chamber. 1 -
. up into heav'n, from paradise,
shakoff, mirth of sini,
w. shak, ho's wii,
aution or defen.”
back into th:
i king; xiv, 10.
in haste to'
and brought them
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 967</div><p class="text">g u a
:
* *
* --&gt;
, f
th' angelickguards ascended, mute, and sad, :
for man. milton's paradis, loft.
they miss'd courts, guards, a gay and num’rous train,
our judges like our laws were rude and plain. cowley.
- with listed hands, and gazing eyes,
his guards behold him soaring through the skies. dryden.
he must be trusted to his own conduct, fince there cannot
always be a guard upon him, except what you put into his
own mind by good principles. locke.
they, usurping arbitrary power, had their guards and spies,
after the practice of tyrants. swift.
2. a state of caution; a state of vigilance. --
the great alteration which he made in the state ecclesiasti-
cal, caused him to stand upon his guard at home. davies.
temerity puts a man off his guard. l’estrange.
it is wisdom to keep ourselves upon a guard. l’eirange.
now he stood colle&amp;ted and prepar’d ;
for malice and revenge had put him on his guard. dryden.
others are cooped in close by the strict guards of those
whose interest it is to keep them ignorant. locke.
men are always upon their guard against an appearance of
design. - smalridge.
3. limitation; anticipation of objection; caution of expression.
they have expressed themselves with as few guard; and re-
strictions as i. atterbury.
4. an ornamental hem, lace, or border. -
5. part of the hilt of a sword.
gua'rdage. n.s.. [from guard.] state of wardship. obsolete.
a maid so tender, fair and happy, -
run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
of such a thing as thou. shakespeare's othello.
gua r der. m. s. one who guards. ainsworth.
guardian. m. s. [gardien, french, from guard.]
1. one that has the care of an orphan ; one who is to supply the
want of parents.
i am sorry for her, as i have just cause, being her uncle and
her guardian. - shakesp. much ado.
when perjur’d guardians, proud with impious gains,
choak up the streets, too narrow for their trains ! dryden.
hocus, with two other of the guardians, thought it their
duty to take care of the interest of the three girls. arbuthnot.
2. one to whom the care and preservation of any thing is com-
mitted.
obsolete.
i gave you all, -
made you my guardians, my depositaries;
but kept a reservation to be follow'd
with such a number. shakesp. king lear.
t then becomes the common concern of all that have truth
at heart, and more especially of those who are the appointed
guardians of the christian faith, to be upon the watch against
seducers. . waierland.
3. a repository or storehouse. not used.
where is duncan's body ?
—carried to colmeskill,
the sacred storehouse of his predecessors, -
and guardian of their bones. shakesp. macbeth.
guarbian of the spiritualties. he to whom the spiritual juris-
diction of any diocese is committed, during the vacancy of the
see. he may be either guardian in law, or jure magistratus,
as the archbishop is of any diocese within his province; or
guardian by delegation, as he whom the archbishop or vicar-
general doth for the time depute. cowel.
guardian. adj. performing the office of a kind protector or
superintendant.
my charming patroness protects me unseen, like my guar-
dian angel; and shuns my gratitude like a fairy, who is boun-
tiful by stealth, and conceals the giver, when she bestows the
gift. dryden's dedication to cleomenes.
thus shall mankind his guardian care *;
the promis'd father of the future age. ope's mosiah.
mead while minerva, in her guardian care,
shoots from the starry vaults through fields of air. pope.
gu a'rdianship. m. s. [from guardian.] the office of a
guardian. - -
the curate stretched his patent for the cure of souls, to a
kind of tutelary guardianship over goods and chattels.
l’estrange.
this holds true, not only in losses and indignities offered
to ourselves, but also in the case of trust, when they are offered
to others who are committed to our care and guardianship.
kettlewell.
theseus is the first who established the popular state in
athens, assigning to himself the guardianship of the laws, and
chief commands in war. swift.
gua'rpless. adj. [from guard.] without defence.
so on the guardless herd, their keeper slain,
rushes a tyger in the lybian plain. jwaller.
a rich land, guardles; and undefended, must needs have
been a double incitement. - south's sermons.
gua(rdship. m. s. [from guard.]
1. care; protection. -
how bless'd am i, by such a man led !
* --
. under whose wise and careful guardship -
i now despise fatigue and hardship. swift.
2. [guard and ship.] a king's ship to guard the coast.
guara *}”. j. an americal fruit. the fruit, says sir
gua’v a. hans sloane, is extremely delicious and whole-
some. they have only this inconvenience, that, being very
astringent, they stop up the belly, if taken in great quantities.
j. : : - - 2- - - - miller.
guberna tion. m. s. [gubernatio, latin.] government; su-
perintendency; superiour dire&amp;tion.
. perhaps there is little or nothing in the government of the
kingdoms of nature and grace, but what is transacted by the
man, jesus, inhabited by the divine power and wisdom, and
employed as a medium or conscious instrument of this exten-
five gubernation. watts's improvement of the mind.
gospoeon. n.s. [goujon, french.]
1. a small fish found in brooks and rivers, easily caught, and
therefore made a proverbial name for a rhan easily cheated.
'tis true, no turbets dignify my boards;
but gudgeons, flounders, what my thames affords. pope.
2. a man easily cheated.
this he did to draw you in, like so many gudgeons, to swal-
low his false argumefits. swift.
3. something to be caught to a man's own disadvantage; a bast;
i. allurement: gudgeons being commonly used as baits for
pike. -
but fish not with this melancholy bait, -
for this fool's gudgeon, this opinion. shakesp. merch, of won.
gbe rpos, n.s. squerdon, gardin, french.] "a reward; a re.
o, in a good and bad sense. a word now no longer
1i] use.
but to the virgin comes, who all this while
amazed stands herself so mock'd to see,
y him who has the guerdon of his guile, - *
for so misfeigning her true knight to be. spensor.
he shall, by thy revenging hand, at once receive the just
guerdon of all his former villanies. - knolles.
fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise
to scorn delights, and live laborious days;
but the fair guerdon when we hope to find,
and think to burst out into sudden blaze,
comes the blind fury with th' abhorred sheers,
and slits the thin-spun life. .
to guess. v. a. [ghiffon, dutch:] -
1. to conjecture; to judge without any certain principles of
judgment. -
incapable and shallow innocents' - -
you cannot gues, who caus'd your father's death. shałoff.
let not your ears despise my tongue for ever,
which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
that ever yet they heard.
—hum ! i gues at it. shakes. macbeth.
he that, by reason of his swift motions, can inform him-
self of all places and preparations, should he not very often
gues; rightly of things to come, where god pleaseth not to
give impediment raleigh's history.
there issue swarming bands -
of ambush'd men, whom; by their arms and dress,
to be taxcallan enemies i gues. . dryd, indian emperor.
the same author ventures to gues; at the particular fate
- " *
miłon.
which would attend the roman government. swift.
nor can imagination gues,
how that ungrateful charming maid -
my purest passion has betray'd. swift.
2. to conjecture rightly, or upon some just reason.
one may gues by plato's writings, that his meaning, as to
the inferiour deities, was, that they who would have thern
might, and they who would not, might let them alone; but
that himself had a right opinion concerning the true god.
stillingfleet.
t3 guess. v. a. to hit upon by accident; to determine
rightly of any thing without certain direetion of the judgment.
if xerxes was able to call every common soldier by his
name in his army, it may be guessed he got not this wonder-
ful ability by learning his lessons by heart. locłe.
guess. n.f. [from the verb.]. conjecture; judgment without
any positive or certain grounds.
the enemy's in view; draw up your powers: -
hard is the gues; of their true strength and forces. shakesh.
his guese was usually as near to prophecy as any man's. fell,
a poet must confess -
his art's like physick, but a happy gues. dryden.
it is a wrong way of proceeding to venture a greater good
for a less, upon uncertain guesses, before a due *;
* looe.
we may make some gues; at the distinction of things, into
those that are according to; above, and contrary to reason.
locke.
this problem yet, this offspring of a gues, -
let us for once a child of truth confess. prior.
no man is blest by accident, or gues,
true wisdom is the price of happiness; 1%ung.
gue'sskr.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 968</div><p class="text">g u i
gue'sser. m. s. [from gues...] conjeclurer; one who judges
without certain knowlege.
it is the opinion of divers good guessers; that the last fit will
not be more violent than advantageous. pope.
if fortune should please but to take such a crochet,
to thee i apply, great smedley's successor,
to give thee lawn sleeves, a mitre and rochet, -
whom would'st thou resemble? i leave thee a guesser. swift.
gue'ssingly, adv. [from guessing.] conjecurally, uncer-
uiny, no. use. s -
i have a letter guessingly set down. shakesp. king lear.
guest. m. s. [3ere, 4. gwest, § g
1. one entertained in the house or at the table of another.
they all murmured, saying, that he was gone to be guest
with a man that is a sinner. - luke xix. 7.
methinks a father
is, at the nuptial of his son, a gue
that best becomes the table.
tell my royal gues?
i add to his commands my own request.
2. a stranger; one who comes newly to reside.
odesarts, desarts how fit a guest am i for you, since my
heart can people you with wild ravenous beasts, which in you
are wanting sidney.
those happiest smiles
that play'd on her ripe lip, seem’d not to know
what guests were in her eyes; which parted thence
as pearls from diamonds dropt. shakespeare.
goro. m. s. [from guest and rite.] offices due to a
guest.
shakesp. winter's tale.
dryden's an.
- ulysses so dear
a gift esteem'd it, that he would not beare
in his black fleete that guest-rite to the war. chapman.
gue'stch amber. m. s. [gust and chamber...] chamber of en-
tertal in ment.
where is the guestchamber, where i shall eat the passover
with my disciples mark xiv. 14.
to gu'ggle. v. m. [gorgoliare, italian.] to sound as water
running with intermissions out of a narrow mouthed vessel.
gui'dage. m. s. [from guide.] the reward given to a guide.
ainsworth.
gu1'dance. n.s.. [from ...] direetion; government.
they charge me with neglecting the guidance of wiser men.
s t?ist'?",
as to those who lived under the guidance of reason ic.
without the assistance of supernatural light, it is highly pro-
bable that miracles, or a message from the dead, would per-
suade them. - - atterbury.
particular application must be left to christian prudence,
under the guidance of god's holy spirit, who knows our neces-
sity before we ask, and our ignorance in asking. rogers.
this to the young—but thy experienc'd age -
wants not the guidance of a former sage. sewell.
a prince ought not to be under the guidance or influence of
either faction, because he declines from his office of presiding
over the whole to be the head of a party. swift.
to guide. v. a. [guider, french.]
i. to dire&amp;t in a way.
when the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into
all truth. - , jo. xvi. 13.
the new light served to guide them to their neighbours
coffers. decay of piety.
whosoever has a faithful friend to guide him in the dark
passages of life, may carry his eyes in another man's head,
and yet see never the worse. south.
2, to influence.
upon these, or such like secular maxims, when nothing
but the interest of this world guides men, they many times
conclude that the slightest widngs are not to be put up.
- rettlewell.
3. to govern by counsel; to instruct.
for thy name's sake lead me and guide me. ps, xxxi. 3.
4. to regulate; to superintend.
women neglect that which st. paul assigns them as their
proper business, the guiding of the house. decay of piety.
guide. n. s. [guide, french, from the verb.]
1. one who direets another in his way. .
thou gavest them a burning pillar of fire to be a guide of
the unknown journey. . . . //isd. xviii. 3.
can knowledge have no bound, but must advance
so far to make us wish for ignorance
and rather in the dark to grope our way,
than led by a false guide to err by day : denham.
2. one who direets another in his conduct.
while yet but young, his father dy'd, * . .
and left him to an happy #. - - ** soaller.
they have all the same pastoral guides appointed, authorised,
fanaified, and set apart by the appointment of god, by the
direction of the spirit, to direct and lead the people of god in
the same way of eternal salvation. pearson.
3. director; regulator.
who the grid, of nature, but only the god of nature in
gui'deless. adj. [from guide.]
gui'd e.r. n. j.
gui don. n. s. [french..] a standardbearer.
gop; his [3]ercio, saxon, a followship,
gusieless. adj. [from guile.] free from deceit:
1. the state of a man justly charged with a crim
–
. . live, move, and are, t hich
aid to do, are by divine art performed sch nature;
-- - - - - - - l o
...'. nor is there any such ; .. as an i.
erself working, but in the guide of nature's w * in nature
b o are not by reason to be .*. histor
ut we have sure experience for ..." -
.9%r guide. dryd,
- 'odn'. foll,
having no guide; winting
hose things w
d so or superintendant.
ambitious swede, like refll
though in his life he blood o breath’
to his now guideloft kingdom peace b. . l,
o there fierce winds o'er dusky o: s o .
whose every puff bears empty shades o blow,
which * in those daikomi.
from guide.] director; oso
• gulde,
p conducus, shał.
billows tost,
dolo,
obsolete.
...our guider come! to the roman ca
..that person, that being provoked by o -
his dagger into his body, and thereby, instead ; pain, thrust
vitals, opened an impôfthurne, the unknown c o his
pain, and so stabbed himself into perfeoł h i. o of all his
surely had great reason to acknow ealth and case,
* * * ledge :- - -
goon, and providence for the guider of jo, his chini.
obsolete.
a society; a corporation; a fraternity.” a corporation.]
bined together by orders and laws . o:any, com.
their prince's licence. hence the common o o:
hall proceeds, being a fraternity or commonalt o: orguli.
thered into one combination, supporting their so men gi-
by mutual contribution. mon charge
towards three or four o'clock cowl,
look for the news that the guild hall affords, skał
in woollen cloth it appears, by those *::::::: iii.
settled in england for this manufacture, i. .
greatly flourished in that art. hale's orish jji.
as when the long-ear'd milky mothers wit isld,
at some sick oniser's triple bolted gate,
for their defrauded absent foals they make -
a moan so loud, that all the guild awake. popo'; duncial,
guile. m. s. [guille, gille, old french, the simo will.]
deceitful cunning; insidious artifice; mischiev tilty
with fawning words he come; her so. subtity,
and looking lovely, and oft fighing fore, 2
her constant heart did court with divers guile;
but words and looks, and fighs she did abhor. sotsir,
when i have most need to employ a friend,
deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of gull,
be he to me! this do i beg of heav'n, -
when i am cold in zeal to you or yours. shaft, roh, iii,
we may, with more successful hope, resolve
to wage by force or guile eternal war, milton,
northou his malice and false guil, contemn:
subtile he needs must be who could seduce
angels. milton's paradji loft,
gui leful. adj. [guile and full.]
1. wily; insidious; mischievously artful.
the way not to be inveigled by them that are so gifts
through skill, is thoroughly to be instructed in that which
maketh skilful against guile. hor,
without expence at all,
by guilful fair words, peace may be obtain'd, shał, h.vi.
he saw his guilful act -
by eve, though all unweeting, seconded
upon her husband. milion's parals. lý.
the guilful phantom now forsook the shrowd,
and flew sublime, and vanish'd in a cloud. drydon,
2. treacherous; secretly mischievous.
i train'd thy brethren to that guilful hole,
where the dead corps of baffianus say. shakoff. tito.
gui'l efully. adv. [from guilful..] insidiously; “”
rously.
to whom the tempter guilfully reply'd, milton,
gur'lefulness. n.s. [from guilful..] secret treachery; trick’
ing cunning. oidofil-
y
sidiousness; simply honest.
guiler. n.s. [from guile. see bequite.] one thatbotso
into danger by insidious practices, .
but he was wary wise in all his way,
and well perceived his deceitful sleight;
ne suffered lust his safety to betray;
- - : 1...' sonor.
. so goodly did beguile the guiler of the pro" is:
guio ...}. §. originally signified the fine of mult
hence itself.]
- - - - o
paid for an offence, and afterward the e; the contri's
to innocence. - . . . . f* - " - so sk teould
it was neither guilt of crime, nor o:
quench the envy that was upon the king bacon'; henry vil
, - ility of guit,
when these two are taken away. " possibility and
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 969</div><p class="text">g u i
and the possibility of innocence, what restraint can the belief
of the creed lay "p" any man hammond on fundamental.
2. a crime; an offence.
- close pent up guilts
rive your “9ncealing continents, and ask
these dreadful summoners grace. shakesp. king lear.
gui ltily. adv. [from guilty.] without innocence; without
clearness of conscience.
bloody and guilty; guiltily awake,
and in a bloody battle end thy days:
think on lord hastings, and despair, and die. shak. r. iii.
gui lori ness. n. j. [from guilty.] the state of being guilty;
wickedness; consciousness of crime.
he thought his flight rather to proceed of a fearful guiltings;
than of an humble faithfulness. sidney.
the last was i that felt thy tyranny:
o, in the battle think on buckingham,
and die in terrour of thy guiltiness. shakesp. rich. iii.
i should be guiltier than my guiltings. - shakespeare.
gui ltle'ss. adj. [from guilt.] innocent; free from crime.
i am in this commanded to deliver
the noble duke of clarence to your hands:
! will not reason what is meant hereby,
because i will be guiltless of the meaning.
many worthy and chaste dames thus,
all guiltless, meet reproach. shakespeare's othello.
then shall the man be guist's from iniquity, and this wo-
man shall bear her iniquity. num, v. 31.
thou, who do's all thou wishes at thy will,
and never willest aught but what is right,
preserve this guitles; blood they seek to spill;
thine be my kingdom.
guiltless of greatness, thus he always pray'd,
nor knew nor wish'd he, that those vows he made ;
on his own head should be at last repaid. dryden.
the teeming earth yet guiltless of the plough,
and unprovok'd did fruitful stores allow.
thou know'st how guills; first i met thy flame,
when love approach'd me under friendship's name. pope.
gui'l flessix. adv. [from guiltles...] without guilt; inno-
cently.
goosses. m. s. [from guills,..] innocence; freedom
from crime.
a good number, trusting to their number more than to
their value, and valuing money higher than equity, felt that
guiltleshes is not always with ease oppressed. sidney.
i would not have had any hand in his death, of whose guilt-
'os i was better assured than any man living could be.
king charles.
guitty. adj. [3].3, saxon, one condemned to pay a fine
for an offence.]
1. justly chargeable with a crime; not innocent.
is there not a ballad of the king and the beggar?
-the world was guilty of such a ballad some three ages since.
shakespeare's love's labour loft.
mark'd you not
how that the guilty kindred of the queen
jook'd pale, when they did hear of clarence’ death? sha'.
we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw
the anguish of his soul when he befought us, and we would
not hear. gen. xlii. 21.
voith mortal hatred i pursu’d his life,
nor he, nor you, were guilty of the strife;
nor i, but as i lov'd ; yet all combin'd,
shakesh. r. iii.
fairfax.
dryden.
your beauty and my impotence of mind. dryden.
farewel the stones -
and threshold, guilty of my midnight moans. dryden.
there is no man, that is knowingly wicked, but is guilty
to himself; and there is no man, that carries guilt about him,
but he receives a sting into his soul. tillotson.
2. wicked; corrupt.
all the tumult of a guilty world,
tost by ungenerous passion, finks away, thomson.
gui nea. m. s. [from guinea, a country in africa abounding
with gold.] a gold coin valued at one and twenty shillings.
by the word gold i must be understood to design a particular
piece of matter; that is, the last ruinea that was coined. locke.
ladies, whose love is constant as the wind:
cits, who prefer a guin, a to mankind. 1%ung.
gui'neadr oppo r. m. s. [guinea and drop.] one who cheats
by dropping guineas. -
who now the guineadropper's bait regards,
trick'd by the sharper's dice, or juggler's cards. gay.
gu 'n e a hen. m. s. a fowl, supposed to be of guinea. -
guine apepper. m. s. scapsicum, latin.] a plant. miller.
go neap1g. m. s. a small animal with a pig's snout, brought,
i believe, from affrica. - - -
guise. m. s. [the same with wise; guise, french ; pira, saxon,
the p or w being changed, as is common, into 3.]
i. manner; mien ; habit; cast of behaviour.
his own fire, and master of his guise,
did often tremble at his horid vicw.
spensor.
vol. i.
g u l
thus women know, and thus they use the
to enchant the valiant and beguile the wise. forfax.
lo you ! here she comes: this. her very guise; and, upon
my life, fast asleep: observe her, stand close. shakesh. macbeth.
they stand a horrid front
of dreadful length, and dazzling arms, in guise
of warriors old, with order'd spear and shield,
awaiting what command their mighty chief
had to impose. asilico’s parad's loft.
by their guise
just men they seem, and is their study bent
to worship god a right. azilton's paradio ezo.
- back, shepherds, back; y - ~ 3,
here be without duck of nod,
9ther trippings to be trod,
of lighter toes and such court guis,
as mercury did first devise. aoi.
their external shapes are notoriously accommodated to that
low or guise of life that nature ho designed them. 41 re.
2. pracice; custom; property.
i have drunke wine past my usual ois ;
strong wine commands the foole, and moves the wise. chap.
this would not be slept;
old guise must be kept.
the swain reply'd, it never was our guis?
to flight the poor, or aught humane despise.
3. external appearance; dres. -
when i was very young, nothing was so much tasked of as
rickets among children, and consumptions among young
people: after these the spleen came in play, and then the
scurvy, which was the general complaint, and both were
th9:ght to appear in many various guises. temple.
the hugonots were engaged in a civil war, by the specious
pretences of some, who, under the guise of religion, sacrificed
so many thousands to their own ambition. swift.
guitar. m. s. [ghitara, italian ; guiterre, french..] a stringed
instrument of musick.
sallads and eggs, and lighter fare,
tune the italian spark's goor.
gulch. n: / [from gulo,
gu'lchin. } skinner. -
gules. adj. [perhaps from geule, the throat.] red : a bar-
barous term of heraldry.
follow thy drum;
with man's blood paint the ground: gules, gules;
religious canons, civil laws are cruel;
then what should war be shakespeare's tonon,
he whose sable arms,
black as his purpose, did the knight resenble,
when he laid couched in the ominous horse,
hath now his dread and black complexion smear'd
with heraldry more dismal; head to foot,
now he is total gules. - -
gulf. m. s. [golf, italian.]
i. a bay ; an opening into land.
the venetian admiral withdrew himself farther off from the
guise,
ben. johnson.
pope.
prior.
latin.] a little glutton.
shakes care.
~
island corfu, into the gulf of the adriatick. anolics.
2. an abyss: an unmeasurable depth.
thence turning back, in silence soft they stole,
and brought the heavy corse with easy pace
toyowning gulf of deep avernus’ hole. spensor.
i know thou’d'st rather
follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf,
than flatter him in a bower. shakespeare's coriolanus.
. . this is the gulf through which virgil's alecto shoots her-
self into hell: the fall of waters, the woods that encompass it,
are all in the description. addison on italy.
the sea could not be much narrower than it is, without a
great loss to the world ; and must we now have an ocean of
mere flats and shallows, to the utter ruin of navigation, for
fear our heads should turn giddy at the imagination of gaping
abysses and unfathomable gulf. a bently.
3. a whirlpool; a sucking eddy.
england his approaches makes as fierce
as waters to the fucking of a gulf. shakoff. henry v.
4. anything insatiable, as the mouth or stomach.
scull of dragon, tooth of wolf,
witches mummy; maw and guff -
of the ravening salt sea shark; -
root of hemlock, digg'd i' th' dark. shakesp. macleth.
gusi fy. adj. [from gulf.] full of gulfs or whirspools; wor-
it costs.
is: rivers arise; whether thou be the son
of utmost tweed, or oose, or guly dun. milton.
at their native realms the greeks arriv'd, -
all who the war of ten long years surviv'd, &gt; -
and 'scap'd the perils of the guly main. pope's odoy.
high o'er a gulff sea the pharian isle . &gt;
fronts the deep roar of disemboguing nile. pope's odyssy.
to gull. v. a. [guiller, to cheat, old french..] to trick;
to cheat; to defraud; to deceive. -
if i do not gull him into a nay word, and make him a com-
* io t' 171012<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 970</div><p class="text">g u m
g u n
mon recreation, do not think i have wit enough to lie straight
in my bed. shakespeare's twelfth night.
yet love these sorc'ries did remove, and move
thee to gull thine own mother for my love. donne.
he would have gull'd him with a trick,
but mart was too too politick. hudibras.
they are not to be gulled twice with the same trick. l’esir.
the roman people were grosly gulled twice or thrice over,
and as often enslaved in one century, and under the same pre-
tence of reformation. dryden.
by their designing leaders taught,
the vulgar, gull'd into rebellion, arm'd.
for this advantage age from youth has won,
as not to be out-ridden, though out-run ;
by fortune he was now to venus trin'd,
and with stern mars in capricorn was join'd:
of him disposing in his own abode,
he sooth'd the goddess, while he gull'd the god.
gull. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. [mergus.] a sea-bird.
2. a cheat; a fraud ; a trick.
i should think this a gull, but that the white-bearded fellow
speaks it. shakespeare's much ado.
either they have these excellencies they are praised for, or
they have not ; if they have not, 'tis an apparent cheat and
gull. government of the tongue.
3. a stupid animal; one easily cheated.
being fed by us you us’d us so,
as that ungentle gull, the cuckow bird,
useth the sparrow. shakoff. henry iv.
why have you suffer'd me to be imprison'd,
kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
and made the most notorious geck and gull
that e'er invention plaid on. shakesp. twelfth night.
that paltry story is untrue,
and forg'd to cheat such gulls as you. hudibrar.
gu’llcatch er. m. s. [gull and catch..] a cheat; a man of
trick; one who catches filly people.
here comes my noble gullcatcher. shakes. twelfth night.
gu’l l.e.r. m. s. [from gull.] a cheat; an impostor.
gu'll ery. m. s. [from gull.] cheat; imposture. ainsworth.
gu'll et. m. s. [gotilet, french ; gula, latin.]
1. the throat; the passage through which the food passes; the
meat-pipe; the oesophagus.
it might be his doom.
one day to sing
with gullet in string. denham.
many have the gullet or feeding channel which have no
lungs or windpipe; as fishes which have gills, whereby the
heart is refrigerated; for such thereof as have lungs and re-
spiration are not without wizzon, as whales and cetaceous
animals. brown's vulgar errours.
2. a small stream or lake. not in use.
nature has various tender muscles plac'd,
by which the artful gullet is embrac'd. blackmore.
the liquor in the stomach is a compound of that which is
separated from its inward coat, the spittle which is swallowed,
and the liquor which distils from the gullet. arbuthnot.
the euxine sea and the mediterranean, small gullets, if
compared with the ocean. heylyn.
7, gu'lly. v. n. [corrupted from gurgle.] to run with
noise.
gu'lly hole. m. s. [from gully and hole.] the hole where the
gutters empty themselves in the subterraneous sewer.
gulo'sity. m. s. [gulosus, latin.] greediness; gluttony;
voracity. - - -
they are very temperate, seldom offending in ebriety, nor
erring in gillsity, or superfluity of meats. brown.
t. guip. v. a. [golpen, dutch..] to swallow eagerly; to
suck down without intermission.
he loosens the fish, gulps it down, and so soon as ever the
dryden,
dryden.
morsel was gone wipes his mouth. l’estrange.
i see the double flaggon charge their hand;
see them puff off the froth, and gulp amain,
while with dry tongue i lick my lips in vain. gay.
gulp. m. s. [from the verb.] as much as can be swallowed
at oi, cc, -
in deep suspirations we take more large gulps of air to
cool our heart, overcharged with love and sorrow. more.
as oft as he can catch a gulp of air,
and peep above the seas, he names the fair. dryden's fables.
gum. n.s. [gummi, latin.]
1. a vegetable substance differing from a refin, in being more
viscid and less friable, and generally dissolving in aqueous men-
struums; whereas refins, being more sulphurous, require a
fpirituous dissolvent. souincy.
one whose eyes,
albeit unused to the melting mood,
drop tears as fast as the arabian trees -
their medicinal gum. shakespeare’s othello.
he ripens spices, fruit, and precious gum,
which from remotest regions hither come- j/aller.
her maiden trai
s),
who bore the vests that holy rites re uir
incense, and od’rous gums, and lo .
2. [loma, saxon; gumme, dutch.] the i d - -
invests and contains the teeth. y o9′ering that
i’d pluck the babe that milks me
pluck my nipple from his boneles
sh' untwists a wire, and from ho shak, machi,
a set of teeth completely comes, -f-
to gum. v. a. [from the noun - swift,
smear with gum. ..] to close with to:
the eyelids are a -
humour. y pt to be gummed *; with a viscous
- - iseman'; sur-.
gu’mmin ess. o, so [from gummy.] the ho b ; surgery.
my; accumulation of gum. *ing gum-
the tendons are involve stamm;
lcaion of in atter. o: o col.
gummossity. n, s. [from £4mmous.] the natu * * surgery,
gumminess. * of gum;
sugar and honey make windy liquor -
menting particles #: detained o, . o: for.
gu’m mous. adj. [from gum.] of the nature, ; flyer,
observations concerning english amber, and i. -
the amber of prussia, prove that amber is not a ons about
resinous substance drawn out of trees by the sun' o of
natural fossi). $ heat, but a
wood -
gu’mmy. adj. [from gum.] 00dward's natural hjio,
1. consisting of gum ; of the nature of gum.
from the utmost end of the head branches ther
a gummy juice, which hangeth downward like a c
nor all the gummy stores arabia yields.
how each arising alder now appears,
and o'er the po distils her gummy tears.
2. productive of gum.
d with a great
e issueth out
ord. rahigh.
dryden's wril
dryden's silms,
- the clouds
tine the flant light'ning; whose thwart flame driv'n down
kindles the gummy bark of fir and pine. mio.
3. overgrown with gum. -
the yawning youth, scarce half awake, essays
i. lazy o: and dozy head to raise;
hen subs his gummy eyes, and scrubs his pate. door,
gun. m. s. [of this word there is no o; as:
mr. lye observes that gun in iceland fignifies laith; but who
guns came into use we had no commerce with iceland. may
not gun come by gradual corruption from came, game, gunne?
canne is the original of cannon.] . the general name for fire-
arms; the instrument from which shot is discharged by fit.
these dread curses, like the sun gainst glass,
or like an overcharged gun, recoil
and turn upon thysols. shakspeare', henry vi.
o: emperor, smiling, said that never emperor was yet slain
with a gun. knollei's history.
the bullet flying, makes the gun recoil. ao.
in vain the dart or glitt’ring sword we shun,
condemn'd to perish by the slaught’ring gun. granvil,
gu'nnel. m. s. [corrupted for gunwale. see gunwale.]
gu'nner. m. s. [from gun.] cannonier; he whose employ-
ment is to manage the artillery in a ship.
the nimble gunner
with lynstock now the devilish cannon touches,
and down goes all before him. shakespeare's hanw.
they slew the principal gunners, and carried away their to:
tillery. howard,
gu'nn's ry. m. s. [ from gunner.] the science of artillery;
the art of managing cannon. -
gu'npowder. n.f. [gun and powder.] the powder poto
guns to be fired. it consists of about fifteen pass of "
three parts of sulphur, and two of charcoal. the po
tions are not exactly kept. - small-
gunpowder consisteth of three ingredients, so o
“, and brimstone. brown's 'o';.
urning by gunpowder frequently happens at sea. f a
gu'nshot. n.f. [gun and shot..] the reach or ra"; "
gun; the space to which a shot can be thrown. sed to
those who are come over to the royal party " o kn
be out of gunshot. join.
gu's shot. adj. made by the shot of a gun.
the symptoms i have translated to go
gu'n smith. n, s. [gun and smith..] a man w
make guns. - morf,
it #. particular effecm with the goofith: *...
gu'nstick. m. s. [gun and/o.] the rammer; o
which the charge is . ;: gun. situart.
ev’n a gun/lick flying into fame: ich the
gu'n's tock. o i. and stock.] the wood to whic
barrel of the gun is fixed- * kew, mil: *
the timber is used for bows, polio usland?
gunstocks. r
go. m. s. [gun and stone.] the shot of cann
used formerly to shoot stones from *:::::: hi
tell the pleasant prince, this mock o i.
hash und his ball to guinones, and ** shall
ounds. woo,
hose trade is 19
os],
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 971</div><p class="text">g u s
shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
z that shall fly with them. shakesp. henry v.
gu'nwale, or gunnel of a ship. n.s. that piece of timber
which reaches on either side of the ship from the half-deck to
the forecastle, being the uppermost bend which finisheth the
upper works of the hull in that part, and wherein they put
the stanchions which support the waste trees; and this is
called the gunwale, whether there be guns in the ship or no;
and the lower part of any port, where any ordnance are, is
also termed the gunwale. harris.
gurge. n.f. [gurges, latin.] whirlpool; gulf.
marching from eden he shall find
the plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge
2 boils out from under ground. milton's paradis? loft.
g; **on. m. s. the coarser part of the meal, fifted from the
iran.
to gu'rgle. v. n. [gorgogliare, italian.] to fall or gush with
noise, as water from a bottle.
then when a fountain's gurgling waters play,
they rush to land, and end in feasts the day. pope.
pure gurgling rills the lonely desert trace,
. . and waste their musick on the savage race. young.
gu'rnard. -
gu'rnet. {*.s. [gournal, french..] a kind of sea-fish.
if i be not asham'd of my soldiers i am a sowc'd gurnet: i
have misus’d the king's press damnably. shak. henry iv.
to gush. v. n. [goslelin, dutch.]
1. to flow or rush out with violence; not to spring in a small
stream, but in a large body.
a sea of blood gush'd from the gaping wound,
that her gay garments stain'd with filthy gore. spenser,
the covering of this abyss was broken asunder, and the
water gushed out that made the deluge. burnet.
inceslant streams of thin magnetick rays
gush from their fountains with impetuous force,
in either pole, then take an adverse course. blackmore.
on either hand the gushing waters play,
...and down the rough cascade white dashing fall. thomson.
2. to emit in a copious effluxion.
the gaping wound gush'd out a crimson flood. dryden.
line after line my gushing eyes o'erflow,
led through a sad variety of woe. pope.
gush. n.s.. [from the verb.j an emission of liquor in a large
quantity at once; the liquor so emitted.
if a lung-vein be bursted, generally at the first cough a
great gush of blood is coughed up. harvey.
gu'sset. n.s. [gouffet, french.] any thing sewed on to cloth
in order to strengthen it. -
gust, n. /. [gous, french; gustus, latin.]
1. sense of tasting.
destroy all creatures for thy sport orguso,
yet cry, if man's unhappy, god's unjust.
2. height of perception; height of sensual enjoyment.
they fondly thinking to allay
their appetite with guft, instead of fruit
chew'd bitter ashes, which th' offended taste -
with spattering noise rejected. milton's paradis, loft.
where love is duty on the female side,
on theirs meer sensual guff, and sought with surly pride.
dryden's fables.
my fight, and smell, and hearing were employ'd,
and all three senses in full guft enjoy’d. dryden's fables.
3. love; liking.
to kill, i grant, is sin's extremest gust;
but, in defence, by mercy 'tis made just. shakesp. timon,
old age shall do the work of taking away both the gust and
comfort of them. l’estrange.
we have lost, in a great measure, the gust and relish of true
happiness. tillotson.
4. turn of fancy; intelle&amp;tual taste. .
the principal part of painting is to find what nature has
made most proper to this art, and a choice of it may be made
according to the gust and manner of the ancients. dryden.
5. [from gusler, islandick.] . a sudden violent blast of wind.
she led calm henry, though he were a king,
as doth a sail, fill'd with a o £1!/12
command an argosie to stem the waves.
o il &amp; shakespeare's henry vi.
you may as well forbid the mountain pines
to wag their high tops, and to make a noise,
when they are fretted with the guffs of heav'n. , shakoff.
presently come forth swarms and volleys of libels, which
are the goff; of liberty of speech restrained. bacon's h. vii.
as when fierce northern blasts from th’alps descend,
from his firm roots with struggling gifts to rend
pope.
an aged sturdy oak. - - . . . denham.
part stay for passage, ’till a gust of wind
ships o'er their forces in a shining sheet. dryden.
pardon a weak distemper’d soul, that o:
with sudden guffs, and finks as soon in calms,...,
the sport of pions. addison's cato.
6. it is written in spenser vitiously for justi, sports.
for jolly knight he seem’d, and fair did fit,
. as one for knightly gust, and fierce encounters fit. spensor.
gustable. adj. [gust, latin.]
i. to be tasted.
- o o informs us of a vulgar errour, terming the
all bitter; whereas there is nothing guffable . ha
2. %. to the taste. g gustable sweeter. harvey,
a gustable thing, seen or smelt, excites the appetite, and
affects the glands and parts of the mouth. derham.
gustation. n. s. [gusło, latin.] the aa of tasting.
the gullet and conveying parts partake of the nerves of
goslation, or appertaining unto sapor. brown.
guoul... adj. igust and full.] tasteful; well-tasted.
yo: he defaults from some dry insipid fin, is but to make
up for some other more gus?ful. decay of piety.
gusto. m.s. [italian.] goff y of piety
1. the relish of any thing; the power by which any thing ex-
cites sensations in the palate.
pleasant gustos gratify the appetite of the luxurious. derb,
2. intellectual taste; liking.
in reading what i have written, let them bring no particu-
lar gufta along with them. dryden,
gusso. adj. [from gust.] stormy; tempestuous.
once upon a raw and gufty day,
the troubled tyber chafing with his shores. sh. jul. cas:
or whirl'd tempestuous by the gusly wind. thomson.
gut. n.s. [autteln, german.]
1. the long pipe reaching with many convolutions from the
stomach to the vent.
this lord wears his wit in his belly, and his guts in his
head. - shakesp. troilus and cressida.
a viol should have a lay of wire-strings below, close to the
belly, and then the strings of guts mounted upon a bridge,
that by this means the upper strings stricken should make the
lower resound. bacon's natural history.
the intestines or guts may be inflamed by any acrid or
poisonous substance taken inwardly. arbuthnot on diet.
2. the stomach; the receptacle of food: proverbially.
...and cramm'd them ’till their guts did ake,
with cawdle, custard, and plum-cake. hudibrar.
with false weights their servants guts they cheat,
and pinch their own to cover the deceit. dryden's juv.
3. gluttony; love of gormandising.
apicius, thou did'st on thy guts bestow
full ninety millions; yet, when this was spent,
ten millions still remain'd to thee; which thou,
fearing to suffer thirst and famishment,
in poison'd potion drank'st. hakewill on providence.
to gut. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to eviscerate; to draw; to exenterate.
the fishermen save the most part of their fish: some are
gutted, splitted, powdered, and dried. carew's cornwal.
2. to plunder of contents.
in nero's arbitrary time,
when virtue was a guilt, and wealth a crime,
a troop of cut-throat guards were sent to seize -
the rich men's goods, and gut their palaces. dryden.
tom brown of facetious memory, having gutted a proper
name of its vowels, used it as freely as he pleased. addison.
guttated. adj. [from gutta, latin, a drop.] besprinkled
with drops; bedropped. dic7.
gu’tt er. m. s. [from guttur, a throat, latin.]
1. a passage for water; a passage made by water.
these gutter tiles are in length ten inches and a half. moxon,
rocks rise one above another, and have deep gutters worst
in the sides of them by torrents of rain. addison on italy.
2. a small longitudinal hollow. -
to gutter. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut in small hollows.
tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
the gutter'd rocks, and congregated sands,
traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel,
as having sense of beauty, do omit
their mortal natures, letting safe go by -
the divine desdemona. shakespeare's othell.
my cheeks are gutter'd with my fretting tears. sandys.
first in a place, by nature close, they build
a narrow flooring, gutter'd, wall'd, and til'd. dryden.
to gu’ttle. v. n. [from gut.] to feed luxuriously; to gor-
mandise. a low word.
his jolly brother, opposite in sense,
laughs at his thrift; and, lavish of expence,
quaffs, crams, and guttles in his own defence. dryden.
to gu’ttle. v. a. [from gut..] to swallow. a low word.
the fool spit in his porridge, to try if they'd hiss : they
did not hiss, and so he guttled them up, and scalded his chops.
l’e/irange.
gu’ttler. m. s. [from guttle..] a greedy eater.
guttu lous. s: ; guttula, latin.] in the form of a
small drop. - - -
ice is plain upon the surface of the water, but round in hail,
which is also a glaciation, and figured in its gostikus descent
from theair. brown's pulgar errouri.
4. qu’ ttural,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 972</div><p class="text">g y m
g y v
guttural. adj. [gutturalis, latin.] pronounced in the
throat; belonging to the throat.
the hebrews have assigned which letters are labial, which
dental, and which guttural. bacon.
in attempting to pronounce the nasals, and some of the
vowels spiritally, the throat is brought to labour, and makes
that which we call a guttural pronunciation. holder.
guo tturalness. m. s. [from guitural.] the quality of being
guttural. dic7.
gu’t wort. n. s. [gut and wort.] an herb.
gu y. m. s. [from guide..] a rope used to lift any thing into the
ship. skinner.
to guozzle. v. m. [from gut, or guso, to guttle or gusłle.] to
gormandise; to feed immoderately; to swallow any liquor
greedily.
well season'd bowls the gossip's spirits raise,
who while she guzzles chats the doctor's praise, roscommon.
they fell to lapping and guzzling, till they burst themselves.
l’estrange.
no more her care shall fill the hollow tray,
to fat the guzzling hogs with floods of whey. gy .
to guozzle. v. a. to swallow with immoderate gust.
the pylian king
was longest liv'd of any two-legg'd thing,
still guzzling must of wine. dryden.
gu’zzl er. m. s. [from guzzle.] a gormandiser; an immode-
rate eater or drinker.
gybe. n.s. [see gibe.] a sneer; a taunt ; a sarcasm.
ready in gybes, quick answer'd, saucy, and as quarrellous
as the weazel. shakspeare's cymbeline.
to gy be. v. n. to sncer; to taunt.
the vulgar yield an open ear,
and common courtiers love to gybe and fleer. spensor.
gymna's t1c ally. adv. [from gymnastick.] athletically; fitly
for strong exercise.
such as with agility and vigour are not gymnastically com-
posed, nor actively use those parts. brown.
gymnas fick. adj. [yopovoze; ; gymnastique, french.]
pertaining to athletick exercises; consisting of leaping, wrest-
ling, running, throwing the dart, or quoit.
the cretans wisely forbid their servants gymnasticks as well
as arms; and yet your modern footmen exercise themselves
daily, whilst their enervated lords are softly lolling in their
chariots. a, buthnot and pope.
gy'mnick, adj. [yup.wix}; ; gymnique, french..] such as prac-
tise the athletick or gymnastick exercises.
have they not sword players, and ev'ry fort
of gymnick artists, wrestlers, riders, runners. milton.
gymnospe rmous, adj. [yoyo and 7zio.2.] having the
seeds naked.
gy'necocracy. m. s. so
gyration. n.s. (gyro, latin.] the aa of turning a
gan
gy'red. adj. falling in rings.
oxikox;2+(z
- ; gynecocrat;.
3 female power gynecocrati,
petticoat government fronol
about.
this effluvium attenuateth a
which, returning home, in a
vious bodies into the electrick.
if a burning coal be nimbly moved round
gyrations, continually repeated, t
like fire ; the reason of which is
- • that the sensat
1 in the several places of that circle remains o
sensorium, until the coal return again to i. o the
diace,
ything
nd impelleth the
“.... . . * the neighbours:
&amp;j'ration carrieth suburai,
with it the ob-
brown,
to a circle wi
- • t
he whole circle will o
gy re. m. s. [gyrus, latin.] a circle described by o:
moving in an orbit.
ne thenceforth his approved ski!
or strike, or hurlen ... in o
remember'd he , he car'd for his late oad
but rudely rag’d. soux
does the wild haggard tow'r into the sk sosr.
and to the south by thy direction fly? y,
o. eagle in her gyres the clouds embrace?
y thing
he fashion'd those harmonious orbs, that roll sand,
in restless gyres about the artick pole. sand
quick and more quick he spins in giddy gyro, andji,
then falls, and in much foam his soil expires, dryder
hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,
no hat upon his head, his stockings loose
ungarter'd, and down gyred to his ankle. shakor,
gy vos. m. s. [geyn, welsh.] fetters; chains forth. legs.
the villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had
gyves on.
y and knowing this, should i yet stay, shakoftara
like such as blow away their lives,
and never will redeem a day,
enamour'd of their golden gyves? bon, jiho,
the poor prisoners, boldly starting up, break off theftchi.
and gyves. knoll.
gyves and the mill had tam'd thee. milio,
but telamon rush'd in, and hap'd to meet
a rising root, that held his fasten’d feet;
so down he fell, whom sprawling on the ground,
his brother from the wooden gyves unbound. drolm,
to gyve. v. a. [from the noun.j. to setter; to shackle, to
enchain; to ensnare.
with as little a web as this, will i ensnare as great a fly is
cassio. ay, smile upon her, do. i will gyve thee in thine
own courtship. shajaro: oh!.
i
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div>

alphasectend
