
<p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o
his -
to ~
- *
a. **
s a b
has in o the same hising sound as in other lan-
guages, and unhappily prevails in so many of our words
that it produces in the ear of a foreigner a continued
sibilation.
in the beginning of words it has invariably its natu-
ral and genuine sound: in the middle it is sometimes uttered
with a stronger appulse of the tongue to the palate, like z ; as
rose, roseate, rosy, offer, nosel, resident, busy, business. it some-
times keeps its natural sound; as loose, designation; for which
i know not whether any rules can be given.
in the end of monosyllables it is sometimes s, as in this ;
and sometimes z, as in as, has ; and generally where es stands
in verbs for eth, as gives. it seems to be established as a rule,
that no noun singular should end with s single: therefore in
words written with diphthongs, and naturally long, an e is
nevertheless added at the end, as goose, house; and where the
fyllable is short the sis doubled, and was once so, as as, an-
ciently asse; wilderness, anciently wildernese ; distress, anciently
distresse.
saba(oth. n. s. [hebrew.] signifying an army.
holy lord god of sabaoth ; that is, lord of hosts.
common prayer.
satbbath. n.s. [an hebrew word signifying res'; sabbat, fr.
sabbatum, lat.] -
1. a day appointed by god among the jews, and from them
established among christians for publick worship; the seventh
day set apart from works of labour to be employed in piety.
i purpose,
and by our holy sabbath have i sworn,
to have the due and forfeit of my bond.
glad we return'd up to the coasts of light,
histo ev’ning.
ere ev'ry day was sabbath: only free
from hours of pray’r, for hours of charity,
such as the jews from servile toil releast,
where works of mercy were a part of rest:
such as blest angels exercise above,
vary'd with sacred hymns and acts of love;
such sabbaths as that one she now enjoys,
ev’n that perpetual one, which she employs:
for such vicissitudes in heav'n there are,
in praise alternate, and alternate pray’r.
2. intermission of pain or sorrow ; time of rest.
never any sabbath of release
could free his travels and afflictions deep. daniel's c. war.
nor can his blessed soul look down from heav'n,
or break th’ eternal sabbath of his rest,
to see her miseries on earth.
peaceful sleep out the sabbath of the tomb,
and wake to raptures in a life to come. pope.
sabbata/rian. n.s.. [from sabbath..] one who observes the
sabbath with unreasonable rigour; one who observes the
seventh day of the week in opposition to the first.
sabbathbreaker. m. s. [ sabbath, and break..] violator of
the sabbath by labour or wickedness.
the usurer is the greatest sabbathbreaker, because his plough
goeth every sunday. bacon's essays.
sabba'tical. adj. isabbaticus, lat. sabbatique, fr. from sab-
bath..] resembling the sabbath; enjoying or bringing inter-
mission of labour.
the appointment and observance of the sabbatical year, and
after the seventh sabbatical year, a year of jubilee, is a circum-
stance of great moment. forbes.
sabbatism. n.s.. [from sabbatum, lat.] observance of the
sabbath superstitiously rigid.
***no, n.s. isabine, fr. salina, lat..] a plant.
. sabine or savin will make fine hedges, and may be brought
onto any form by clipping, much beyond trees. mortimer.
*a*s, *.s. folio, taj fur.
*% is worn of great personages, and brought out of russia,
"g the fur of a little beast of that name, esteemed for the
roof, of the colour of the hairs, which are very black.
ol. - -
shakespeare.
milton.
dryden.
dryden.
s a c
hence sable, in heraldry, signifies the black colour in gen-
tlemens arms. - peacham on blazoning.
furiously running in upon him, with tumultuous speech,
he violently raught from his head his rich cap of sables. knolles.
the peacock's plumes thy tackle must not fail,
nor the dear purchase of the sable's tail. gay.
sa’ble, adj. [fr. j. black. a word used by heralds and poets.
by this the drooping daylight’gan to fade, -
and yield his room to sad succeeding night,
who with her sable mantle 'gan to shade
the face of earth, and ways of living wight. fairy queen,
with him inthron’d
sat sable vested night, eldest of things,
the consort of his reign. milton's paradis, loft.
they soon begin that tragick play,
and with their snoaky cannons banish day:
night, horrour, slaughter, with confusion meet,
and in their sable arms embrace the fleet. waller. .
adoring first the genius of the place,
and night, and all the stars that gild her sable throne. dryd.
sa’bliere. m.s. [french.]
1. a sandpit. bailey.
2. [in carpentry.] a piece of timber as long, but not so thick,
as a beam. bailey,
sa/bre. m. s. isabre, fr. i suppose, of turkish original.] a
cymetar; a short sword with a convex edge; a faulchion.
to me the cries of fighting fields are charms;
keen be my sabre, and of proof my arms;
i ask no other blessing of my stars,
no prize but fame, no mistress but the wars. dryden,
seam'd o'er with wounds, which his own sabre gave,
in the vile habit of a village slave,
the foe deceiv'd. pope's odsy.
sabulo's 1ty. m. s. [from sabulous.] grittiness; sandiness.
sa'bulous. ads. [ sabulum, lat.) gritty; sandy.
s4ccade. m. s. [french.) a violent check the rider gives
his horse, by drawing both the reins very suddenly ; a cor-
rection used when the horse bears heavy on the hand. bailey.
sa'ccharine. adj. [saccharum, lat.] having the taste or any
other of the chief qualities of sugar.
manna is an essential saccharine salt, sweating from the
leaves of most plants. arbuthnot on aliments.
sacer do"tal. adj. [sacerdotalis, lat.] priestly ; belonging
to the priesthood. -
they have several offices and prayers, especially for the
dead, in which functions they use sacerdotal garments. stilling.
he fell violently upon me, without respect to my sacerdotal
orders. dryden's spanish fryar.
if ample powers, granted by the rulers of this world, add
dignity to the persons intrusted with these powers, behold the
importance and extent of the sacerdotal commission. atterbury.
sa’c hel. n.s.. [sacculus, lat..] a small sack or bag.
sack. m. s. spoo hebrew ; cookxg, ; saccus, lat. raec, sax.
it is observable of this word, that it is found in all languages,
and it is therefore conceived to be antediluvian.]
1. a bag; a pouch ; commonly a large bag.
our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,
and we be lords and rulers over roan. shak. henry vi.
vastius caused the authors of that mutiny to be thrust into
sacks, and in the sight of the fleet cast into the sea, knolles.
2. the measure of three bushels. -
3. a woman's loose robe.
to sack. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to put in bags.
now the great work is done, the corn is ground,
the grist is sack'd, and every sack well bound. betterion.
2. [from sacar, spanish.] to take by storm ; to pillage ; to
plunder.
edward bruce spoiled all the old english pale inhabitants,
and sacked and rased all cities and corporate towns. spensor.
i’ll make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
or sack this country with a mutiny. shakesp. henry vi.
23 a what
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a c
s a c
what armies conquerod, perish'd with thy sword
what cities sock'd? fairfax.
who sees these dismal heaps, but would demand
what barbarous invader sack'd the land? denham.
the pope himself was ever after unfortunate, rome being
twice taken and sacked in his reign. - south.
the great magazine for all kinds of treasure is the bed of
the tiber: when the romans lay under the apprehensions of
seeing their city sacked by a barbarous enemy, they would take
care to bestow such of their riches this way as could best bear
the water. addison.
sack. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. storm of a town ; pillage ; plunder.
if saturn's son bestows
the sack of troy, which he by promise owes,
then shall the conqu'ring greeks thy loss restore. dryden.
2. a kind of sweet wine, now brought chiefly from the cana-
ries. [sec, french, of uncertain etymology , but derived by
skinner, after mandosło, from xeque, a city of morocco. the
jack of shakespeare is believed to be what is now called sherry.]
please you drink a cup of sack. shakspeare.
the butler hath great advantage to allure the maids with a
glass of sack. - swift.
sa ckbu r. m. s. ssacabuche, spanish ; sambuca, lat. sambuque,
fr. j a kind of pipe.
the trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fife,
make the sun dance. shakespeare's coriolanus.
sa'ck clo at h. m. s. [ sack and cloath.] cloath of which sacks
are made ; coarse cloath sometimes worn in mortification.
coarse stuff made of goats hair, of a dark colour, worn by
soldiers and mariners; and used as a habit among the hebrews
in times of mourning. called sackcloth, either because sacks
were made of this fort of stuff, or because haircloaths were
straight and close like a sack. calmet.
to augment her painful penance more,
thrice every week in ashes she did fit,
and next her wrinkled skin rough sackloth wore. spenser.
thus with sackcloath i invest my woe, -
and dust upon my clouded forehead throw. sandys.
being clad in sackcloath, he was to lie on the ground, and
constantly day and night to implore god's mercy for the fin
he had committed. ayliffe's parergon.
sa cker. m. s. [from sack.] one that takes a town.
sa’ckful. m. s. [sack and full.] . a full bag.
wood goes about with sac{fuls of dross, odiously misrepre-
senting his prince's countenance. swift.
sa'ck foss et. n.s.. [sack and posit..] a posset made of milk,
sack, and some other ingredients.
snuff the candles at supper on the table, because the burn-
ing snuff may fall into a dish of soup or sackposset. swift.
sa’crament. m. s. [sacrement, fr. sacramentum, lat.]
1. an oath ; any ceremony producing an obligation.
2. an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace.
as often as we mention a sacrament, it is improperly under-
stood; for in the writings of the ancient fathers all articles
which are peculiar to christian faith, all duties of religion
* containing that which sense or natural reason cannot of itself
discern, are most commonly named sacraments; our restraint
of the word to some few principal divine ceremonies, im-
porteth in every such ceremony two things, the substance of
the ceremony itself, which is visible; and besides that, some-
what else more secret, in reference whereunto we conceive
that ceremony to be a sacrament. hooker.
3. the eucharist; the holy communion.
ten thousand french have ta'en the sacrament
to rive their dangerous artillery
upon no christian soul but english talbot. shakes. h. vi.
as we have ta'en the sacrament,
we will unite the white rose with the red. shakoff. r. iii.
before the famous battle of cressy, he spent the greatest
part of the night in prayer ; and in the morning received the
sacrament, with his son, and the chief of his officers. addison.
sacr ame’ntal, adj. [sacramental, fr. from sacrament.] con-
stituting a sacrament; pertaining to a sacrament.
to make complete the outward substance of a sacrament,
there is required an outward form, which form sacramental
elements receive from sacramental words. hooker.
the words of st. paul are plain ; and whatever interpreta-
tion can be put upon them, it can only vary the way of the
sacramental efficacy, but it cannot evacuate the blesfing.
taylor.
sacrame’nt ally. adv. [from sacramental.] after the man-
ner of a sacrament.
my body is sacramentally contained in this sacrament of
bread. hall.
the law of circumcision was meant by god sacramentally to
impress the duty of striet purity. hammond.
sa’cred. adj. [sacre, fr. sacer, lat.]
1. immediately relating to god.
wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous wolves,
who all the sacred mysteries of heav'n
to their own vile advantages shall turn. milton.
before melay the sacred text,
the help, the guide, the balm of souls perp'ex'd. a lot.
2. devoted to religious uses; holy.
those who came to celebrate the sabbath, made a conscience
of helping themselves for the honour of that most sacred day.
4...acc.
they with wine-off rings pour’d, and scred feast, ot
shall spend their days with joy unblam’d. zmilton.
this temple and his holy ask,
with all his sacred things. a4ilton.
3. dedicated ; consecrate; consecrated: with to.
o'er its eastern gate was rais'd above
a temple, sacred to the queen of love. dryden.
4. relating to religion; theological.
smit with the love of sacred song. a4ilton.
5. entitled to reverence; awfully venerable.
bright officious lamps,
in thee concentring all their precious beams
of sacred influence. milton.
poet and saint, to thee alone were giv'n,
the two most sacred names of earth and heav'n. cowley.
6. inviolable, as if appropriated to some superiour being.
the honour's sacred, which he talks on now,
supposing that i lackt it. shakes). ant. and cleopatra.
how hast thou yielded to transgress
the strict forbiddance f how to violate -
the sacred fruit milton.
secrets of marriage still are scred held ;
there sweet and bitter by the wise conceal’d. dryden.
sa'crfdly, adv. [from sacred.] inviolably ; religiously.
when god had manifested himself in the flesh, how sacred,
did he preserve this privilege south.
sa cro dnfss. n. s. [from sacred.] the state of being sacred;
state of being consecrated to religious uses; holiness; sinetity.
in the sanctuary the cloud, and the oracular answers, were
prerogatives peculiar to the sacredness of the place. south.
this insinuates the sacredness of power, let the administra-
tion of it be what it will. l'e/orange.
sacri'fick. adj. [sacrificus, lat.] employed in sacrifice.
sacrificable, adj. [from sacrificor, lat.j capable of being
offered in sacrifice.
although jephtha's vow run generally for the words, what-
soever shall come forth ; yet might it be restrained in the sense,
to whatsoever was sacrificable, and justly subject to lawful im-
molation, and so would not have sacrificed either horse or dog.
brown's wulgar errours.
sacrifica tor. m. s. [sacrificateur, fr. from sacrificor, lat.]
sacrificer; offerer of sacrifice.
not only the subject of sacrifice is questionable, but also
the sacrificator, which the picture makes to be jephtha. brown.
sa'crificatory. adj. [from sacrificor, lat..] offering sacri-
fice. -
to sacrifice. v. a. [sacrifier, fr. sacrifico, lat.]
1. to offer to heaven; to immolate as an atonement or propi-
tiation: with to.
alarbus' limbs are lopt,
and intrails feed the sacrificing fire.
shakespeare's titus andronicus.
this blood, like sacrificing abel's, cries
to me for justice. shakespeare's richard ii.
i sacrifice to the lord all that openeth the matrix, being
males. ex. xiii. 15.
men from the herd or flock
of sacrificing bullock, lamb, or kid. milton.
2. to destroy or give up for the sake of something else: with
fo.
'tis a sad contemplation, that we should sacrifice the peace
of the church to a little vain curiosity. decay of piety.
the breach of this rule, to do as one would be done to,
would be contrary to that interest men sacrifice to when they,
break it. locke.
syphax loves you, and would sacrifice
his life, nay more, his honour, to your service. aidson.
a great genius sometimes sacrifices sound to sense. brozone.
3. to destroy ; to kill.
4. to devote with loss.
condemn'd to sacrifice his childish years
7% babbling ign’rance, and to empty fears. prior.
to sacrif ice. v. n. to make offerings; to offer sacrifice.
he that sacrificeth of things wrongfully gotten, his offering
is ridiculous. ecclus, xxxiv. 18.
let us go to sacrifice to the lord. ex. iii. 18.
some mischief is befallen -
to that meck man who well had sacrific’d. assistan.
sa'crifice. m. s. [sacrifice, fr. sacrificium, lat.]
1. the act of offering to heaven.
god will ordain religious rites -
of sacrifice. milrazz.
2. the thing offered to heaven, or immolated by an ast of reli-
1oil,
§ upon such sacrifice
the gods themselves throw incense. shak. king lear.
go
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a d
s a d
go with me like good angels to my end,
o and as the long divorce of steel falls on me,
o make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,
o and lift my soul to heav'n. shakoffeare.
o moloch besmear'd with blood
of human sacrifice. milton.
my life if thou preserv'st, my life
o thy sacrifice shall be ;
* and death, if death must be my doom, -
o shall join my soul to thee. aidson's spenator.
3. any thing destroyed, or quitted for the sake of sonething
to else; as, he made a sacrifice of his friendship to his interest.
4. anything destroyed. -
* sa'crificer. m. s. [from sacrifice.] one who offers sacrifice;
"… one that immolates.
let us be sacrificers, but not butchers. shakspeare.
when some brawny sacrificer knocks,
before an altar led, an offer'd ox. dryden.
a priest pours wine between the horns of a bull: the priest
is veiled after the manner of the old roman sacrificers. addison.
s. sacrifi c1al. adj. [from sacrifice. j performing sacrifice; in-
cluded in sacrifice.
rain sacrificial whisp'rings in his ear;
make sacred even his stirrop. shakesp. timon.
tertullian's observation upon these sacrificial rites, is per-
tinent to this rule. taylor’s j/orthy communicant.
sacrilege. m. s. [sacrilege, fr. sacrilegium, lat..] the
crime of appropriating to himself what is devoted to religion;
the crime of robbing heaven; the crime of violating or pro-
faning things sacred.
by what celipse shall that sun be defac'd,
what mine hath erst thrown down so fair a tower
what sacrilege hath such a saint disgrac'd : sidney.
then 'gan a cursed hand the quiet womb
of his great grandmother with steel to wound,
and the hid treasures in her sacred tomb
with sacrilege to dig. fairy queen.
we need not go many ages back to see the vengeance of
god upon some families, raised upon the ruins of churches,
and enriched with the spoils of sacrilege. south.
sacrile gious. adj. [sacrilogus, lat. from sacrilege.] violating
things sacred; polluted with the crime of sacrilege.
to sacrissions perjury should i be betrayed, i should ac-
count it greater misery. king charles.
o by vile hands to common use debas'd,
to with sacrilegions taunt, and impious jest. . prior.
– still green with bays each ancient altar stands,
above the reach of sacrilegious hands. pope.
o blasphemy is a malediction, and a sacrilegious detraction
!-- from the godhead. ayliffe's parergon.
sack ii.e grously, adv. [from sacrilegious.] with sacrilege.
when these evi's befell him, his conscience tells him it was
for sacril giously pillaging and invading god’s house. south.
sa cking. part. [this is a participle of the french sacrer. the
verb is not used in english..] consecrating.
- i'll startle you,
worse than the sacring bell. shakesh. henry viii.
- the sacring of the kings of france is the fign of their sove-
reign priesthood as well as kingdom, and in the right thereof
they are capable of holding all vacant benefices. 7 emple.
sa crist. n. s. [sacrisłain, french..] he that has the care
sa cristan. } of the utensils or moveables of the church.
a sacriff or treasurer are not dignitaries in the church of
common right, but only by custom. ayliff’s parcrgon.
sa'cristy. m. s. [sacristie, fr.] an apartment where the con-
secrated vessels or moveables of a church are reposited.
bold amycus from the robb’d vestry brings
a sconce that hung on high,
with tapers fill'd to light the sacrisy. dryden.
a third apartment should be a kind of sacrisy for altars,
idols, and sacrificing instruments. addison.
sad. adj. [of this word, so frequent in the language, the ety-
inology is not known. it is probably a contraction of sagged,
heavy, burthened, overwhelmed, from to sag, to load.]
1 - sorrowful; full of grief.
do you think i shall not love a sad pamela so well as a
joyful? sidney.
- one from sad dismay -
-- recomforted, and after thoughts disturb’d,
submitting to what seem'd remediless, milton.
. the hapless pair
:- sat in their sad discourse and various plaint. milton.
...to p into heav'n, from paradise in haste
to th” angelic guards ascended, mute and jad. milton.
- i now must change
those notes to tragick; sad task milton.
* brave companions from each ship we lost:
: § sails outspread we fly th’ unequal strife, -
13o 2- hjoi. loss, but joyful of our life. pope's odyssey.
cheerful. y inelancholy; heavy ; gloomy ; not gay ; not
go it "istreth unto men, and other creatures, all celestial
influences: it dissipateth those sid thoughts and sorrows, which
the darkness both begetteth and maintaineth. raleigh.
see in her cell sad eloisa spread,
propp'd on some tomb, a neighbour of the dead. pope.
3. gloomy ; shewing sorrow or anxiety by outward appearance.
be not as the hypocrites of a sad countenance. 41st.
earth trembled from her entrails, as again
in pangs, and nature gave a second groan;
sky lour’d, and muttering thunder, some sad drops
wept at completing of the mortal sin
original. milton.
4. serious ; not light; not volatile ; grave.
he with utterance grave, and countenance sad,
from point to point discours'd his voyage. spenser.
the lady katharine, a sad and religious woman, when
henry viii's resolution of a divorce from her was first made
known, said that she had not offended; but it was a judgment
of god, for that her former marriage was made in blood. bac.
if it were an embassy of weight, choice was made of some
sad person of known judgment and experience, and not of a
young man, not weighed in state matters. - bacon.
a sad wife valour is the brave complexion
that leads the van, and swallows up the cities:
the gigler is a milk-maid, whom infle&amp;tion,
or a fir’d beacon, frighteth from his ditties. herbert.
5. aflictive; calamitous.
thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
tending to some relief of our extremes,
or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable. milton.
6. bad; inconvenient; vexatious. a word of burlesque com-
laint. -
p these qualifications make him a sad husband. addison.
7. dark coloured.
crystal, in its reduction into powder, hath a vale and
shadow of blue; and in its coarse pieces is of a sadder hue than
the powder of venice glass. brown's sugar errours.
i met him accidentally in london in sad coloured clothes,
far from being costly. j/alton's life of bp. sanderson.
scarce any tinging ingredient is of so general use as woad,
or glastum ; for though of itself it dye but a blue, yet it is used
to prepare cloth for green, and many of the sadler colours,
when the dyers make then last without fading. boyle.
woad or wade is used by the dyers to lay the foundation of
all sad colours. 44;rtimer's husbandry.
8. heavy; weighty; ponderous.
with that his hand, more sad than lump of lead,
uplifting high, he weened with morddure,
his own good sword, morddure, to cleave his head.
fairy queen.
9. cohesive; not light; firm; close.
chalky lands are naturally cold and sad, and therefore re-
quire warm applications and light compost. mortimer,
to sa dd en. v. a. [from sad.] -
1. to make sad ; to make sorrowful.
2. to make melancholy ; to make gloomy.
, her gloomy presence saddens all the scene,
shades ev'ry flow'r, and darkens ev'ry green;
deepens the murmurs of the falling floods, -
and breathes a browner horror on the woods. pope.
3. to make dark coloured. -
4. to make heavy ; to make cohesive.
marl is binding, and saddening of land is the great prejudice
it doth to clay lands. martimer’s hoshandry.
satddle. m. s. [rabl, saxon; sidel, dutch..] i he seat
which is put upon the horse for the accommodation of the
rider.
his horse hipped, with an old moth-eaten saddle, and the
stirrups of no kindred. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
the law made for apparel, and riding in saddlis, after the
english fashion, is penal only to englishmen. davies.
one hung a pole-ax at his saddle bow,
and one a heavy mace. dryden's knight's tale.
the vent’rous knight is from the saddle thrown;
but 'tis the fault of fortune, not his own. dryden.
to saddle. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to cover with a saddle.
i will saddle me an ass, that i may ride thereon. 2 sam.
rebels, by yielding, do like him, or worse,
who saddled his own back to shame his horse. cleaveland.
no man, sure, e'er left his house,
and saddl’d ball, with thoughts so wild,
to bring a midwife to his spouse,
before he knew she was with child. prior.
2. to load ; to burthen.
resolv’d for sea, the slaves thy baggage pack,
each saddl'd with his burden on his back; -
nothing retards thy voyage. dryden.
sa’ddleb acked. adj. isaddle and back.]
horses, saddlebacked, have their backs low, and a raised
head and neck. farrier’s die?.
saddlemaker, 1 m. s... [from saddle.] one whose trade is to
satddl er. } make saddles.
sixpence
7<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a f
s a g
sixpence that i "...a ss’
...!!!er for my mistress' crupper,
offs y shakesp. comedy of errors.
the "utmost exactness in these belongs to farriers, jaddlers,
and smiths. - digby.
the smith and the saddler's journeyman ought to partake
of your master's generosity. swift's direct. to the groom.
sa‘dīy. adv. [from sad..]
1. sorrowfully; mournfully.
my father is gone wild into his grave;
for in his tomb lie my affections;
and with his spirit sadly i survive,
to mock the expe&amp;tations of the world. shak. henry iv.
he griev'd, he wept, the fight an image brought
of his own filial love; a sadly pleasing thought. dryden.
he sadly suffers in their grief,
out-weeps an hermit, and out-prays a saint. dryden.
2. calamitously ; miserably.
we may at present easily see, and one day sadly feel. south.
sa’dness. m. s. [from sad.] -
1. sorrowfulness; mournfulness; dejection of mind.
the soul receives intelligence
by her near genius of the body's end, - -
and so imparts a sadness to the sense. daniel's civil war.
and let us not be wanting to ourselves,
lest so severe and obstinate a sadness
tempt a new vengeance. denham's sophy.
a passionate regret at fin, a grief and sadness of its memory,
enter into god's roll of mourners. decay of piety.
2. melancholy look.
dim sadness did not spare
celestial visages. o milton.
3. seriousness; sedate gravity: - -
if the subject be mournful, let every thing in it have a stroke
of sadness. dryden.
safe. adj. [saus, french ; salvus, latin.]
1. free from danger.
our separated fortune
shall keep us both the safer; where we are,
there's daggers in men's smiles. shakesp. macbeth.
but trivia kept in secret shades alone,
her care, hippolytus, to fate unknown;
and call'd him virbius in th’ egerian grove,
where then he liv'd obscure, but safe from jove. dryden.
2. free from hurt.
put your head into the mouth of a wolf, and when you've
brought it out safe and sound, talk of a reward. l'estrange.
3. conferring security. -
to write the same things to you, to me is not grievous,
but to you safe. phil. iii. i •
ascend; i follow thee, safe guide, the path
thou lead'st me. milton.
beyond the beating surge his course he bore,
with longing eyes observing, to survey
some smooth ascent, or safe sequester'd bay. pope.
4. no longer dangerous; reposited out of the power of doing
harm. this is rather a ludicrous meaning.
banquo's safe.
—ay, my good lord; safe in a ditch: he lies
with twenty trenched gashes on his head,
the least a death to nature. shakesp. macbeth.
our great forbidder safe, with all his spies
about him. milton.
safe. n. s. [from the adjective..] a buttery; a pantry. ainsw.
safeconduct. n. s. [sauf conduit, fr.]
1. convoy; guard through an enemy's country.
2. pass; warrant to pass.
a trumpet was sent to fir william waller, to desire a safe-
conduct for a gentleman. clarendon.
sa‘feguard. m. s [soft and guard.]
1. defence; protection ; security. -
we serve the living god as near as our wits can reach to
the knowledge thereof, even according to his own will; and
do therefore trust, that his mercy shall be our safeguard. hooker.
if you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
your wives shall welcome home the conquerors. shakesp.
caesar, where dangers threatened on the one side, and the
opinion that there should be in him little safeguard for his
friends on the other, chose rather to venture upon extremities,
than to be thought a weak protector. raleigh.
great numbers, descended from them, have, by the bles-
sing of god upon their industry, raised themselves so high in
the world as to become, in times of difficulty, a protection
and a safeguard to that altar, at which their ancestors mini-
stred. - atterbury.
thy sword, the safeguard of thy brother's throne,
is now become the bulwark of thy own. granville.
2. convoy; guard through any interdicted road, granted by the
possessor.
3. pass; warrant to pass.
on safeguard he came to me. shakespeare.
a trumpet was sent to the earl of essex for a safeguard or
pass to two lords, to deliver a message from the king to the
two houses. clarendon,
to safeguard. v. n. [from the noun..] to guard ; to pro-
te&amp;t.
we have locks to safeguard necessaries,
and pretty traps to catch the petty thieves. shak. hen. v.
sa'fely. adv. [from safe.]
1. in a safe manner; without danger. -
who is there that hath the leisure and means to colled all
the proofs, concerning most of the opinions he has, so as afely
to conclude that he hath a clear and full view e
all keep aloof, and safely shout around ;
but none presumes to give a nearer wound. dryden,
2. without hurt. +
god safely quit her of her burthen, and with gentle travel,
to the gladding of your highness with an heir. shakespeare.
sa'feness. n. s. [from safe.] exemption from danger.
if a man should forbear his food or his business; ’till he had
certainty of the safenes of what he was going about, he must
starve and die disputing. south.
sa(fety. n.s.. [from safe.]
1. freedom from danger.
to that dauntless temper of his mind,
he hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour
to act in safety. shakespeare's macleth.
2. exemption from hurt.
if her acts have been directed well,
while with her friendly clay she deign'd to dwell,
shall she with safety reach her pristine seat,
find her rest endless, and her bliss complete :
3. preservation from hurt. ,
let not my jealousies be your dishonours,
but mine own safeties: you may be rightly just,
whatever i shall think. shakespeare's 44acbeth.
4. custody; security from escape.
imprison him;
deliver him to safety, and return. shak. king jobn.
sa'fflow. n. s. a plant. -
an herb they call softow, or bastard saffron, dyers use for
scarlet. mortimer's husbandry.
sa'ff ron. m. s. [safran, french, from saphar, arabick. it
was yellow, according to davies in his welsh dictionary.
crocus, latin.] a plant. a4iller.
grind your bole and chalk, and five or fix shives of saffron.
ocke.
prior.
- peacham.
sa'ffr on bastard. n. s. scarthamus, lat..] a plant.
this plant agrees with the thistle in most of its characters;
but the seeds of it are destitute of down. it is cultivated in
germany for dyers. it spreads into many branches, each
producing a flower, which, when fully blown, is pulled off,
and dried, and it is the part the dyers use. a4iller.
sa ffr on. adj. yellow ; having the colour of saffron.
are these your customers
did this companion, with the saffron face,
revel and feast it at my house to-day,
whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut shakespeare.
soon as the white and red mixt finger'd dame
had gilt the mountains with her saffron flame,
i sent my men to circe's house. chapman's odyssey.
now when the rosy morn began to rise,
and wav'd her saffron streamer through the skies. dryden.
to sag. v. n. to hang heavy.
the mind i say by, and the heart i bear,
shall never sag with doubt, nor shake with fear. shakespeare.
to sag. v. a. to load; to burthen.
saga cious. adj. [sagax, lat.]
1. quick of scent: with of.
so scented the grim feature, and up-turn'd
his nostrils wide into the murky air;
sagacious of his quarry from so far. - alfilton,
with might and main they chas'd the murd’rous fox,
nor wanted horns t” inspire sagacious hounds. dryden.
2. quick of thought ; acute in making discoveries.
only sagacious heads light on these observations, and reduce
them into general propositions. locke-
saga'ciously. adv. [from sagacious.]
1. with quick scent.
2. with acuteness of penetration.
saga'cious ness. m. s. [from sagacious.] the quality of being
sagacious.
saga city. m. s. [sigacite, fr. sagacitas, lat.]
1. quickness of scent.
2. acuteness of discovery.
it requires too great a sagacity for vulgar minds to draw the
line nicely between virtue and vice. south.
sagacity finds out the intermediate ideas, to discover what
connection there is in each link of the chain, whereby the
extremes are held together. locke.
many were eminent in former ages for their discovery of it;
but though the knowledge they have left be worth our study,
yet they left a great deal for the industry and sagacity of after-
ages. - locke.
sa ga mor.e.
o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a i
".
o
*
o,
sa'gamore. m. s. -
1. [among the american indians.] a king or supreme
ruler. bailey.
2. the juice of some unknown plant used in medicine.
sage. m.s.. [sauge, french; salvia, latin.] a plant of which
the school of salernum thought so highly, that they left this
verse:
cur moriatur homo cui salvia crosoft in hort, 2
by the colour, figure, taste, and smell, we have as clear
ideas of sage and hemlock, as we have of a circle. locke.
marbled with sage the hard’ning cheese she press'd. gay.
sage. adj. [sage, fr. saggio, ital.] wise; grave; prudent.
tired limbs to rest,
o matron sage, quoth she, i hither came. fairy queen.
vane, young in years, but in sage councils old,
than whom a better senator ne'er held
the helm of rome. milton.
can you expect that she should be so sage
to rule her blood, and you not rule your rage i/aller.
sage. m. s. [from the adjective..] a philosopher ; a man of
gravity and wisdom.
though you profess
yourselves such sages; yet know i no less,
nor am to you inferior. sandys.
at his birth a star proclaims him come,
and guides the eastern sages, who enquire
his place, to offer incense, myrrh, and gold. milton.
for so the holy sages once did fing,
that he our deadly forfeit should release,
and with his father work us a perpetual peace. milton.
groves, where immortal sages taught,
where heav'nly visions plato fir’d. pope.
sa/gely. adv. [from sage.] wisely; prudently.
sa'ge ness. n.s.. [from sage.j gravity; prudence.
sagittal. adj. [from sagitta, lat. an arrow.]
1. belonging to an arrow.
2. [in anatomy..] a suture so called from its resemblance to an
arrow.
his wound was between the sagittal and coronal sutures to
the bone. wiseman's surgery.
sagittary. m. s. [sagittarius, latin ; sagittaire, french.]
a centaur ; an animal half man half horse, armed with a
bow and quiver.
the dreadful sigittary
appals our numbers.
shakesp. trail, and cressida.
sa'go. n. s. a kind of eatable grain. bailey.
sa(1ck. n.f. [saica, italian ; saique, fr.] a turkish vessel
proper for the carriage of merchandise. bailey.
said. preterite and part, pass of say.
i. aforesaid.
king john succeeded his said brother in the kingdom of
england and dutchy of normandy. hale.
2. declared; shewed.
sail. n.s. [regl, saxon; soyhel, soyl, dutch.]
1. the expanded sheet which catches the wind, and carries on
the vessel on the water.
he came too late; the ship was under sail. shakespeare.
they loosed the rudder-bands, and hoisted up the main sail
to the wind. - aeis, xxvii. 40.
the galley born from view by rising gales,
she follow’d with her fight and flying sails. dryden.
2. [in poetry.] wings.
he cutting way
with his broad sails, about him soared round;
at last, low stooping with unwieldy sway,
snatch’d up both horse and man.
3. a ship; a vessel.
- a sail arriv'd
from pompey's son, who through the realms of spain
calls out for vengeance on his father's death. addis. cato.
4. sail is a colle&amp;tive word, noting the number of ships.
so by a roaring tempest on the flood,
a whole armado of colle&amp;ted sail
is scatter'd. shakespeare.
it is written of edgar, that he increased the fleet he found
two thousand six hundred sail. raleigh's essays.
a feigned tear destroys us, against whom
tydides nor achilles could prevail,
fairy queen.
nor ten years conflict, nor a thousand sail. . . denham."
he had promised to his army, who were discouraged at the
fight of seleucus's fleet, consisting of an hundred soil, that at
the end of the summer they should see a fleet of his of five
hundred fail. arbuthnot on coins.
5. to strike sail. to lower the sail.
fearing left they should fall into the quicksands, they strake
jail, and so were driven. acis, xxvii. 17.
: a proverbial phrase for abating of pomp or superiority.
margaret
must/dria, her sail, and learn a while to serve
72 s here kings command. shakesp. henry vi.
*}^*, v. 7. [from the noun.]
1. w. be moved by the wind with sails,
ol. ii.
i shall not mention any thing of the sailing waggons. mort,
2. to pass by sea.
when sailing was now dangerous, paul admonished them. moss.
3. to swim. -
to which the stores of croesus, in the scale,
would look like little dolphins, when they sail -
in the vast shadow of the british whale. dryden.
4. to pass smoothly along.
speak again, bright angel ! for thou art
as glorious to this fight, being o'er my head,
as is a winged messenger from heav'n,
when he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds,
and sails upon the bosom of the air.
to sail. v. a.
1. to pass by means of sails.
a thousand ships were mann'd to sail the sea. dryden.
view alcinous’ groves, from whence
sailing the spaces of the boundless deep,
to ariconium precious fruits arriv'd. philips.
2. to fly through.
sublime she sails - -
th’aerial space, and mounts the winged gales. pope.
satler, l n.s.. [sailor is more usual, sailer more analogical;
satlor. 9 from sail.] a seaman; one who practises or under-
stands navigation. -
they had many times men of other countries that were no
sailors. bacon:
batter'd by his lee they lay;
the passing winds through their torn canvas play,
and flagging sails on heartless sailors fall. dryden.
young pompey built a fleet of large ships, and had good
sailors, commanded by experienced captains. arbuthnot.
full in the openings of the spacious main
it rides, and, lo! descends the sailer train. pope's odyssey.
sailya'rd. n.s.. [sail and yard.] the pole on which the sail
is extended.
with glance so swift the subtle lightning past, -
as split the sailyards. dryden's juvenal.
saim. m. s. [saime, italian.] lard. it still denotes this in
scotland: as, swine's saim.
sain: [a participle ; obsolete; from say..] said.
some obscure precedence, that hath tofore been sain. shak,
sa’infor n. m. s. (sainfoin, fr. medica.]. a kind of herb.
saint, n.s.. [saint, french ; sancius, latin.] a person emi-
nent for piety and virtue.
to thee be worship and thy saints for aye. shakesp.
she will not stay the siege of loving terms,
nor ope her lap to saint seducing gold.
then thus i cloath my naked villainy
with old odd ends, stol’n forth of holy writ,
and seem a saint, when most i play the devil. shakespeare.
miracles are required of all who aspire to this dignity, be-
cause they say an hypocrite may imitate a saint in all other
particulars. addison on italy.
by thy example kings are taught to sway,
heroes to fight, and saints may learn to pray. granville.
so unaffected, so compos'd a mind;
so firm, yet soft, so strong, yet so refin'd,
heav'n, as its purest gold, by tortures try’d ; -
the saint sustaih'd it, but the woman dy’d. pope.
to saint. v. a. [from the noun..] to number among saints;
to reckon among saints by a publick decree; to canonize.
are not the principles of those wretches still owned, and
their persons sainted, by a race of men of the same stamp 2 south.
over-against the church stands a large hospital, erected by a
shoemaker, who has been beatified, though never sainted. add.
thy place is here; sad sister; come away :
once, like thyself, i trembled, wept, and pray'd ;
love's victim then, though now a sainted maid. pope.
sa'inted. adj. [from saint.]
1. holy; pious; virtuous.
thy royal father -
was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee,
oftner upon her knees than on her feet,
died every day she liv'd.
2. holy ; sacred.
i hold you as a thing enskied and sainted,
by your renouncement an immortal spirit,
and to be talk'd with in sincerity
as with a saint.
the crown virtue gives,
after this mortal change, to her true servants, 2.
amongst the enthron'd gods on sainted hills. a4.lton,
saint john's short. m. s. [hypercum.] a plant.
sa'1ntlik e. adj. [saint and like.]
1. suiting a saint ; becoming a saint.
if still thou do'st retain
the same ill habits, the same follies too,
gloss'd over only with a saintise show,
still thou art bound to vice.
2. resembling a saint. - -
the king, in whose time it passed, whom catholicks count
23 b a saintlier
shakoffeare,
shakespeare.
soaieff. macle:h.
shakes care.
drydn's persovo.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a l
s a l
a saintlike and immaculate prince, was taken away in the
flower of his age. - - bacon.
satntly. adj. [from saint.] like a saint; becoming a saint.
i mention still -- . .
him whom thy wrongs, with saintly patience borne,
made famous in a land and times obscure. milton.
sa'1ntship. n.s.. [from saint.] the character or qualities of
a saint.
he that thinks his saintship licenses him to censures, is to be
looked on not only as a rebel, but an usurper. decay of piety.
this savours something ranker than the tenets of the fifth
monarchy, and of sovereignty founded upon saintship. south.
the devil was piqu'd such saintship to behold,
and long'd to tempt him.
sake.. n.s. [ras, saxon; saecke, dutch..]
1. final cause ; end; purpose.
thou neither do'st persuade me to seek wealth
for empire's sake, nor cmpire to affect
for glory's sake. milton's paradise losł.
the prophane person serves the devil for nought, and sins
only for fin's sake. * tillotson.
wyndham like a tyrant throws the dart,
and takes a cruel pleasure in the smart;
proud of the ravage that her beauties make,
delights in wounds, and kills for killing's sake. granville.
2. account; regard to any person or thing.
would i were young for your sake, mittress anne | shakesp.
the general so likes your musick, that he desires you, for
love's sake, to make no more noise with it. shakesp. othello.
saker. m. s. [saker originally signifies an hawk, the pieces of
artillery being often denominated from birds of prey.]
the cannon, blunderbuss, and saker, -
he was th’ inventor of, and maker. hudibras.
according to observations made with one of her majesty's
fakers, and a very accorate pendulum chronometer, a bullet,
at its first discharge, flies five hundred and ten yards in five
half seconds, which is a mile in a little above seventeen half
seconds. derham's physico-theology.
sa’keret. m. s. [from saker.] the male of a saker-hawk.
this kind of hawk is esteemed next after the falcon and gyr-
falcon. bailey.
s.1l. m. s. [latin.] salt. a word often used in pharmacy.
salsoacids will help its passing off; as sal prunel. floyer.
sal gem is so called from its breaking frequently into gem-
like squares. it differs not in property from the common salt
of the salt springs, or that of the sea, when all are equally
pure. jwoodward's met. foss.
sal ammoniack is found still in ammonia, as mentioned by
the ancients, and from whence it had its name. //ozdward.
sala(cious. adj. [salax, lat. salace, fr.] lustful; lecherous.
one more salacious, rich, and old,
out-bids, and buys her.
feed him with herbs
of generous warmth, and of salacious kind. dryd. virg.
animals spleened, grow extremely salacious. arbuthnot.
sala(c.1ously. adv. [from salacious...] lecherously; lustfully.
sala(c1r y. m. s. [ salucitas, lat. from salacious. j lust ;
lechery.
molents salacity and excess of venery is supposed to
shorten the lives of cocks. brown's wulgar errours.
a corrosive acrimony in the seminal lympha produces sala-
city. floyer on the humours.
sa'la d. m. s. [ salade, fr. salart, germ.] food of raw herbs.
it has been always pronounced familiarly sallet.
i climbed into this garden to pick a salad, which is not
amiss to cool a man's stomach. shakesp. henry vi.
- my fallet days,
when i was green in judgment, cold in blood. sha's care.
you have, to reetify your palate, .
an olive, capers, or some better salad,
ush'ring the mutton.
some coarse cold salad is before thee set;
fall on. dryden's pers.
the happy old coricyan's fruits and salads, on which he
lived contented, were all of his own growth. dryden.
leaves, eaten raw, are termed salad: if boiled, they be-
come potherbs; and some of those plants which are potherbs
in one family, are sallad in another. j/atts.
salama'nder. m. s. [salamandre, fr. salamandra, lat.] an
animal supposed to live in the fire, and imagined to be very
poisonous. ambrose parey has a picture of the salamander,
with a receipt for her bite; but there is no such creature, the
name being now given to a poor harmless insect.
the salamander liveth in the fire, and hath force also to
extinguish it. bacon's natural history,
according to this hypothesis, the whole lunar world is a
torrid zone, and may be supposed uninhabitable, except they
are salamanders which dwell therein. glanville's scepsis.
whereas it is commonly said that a salamander extinguisheth
fire, we have found by experience, that on hot coals it dieth
immediately. - brown's wulgar errours.
the artist was so encompassed with fire and smoke, that
pope.
*
dryden's juvenal.
ben. johnson.
one would have thought nothing but a salamander could have
been safe in such a situation. . addison's guardian.
salama'n der’s hair. un. s. a kind of asbestos, or mineral
salama'nder’s wool. ; flax.
there may be such candles as are made of salamander's wool
being a kind of mineral, which whiteneth in the burning,
and consumeth not. bo.
of english talc, the coarser sort is called plaister or parget.
- the finer, spaad, earth flax, or salamander’s hair. iłodio.
salamandrine. adj. [from salamander.] resembling a sala.
mander.
. . laying it into a pan of burning coals, we observed a certain
salamandrine quality, that made it capable of living in the
midst of fire, without being consumed or finged. speciator.
sat, ary. m. s. [ salaire, fr. salarium, latin.]
1. salarium, or salary, is derived from sal. arbuthnot.
2. stated hire; annual or periodical payment.
this is hire and salary, not revenge. shakespeare.
several persons, out of a salary of five hundred pounds,
have always lived at the rate of two thousand. swift.
sale. m. s. [saal, dutch.]
1. the aet of selling.
2. vent; power of selling; market.
nothing doth more enrich any country than many towns;
for the countrymen will be more industrious in tillage, and
rearing of all husbandry commodities, knowing that they shall
have ready sale for them at those towns. speoser.
3. a publick and proclaimed exposition of goods to the market;
auotion.
those that won the plate, and those thus sold, ought to be
marked so as they may never return to the race, or to the
ale. temple.
4. state of being venal; price.
the other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the
gods. shakesp. cymbeline.
others more moderate seeming, but their aim
private reward; for which both god and state
they'd set to sale. milton's agonises.
the more money a man spends, the more must he endea-
vour to increase his stock; which at last sets the liberty of a
commonwealth to sale. addison.
5. it seems in spessor to signify a wicker basket; perhaps from
jallow, in which fish are caught. -
to make baskets of bulrushes was my wont;
who to entrap the fish in winding sale
was better seen spenser.
sat. eable. adj. [from sale.] wendible; fit for sale; market-
able.
i can impute this general enlargement of saleable things to
no cause sooner than the cornishman's want of vent and
money. carew.
this vent is made quicker or slower, as greater or less quan-
tities of any saleable commodity are removed out of the course
of trade. locke.
sai.earleness. m. s. [from sakable.] the state of being
saleable.
sa'leably. adv. [from saleable.] in a saleable manner.
salebrous, adj. isakbrosus, lat..] rough; uneven ; rugged.
sat esman. m. s. [sale and man.] one who sells cloaths ready
made.
poets make charaders, as salesmen cloaths;
we take no measure of your fops and beaus. swift.
sat. ewok k. m. s. [sale and work.] work for sale; work
carelessly done. -
i see no more in you than in the ordinary
of nature's salework. shakesp. as you like it.
sa lian7 adj. [french..] in heraldry, denotes a lion in a
leaping posture, and standing so that his right foot is in the
dexter point, and his hinder left foot in the finister base point
of the escutcheon, by which it is distinguished from ram-
pant. harris.
sa liant, in heraldry, is when the lion is sporting himself.
- peacham.
sat.1 ent. adj. [saliens, latin.]
1. leaping; bounding; moving by leaps.
the legs of both sides moving together, as frogs, and salient
animals, is properly called leaping. brown's puig. err.
2. beating; panting.
a salient point so first is call'd the heart,
by turns dilated, and by turns comprest,
expels and entertains the purple guest. blackmore.
3. springing or shooting with a quick motion.
who best can send on high
the saliant spout, far streaming to the fly. pope.
sa’li got. m. s. [tribulus aquaticus. j. water-thistle.
sat.ine. } adj. [salinus, latin.] consisting of salt ; con-
sat, inous, stituting salt.
we do not easily ascribe their induration to cold; but ra-
ther unto salinous spirits and concretive juices. brown.
this saline sap of the vessels, by being refused reception of
the parts, declares itself in a more hostile manner, by drying
the radical moisture.
harvey on consumptions.
if
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a l
s a l
in-
* *-
72 sat ly, z, n
if a very small quantity of any salt or vitriol be dissolved in
a great quantity of water, the particles of the salt or vitriol
will not sink to the bottom, though they be heavier in specie
than the water; but will evenly diffuse themselves into all the
water, so as to make it as saline at the top as at the bottom.
newton's opticks.
as the substance of coagulations is not merely saline, no-
thing dissolves them but what penetrates and relaxes at the
same time. arbuthnot on aliments.
saliva. m. s. [latin.] every thing that is spit up ; but it
more strictly signifies that juice which is separated by the
glands called salival. $2tincy.
not meeting with disturbance from the saliva, i the sooner
extirpated them.
so {aj. [from saliva, latin.] relating to spittle.
the woodpecker, and other birds that prey upon flies,
which they catch with their tonguc, in the room of the said
glands have a couple of bags filled with a viscous humour,
which, by small canals, like the salival, being brought into
their mouths, they dip their tongues herein, and so with the
help of this natural birdlime attack the prey. grew.
the necessity of spittle to dissolve the aliment appears from
the contrivance of nature in making the salivary ducts of ani-
mals which ruminate, extremely open : such animals as swal-
//iseman's surgery.
-&gt;
low their aliment without chewing, want salivary glands.
artuthnot.
to sa liv at e. v. a. [from saliva, latin.] to purge by the
salival glands. -
she was prepossessed with the scandal of salivating, and
went out of town. - joseman's surgery.
salivation. m. s. [from salivate.] a method of cure much
practised of late in venereal, scrophulous, and other obstinate
causes, by promoting a secretion of spittle, quincy.
holding of ill-tasted things in the mouth will make a small
salivation. grew's cosmol.
sali'vous. adj. [from saliva.] consisting of spittle ; having
the nature of spittle.
there happeneth an elongation of the uvula, through the
abundance of salivous humour flowing upon it. //seman.
###, g. }n. f. [corrupted by pronunciation from salad.]
i tried upon sallet oil. boyle.
sow some early salleting. mortimer's husbandry.
sa’ll iance. n.s.. [from sally..] the aet of issuing forth ; sally.
a word not inelegant, but out of use. -
now mote i weet,
sir guyon, why with so fierce salliance -
and fell intent, ye did at earst me meet. fairy queen.
sat low. n. / ssalix, latin.] a tree of the genus of willow.
sallows and reeds on banks of rivers born,
remain to cut to stay thy vines. dryden.
saillow. adj. [salo, german, black; sale, french, foul.]
sickly; yellow.
what a deal of brine
hath washt thy sallow cheeks for rosaline *
the scene of beauty and delight is chang'd:
no roses bloom upon my fading cheek,
nor laughing graces wanton in my eyes;
but haggard grief, lean-lookingsallow care,
and pining discontent, a rueful train,
dwell on my brow, all hideous and forlorn. rowe.
sa'llow ness. m. s. [from sallow.] yellowness; sickly pale-
shakespeare.
t
ness.
a fish-diet would give such a sillowness to the celebrated
beauties of this island, as would scarce make them distin-
guishable from those of france. addison,
sat.l.y. m. s. [sallie, french.]
1. eruption; issue from a place besieged; quick egress.
the deputy sat down before the town for the space of three
winter months; during which time sallies were made by the
spaniards, but they were beaten in with loss.
2. range; excursion.
every one shall know a country better, that makes often
fallies into it, and traverses it up and down, than he that, like
a mill-horse, goes still round in the same track. locke.
3. flight; volatile or sprightly exertion. -
these passages were intended for sallies of wit; but whence
comes all this rage of wit? stilling fleet.
4. escape; levity; extravagant flight; frolick; wild gaiety;
exorbitance.
at his return all was clear, and this excursion was esteemed
but a sally of youth. //otton.
'tis but a fally of youth. denham's sophy.
e have written some things which we may wish never to
have thought on: some sallies of levity ought to be imputed
to youth. swift.
h t he episodical part, made up of the extravagant sallies of
* prince of wales and falstaff's humour, is of his own in-
vention, shakespeare illustrated.
[from the noun..] to make an eruption; to
bacon.
the turks salying forth, received thereby great hurt. k.i.
the noise of some tumuluous fight:
they break the truce, and sally out by night.
the summons take of the same trumpet’s call,
to sally from one port, or man one publick wal'. 7...te.
satly fort. n.s.. [saly and port.] gate at which sallies are
made.
my slippery soul had quit the fort,
but that she stopp'd the saloport.
love to our citadel resorts
through those deceitful salyports;
our sentinels betray our forts. i}&lt;n' arm.
salmagu'ndi. m. s. [it is said to be corrupted from soon mon
gout, or sale a rion gast.] a mixture of chopped meat and
pickled herrings with oil, vinegar, pepper, and onions.
satlmon. n.s. (salmo, latin; sainion, french.)
the salmon is accounted the king of fresh water fish, and
is bred in rivers relating to the sea, yet so far from it as ad-
mits no tincture of brackishness. he is said to cast his spawn
in august: some say that then they dig a hole in a safe place
in the gravel, and there place their eggs or spawn, after the
melter has done his natural office, and then cover it over with
gravel and stones, and so leave it to their creator's protec-
tion ; who, by a gentle heat which he infuses into that cold
element, makes it brood and beget life in the spawn, and to
become samlets early in the spring: they haste to the sea be-
fore winter, both the melter and spawner. sir francis bacon
observes the age of a salmon exceeds not ten years. after he
is got into the sea he becomes from a famlet, not so big as a
gudgeon, to be a salmon, in as short a time as a gosling be-
comes a goose. //alton's anglor.
they poke them with an instrument somewhat like the sal-
mon spear. carew's survey of cornwall.
they take saloon and trouts by groping and ticking them
under the bellies in the pools, where they hover, and so throw
them on land. - - carew.
of fishes, you find in arms the whale, dolphin, sa'mon and
trout. - peacham.
sa’ll montrout. m. s. a trout that has some resemblance to a
salmon.
there is in many rivers that relate to the sea salmontrout, as
much different from others, in shape and spots, as sheep differ
in their shape and bigness. //alton's angler.
sa lp1(con. m. s. [in cookery.] a kind of farce put into
holes cut in legs of beef, veal, or mutton. bailey.
sa lsamentar lous. adj. [salsamentarius, latin.] belonging
to salt things. dic.
sa'lsify. m. s. [latin.] a plant. -
sassy, or the common fort of goatsbeard, is of a very long
oval figure, as if it were cods all over streaked, and engraven
in the spaces between the streaks, which are sharp pointed
towards the end. martimer's husbandry.
salso acid. adj. [salsus and acidus, latin, j. having a taste
compounded of saltness and sourness.
the falsoacids help its passing off; as sal prunel. floyer.
salsu'ginous, adj. [salsago, lat..] saltish ; somewhat salt.
the distinction of salts, whereby they are discriminated
into acid, volatile, ...!!!". if i may so call the fugitive
salts of animal substanees, and fixed or alcalizate, may appear
of much use in natural philosophy. boyle.
salt. n. s. [salt, gothick; o , saxon ; sal, latin; sel,
french.] o
r. salt is a body whose two essential properties seem to be, dis-
solubility in water, and a pungent sapor: it is an active incom-
bustible substance : it gives all bodies consistence, and pre-
serves them from corruption, and occasions all the variety of
tastes. there are three kinds of salts, fixed, volatile, and
essential : fixed salt is drawn by calcining the matter, then
boiling the ashes in a good deal of water: after this the solu-
tion is filtrated, and all the moisture evaporated, when the salt
remains in a dry form at the bottom: this is called a lixivious
salt. volatile salt is that drawn chiefly from the parts of ani-
mals, and some putrified parts of vegetables : it rises easily,
and is the most volatile of any. the essential salt is drawn
from the juice of plants by crystalization. harris.
is not discourse, manhood, learning, gentleness, virtue
and liberality, the spice and salt that seasons a man : shakesp.
he perfidiously has given up,
for certain drops of salt, your city rome,
to his wife and mother. shakes. corioianus.
since salts differ much, some being fixt, some volatile, some
acid, and some urinous, the two qualities wherein they agree
are, that it is easily dissoluble in water, and affects the palate
with a sapour, good or evil. boyle.
a particle of salt may be compared to a chaos, being dense,
hard, dry, and earthy in the centre, and rare, soft, and moist
in the circumference. newton's opt.
salts are bodies friable and brittle, in some degree pellucid,
sharp or pungent to the taste, and dissoluble in water ; but af-
ter that is evaporated, incorporating, crystalizing, and forming
themselves into angular figures. //ood ar.l.
2, taste; smack.
ue out,
i though
dryden.
cledvola *:d-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a l
s a l
though we are justices and doctors, and churchmen, mr.
page, we have some salt of our youth in us; we are the sons
of women. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
3. wit; merriment.
s.alt. adj.
i • having the taste of salt : as, salt fish.
we were better parch in africk sun,
than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes. shakesp.
thou old and true menenius,
thy tears are salter than a younger man's,
and venomous to thine eyes. shakesp. coriolanus.
2. impregnated with salt.
hang him, mechanical salt butter rogue: i will awe him
with my cudgel. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
it hath been observed by the ancients, that salt water will
dissolve salt put into it in less time than fresh water. bacon.
a leap into salt waters very often gives a new motion to the
fpirits, and a new turn to the blood. addison.
in cheshire they improve their lands by letting out the
water of the salt springs on them, always after rain. mortim.
3. abounding with salt.
he shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness in a
fall land, and not inhabited. - jer. xvii. 6.
4, [salax, lat.] lecherous ; salacious.
be a whore still :
make use of thy salt hours, season the slaves
for tubs and baths; bring down the rose-cheek'd youth
to the tub-fast, and the diet. shakesp. timon.
all the charms of love,
salt cleopatra, soften thy wan lip ! shakespeare.
this new-married man, approaching here,
whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
your well-defended honour, you must pardon. shakesp.
to salt. v. a. [from the noun..] to season with salt.
if the offering was of flesh, it was salted thrice. brown.
sa'lta nt. adj. [saltans, latin.] jumping; dancing.
saltation. n.s.. [saltatio, latin.]
1. the aet of dancing or jumping.
the locusts being ordained for saltation, their hinder legs
do far exceed the others. brown's vulgar errours.
2. beat; palpitation.
if the great artery be hurt, you will discover it by its salta-
tion and florid colour. wiseman's surgery.
saltcat. n.s.
many give a lump of salt, which they usually call a saltcat,
made at the salterns, which makes the pigeons much affect the
place. mortimer's husbandry.
saltce'll ar. n.s.. [salt and cellar.] vessel of salt set on the
table. -
when any salt is spilt on the table-cloth, shake it out into
the saltcellar. swift's directions to the butler.
satter... n.s.. [from salt.]
1. one who salts.
2. one who sells salt.
after these local names, the most have been derived from
occupations; as smith, salter, armourer. camden's remains.
sa'ltern. n.s. a saltwork.
a saltcat made at the salterns. mortimer’s husbandry.
salt inba. n.co. n.s.. [saltare in banco, to climb on a bench, as
a mountebank mounts a bank or bench..] a quack or moun-
tebank. -
saltinbancoes, quacksalvers, and charlatans, deceive them:
were æsop alive, the piazza and pont-neuf could not speak
their fallacies. brown's wulgar errours.
he play'd the saltinbanco's part,
transform'd to a frenchman by my art. hudibras.
sa‘ltier... n.s.. [saultiere, french..] term of heraldry.
a saltier is in the form of a st. andrew's cross, and by some
is taken to be an engine to take wild beasts: in french it is
called un sautoir; it is an honourable bearing. peacham.
sat tish. adj. [from salt..] somewhat salt.
soils of a saltish nature improve sandy grounds. mortimer.
salt less. adj. [from salt..] insipid ; not tasting of salt.
sa'ltly. adv. [from salt..] with taste of salt; in a salt manner.
so ltn ess. m. s. [from salt.] taste of salt.
salt water passing through earth, through ten vessels, one
within another, hath not lost its saltness, so as to become pot-
able; but drained through twenty, become fresh. bacon.
some think their wits have been asleep, except they dart
out somewhat that is piquant and to the quick: men ought to
find the difference between salines, and bitterness. bacom.
sa’lt-pan. ; m. s. [ salt and pan, or pit. j pit where salt is
sa/lt-pit. got.
moab and ammon shall be as the breeding of nettles, salt-
pits, and a perpetual desolation. zeph. ii. 9.
cicero prettily calls them salinas salt-pans, that you may
extract salt out of, and sprinkle where you please. bacon.
the stratum lay at about twenty-five fathom, by the duke
of somerset's salt-pans near whitehaven. woodivard on fossils.
saltpetre. m. s. [sal petrae, latin; sal petre, fr. j nitre.
nitre, or saltpetre, having a crude and windy spirit, by the
heat of the fire suddenly dilateth. bacon,
nitre or saltpetre, in heaps of earth, has been extra &amp;ed, if
they be exposed to the air, so as to be kept from rain. locke.
saly ability.. n.s.. [from salvable.] possibility of being re.
ceived to everlasting life.
why do we christians so fiercely argue against the salvali-
lity of each other, as if it were our wish that all should be
damned, but those of our particular se&amp;t decay of piety.
sat.vable. adj. [from salvo, latin.] possible to be saved.
our wild fancies about god's decrees have in event repro-
bated more than those decrees, and have bid fair to the damn-
ing of many whom those left salvable. decay of piety.
sa'lv age. adj. [saulvage, french ; sokaggio, italian, from
filva, latin.] wild; rude; cruel. it is now spoken and
written savage.
may the essexian plains
prove as a desert, and none there make stay
but savage beasts, or men as wild as they. waller.
a savage race inur'd to blood. ixrydin.
salvation. m. s. [from salvo, latin.] preservation from
eternal death; reception to the happiness of heaven.
as life and death, mercy and wrath, are matters of under-
standing or knowledge, all mens salvation, and all mens end-
less perdition, are things so opposite, that whosoever doth
affirm the one must necessarily deny the other. hooker.
him the most high, -
wrap'd in a balmy cloud with winged fleeds,
did, as thou saw'st, receive ; to walk with god
high in salvation, and the climes of bliss,
exempt from death. amolton's parad. l2/?.
sat v atory. v. j. [salvatoire, french.] a place where any
thing is preserved.
i consider the admirable powers of sensation, phantasy,
and memory, in what salvatories or repositories the forcies of
things past are conserved. hale's origin of mankind.
saluterious. adj. [salubris, lat..] wholesome; health-
ful; promoting health.
the warm limbeck draws
salubrious waters from the nocent brood. philips.
salu'brity. m. s. [from salubrious.] wholesomeness; health-
fulness.
salve. m. s. [this word is originally and properly sals, which
having salves in the plural, the fingular in time was borrowed
from it: jealp, saxon, undoubtedly from salvus, latin.)
1. a glutinous matter applied to wounds and hurts; an emplaster.
let us hence, my sov’reign, to provide
a solve for any sore that may betide. shakesp. henry vi,
sleep is pain's easiest salve, and doth fulfil
all offices of death, except to kill. donne.
go study salve and treacle; ply
your tenant's leg, or his sore eye. cleaveland.
the royal sword thus drawn, has cur'd a wound,
for which no other salve could have been found. waller.
though most were sorely wounded, none were slain;
the surgeons foon despoil'd them of their arms,
and some with salves they cure. dryden.
2. help; remedy.
- if they shall excommunicate me, hath the doctrine of
meekness any salve for me then hanımond.
to salve. v. a. [salvo, latin; or from the noun.] -
1. to cure with medicaments applied.
many skilful leeches him abide,
to salve his hurts. fairy queen.
it should be to little purpose for them to solve the wound,
by making protestations in disgrace of their own actions.
hooker.
the which if i perform, and do survive,
i do beseech your majesty may salve
the long-grown wounds of my intemperature. sh. h. vi.
2. to help ; to remedy.
some seek to salve their blotted name
with others blot, 'till all do taste of shame. sidney.
our mother-tongue, which truly of itself is both full
enough for prose, and stately enough for verse, hath long time
been counted most bare and barren of both ; which default,
when as some endeavoured to salve and cure, they patched up
the holes with rags from other languages. speyer-
3. to help or save by a salvo, an excuse, or reservation.
ignorant i am not how this is salued: they do it but after
the truth is made manifest. hazaer.
my more particular,
and that which most with you should salve my going,
is fulvia's death. shakesp. aut. and cleopatra.
the schoolmen were like the astronomers, who, to save
phoenomena, framed to their conceit eccentricks and epicy-
cles; so they, to salue the practice of the church, had devised
a great number of flrange positions. b-reco-
there must be another state to make up the inequalities of
this, and salve all irregular appearances. af.:eror.' ..
this conduct might give horace the hint to say, that when
homer was at a loss to bring any difficult matter to an isiue,
he laid his hero asleep, and this saved all difficulty. bretoe.
4. [from salvo, latin.] to salute. obsolete.
- 7 - that<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a m -
s a n
---
-o-
* -
• * *
4:... --
os. so
loss -
or "
that stranger knight in presence came,
and goodly salved them; who nought again
him answered as courtesy became. fairy queen.
sa'lver. m. s. [a vessel, i suppose, used at first to carry away
or save what was left.] a plate on which any thing is pre-
sented.
he has printed them in such a portable volume, that many
bf them may be ranged together on a single plate; and is of
opinion, that a salver of spectators would be as acceptable an
entertainment for the ladies, as a salver of sweetmeats. addison.
between each act the trembling salvers ring,
from soup to sweet wine. pope.
sa l.p.o. n.s. (from salvo jure, latin, a form used in granting
any thing: as salvo sure putei.] an exception ; a reservation ;
an excuse.
they admit many salvoes, cautions, and reservations, so
as they cross not the chief design. king charles.
it will be hard if he cannot bring himself off at last with
fome salvo or distinction, and be his own confessor. l’estr.
if others of a more serious turn join with us deliberately in
their religious professions of loyalty, with any private salvoes
or evasions, they would do well to consider those maxims in
which all casuists are agreed. addison.
sa'lut ariness. n.s. [from salutary..] wholsomeness; qua-
lity of contributing to health or safety.
satutary. adj. [ salutaire, fr. salutaris, lat..] whol-
some ; healthful; safe ; advantageous; contributing to health
or safety.
the gardens, yards, and avenues are dry and clean; and so
more salutary as more elegant. ray.
it was want of faith in our saviour's countrymen, which’
hindered him from shedding among them the salutary emana-
tions of his divine virtue; and he did not many mighty works
there, because of their unbelief. bentley.
salutation. m. s. [salutation, fr. salutatio, lat.] the act
or stile of saluting ; greeting.
the early village cock
hath twice done salutation to the morn.
thy kingdom's peers
speak my salutation in their minds;
whose voices i desire aloud with mine,
shakesp. r. iii.
hail, king of scotland 1 shakesp. macbeth.
- on her the angel hail
bestow'd, the holy salutation used
to blest mary. milton.
in all publick meetings, or private addresses, use those
forms of salutation, reverence and decency, usual amongst the
most sober persons. taylor's rule of living holy.
court and state he wisely shuns;
nor brib'd, to servile salutations runs.
to salute. v. a. [saluto, lat. saluer, fr.]
1. to greet; to hail.
the golden sun salutes the morn,
and, having gilt the ocean with his beams,
gallops the zodiack in his glist'ring coach. shakes. tit. and.
one hour hence
shall salute your grace of york as mother.
2. to please ; to gratify.
- would i had no being,
if this salute my blood a jot: it faints me,
to think what follows. shakesp. henry viii.
3. to kiss.
salute. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. salutation; greeting.
the custom of praying for those that sneeze is more ancient
than these opinions hereof: so that not any one disease has
dryden's horace.
shak. r. iii.
been the occasion of this salute and deprecation. brown.
o, what avails me now that honour high
to have conceiv'd of god, or that salute,
hail highly favour'd, among women blest milton.
continual salutes and addresses entertaining him all the way,
kept him from saving so great a life, but with one glance of
his eye upon the paper, 'till he came to the fatal place where
he was stabbed. south.
i shall not trouble my reader with the first salutes of our three
friends. addison.
2. a kiss. -
there cold salutes, but here a lover's kiss. roscommon.
saluter. m. s. [from salute.] he who salutes.
so. adj. [salutifer, lat.] healthy; bringing
ealth.
the king commanded him to go to the south of france,
believing that nothing would contribute more to the restoring
of his former vigour than the gentle salutiferous air of mont-
pelier, dennis’s letters.
*ame, adj. [samo, gothick; sammo, swedish.]
1. not different; not another; identical; being of the like
kind, sort, or degree.
iso, as spitefully as her rotten voice could utter it, set
forth the jame fins of amphialus. sidney.
the tenor of man’s woe
holds on the same. milton.
vol. ii.
th' etherial vigour is in all the same, -
and ev'ry soul is fill'd with equal flame. dryden's zt.
if itself had been coloured, it would have transmitted all
visible objects tinctured with the same colour; as we see what-
ever is beheld through a coloured glass, appears of the same
colour with the glass. ray on the creation.
the merchant does not keep money by him; but if you
consider what money must be lodged in the banker's hands,
the case will be much the same. locke.
the same plant produceth as great a variety of juices as
there is in the same animal. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. that which was mentioned before.
do but think how well the same he spends,
who spends his blood his country to relieve.
sa’meness. m. s. [from same.]
1. identity; the state of being not another; not different.
difference of persuasion in matters of religion may easily
fall out, where there is the sameness of duty, allegiance, and
subjection. king charles.
2. undistinguishable resemblance.
if all courts have a sameness in them, things may be as they
were in my time, when all employments went to parliament-
mens friends. swift.
sa’m let. n.s. [ salmonet, or salmonlet.] a little salmon.
a salmon, after he is got into the sea, becomes from a
samlet, not so big as a gudgeon, to be a salmon, in as short a
time as a gosling becomes a goose. walton's angler.
sa'mphir e. n.s. [ saint pierre, fr. rithmum, lat..] a plant
preserved in pickle.
this plant grows in great plenty upon the rocks near the
sea-shore, where it is washed by the salt water. it is greatly
esteemed for pickling, and is sometimes used in medicine.
danic!.
44iller.
half way down
hangs one that gathers samphire: dreadful trade 1
methinks he seems no bigger than his head. shakespeare.
sa'mple. n.s.. [from example..] a specimen; a part of the
whole shown that judgment may be made of the whole.
he intreated them to tarry but two days, and he himself
would bring them a sample of the oar. raleigh.
i have not engaged myself to any : i am not loaded with a
full cargo : ’tis sufficient if i bring a sample of some goods in
this voyage. dryden.
i design this but for a sample of what i hope more fully to
discuss. woodward's natural hislory.
determinations of justice were very summary and decisive,
and generally put an end to the vexations of a law-suit by the
ruin both of plaintiff and defendant : travellers have recorded
some samples of this kind. addijan.
from most bodies
some little bits ask leave to flow ;
and, as through these canals they roll,
bring up a sample of the whole. prizr.
to sample. v. a. to show something fimilar. ainsworth.
sa'mple.r. m. s. [exemplar, lat. whence it is sometimes written
samplar.] a pattern of work; a piece worked by young
girls for improvement.
o love, why do'st thou in thy beautiful sampler set such a
work for my desire to set out, which is impossible : sidney.
fair philomela, she but lost her tongue,
and in a tedious sampler sew’d her mind.
shakespeare's titus andronicus.
we created with our needles both one flower,
both on one samplar, fitting on one cushion;
both warbling of one song, both in one key,
as if our hands, our sides, voices and minds
had been incorp'rate.
coarse complexions,
and cheeks of sorry grain, will serve to ply
the sampler, and to teize the housewife's wool. milton.
i saw her sober over a sampler, or gay over a jointed baby.
pope.
sa'nable. adj. [sanabilis, lat..] curable; susceptive of o:
medy ; remediable. -
sana‘tion. m. s. [ sanatio, lat..] the aet of curing.
confider well the member, and, if you have no probable
hope of sanation, cut it off quickly. i/iseman's surgery.
sa'native. adj. [from sano.] powerful to cure; healing.
the vapour of coltsfoot hath a sanative virtue towards the
lungs. bacon's natural hisłory.
sa'nativeness. n.s.. [from sanative..] power to cure.
solos. n. s. [sancification, fr. from sanesifico, low
a tin.
i. the le of being freed, or act of freeing from the dominion
of sin for the time to come.
the grace of his sanesification and life, which was first re-
ceived in him, might pass from him to his whole race, as ma-
lediction came from adam unto all mankind. hooker.
2. the act of making holy; consecration.
the bishop kneels before the cross, and devoutly adores
and kisses it: after this follows a long prayer for the san:lifica-
tion of that new sign of the cross. stillingfieet.
23 c sa'nctif i er.
shakespeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a n
s a n
sa'ncrifier. m. s. [from sancis/.] he that sanetifies or makes
holv.
to be the sanciiffer of a people, and to be their god, is all
onc. - derham's physico theology.
t, sa’nctify. v. a. [sancifier, fr. sancifico, lat.]
1. to free from the power of fin for the time to come.
for if the blood of bulls, sprinkling the unclean, sanciifieth
to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood
of christ heb. ix. 13.
2. to make holy.
what actions can express the intire purity of thought, which
refines and sancifies a virtuous man : addison.
3. to make a means of holiness.
the gospel, by not making many things unclean, as the
law did, hath sancified those things generally to all, which
particularly each man to himself must sancifty by a reverend
and holy use. hocker.
those judgments god hath been pleased to send upon me,
are so much the more welcome, as a means which his mercy
hath sancified so to me as to make me repent of that unjust act.
- king charles.
those external things are neither parts of our devotion, or
by any strength in themselves direct causes of it; but the grace
of god is pleased to move us by ways suitable to our nature,
and to sancify these sensible helps to higher purposes. south.
4. to make free from guilt.
the holy man, amaz'd at what he saw,
made haste to sancify the bliss by law. dryden.
5. to secure from violation. -
truth guards the poet, sancifies the line. pope.
san ctimo'nious. adj. [from sancimonia, latin.] saintly ;
having the appearance of sanetity.
a sanciimonious pretence, under a pomp of form, without
the grace of an inward integrity, will not serve the turn.
l'estrange.
sa'ncti mony. m.s.. [sancimonia, lat..] holiness ; scrupulous
austerity ; appearance of holiness.
if sanciimony, and a frail vow between an errant barbarian
and a supersubtle venetian, be not too hard for my wit, and
all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her. shak. othello.
her pretence is a pilgrimage, which holy undertaking, with
most austeresancimony, she accomplish'd. shakespeare.
there was great reason why all discreet princes should be-
ware of yielding hasty belief to the robes of sanciimony. raleigh.
sa'nction. m. s. [ sancion, fr. sanctio, lat.]
1. the act of confirmation which gives to any thing its obliga-
tory power; ratification.
i have kill'd a slave,
and of his blood caus’d to be mixt with wine :
fill every man his bowl. there cannot be
a fitter drink to make this sancion in. ben. johns. catil.
against the publick sanctions of the peace,
with fates averse, the rout in arms resort,
to force their monarch. dryden's acn.
there needs no positive law or sancion of god to stamp an
obliquity upon such a disobedience. south.
. by the laws of men, enacted by civil power, gratitude is
not enforced; that is, not enjoined by the sanction of penal-
ties, to be inflicted upon the person that shall not be found
grateful. south.
the satisfactions of the christian life, in its present prac-
tice and future hopes, are not the mere raptures of enthusiasm,
as the strictest professors of reason have added the sam&amp;ion of
their testimony. //atts.
this word is often made the sancion of an oath: it is
reckoned a great commendation to be a man of honour. swift.
wanting sancion and authority, it is only yet a private
work. baker on learning.
2. a law; a decree ratified. improper.
'tis the first sanciion nature gave to man,
each other to assist in what they can. denham.
sa'nctitude. m. s. [from sancius, lat...] holiness; goodness;
saintliness,
- in their looks divine
the image of their glorious maker shone,
truth, wisdom, sanciitude, serene and pure. milton.
sa'nct it y. m. s. [sancitas, lat.]
1. holiness; the state of being holy.
at his touch,
such sanelity hath heaven given his hand,
they presently amend. shakoffeare.
god attributes to place
no sancity, if none be thither brought
by men who there frequent. milton.
2. goodness; the quality of being good; purity; godliness.
this youth
i reliev'd with such sanciity of love,
and to his image, which methought did promise
most venerable worth, did i devotion. shakespeare.
it was an observation of the ancient romans, that their
empire had not more increased by the strength of their arms
than the sancłity of their manners. addison.
3. saint; holy being.
about him all the sam&amp;#ifies of heav'n
stood thick as stars, and from his sight receiv'd -
beatitude past utt’rance. milton
to sanctuaris e. v. m. [from sanciuary.] to shelter by
means of sacred privileges. not in use.
no place indeed should murder sanctuaris. shakoso,
sa'nctuary. m. s. [sanctuaire, fr. sanciuarium, lat.j
1. a holy place; holy ground. properly the penetralia, or most
retired and awful part of a temple.
having waste ground enough,
shall we desire to raze the sanciuary, - -
and pitch our evils there skałospeare,
they often plac'd
within his sanciuary itself their shrines. amilton.
let it not be imagined, that they contribute nothing to the
happiness of the country who only serve god in the duties of
a holy life, who attend his sanctuary, and daily address his
goodness. rogers's sermont,
2. a place of protection; a sacred asylum: whence a sanciuary
man, one who takes shelter in a holy place.
come, my boy, we will to sanctuary. shakesp. r. iii.
i’ll hence forth with unto the sanciuary,
to save at least the heir of edward's right. shak. h. vi.
oft have i heard of sanciuary men;
but sanciuary children, ne'er 'till now. shakes. r. iii.
he fled to beverly, where he and divers of his company
registered themselves sanctuary men. bacon's henry vii.
howsoever the sanctuary man was protected from his credi-
tors, yet his goods out of sanctuary should not. bacon's h. vii.
3. shelter; protection.
what are the bulls to the frogs, or the lakes to the mea-
dows very much, says the frog; for he that's worsted will
be sure to take sanciuary in the fens. l'estrange.
the admirable works of painting were made fuel for the
fire; but some reliques of it took sanctuary under ground, and
escaped the common destiny. dryden's dufresnoy.
sand. m. s. [ sand, danish and dutch.]
1. particles of stone not conjoined, or stone broken to powder.
that finer matter called sand, is no other than very small
pebbles. jwoodward.
here i' th' sands
thee i’ll rake up, the post unsanetified. , shakes. k. lear.
hark, the fatal followers do pursue ! -
the sands are number'd that make up my life:
here must i stay, and here my life must end. shak. h. vi.
sand hath always its root in clay, and there be no veins of
fand any great depth within the earth. bacon.
calling for more paper to rescribe, king philip shewed him
the difference betwixt the ink box and sand box. howel.
if quicksilver be put into a convenient glass vessel, and that
vessel exactly stopped, and kept for ten weeks in a sand fur-
nace, whose heat may be constant, the corpuscles that consti-
tute the quicksilver will, after innumerable revolutions, be so
connected to one another, that they will appear in the form of
a red powder. boyle.
engag’d with money bags, as bold
as men with sand bags did of old. hudibras.
the force of water casts gold out from the bowels of moun-
tains, and exposes it among the sands of rivers. dryden.
shells are found in the great sand pit at woolwich.
j%adward.
celia and i, the other day,
walk'd o'er the sand hills to the sea. prior.
2. barren country covered with sands.
most of his army being slain, he, with a few of his friends,
sought to save themselves by flight over the desert sands. knolls.
her sons spread
so, where our wild numidian wastes extend,
sudden th’ impetuous hurricanes descend,
wheel through the air, in circling eddies play,
tear up the sands, and sweep whole plains away.
the helpless traveller, with wild surprise,
and smother'd in the dusty whirlwind dies. ‘.…
sandal. m. s. [sandals, fr. sandalium, lat..] a loose shoe.
thus sung the uncouth swain to th’ oaks and rills,
while the still morn went out with sandals grey. asilion.
from his robe
and lycian bow are gold; with golden sandals
his feet are shod. prizr.
the sandals of celestial mold,
fledg’d with ambrosial plumes, and rich with gold,
surround her feet. pope's ods.
1. a mineral of a bright right colour, not much unlike to red
arse nick. fairy.
2. a white gum oozing out of the juniper-tree. bailey.
sandblin d. adj. [sand and blind.] having a defe&amp;t in the
eyes, by which small particles appear to fly before them.
beneath gibraltar to the lybian sands. a4istan.
sees the dry desart all around him rise,
flows light ineffable. his harp, his quiver,
sa'n dar a k. m. s. [ sandaraque, fr. sandaraca, lat.j
my
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a n
s a p
t
wo
my true begotten father, being more than sandblind, high
ravelblind, knows me not. shakesp. merchant of venice.
sand box tree. m. s. shura, lat..] a plant. .
the fruit of this plant, if suffered to remain on 'till they are
fully ripe, burst in the heat of the day with a violent explo-
fion, making a noise like the firing of a pistol, and hereby the
seeds are thrown about to a considerable distance. these seeds,
when green, vomit and purge, and are supposed to be some-
what a-kin to nux vomica. amiller.
sanded. adj. [from sand.]
1. covered with sand; barren.
in well sanded lands little or no snow lies.
the river pours along
resistless, roaring dreadful down it comes;
then o'er the sanded valley floating spreads. thomson.
2. marked with small spots; variegated with dusky specks.
my hounds are bred out of the spartan kind,
so flew'd, so sanded, and their heads are hung
with ears that sweep away the morning dew. shakespeare.
sa’nderling. m. s. a bird.
we reckon coots, sanderlings, pewets, and mews. carew.
sa'nders. m. s. [santalum, lat..] a precious kind of indian
wood, of which there are three sorts, red, yellow, and green.
bailey.
wiseman's surgery.
mortioner.
aromatize it with sanders.
sa'n dever. m. s.
that which our english glassmen call sand ver, and the
french, of whom probably the name was borrowed, suinde-
ver, is that recrement that is made when the materials of
glass, namely, sand and a fixt lixiviate alkali, having been
first baked together, and kept long in fusion, the mixture casts
up the superfluous salt, which the workmen afterwards take
off with ladles, and lay by as little worth. boyle.
sa'ndis h. adj. [from sand.] approaching to the nature of
sand; loose; not close ; not compact.
plant the tenuifolia's and ranunculus's in fresh sandish earth,
taken from under the turf. evelyn's kalendar.
sa'n dston e. n. s. [sand and stone..] stone of a loose and fri-
able kind, that easily crumbles into sand.
grains of gold in sandstone, from the mine of costa rica,
which is not reckoned rich ; but every hundred weight yields
about an ounce of gold. woodward.
sa'n dy. adj. [from sand.]
1. abounding with sand ; full of sand.
i should not see the sandy hourglass run,
but i should think of shallows and of flats.
safer shall he be on the sandy plains, -
than where castles mounted stand. shakes). h. vi.
a region so desert, dry, and sandy, that travellers are fain
to carry water on their camels. brown's vulgar errours.
rough unweildy earth, nor to the plough
nor to the cattle kind, with sandy stones
and gravel o'er-abounding. phillips.
o'er sandy wilds were yellow harvests spread. pope.
2. consisting of sand; unsolid.
favour, so bottomed upon the sandy foundation of personal
respects only, cannot be long lived. bacon to williers.
sane, adj. [sanus, lat..] sound; healthy. baynard wrote a
poem on preserving the body in a sane and sound state.
sang. the preterite of sing.
then sang moses and israel this song unto the lord. ex. xv.
thee next they sang, of all creation first. amilton.
sangui'ferous. adj. [sanguiser, lat..] conveying blood.
the fifth conjugation of the nerves is branched to the
muscles of the face, particularly the cheeks, whose sangui-
ferous vessels it twists about. derham's physico-theology.
sanguification. n.s. [ sanguification, fr. sanguis and facio,
lat..] the production of blood; the conversion of the chyle
into blood.
since the lungs are the chief instrument of sangulfication,
the animal that has that organ faulty can never have the vital
juices, derived from the blood, in a good state. arbuthnot.
asthmatick persons have voracious appetites, and conse-
quently, for want of a right sanguification, are leucophlegma-
tick. arbuthnot on aliments.
so. m. s. [sanguis and facio, lat..] producer of
ood.
bitters, like choler, are the best sanguifiers, and also the
best febrifuges. floyer cn the humours.
ovo. v. n. [sanguis and facio, lat.] to produce
000.
- at the same time i think, i command: in inferior facul-
ties, i walk, see, hear, digest, sanguisy, and carnify, by the
power of an individual soul. hale.
sa *goinary. adj. [ sanguinarius, lat. sanguinaire, fr. from
janguis, lat.] cruel; bloody ; murtherous.
* may not propagate religion by wars, or by sanguinar
persecutions to tj y y .
o scene is now more sanguinary, and fuller of actors:
"...was such a confused mysterious civil war as this. howel.
too transforms us into a kind of savages, and makes us
and jazz guinary, brozone.
shakespeare.
sanguinary. m. s. [sanguis, lat..] an herb. ainsworth,
sanguine, adj. isanguin, fr. sanguineus, from sanguis, lat.]
1. red; having the colour of blood.
this fellow
upbraided me about the rose i wear;
saying, the sanguine colour of the leaves
did represent my master's blushing cheeks. shak. h. vi.
a stream of nect’rous humour issuing flow'd
saguine. milton.
dire tisiphone there keeps the ward,
girt in her sanguine gown. - dryden.
her flag aloft, spread ruffling to the wind,
and sanguine streamers seem the flood to fire:
the weaver, charm'd with what his loom design'd,
goes on to sea, and knows not to retire. o dryden.
2. aounding with blood more than any other humour; cheer-
ll -
the cholerick fell short of the longevity of the sanguine. br.
though these faults differ in their complexions as sanguine
from melancholy, yet they are frequently united. g2%. of 1.
3. warm; ardent; confident.
a set of sanguine tempers ridicule, in the number of fop-
... peries, all such apprehensions. swift.
sa'nguine. m. s. [from sanguis.] blood colour.
a griefly wound,
from which forth gush'd a stream of gore, blood thick
that all her goodly garments stain’d around, &gt;
and in deep sanguine dy'd the grassy ground. fa. 9ueen.
:::::::::::: n: s [from sanguinej ardour; heat of ex.
sanguinity. pestation; confidence. sanguinity is per-
haps only used by swift.
rage, or phrensy it may be, in some perhaps natural cou-
rage, or sanguineness of temper in others; but true valour it is
not, if it knows not as well to suffer as to do. that mind is
truly great, and only that, which stands above the power of
all extrinsick violence ; which keeps itself a distinct principa-
lity, independent upon the outward man. decay of piety
i very much distrust your sanguinity. swift.
sanguin eous. adj. [sanguineus, lat. sangiin, fr.] -
1. constituting blood.
this animal of plato containeth not only sanguineous and
reparable particles, but is made up of veins, herves, and ar-
terics. brown's - *
2. abounding with blood. - /ugar errors.
a plethorick constitution, in which true blood abounds is
called sanguineous. zluto.
sa'n hedrim. m. s. [soned ium, lat.] the chief council
among the jews, consisting of seventy elders, over whom the
high priest presided.
san1c1, ... m. s. ssanide; fr. sanicula, lat..] a plant.
sanies. n. s. [latin.] thin matter; serous excretion.
it began with a round crack in the skin, without other mat-
ter than a little sanies. *istman's surgery.
sa'nious. adi, [from sanies.] running a thin serous mates
not a well digested pus. 2
observing the ulcer sanious, i proposed digestion as the only
way to remove the pain. //?
sa'nity. m. s. [sanius, lat..] soundness of mind. seman,
how pregnant, sometimes, his replies are
a happiness that often madness hits on,
which sanity and reason could not be
so prosp’rously delivered of.
sank. the preterite of sink.
as if the opening of her mouth to zelmane had opened
some great floodgate of sorrow, whereof her heart could not
abide the violent issue, she sank to the ground. sidney.
our men followed them close, took two ships, and gave
divers others of their ships their death's wounds, whoeof
soon after they sank and perished.
sans. prep. [french.j. without. out of use.
last scene of all,
that ends this strange eventful history,
is second childishness and mere oblivion,
sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing. shahsh.
for nature so preposterously to err,
being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,
sans witchcraft could not. shakespeare's othell.
sap. m. s. [raepe, saxon; sap, dutch..] the vital juice of
plants ; the juice that circulates in trees and herbs.
now sucking of the sap of herbs most sweet,
or of the dew, which yet on them does lie,
now in the same bathing his tender feet. soemser.
though now this grained face of mine be hid ./
in sap consuming winter’s drizzled snow,
and all the conduits of my blood froze up,
yet hath my night of life some memory,
wound the bark of our fruit-trees,
lest, being over-proud with sap and blood,
with too much riches it confound itself.
shakespeare's richard ii.
shakespeare.
his presence had infus'd
into the plant sciential sap. - a filton.
the
shakespeare's hamlet. -
bacon's i/ar with spain,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a p.
s a r
the so, which at the root is bred
in ..o. all the boughs is spread. . wwaller.
vegetables consist of the same parts with animal substances,
spirit, water, salt, oil, earth; all which are contained in the
fap they derive from the earth. arbuthnot.
t; sa p. v. a. [sapper, fr. zappare, italian.] to undermine;
to subvert by digging ; to mine.
their dwellings were sapp'd by floods,
their houses fell upon their houshold gods. dryden.
to sap. v. n. to proceed by mine; to proceed invisibly.
for the better security of the troops, both assaults are carried
on by sapping. tatler.
in vain may heroes fight, and patriots rave,
if secret gold saps on from knave to knave, pope.
sa pphire. m. s. [sapphirus, latin: so that it is improperly
written saphyre..] a precious stone of a blue colour.
saphire is of a bright blue colour. jwoodward.
in enroll'd tuffs, flow'rs pursled, blue and white,
like saphire, pearl, in rich embroidery. shakespeare.
he tinetures rubies with their rosy hue,
and on the saphire spreads a heavenly blue. blackmore.
that the saphire should grow foul, and lose its beauty, when
worn by one that is lecherous, and many other fabulous sto-
ries of gems, are great arguments that their virtue is equiva-
lent to their value. derham.
sa pphirin e. adj. [sapphirinus, lat.] made of sapphire; re-
sembling sapphire.
she was too saphirine and clear for thee;
clay, flint, and jet now thy fit dwellings be. donne.
a few grains of shell silver, with a convenient proportion of
powdered crystal glass, having been kept three hours in fusion,
i found the coliquated mass, upon breaking the crucible, of a
lovely sophirine blue. boyle.
sapi.d. adj. [sapidus, lat.] tasteful; palatable; making a
powerful stimulation upon the palate.
thus camels, to make the water sapid, do raise the mud
with their feet. brown's pulgar errours.
the most oily parts are not separated by a slight deco&amp;tion,
'till they are disentangled from the salts; for if what remains
of the subject, after the infusion and decoetion be continued
to be boiled down with the addition of fresh water, a fat,
sapid, odorous, viscous, inflammable, frothy water will con-
stantly be found floating a-top of the boiling liquor. arbuthn.
sap1’dity. u n. s. [from sapid.] tastefulness; power of
sa pidness. } stimulating the palate.
as for their taste, if their nutriment be air, neither can it
be an instrument thereof; for the body of that element is in-
gustible, and void of all sapidity. brown's wulgar errours.
if sapidness belong not to the mercurial principle of vege-
tables and animals, it will scarce be discriminated from their
phlegm. boyle.
sa'pien ce. n. s. [ sapience, fr. sapientia, lat.] wisdom; sage-
ness; knowledge.
by sapience, i mean what the ancients did by philosophy;
the habit or disposition of mind which importeth the love of
wisdom. grew.
ne only they that dwell in lowly dust,
the sons of darkness and of ignorance;
but they whom thou, great jove, by doom unjust,
did'st to the top of honour earst advance:
they now, puft up with’s deignful insolence,
despise the brood of blessed sapience. spenser.
king james, of immortal memory, annong all the lovers
and admirers of divine and human sapience, accomplished at
theobalds his own days on earth. // otton.
because enterprises guided by ill counsels have equal suc-
cess to those by the best judgment conducted, therefore had
violence the same external figure with sapience. raleigh.
sapience and love
immense, and all his father in him shone. amilton.
o sov’reign, virtuous, precious of all trees
in paradise ! of operation blest
to sapience. milton.
many a wretch in bedlam,
though perhaps among the rout
he wildly flings his filth about,
still has gratitude and sapience,
to spare the folks that give him ha'pence. swift.
sapient. adj. [ sapiens, lat..] wise; sage.
there the sapient king held dalliance. milton.
sa pless. adj. [saploos, dutch.]
1. wanting sap ; wanting vital juice.
pithless arms, like to a wither'd vine,
that droops his saples; branches to the ground. shak. h. vi.
the tree of knowledge, blasted by disputes,
produces saples, leaves instead of fruits. denham.
this single stick was full of sap; but now in vain does art
tie that withered bundle of twigs to its saploss trunk. swift.
2. dry ; old; husky.
if by this bribe, well plac'd, he would ensnare
some saples; usurer that wants an heir. dryden's juven,
sa'pling. m. s. [from sap.] a young tree; a young plant.
look how i am bewitch'd; behold, mine arm
is, like a blasted sapling, wither'd up. shakesp. r. iii.
nurse the saplings tall, and curl the grove
with ringlets quaint. milton.
a sapling pine he wrench'd from out the ground,
the readiest weapon that his fury found. dryden.
what planter will attempt to yoke
a sapling with a falling oak swift.
slouch turn'd his head, saw his wife's vigorous hand
wielding her oaken sapling of command. king.
sap on aceous. } adj. [from sapo, latin, soap.] sopy; re-
sa'pon ary. sembling soap; having the qualities of soap.
by digesting a solution of salt of tartar with oil of almonds,
i could reduce them to a soft saponary substance. boyle.
any mixture of an oily substance with salt, may be called a
soap : bodies of this nature are called saponaceous. arbuthnot.
sa por. m. s. [latin.] taste ; power of affecting or stimu-
lating the palate.
there is some sapor in all aliments, as being to be distin-
guished and judged by the gust, which cannot be admitted in
air. brown's pulgar errours.
the shape of those little particles of matter which distin-
- guish the various sapors, odours, and colours of bodies. watts.
sapori fick, adj. [saporifique, fr. sapor and facio, latin.]
having the power to produce tastes.
sa ppin ess. n. s. [from sappy..] the state or the quality of
abounding in sap ; succulence; juiciness.
sa ppy. adj. [from sap.]
1. abounding in sap ; juicy; succulent.
the sappy parts, and next resembling juice,
were turn'd to moisture for the body's use, -
supplying humours, blood, and nourishment. dryden.
the sappy boughs
attire themselves with blooms, sweet rudiments
of future harvest. philips.
the green heat the ripe, and the ripe give fire to the green;
to which the bigness of their leaves, and hardness of their
stalks, which continue moist and sappy long, doth much con-
tribute. amortimer.
2. young; not firm ; weak.
this young prince was brought up among nurses, ’till he
arrived to the age of six years: when he had passed this weak
and sappy age, he was committed to dr. cox. płayward.
sa'raband. m. s. [garabande, spanish; sarabande, french..] a
spanish dance.
the several modifications of this tune-playing quality in a
fiddle, to play preludes, sarabands, jigs and gavots, are as
much real qualities in the instrument as the thought is in the
mind of the composer. arbuthnot and pope.
sat casm. m. s. [sarcasme, fr. sarcasmus, lat.] a keen
reproach ; a taunt ; a gibe.
sarcosins of wit are transmitted in story. gov. of the tongue.
rejoice, o young man, says solomon, in a severe sarcasm,
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart;
but know that for these things god will bring thee into judg-
in cnt. rogers's sermons.
when an angry master says to his servant, it is bravely done,
it is one way of giving a severe reproach ; for the words are
spoken by way of sarcasm, or irony. watts.
sarca's tically. adv. [from sarcosick.] tauntingly ; se-
verely.
he asked a lady playing with a lap-dog, whether the wo-
men of that country used to have any children or no? thereby
sarcastically reproaching them for misplacing that affection
upon brutes, which could only become a mother to her child.
south.
sarca'stical. } adj. [from sarcasm.] keen; taunting ; se-
sarca'stick. vere.
what a fierce and sarcastick reprehension would this have
drawn from the friendship of the world, and yet what a gentle
one did it receive from christ south.
sa'rcenet. n. s...[supposed by skinner to be sericum saract-
nicum, lat..] fine thin woven silk.
why art thou then exasperate, thou idle immaterial skeia
of sley'd silk, thougreen sarcenet flap for a sore eye, thou tassel
of a prodigal's purse : shakesp. troilus and cressida.
if they be covered, though but with linen %. it in-
tercepts the effluvium. brown's wulgar errours.
these are they that cannot bear the heat
of figur’d silks and under sarcemets sweat.
she darts from sarcemet ambush wily leers,
twitches thy sleeve, or with familiar airs
her fan will pat the cheek; these snares disdain. gay.
to sarcle. v. a. [sartler, fr. sarculo, lat..] to weed corn.
ainswarth.
sarcocele. n.s. [76.8% and xian; sarcocele, fr.] a fleshy
excrescence of the testicles, which sometimes grows so large as
to stretch the scrotum much beyond its natural size. wincy.
sarco m.a. n. j. [gzozowo...] a fleshy excrescence, or lump,
growing in any part of the body, especially the nostrils. bailey.
sarco'phagous, adj. [a.æ; and payw.] flesh-eating; feed-
ing on flesh,
dryd. juven.
3 sarco'phagy.
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a.t
s a t
-
-
o
o
2.-
o
so. m. s. [gzoo and tayw.] the pracice of eating
hesh. - -
there was no sarcophagy before the flood; and, without the
eating of flesh, our fathers preserved themselves unto longer
lives than their posterity. brown's wulg. errours.
sar costick. m. / [from 72:#; sarcotique, fr.] medicines
which fill up ulcers with new flesh; the same as incarna-
tivcs.
the humour was moderately repressed, and breathed forth;
after which the ulcer incarned with common farcoticks, and
the ulcerations about it were cured by ointment of tuty.
//iseman on inflammations.
sarc u la tion. m. s. [sarculus, latin.] the aet of weeding;
plucking up weeds. dic?.
sa'rdel.
sa'rdin e stone. {../ a sort of precious stone.
sa'rdius. -
he that sat was to look upon, like a jasper and a sardine
one. rev. iv. 3.
thou shalt sct in it four rows of stones: the first row shall
be a sardius. exod. xxviii. 17.
sa'rdonyx. m. s. a precious stone.
the onyx is an accidental variety of the agat kind: 'tis of
a dark horny colour, in which is a plate of a bluish white, and
sometimes of red : when on one or both sides the white there
happens to lie also a plate of a reddish colour, the jewellers call
the stone a sardonyx. woodward.
sark. m. s. [rcyrk, saxon.]
1. a shark or shirk.
2. in scotland it denotes a shirt.
flaunting beaus gang with their breasts open, and their
faras over their waistcoats. arbuthn. hist. of john bus/.
sarn. m. s. a british word for pavement, or stepping-stones,
still used in the same sense in berkshire and hampshire.
sa'rplie r. n.s.. [sarpilliere, french..] a piece of canvas for
wrapping up wares; a packing-cloth. bailey.
sat rasine. m. s. [in botany..] a kind of birthwort. bailey.
sa'rsa. { n. s. both a tree and an herb. ainsworth.
sarsapare'll.a.
sarse. n.s. . [perhaps because made of sarcenet.] a sort of
fine lawn sieve. bailey.
to sars e. v. a. [sasser, french..] to fift through a sarse or
fearse. - bailey.
sart. n.s. [in agriculture.] a piece of woodland turned into
arable. bailey.
sas h. n.s. [of this word the etymologists give no account: i
suppose it comes from stache, of stavoir, to know, a sash worn
being a mark of distinction; and a sash window being made
particularly for the sake of seeing and being seen.]
1. a belt worn by way of distinction; a silken band worn by
officers in the army.
2. a window so formed as to be let up and down by pullies.
she ventures now to lift the sash;
the window is her proper sphere. swift.
she broke a pane in the sash window that looked into the
yard. swift.
sa's hoon. m. s. . a kind of leather stuffing put into a boot for
the wearer’s ease. ainsworth.
sa'ssafras. m. s. a tree. the wood is medicinal.
sat. the preterite of st.
the picture of fair venus, that
for which, men say, the goddess sat,
was lost, 'till lely from your look -
again that glorious image took. //aller.
i answered not the rehearsal, because i knew the author sat
to himself when he drew the piciure, and was the very bays
of his own farce. dryden.
satch fl. m. s. [seckel, german; socculus, latin. perhaps
better sackel.] a little bag; commonly a bag used by school-
boys to carry their books. -
the whining schoolboy with his satchel,
and shining morning face, cred ping like snail
unwillingly to school. shaksp. as you like it.
schoolboys lag with satches, in their hands. swift.
to sate. v. a. [satio, latin.] to satiate; to glut; to pall;
to feed beyond natural desires.
sated at length, ere'long i might perceive
strange alteration in me. milton's paradis. loft.
how will their bodies stript
enrich the victors, while the vultures sate
their maws with full repas ?
thy useless strength, mistaken king, employ,
- sated with rage, and ignorant of joy. p, ior.
satellite. n.j. [satells, lat. satellite, fr. this word is com-
monly pronounced in prose with the e mute in the plural, as in
the fingular, and is therefore only of thice syllables; but pope has
:*, *h, plural continued the latin form, and affigned it four ;
i think, improperly.] a small planet revolving round a larger.
* moons move about jupiter, and five about saturn,
called their /atelites. locke.
| he smajlest planets are situated nearest the sun and each
ot * ofess jupiter and satuin, that are vastly greater, and
philips.
have many sociotes about them, are wisely removed to the
extreme regions of the system. bently.
ask of yonder argent fields above,
why jove's satellites are less than jove? pop.
satel liorious. adj. [from sateles, lat..] consisting of satellites.
their solidity and opacity, and their satellitious attendance,
their revolutions about the sun, and their rotations about their
axis, are exactly the same. cheyne's phil princ.
to satiate. v. a. [satis, latin.]
1. to satisfy ; to fill.
those smells are the most grateful where the degree of heat
is small, or the strength of the smell allayed; for these rather
woo the sense than satiate it. bacon.
buying of land is the result of a full and satiat-d gain; and
men in trade seldom think of laying out their money upon
land, 'till their profit has brought them in more than their
trade can well employ. lake.
the loosen’d winds
hurl’d high above the clouds; ’till all their force
consum’d, her rav'nous jaws th’earth satiate clos'd. philips.
2. to glut; to pall; to fill beyond natural desire.
whatever novelty presents, children are presently eager to
have a taste, and are as soon satiated with it. locke.
he may be satiated, but not satisfy'd. no ris.
3. to gratify desire.
i may yet survive the malice of my enemies, although they
should be satiated with my blood. king charle.
4. to saturate; to impregnate with as much as can be contained
or imbibed. - -
why does not salt of tartar draw more water out of the
air, than in a certain proportion to its quantity, but for want
of an attraciive force after it is satiated with water n, won.
sa tiate., adj. [from the verb.] , glutted ; full to satiety.
when it has with, it seems a participle; when of, an adjective.
our generals, retir'd to their estates,
in life's cool evening, stiate of applause,
nor think of bleeding ev’n in brunswick’s cause. pope.
now may’rs and shrieves all hush'd and satiate lay,
yet eat, in dreams, the custard of the day. pope.
sati'e.t.y. m. s. [satietas, latin; satiote, fr.] fulness beyond
desire or pleasure ; more than enough; wearisomeness of plen-
ty; state of being palled or glutted.
he leaves a shallow plash to plunge him in the deep,
and with satiety seeks to quench his thirst. shakesheare.
nothing more jealous than a favourite, especially towards
the waining-time and suspect of satiety. * i, attan.
in all pleasures there is satiety; and after they be used, their
verdure departeth. - hak, will,
they satiate and soon fill,
though pleasant; but thy words, with grace divine
imbu'd, bring to their sweetness no satiety. /l/lion.
no action, the usefulness of which has made it the matter
of duty, but a man may bear the continual pursuit of, without
loathing or satiety. - - south.
the joy unequal’d, if its end it gain, - -
without satiety, though eer so blest, -
and but more relish'd as the more distress'd. pote.
satin. m. s. [satin, french ; drapo distan, italian; satiin,
dutch..] a soft close and shining silk.
upon her body she wore a doublet of sky-colour satin,
covered with plates of gold, and as it were nailed with pre-
cious stones, that in it she might seem armed. sidney.
the ladies dress'd in rich symars were seen,
of florence satin, flower'd with white and green,
and for a shade betwixt the bloomy gridclin.
her petticoat, transform'd apace,
became black satin flounc'd with lace. swift.
lay the child carefully in a case, covered with a mantle of
blue satin. arbuthnot and pope.
satire. m. s. ssatira, anciently satura, lat. not from styrus,
a satyr; satire, fr.] a poem in which wickedness or folly is cen-
sured. proper satire is distinguished, by the generality of the
refle&amp;tions, from a lampoon which is aimed against a particular
person; but they are too frequently confounded : it has on
before the subject.
- he dares to sing thy praises in a clime
where vice triumphs, and virtue is a crime;
where ev'n to draw the picture of thy mind,
is satyr on the most of human kind.
my verse is satire, dorset lend your ear,
and patronise a muse you cannot fear. 1 urg.
sat1 rical. u adj. [satiricus, latin ; satirique, french ; from
sati'rick. } satire.]
1. belonging to satire; employed in writing of investive.
you must not think, that a satyrick style
allows of scandalous and brutish words. roscommon,
what human kind desires, and what they shun,
rage, passions, pleasures, impotence of will,
shall this satirical colle&amp;tion fill. dryden’s juvenal.
2. censorious; severe in language. -
slanders, sir; for the satirical slave says here, that old men
have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled. shakspeare.
23 d he
dryden.
dryden.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a t
s a t
he that hath a satirical vein, as he maketh others afraid of
his wit, so he had need be afraid of others memory. bacon.
on me when dunces are satirick, -
i take it for a panegyrick. swift.
sati'r1 cally. alv. [from satirical.] with invective; with
intention to censure or vilify. -
he applies them satirically to some customs, and kinds of
philosophy, which he arraigns. - - dryden.
sa tir is r. m. s. [from satire.] one who writes satires.
i first adventure, follow me who list,
and be the second english satiris. - hall.
wychelly, in his writings, is the sharpest satyrs of his
time; but, in his nature, he has all the softness of the ten-
derest dispositions: in his writings he is severe, bold, under-
taking; in his nature gentle, modest, inoffensive. granville.
all vain pretenders have been constantly the topicks of the
most candid satyrisis, from the codrus of juvenal to the da-
mon of boileau. cleland.
yet soft his nature, though severe his lay ;
his anger moral, and his wisdom gay :
blest satyris' ' who touch'd the mean so true,
as show’d vice had his hate and pity too. pope.
t, satir 1ze. v. a. [satirizer, fr. from satire.] to censure
as in a satire.
covetousness is described as a veil cast over the true mean-
ing of the poet, which was to satirize his prodigality and vo-
luptuousness. - - dryden.
should a writer single out and point his raillery at particu-
lar persons, or satirize the miserable, he might be sure of
pleasing a great part of his readers; but must be a very ill
man if he could please himself. addison.
i insist that my lion's mouth be not defiled with scandal;
for i would not make use of him to revile the human species,
and satirize his betters. addison's speciator.
it is as hard to satirize well a man of distinguished vices, as
to praise well a man of distinguished virtues. swift.
sat is fa’ction. n.s.. [satisfactio, latin; satisfaction, french.]
1. the act of pleasing to the full, or state of being pleased.
run over the circle of earth'y pleasures, and had not
god secured a man a solid pleasure from his own actions, he
would be forced to complain that pleasure was not satisfac-
tion. . . south.
2. the aet of pleasing.
the mind, having a power to suspend the execution and
satifolion of any of its desires, is at liberty to consider the
objects of them. locke.
3. the state of being pleased.
'tis a wretched satisfaction a revengeful man takes, even in
losing his life, provided his enemy go for company. l'e/ir.
there are very few discourses so short, clear, and con-
sistent, to which most men may not, with satisfaction enough
to themselves, raise a doubt. locke.
4. release from suspense, uncertainty, or uneasiness; con-
viction. -
wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied ?
—what satisfadion can you have
5. gratification; that which pleases.
o; ev’ry nation each illustrious name,
such toys as these have cheated into fame;
exchanging solid quiet to obtain
the windy satisfaction of the brain. dryden's juvenal.
6. amends; atonement for a crime; recompense for an injury.
die he or justice must ; unless for him
some other able, and as willing, pay
the rigid satisfaction, death for death. milton.
satisf active. adj. [satisfacius, lat.] giving satisfaction.
by a final and satisfadive discernment of faith, we lay the
last effects upon the first cause of all things. brown.
sat isfa"ctorily. adv. [from satisfactory. j so as to content.
bellonius. hath been more satisfactorily experimental, not
only affirming that chameleons feed on flies, but upon exen-
teration he found these animals in their bellies. brown.
they strain their memory to answer him satisfactorily unto
all his demands. - digby.
sa ris fa"ctor iness. m. s. [from satisfactory..] power of sa-
tisfying; power of giving content. - - - -
the incompleatness of the seraphick lover's happiness in
his fruitions, proceeds not from their want of satisailorines,
but his want of an entire possession of them. -
satisf actory. adj. [satisfactoire, fr. satisacius, latin.]
1. giving satisfaction; giving content.
an intelligent american would scarce take it for a satisfac-
tory account, if, desiring to learn our architecture, he should
be told that a pillar was a thing supported by a basis. locke.
2. atoning ; making amends.
a most wise and sufficient means of redemption and salva-
tion, by the satisfactory and meritorious death and obedience
of the incarnate son of god, jesus christ. sanderson.
to satisfy. v. a. [satisfaire, fr. satisfacio, latin.]
1. to content; to please to such a degree as that nothing more
is desired.
a good man shall be satisfied from himself.
shakespeare.
oy se -
proverb;.
i'm satisfy'd: my boy has done his duty. addison.
2. to feed to the fill. -
who hath caused it to rain on the earth, to satisfy the de-
solate and waste ground, and to cause the bud of the tender
tree to spring forth - job.
i will pursue and divide the spoil: my lust shall be satified.
upon them. exodus.
the righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul. proverb.
3. to recompense; to pay to content.
he is well paid that is well satisfied;
and i, delivering you, am satisfied,
and therein do account myself well paid.
4. to appease by punishment.
will he draw out,
for anger's sake, finite to infinite
in punish'd man, to satisfy his rigour,
satisfy'd never ? that were to extend
his sentence beyond dust and nature's law. milton.
5. to free from doubt, perplexity, or suspense.
of many things useful and curious you may satisfy your-
selves in leonardo de vinci. dryden.
this i would willingly be satisfied in, whether the soul,
when it thinks thus, separate from the body, ads less rationally
than when conjointly with it? locke.
6. to convince.
he declares himself satisfied to the contrary, in which he
has given up the cause. dryden.
when come to the utmost extremity of body, what can
there put a stop and satisfy the mind that it is at the end of
space, when it is satisfied that body itself can move into
it 2 locke.
the standing evidences of the truth of the gospel are in
themselves most firm, solid, and satisfying. atterbury.
to sat is fy. v. n.
1. to give content.
2. to feed to the full.
3. to make payment.
by the quantity of silver they give or take, they estimate
the value of other things, and satisfy for them: thus silver
becomes the measure of commerce. locke.
saturable, adj. [from saturate.] impregnable with any
thing 'till it will receive no more.
be the figures of the salts never so various, yet if the atoms
of water were fluid, they would always so conform to those
figures as to fill up all vacuities; and consequently the water
would be saturable with the same quantity of any salt, which
it is not. grew's cosnol. sacra.
saturant, adj. [from saturans, lat.] impregnating to the
fill.
to saturate. v. a. [saturo, latin.] to impregnate ’till
no more can be received or imbibed.
rain-water is plentifully saturated with terrestrial matter,
and more or less stored with it. woodward.
his body has been fully saturated with the fluid of light, to
be able to last so many years without any sensible diminution,
though there are constant emanations thereof. cheyne.
still night succeeds
a soften’d shade, and saturated earth
awaits the morning beam.
shakspear.
thomson.
saturday. m. s. [raecenrbae;, or raetennroae;, saxon, ac-
cording to wer/legan, from raeten, a saxon idol; more pro-
bably from saturn, dies saturni.] the last day of the week.
this matter i handled fully in last saturday's speaator. add.
saturity... n.s.. [saturitas, from saturo, latin.] fulness; the
state of being saturated; repletion.
saturn. m. s. [saturne, french ; saturnus, latin.]
1. the remotest planet of the solar system: supposed by astrolo-
gers to impress melancholy, dulness, or severity of temper.
the smallest planets are placed nearest the sun and each
other; whereas jupiter and saturn, that are vastly greater,
are wisely removed to the extreme regions. bentley.
from the far bounds
of utmost saturn, wheeling wide his round. thomson.
2. [in chemistry.] lead.
saturnine, adj, [saturninus, lat. saturnien, fr. from saturn.]
not light; not volatile; gloomy; grave; melancholy; severe
of temper: supposed to be born under the dominion of sa-
turn.
i may cast my readers under two divisions, the mercurial
and saturnine: the first are the gay part, the others are of a
more sober and solemn turn. addison.
saturnian. adj. [saturnius, latin.] happy; golden : used
by poets for times of felicity, such as are feigned to have been
in the reign of saturn.
th’augustus, born to bring saturnian times. pepz.
sa’tyr. m. s. [satyrus, latin.] a sylvan god: supposed
among the ancients to be rude and lecherous.
satyrs, as pliny testifies, were found in times past in the
eastern mountains of india. peacham on drazzirg.
satyriasis, n. s. [from satyr.]
if the chyle be very plentiful, it breeds a satyrios, or an
abundance of seminal lymphas. floyer on the hirzzzzzo-s.
savag c.
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s. a u
s a u
oo
o
re.
savage. adj. [sauvage, french; selvaggio, italian.] :
1. wild; uncultivated.
these godlike virtues wherefore do'st thou hide,
affecting private life, or more obscure
in savage wilderness : -
cornels, and savage berries of the wood,
and roots and herbs, have been my meagre food. dryden.
2. untamed ; cruel.
chain me to some steepy mountain's top,
where roaring bears and savage lions roam.
hence with your little ones:
to fright you thus, methinks, i am too savage;
to do worse to you, were fell cruelty. shakesp. macbeth.
tyrants no more their savage nature kept,
and foes to virtue wonder'd how they wept.
3. uncivilized; barbarous; untaught; wild; brutal.
thus people lived altogether asavage life, ’till saturn, ar-
riving on those coasts, devised laws to govern them by. raleigh.
- the savage clamour drown'd
both harp and voice. milton.
a herd of wild beasts on the mountains, or a savage drove
of men in caves, might be so disordered ; but never a peculiar
people. spratt's sermons.
sa'v age. n.f. [from the adjective..] a man untaught and un-
civilized; a barbarian.
long after these times were they but savages. raleigh.
the seditious lived by rapine and ruin of all the country,
omitting nothing of that which savages, enraged in the height
of their unruly behaviour, do commit. hayward.
to deprive us of metals is to makeous mere savages; to
change our corn for the old arcadian diet, our houses and
cities for dens and caves, and our clothing for skins of beasts :
'tis to bereave us of all arts and sciences, nay, of revealed
religion. - bentley.
to sa’v age. v. a. [from the noun..] to make barbarous,
wild, or cruel. a word not well authorised.
friends, relations, love himself,
savag’d by woe, forget the tender tie. thomson.
sa’v agely. adv. [from savage.] barbarously; cruelly.
your castle is surpris’d, your wife and babes
savagely slaughter'd. shakesp. macbeth.
sa’v ageness. n. s. [from savage.] barbarousness; cruelty;
wildness.
a savagents in unreclaimed blood
of general assault.
wolves and bears, they say,
casting their savagenes; aside, have done
like offices of pity. shakesp. winter's tale.
the cyclops were a people of sicily, remarkable for sa-
wagenes; and cruelty. - wg0//los
sa'y agery., n.s.. [from savage.]
1. cruelty; barbarity.
this is the bloodiest shame,
the wildest savag’ry, the vilest stroke,
that ever wall-ey’d wrath, or flaring rage,
presented to the tears of soft remorse.
2. wild growth.
milton.
shakespeare.
pope,
shakesp. hamlet.
her fallow lees
the darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
doth root upon; while that the culter rusts,
that should deracinate such savagery. shakesp. h. v.
sava'nna. n.s. [spanish, according to bailey.] an open mea-
dow without wood; pasture-ground in america.’
he that rides post through a country may tell how, in gene-
ral, the parts lie; here a morass, and there a river; woodland
in one part, and savannas in another. locke.
- plains immense,
and vast savannas, where the wand'ring eye,
unfix'd, is in a verdant ocean lost. thomson's summer.
sauce. n. s. [sauce, saulse, french ; salsa, italian.]
1. something eaten with food to improve its taste.
the bitter sauce of the sport was, that we had our honours
for ever lost, partly by our own faults, but principally by his
faulty using of our faults. sidney.
to feed were best at home ;
from thence the sauce to meat is ceremony;
meeting were bare without it. shakesp. macbeth.
epicurean cooks
sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite. shakespeare.
such was the sauce of moab's noble feast,
*till night far spent invites them to their rest. cowley.
he that spends his time in sports, is like him whose meat is
nothing but sauces ; they are healthless, chargeable, and use-
less. taylor.
high sauce; and rich spices are fetched from the indies. baker.
2. to serve one the same sauce. a vulgar phrase to retaliate one
injury with another. -
* &gt;auce. v. a. [from the noun.]
so accompany meat with something of higher relish.
2. to gratify with rich tastes. obsolete. o
earth yield me roots;
who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
with thy most operant poison. shakespeare.
shak. king john.
3. to intermix or accompany with any thing good, or, ironi-
cally, with any thing bad. -
then fell she to sauce her desires with threatenings, so that
y. woo in a great perplexity, restrained to so unworthy
a bondage, and yet restrained by love, which i cannot tell
how, in noble minds, by a certain duty, claims an answer-
in sidney.
- ve, wherein wanton youth walloweth,
be but folly mixed with bitterness, and sorow sauced with
repentance. spenser.
thou say's his meat was sout'd with thy upbraidings;
z unquiet meals make ill digestions. shakespeare.
sauck box. m. s. [from sauce, or rather from jauty..] an im-
pertinent or petulant fellow.
. the foolish old poet says, that the souls of some women
are made of sea-water: this has encouraged my saucelox to be
witty upon me. addison's spectator.
sauck pan. n.s.. [sauce and pan.] a small skillet with a long
handle, in which sauce or small things are boiled.
our master will not allow you a silver saucepan. swift.
sau’cer. n. s. sjauciere, fr. from sauce.]
i. a small pan or platter in which sauce is set on the table.
infuse a pugil of new violets seven times, and it shall make
the vinegar so fresh of the flower, as, if brought in a soucer,
you shall smell it before it come at you.
all the delights of love,
bacon.
some have mistaken blocks and posts
for spectres, apparitions, ghosts,
with saucer eyes and horns. hudibras.
2. a piece or platter of china, into which a tea-cup is set.
satucily., adv. [from saucy.) impudently ; impertinently;
petulantly; in a saucy manner.
though this knave came somewhat faucily into the world
before he was sent for, yet was his mother fair. shakesp.
a freed servant, who had much power with claudius, very
jauci', had almost all the words; and, amongst other things,
he asked in scorn one of the examinates, who was likewise a
freed servant of scribonianus, i pray, fir, if scribonianus had
been emperor, what would you have done? he answered, i
would have stood behind his chair, and held my peace. bacon.
a trumpet behaved himself very saucily. addison.
sau'ciness. m. s. [from saucy.] impudence; petulance; im-
pertinence; contempt of superiours. - -
with how sweet saws she blam'd their saucines,
to feel the panting heart, which through her side
did beat their hands. sidney.
by his authority he remains here, which he thinks is a pa-
tent for his sauciness. shakoff. all's well that ends well.
being intercepted in your sport,
great reason that my noble lord be rated
for sauciness. shakes?. titus andronicus.
it is saucings, in a creature, in this case, to reply. bramb.
imputing it to the natural saucings of a pedant, they made
him eat his words. l’eirange.
you sauciness, mind your pruning-knife, or i may use it
for you. dryden's don sebastian.
this might make all other servants challenge the same
liberty, and grow pert upon their masters; and when this
saucings; became universal, what less mischief could be expected
than an old scythian rebellion ? collier on pride.
satuciss.e. n.s. [french.] in gunnery, a long train of pow-
der sewed up in a roll of pitched cloth, about two inches dia-
meter, in order to fire a bombchest. bailey.
sa'ucisson, n. s. [french.] in military archite&amp;ure, fag-
gots or fascines made of large boughs of trees bound together.
they are commonly used to cover men, to make epaulments,
traverses, or breastworks in ditches full of water, to render
the way firm for carriages. bailey.
satucy. adj. [i know not how this word can be easily deduced
from sauce : it may come more properly from salsus, latin.]
pert; petulant; contemptuous of superiors; insolent; im-
pudent ; impertinent.
you are more saucy with lords than the heraldry of your
birth and virtue gives you commission. shakespeare.
study is like the heav'ns glorious sun,
that will not be deep search'd with saucy looks;
small have continual plodders ever won,
save base authority from others’ books.
and if thou hast the mettle of a king,
being wrong'd as we are by this peevish town,
turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
as we will ours against these saucy walls. shakesp. k. john.
power's first pedigree from force derives, -
and calls to mind the old prerogatives
of free-born man; and with a saucy eye
searches the heart and soul of majcsty. , denham’s sopsy.
i lose my patience, when with saucy pride
shakespeare.
by untun'd ears i hear his numbers try’d. roscommon.
no saucy citizen shall dare
to strike a soldier, nor, when struck, resent
the wrong. dryden's juvenal.
homer, to express a man both timorous and sauty, makes
use of a kind of point, namely, that he had the eyes of a dog,
but the heart of a deer. - a'dison's soedjator.
7 to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a v
s. a v
t, save. v. a. [sauver, soulver, french ; salvo, latin.]
1. to preserve from danger or destruction.
let me die ere men can say god save the queen. shak.
one shall cry, yet cannot he answer, nor save him out of
his trouble. isa. xlvi. 7.
a wond’rous ark, -
to save himself and houshold from amidst
a world devote to universal wreck. milton.
the circling streams, once thought but pools of blood,
from dark oblivion harvey's name shall save. dryden.
will no superiour genius snatch the quill,
and save me on the brink from writing ill 1%ung.
2. to preserve finally from eternal death.
whatsoever we read in scripture concerning the endless
love and saving mercy which god sheweth towards his church,
the only proper subject thereof is this church. hooker.
there are some that will be saved, and some that will be
damned. shakespeare.
we are not of them who draw back unto perdition ; but
of them that believe, to the saving of the soul. heb. x. 39.
his merits save them. amilton.
he who feareth god, and worketh righteousness, and per-
severes in the faith and duties of our religion, shall certainly
be saved. rogers.
3. not to spend or lose ; to hinder from being spent or lost.
we may be confident whatever god does is intended for
our good, and whatever we interpret otherwise we can get
nothing by repining, nor save any thing by resisting. temple.
with your cost you terminate the cause,
and save th’ expence of long litigious laws,
where suits are travers'd, and so little won,
that he who conquers is but last undone. dryden.
4. to reserve or lay by.
he shall not feel quietness, he shall not save of that which
he desired. job, xx. 20.
they meanly pilfer, as they bravely fought,
now save a nation, and now save a groat. pope.
when hopkins dies, an hundred lights attend
the wretch, who living sav'd a candle's end. pope.
5. to spare; to excuse.
will you not speak to save a lady's blush dryden.
our author saves me the comparison with tragedy. dryden.
these finews are not so much unstrung,
to fail me when my master should be serv'd ;
and when they are, then will i steal to death,
silent and unobserv'd, to save his tears. dryd. don sebast.
6. to salve; to reconcile.
how build, unbuild, contrive
to save appearances; how gird the sphere
with centrick and eccentrick. a4ilton's paradis: lost.
7. to take or embrace opportunely, so as not to lose.
the same persons, who were chief confidents to cromwell,
foreseeing a restoration, seized the castles in ireland, just saving
the tide, and putting in a stock of merit sufficient. swift.
72 sa v e. v. n. to be cheap.
brass ordnance saveth in the quantity of the material, and
in the charge of mounting and carriage. bacon.
sav e. adv. [this word, adverbially used is, like except, origi-
nally the imperative of the verb.] except; not including. it
is now little used.
- but being all defeated, save a few,
rather than fly, or be captiv'd, herself she slew. spenser.
all the conspirators, save only he,
did that they did in envy of great caesar. shakespeare.
he never put down a near servant, save only stanley, the
lord chamberlain. bacon's henry vii.
how have i then with whom to hold converse, -
save with the creatures which i made 2 milton.
save all. m. s. [save and all.] a small pan inserted into a
candlestick to save the ends of candles.
sa'ver. m. s. [from save.]
i. preserver; rescuer. *
they were manifoldly acknowledged the sovers of that
country. sidney.
2. one who escapes loss, though without gain.
laws of arms permit each injur'd man
to make himself a saver where he can. drydon.
who dares affirm this is no pious age,
when charity begins to tread the stage?
when actors, who at best are hardly savers,
will give a night of benefit to weavers ? swift.
3. a good husband.
4. one who lays up and grows rich.
by nature far from profusion, and yet a greater sparer than
a saver; for though he had such means to accumulate, yet his
garrisons and his feastings soaked his exchequer. wotton.
savin. m. s. isabina, lat. savin, sabin, fr.] a plant. -
sa'v ing. adj. [from save.]
1. frugal; parsimonious; not lavish.
she loved money; for she was saving, and applied her for-
tune to pay john's clamorous debts.
- arbathnot's history of john bull.
be saving of your candle. swift.
2. not turning to loss, though not gainful.
silvio, finding his application unsuccessful, was resolved to
make a saving bargain; and since he could not get the widow's
estate, to recover what he had laid out of his own. a., an
saving: adv. [this is nothing more than a participle of .
verb save adverbially used.] with exception in favour of.
all this world’s glory seemeth vain,
and all their shows but shadows, saving she. speosor
such laws cannot be abrogated, saving only by whom the
were made; because the intent of them being known on.
none but the author, he alone can judge how long it is re-
quisite they should endure. hocker
saving the reverence due to so great a man, i doubt not bit
they did all creep out of their holes. ray on the creation.
sa'ving. m. s. [from save.]
1. escape of expence; somewhat preserved from being spent,
it is a great saving in all such lights, if they can be made
as fair and right as others, and yet last longer. bacon.
by reducing interest to four per cent. there was a consider-
able saving to the nation; but this year they give fix. alaj.
2. exception in favour. -
contend not with those that are too strong for us, but still
with a saving to honesty; for integrity must be supported
against all violence. l'a/trange.
sa'vingly, adv. [from saving.] with parsimony.
sa'vi ngn ess. n.s.. [from saving.]
1. parsimony; frugality.
2. tendency to promote eternal salvation.
sa'viour. m. s. [sauveur, fr.] redeemer; he that has gra-
ciously saved mankind from eternal death.
so judg’d he man, both judge and saviour sent. milton.
however consonant to reason his precepts appeared, no-
thing could have tempted men to acknowledge him as their
god and saviour, but their being firmly persuaded of the mi-
racles he wrought. addison.
to sa unter. v. n. [aller a la sainte terre, from idle people who
roved about the country, and asked charity under pretence of
going &amp; la sainte terre, to the holy land; or sons terre, as
having no settled home.] -
1. to wander about idly.
the cormorant is still sauntering by the sea-side, to see if
he can find any of his brass cast up. z'e/orange.
tell me, why saunt'ring thus from place to place -
i meet thee, naevolus, with clouded face dryden's juv.
so the young’squire, when first he comes
from country school to will's or tom's,
without one notion of his own,
he saunters wildly up and down. prior.
9. here saunt’ring 'prentices o'er otway weep. gay.
led by my hand, he saunter'd europe round,
and gather'd ev’ry vice in ev'ry ground.
2. to loiter; to linger. -
though putting the mind upon an unusual stress that may
discourage, ought to be avoided; yet this must not run it into
a lazy sauntering about ordinary things. locke.
if men were weaned from their sauntering humour, wherein
they let a good part of their lives run uselesly away, they
would acquire skill in hundreds of things. locee-
the brainless stripling
spells uncouth latin, and pretends to greek;
a saunt’ring tribe such born to wide estates,
with yea and no in senates hold debates. tickel.
sa'vor y. m. s. [ savoree, fr. satureia, lat.] a plant. a filler.
sa'vour. m.s.. [saveur, fr.] -
1. a scent ; odour. -
what savour is better, if physick be true,
for places infected, than wormwood and rue : tosor.
benzo calls its smell a tartareous and hellish savour. zoot.
turn then my freshest reputation to
a savour that may strike the dullest nostril. shakespeare.
i smell sweet savours, and i feel soft things. shakespeare.
that jews stink naturally, that is, that there is in their
race an evil savour, is a received opinion we know not how to
admit. brown's wugar err cars.
truffles, which have an excellent oil, and a volatile salt of
a grateful savour, are heating. arbuthnot on diet.
2. taite; power of affecting the palate.
dunciad.
i taste
the savour of death from all things. assizz.
a directer influence from the sun gives fruit a better sco zor
and a greater worth. szoto.
to sa’vou r. v. n. [ savourer, fr. from the noun.]
i. to have any particular smell or taste.
2. to betoken; to have an appearance or intelle&amp;tual taste of
something. -
this ripping of ancestors is very pleasing, and savoureth of
good conceit and some reading. speos, r an ireland.
the duke's answers to his appeachments are very diligently
and civilly couched; and though his heart was big, yet they
all savour of an humble spirit. - j%zzo”.
that savours only of rancour and pride. 4:2: on-
if 'twere a secret that concern'd my life,
this boldness might become thce ;
- - - but
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s a w
s a y
o
o
lo
--"
**
but such unnecessary rudeness savors
of some design. denham's sophy.
i have rejected every thing that savours of party. addison.
7% sa’vo u. r. v. a. - - -
1. to like; to taste or smell with delight.
wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
filths savour but themselves.
shakespeare.
2. to exhibit taste of.
thousavoures not the things that be of god. matt.
sa'vour ily. adv. [from savoury.]
1. with gust ; with appetite.
the collation he fell to very savourily. l’esprange.
this mufti is some english renegado, he talks so favourily
of toaping. dryd. don sebastian.
*. with a pleasing relish.
there’s a dearth of wit in this dull town,
when filly plays so savourily go down.
sa'vour iness. m. s. [from savoury.]
1. taste pleasing and picquant.
2. pleasing smell.
sa'vou ry. adj. [ savoureux, fr. from favour.]
1. pleasing to the smell.
the pleasant savoury smell
so quicken'd appetite, that i
could not but taste | milton's paradise lost.
from the boughs a savoury odour blown,
grateful to appetite more pleas'd my sense
than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats
of eve, or goat, dropping with milk at ev'n,
2. picquant to the taste.
savoury meat, such as my father loveth. genosis.
the savoury pulp they chew. a4ilton.
savoy. n.s. [brassica subaudica, lat.] a sort of colwort.
sa'usage. n.s.. [saucise, fr. salsum, lat..] a roll or ball
made commonly of pork or veal, and sometimes of beef,
minced very small, with salt and spice; sometimes it is stuffed
into the guts of fowls, and sometimes only rolled in flower.
saw. the preterite of see.
i never saw 'till now
sight more detestable. milton.
saw. n. s. [ sawe, danish ; raga, or rige, saxon; scie, fr.]
1. a dentated instrument, by the attrition of which wood or
metal is cut.
the teeth are filed to an angle, pointing towards the end
of the saw, and not towards the handle of the saw, or straight
between the handle and end; because the saw is designed to
act only in its progress forwards, a man having in that more
ftrength than he can have in drawing back his saw, and there-
fore when he draws it back, he bears it lightly off the unsawn
stuff, which enables him the longer to continue his several
progressions of the saw. moxon's mech. exer.
. the roach is a leather-mouth'd fish, and has saw-like teeth
in his throat. l/alton's angler.
then saws were tooth'd, and sounding axes made. dryd.
if they cannot cut,
his saws are toothless, and his hatchets lead. pope.
2. [sasa, saxon; sarghe, dutch..] a saying ; a maxim ; a
sentence; an axiom ; a proverb.
good king, that must approve the common saw :
thou out of heaven’s benediction com’st
to the warm sun shakespeare's king lear.
from the table of my memory
i'll wipe away all saws of books.
dryden.
milton.
shakespeare's hamlet.
his weapons, holy saws of sacred writ. shakespeare.
strict age and sour severity,
with their grave saws in slumber lie. milton.
to saw. part. saved and sawn. [scier, fr. from the noun.]
to cut timber or other matter with a saw.
they were stoned, they were sawn asunder. hebrews.
a carpenter, after he hath sawn down a tree, and wrought
it handsomely, sets it in a wall. jwisd. xiii. 11.
master-workmen, when they dire&amp;t any of their underlings
to saw a piece of stuff, have several phrases for the sawing of
it: they seldom say, saw the piece of stuff; but, draw the
saw through it 5 give the piece of stuff a kerf, moxon.
it is an incalescency, from a swift motion, such as that of
running, threshing, or sawing. ray on the creation.
if i cut my finger, i shall as certainly feel pain as if my soul
was co-extended with the limb, and had a piece of it sawn
through. . - collier.
sa woust. n.s. [saw and dust.] dust made by the attrition
of the saw.
if the membrane be fouled by the sawdus of the bone,
wipe it off with a sponge. i/iseman's surgery.
rotten sawdust, mixed with earth, enriches it very much.
mortimer's husbandry.
sa'wfish. n.s.. [saw and fish.] a sort of fish with a kind of
dentated horn.
sa'wpit. n.s. [ saw and pit.] pit over which timber is laid
to be sawn by two men.
let them from forth a sawfit rush at once
with some diffused song. shakesp. merry wives of winds.
vol. ii.
sa'w er.
sa^w yer.
they colour it by laying it in a sopit that hath oak
dust therein. - o a sortimer's 11.
saw-woo t. m. s. s sorratula, lat..] a plant like the
centaury, from which this differs in having smaller be .
from the knapweed in having the borders of the leaves
small sharp segments, resembling the teeth of a saw.
saw-wr est. m. s. [saw and wrest.) a sort of tool.
with the saw-west they set the teeth of the sw; tha
they put one of the notches of the wrest between the first -
teeth on the blade of the saw, and then turn the handle ho
zontally a little about upon the notch towards the end of to
saw ; and that at once turns the first tooth somewhat tow lou.
you, and the second tooth from you. moon's moch. ezer.
{ m. s. [scieur, fr. from saw.] one whose trade is
to saw timber into boards or beams.
the pit-saw is used by joiners, when what they have to do
may be as soon done at home as send it to the sowyers. a 1.20m.
sa’s (frage. m. s. [ saxifrage, fr. saxifraga, lat. j a plant.
saxifrage, quasi saxum frangere, to break the stone, is ap-
plicable to any thing having this property; but is a term most
commonly given to a plant, from an opinion of its medicinal
virtues to this effect. &amp;tiny.
sa'x1frage meadow. m. s. [silanum, lat..] a plant.
sa'xifragous. adj. isaxum and frago, lat..] dissolvent of
the stone.
because goat's blood was found an excellent medicine for the
stone, it might be conceived to be able to break a diamond;
and so it came to be ordered that the goats should be fed on
jaxifragous herbs, and such as are conceived of power to break
the stone. brown's wulgar errours.
to say. v. a. preter said. [reczan, saxon; soggen, dutch.]
i. to speak ; to utter in words; to tell,
say it out, diggon, whatever it hight. spenser.
in this slumbry agitation what have you heard her say? shak.
speak unto solomon ; for he will not say thee nay. 1 kings.
say nothing to any man, but go thy way. amark.
2. to allege by way of argument.
after all can be said against a thing, this will still be true,
that many things possibly are, which we know not of. tillots.
in vain shall we attempt to justify ourselves, as the rich
young man in the gospel did, by appealing to the great duties
of the law; unless we can say somewhat more, even that we
have been liberal in our distributions to the poor. alterbury.
3. to tell in any manner. -
with flying speed, and seeming great pretence,
came messenger with letters which his message said. f. qu.
4. to repeat; to rehearse: as, to say a part; to say a lesson.
5. to pronounce without singing.
then shall be said or sung as follows.
to say. v. n. -
1. to speak; to pronounce ; to utter; to relate.
he said moreover, i have somewhat to say unto thee; and
she said, say on. i kings.
the council-table and star-chamber hold, as thucydides
said of the athenians, for honourable that which pleased, and
for just that which profited. - - clarendon.
the lion here has taken his right measures, that is to say,
he has made a true judgment. l'eorange.
of some propositions it may be difficult to say whether they
common prayer.
affirm or deny; as when we say, plato was no fool. j/atts.
2. in poetry, say is often used before a question; tell.
say first what cause -
mov’d our grand parents to fall off? milton.
say, stella, feel you no content,
reflecting on a life well-spent swift.
and who more blest, who chain'd his country; sy,
or he whose virtue figh’d to lose a day pope.
say. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a speech; what one has to say.
he no sooner said out his say, but up rises a cunning snap.
so l’estrange.
2. [for assay..] sample.
so good a say invites the eye,
a little downward to esp
the lively clusters of her breasts. sidney.
since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
and that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
by rule of knighthood i disdain. shakoshcare.
3. trial by a sample. - -
this gentleman having brought that earth to the publick
'say masters, and upon their being unable to bring it to fusion,
or make it fly away, he had procured a little of it, and with
a peculiar flux separated a third part of pure gold. boyle.
4. [soie, fr.] silk. obsolete.
5. a kind of woollen stuff.
sa'ying, n. s. [from say..] expression; words; opinion sen-
tentiously delivered. -
i thank thee, brutus,
that thou hast prov’d lucilius’ saying true. shałoscare.
moses fled at this saying, and was a stranger in midian. mois.
many are the sayings of the wise,
extolling patience as the truest fortitude,
23 e.
milton.
others<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c a
s c a
others try to divert the troubles of other men by pretty and
plausible sayings, such as this, that if evils are long, they are
but light. tillotson.
we poetick folks, who must restrain
our measur’d sayings in an equal chain,
have troubles utterly unknown to those,
who let their fancy loose in rambling prose. prior.
the sacred function can never be hurt by their sayings, if
not first reproached by our doings. atterbury.
scab. m. s. [rcaeb, saxon; scabbia, italian; schable, dutch ;
scabies, latin.]
1. an incrustation formed over a sore by dried matter.
what's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
that rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
make yourselves scabs p shakespeare's coriolanus.
that free from gouts thou may’s preserve thy care,
and clear from stabs produc’d by freezing air. dryden.
2. the itch or mange of horses.
3. a paltry fellow, so named from the itch often incident to
negligent poverty.
i would thou did'st itch from head to foot, and i had the
scratching of thee, i would make thee the loathsom'st scab in
greece. shakespeare's troilus and cressida.
well said, wart, thou art a good scab : there is a tester for
thee. shakespeare's henry iv.
one of the usurers, a head man of the city, took it in dud-
geon to be ranked, cheek by joul, with a scab of a currier.
l’estrange.
this vap'ring scab must needs devise
to ape the thunder of the skies. swift.
sca’bbard. n.s.. [schap, german. junius.] the sheath of a
sword.
enter fortune's gate,
nor in thy scabbard sheath that famous blade,
*till settled be thy kingdom and estate. fairfax.
what eyes | how keen their glances ! you do well to keep
'em veil'd : they are too sharp to be trusted out o' th' scabbard.
dryden's spanish fryar.
sca’bbed. adj. [from scab.]
1. covered or diseased with scabs.
the briar fruit makes those that eat them scabbed. bacon.
2. paltry; sorry; vile; worthless.
to you such scabb'd harsh fruit is giv'n, as raw
young soldiers at their exercisings gnaw. dryden.
scabbedness. n.s.. [from scabbed.] the state of being
scabbed.
sca'bbiness. n. s. [from scabby.]
scabby.
scabby. adj. [from scab.] diseased with scabs.
her writhled skin, as rough as mapple rind,
so scabby was, that would have loath'd all womankind. f. q.
a scabby tetter on their pelts will stick,
when the raw rain has pierc'd them to the quick. dryden.
if the grazier should bring me one wether, fat and well
fleeced, and expect the same price for a whole hundred, with-
out giving me security to restore my money for those that were
lean, shorn, or stably, i would be none of his customer. swift.
sca bious. adj. [scabiosus, lat.] itchy ; leprous.
in the spring scabious eruptions upon the skin were epidemi-
cal, from the acidity of the blood. arbuthnot on air.
sc a bious. m. s. [scalieuse, fr. scabiosa, lat..] a plant.
sca brous. adj. [scabreux, fr. scaber, lat.]
1. rough; rugged ; pointed on the surface.
urine, black and bloody, is occasioned by something sharp
or scabrous wounding the small blood-vessels: if the stone is
snooth and well bedded, this may not happen. arbuthnot.
2. harsh; unmusical.
lucretius is scabrous and rough in these : he seeks them, as
some do chaucerisms, which were better expunged. b. john.
sovoso. n. s. [from scabrous.] roughness ; rugged-
nels.
scab wort. m. s. [helenium.] a plant. ainsworth.
scad. n. s. a kind of fish. probably the same with shad.
of round fish there are sprat, barn, smelts, and stad, carew.
sca ffold. m. s. softhafaut, french; schavat, dutch; from
schawen, to show.}
1. a temporary gallery or stage raised either for shows or spec-
£2toss.
the quality of being
pardon
the flat unraised spirit, that hath dar'd
on this unworthy scaffold to bring forth
so great an object. shakespeare's henry v.
the throng
on banks and scaffold, under sky might stand. milton.
2. the gallery raised for execution of great malefactors,
fortune smiling at her fortune therein, that a staffold of ex-
ecution should grow a scaffold of coronation. sidney.
3. frames of timber crected on the fide of a building for the
workmen.
these outward beauties are but the props and staffolds
on which we built our love, which, now made perfeot,
stands without those supports. denham's sophy.
sylla added three hundred commons to the senate; then
abolished the office of tribune, as being only a staffold to .
ranny, whereof he had no further use. so,
to scaffold. v. a. [from the noun..] to furnish with frai.
of timber.
sca'ffolpage, n.s.. [from scaffold.] gallery; hollow floor,
a strutting player doth think it rich
to hear the wooden dialogue and sound,
*twixt his stretch'd footing and the scaffoldage. shakespear,
sca'ffol ding. m. s. [from scaffold.]
1. temporary frames or stages.
what are riches, empire, power,
but steps by which we climb to rise, and reach
our wish and, that obtain'd, down with the staffolding
of sceptres and of thrones. congreve.
sickness, contributing no less than old age to the shaking
down this scaffolding of the body, may discover the inward
structure. pope.
2. building slightly ereoted.
send forth your lab’ring thought;
let it return with empty notions fraught,
of airy columns every moment broke,
of circling whirlpools, and of spheres of smoke:
yet this solution but once more affords
new change of terms and scaffolding of words. prior.
scala de. n. m. s. [french ; scalada, spanish, from scala, lat.
scala do. } a ladder.] a storm given to a place by raising
ladders against the walls.
what can be more strange than that we should within two
months have won one town of importance by scalado, battered
and assaulted another, and overthrown great forces in the
field 2 bacon.
thou raisedst thy voice to record the stratagems, the ardu-
ous exploits, and the nocturnal scalade of needy heroes, the
terror of your peaceful citizens.
arbuthnot's history of john bull.
sca'lary. adj. [from scala, lat..] proceeding by steps like
those of a ladder.
he made at nearer distances certain elevated places and sta-
lary ascents, that they might better ascend or mount their
horses. brown's wugar errours.
to scald. v. a. [scaldare, italian ; calidus, lat.]
1. to burn with hot liquor.
i am scalded with my violent motion,
and spleen of speed to see you.
o majesty i
when thou do'st pinch thy bearer, thou do'st sit
like a rich armour worn in heat of day,
that scalds with safety. shakespeare's henry iv.
thou art a soul in bliss; but i am bound
upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
do scald like molten lead. shakespeare's king lear.
here the blue flames of scalding brimstone fall,
involving swiftly in one ruin all.
that i grieve, ’tis true;
but 'tis a grief of fury, not despair |
and if a manly drop or two fall down,
it scalds along my cheeks, like the greenwood,
that, sputt'ring in the flame, works outward into tears.
dryden’s cleomenes.
it depends not on his will to persuade himself, that what
actually scalds him, feels cold. i. locke.
warm cataplasms discuss; but scalding hot may confirm the
tumour: heat, in general, doth not resolve and attenuate the
juices of a human body; for too great heat will produce con-
cretions. arbuthnot on aliments.
the best thing we can do with wood is to scald him;
for which operation there’s nothing more proper
than the liquor he deals in, his own melted copper. swift.
2. a provincial phrase in husbandry.
in oxfordshire the sour land they fallow when the sun is
shak. king john.
cowley.
pretty high, which they call a scalding fallow. martimer.
scald. m. s. [from the verb.] scurff on the head.
her head, altogether bald,
was overgrown with scurff and filthy stald. spensor.
scald. adj. paltry; sorry; scurvy.
saucv lictors
will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers
ballad us out o'tune. shakespeare.
sca(ldhead. n. s. [skalladur, bald, islandick. hickes.] a
loathsome disease; a kind of local leprosy in which the head
is covered with a continuous scab.
the serum is corrupted by the infection of the touch of a
salt humour, to which the scab, pox, and scaldhead are refe-
rable. - flyer.
scale. m. s. [rcale, saxon; schael, dutch; skal, islandick.3
1. a balance: a vessel suspended by a beam against another
vessel; the dish of a balance.
if thou tak'st more
or less than just a pound, if the scale turn
but in the estimation of a hair,
thou diest, shakespeare's merchant of wenice.
your
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c a
your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
will even weigh, and both as light as tales. shakespeare.
here's an equivocator, that could swear, in both the scales,
against either scale. shakespeare's macbeth.
long time in even scale
the battle hung. milton's paradise lost.
the world's scales are even ; what the main
in one place gets, another quits again. cleaveland.
the scales are turn'd, her kindness weighs no more
now than my vows. jvaller.
in full assemblies let the crowd prevail;
i weigh no merit by the common scale,
the conscience is the test. dryden,
lf we consider the dignity of an intelligent being, and put
that in the scales against brute inanimate matter, we may af-
firm, without overvaluing human nature, that the soul of one
virtuous and religious man is of greater worth and excellency
than the sun and his planets. bentley's sermons.
2. the sign libra in the zodiack.
juno pours out the urn, and vulcan claims
the scales, as the just product of his flames. creech.
3. [escaille, fr. squama, lat.] the small shells or crusts which
jing one over another make the coats of fishes.
he puts him on a coat of mail,
which was made of a fish's scale. drayton.
standing aloof, with lead they bruise the scales,
and tear the flesh of the incensed whales. jvaller.
1. any thing exfoliated or desquamated; a thin lamina.
take jet and the scales of iron, and with a wet feather,
when the smith hath taken an heat, take up the scales that fly
from the iron, and those scales you shall grind upon your
ainter’s stone. peacham.
when a scale of bone is taken out of a wound, burning re-
tards the separation. sharp's surgery.
; (ola, a ladder, latin.] ladder; means of ascent.
love refines
the thoughts, and heart enlarges; hath his seat
in reason, and is judicious; is the scale
by which to heav'nly love thou may’st ascend. milton.
on the bendings of these mountains the marks of several
ancient scales of stairs may be seen, by which they used to afo
cend them. addison on italy.
6. the act of storming by ladders.
others to a city strong
lay siege, encamp'd; by batt'ry, scale, and mine
koo. y y, so milton's paradise lost.
7. regular gradation; a regular series rising like a ladder.
well hast thou the scale of nature set,
from centre to circumference; whereon
in contemplation of created things,
by steps we may ascend to god. milton's par. loft.
the scale of the creatures is a matter of high olo,
reto's
the higher nature still advances, and preserves his superio-
rity in the scale of being. addison.
all the integral parts of nature have a beautiful analogy to
one another, and to their mighty original, whose images are
more or less expressive, according to their several gradations
in the scale of beings. cheyne's phil. princ.
we believe an invisible world, and a scale of spiritual beings
all nobler than ourselves. bentley's sermons.
far as creation's ample range extends,
the scale of sensual mental pow'rs ascends. pope.
8. a figure subdivided by lines like the steps of a ladder, which
is used to measure proportions between pictures and the thing
represented.
the map of london was set out in the year 1658 by mr.
newcourt, drawn by a scale of yards. graunt.
9. the series of harmonick or musical proportions.
the bent of his thoughts and reasonings run up and down
this scale, that no people can be happy but under good go-
vernments. temple.
10. anything marked at equal distances.
they take the flow o' th' nile
by certain scale i' th' pyramid: they know
by th’ height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth
or foizon follow. shak. ant. and cleopatra.
to scale. v. a. [scalare, italian.]
1. [from scala, a ladder.] to climb as by ladders.
often have i scal'd the craggy oak,
all to dislodge the raven of her nest:
how have i wearied, with many a stroke,
the stately walnut-tree, the while the rest
under the tree fell all for nuts at strife spenser.
they affailed the breach, and others with their scaling
ladders scaled the walls. knolles's history of the turks.
the way seems difficult, and steep, to scale
with upright wing against a higher foe. milton.
heav'n with those engines had been scal’d,
when mountains heap'd on mountains fail'd. waller.
a when the bold typhaeus scal'd the sky,
#. forc’d great jove from his own heav'n to fly,
he lesser gods all suffer'd. bryden.
2. [from scale, a ballance.] to measure or compare; to weigh,
you have found, o
scaling his present bearing with his past,
that he's your fixed enemy.
3. [from scale of a fish.] to strip of scales;
thin lamina.
raphael was sent to scale away the whiteness of tobit's
eves. ---
4. %. pare off a surface. tob. iii. 17.
if all the mountains were foaled, and the earth made even
the waters would not overflow its smooth surface. &gt;
t2 so ow. 77. so peel off in thin particles.
ose that cast their shell are the lobster and :
skins are found, but the old shells never; so as o
foale off, and crumble away by degrees. po.
sca'led, adj. [from scale.] squamous; having scales like fishes
a o . egypt was submerg'd, and made -
cistern for scal’d snakes. shakesp. ant. and cl.”
scale’ne. o/#!. ; scalenum, lat f in o:
triangle that has its three sides unequal to each other. boi.
:#; to." {...] i the state of being scaly.
call. m. s. iskalladur, ba slandick. ee
leprosy ; morbid baldness. 2 see scaldhe ap.]
upon thy bald hede maist thou have the fall.
it is a dry scall, a leprosy upon the head.
sca'llion. n.s.. [scalyna, italian; as alonia,
of onion.
sor. n: / [ostallop, fr.] a fish with a hollow pecinated
cll.
so th’ emperour caligula,
that triumph'd o'er the british sea,
engag’d his legions in fierce bustles
with periwincles, prawns, and muscles;
and led his troops with furious gallops,
to charge whole regiments ofscallops. hudibrar
the sand is in scilly glistering, which may be ooij
from freestone mingled with white scallop shells. mortimer
to sca’llop. v. a. to mark on the edge with segments of
circles.
scalp. n.s.. [shelpe, dutch, a shell; saloo, italian.]
i. the scull; the cranium ; the bone that incloses the brain
high brandishing his bright dew-burning blade e
}. .#. so sore did smite, 2
hat to the scull a yawning wound it made. fairy 6
if the fracture ...'. *::: with a wo ;
scalp, or the wound is too small to admit of the operation, the
jor must be laid bare by taking away a large piece &amp; the
calp. sharp' "froz"
2. the integuments of the head. p’s surgery.
white beards have arm'd their thin and hairless
shak. coriolanus,
to take off in a
burnet.
chaucer.
lev. xiii. 30.
latin.] a kind
scalps,
against thy majesty. shakespeare's rich
the hairy scalps espeare's richard ii.
are whirl’d aloof, while numerous trunks bestrow
th’ensanguin’d field. phillips.
to scalp. v. a. [from the noun.] to deprive the scull of its
integuments.
we seldom inquire for a fracture of the scull b lpi
but that the scalp itself is contused. uli by so
sc4 lpbl. n.s. [french; scalpellum, lat.] an instrument used
to scrape a bone by chirurgeons. -
sca'ly. adj. [from scale.] covered with scales.
the river horse and scaly crocodile. milton.
his awful summons they so soon obey;
so hear the scaly herd when proteus blows,
and so to pasture follow through the sea. dryden.
a scaly fish with a forked tail. woodward.
to sca mble. v. m. [this word, which is scarcely in use
has much exercised the etymological sagacity of m.o. con.
bon; but, as is usual, to no purpose.]
1. to be turbulent and rapacious; to scramble; to get by strug-
gling with others.
have fresh chaff in the bin,
- and somewhat to scamble for hog and for hen. tosor.
scambling, out-facing, fashion-mong’ring boys,
that lie, and cog, and flout, deprave and slander. shakesp.
that self bill is urg'd, and had against us past,
but that the scambling and unquiet time
did push it out of further question. shakes. hory v.
he was no sooner entered into the town but a siamong so-
dier clapt hold of his bridle, which he thought was in a beg-
ging or a drunken fashion, j/ction.
2. to shift aukwardly. -
some scambling shifts may be made without them. as re.
to sca'mble. v. a. to mangle; to maul.
my wood was cut in patches, and other parts of it sambled
and cut before it was at its growth. amor timer.
sca'mbler. m. s. [scottish j a bold intruder upon one's ge-
nerosity or table. -
sca'mblingly. adv. [from soambling.] with turbulence and
noise; with intrusive audaciousness. -
scammo'niate. adj. [from scammomy..] made with scammony,
it may be excited by a local, scammoniate, or other acrimo-
nious medicines. - j/iseman's surgery.
4. sca mmony.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c a
s c a
sca mmony. m.s. [latin; scammonse, fr.] a concreted
resinous juice, light, tender, friable, of a greyish brown co-
lour, and disagreeable odour. it flows upon incision of the
root of a kind of convolvulus, that grows in many parts of
asia. trevaux.
to scamper. v. n. [shampen, dutch ; scampare, italian.] to
fly with speed and trepidation.
a fox seized upon the fawn, and fairly stampered away with
him. - - l’estrange.
you will suddenly take a resolution, in your cabinet of
highlanders, to stamper off with your new crown. addison.
be quick, nay very quick, or he'll approach,
and as you're stamp'ring stop you in your coach. king.
to sc an. v. a. s. scandre, fr. scando, lat.]
1. to examine a verse by counting the feet.
harry, whose tuneful and well measur’d song
first taught our english musick how to span
words with just note and accent, not to scan
with midas' ears, committing short and long. milton.
they scan their verses upon their fingers. jwalsh.
2. to examine nicely.
so he goes to heav'n,
and so am i reveng'd : that would be scann'd. shakes. ham.
- the rest the great architect
did wisely to conceal; and not divulge
his secrets to be scann’d by them, who ought
rather admire. milton’s paradise lost.
every man has guilts, which he desires should not be rigo-
rously scanned; and therefore, by the rule of charity and ju-
stice, ought not to do that which he would not suffer.
- government of the tongue.
at the final reckoning, when all mens actions shall be
fanned and judged, the great king shall pass his sentence, ac-
cording to the good men have done, or negle&amp;ted to do. calam.
sir roger exposing his palm, they crumpled it into all
shapes, and diligently scanned every wrinkle that could be
made in it. addison.
one moment and one thought might let him san
the various turns of life, and fickle state of man. prior.
the actions of men in high stations are all conspicuous,
and liable to be scanned and fifted. atterbury.
scandal. m. s. saxxvoxxov ; scandle, fr.]
1. offence given by the faults of others.
his lustful orgies he enlarg’d
even to the hill of scandal, by the grove
of moloch homicide. milton's paradise losł.
2. reproachful aspersion; opprobrious censure ; infamy.
if black standal, or foul-fac’d reproach,
attend the sequel of your imposition,
your meer enforcement shall acquittance me
from all the impure blots and stains thereof. shak. r. iii.
my known virtue is from scandal free,
and leaves no shadow for your calumny. dryd. aurengz.
in the case of scandal, we are to reflect how men ought to
judge. rogers's sermons.
to sca'ndal. v. a. [from the noun..] to treat opprobriously;
to charge falsely with faults.
you repin'd,
scandal'd the suppliants; for the people call'd them
time-pleasers, flatterers. shakespeare's coriolanus.
i do fawn on men, and hug them hard,
and after scandal them. shakespeare's julius cæsar.
to sca'ndalize. v. a. saxov3.xxo~ ; scandaliser, fr. from
scandal.]
1. to offend by some action supposed criminal.
i demand who they are whom we scandalize by using harm-
less things : among ourselves, that agree in this use, no man
will say that one of us is offensive and scandalous unto an-
other. hooker.
it had the excuse of some bashfulness, and care not to stan-
dalize others. hammond on fundamentals.
whoever considers the injustice of some ministers, in those
intervals of parliament, will not be scandalized at the warmth
and vivacity of those meetings. clarendon.
2. to reproach; to disgrace; to defame.
thou do'st appear to scandalize
the publick right, and common cause of kings. daniel.
many were scandalized at the personal slander and reflection
flung out by standalizing libellers. addison.
sca'ndalous. adj. [scandaleux, fr. from scandal.]
1. giving publick offence.
nothing scandalous or offensive unto any, especially unto
the church of god: all things in order, and with seemliness.
hooker.
something savouring
of tyranny, which will ignoble make you,
yea, scandalous to the world. shakesp. winter's tale.
2. cpprobrious; disgraceful.
3. shameful; openly vile.
you know the scandalous meanness of that proceeding, which
was used. pope.
sca'n dalou sly. adv. [from scandalous.]
. . . . . oil, ; ill to a degree that gives publick offence.
his discourse at table was scandalously unbecoming the dio,
nity of his station ; noise, brutality, and obsceneness. soft.
2. censoriously ; opprobriously. -
- shun their fault, who, sandaloos!y nice,
will needs mistake an author into vice. pope
sca’nda lous ness. n. s. [from scandalous...] the quality o:
giving publick offence.
sca'nsion. m. s. [scans, lat.] the act or practice of scan-
ning a verse.
to scant. v. a. sorcaenan, saxon, to break; skaaner, da-
nish, to spare.] to limit; to straiten.
you think
i will your serious and great business stant,
for she is with me. shakespeare's othell.
they need rather to be scanted in their nourishment than
replenished, to have them sweet. bacon's nat. history,
we might do well to think with ourselves, what time of
stay we would demand, and he bade us not to stant ourselves.
bac:
looking on things through the wrong end of the po
tive, which stants their dimensions, we neglect and contemn
them. glanville's stepsis.
starve them,
for fear the rankness of the swelling womb
should stant the passage and confine the room. dryden,
i am scanted in the pleasure of dwelling on your actions.
dryden,
scant. adj. [from the verb.]
1. not plentiful ; scarce; less than what is proper or compe-
tent.
white is a penurious colour, and where moisture is stant:
so blue violets, and other flowers, if they be starved, turn pale
and white. bacon's natural history.
a single violet transplant:
the strength, the colour, and the fize,
all which before was poor and scant,
redoubles still and multiplies. donne,
to find out that,
in such a scant allowance of star-light,
would over-task the best land-pilot's art. milton,
2. wary; not liberal ; parsimonious.
from this time,
be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence. shakespeare.
scant. adv. [from the adjective..] scarcely ; hardly. obso-
lete.
the people, beside their travail, charge, and long attend-
ance, received of the bankers scant twenty shillings for thirty.
camden's remains.
we stant read in any writer, that there have been seen any
people upon the south coast. abbot’s descript. of the world.
a wild pamphlet, besides other malignities, would scant al-
low him to be a gentleman. wotton.
o'er yonder hill does scant the dawn appear. gay,
sca(ntily. adv. [from scanty.]
1. narrowly; not plentifully.
2. sparingly; niggardly.
he spoke
scantily of me, when perforce he could not
but pay me terms of honour. shakesp. ant. and cleop.
sca'ntin ess. m. s. [from scanty.]
1. narrowness; want of space; want of compass.
virgil has sometimes two of them in a line; but the stanti-
nes of our heroick verse is not capable of receiving more than
one. dryden.
2. want of amplitude or greatness; want of liberality.
alexander was much troubled at the stantiness of nature it-
self, that there were no more worlds for him to disturb. south.
sca(ntlet. n.s.. [corrupted, as it seems, from scantling.] a
small pattern; a small quantity; a little piece.
while the world was but thin, the ages of mankind were
longer; and as the world grew fuller, so their lives were suc-
cessively reduced to a shorter scantlet, 'till they came to that
time of life which they now have. hale.
sca’ntling. m. s. [eshantillon, french; ciantellino, italian.]
1. a quantity cut for a particular purpose.
'tis hard to find out a woman that's of a just scantling for
her age, humour, and fortune, to make a wife of. l'esir.
2. a certain proportion.
the success,
although particular, shall give a scantling
of good or bad unto the general. -
- shakespeare's troilus and crosia.
3. a small quantity.
reduce desires to narrow stantlings and small proportions.
taylor's rule of living o'
a scantling of wit lay gasping for life, and groaning beneath
a heap of rubbish. ix: y.o.
in this narrow scantling of capacity, we enjoy but one plea-
sure at once. locke.
sca(ntly. adv. [from stant.]
1. scarcely ; hardly. obsolete. -
england, in the opinion of the popes, was preferred, be-
cause it contained in the ecclesiastical division two large pro-
vinces,
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o,
o s
'',
"...
o,
t.
| d: &amp;
*::::::
o
lo.
into
joz -
of r
::::--
r
vinces, which had their several legati nati; whereas france
had scantly one. - camden's remains.
2. narrowly; penuriously; without amplitude.
my eager love, i'll give myself the lye,
the very hope is a full happiness,
yet scantly measures what i shall possess. dryden.
scantnfss. m. s. [from stant..] narrowness; meanness;
smalness.
he was a man fierce, and of no evil disposition, saving that
he thought scantness of estate too great an evil. hayward.
did we but compare the miserable stantness of our capaci-
ties with the vast profundity of things, truth and modesty
would teach us wary language. glanville's scepsis.
$canty. adj. [the same with stant.]
1, narrow ; small ; wanting amplitude; short of quantity suf-
ficient.
as long as one can increase the number, he will think the
idea he hath a little too scanty for positive infinity. locke.
his dominions were very narrow and scanty; for he had not
the possession of a foot of land, 'till he bought a field of the
sons of heth. locke.
now stantier limits the proud arch confine,
and scarce are seen the prostrate nile and rhine;
a small euphrates through the piece is roll’d,
and little eagles wave their wings in gold. pope.
2. small; poor; not copious; not ample.
their language being scanty, and accommodated only to the
few necessaries of a nee y simple life, had no words in it to
stand for a thousand. locke.
there remained few marks of the old tradition, so they
had narrow and scanty conceptions of providence. woodward.
, sparing; niggardly ; parsimonious.
in illustrating a point of difficulty, be not too stanty of
words, but rather become copious in your language. watts.
they with such stanty wages pay
the bondage and the slavery of years. swift.
t. seape. v. a. [contracted from escape.] to escape; to miss;
to avoid; to shun ; not to incur; to fly.
what, have i scaped love-letters in the holyday time of my
beauty, and am i now a subject for them shakespeare.
1 doubt not but to die a fair death, if i scape hanging.
shakespeare.
what can stape the eye
of god all-seeing milton.
to scape. v. n. to get away from hurt or danger.
could they not fall unpity'd on the plain,
but slain revive, and, taken, scape again
scape. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. escape; flight from hurt or danger; the aet of declining or
running from danger; accident of safety.
i spoke of most disast’rous chances,
of hair-breadth scapes in th’ imminent deadly breach. shak.
2. means of escape; evasion.
having purpos'd falsehood, you
can have no way but falsehood to be true !
vain lunatick, against these scapes i could
dispute, and conquer, if i would.
3. negligent freak ; deviation from regularity.
no natural exhalation in the sky,
no scape of nature, no distemper'd day,
but they will pluck away it's nat'ral cause,
and call them meteors, prodigies, and figns. shakespeare.
4. loose act of vice or lewdness. *
a bearne' a very pretty bearnel sure some scape: though
i am not bookish, yet i can read waiting-gentlewoman in the
scape. shakesp. winter's tale.
- thou lurk'dst
in valley or green meadow, to way-lay
some beauty rare, calisto, clymene:
too long thou laid'st thy scapes on names ador'd.
scapula. n. s. [latin.] the shoulder-blade.
the heat went off from the parts, and spread up higher to
the breast and scapula. wiseman.
sca'pular. q adj. [scapulaire, fr. from scapula, lat.j re-
sca'pulary. } lating or belonging to the shoulders.
the humours dispersed through the branches of the axil-
lary artery to the scapulary branches. wiseman of ulcers.
the viscera were counterpoised with the weight of the sea-
pular part. derham.
scar. m. / [from eschar, escare, french; iex4ez.] a mark
made by a hurt or fire; a cicatrix.
scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
some scar of it. shakesp. as you like it.
the soft deficious air,
to heal the stars of these corrosive fires,
shall breathe her balm.
dryden.
donne.
milton.
milton.
it may be struck out of the omnisciency of god, and leave
no scar nor blemish behind. more.
this earth had the beauty of youth and blooming nature,
and not a wrinkle, scar, or fracture on all its body. burnet.
in a hemorrhage from the lungs, stypticks are often infig-
nificant ; and if they could operate upon the affected part, so
vol. ii.
far as to make a far, when that fell off, the disease would
return. arbuthnot on diet.
to scar; v. a. [from the noun..] to mark as with a fore or
wound.
yet i'll not shed her blood,
nor scar that whiter skin of her’s than snow,
and smooth as monumental alabaster. shakesp. othello.
sca'rab. m. /.. [saraboe, fr. scarabaeus, latin.] "a beetle;
an insect with sheathed wings.
a small scarab is bred in the very tips of elm-leaves: these
leaves may be observed to be dry and dead, as also turgid, in
which lieth a dirty, whitish, rough maggot, from which pro-
ceeds a beetle. derham's physico-theology.
sonovci. m. s. softarmouche, fr.] a buffoon in motiy
it! s.
it makes the solemnities of justice pageantry, and the bench
reverend poppets, or scaramouches in scarlet. collier.
scarce. adj. [stars, italian ; schaers, dutch.]
1. not plentiful; not copious. -
a swede will no more sell you his hemp for less silver, be-
cause you tell him silver is scarcer now in england, and there-
fore risen one fifth in value, than a tradesman of london will
sell his cominodity cheaper to the isle of man, because money
is scarce there. - locke:
2. rare ; not common.
the sarcost of all is a pescennius niger on a medallion well
s..." addison.
sca(rce ly. ładv. [from the adjective.]
1. hardly ; scantly.
a thing which we so little hoped to see, that even they
which beheld it done scarcely believed their own senses. hooker.
when we our betters see bearing our woes,
we scarcely think our miseries our foes. shak. king lear.
age, which unavoidably is but one remove from death,
and consequently should have nothing about it but what looks
like a decent preparation for it, scarce ever appears, of late
days, but in the high mode, the flaunting garb, and utmost
gaudery of youth. south.
you neither have enemies, nor can scarce have any. dryd.
2. with difficulty.
he scarcely knew him, striving to disown
his blotted form, and blushing to be known.
slowly he sails, and scarcely stems the tides ;
the pressing water pours within her sides.
::::::::::: ; n. s. [from scarce.]
1. smalness of quantity; not plenty; penury.
scarcity and want shall shun you;
ceres’ blessing so is on you. shakespeare,
raphael writes thus concerning his galatea: to paint a fair
one, ’tis necessary for me to see many fair ones; but, because
there is so great a scarcity of lovely women, i am constrained
to make use of one certain idea, which i have formed in my
fancy. dryden's dufresnoy.
corn does not rise or fall by the differences of more or less
plenty of money, but by the plenty and scarcity that god
sends. lotke.
in this grave age, when comedies are few,
we crave your patronage for one that’s new,
and let the scarceness recommend the fare. addison.
they drink very few liquors that have not lain in fresco, in-
somuch that a scarcity of snow would raise a mutiny at
naples. addison.
2. rareness; infrequency; not commonness.
they that find fault with our store, should be least willing
to reprove our scarcity of thanksgivings. hooker.
since the value of an advantage is enhanced by its scarcents,
it is hard not to give a man leave to love that most which is
most serviceable. collier on pride.
to scare. v. a. [scorare, italian. skinner.] to fright; to
frighten; to affright; to terrify ; to strike with sudden fear.
they have scared away two of my best sheep, which, i
fear, the wolf will sooner find than the master. shakespeare.
my grained ash an hundred times hath broke,
and scar'd the moon with splinters. shakesp. coriolanus.
the noise of thy cross-bow
will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost. shakes. h. vi.
scarecrows are set up to keep birds from corn and fruit; and
some report that the head of a wolf, whole, dried, and hanged
up in a dovehouse, will scare away vermin. bacon.
the wing of the irish was so grievously either galled or
feared therewith, that, being strangers, and in a manner neu-
trals, they had neither good heart to go forward, nor good
liking to stand still, nor good assurance to run away. hayward.
one great reason why mens good purposes so often fail, is,
that when they are devout, or scared, they then in the general
resolve to live religiously. calamy's sermons.
let wanton wives by death be star'd;
but, to my comfort, i'm prepar’d. prior.
sca'recrow. m.s.. [scare and crow.] an image or clapper set
up to fright birds: thence any vain terrour.
23 f thereat
dryden,
dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c a
thereat the sare-row waxed wond’rous proud,
through fortune of his first adventure fair,
and with big thundering voice revil'd him loud. pa, queen.
no eye hath seen such soarecrows : i’ll not march through
coventry with them, that's flat. shakes). henry iv.
we must not make a scarecrow of the law,
setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
and set it keep one shape, ’till custom make it
their pearch, and not their terrour. shakespeare.
many of those great guns, wanting powder and shot, stood
but as cyphers and scarecrows. raleigh.
a scarecrow set to frighten fools away. dryden.
scare fire. m. s. [scare and fire.] a fright by fire ; a fire
breaking out so as to raise terrour. -
the drum and trumpet, by their several sounds, serve for
many kind of advertisements; and belis serve to proclaim a
scarefire, and in some places water-breaches. holder.
scarf. m. s. seschafe, french..] any thing that hangs loose
upon the shoulders or dress. -
the matrons flung their gloves,
ladies and maids their scarf; and handkerchiefs,
upon him as he pass'd. shakesp. coriolanus.
will you wear the garland about your neck, or under your
arm, like a lieutenant's scaff shakspeare.
iris there, with humid bow, -
waters th'odorous banks, that blow
flowers of more mingled hew
than her pursled scarf can show. milton.
titian, in his triumph of bacchus, having placed ariadne
on one of the borders of the picture, gave her a scarf of a
vermilion colour upon a blue drapery. dryden.
the ready nymphs receive the crying child;
they swath'd him with their scars. dryden.
my learned correspondent writes a word in defence of large
scal ves. speosator.
put on your hood and scars, and take your pleasure. swift.
to scarf. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to throw loosely on.
my sea-gown scarst about me, in the dark
grop'd i to find them out. shakesp. hamlet.
2. to dress in any loose vesture. - -
how like a younker, or a prodigal,
the scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
hugg’d and embraced by the strumpet wind
come, feeling night, -
scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day. shak. macbeth.
sca'rfskin. m. s. [scarf and skin.] the cuticle ; the epider-
mis; the outer scaly integuments of the body.
the scarfskin, being uppermost, is composed of several lays
of small scales, which lie thicker according as it is thicker in
one part of the body than another : between these the excre-
tory ducts of the miliary glands of the true skin open. cheyne.
: scarification. m. s. [s.a. ificatio, lat. scarification, french;
shakoff care.
. . . . from soarify.] incision of the skin with a lancet, or such like
instrument. it is most practised in cupping. &amp;aincy.
- hippocrates tells you, that, in applying of cups, the scariff-
cation ought to be made with crooked instruments. arbuthnot.
scarificator. m. s. [from scarisy.] one who scarifies.
scarifi er. m. s. [from scariff.] - -
1. he who scarifies. - -
2. the instrument with which scarifications are made.
to sca rify. v. a. [scarifico, lat. scarifier, fr.] to let blood
by incisions of the skin, commonly after the application of
cupping glasses. - -
washing the salts out of the eschar, and soarifying it, i
dressed it. j/iseman's surgery.
you quarter foul language upon me, without knowing whe-
ther i deserve to be cupped and scarifted at this rate. speciator.
scarlet. m. s. [escarlate, french ; scarlato, ital.] a colour
compounded of red and yellow ; cloth dyed with a scarlet
colour. -
- if we live thus tamely,
to be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,
farewel nobility. shakespeare's hlonry viii.
as a bull
amid’ the circus roars; provok'd from far
by fight of scarlet and a sanguine war. dryden.
would it not be insufferable for a learned professor, and
that which his scarict would blush at, to have his authority of
forty years standing in an instant overturned : iocke.
sc.a.r.l.e.t. adj. [from the noun..] of the colour of scarlet;
red deeply died.
i conjure thee,
by her high forehead and her scarlet lip. shak. ro. &amp; jul.
the chinese, who are of an ill complexion, being olivaster,
paint their cheeks scarlet. - bacon.
the scarlet honour of your peaceful gown. dryden.
sca. r leteean. m. s. [scarlet and bean.] a plant.
the scarletoean has a red husk, and is not the best to eat in
the shell, as kidneybeans; but is reputed the best to be eaten
in winter, when dry and boiled. a sortioner's ii./jandy.
scarleto a k. m. s. the ilex. a species of oak.
-
sca'rmage. }". [for skirmish. spensor.] it is now pro-
sca(rmoc f. 9 nounced by the londoners sirmige.
such cruel game my scarmages disarms;
another war, and other weapons, i
do love, when love does give his sweet alarms. fa. &amp;ueen.
scarp. m. s. [escarpe, french..] the slope on that fide of a
ditch which is next to a fortified place, and looks towards the
fields. dic7.
scatch. m. s. [ scache, french, j a kind of horsebit for
bridles. bailey.
scatc hes. n.s.. [chases, french..] stilts to put the feet in to
walk in dirty places. - bailer.
sc.a.t.e. m. s. [skidor, swedish; skid, islandick.] a kind of
wooden shoe, with a steel plate underneath, on which they
flide over the ice.
to scate. v. n. [from the noun..] to slide on scates.
scate. n.s.. [sauatus, latin.] a fish of the species of thorn-
back.
scatebrous. adj. [from scatebrae, latin.] abounding with
springs. - dic.
to scath. v. a. srceasan, rcaban, saxon; sharden, dut.]
to waste; to damage ; to destroy. both the verb and noun
are now obsolete.
as when heaven's fire
hath scath'd the forest oaks, or mountain pines,
with singed top their stately growth, though bare, -
stands on the blasted heath. milton's paradis, loff.
scath. n. s. [rceab, saxon.] waste; damage; mischief;
depopulation. seath in scotland denotes spoil or damage:
as, he bears the scath and the scorn. - a proverb.
the ear that budded fair is burnt and blasted,
and all my hoped gain is turn'd to scath. spenser.
he bore a spiteful mind against king edward, doing him
all the sath that he could, and annoying his territories, spenser.
they placed them in rhodes, where daily doing great soath
to the turk, the great warrior soliman, with a mighty army,
so overlaid them, that he won the island from them. knolles.
still preserv'd from danger, harm, and scath,
by many a sea and many an unknown shore. fairfax.
scath ful. adj. [from scath.] mischievous; destructive.
a bawbling vessel was he captain of,
for shallow draught, and bulk unprizable,
with which such scathful grapple did he make,
that very envy, and the tongue of loss,
cried fame and honour on him. shakesp. twelfth night.
to scatter. v. a. [rcatenan, saxon; jchatteren, dutch..]
i. to throw loosely about; to sprinkle.
teach the glad hours to scatter, as they fly,
soft quict, gentle love, and endless joy. prior.
corruption, still
voracious, swallow’d what the liberal hand
of bounty scatter'd o'er the savage year. thomson.
2. to dissipate ; to disperse. -
a king, that fitteth in the throne of judgment, scattereth
away all evil with his eyes. prov. xx. 8.
samuel came not to gilgal, and the people were scattered
from saul. i sam. xiii. 8.
adam by this from the cold sudden damp
recovering, and his scatter'd sp'rits return'd.
3. to spread thinly.
why should my muse enlarge on libyan swains,
their scatter'd cottages and ample plains 2
4. to besprinkle with something loosely spread.
where cattle pastur'd late, now scatter'd lies
with carcases and arms th’ensanguin’d field.
to scatter. v. m. to be diffipated ; to be dispersed.
sound diffuseth itself in rounds; but if that which would
scatter in open air be made to go into a canal, it gives greater
milton.
drydon.
milton.
force to the sound. bacon.
the sun
shakes from his noon-day throne the scattering clouds.
thornson.
scatteringly. adv. [from scattering.] loosely; dispersediy.
the spaniards have here and there scatteringly, upon the
sea-coasts, set up some towns. abbot.
those drops of prettiness, scatteringly sprinkled amongst the
creatures, were designed to defecate and exalt our conceptions,
not to inveigle or detain our passions. boyle.
scatterling.. n.s.. [from scatter.] a vagabond ; one that
has no home or settled habitation. an elegant word, but
disused.
such losels and scatterlings cannot easily, by any ordinary
officer, be gotten, when challenged for any such fact. speror.
gathering unto him all the scatterlings and outlaws out of
all the woods and mountains, in which they long had îurked,
he marched forth into the english pale. sponsor on ireland.
scaturient. adj. [scaturiens, latin.] springing as a foun-
tain. - lic.
scatur 'cis ous. adj. [siom saturigo, latin.] full of springs
or fountains. adr.:f.
scav enger. m. s. [from reapan, to shave, perhaps to sweep.
saxon j a petty magistrate, whose province is to keep the
it rects
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c e
s c h
streets clean: more commonly the labourer employed in re-
moving filth. -
since it is made a labour of the mind, as to inform mens
judgments, and move their affections, to resolve difficult places
of scripture, to decide and clear off controversies, i cannot
see how to be a butcher, scavenger, or any other such trade,
s does at all qualify men for this work. south.
o fasting's nature's scavenger. baynard.
. dick the scavenger, with equal grace,
fo flirts from his cart the mud in walpole's face. swift.
sce lera.t. n. s. [french ; seleratus, latin, j a villain ;
a wicked wretch. a word introduced unnecessarily from the
french by a scottish author.
seelerats can by no arts stifle the cries
science.
sct nary. m. s. [from scene.]
1. the appearances of place or things.
he must gain a relish of the works of nature, and be con-
versant in the various scenary of a country life. addison,
2. the representation of the place in which an action is per-
formed.
the progress of the sound, and the scenary of the border-
ing regions, are imitated from æn. vii. on the sounding the
horn of aleclo. pope.
3. the disposition and consecution of the scenes of a play.
to make a more perfect model of a picture, is, in the lan-
uage of poets, to draw up the scenary of a play. dryden.
scene. m. s. [stacna, latin; axovii; scene, french.]
1. the stage; the theatre of dramatick poetry.
1. the general appearance of any action; the whole contexture
of objects; a display; a series; a regular disposition.
cedar and pine, and fir and branching palm,
a sylvan scene; and as the ranks ascend
shade above shade, a woody theatre
of a wounded con-
cheyne.
of stateliest view. milton.
now prepare thee for another scene. azilton.
o a mute scene of sorrow, mixt with fear;
* still on the table lay the unfinish’d cheer. dryden.
go, , a larger scene of a&amp;tion is display'd,
- -- and, rising hence, a greater work is weigh’d. dryden.
ev'ry sev'ral place must be
o a scene of triumph and revenge to me. dryden.
44 when rising spring adorns the mead,
a charming scene of nature is display’d. dryden.
eternity thou pleasing, dreadful thought !
through what variety of untry’d beings,
through what new scenes and changes must we pass! addis.
about eight miles distance from naples lies a very noble
/ene of antiquities: what they call virgil's tomb is the first.
addison on italy.
say, shepherd, say, are these refle&amp;tions true?
or was it but the woman’s fear that drew
this cruel scene, unjust to love and you ?
3. part of a play. -
it shall be so my care
to have you royally appointed, as if
the scene you play were mine. shakes. isinter's tale.
our author would excuse these youthful scenes
begotten at his entrance. granville.
4. so much of an act of a play as passes between the same per-
sons in the same place.
; , if his characters were good,
the scenes entire, and freed from noise and blood,
the action great, yet circumscrib'd by time,
the words not forc'd, but sliding into rhime,
he thought, in hitting these, his business done.
5. the place represented by the stage.
the king is set from london, and the scene
is now transported to southampton. shakesp. hen. v.
6. the hanging of the theatre adapted to the play.
the alteration of scenes feeds and relieves the eye, before it
be full of the same object. bacon.
sce"nick. adj. [scenique, fr. from scene.] dramatick; theatrical.
o with senick virtue charm the rising age. anonym.
scenogra‘phical. adj. [axwn and yozoa.] drawn in per-
spective.
scenogra‘phically. adv. [from scenographical. j. in per-
spective.
if the workman be skilled in perspective, more than one
face may be represented in our diagram scenographically. mart.
sce nog raphy. n. s. [tzavn and %3 po ; scenographie, fr.]
the art of perspective. -
scent. n. / isntir, to smell, french.]
* the power of smelling; the smell.
prior.
dryden.
founds her former track, and uses all possible methods to divert
the scent.
* the object of smell; odour good or bad.
elman cried upon it at the meerest loss,
and twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent. shakespeare.
the plague, they report, hath a scent of the smell of a mel-
low apple. - o bacon,
a hunted hare treads back her mazes, crosses and con- .
watts's improvement of the mind. .
good scents do purify the brain,
awake the fancy, and the wits refine.
partake
the season, prime for sweetest sents and airs.
exulting, 'till he finds their nobler sense
their disproportion'd speed does recompense;
then curses his conspiring feet, whose scent
betrays that safety which their swiftness lent.
chearful health, -
his duteous handmaid, through the air improv’d,
with lavish hand diffuses scents ambrosial.
3. chace followed by the smell.
he gained the observations of innumerable ages, and tra-
velled upon the same scent into aethiopia. temple.
to scent...v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to smell; to perceive by the nose.
so scented the grim feature, and upturn’d
his nostrils wide into the murky air,
sagacious of his quarry from so far. milton's par. loft.
2. to perfume; or to imbue with odour good or bad.
balm, from a silver box distill'd around,
shall all bedev the roots, and scent the sacred ground. dryd.
aetaeon spies
his op'ning hounds, and now he hears their cries;
a gen’rous pack, or to maintain the chace,
or snuff the vapour from the scented grass. addison.
sco ntless: adj. [from scent..] [nodorous ; having no smell.
sce ptre., n.s.. [sc.ptrum, latin; sceptre, fr.] the ensign
of royalty born in the hand,
nor shall proud lancaster usurp my right,
nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist. shak. henry vi.
how, best of kings, do'st thou a sceptre bear !
how, best of poets, do'st thou laurel wear !
but two things rare the fates had in their store,
and gave thee both, to shew they could no more. b. johns.
i sing the man who judah’s sceptre bore
in that right hand which held the crook before. cowley.
the parliament presented those acts which were prepared
by them to the royal sceptre, in which were some laws restrain-
ing the extravagant power of the nobility. clarendon.
the court of rome has, in other instances, so well attested
its good managery, that it is not credible crowns and sceptres
are conferred gratis. decay of piety.
sc eptred. adj. [from sceptre.] bearing a sceptre.
the sceptred heralds call
to council, in the city-gates. milton's paradise loft.
to britain's queen the scepter'd suppliant bends,
to her his crowns and infant race commends.
sceptick. m. s. see skeptick. -
sche dul e. n. s [schedula, latin; schedule, french.]
i. a small scroll.
the first published schedules being brought to a grave knight,
he read over an unsavory sentence or two, and delivered back
davier'
milton.
denham.
prior.
tickel.
the libel. hooker.
2. a writing additional or appendant.
all ill, which all
prophets or poets spake, and all which shall
b' annex'd in schedules unto this by me,
fall on that man. donne.
3. a little inventory.
i will give out schedules of my beauty: it shall be invento-
ried, and every particle and utensil label'd to my will. shak.
sche matism. m. s. saxonologo;..]
1. combination of the aspects of heavenly bodies.
2. particular form or disposition of a thing.
every particle of matter, whatever form or schematisin it
puts on, must in all conditions be equally extended, and
therefore take up the same room. creech.
sche"matist, n. s. [from scheme.] a projector; one given
to forming schemes.
scheme. n.s. saxop.2.]
i. a plan; a combination of various things into one view, de-
sign, or purpose; a system.
were our senses made much quicker, the appearance and
outward scheme of things would have quite another face to us,
and be inconsistent with our well-being. locke.
we shall never be able to give ourselves a satisfactory ag-
count of the divine conduct, without forming such a scheme of
things as shall at once take in time and eternity. atterbury.
2. a project; a contrivance ; a design.
- he forms the well concerted scheme of mischief;
'tis fix’d, 'tis done, and both are doom'd to death. rowe.
the haughty monarch was laying schemes for suppressing the
ancient liberties, and removing the ancient boundaries of king-
doms. atterbury.
the stoical scheme of supplying our wants by lopping of our
desires, is like cutting off our feet when we want shoes.
- swift.
3. a representation of the aspects of the celestial bodies; any
lineal or mathematical diagram.
it hath embroiled astrology in the erection of schemes, and
the judgment of death and diseases. *
8 . t<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">· s c h
it is a scheme and face of heaven, -
as th’ aspects are dispos'd this even. hudibras.
sche’mer. n.s. [from scheme.] a projector; a contriver: .
sche's is. m. f. [rxaris.] an habitude ; state of any thing
with respect to other things.
if that mind which has existing in itself from all eternity all
the fimple essences of things, and consequently all their possible
scheses or habitudes, should ever change, there would arise a
new schosis in the mind, which is contrary to the supposition.
- norris.
sci'rrhus. n.s. [ stirrhe, french. this should be written
skirrhus, not merely because it comes from roof, but be-
cause c in english has before e and i the sound off. see
skeptick.] an indurated gland.
any of these three may degenerate into a scirrhus, and that
stirrhus into a cancer. jwiseman of tumours.
sc1(rrhous. adj. [from stirrhus.j having a gland indu-
rated ; consisting of a gland indurated.
how they are to be treated when they are strumous, scir-
rhous, or cancerous, you may see. j%iseman.
scirrho'sity. m. s. [from scirrhous j. an induration of the
lands,
§ the difficulty of breathing, occasioned by stirrhosities of the
glands, is not to be cured. arbuthnot on diet.
schism. m. s. [rxfroz; schisone, fr.] a separation or divi-
sion in the church of god. -
set bounds to our passions by reason, to our errours by
truth, and to our shisons by charity. king charles.
oppose schisms by unity, hypocrisy by sober piety, and de-
bauchery by temperance. spratt's sermons.
when a sh;sin is once spread, there grows at length a dis-
pute which are the schismaticks: in the sense of the law the
jihim lies on that side which opposes itself to the religion of
the state. swift.
schis ma's ical. adj. [schismatique, fr. from schismatick.] im-
plying schisin; practising schism.
by these tumults all factions, seditions, and sch's natical pro-
posals against government, ecclesiastical and civil, must be
backed. king charles.
here bare anathemas fall but like so many bruta fulmina
upon the obstinate and schismatical, who are like to think them-
selves shrewdly hurt by being cut off from that body which
they chuse not to be of, and so being punished into a quiet
enjoyment of their beloved separation. south.
schis matically. adv. [from schismatical.] in a schismatical
in anner.
schi's ma tick. m. s. [from schism.] one who separates from
the true church.
no known heretick nor schisinatick should be suffered to go
into those countries. bacon.
thus you behold the schismaticks bravado's :
wild speaks in squibs, and calamy in granado's. butler.
the schismaticks united in a solemn league and covenant to
alter the whole system of spiritual government. swift.
to schi's matize. v. a. [from schism..] to commit the crime
of schism ; to make a breach in the communion of the church.
scho’lar. n.s. [ scholaris, lat. colier, fr.]
1. one who learns of a master; a disciple.
many times that which deserveth approbation would hardly
find favour, if they which propose it were not to profess them-
selves scholars, and followers of the ancients. hooker.
the scholars of the stagyrite,
who for the old opinion fight,
would make their modern friends confess
the diff'rence but from more to less. prior.
2. a man of letters.
this same scholar's fate, res angusla domi, hinders the pro-
moting of learning. wilkins's math. magic.
to watch occasions to correot others in their discourse, and
not slip any opportunity of shewing their talents, scholars are
most blamed for. locke.
3. a pedant; a man of books.
to spend too much time in studies, is sloth; to make judg-
ment wholly by their rules, is the humour of a scholar : they
perfect nature, and are perfeoted by experience. bacon.
4. one who has a lettered education.
my cousin william is become a good scholar; he is at ox-
ford still, is he not shakespeare's henry vi.
school af ship. n. s. [from scholar.]
1. learning ; literature; knowledge.
it pitied my very heart to think that a man of my master's
understanding, and great scholarship, who had a book of his
own in print, should talk so outragiously. pope.
2. literary education.
this place should be school and university, not needing a
remove to any other house of scholarship. milton.
3. exhibition or maintenance for a scholar. ainsworth.
schola‘stical. adj. [scholasticus, lat.] belonging to a scho-
lar or school. - -
schola‘stic all y. adv. [from scholastick.] according to the
niceties or method of the schools.
no moralists or casuists, that treat scholastically of justice,
r
but treat of gratitude, under that general head, as a part of
it. south,
schola's rick, adj. [from schola, lat. scholastique, fr.]
1. pertaining to the school ; practised in schools.
i would render this intelligible to every rational man, how-
ever little versed in scholassick learning. digby on bodies,
scholastick education, like a trade, does so fix a man in a
particular way, that he is not fit to judge of any thing that
lies out of that way. burnet's theory.
2. befitting the school; suitable to the school ; pedantick;
needlesly subtle.
the favour of proposing there, in convenient sort, what-
soever ye can object, which thing i have known them to grant,
of schola/lick courtesy unto strangers, never hath nor ever will
be denied you. hooker,
sir francis bacon was wont to say, that those who left use-
ful studies for useless scholastick speculations, were like the
olympick gamesters, who abstained from necessary labours,
that they might be fit for such as were not so. bacon.
both sides charge the other with idolatry, and that is a mat-
ter of conscience, and not a scholastick nicety. stilling feet.
school iast. m. s. [scholiose, fr. joholiostes, lat.] a writer
of explanatory notes.
the title of this satyr, in some ancient manuscripts, was
the reproach of idleness; though in others of the scholas's 'tis
inscribed against the luxury of the rich. dryden.
what gellius or stobaeus cook'd before,
or chew d by blind old scholiosis o'er and o'er. pope.
scho lion. n. m. s. [latin.] a note; an explanatory ob.
§ { servation.
hereunto have i added a certain gloss or schelion, for the
exposition of old words, and harder phrases, which manner
of glosing and commenting will seem strange in our lan-
guage. spenser.
some cast all their metaphysical and moral learning into the
method of mathematicians, and bring every thing relating to
those abstracted or practical sciences under theorems, problems,
postulates, scholiums, and corollaries. watts.
school y. m. s. [scholie, fr. scholium, lat.] an explanatory
note. this word, with the verb following, is, i fancy, pe.
culiar to the learned hooker.
he therefore, which made us to live, hath also taught us
to pray, to the end, that speaking unto the father in the
son's own prescript form, without scholy or gloss of ours, we
may be sure that we utter nothing which god will deny.
hooker.
that scholy had need of a very favourable reader, and a
tractable, that should think it plain construction, when to be
commanded in the word, and grounded upon the word, are
made all one. hooker.
to scho'ly. v. n. [from the noun..] to write expositions.
the preacher should want a text, whereupon to scholy.
hocker.
school. m. s. [schola, lat. ecole, fr.]
i. a house of discipline and instruction.
their age the same, their inclinations too, -
and bred together in one school they grew. dryden.
2. a place of literary education; an university.
my end being private, i have not expressed my conceptions
in the language of the schools. digby.
writers on that subject have turned it into a composition
of hard words, trifles, and subtilties, for the mere use of the
schools, and that only to amuse men with empty sounds. watts.
3. a state of instruction.
the calf breed to the rural trade,
set him betimes to school, and let him be
instructed there in rules of husbandry. dryden.
4. system of doctrine as delivered by particular teachers.
no craz'd brain could ever yet propound,
touching the soul, so vain and fond a thought;
but some among these masters have been found,
which in their school, the self-same thing had taught.
davies:
let no man be less confident in his faith, concerning the
great blessings god defigns in these divine mysteries, by reason
of any difference in the several schools of christians, concern-
ing the consequent blesfings thereof. taylor.
5. the age of the church, and form of theology succeeding that
of the fathers: so called, because this mode of treating religion
arose from the use of academical disputations.
the first principles of christian religion should not be farced
with school points and private tenets. sanderson.
a man may find an infinite number of propositions in books
of metaphysicks, school divinity, and natural philosophy, and
know as little of god, spirits, or bodies, as he did before.
locke.
to school. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to instruct; to train.
una her besought to be so good
as in her virtuous rules to school her knight. fa. queen.
he’s i. never school'd, and yet learned. shakespeare.
2. to teach with superiority; to tutor.
you
o
*
im
\) j.
orit:
|an
o:
v<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c i
s c i
o t you shall go with me; -
o ihave some private schooling for you both. . . shafts, care.
#, i cousin, school yourself; but for your husband,
o he's noble, wise, judicious. shakesp. macbeth.
o school your child,
o and ask why god’s anointed he revil’d. dryden.
o if this be schooling, 'tis well for the considerer: i’ll cngage
o that no adversary of his shall in this sense ever school him. att.
to schoolboy. m. s. [school and boy..] a boy that is in his rudi-
o, ments at school.
&amp; schoolboys tears take up
the glasses of my fight. shakespeare.
he grins, smacks, shrugs, and such an itch endures,
as 'prentices or schoolboys, which do know -
of some gay sport abroad, yet dare not go. donne.
once he had heard a schoolboy tell,
how semele of mortal race
by thunder died. swift.
schoold ay. m. s. [school and day.] age in which youth is
sent to school.
is all forgot
all schooldays friendship, childhood, innocence? shakespeare.
school fellow. n. s. [school and fellow.] one bred at the
same school.
thy flatt’ring method on the youth pursue;
join'd with his schoolfellows by two and two:
persuade them first to lead an empty wheel,
in length of time produce the lab'ring yoke. dryden.
the emulation of schoosellows often puts life and industry
into young lads. locke.
schoolhouse. m. s. [shoo! and hous:..] house of discipline
and instruction.
fair una ’gan fidelia fair request,
to have her knight unto her schoolhouse plac'd. spensor.
school man. m. s. [school and man.]
1. one versed in the niceties and subtilties of academical dispu-
tation. -
the king, though no good schoolman, converted one of
them by dispute. bacon.
o unlearn'd, he knew no shoolman's subtle art;
#12 no language, but the language of the heart. pope.
--- 2. a writer of scholastick divinity or philosophy.
o if a man's wit be not apt to distinguish or find differences,
let him study the schoolmen. bacon.
to schoolmen i bequeath my doubtfulness,
my sickness to physicians. donne.
. men of nice palates could not relish aristotle, as he was
o drest up by the schoolmen. baker.
too let subtle schoolmen teach these friends to fight,
o more studious to divide than to unite. pope.
- school ma’ster. m. s. [school and master.] one who presides
to and teaches in a school.
o i, thy schoolmaster, have made thee more profit
- than other princes can, that have more time
for vainer hours, and tutors not so careful. shakespeare.
adrian vi. was sometime shoolmaster to charles v. knolles.
o the ancient sophists and rhetoricians lived ’till they were
o an hundred years old ; and so likewise did many of the gram-
marians and schoolmasters, as orbilius. bacon.
a father may see his children taught, though he himself
does not turn schoolmaster. south's sermons.
* schoolmistress. m. s. [school and miseres...] a woman who
or. governs a school.
o * such precepts i have seleded from the most confiderable
which we have from nature, that exact schoolmistress. dryden.
my schoolmistress, like a vixen turk,
. maintains her lazy husband by our work.
!. gay's what d'ye call it.
* schreight. a. s. sturdus viscivorus.] a fish. ainsworth.
sci’agraphy, n. s. [sciagraphic, fr. oxlzyczosa..]
r: 1. [in archite&amp;ture.] the profile or section of a building, to
".- shew the inside thereof. bailey.
or 2. [in astronomy..] the art of finding the hour of the day or
- night by the shadow of the sun, moon, or stars. baily.
* sci. at her1cal. adj. [sciaterique, fr. azz3%iző'.] be-
* sci"ather1ck. } longing to a sun-dial. dia.
o there were also, from great antiquity, sciatherical or sun-
; dials, by the shadow of a stile or gnomon denoting the hours ;
… an invention ascribed unto anaxamines by pliny. brown.
&amp; sciatica. r. m. s. [sciatique, fr. ischiadica passic, lat..] the
sciatick. is, s: 4. is: poss l . .
o which of your hips has the most profound sciatica p shakes.
o thou cold sciatica,
cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
as lamely as their manners. shakesh. timon.
1. * the scythians, using continual riding, were generally mo-
lested with the /ciatica, or hip gout. brown's pugar errours.
rack'd with sciatio, martyr'd with the stone,
will any mortal let himself alone * pope.
sciarica l. ads. [from sciatica.] affiicting the hip.
in obstinate /ciatical pains, blitering and cauteries have
been found effectual, arbuthnot,
vol. ii.
**
so
*
science. m. s. [science, fr. scientia, lat.]
1. knowledge. -
if we conceive god's fight or sience, before the creation,
to be extended to all and every part of the world, seeing every
thing as it is, his prescience or forefight of any action of mine,
or rather his science or sight, from all eternity, lays no neces-
sity on any thing to come to pass, more than my seeing the
sun move hath to do in the moving of it. hammond.
the indisputable mathematicks, the on'y science heaven
hath yet vouchsafed humanity, have but few votaries among
the slaves of the stagirite. glanville's scep n.
2. certainty grounded on demonstration.
so you arrive at truth, though not at saience. berkley.
3. art attained by precepts, or built on principles.
science perfects genius, and moderates that fury of the fancy
which cannot contain itself within the bounds of reason. drya.
4. any art or species of knowledge. *
no science doth make known the first principles, whereon
it buildeth ; but they are always taken as plain and manifest
in themselves, or as proved and granted already, some former
knowledge having made them evident. hooker.
whatsoever we may learn by them, we only attain accord-
ing to the manner of natural sciences, which mere discourse of
wit and reason findeth out. - hooker.
i present you with a man
cunning in musick and the mathematicks,
to instruct her fully in those sciences. shakespeare.
5. one of the seven liberal arts, grammar, rhetorick, logick,
arithmetick, musick, geometry, astronomy.
good sense, which only is the gift of heav'n,
and though no scence, fairly worth the sev'n, pope.
scie’ntial. adj. [from science..] producing science.
from the tree her step she turn'd;
but first low reverence done, as to the pow'r
that dwelt within; whose presence had infus’d
into the plant sciential sap, deriv'd -
from nectar, drink of gods. milton's paralis ioff.
scientifical. { adj. [scientifique, fr. scientia and facio, lat.]
scientifick. producing demonstrative knowledge; pro-
ducing certainty.
natural philosophy proceeding from settled principles,
therein is expected a satisfaction from scientifical progressions,
and such as beget a sure or rational belief. -
brown's pu'ar errours.
no where are there more quick, inventive, and penetrating
capacities, fraught with all kind of scientifical knowledge.
howel.
no man, who first trafficks into a foreign country, has any
frientifick evidence that there is such a country, but by report,
which can produce no more than a moral certainty; that is,
a very high probability, and such as there can be no reason to
except against. south.
the systems of natural philosophy that have obtained, are
to be read more to know the hypotheses, than with hopes to
gain there a comprehensive, scientifical, and satisfactory know-
ledge of the works of nature. locke.
scient1'fically. adv. [from scientifical.] in such a manner
as to produce knowledge.
sometimes it rests upon testimony, because it is easier to
believe than to be scientifically instructed. locke.
sci'm itar. m. s. [sce cimeter.] a short sword with a con-
vex edge.
i'll heat his blood with greekish wine to-night,
which with my scimitar i'll cool to-morrow. shakes care.
scink. m. s. a cast calf. ainsworth. in scotland and in
london they call it slink.
to scintillate. v. m. [scintill, lat.] to sparkle ; to
emit sparks. -
scintillation. m. s. [scintillatio, lat. from scintoloate.] the
act of sparkling ; sparks emitted.
these stintillations are not the accension of the air upon the
collision of two hard bodies, but rather the inflammable ef-
fluences discharged from the bodies collided. brown.
he faith the planets saintillation is not seen, because of their
propinquity. glanville’s scopsis.
scio list. n.s.. [sciolus, lat.] one who knows many things
superficially. - -
'twas this vain idolizing of authors which gave birth to
that filly vanity of impertinent citations: these ridiculous
fooleries fignify nothing to the more generous discerners, but
the pedantry of the affected scio isłs. glanville's socosis.
these passages were enough to humble the presumption of
our modern sciol/ls, if their pride.were not as great as their
ignorance. temple.
sci’olous. adj. [siolus, lat.] superficially or imperfectly
knowing. not used.
i could wish thesesiolus zclotists had more judgment joined
with their zeal. howe'.
scio'machy, n.s. [ s kiamachie, fr. cziz and oxx...] 'battle
with a shadow. this should be written sciamachy.
to avoid this stimachy, or imaginary combat of words, let
me know, sir, what you mean by the name of tyrant? cowley.
23 g scio n.
o
.
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c o
s c o
scroon. n.s. tsin, fr.] a small twig taken from one tree to
be engrafted into another.
sweet maid, we marry
a gentle stion to the wildest stock ;
and make conceive a bark of baser kind,
by bud of nobler race. shakespeare's winter's tale.
march is drawn in his left hand blossoms, and scions upon
his arm. peacham.
the scions are best of an old tree. mortimer's husbandry.
scire fa cia.s. m. s. [latin.] a writ judicial, in law, most
commonly to call a man to shew cause unto the court, whence
it is sent, why execution of a judgment passed should not be
made. this writ is not granted before a year and a day is
passed, after the judgment given. cowel.
sci'ssible. adj. [foom so sus, lat..] capable of being divided
smoothly by a sharp edge.
* the differences of impressible and not impressible, scissible
and not sissible, and many other passions of matter, are ple-
beian notions. bacon.
scissil e. adj. [scissile, fr. fijilis, lat.] capable of being
cut or divided smoothly by a sharp edge.
animal fat is a sort of amphibious substance, scissile like a
solid, and resolveable by heat. arbuthnot.
sc1'ssion. m. s. [sission, fr. scissio, lat.) the aet of cutting.
nerves may be wounded by sission or puneture: the former
way they are usually cut through, and wholly cease from ac-
tion. i?’iseman's surgery.
sci'ssor. m. s. [this word is variously written, as it is sup-
posed to be derived by different writers; of whom some write
cisors, from cardo, or incido ; others scissors, from scindo ; and
some cisars, cizars, or sissars, ciseaux, fr.] a small pair of
sheers, or blades moveable on a pivot, and intercepting the
thing to be cut.
his beard they have fing'd off with brands of fire; -
and ever, as it blaz'd, they threw on him
great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair :
my master preaches patience to him, and the while
his man with scissors nicks him for a fool. shakespeare.
wanting the siisars, with these hands i’ll tear,
if that obstruct my flight, this load of hair. prior.
when the lawyers and tradesmen brought extravagant bills,
fir roger wore a pair of scissars in his pocket, with which he
would snip a quarter of a yard off nicely. arbuthnot.
sci'ssure. n. s. [scissum, lat..] a crack; a rent; a fissure.
the breach seems like the scissures and ruptures of an earth-
quake, and threatens to swallow all that attempt to close it,
and reserves its cure only for omnipotence. decay of piety.
sclerotick., adj. [solerotique, fr. azoo.] hard: an
epithet of one of the coats of the eye.
the ligaments observed in the inside of the solerotick tunicles
of the eye, serve instead of a muscle, by their contraction, to
alter the figure of the eye. ray on the creation.
sclero"ticks. n. s. [from the adjective..] medicines which
harden and consolidate the parts they are applied to. quincy.
to sco a.t. v. a. to stop a wheel by putting a stone or
7 o scotch. } piece of wood under it before. bailey.
to scoff. v. n. [shoppen, dutch..] to treat with insolent
ridicule; to treat with contumelious language: with at.
of two noblemen of the west of england, the one was
given to scoff, but kept ever royal cheer in his house; the
other would ask of those that had been at his table, tell truly,
was there never a flout or dry blow given bacon.
there is no greater argument of a light and inconsiderate
*
person, than prophanely to s off at religion. tillotson.
uch is love,
and such the laws of his fantastick empire,
the wanton boy delights to bend the mighty,
and scoff; at the vain wisdom of the wise. rowe.
scoff. n.s. (from the verb.] contemptuous ridicule; expres-
sion of scorn ; contumelious language.
our answer therefore to their reasons is no ; to their scoff,
nothing. hooker.
with soff, and scorns, and contumelious taunts,
in open market-place produc’d they me.
shakespeare's henry vi.
how could men surrender up their reason to flattery, more
abusive and reproachful than the rudest scoff; and the sharpest
invectives south.
some little souls, that have got a smattering of astronomy
or chemistry, for want of a due acquaintance with other
sciences, make a scoff at them all, in comparison of their fa-
vourite science. /watts.
sco'ffer. m. s. [from staff.] insolent ridiculer; saucy scorner;
contumelious reproacher,
sell when you can ; you are not for all markets:
cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer;
foul is the most foul, being found to be a scoffer. shakesp.
divers have herded themselves amongst these profane soof-
fers, not that they are convinced by their reasons, but ter-
rified by their contumelies. government of the tongue.
consider what the apostle tells these scoffers they were igno-
rant of, not that there was a deluge; but he tells them, that
they were ignorant that the heavens and the earth of old were
so and so constituted. burnet's theory of the earth.
sco'ffingly. adv. [from scoffing.] in contempt; in ridicule.
aristotle applied this heinistick soffingly to the sycophants
at athens. * 700/ne.
to scold. v. n. [scholen, dutch..] to quarrel clamorously
and rudely.
pardon me, ’tis the first time that ever
i'm forc’d to scold. shakespeare's coriolanut,
the one as famous for a solding tongue,
as the other is for beauteous modesty. shakespeare.
they attacked me, some with piteous moans, others grin-
ning and only shewing their teeth, others ranting, and others
scalding and reviling. stillingfiest.
for gods, we are by homer told, fie
can in celestial language scold. swift.
scolding and curfing are her common conversation. swift.
scol d. n. s. [from the verb..] a clamorous, rude, mean,
low, foul-mouthed woman,
a shrew in domestick life, is now become a sold in poli-
ticks. addison's freeholder.
sun-burnt matrons mending old nets;
now singing shrill, and scolding oft between;
scolds answer foul-mouth'd sco'ds. swift.
sco'llop. m. s. [written properly scalop.] a pectinated shell-
scotope's dra. m. s. [solipendre, fr. azoxarivesz.]
1. a sort of venomous serpent.
2. [sco'opendium, lat..] an herb. ainsworth.
scom m. m. s. [perhaps from scomma, lat. a buffoon. a word
out of use, and unworthy of revival.
the scomms, or buffoons of quality, are wolvish in con-
versation. l'e/irange.
sconce. m.s.. [shantz, german.]
1. a fort; a bulwark.
such fellows are perfeot in the great commanders names,
and they will learn you by rote where services were done; at
such and such a sconce, at such a breach. shak. henry v.
2. the head : perhaps as being the acropolis, or citadel of the
body. a low word.
why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him
about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of
his action of battery shakespeare's hamlet.
3. a pensile candlestick, generally with a looking-glass to refle&amp;
the light.
golden sconces hang upon the walls,
to light the costly suppers and the balls. dryden's lucret.
triumphant umbriel on as once's height,
clapp'd his glad wings, and sat to view the fight. pope.
put candles into sconces. * swift's direct to the butor.
4. a mulet, or fine.
to sconce. v. a. [a word used in the universities, and derived
plausibly by skinner, whose etymologies are generally rational,
from sconce, as it signifies the head; to sconce being to fix a fine
on any one's head..] to mulet; to fine. a low word which
ought not to be retained.
scoop. m. s. [schoepe, dutch.]
1. a kind of large ladle; a vessel with a long handle used to
throw out liquor.
they turn upside down hops on malt-kilns, when almost
dry, with a scoop. mortimer's husbandry.
2. a chirurgeon's instrument.
endeavour with thy scoop, or fingers, to force the flone
outwards. sharp's surgery.
3. a sweep; a stroke. perhaps it should be swoop.
oh hell-kite
what, all my pretty chickens and their dam,
at one fell scoop 1 shakesp. macbeth.
to scoop. v. a. [schoopen, dutch.]
1. to lade out.
as by the brook he stood,
he scoop'd the water from the crystal flood. dryden', a.,
2. this word seems to have not been understood by thomson.
- melted alpine snows
the mountain cisterns fill, those ample flores
of water scoop'd among the hollow rocks.
3. to empty by lading.
if some penurious source by chance appear'd,
scanty of waters, when you sloop'd it dry,
and offer'd the full helmet up to cato,
did he not dash th' untasted moisture from him
4. to carry off, so as to leave the place hollow.
a spectator would think this circular mount had been ac-
tually scooped out of that hollow space. speciator.
her fore-feet are broad, that she may scoop away much earth
at a time. addison.
to his single eye, that in his forehead glar'd
like a full moon, or a broad burnish’d shield,
a forky staff we dext rously apply'd,
which, in the spacious socket turning round,
scoopt out the big round gelly from its orb.
5. to cut into hollowness or depth.
thomson:
addison.
asidison.
whatever
3.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c o -
s c o
whatever part of the harbour they stoop in, it has an in-
fluence on all the rest; for the sea immediately works the
whole bottom to a level. addison on italy.
those carbuncles the indians will scoop, so as to hold above
a pint - arbuthnot on coins.
it much conduces how to scare
the little race of birds, that hop
from spray to spray, scooping the costliest fruit,
insatiate, undisturb’d.
the genius of the place
or helps th’ ambitious hill the heav'n to scale,
or scoops in circling theatres the vale. pope.
sco'opr r. n. / [from scoop.] one who scoops.
scope. n. s. [scopus, lat.]
1. aim ; intention; drift.
your scope is as mine own,
so to inforce or qualify the laws,
as to your soul seems good. shak. measure for measure.
his coming hither hath no farthers ope
than for his lineal royalties, and to be
infranchisement immediate on his knees. shak. r. ii.
had the whole scope of the author been answerable to his
title, he would have only undertaken to prove what every man
is convinced of; but the drift of the pamphlet is to stir up our
compassion towards the rebels. addison.
2. thing aimed at ; mark; final end.
the scope of all their pleading against man's authority is to
overthrow such laws and constitutions in the church, as de-
pending thereupon, if they should therefore be taken away,
would leave neither face nor memory of church to continue
phillips.
long in the world. h22aer.
now was time
to aim their counsels to the fairest stope. hubberd's tale.
we should impute the war to the scope at which it aimeth.
raleigh.
he, in what he counsels, and in what excels,
mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair,
and utter dissolution, as the scope
of all his aim. milton's paradis lo?.
3. room; space; amplitude of intelle&amp;ual view.
an heroick poet is not tied to a bare representation of what
is true, but that he might let himself loose to visionary objects,
which may give him a freer scope for imagination. dryden.
these theorems being admitted into opticks, there would
be scope enough of handling that science voluminously, after
a new manner; not only by teaching those things which tend
to the perfection of vision, but also by determining mathema-
tically all kinds of phenomena of colours which could be pro-
duced by refraction. newton's opt.
4. liberty; freedom from restraint.
if this constrain them to grant that their axiom is not to
take any place, save in those things only where the church
hath larger scope, it resteth that they search out some stronger
reason. hooker.
ah, cut my lace asunder,
that my pent heart may have some scope to beat,
or else i swoon with this dead killing news. shakespeare.
5. liberty beyond just limits ; licence.
sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
'twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them,
for what bid them do.
being moody, give him line and scope,
till that his passions, like a whale on ground,
confound themselves with working. shakesp. henry iv.
6. act of riot; fally.
as surfeit is the father of much fast,
so every scope, by the immoderate use,
turns to restraint.
7. extended quantity.
the scopes of land granted to the first adventurers were too
large, and the liberties and royalties were too great for sub-
jects. davies on ireland.
8. it is out of use, except in the three first senses.
scopulous. adj. [scopulosus, lat.] full of rocks. dic7.
sco r bu'tic al. un. s. [scorbitique, fr. from scorbutus, lat.]
scor bu’tick. } diseased with the scurvy.
a person about forty, of a full and scorbutical body, having
broke her skin, endeavoured the curing of it; but observing
the ulcer sanious, i proposed digestion. wiseman.
violent purging hurts scorbutick constitutions; lenitive sub-
stances relieve. arbuthnot.
scoreutic ally. adv. [from scorbutical.] with tendency to
the scurvy ; in the scurvy. -
a woman of forty, sorbutically and hydropically affeoted,
having a sordid ulcer, put herself into my hand. wiseman.
scorce. n.s. this word is used by spensor for discourse, or
power of reason. in imitation perhaps of the italians.
lively vigour rested in his mind,
and recompensed him with a better scorce ;
weak body well is chang'd for mind's redoubled force.
fairy queen.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
f
to scqrch. v. a. srconches, saxon, burnt.]
1. to burn superficialiy.
fire scorcheth in frosty weather. bacon's nat. history:
the ladies gasp'd, and scarcely could respire;
†: o ... no longer air, but fire ;
e fainty knights were sorch”
2. to burn. y ghts were scorch’d.
power was given to scorch men with fire. sev. xvi
the same that is: by the *i. *** xvi. 8.
sase from sun's heat; but scorch'a with beauty. beam fairs.
you look with such contempt on pain - * *** f f -
that languishing you conquer more."
so lightnings which in storms appear,
$orch more than when the skies are cear.
dryden,
the same beams that shine, scorch too. "...
i rave, -
and, like a giddy bird in dead of night,
fly round the fire that scorches me to death. dryden
he, from whom the nations should receive yaert.
justice and feedom, lies himself a slave;
tortur’d by cruel change of wild desires,
lash'd by mad rage, and scorch'd by brutal fires. prior.
to scorch. v. m. to be burnt superficially; to be dried up.
the swarthy africans complain
to see the chariot of the sun
so nigh their scorching country run. roscommon.
the love was made in autumn, and the huntin, followed
properly, when the heats of that scorching country were de-
clining. dryden.
scatter a little mungy straw or fern amongst vour seedlings,
to prevent the roots from scorching, and to receive the moistie
that falls. 44%, timer’s husbandry.
so. "is a plant.
o: ... n. s. [latin.) an herb. ainsworth
score. m. s. s.soro, io. a mark, cut, or nojo toys
1. a notch or long incision.
our forefathers had no other books but the fore and the
tally: thou hast caused printing to be used. soakes. henry vi.
2. a line drawn.
3. an account, which, when writing was less common, was
kept by marks on tallies, or by lines of chalk
he's worth no more :
they say he parted well, and paid his score. shakesh. macb.
does not the air feed the flame and does not the flam.
warm and enlighten the air : does not the earth quit scores
with all the elements, in the fruits that issue from it': south.
4. account kept of something past; an epoch; an era.
universal deluges have swept all away, except two or three
persons who begun the world again upon a new score. tillotson.
5. debt imputed.
that thou do's love her, strikes some scores away
from the great com pt. shakesp. all's well that end, well,
6. reason; motive.
he had been prentice to a brewer,
but left the trade, as many more
have lately done on the same score. hudibrar.
a lion, that had got a politick fit of sickness, wrote the
fox word how glad he should be of his company, upon the
score of ancient friendship. l'e//range.
if your terms are moderate, we'll never break off upon that
fore. - collier on pride.
7. sake : account; relative motive.
you act your kindness on cydaria's sore. dryden.
kings in greece were deposed by their people upon the
score of their arbitrary proceedings. swift.
8. twenty. ... i suppose, because twenty, being a round nuen.
ber, was distinguished on tallies by a long score.
how many score of miles may we well ride
*twixt hour and hour * shakespeare's cymbeline.
the fewer still you name, you wound the more;
bond is but one; but harpax is a score. pope.
for some scores of lines there is a persed absence of that
spirit of poesy. watts.
9. a song in score. the words with the musical notes of a
song annexed. -
to scor e. v. a.
1. to set down as a debt.
madam, i know when
instead of five you scor'd me ten.
2. to impute; to charge.
your follies and debauches change
with such a whirl, the poets of your age
are tir’d, and cannot score 'em on the stage;
unless each vice in short-hand they indite,
ev’n as notcht prentices whole sermons write.
3. to mark by a line.
hast thou appointed where the moon should rise,
and with her purple light adorn the skies 2
scor’d out the bounded sun's obliquer ways,
that he on all might spread his equal rays
sco’ria, n. s. [latin.) dross; recrement.
swift.
dryden.
sandyr.
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c o
the storia, or vitrified part, which most metals, when
heated or melted, do continually protrude to the surface, and
which, by covering the racials in form of a thin glassy skin,
causes these colours, is much denser than water. newt. opt.
sco rious. adj. [from scoria, lat.) drosy ; recrementitious.
by the fire they emit many drosy and storious parts. brown.
to scorn. v. a. [shermen, dutch; escorner, fr.] to despise ;
to slight; to revile ; to vilify; to contemn. -
my friends scorn me; but mine eye poureth out tears unto
god. job, xvi. 20.
to scort n. v. n.
1. to scoff; to treat with contumcly.
he said mine eyes were black, and my hair black;
and now, i am remember'd, scorn’d at me. shakespeare.
our soul is filled with the scorning of those that are at ease,
and with the contempt of the proud. ps. cxxiii. 4.
2. to disdain; to think unworthy.
i've seen the morning's lovely ray
hover o'er the new-born day,
with rosy wings so richly bright,
as if he scorn'd to think of night.
, fame, that delights around the world to stray,
scorns not to take our argos in her way. pope's statius.
3. to despise; to contemn. o
surely he scorneth the scorner, but he giveth grace unto the
lowly. prov.
back to th’ infernal pit i drag thee chain'd,
and seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
the facil gates of hell too slightly barr'd.
4. to neglect ; to disregard. -
this my long sufferance and my day of grace,
they who neglect and scorn shall never taste;
but hard be harden'd, blind be blinded more.
scor n. m. s. [escorne, old fr. from the verb.]
1. contempt; scoff; slight; act of contumely.
we were better parch in africk's sun,
than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes. shakes care.
why should you think that i should woo in scorn ?
scorn and derision never come in tears. shakspeare,
if we draw her not unto us, she will laugh us to scorn. jud.
diogenes was asked in scorn, what was the matter that phi-
losophers haunted rich men, and not rich men philosophors :
he answered, because the one knew what they wanted, the
others did not. bacon.
whosoever hath any thing in his person that induces con-
tempt, hath also a perpetual spur to rescue himself from scorn :
therefore all deformed persons are bold, as being on their own
crashaw.
milton.
milton,
defence as exposed to scorn. bacon.
every sullen frown and bitter scorn, w
but fann’d the fuel that too fast did burn. dryden.
2. subject of ridicule; thing treated with contempt.
is it not a most horrid ingratitude, thus to make a sorn of
him that made us * tilson.
numidia’s grown a scorn among the nations
for breach of publick vows. addison's cato.
3. to think scorn. to disdain; to hold unworthy of regard.
not now in use.
if he do fully prove himself the honest shepherd menalcas
his brother and heir, i know no reason why you should think
scorn of him. - sidney.
unto thee will i cry, o lord: think no scorn of me, lest if
thou make as tho’ thou hearest not, i become like them that
go down into the pit. ps. xxviii. i.
4. to laugh to scor n. to deride as contemptible.
he that fitteth in the heavens shall laugh them to soorn; the
lord shall have them in derision. psalms. comm. prayer.
sco rner. m. s. [from scorn.]
1. contemner ; despiser.
they are very active, vigilant in their enterprises, present
in perils, and great scorners of death. speyer on ireland.
2. scoffer; ridiculer.
the scorner should consider, upon the fight of a cripple,
that it was only the distinguishing mercy of heaven that kept
him from being one top. l’estrange.
they, in the scorner’s or the judge's seat,
dare to condemn the virtue which they hate.
sco'rnfu l. adj. [storm and full.]
1. contemptuous; insolent; disdainful.
- th’ enamour'd deity
the stormful damsel shuns.
2. acting in defiance.
with him i o'er the hills had run,
scornful of winter's frost and summer's sun. prior.
sco'rnfully. adv. [from scornful..] contemptuously; inso-
lently.
he us'd us scornfully: he would have shew'd us
his marks of merit, wounds receiv'd for’s country.
- shaks rare.
the sacred rights of the christian church are sorofully
trampled on in print, under an hypocritical pretence of main-
taining them. 8 atterlury's sermons.
prior.
dryden.
sco'rpion. n.s. (scorpion, fr. scorpio, lat.] -
1. a reptile much resembling a small lobster, but that his tail
ends in a point with a very venomous sting.
well, fore-warning winds
did seen to say, seek not a scorpion's nest. :
shakespeare's henry vi.
full of sorpions is my mind, dear wife. shak. ajacloth.
2. cne of the signs of the zodiack.
the squezing crab and stinging scorpion shine. dryden.
3. a scourge so called from its cruelty.
my father hath chastised you with whips, but i will chasise
you with scorpions. 1 kings, xii. 11.
4. [scorpius, lat. j a sea fish. ainsworth.
scoo p10n sena. m. s. [emerus, lat..] a plant. 4.iller.
sco'r pion grass.
sco'rpion’s % n. s. herbs. ainsworth.
sco'rp10 n jp'ort.
scor. n.s. [ccot, fr.]
i. shot; payment.
2. scot and lot. parish payments.
'twas time to countcrseit, or that hot termagant scot had
paid me scot and lot too, shakespeare's henry iv,
protogcues, historians note,
liv'd there a burgess, soot and lot. prior.
the chief point that has puzzled the freeholders, as well
as those that pay soot and lot, for about these six months, is,
whether they would rather be governca by a prince that is
obliged by law to be good, or by one who, if he pleases, may
plunder or imprison addison.
scot free. adj. without scot or mula; unhurt; im; tıme.
to scotch. v. a. to cut with shallow incisions.
he was too hard for him directly: before corioli, he set:ht
and notcht him like a carbonado. shakesp. coriolanos.
scorch. n.s.. [from the verb..] a slight cut ; a hallow inci-
sion. -
we'll beat 'em into bench-holes: i have yet room for six
scotches more. shakesp. antony and cloatra.
give him four scotches with a knife, and then put into his
belly and these scotches sweet herbs. //alton's angier.
scotch collaps, or scotched collaps. n.s.. [from to scotch, or cut.]
veal cut into small pieces.
scotch hoppers. m. s. a play in which boys hop over lines or
scotches in the ground.
children being indifferent to any thing they can do, dancing
and footch hoppers would be the same thing to them. loco.
sco"tomy. m. s. [7x6two...] a dizziness or swimming in the
head, causing dimness of fight, wherein external objects stem
to turn round. ains, and paily.
scott ering. a provincial word which denotes, in herc-
fordshire, a custom among the boys of burning a wad of pease-
straw at the end of harvest. hailey.
sco'v el. m. s. [scopa, lat..] a sort of mop of clouts for sweep-
ing an oven; a maulkin. ains, and bailey.
sco'und rel. m. s. [scondaruolo, italian, a hider. skinner.] a
mean rascal ; a low petty villain. a word rather ludicrous.
now to be baffl’d by a soundrel,
an upstart sect'ry, and a mungrel.
scoundrels as these wretched ombites be,
canopus they exceed in luxury.
go, if your ancient but ignoble blood
has crept through scoundrels cver since the flocq,
go, and pretend your family is young;
nor own your fathers have been fools so long.
to scour. v. a. [sourer, danish; scheuren, dutch.]
1. to rub hard with any thing rough, in order to clean the sur-
face.
i were better to be eaten to death with a rust, than to be
scour'd to nothing with perpetual motion. shakspeare,
by dint of sword his crown he shall increase,
and scour his armour from the rust of peace. dryden's mīn.
parts our the rusty shields with seam, and part
new grind the blunted ax, and point the dart. dryden.
some blamed mrs. bull for grudging a quarter of a pound
of soap and sand to scour the rooms. arithmii,
poor vadius, long with learned spleen devour’d,
can taste no pleasure since his shield was sair'd.
2. to purge violently. -
3. to cleanse; to bleach ; to whiten; to blanche.
in some lakes the water is so nitrous, as if foul clothes be
put into it, it sloureth them of itself; and, if they stay, they
moulder away.
a garden-worm should be well scoured cight days in mess,
before you fish with him. walton's angler.
beneath the lamp her tawdry ribbons glare,
the new scour'd manteau, and the flattern air.
4. to remove by scouring. -
never came reformation in a flood
with such a heady current, souring faults;
nor ever hydra-headed wilfuiness
so soon did lose his seat, and all at once,
as in this king.
hadilraj.
tate.
pope.
pope,
gay.
shakesp. henry v.
i will
bacon's natural hory.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c o
i will wear a garment all of blood,
and stain my favour in a bloody mask,
which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it. shak,
then, in the clemency of upward air,
we'll stout our spots, and the dire thunder's scar. dryden.
5. to range about in order to catch or drive away something;
to clear away.
the kings of lacedemon having set out some gallies, un-
der the charge of one of their nephews, to scour the sea of the
pyrates, they met us. sidney.
divers are kept continually to scour these seas, infested
greatly by pirates. sandys.
if with thy guards thou scours the streets by night,
and do'st in murders, rapes, and spoils delight,
please not thyself the flatt’ring crowd to hear.
6. to pass swiftly over.
sometimes
he sour; the right hand coast, sometimes the left. milton.
not half the number in their seats are found,
but men and steeds lie grov'ling on the ground;
the points of spears are stuck within the shield,
the steeds without their riders four the field,
the knights unhors’d. dryden.
when ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,
the line too labours, and the words move slow ;
not so when swift camilla scours the plain,
flies o'er th' unbending corn, and skims along the main.
pope's essay on criticism.
dryden.
to scour. v. n.
1. to perform the office of cleaning domestick utensils.
i keep his house, and was to wring, brew, bake, sour,
dress meat, and make the beds. shakespeare.
2. to clean.
warm water is softer than cold ; for it scourth better. bac.
3. to be purged or lax ; to be diseased with looseness.
some apothecarics, upon stamping coloquintida, have been
put into a great scouring by the vapour only. bacon.
convulsion and scouring, they say, do often cause one an-
other. graunt's bills of mortality.
if you turn sheep into wheat or rye to feed, let it not be
too rank, left it make them sour. mortimer’s husbandry.
4. to rove ; to range.
barbarosla, scouring along the coast of italy, struck an ex-
ceeding terror into the minds of the citizens of rome. knolles.
5. to run here and there.
the enemy's drum is heard, and fearful scouring
doth choak the air with dust. shak. timon.
6. to run with great eagerness and swiftness; to scamper.
she from him fled with all her pow'r,
who after her as hastily 'gan to scour. fairy queen.
i saw men sour so on their way: i ey'd them
fven to their ships. shakesp. //inter’s tale.
word was brought him, in the middle of his schemes, that
his house was robbed; and so away he scours to learn the
truth. l’estrange.
if they be men of fraud, they’ll sour off themselves, and
leave those that trust them to pay the reckoning. l'estrange.
so four fierce coursers, starting to the race,
scour through the plain, and lengthen ev'ry pace;
nor reins, nor curbs, nor threat'ning cries they fear,
but force along the trembling charioteer. dryden.
as soon as any foreign object psesses upon the sense, those
spirits, which are posted upon the out-guards, immediately
take the alarm, and scour off to the brain, which is the head
quarters. collier.
swift at her call her husband scour’d away,
to wreak his hunger on the destin'd prey. pope.
scou rer. m. s. [from scour.]
1. one that cleans by rubbing.
2. a purge, rough and quick.
. one who runs swiftly.
$courge. m. s. [estaurgee, fr. scoreggia, italian ; corrigia,
lat.
1. a * a lash ; an instrument of discipline.
when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them
all out of the temple. john, ii. 15.
the scourge -
inexorable, and the torturing hour,
cails us to penance.
2. a punishment; a vindictive affliction.
what scourge for perjury
can this dark monarchy afford false clarence : shakosheare.
see what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
that heav'n finds means to kill your joys with love. shak.
famine and plague are sent as scourges for amendment.
2 esdras.
thus attila was
milton.
3. one that affiets, harasses, or destroys.
called flagellum dei.
is this the scourge of france
is this the talbot so much fear'd abroad,
that with his name the mothers still their babes? sh. h. vi.
vol. ii.
s c o
such conquerors are not the favourites, butsourges of god;
the instruments of that vengeance. atterbury's sermons.
in all these trials i have born a part;
i was myself the scourge that caus’d the smart.
pope.
- - mmortal jove, -
let kings no more with gentle mercy sway,
or bless a people willing to obey, 2
but crush the nations with an ison rod, -
and every monarch be the sourge of god. pope,
4. a whip for a top. -
| hoy had a top, the sourge stick and leather strap should
be left to their own making. jocke.
to scourg e. v. a. [from the noun.] •
1. to lash with a whip; to whip.
the gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
make instruments to scourge us. shakesh. king lear.
is it lawful for you to scourge a roman : act, oi....
he scourg'd with many a stroke the indignant waves. ass.
when a professor of any religion is set up to be laughed at
this cannot help us to judge of the truth of his faith, any botto:
than if he were scourged. j/attr,
2. to punish; to chastise; to chasten; to castigate with any
punishment or affliction.
seeing that thou hast been scourged from heaven, declare the
mighty power of god. 2.44ae. iii. 34.
he will scourge us for our iniquities, and will have mercy
again. - tob. xiii. 5.
scour ger. m. s. [from scourge.] one that scourges; a pu-
nisher or chastiser.
to scourse. v. a. to exchange one thing for another; to
swap. ainsw. it seems a corruption of scorsa, ital. ex-
change; and hence a horse scourser.
scout. m. s. [oscout, fr. from escouter; ausculiare, lat. to
listen; scolta, italian.] one who is sent privily to observe
the motions of the enemy.
are not the speedy scouts return’d again,
that dogg'd the mighty army of the dauphin : shakspeare.
as when a scout,
through dark and desert ways with peril gone
all night, at last, by break of cheerful dawn,
obtains the brow of some high-climbing hill. milton.
this great veilel may have lesser cabins, wherein scouts may
be lodged for the taking of observations. //il{ins.
the scouts to sev'ral parts divide their way,
to learn the natives names, their towns, explore
the coasts. dryden’s aon.
to scout. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to go out in order to observe the motions of an enemy pri-
vately.
oft on the bordering deep
encamp their legions; or with obscure wing
scout far and wide into the realm of night,
scorning surprize.
as a hunted panther casts about
her glaring eyes, and pricks her list’ning ears to sout, -
moltz”.
so she, to shun his toils, her cares employ’d. ' dryden,
command a party out, -
with a strict charge not to engage, but scout. dryden.
2. to ridicule ; to sneer.
vulgar.
to scow l. v. m. [rcylian, to squint, saxon; seesa sig, to look
sour, islandick.] to frown ; to pout; to look angry, sour,
or sullen.
miso, her authority increased, came with sowling eyes to
deliver a slavering good-morrow to the two ladies.
with bent louring brows, as she would threat,
she scowl'd and frowned with froward countenance.
fairy queen.
even so, or with much more contempt, mens eyes
did slowl on richard. shaks care’s richard ii.
not a courtier,
although they wear their faces to the bent
of the king's look, but hath a heart that is
glad at the thing they scow! at. shaos?. cymoeline.
the dusky clouds o'er spread -
heav'n's cheerful face, the low'ring element
this is a sense unauthorised, and
sidney.
scowls o'er the darken'd landscape snow or show'r. milton.
fly, fly, prophane fogs far hence fly away,
with your dull influence; it is for you
to fit and scowl upon night's heavy brow. crashaw.
in rueful gaze
the cattle stand, and on the scowling heavens
cast a deploring eye. thomson's summer.
scowl. m. s. [from the verb..] look of sullenness or discon-
tent; gloom.
i've seen the morning's lovely ray
hover o'er the new-born day,
with rosy wings so richly bright,
as if he scorn'd to think of night;
when a ruddy storm, whose scowl
made heaven's radiant face look foul,
23 h
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c r.
s c r.
*
call'd for an untimely night, ..
to blot the newly-blossom'd light. crashaw.
sco'wlingly. adv. [from scowl.] with a frowning and fullen
look.
to scrathele. v. n. [krabbelen, straffelen, to scrape or scratch,
dutch..] to paw with the hands.
he feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the
doors of the gate. i sa. xxi. 13.
scragg. n.j. [scraghe, dutch..] anything thin or lean,
scra'cced. adj. [this seems corrupted from cragged.] rough;
uneven; full of protuberances or asperities.
is there then any physical deformity in the fabrick of a hu-
man body, because our imagination can strip it of its muscles
and skin, and shew us the scragged and knotty back-bone :
bentley's sermons.
[from scragged.]
scra’gced ness.
"/" [from stroggy.]
scra'gg in ess.
1. leanness; marcour.
2. unevenness; roughness ; ruggedness.
scra'ggy. m. s. [from scrag.]
1. lean; marcid ; thin.
such a constitution is easily known by the body being lean,
warm, hairy, scraggy, and dry, without a disease. arbuthnot.
2. [corrupted from craggy.] rough ; rugged; uneven.
from a scraggy rock, whose prominence
half overshades the ocean, hardy men,
fearless of rending winds and dashing waves,
cut sampire.
to scra’mble. v. n.
dutch.]
1. to catch at any thing eagerly and tumultuously with the
hands; to catch with haste preventive of another; to contend
tumultuously which shall catch any thing.
england now is left
to tug and scramble, and to part by th’ teeth
the unow’d interest of proud swelling state.
of other care they little reck'ning make,
than how to scramble at the shearer's feast,
and shove away the worthy bidden guest. milton.
it is not to be supposed, that, when such a tree was shaking,
there would be no scrambling for the fruit. stillingfleet.
they must have scrambled with the wild beasts for crabs and
nuts. ray on the creation.
2. to climb by the help of the hands: as, he scrambled up that
rock.
scra’mble. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. eager contest for something, in which one endeavours to get
it before another.
as they were in the middle of their gambols, some body
threw a handful of apples among them, that set them pre-
sently together by the ears upon the scramble. l’estrange.
because the desire of money is constantly almost every
where the same, its vent varies very little, but as its greater
philipi.
[the same with scrabble; scraffelen,
shakespeare.
scarcity enhances its price and increases the scramble. locke.
2. act of climbing by the help of the hands.
scra'mbler. m. s. [from scramble.]
1. one that scrambles.
all the little scramblers after fame fall upon him. addison.
2. one that climbs by help of the hands.
to scranch. v. a. [schrantzer, dutch..] to grind somewhat
crackling between the teeth. . the scots retain it.
scrannel. adj. [of this word i know not the etymology, nor
any other example..] vile ; worthless. perhaps grating by
the sound.
when they list, their lean and flashy songs
grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw. milton.
scrap. n. s. [from scrape, a thing scraped or rubbed off.]
1. a small particle; a little piece; a fragment.
it is an unaccountable vanity to spend all our time raking
into the scraps and imperfect remains of former ages, and ne-
gle&amp;ting the clearer notices of our own. glanville.
trencher esquires spend their time in hopping from one
great man's table to another's, only to pick up scraps and in-
telligence. l’estrange.
languages are to be learned only by reading and talking,
and not by scraps of authors got by heart. locke.
no rag, no scrap, of all the beau, or wit,
that once so flutter'd, and that once so writ. pope.
i can never have too many of your letters: i am angry at
every scrap of paper lost. pope,
2. crumb ; small particles of meat left at the table.
the contract you pretend with that base wretch,
one bred of alms, and foster'd with cold dishes,
with scraps o' th' court, is no contract. shak. cymbeline.
the attendants puff a court up beyond her bounds, for
their own scraps and advantage. bacon.
on bones, on scraps of dogs let me be fed,
my limbs uncover'd, and expos'd my head
to bleakest colds. granville.
what has he else to bait his traps,
or bring his vermin in, but scraps ?
2
the offals of a church distrest,
a hungry vicarage at best. swift,
3. a small piece of paper. this is properly strip.
pregnant with thousand flits the scrap unseen,
and filent sells a king, or buys a queen. pope.
to scrape. v. a... [rcneopan, saxon; shrapen, dutch,
'sastropitigh, erse.]
1. to deprive of the surface by the light action of a sharp instru-
ment, used with the edge almost perpendicular.
these hard woods are more properly scraped than planed.
03:07,
2. to take away by scraping; to eraze.
they shall destroy the walls, and i will scrape her dust, and
make her like the top of a rock. ezek. xxvi. 4.
bread for a toast lay on the coals; and, if toasted quite
through, scrape off the burnt side, and serve it up. swift.
3. to act upon any surface with a harsh noise.
the chiming clocks to dinner call;
a hundred footsteps scrape the marble hall. pope.
4. to gather by great efforts; or penurious or trifling diligence.
let the government be ruined by his avarice, if, by avarice,
he can scrape together so much as to make his peace. south.
unhappy those who hunt for a party, and scrape together
out of every author all those things only which favour their
own tenets. watts.
to scrap e. v. n.
1. to make a harsh noise.
2. to play ill on a fiddle.
3. to make an aukward bow. ainsworth.
4. to scrape acquaintance. a low phrase. to curry favour, or
infinuate into one's familiarity : probably from the scrapes or
bows of a flatterer.
scrape. n.s.. [skrap, swedish.j.'
1. difficulty; perplexity; distress. this is a low word.
2. the sound of the foot drawn over the floor.
3. a bow.
scra'per. m. s. [from scrape.]
1. instrument with which any thing is scraped.
never clean your shoes on the scraper, but in the entry,
and the scraper will last the longer. swift.
2. a miser ; a man intent on getting money; a scrapepenny.
be thrifty, but not covetous ; therefore give
thy need, thine honour, and thy friend his due:
never was scraper brave man. get to live,
then live, and use it; else it is not true
that thou hast gotten: surely use alone
makes money not a contemptible stone. herbert.
3. a vile fiddler.
out ! ye sempiternal scrapers. cowley.
have wild boars or dolphins the least emotion at the most
elaborate strains of your modern scrapers, all which have been
tamed and humanized by ancient musicians ? arbuthnot.
scrat. n. s. [rcrucca, saxon.] an hermaphrodite. skinner
and ‘funius.
to scratch. v. a. [kratzen, dutch.]
1. to tear or mark with slight incisions ragged and uneven.
the lab’ring swain
scratch'd with a rake a furrow for his grain, }
and cover'd with his hand the shallow seed again. ) dryden.
a sort of small sand-coloured stones, so hard as to scratch
glass. grew's musacum.
2. to tear with the nails."
how can i tell but that his talons may
yet scratch my son, or rend his tender hand 2
i should have scrat.h'd out your unseeing eyes,
to make my master out of love with thee. shakespeare.
i had rather hear my dog bark at a crow, than a man swear
he loves me.
keep your ladyship still in that mind so some gen-
tleman or other shall 'scape a predestinate scratcht face.
scratching could not make it worse, an 'twere such a face
as yours were. shak. much ado about nothing.
scots are like witches: do but whet your pen,
scratch'till the blood come, they'll not hurt you then. cleav.
to wish that there were nothing but such dull tame things
in the world, that will neither bite nor scratch, is as childless
fa. queen.
as to wish there were no fire in nature. a fore.
unhand me, or i'll scratch your face;
let go, for shame. dryden.
3. to wound slightly.
4. to hurt slightly with anything pointed or keen.
daphne, roaming through a thorny wood,
scratching her legs, that one shall swear she bleeds. shaks.
5. to rub with the nails.
francis cornfield did scratch his elbow, when he had sweetly
invented to signify his name st. francis, with a friary cowl
in a corn field. camden.
other mechanical helps aretaeus uses to procure sleep, par-
ticularly the scratching of the temples and the ears. arbuthnot.
be mindful, when invention fails,
to scratch your head, and bite your nails. swift.
6. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c r.
s c r. -
o
s
•,*
o
• *-
6. to write or draw aukwardly,
if any of their labourers can scratch out a pamphlet, they
desire no wit, style, or argument. swift.
scratch. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. an incision ragged and shallow. - -
the coarse file cuts deep, and makes deep scratches in the
work; and before you can take out those deep scratches with
your finer cut files, those places where the risings were when
your work was forged, may become dents to your hammer
dents. moxon's mech. exercises.
the smaller the particles of those substances are, the smaller
will be the scratches, by which they continually fret and wear
away the glass until it be polished; but be they never so small,
they can wear away the glass no otherwise than by grating
and scratching it, and breaking the protuberances; and there-
fore polish it no otherwise than by bringing its roughness to a
very fine grain, so that the scratches and frettings of the surface
become too small to become visible. newton's opt.
1, laceration with the nails.
these nails with scratches shall deform my breast,
left by my look or colour be express'd
the mark of aught high-born, or ever better dress'd.) prior.
3. a slight wound.
the valiant beast turning on her with open jaws, she gave
him such a thrust through his breast, that all the lion could
do was with his open paw to tear off the mantle and sleeve of
zelmane, with a little scratch rather than a wound. sidney.
heav'n forbid a shallow scratch should drive
the prince of wales from such a field as this. shak. h. iv.
scra’rcher. n.s.. [from scratch..] he that scratches.
scra’rches. n.s. cracked ulcers or scabs in a horse's foot. ains.
scratchingly. adv. [from scratching.] with the action of
scratching. -
making him turn close to the ground, like a cat, when
scratchingly she wheels about after a mouse. sidney.
$oraip. n.s. [irish and erse.] surface or scurf.
neither should that odious custom be allowed, of cutting
foraws, which is flaying off the green surface of the ground
to cover their cabins, or make up their ditches. swift.
to scrawl. v. a. [i suppose to be corrupted from scrabble.]
to draw or mark irregularly or clumsily.
peruse my leaves through ev'ry part,
and think thou see'ft its owner’s heart,
scrawl'd o'er with trifles thus, and quite
as hard, as senseless, and as light. swift.
to scrawl. v. n.
1. to write unskilfully and inelegantly.
think not your verses sterling,
though with a golden pen you scrawl, -
and scribble in a berlin. swift.
2. [from crawl.] to creep like a reptile. , ... ains.
scrawl. n. s. [from the verb.] unskilful and inelegant
writing.
the left hand will make such a scrawl, that it will not be
legible. arbuthnot's hist. of john bull.
mr. wycherly, hearing from me how welcome his letters
would be, writ to you, in which i inserted my scrawl. pope.
scra'wler. n. s. [from scrawl.] a clumsy and inelegant
writer.
scray. m. s. [hirundo marina.] a bird called a sea-swallow.
ainsworth and bailey.
scre(able. adj. [screabilis, latin.] that which may be spit
out. bailey.
to screak. v. n...[properly creak, or shriek, from serige, dan.]
to make a shrill or hoarse noise. bailey.
to scream. v. n. [preman, saxon.]
1. to cry out shrilly, as in terrour or agony.
soon a whirlwind rose around,
and from afar he heard a streaming sound,
as of a dame distress'd, who cry’d for aid,
and fill'd with loud laments the secret shade.
the fearful matrons raise a screaming cry,
old feeble men with fainter groans reply ; }
a jarring sound results, and mingles in the sky, ) dryden.
# chance a mouse creeps in her sight,
can finely counterfeit a fright;
so sweetly streams, if it comes near her,
she ravishes all hearts to hear her. swift.
2. to cry shrilly.
i heard the owl stream, and the crickets cry. shakesp.
screa m. m. s. [from the verb.] a shrill quick loud cry of
terrour or pain.
our chimnies were blown down; and, as they say,
lamentings heard i' th' air, strange streams of death. "shak.
then flash'd the livid lightning from her eyes,
and screams of horror rend th’ affrighted skies. pope.
to screech. v. n. [skrakia, to cry, islandick.]
* to cry out as in terrour or anguish.
§orreching is an appetite of expelling that which suddenly
strikes the spirits. bacon.
*:to cry as a night owl: thence called a screechowl.
screech. m. s. [from the verb.]
dryden.
1. sry of horror and anguish.
2. harsh horrid cry.
tools obscene, that nightly flock'd to taste,
with hollow screechi fled from the dire repast;
and ravenous dogs, allur'd by scented blood,
and starving wolves, ran howling to the wood. 'pope,
scree chowl. m. s. [screech and owl.] an owl that hoots in
the night, and whose voice is supposed to betoken danger,
misery, or death.
deep night,
the time of night when troy was set on fire,
the time when screechowl, cry, and bandogs howl. shakes,
let him, that will a screechowl ay be call’d,
go into troy, and say there, hector's dead, shakespeare.
by the screechowl's dismal note,
by the black night raven's throat,
i charge thee, hob. drayton,
jupiter, though he had jogged the balance to weigh down
turnus, sent the screechows to discourage him. dryden.
sooner shall streethowl, bask in sunny day,
than i forget my shepherd's wonted love. gay,
screen. m. s. sesoran, french.]
i. any thing that affords shelter or concealment.
now near enough: your leavy screens throw down,
and show like those you are. shakesp. macbeth.
some ambitious men seem as screens to princes in matters
of danger and envy. bacon.
our people, who transport themselves, are settled in those
interjacent tracts, as a screen against the insults of the sa-
wages. swift,
my juniors by a year,
who wisely thought my age a screen,
when death approach'd, to stand between,
the screen remov’d, their hearts are trembling, swift.
2. ao used to exclude cold or light.
hen there is a screen between the candle and the eye, yet
the light passeth to the paper whereon one writeth. bacon,
qne speaks the glory of the british queen,
and one describes a charming indian sireen. pope.
ladies make their old cloaths into patchwork for foreens and
stools. swifts
3. a riddle to sift sand.
to scrge n. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to shelter; to conceal; to hide.
back'd with a ridge of hills,
that screen'd the fruits of th’earth and seats of men,
from cold septentrion blasts. milt. par. regain'd,
a good magistrate's retinue of state screens him from the
dangers which he is to incur for the sake of it. atterbury.
this gentle deed shall fairly be set foremost,
to screen the wild escapes of lawless passion. rowe,
2. [cerno crevi, latin.] to fift; to riddle.
let the cases be filled with natural earth, taken the first
half spit, from just under the turf of the best pasture-ground,
mixed with one part of very mellow soil screened. evelyn.
screw. m. s. [scroeve, dutch ; estrou, french..] one of the
mechanical powers, which is defined a right cylinder cut int&amp;
a furrowed spiral : of this there are two kinds, the male and
female; the former being cut convex, so that its threads rise
outwards; but the latter channelled on its concave side, so
as to receive the former. quincy.
the screw is a kind of wedge, that is multiplied or con-
tinued by a helical revolution about a cylinder, receiving its
motion not from any stroke, but from a vectis at one end of
it. wilkins's math. magick.
after your apples are ground, commit them to the sorew
press, which is the best. mortimer's husbandry.
to screw. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to turn or move by a screw.
some, when the press by utmost vigour screw'd,
has drain'd the pulpous mass, regale their swine
with the dry refuse.
2. to fasten with a screw.
we fail i
but screw your courage to the sticking place,
and we’ll not fail. shakesp. macbeth.
to screw your lock on the door, make wide holes, big
phillips.
enough to receive the shank of the screw. moxon.
3. to deform by contortions.
sometimes a violent laughter screw'd his face,
and sometimes ready tears dropp'd down apace. cowley;
he screw'd his face into a harden'd smile,
and said sebastian knew to govern slaves. dryden,
with screwed face, and doleful whine, they ply you with
senseless.harangues against human inventions on the one hand,
and loud outcries for a further reformation on the other. south.
let others screw their hypocritick face,
she shews her grief in a sincerer place. swift.
4. to force; to bring by violence.
he resolved to govern by subaltern ministers, who screwed
up the pins of power too high. howel's vocal forest:
no discourse can be, but they will try to turn the *...
saw
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c r
s c r.
draw it all into their own channel; or they will screw in here
and here some intimations of what they said or did. gov. tong.
the rents of land in ireland, since they have been so enor-
mously raised and screwed up, may be computed to be about
two millions. -
5. to squeeze; to press.
6. to oppress by extortion.
our country landlords, by unmeasurable screwing and rack-
ing their tenants, have already reduced the miserable people
to a worse condition than the peasants in france. swift.
scr ew tree. m. s. sisara, latin.] a plant of the east and
west indies.
to scribble. v. a. s.s., ibo, scribillo, latin.]
1. to fill with artless or worthless writing. .
how gird the sphere
with centrick and eccentrick, scribbl/d o'er -
cycle and epicycle, orb in orb. milton's paradis, loft.
2. to write without use or elegance: as, he scribbled a pam-
phlet.
to scri'bble. v. m. to write without care or beauty.
if a man should affirm, that an ape casually meeting with
pen, ink, and paper, and falling to scribble, did happen to write
exactly the leviathan of hobbes, would an atheist believe
such a story : and yet he can easily digest things as incredible
as that. bentley.
if maevius soribble in apollo's spite,
there are, who judge still worse than he can write. pope.
leave flattery to fulfome dedicators,
whom, when they praise, the world believes no more
than when they promise to give scribbling o'er. pope.
scr1 bble. m. s. [from the verb.] worthless writing.
by solemnly endeavouring to countenance my conjectures,
i might be thought dogmatical in a hasty scribble. boyle.
if it struck the present taste, it was soon transferred into the
plays and current scribbles of the week, and became an addi-
tion to our language. swift.
scr1 bbler. m. s. [from scribble.] a petty author ; a writer
without worth.
the most copious writers are the arrantest scribblers, and in
so much talking the tongue runs before the wit. l’estrange.
the actors represent such things as they are capable, by
which they and the scribbler may get their living. dryden.
the scribbler, pinch'd with hunger, writes to dine,
and to your genius must conform his line. granv.
to affirm he had cause to apprehend the same treatment
with his father, is an improbable scandal flung upon the na-
tion by a few bigotted french scribblers. swift.
no body was concerned or surprised, if this or that scribbler
was proved a dunce. letter to pope's dunciad.
scribe. m. s. [scribe, french; scriba, latin.]
1. a writer.
hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot
think, speak, cast, write, fing, number, ho!
his love to antony. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra:
my master, being the scribe to himself, should write the
letter. shakespeare.
we are not to wonder, if he thinks not fit to make any
perfeot and unerring scribes. grew's cosmol.
the following letter comes from some notable young female
scribe. spectator.
2. a publick notary. ainsworth.
scr1'mer. m. s. [escrimeur, french.] a gladiator; a fencing-
master. not in use.
the scrimers of their nation,
he swore, had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
if you oppos'd them. shakesp. hamlet.
scrine. m. s. [scrinium, latin.] a place in which writings or
curiosities are reposited. -
help then, o holy virgin,
thy weaker novice to perform thy will;
lay forth, out of thine everlasting scrine,
- the antique rolls which there lie hidden still.
scrip. m. s. [skrappa, islandick.]
1. a small bag; a satchel.
come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat; though
fa. queen.
not with bag and baggage, yet with strip and scrippage. shak.
he’d in requittal ope his leathern scrip,
and shew me simples of a thousand names,
telling their strange and vigorous faculties. milton.
2. [from scriptio, latin, as it seems.] a schedule; a small
writing.
call them man by man, according to the scrip. shak.
bills of exchange cannot pay our debts abroad, 'till scrips of
paper can be made current coin. locke.
scr1 ppage. n.s.. [from scrip.] that which is contained in a
scrip. dicf.
scr1'ptor y. adj. [scriptorius, latin.] written; not orally
delivered. swift.
scr1'ptural. adj. [from scripture.] contained in the bible;
biblical.
creatures, the scriptural use of that word determines some-
times to men. - alterbury.
scripture. m. s. [scriptura, latin.]
1. writing.
it is not only remembered in many scriptures, but famous
for the death and overthrow of crassus. raleigh.
swift. 2. sacred writing; the bible.
with us there is never any time bestowed in divine service,
without the reading of a great part of the holy stripture, which
we account a thing most necessary. ooker.
the devil can cite scripture for his purpose:
an evil soul producing holy witness,
is like a villain with a smiling cheek. shakespeare.
there is not any action which a man ought to do, or to
forbear, but the scripture will give him a clear precept, or pro.
hibition for it. south.
forbear any discourse of other spirits, ’till his reading the
scripture history put him upon that enquiry. locke.
scripture proof was never the talent of these men, and 'tis
no wonder they are foiled. atterbury.
why are scripture maxims put upon us, without taking
notice of scripture examples, that lie cross 'em : attortur.
the author of nature and the scriptures has expressly en-
joined, that he who will not work, shall not eat. seed's serm.
scri’v ener. m. s. [scrivano, latin.]
i. one who draws contracts.
we’ll pass the business privately and well:
send for your daughter by your servant here,
my boy shall fetch the scrivener. shakes. tam. of the shrew.
2. one whose business is to place money at interest.
how happy in his low degree,
who leads a quiet country life,
and from the griping scrivener free? dryden's horace.
i am reduced to beg and borrow from scriveners and usurers,
that suck the heart and blood. arbuthnot's hist. of john bull.
scro'fula. m. s. [from scrofa, latin, a sow, as xotzo.)
a depravation of the humours of the body, which breaks out
in sores commonly called the king's evil.
if matter in the milk dispose to coagulation, it produces a
scrofula. //iseman of tumours:
scrofulous. adj. [from scrofula.j diseased with the scrofula.
scrofulous persons can never be duly nourished; for such as
have tumours in the parotides often have them in the pancreas
and mesentery. arbuthnot on aliments.
english consumptions generally proceed from a scrofukus
disposition. arbuthnot.
what would become of the race of men in the next age, if
we had nothing to trust to, beside the scrofulous consumptive
production furnished by our men of wit and pleasure? swift.
scroll. m. s. [supposed by minshew to be corrupted from roll;
by skinner derived from an escrouelle given by the heralds:
whence parchment, wrapped up into a resembling form, has
the same name. it may be observed, that a gaoler's list of
prisoners is estrou.] a writing wrapped up. .
his chamber all was hanged about with rolls,
and old records from ancient times deriv'd;
some made in books, some in long parchment scrolls,
that were all worm-eaten, and full of canker holes. spens.
we'll add a royal number to the dead,
gracing the scroll, that tells of this war's loss,
with slaughter coupled to the name of kings. shakespeare.
here is the scroll of every man's name, which is thought fit
through all athens to play in our interlude. shakespeare.
a numidian priest, bellowing out certain superstitious
charms, cast divers scrolls of paper on each side the way,
wherein he cursed and banned the christians. knolles.
he drew forth a scroll of parchment, and delivered it to our
foremast man. * . bacon.
such follow him, as shall be register'd ;
part good, part bad : of bad the longer scroll. milion.
with this epistolary scroll,
receive the partner of my inmost soul. prior.
may take yon’ beauteous, mystick, starry roll,
and burn it, like an useless parchment soroll.
scroyle. n. s. [this word i remember only in shakespeare:
it seems derived from scrouelle, french, a scrofulous swell-
ing ; as he calls a mean fellow a scab from his itch, or a
patch from his raggedness.] a mean fellow; a rascal; a
wretch. - -
the s.royles of angiers flout you kings,
and stand securely on their battlements,
as in a theatre. shakespeare's king john.
to scrub. v. a. [/chrobben, dutch.j. to rub hard with
something coarse and rough.
such wrinkles as a skilful hand would draw
for an old grandam ape, when, with a grace,
she fits at squat, and scrubs her leathern face. dryden.
she never would lay aside the use of brooms and scrubbing
brushes. arbuthnot.
now moll had whirl’d her mop with dext’rous airs,
prepar'd to scrub the entry and the stairs.
scrub. m. s. [from the verb.]
i. a mean fellow, either as he is supposed to scrub himself for
the
yet, if he wills, may change or spoil the whole;
prior.
swift.
i.
...:
-
o
d
l
.
o
6
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">*
the itch, or as he is employed in the mean offices of scouring
away dirt. … ". -
2. anything mean or despicable. .* *
o with a dozen large vessels my vault shall be flord;
no little scrub joint shall come on my board. swift.
. a worn-out broom. - ainsworth.
::::::::::::"; [scrubet, danish..] mean; vile; worthless;
scru’bby. dirty ; sorry.
.* . ". . i gave it to a youth,
... a kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy, w
… no higher than thyself. shakesp. merchant of venice.
the scrubois cur in all the pack,
can set the mastiff on your back. swift.
the scene a wood, produc’d no more
o than a few scrubby trees before. swift.
scruff. n. s. the same, i suppose, with scarf, by a meta-
thesis usual in pronunciation.
scru'ple., of [scrupule, french; scrupulus, latin.]
1. doubt; difficulty of determination; perplexity: generally
... about minute things. -
- macduff, this noble passion,
child of integrity, hath from my soul
wip'd the black scruples, reconcil'd my thoughts
to your good truth. shakespeare's macbeth.
nothing did more fill foreign nations with admiration of
his succession, than the consent of all estates of england for
the receiving of the king without the least scruple, pause, or
question. bacon.
for the matter of your confession, let it be severe and seri-
ous; but yet so as it may be without any inordinate anxiety,
and unnecessary scruples, which only intangle the soul. taylor.
men make no scruple to conclude, that those propositions,
of whose knowledge they can find in themselves no original,
were certainly the impress of god and nature upon their
minds, and not taught them by any one else. locke.
2. twenty grains; the third part of a dram. -
milk one ounce, oil of vitriol a scruple, doth coagulate;
the milk at the bottom, where the vitriol goeth. bacon.
3. proverbially, any small quantity.
nature never lends
the smallest scruple of her excellence,
but, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
herself the glory of a creditor. shakesp. meas for meos.
to scru'ple. v. n. [from the noun..] to doubt; to hesitate.
he scrupled not to eat -
o against his better knowledge; not deceiv'd,
but fondly overcome with female charms. milt. par. loft.
scru'pler. m. s. [from scruple..] a doubter; one who has
scruples. -
e the scruples which many publick ministers would make of
, the worthiness of parents to have their children baptised, forced
such questioned parents, who did not believe the necessity of
having their children baptised by such scruplers, to carry their
children unto other ministers. graunt's bills of mortality.
scr upu lo's it y. m. s. [from scrupulous.]
1. doubt; minute and nice doubtfulness.
the one sort they warned to take heed, that scrupulosty did
not make them rigorous in giving unadvised sentence against
their brethren which were free; the other, that they did not
become scandalous, by abusing their liberty and freedom to the
.* offence of their weak brethren, which were scrupulous. hook.
so careful, even to scrupulosity, were they to keep their
sabbath, that they must not only have a time to prepare them
for that, but a further time also to prepare them for their very
... preparations. - south.
2. fear of a&amp;ting in any manner; tenderness of conscience.
the first sacrilege is looked on with horror; but when they
... have made the breach, their scrupulosity soon retires. dec. of p.
scru'pulous. adj. [scrupuleux, french; scrupulosus, latin.
from scruple.] o -
1. nicely doubtful; hard to satisfy in determinations of con-
- science. • ? --- . . . * * * - - - -
they warned them that they did not become scandalous,
by abusing their liberty, to the offence of their weak brethren
which were scrupulous. - hooker.
some birds, inhabitants of the waters, whose blood is cold
as fishes, and their flesh is so like in taste, that the scrupulous
!, are allowed them on fish-days. locke.
2. given to objections; captious. - -
equality of two domestick pow'rs.
breeds scrupulous faction. shakes). ant, and cleopatra.
3. nice; doubtful. -
as the cause of a war ought to be just, the justice of that
cause ought to be evident; not obscure, not scrupulous. bacon.
4. careful; vigilant; cautious. -
i have been the more scrupulous and wary, in regard the in-
ferences from these observations are of importance. woodward.
scru'pulously. adv. [from scrupulous.] carefully ; nicely;
anxiously. -
the duty consists not scrupulously in minutes and half
hours. - taylor.
henry v. manifestly derived his courage from his picty,
vol. ii.
*
- &gt; *** - -
s c u
and was scrupulously careful not to ascribe the succes, of it to
himself. - addison's aroor.
scouturousness. n.s.. [from scrupulous.): the state of being
scrupulous. "e
scroorable. adj. [from scrutor, latin.] discoverable by in-
uiry. s * , . . . .”
shall we think god so scrutable, or ou
that none of his secrets can escape us?
scruration. n. s. [strutor, lat.) search ; examination;
inquiry. - dicf.
scrut aotor. m. s. [scrutateur, fr. from scrutor, lat.j. ln-
quirer ; searcher; examiner. ----
in process of time, from being a fimple fruator, an arch-
deacon became to have jurisdiction more amply. ‘’’ aliff.
scrutine’er. m. s. [scrutator, lat..] a searcher; an exa-
miner.
scrustinous. adj. [from scrutiny..] captious; full of inqui-
ries. a word little used.
age is froward, uneasy, scrutinous,
hard to be pleas'd, and parsimonious. denham.
to scruti n1ze. ! v. a. [from scrutiny..] to search; to exa-
rselves so fenetrating,
decay of piety.
to scru’t1 ny. mine.
the compromiffarii should chuse according to the votes of
such, whose votes they were obliged to scrutinize. ayliffe.
scrutiny. m. s. [scrutinium, latin.] enquiry; search;
examination with nicety.
in the scrutinies for righteousness and judgment, when it is
inquired whether such a person be a good man or no, the
meaning is not, what does he believe or hope, but what he
loves. taylor's rule of living holy.
i thought thee worth my nearer view
and narrower scrutiny, that i might learn
in what degree or meaning thou art call’d
the son of god. milton's paradise regain'd.
they that have designed exactness and deep scrutiny, have
taken some one part of nature. hale.
their difference to measure, and to reach,
reason well rectify’d must nature teach;
and these high scrutinies are subjects fit -
for man's all-searching and enquiring wit. denham.
we are admonished of want of charity to others, and want
of a christian scrutiny and examination into ourselves.
- l’estrange.
when any argument of great importance is managed with
that warmth which a serious conviction of it generally in-
spires, somewhat may easily escape, even from a wary pen,
which will not bear the test of a severe scrutiny. atterbury.
these, coming not within the scrutiny of human senses,
cannot be examined by them, or attested by any body. locke.
scrutoi're. m. s. [for seritoire, or seritoire.] a case of
drawers for writings.
i locked up these papers in my scrutoire, and my scrutoire
came to be unlocked. prior.
to scruze. v. a. [perhaps from screw. this word, though
now disused by writers, is still preserved, at least in its cor-
ruption, to scrolge, in the london jargon.] to squeeze 3 to
compress.
though up he caught him 'twixt his puissant hands,
and having scruzed out of his carrion corse
the loathful life, now loos'd from sinful bands,
upon his shoulders carried him. fairy qaeen.
to scud. v. n. [suittire, italian; soutta, swedish ; skictur,
swift, islandick.] to fly; to run away with precipitation.
the vote was no sooner passed, but away they studded to the
next lake. l’estrange.
the frighted satyrs, that in woods delight, -
*- now into plains with prick'd-up ears take flight;
and sudding thence, while they their horn-feet ply,
about their fires the little sylvans cry. dryden.
* away the frighted spectrescudi, -
and leaves my lady in the suds. swift.
to scu'ddle. v. n. [from scud.] to run with a kind of af-
feołed haste or precipitation. a low word: commonly pro-
nounced scuttle. - - -
scu'ffle. n.s. [this word is derived by skinner from shuffle.]
a confused quarrel; a tumultuous broil. . . .
- his captain's heart, -
in the suffes of great fights hath burst -
the buckles on his breast. shakesh. ant. and cleopatra.
avowed atheists, placing themselves in the seat of the scorner,
take much pleasing divertisement, by deriding our eager scuffles
about that which they think nothing. decay of piety.
the dog leaps upon the serpent, and tears it to pieces; but
in the suffie the cradle happened to be overturned. l’estrange:
popish misfionaries mix themselves in these dark scuffles, and
animate the mob to such outrages and insults. addison.
o
o
to scuole. v. n. [from the noun..] to fight confusedly and
tumultuously. -
i must confess i've seen, in former days,
the best knights in the world, and scuffled in some frays.
drayton.
a gallant man had rather fight to great disadvantages in the
- 23 i field,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s c u
s c u
field, in an orderly way, than scuffle with an undisciplined
rabble. king charles.
to sculk. v. n. [sculcke, danish.] to lurk in hiding-places;
to lie close.
it has struck on a sudden into such a reputation, that it scorns
any longer to sculk, but owns itself publickly. gov. of tongue.
fearing to be seen, within a bed
of coleworts he conceal’d his wily head;
there sculk'd 'till afternoon, and watch'd his time. dryden.
my prophets and my sophists finish'd here
their civil efforts of the verbal war :
not so my rabbins and logicians yield;
retiring still they combat; from the field
of open arms unwilling they depart,
and sculk behind the subterfuge of art. prior,
no news of phyl the bridegroom came,
and thought his bride had sculk'd for shame;
because her father us’d to say
the girl had such a bashful wa swift.
scu'lker. m. s. [from sculk.] a fier, one that hides him-
self for shame or mischief.
scull. n.s. [it is derived by skinner from shell, in some pro-
vinces called shull; as tesla and tesle, or tete, signify the head.
mr. lye observes more satisfactorily, that skola is in islandick
the skull of an animal.]
1. the bone which incases and defends the brain; the arched
bone of the head.
fractures of the scull are at all times very dangerous, as the
brain becomes affected from the pressure. sharp.
2. a small boat; a cockboat. [see sculler.]
3. one who rows a cockboat.
like caitiff vile, that for misdeed
rides with his face to rump of steed;
or rowing scull, he's fain to love,
look one way and another move. hudibras.
4. [sceole, saxon, an assembly.] in milton's style, a shoal or
vast multitude of fish. o
each bay
with fry innumerable swarm, and shoals
of fish, that with their fins and shining scales
glide under the green wave, in sculls that oft
bank the mid sea.
scu'llcap. n. s. [scull and cap.]
1. a headpiece.
2. a nightcap.
scu'll er. m. s. [of this word i know not the etymology.
skiola is in islandick, a vessel; and scueille in french, a dish.]
i. a cockboat; a boat in which there is but one rower.
her soul already was consign'd to sate,
and shiv'ring in the leaky sculler sate. dryden.
they hire the sculler, and, when once aboard,
grow sick, and damn the climate like a lord. pope.
2. one that rows a cockboat.
scu'll ery. n.s.. [from skiola, a vessel, islandick; or escueille,
french, a dish.] the place where common utensils, asket-
tles or dishes, are cleaned and kept.
pyreicus was famous for counterfeiting base things, as pitch-
ers, a scullery, and setting rogues together by the ears. peach.
scu'llion. m. s. [from escueille, french, a dish.] the lowest
domestick servant, that washes the kettles and the dishes in the
kitchen.
i must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,
and fall a-cursing like a very drab,
a scullion, fye upon't! fohl about my brain. shak. hamlet.
if the gentleman hath lain there, get the cook, the stable-
men, and the scullion, to stand in his way. swift.
to sculp. v.a. [sculpo, latin ; sculper, fr.] to carve ; to
engrave. a word not in use.
o, that the tenor of my just complaint
were sculpt with steel on rocks of adamant i
scu'lptile. adj. [sculptilis, latin.] made by carving.
in a silver medal is upon one side moses horned, and on the
reverse the commandment against sculptile images. brown.
scu'lptor. n. s. [sculptor, latin ; sculpteur, fr.] a carver;
one who cuts wood or stone into images.
thy shape's in ev'ry part
so clean, as might instruct the sculptor's art. dryden.
the latin poets give the epithets of trifidum and trisulcum
to the thunderbolt, from the sculptors and painters that lived
before them, that had given it three forks. addison.
scu'lpture. m. s. [sculptura, latin; sculpture, french.]
1. the art of carving wood, or hewing stone into images.
then sculpture and her sister arts revive,
sandys.
stones leap'd to form, and rocks began to live. pope.
2. carved work.
nor did there want
cornice or freeze with bossy sculptures graven. milton.
there too, in living sculpture, might be seen
the mad affection of the cretan queen. dryden.
3. the art of engraving on copper.
to scu'lpt ure. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut ; to en-
grave.
milton. .
gold, filver, ivory vases sculptur'd high,
there are who have not. pope.
scum. n.s.. [estume, french; schiuma, italian; skum, danish.]
schuym, dutch.]
1. that which rises to the top of any liquor.
the rest had several offices assign'd ;
some to remove the scum as it did rise;
others to bear the same away did mind;
and others it to use according to his kind. fairy queen.
the salt part of the water doth partly rise into a scum on the
top, and partly goeth into a sediment in the bottom. bacon.
gather'd like scum, and settl'd to itself,
self-fed and self-consum’d. milton,
away, ye scum,
that still rise upmost when the nation boils. dryden.
they mix a med'cine to foment their limbs,
with scum that on the molten silver swims. dryden.
2. the dross; the refuse; the recrement; that part which is to
be thrown away.
there flocked unto him all the scum of the irish out of all
places, that ere long he had a mighty army. spenser.
some forty gentlemen excepted, had we the very scum of
the world, such as their friends thought it an exceeding good
gain to be discharged of. jkaleigh's essays,
i told thee what would come
of all thy vapouring, base scum. hudibras.
the scythian and egyptian scum
had almost ruin’d rome. roscommon.
you'll find, in these hereditary tales,
your ancestors the scum of broken jails. dryden's juvenal.
the great and innocent are insulted by the scum and refuse
of the people. addison's freeholder.
ta scum. v. a. [from the noun..] to clear off the scum:
commonly written and spoken skim.
a second multitude
severing each kind, and scum'd the bullion dross. milton.
hear, ye sullen power's below ; -
hear, ye taskers of the dead:
you that boiling cauldrons blow,
you that scum the molten lead | dryd, and lee's oedipus,
what corns swim upon the top of the brine, scum off.
w mortimer’s husbandry.
scu'mber. n.s.. [from scum.] the dung of a fox. ainsw.
scu'mmer. m. s. [escumoir, french.] a vessel with which
liquor is scummed, commonly called a skimmer.
scu'pper holes. n. s. [schoepen, dutch, to draw off.] in a
ship, small holes on the deck, through which water is carried
into the sea. the leathers over those holes are called scupper
leathers, and the nails with which they are fastened scupper
nails. - bailey.
the blood at supper holes run out. ward.
scu rf. m. s. [rcump, saxon; sarfa, islandick; skurs?, danish;
skorf, swedish; schorst, dutch.]
1. a kind of dry miliary scab.
her crafty head was altogether bald,
and, as in hate of honourable eld,
was overgrown with surf and filthy scald. fairy queen.
the virtue of his hands
was lost among paeiolus' sands,
against whose torrent while he swims,
the golden surf peels off his limbs. swift,
2. a soil or stain adherent.
then are they happy, when by length of time
the scurf is worn away of each committed crime,
no speck is left. dryden.
3. any thing sticking on the surface.
there stood a hill, whose grisly top
shone with a glossy surf. milton.
. upon throwing in a stone the water boils; and at the same
time are seen little flakes of surf rising up. addison,
scu'rfiness. n. s. [from sourf.] the state of being scurfy.
scu'rril. adj. [scurrilis, latin.] low; mean; grossly op-
probrious; lewdly jocose.
with him, patroclus,
upon a lazy bed, the live-long day
breaks scurriljests. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
nothing conduces more to letters than to examine the
writings of the ancients, provided the plagues of judging and
pronouncing against them be away; such as envy, bitterness,
precipitation, impudence, and sourril scoffing. ben. johnson,
thou mov'st me more by barely naming him,
than all thy foul unmanner'd scurril taunts. dryden.
scurri'lity. m. s. [scurrilite, fr. sourrilitas, lat.] grossness
of reproach ; lewdness of jocularity; mean buffoonery.
good master holofernes, purge ; so it shall please you to
abrogate scurrility. - shakespeare.
banish scurrility and profaneness, find restrain the licentious
insolence of poets. dryden.
scu'rrilous. adj. [scurrilis, lat.] grossly opprobrious ; using
such language as only the license of a buffoon can warrant;
lewdly jocular; vile; low.
scurrilous and more than satyrical immodesty. hooker.
let
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e a
let him approach finging. forewarn him that he use no
zurrilous words in"s tunes. shakesp. winter’s tale.
how often is a person, whose intentions are to do good by
the works he publishes, treated in as scurrilous a manner as if
he were an enemy to mankind? addison's freeholder.
their chara&amp;ters have been often treated with the utmost
barbarity and injustice by scurrilous and enraged orators. swift.
scu'rrilously, adu. [from sourrilous.] with gross reproach;
with low buffoonery; with lewd merriment.
such men there are, who have written scurrilously against
me, without any provocation. dryden.
it is barbarous incivility scurrilously to sport with that which
others count religion. - tillotson.
scu'rrilousness. m. s. [from scurrilous.] scurrility; base-
ness of manners.
scu'rvil y. adv. [from scurvy.] vilely; basely; coarsely. it
is seldom used but in a ludicrous sense.
look i' your glass now,
and see how scurvily that countenance shews;
you would be loth to own it. ben. johns. catiline.
this alters the whole complexion of an action, that would
otherwise look but very scurvily, and makes it perfeoł. south.
the clergy were never more learned, or so scurvily treated.
swift.
scu'rvy. n.s.. [from scurf. this word was, i believe, :
nally an adjective.]
the scurvy is a distemper of the inhabitants of cold coun-
tries, and amongst those such as inhabit marshy, fat, low
moist soils, near stagnating water, fresh or salt; invading
chiefly in the winter such as are sedentary, or live upon salted
or smoaked flesh and fish, or quantities of unfermented fari-
naceous vegetables, and drink bad water. arbuthnot.
scu'rv y. adj. [from scurf, scurfy, scurvy.]
1. scabbed; covered with scabs; diseased with the scurvy.
whatsoever man be survy or scabbed. lev. xxi. 20.
2. wile ; bad; sorry; worthless; contemptible; offensive.
i know him for a man divine and holy;
not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler. shakespeare.
this is a very scurvy tune to sing to a man's funeral. §.
he spoke scurvy and provoking terms
against your honour. shakespeare.
a crane, which is but scurvy meat, lays but two eggs. chey.
it would be convenient to prevent the excess of drink, with
that scurvy custom of taking tobacco. swift.
scu'rv ygrass. m. s. [scurvy and grass; cochlearia, lat..] the
spoonwort. a plant. amiller.
'scuses. for excuses.
i shifted him away,
and laid good scuses on your exstasy. shakesh. othello.
scut. n.s.. [soott, islandick.] the tail of those animals whose
tails are very short, as a hare.
in the hare it is aversely seated, and in its distension inclines
unto the coccix or scut. brown's wulgar errours.
he fled to earth; but first it cost him dear,
he left his scut behind, and half an ear. swift.
scu'rcheon. m. s. [scuccione, italian; from sutum, lat..] the
shield represented in heraldry; the ensigns armorial of a fa-
mily. see escutcheon.
and thereto had she that scutcheon of her desires, supported
by certain badly diligent ministers. sidney.
* your scutcheons, and your signs of conquest, shall
hang in what place you please.
shakespeare's antony and cleopatra.
honour is a meer scutcheon. shakespeare's henry iv.
the chiefs about their necks the scutcheons wore
with orient pearls and jewels powder'd o'er. dryden.
scute'llated. adj. [scutella, lat.] divided into small sur-
faces.
it seems part of the scutellated bone of a sturgeon, being
flat, of a porous or cellular constitution. jwoodward.
scu'tifor m. adj. [soutsformis, lat.] shaped like a shield.
scuttle. n.s.. [scutella, lat. scutell, celt. ainsw.]
1. a wide shallow basket, so named from a dish or platter which
it resembles in form.
a scuttle or skrein to rid soil fro’ the corn. tussor.
the earth and stones they are fain to carry from under
their feet in scuttles and baskets. hakewill on providence.
2. a small grate.
to the hole in the door have a small scuttle, to keep in what
mice are there. mortimer's husbandry.
3. [from stud.] a quick pace; a short run; a pace of affected
precipitation. this is properly scuddle,
she went with an easy scuttle out of the shop. spectator.
to scuttle. v. n. [from scud or scuddle.] to run with af-
fected precipitation.
the old fellow scuttled out of the room. arbuthnot.
to speign. v. a. [spensor. sagnare, ital. milton, for disdain.]
lifted up so high,
isdeign'd subjection. milton.
sde'ionful. adj. contracted for disdainful.
they now, puft up with sleignful insolence,
despise the brood of blessed sapience. spensor.
s e a
sea. m. s. [rae, saxon; see, or zee, dutch.]
1. the ocean; the water, opposed to the land.
will all great neptune's ocean wash this blood
clean from my hand no, this my hand will rather"
thy multitudinous sea incarnardine,
making the green one red.
the rivers run into the sea.
shakespeare's macbeth.
he made the sea, and all that is therein. ex £o
so do the winds and thunders cleanse the air." " ' "
so working seas settle and purge the wine. &gt; davies
amphibious between sea and land -
the river horse. milton,
some leviathan,
haply slumboring on the norway foam,
the pilot of some small night-founder'd skiff
deeming some island, oft as seamen tell,
with fixed anchor in his scaly rind,
moors by his side under the lee, while night -
invests the sea. milton.
small fragments of shells, broken by storms on some shores,
are used for manuring of sea land. jwoodward.
they put to sea with a fleet of three hundred sail. arbuthn.
sea racing dolphins are train'd for our motion,
moony tides swelling to roll us ashore. dryden's albion.
but like a rock unmov’d, a rock that braves
the raging tempest, and the rising waves,
propp'd on himself he stands: his solid side
wash off the sea weeds, and the sounding tides. dryden.
the sea could not be much narrower than it is, without a
great loss to the world.
bentley.
so when the first bold vessel dar'd the seas,
high on the stern the thracian rais'd his strain,
while argo saw her kindred trees -
descend from pelion to the main. pope.
2. a colle&amp;tion of water; a lake.
by the sea of galilee.
3. proverbially for any large quantity.
that sea of blood which hath in ireland been barbarously
shed, is enough to drown in eternal infamy and misery the
malicious author and instigator of its effusion. king charles.
4. any thing rough and tempestuous.
to sorrow abandon'd, but worse felt within,
and in a troubled sea of passion tost.
5. half seas over. half drunk.
the whole magistracy was pretty well disguised before i
gave 'em the slip : our friend the alderman was half seas over
before the bonfire was out. speciator.
sea is often used in composition, as will appear in the following
examples.
se’abar. m. s. [from sea and bar; hirundo pisii, lat.] the
sea-swallow.
se’abeat. adj. isa and beat..] dashed by the waves of the sea.
the sovereign of the seas he blames in vain,
that once seabeat will to sea again. spenser's pastorals.
darkness cover'd o'er
the face of things: along the seabeat shore
satiate we slept. pope's odyssey.
se’aboat. n. s. [sea and boat.] vessel capable to bear the
sea.
shipwrecks were occasioned by their ships being bad sea-
boats, and themselves but indifferent seamen. arbuthnot.
se'abor n. adj. [sia and born.] born of the sea; produced by
the sea.
like neptune and his seaborn niece, shall be
mat. iv. 18.
milton.
- .
the shining glories of the land and sea. waller.
all these in order march, and marching sing
the warlike actions of their seaborn king. dryden.
se’aboy. m. s. [sea and boy..] boy employed on shipboard.
can'st thou, o partial sleep, give thy repose
to the wet seaboy in an hour so rude,
and in the calmest and the stillest night
deny it to a king shakespeare.
se’abreach. n. s. [jea and breach.] irruption of the sea by
breaking the banks.
to an impetuous woman, tempests and scabreaches are no-
thing. l’estrange.
se’abreeze. n.s.. [sia and breeze.] wind blowing from the
sea.
hedges, in most places, would be of great advantage to
shelter the grass from the seabreeze. mortimer.
se’abuilt. adj. [sea and built.] built for the sea.
borne each by other in a distant line,
the seabuilt forts in dreadful order move. dryden.
seaca'baage. n.s. [crambe, lat..] seacolewort. a plant.
it hath fleshy leaves like those of the cabbage. miller.
se’acalf. n.s. [sea and calf; phoca.] the seal.
the stacas, or seal, is so called from the noise he makes
like a calf: his head comparatively not big, shaped rather like
an otter's, with teeth like a dog's, and mustaches like those of
a cat: his body long, and all over hairy: his forefeet, with
fingers clawed, but not divided, yet fit for going : his hinder
feet, more properly fins, and fitter for swimming, as being an
amphibious
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e a
s e a
amphibious animal. the female gives suck, as the porpess,
and other viviparous fishes. grew's musæum.
se'acap. m. s. [sea and cap.] cap made to be worn on ship-
board. - - . . .
* * : * i know your favour well, - * *
though now you have no sacap on your head." shakesp.
se'acarp. m. s. [from sea and carp; turdus marinus, lat.] a
... spotted fish that lives among stones and rocks.
se'achart. n.s.. [sea and chart.] map on which only the
coasts are delineated. - * * *
a. the situation of the parts of the earth are better learned
by a map or seachart, than reading the description. watts.
se’acoal. n. j. [sea and coal.] coal, so called not because
found in the sea, but because brought to london by sea; pit-
coal. - -
we'll have a posset soon at the latter end of a seacoal fire.
. . . . . - shakespeare.
seacoal lasts longer than charcoal.' bacon.
this pulmonique indisposition of the air is very much
* heightened, where a great quantity of seacoal is burnt. harv.
se'acoast. n.s.. [sea and coast.] shore; edge of the sea.
the venturous mariner that way,
learning his ship from those white rocks to save,
which all along the southern seacoast lay ;
for safety’s sake that'same his seamark made,
and nam'd it albion. - fairy queen.
upon the seacoast are many parcels of land, that would pay
well for the taking in. mortimer's husbandry.
seacob. n.s. [gavia, lat..] a bird, called also seagull.
se’acompass. n. s. [sea and compass.] the card and needle
• of mariners.
the needle in the stacompas still moving but to the north-
point only, with moveor immotus, notified the respective
constancy of the gentleman to one only. camden's remains.
se’acoot. n.s.. [from sea and coot; fulica marina, lat..] sea
fowl, like the moorhen. -
se'acormor ant, or seadrake. n.s.. [from sea and cormorant;
corvus marinus, lat.]. a seacrow. o:
seacow. n.f. [sea and cow.] the manatee. ".
. the seacow is of the cetaceous kind. it grows to fifteen
- feet long, and to seven or eight in circumference: its head is
like that of a hog, but longer, and more cylindrick : its eyes
are small, and it has no external ears, but only two little
* apertures. its lips are thick, and it has two long tusks stand-
ing out. it has two fins, which stand forward on the breast
like hands, whence the spaniards called it manatoe. the fe-
* male has two round breasts placed between the pectoral fins.
the skin is very thick and hard, and not scaly, but hairy.
- - - h.l.’s mat. med.
se"a dog. m. s. [sea and dog..] perhaps the shark. -
fierce seadogs devour the mang!'d friends. roon.
when, stung with hunger, she embroils the flood,
the seadog and the dolphin are her food. pope's oosy.
se/aear. n.f. [from sea and ear; aur is marina, lat..] a sea
lant. - -
sors. m. s. [sa and fare.] a traveller by sea; a mariner.
they stiffly refused to vail their bonnets by the summons of
those towns, which is reckoned intolerable contempt by the
better enabled seafarers. carew.
a wand'ring merchant, he frequents the main,
some mean seafarer in pursuit of gain;
studious of freight, in naval trade well skill'd ;
but dreads th’ athletick labours of the field.
seafa'ring, adj. [sia and fare.] travelling by sea.
my wife fasten’d him unto a small spare mast,
such as seafaring men provide for storms. . . . shakespeare.
it was death to divert the ships of seasaring people, against
their will, to other uses than they were appointed. arbuthnot.
se’afennel. the same with samphire. . . . . . . . "
se’afight. n.f. [sea and fight.] battle of ships; battle on
the sea. g
seafights have been o' en final to the war; but this is when
• ‘princes set up their rest upon the battles. bacon.
:* - if our fense of hearing were a thousand times quicker than
it is, we should, in the quietest retirement, be less able to
sleep than in the middle of a scaffght. locke.
this fleet they recruited with two hundred sail, whereof
they lost ninety-three in a scofight. arbuthnot on cains.
se'a fowl. n.s. |s. and fowl.] birds that live at sea, ,
pope.
the bills of curlews, and many other seafowl, are very
long, to enable them to hunt for the worms. derham.
a seafowl properly represents the passage of a deity over the
seas. * - brooms.
a length of ocean and unbounded sky,
which scarce the seafowl in a year o'er fly. pope.
seagirdles. n. s. pl. [fungus phasganoides, lat..] a sort of
sea mushrooms.
se’agirt: adj. [sea and girt.] , girded or incircled by the sea.
neptune, besides the sway
of every salt flood and each ebbing stream,
took in by lot, 'twixt high and nether jove,
imperial rule of all the stagiri isles, -
*
o milton.
- telemachus, the blooming heir
of stagirt ithaca, demands my care: . . .
'tis mine to form his green unpractis'd years -
in sage debates. pope,
seagrass. n.s. [from sa and gros; alga, lat..] an ho
growing on the sea shore. , , -o-; i.
sesagk een. adj. isca nd green.], resembling the colour of
the distant § {.. o 1, * * * * ,
"white, red, yellow, blue, with their mixtures, as green,
scarlet, purple, and seagreen, come in by the eyes. locit.
upon his urn reclin'd, , , , …
his seagreen mantle waving in the wind, . . . .
the god appeard. … . . . or pope.
se’agreen. n.s. saxifrage. a plant. . . .
se’agull. m. s. [sea and gull.] a water fowl. on to . .
seagulls, when they flock together from the sea towards the
shores, foreshow rain and wind. … a bacon’s natural eiffery.
** *
- a
bitterns, herons, and seagulls, are great enemies to fish.
- r - mortimer's husbando.
se’agull. n.s. a sea bird. - ainsworth.
se'ahedge hog. m. s. [echinus.] a kind of sea shell fish.
the seahedgehog is inclosed in a round shell, fashioned as a
loaf of bread, wrought and pinched, and guarded by an outer
shin full of prickles, as the land urchin. carew.
se’ahog. m. s. (sea and hog.] the porpus. . . . . . . . .
se'aholly. n. / seryngium, lat.] a plant, on
the species are, seaholy, or eryngo... common. eryngo.
the roots of the first are candied, and sent to london for me.
dicinal use, being the true eryngo. . . . . . miller.
se’aholm. n. s. lsea and holm.] - … . . )
1. a small uninhabited island. - - -: , ,
2. seaholly. a kind vi a weed. , , , ; *
cornwal bringco, forth greater store of seaholm and samphire
than any other county. carew.
se’ahorse. m. s. [sea and horse.]
1. the seahorse is a fish of a very singular form, as we see it
dried, and of the needlefish kind. it is about four or five
inches in length, and nearly half an inch in diameter in the
a broadest part. its golour, as we see it dried, is a deep reddish
brown ; and its tail is turned round under the belly.
' ' ' . . hill's materia medica.
2. the morse. o
part of a large tooth, round and tapering; a tusk of the
morse, or waltrons, called by some the seahorse. iłoodward.
3. the medical and the poetical seahorse seem very different. by
the seahorse dryden means probably the hippotamus. . .
seahorses, flound'ring in the slimy mud, -
toss'd up their heads, and dash'd the ooze about 'em.
, dryden,
- - *
-- - - -
o --
se’amaid. m. s. [sea and maid.] mermaid.
certain stars shot from their spheres,
to hear the seamaids musick.
se"a man. n.s.. [sea and man.] o, y -
1. a sailor; a navigator; a mariner. . . . . . . .
- she, looking out, , , -
beholds the fleet, and hears the seamen shout. denham.
seamen, through dismal storms, are wont.
to pass the oyster breeding hellespont. evalyn.
aeneas order'd * = * * * * * -
a stately tomb, whose top a trumpet bore, ‘. . . . . .
a soldier's fauchion, and a siaman's oar; - z.
thus was his friend interr'd. dryden.
by undergoing the hazards of the sea, and the company of
common seamen, you make it evident you will refuse no op-
portunity of rendering yourself useful. dryden.
had they applied themselves to the increase of their strength
by sea, they might have had the greatest fleet and the most sea-
men of any state in europe. addison.
2, merman ; the male of the mermaid.
* seals live at land and at sea, and porpuses have the warm
blood and intrails of a hog, not to mention mermaids or sea-
men. s - lock.
seama'rk, n. s. [sea and mark.]. point or conspicuous place
distinguished at sea, and serving the mariners as directions of
, their course. . . . . . . . . . . . .
- those white rocks, . . . .
which all along the southern seacoast lay,
`" threat'ning unheedy wreck and rash decay, -
... he for his safety’s sake his seamark made,
* -
y
shakosheart.
*** * nam'd it albion. fairy queen,
... though you do see me weapon'd, , * -
32-) *** * * * * * * &gt; ". *-
here is my journey's end, here is my butt, ~ :
... the very samark of my utmost sail. shakesp. othells.
‘. . they were executed at divers places upon the seacoast, for
seamarks or lighthouses, to teach perkins's people to avoid the
coast. . . ." ... bacon's henry vii.
they are remembered with a brand of infamy fixt upon
* them, and set as seamarks for those who observe them to avoid.
dryden.
the fault of others sway, -
he set as seamarks for himself to shun. dryden.
seame"w. n. s. [sta and mew.] a fowl that frequents the sea.
, ,- - - an
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e a
s e a
an island salt and bare,
the haunt of seals, and orcks, and seamews clang. milton.
the chough, the seamew, the loquacious crow,
scream aloft. pope's odyssey.
se’amonst er. m. s. [sea and monster.] strange animal of the
sea.
seamonsters give suck to their young. lam. iv. 3.
where luxury late reign'd, seamonsters whelp. milton.
seamoss. n. s. [sea and moss ; corallium, lat..] coral, which
grows in the sea like a shrub, and, being taken out, be-
comes hard like a stone.
se’anavelwor t. n.f. [androsaces, lat.] an herb growing
in syria, by which great cures are performed.
seanymph. m. s. [sea and nymph, j goddess of the sea.
virgil, after homer's example, gives us a transformation
of æneas's ship into seamymphs. broome.
se’aonion. m. s. an herb. - ainsworth.
se'aoose. m. s. [sea and oose.] the mud in the sea or shore.
all seaoose, or oosy mud, and the mud of rivers, are of
great advantage to all sorts of land. 41ortimer.
se’apad. m. s. [sella marina, lat..] the star fish.
se’apanther... n.s.. [sea and panther; gabas, lat.] a fish
like a lampry.
sea piece... n.f. [sea and piece..] a picture representing any
thing at sea.
painters often employ their pencils upon seapieces. addison.
se"a pool. n.s. [/ea and pool.] a lake of salt water.
i heard it wished, that all that land were a seapool. spenser.
sea port. m. s. [sea and port.] a harbour.
sear1sque. n.s.. [sea and risque.] hazard at sea.
he was so great an encourager of commerce, that he charged
himself with all the scarissue of such vessels as carried corn to
rome in the winter. a buthnot.
sea rocket. m. s. a plant. a/isler.
sea room. n. s. s sea and room..] open sea; spacious main.
there is sear-on enough for both nations, without offend-
ing one another. bacon's advice to williers.
the bigger whale like some huge carrack lay,
which wanteth searoom with her foes to play.
sear over. m. s. [sea and rove..] a pirate.
se"aruf f. n. s. [sea and ruff; orphus, lat.] a kind of sea
fi
waller.
se’aserpent. m.s.. [sea and serpent ; hydrus, lat.] a water
serpent; an adder.
sease'rvice. n. s. [sea and service.] naval war.
you were pressed for the seaservice, and got off with much
ado. swift's diree. to servants.
se/ashark. m. s. [sea and shark.] a ravenous seafish.
witches mummy, maw and gulf
of the ravening salt seashark. shakespeare.
se'as hell. n. s. [sea and shell.] shells found on the shore.
seashells are great improvers of sour or cold land. mortimer.
se'ashok e. m. s. [sea and shore.] the coast of the sea.
that seashore where no more world is found,
but foaming billows breaking on the ground. dryden.
fournier gives an account of an earthquake in peru, that
reached three hundred leagues along the seashore. burnet.
* to say a man has a clear idea of any quantity, without
knowing how great it is, is as reasonable as to say he has the
positive idea of the number of the sands on the seashore. locke.
se’asick. adj. [sea and sick.] sick, as new voyagers on the
sea. -
she began to be much seasock, extremity of weather con-
tinuing. shakespeare.
barbarossa was not able to come on shore, for that he was,
as they said, seasick, and troubled with an ague. /..noles.
in love's voyage nothing can offend ;
women are never seasick. dryden’s juvenal.
weary and stasick, when in thee confin'd;
now, for thy safety, cares distract my mind.
se aside. n.s. [ sea and side.] the edge of the sea.
their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea-
swift.
side. jud. vii. 12.
there disembarking on the green seasoe,
we land our cattle, and the spoil divide. pope.
seasurgeos. m. s. [sea and surgeon.] a chirurgeon employed
on shipboard. -- ~ -
my design was to help the seasurgeon. . . hiseman's surgery.
seasur rous ded. adj. [sea and surround.) encircled by the
sea. -
tosasarrounded realms the gods assign.
small tract of fertile lawn, the least to mine. pope.
state'r.m. n.f. [sia and term.] word of art used by the sea-
inti).
! i agree with you in your censure of the seaterms in dryden's
virgii, because no terms of art, or cant words, suit the ma-
jesty of epick poetry. pope.
sawater. n.f. [sia and water.] the salt water of the sea.
by digging of pits in the seashore, he did frustrate the la-
borious works of the enemies, which had turned the seawater
upon the wells of alexandria. bacon's nat. history.
i bathed the member with seawater. ///eman.
vol. ii.
seawater has many gross, rough, and earthy particles in it,
**ppears from its saltness; whereas fresh water is more pure
and unmixt. - it roome
so n: s [sold nella, lat.] rindweed.
**wormwood. m. s. (sea and wormwood; jeriphium, lat.]
a sort of wormwood that grows in the sea.
seal. i. s. (phoca reol, rele, saxon; seel, danish.] the
seacalf.
the seal or soyle is in make and - -
- growth not unlik -
ugly faced, and footodlike a moldwarp; he ji. .
sick, or any loud noise, and thereby is trained to fiew himself
above water: they also come on land.
an island salt and bare,
the haunt of seals and orcks, and seamews cl fle---
seal. n.s. #. saxon ; sigillum, lat.] ang. milton.
1. a stamp engraved with a particular impression, which is fixed
upon the wax that closes letters, or affixed as a testimony.
the king commands you
to render up the great seal, shakespeare's henry viii.
if the organs of perception, like wax overhardened with
cold, will not receive the impresfion of the seal; or, like wax
of a temper too soft, will not hold it; or else supposing the
wax of a temper fit, but the seal not applied with a sufficient
force to make a clear impression: in any of these cases the
carew.
print left by the seal will be obscure. locke.
the same his grandfire wore about his neck
in three seal rings, which after, melted down,
form'd a vast buckle for his widow's gown. pope.
2. the impression made in wax,
'till thou can'st rail the seal from off my bond, "
thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud. shakespeare.
solyman shewed him his own letters, asking him if he knew
not that hand, and if he knew not that seal? knolles.
he saw his monkey picking the seal wax from a letter. arb.
3. any act of confirmation. -
they their fill of love
took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal.
to seal. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fasten with a seal.
he that brings this love to thee,
little knows this love in me;
and by him seal up thy mind. shakesp. as you like it.
i have seen her rise from her bed, take forth paper, fold it,
write upon’t, and afterwards seal it. shakespeare.
2. to confirm or attest by a seal.
god join'd my heart to romeo's ; thou our hands;
and ere this hand, by thee to romeo seal’d,
shall be the label to another deed,
or my true heart with treacherous revolt
turn to another, this shall slay them both.
3. to confirm; to ratify; to settle.
my soul is purg’d from grudging hate,
and with my hand i seal our true hearts love. shak. r. iii.
when i have performed this, and sealed to them this fruit,
i will come into spain. rom. xv. 28.
4. to shut ; to close : with up.
seal up your lips, and give no words, but mum !
at my death
thou hast seal’d up my expe&amp;tation. shakesp. henry iv.
the sense is like the sun; for the sun seals up the globe of
heaven, and opens the globe of earth: so the sense doth ob-
milton,
shakespeare.
shakes,
scure heavenly things, and reveals earthly things. bacon.
5. to make fast.
back to th’ infernal pit i drag thee chain'd,
and seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
the facil gates of hell too slightly barr'd. milton.
6. to mark with a stamp.
you'd rail upon the hostess,
and say you would present her at the leet,
because she bought stone jugs, and no scal'd quarts. shakes.
to seal. v. n. to fix a seal.
i will seal unto this bond. shakespeare.
we make a sure covenant and write it, and our princes and
priests seal unto it. neh. ix. 38.
sealer. m. s. [from seal.] one that seals.
sealingw ax. n.s. (seal and wax.] hard wax used to seal
letters.
the prominent orifice was closed with sealingwax.
seam. n.s. [ream, saxon ; zoom, dutch..]
1. the suture where the two edges of cloath are sewed together.
in velvet white as snow the troop was gown'd,
the sams with sparkling emeralds set around. dryden.
precepts should be so finely wrought together in the same
piece, that no coarse seam may discover where they join. add.
2. the juncture of planks in a ship.
with boiling pitch the seams instops,
which, well laid o'er, the salt sea waves withstand. dryden.
3. a cicatrix; a scar. - -
4. [ream, saxon, a load.]. a measure ; a vessel in which things
are held; eight bushels of corn. ainsworth-
5. seam of glass. a quantity of glass, weighing 120
pounds.
boyle.
23 k 6. [8eme,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e a
s e a
$, [seme, saxon; saim, welch; sain, fr.] tallow; grease ;
hog's lard.
shall the proud lord,
that bastes his arrogance with his own stam,
be worshipp'd : shakespeare's troilus and cressida,
part scour the rusty shields with seam, and part
new grind the blunted ax. dryden's aen.
to seam. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to join together by suture, or otherwise.
2. to mark ; to scar with a long cicatrix.
seam'do'er with wounds, which his own sabre gave. pope.
say, has the small or greater pox -
sunk down her nose, or stam'd her face swift.
se’amless. adj. [from seam.] having no seam. -
se(amrent. m. s. [seam and rent.] a separation of anything
where it is joined ; a breach of the stitches.
se’amstress. n.s. [reamerone, saxon.] a woman whose
trade is to sew. often written .#
they wanted food and raiment; so they took
religion for theirso and their cook. cleaveland.
se’amy. adj. [from seam.] having a seam; shewing the seam.
some such squire he was,
that turn'd your wit the seamy fide without,
and made me to suspect you. shakespeare's othello.
sean. n.s. [regne, saxon ; sagena, lat..] a net. sometimes
written seine, or saine.
sear. adj. [reanian, saxon, to dry.] dry; not any longer
green. spenser uses it.
i have liv'd long enough : my may of life
is fall’n into the sear, the yellow leaf. shak. macbeth.
ye myrtles brown, with ivy never star. milton.
some may be cherished in dry places, as in searwood. ray.
to sear. v. a. [reanian, saxon.] to burn; to cauterize.
the scorching flame sore singed all his face,
and through his armour all his body sear'd. fairy queen.
some shall depart from the faith, speaking lies, having their
conscience seared with a hot iron. 1 tim. iv. 2.
cherish veins of good humour, and scar up those of ill. temp.
i'm sear'd with burning steel, 'till the scorch'd marrow
fries in the bones. rowe's royal convert.
se'arcloath. n.s. [ranclao, saxon, from ran, pain, and
cla’8, a plaster; so that cerecloath, as it is now written, from
cera, wax, seems to be wrong..] a plaster; a large plaster.
bees wax is the ground of all searcloath salves. mortimer.
to searce. v. a. [sasser, fr.] to fift finely.
put the finely searced powder of alabaster into a flat-
bottomed and well heated brass vessel. boyle.
for the keeping of meal, bolt and searce it from the bran.
mortimer's husbandry.
searce. n.s. a sieve ; a bolter.
sea(rcer. m. s. [from searce..] he who searces.
to search. v. a. schercher, fr.]
1. to examine ; to try; to explore; to look through.
help to search my house this one time: if i find not what i
seek, let me for ever be your table sport. shakespeare.
they returned from searching of the land. num. xiii. 25.
through the void immense
to search with wand'ring quest a place foretold. milton.
2. to inquire; to seek for.
now clear i understand
what oft my steddiest thoughts have search'd in vain. milton.
enough is left besides to search and know. milton.
draw up some valuable meditations from the depths of the
earth, and search them through the vast ocean. watts.
3. to probe as a chirurgeon.
alas, poor shepherd 1 searching of thy wound,
i have, by hard adventure, found my own. shakespeare.
with this good sword,
that ran through caesar's bowels, search this bosom. shak.
for the divisions of reuben there were great searchings of
heart. judg. v. 16.
the signs of wounds penetrating are discovered by the pro-
portion of the searching candle, or probe which enters into the
cavity. wiseman's surgery.
4. to search out. to find by seeking.
who went before you, to search you out a place to pitch
your tents in deut. i. 33.
they may sometimes be successful to search out truth. watts.
to se arch. v. n.
1. to make a search; to look for something.
satisfy me once more; once more search with me. shakes.
2. to make inquiry.
to ask or search i blame thee not. milton.
those who seriously search after or maintain truth, should
ftudy to deliver themselves without obscurity or equivocation.
- lotke.
it suffices that they have once with care fifted the matter,
and searched into all the particulars that could give any light
to the question. locke.
with piercing eye some search where nature plays,
and trace the wanton through her darksome maze. tickel.
3. to seek; to try to find. 4.
your husband's coming, woman, to search for a gentleman
that is here now in the house. shak. merry wives of winds.
we in vain search for that constitution within a fly, upon
which depend those powers we observe in them. locke.
search. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. inquiry by looking into every suspected place.
he orb he roam'd
with narrow search, and with inspection deep. milton.
2. examination.
the mind sets itself on work in search of some hidden idea,
and turns the eye of the soul upon it. lock.
3. inquiry; act of seeking: with of, for, or after.
his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of
chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you
have them they are not worth the search. shakespeare.
who #. in search of god and nature grow,
they best the wise creator's praise declare. dryden,
now mourn thy fatal search:
it is not safe to have too quick a sense. dryden,
by the philosophical use of words, i mean such an use as
conveys the precise notions of things, which the mind may
be satisfied with in its search after knowledge. locke.
the parents, after a long search for the boy, gave him for
drowned in a canal. dison.
this common practice carries the heart aside from all that
is honest in our search after truth. //atti.
4. quest; pursuit.
if zealous love should go in search of virtue,
where should he find it purer than in blanch shakes.
stay him from his intendment, or brook such disgrace well
as he shall run into; in that it is a thing of his own search,
and altogether against my will. shakesp. as you like it.
nor did my search of liberty begin,
*till my black hairs were chang'd upon my chin. dryden,
se'archer. m. s. [from search.]
1. examiner; trier.
the agarenes that seek wisdom upon earth, the authors of
fables, and searchers out of understanding. bar. iii. 23.
the searchers found a marvellous difference between the
anakins and themselves. raleigh.
religion has given us a more just idea of the divine nature:
he whom we appeal to is truth itself, the great searcher of
hearts, who will not let fraud go unpunished, or hold him
guiltless that taketh his name in vain. addison.
2. seeker; enquirer.
in vain we lift up our presumptuous eyes
to what our maker to their ken denies: }
the searcher follows fast; the object flies. prior.
avoid the man who practises any thing unbecoming a free
and open searcher after truth. watts.
3. officer in london appointed to examine the bodies of the
dead, and report the cause of death.
the searchers, who are ancient matrons sworn to their of.
fice, repair to the place where the dead corps lies, and by view
of the same, and by other inquiries, examine by what disease
the corps died. graunt's bills of mortality,
season. n.s.. [saison, fr.]
1. one of the four parts of the year, spring, summer, au-
tumn, winter.
the fairest flowers o' th' season
are our carnations and ..o.o.o. shakesp.
then summer, autumn, winter did appear;
and spring was but a season of the year. dryden.
we saw, in six days travelling, the several seasons of the
year in their beauty. addison on italy.
2. a time as distinguished from others.
he's noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
the fits o' th' season. shakesp. macbeth,
the season prime for sweetest scents and airs. milton.
3. a fit time ; an opportune concurrence.
at season fit let her with thee partake. milton.
all business should be done betimes; and there's as little
trouble of doing it in season too, as out of season. l’estrange.
for active sports, for pleasing rest,
this is the time to be possest;
the best is but in season best. dryden,
i would indulge the gladness of my heart |
let us retire: her grief is out of season. philipi.
there is no season to which such thoughts as these are more
suitable. atterbury.
the season when to come, and when to go,
to sing, or cease to fing, we never know. pope.
4. a time not very long.
we'll slip you for a season, but our jealousy
does yet depend. shakesp. cymbeline.
5. [from the verb.] that which gives a high relish.
you lack the season of all natures, sleep.
shakespeare’s macbeth.
to se'ason. v. a. [affaisonner, fr.]
1. to mix with food any thing that gives a high relish.
every oblation of thy meat-offering shalt thou season with
salt. - 1.ev. ii. 13.
they
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e a
they seasoned every sacrifice, whereof a greater part was
eaten by the priests. brown's vulgar errours.
for breakfast and supper, milk and milk-pottage are very
fit for children; only let them not be seasoned with sugar. lock.
the wise contriver,
to keep the waters from corruption free,
mixt them with salt, and season'd all the sea. blackmore.
2. to give a relish to ; to recommend by something mingled.
you season still with sports your serious hours;
for age but tastes of pleasures, youth devours. dryden.
the proper use of wit is to season conversation, to represent
what is praiseworthy to the greatest advantage, and to expose
the vices and follies of men. tillotson.
3. to qualify by admixture of another ingredient.
mercy is above this scepter'd sway;
it is an attribute to god himself;
and earthly pow'r does then shew likest god’s,
when mercy seasons justice. shak. merchant of venice.
season your admiration but a while,
with an attentive ear, 'till i deliver
this marvel to you.
4. to imbue ; to tinge or taint.
whatever thing
the scythe of time mows down, devour unspar'd,
*till i, in man residing, through the race
his thoughts, his looks, words, actions, all infect,
and season him thy last and sweetest prey. milton's pa, loft.
secure their religion, season their younger years with pru-
dent and pious principles. taylor.
sin, taken into the soul, is like a liquor poured into a ves-
sel; so much of it as it fills, it also seasons: the touch and tinc-
ture go together. south.
5. to fit for any use by time or habit; to mature.
the crow doth fing as sweetly as the lark,
when neither is attended ; and, i think,
the nightingale, if she should sing by day,
when ev'ry goose is cackling, would be thought
no better a musician than the wren:
how many things by season season'd are,
to their right praise and true perfe&amp;tion.
who in want a hollow friend doth try,
directly seasons him his enemy. shakespeare.
we charge you, that you have contriv'd to take
from rome all season'd office, and to wind
yourself unto a power tyrannical. shakesp. coriolanus.
the archers of his guard shot two arrows every man to-
gether against an inch board of well seasoned timber. hayward.
his plenteous stores do season'd timber send;
thither the brawny carpenters repair. dryden.
a man should harden and season himself beyond the degree
of cold wherein he lives. addison.
to se'ason. v. n. to be mature; to grow fit for any purpose.
carpenters rough plane boards for flooring, that they may
set them by to season. moxon's mech. exerc.
se’aso nable. adj. [saison, fr.] opportune ; happening or
done at a proper time; proper as to time.
mercy is seasonable in the time of affliction, as clouds of
rain in the time of drought. ecclus. v. 2.
if ever it was seasonable to preach courage in the despised
abused cause of christ, it is now, when his truths are reformed
into nothing, when the hands and hearts of his faithful mini-
sters are weakened. south's sermons.
se'ason ableness. n.s.. [from seasonable.] opportuneness of
time ; propriety with regard to time.
a british freeholder would very ill discharge his part, if he
did not acknowledge the excellency and seasonablenes of those
laws by which his country has been recovered out of its con-
fusions. addison.
se'asonably, adv. [from seasonable.] properly with respect to
time.
this is that to which i would most earnestly, most season-
ably advise you all. spratt's sermons.
se'ason er. m. s. [from to season.] he who seasons or gives a
relish to anything.
se’asoning. n. s. [from season.] that which is added to any
thing to give it a relish.
breads we have of several grains, with divers kinds of
leavenings and seasonings; so that some do extremely move ap-
petites, and some do nourish so as divers do live of them
alone. bacon.
some abound with words, without any seasoning or taste of
matter. ben. johnson.
a foundation of good sense, and a cultivation of learning,
are required to give a seasoning to retirement, and make us
taste the blesfing. dryden.
political speculations are of so dry and austere a nature,
that they will not go down with the publick without frequent
seasonings. addison's freeholder.
the publick accept a paper which has in it none of those
seasonings that recommend the writings which are in vogue
among us. addison's speciator.
many vegetable substances are used by mankind as season-
shakespeare's hamlet.
shakespeare.
s e c
ings, which abound with a highly exalted aromatic oil; as
thyme and savory. arbuthnot on alime
hts.
seat. n.s.. [sodes, lat, sett, old german. skinner.]
1. a chair, bench, or any thing on which on
sit.
the sons of light e may
hasted, resorting to the summons high,
and took their seats. milton's paradis, loft.
the lady of the leafordain’d a feast
and made the lady of the flow'r her guest ;
when, lo, a bow'r ascended on the plain
with sudden seats ordain'd, and large for either train
2. chair of state ; throne; post of authority; tribunal e
with due observance of thy goodly far, -
o: ...” nestor shall supply
atcit words. shakesp. troi
y thus we debase sp ilus and crossida.
§ nature of our seats, and make the rabble,
all our cares fears. shakespeare's cori
whatsoever be the manner of the wo. ::::::::::
it is an end it shall have, and as certain that then we shall ap-
pear before the judgment seat of christ, that every man may
receive according to that which he hath done in his body,
whether it be good or evil. hakewill on providence.
3. mansion; residence; dwelling; abode.
it were enough in reason to succour with victuals, and
other helps, a vast multitude, compelled by necessity to seek a
new seat, or to direct them unto a country able to receive
them.
dryd.
- raleigh.
o earth, how like to heav'n if not prefer'd
most justly, seat worthier of gods, as built
with second thoughts, reforming what was old. milton.
in alba he shall fix his royal seat;
and, born a king, a race of kings beget. dryden.
has winter caus’d thee, friend, to change thy seat,
and seek in sabine air a warm retreat? dryden.
the promis'd seat of empire shall again
cover the mountain, and command the plain.
4. situation ; site.
it followeth now that we find out the seat of eden; for in
it was paradise by god planted. raleigh.
a church by strand-bridge, and two bishops houses, were
pulled down to make a seat for his new building. hayward.
he that builds a fair house upon an ill seat, committeth
himself to prison.
the fittest and the easiest to be drawn
to our society, and to aid the war,
the rather for their seat, being next borderers
on italy. ben johnson's catiline,
to seat. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to place on seats; to cause to sit down.
the guests were no sooner seated but they entered into a
warm debate. arbuthnot.
2. to place in a post of authority, or place of distinetion.
thus high was king richard seated. shakesp. r. iii.
not babylon,
nor great alcairo, such magnificence
equal’d in all their glories to inshrine
belus or serapis their gods, or seat
their kings. milton.
a spirit of envy or opposition makes mankind uneasy to see
others of the same species seated above them in a sort of per-
fection. pope.
3. to fix in any particular place or situation; to settle.
should one family or one thousand hold possession of all the
southern undiscovered continent, because they had seated them-
selves in nova guiana. raleigh.
by no means build too near a great neighbour, which were,
in truth, to be as unfortunately seated on the earth as mercury
is in the heavens ; for the most part ever in combustion, or
obscurity, under brighter beams than his own. //ottom.
4. to fix; to place firm.
why do i yield to that suggestion,
whose horrid image doth upfix my hair,
and make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
against the use of nature. shakespeare's macbeth.
from their foundations loosening to and fro,
they pluck'd the seated hills. milton.
se/award. adv. [sea and peano, saxon.] towards the sea.
the rock rush'd seaward with impetuous roar,
ingulf'd, and to th’ abyss the boaster bore. pope.
se'cant. n. s. [secans, lat. secante, fr.] in geometry, the
right line drawn from the centre of a circle, cutting and
meeting with another line called the tangent without it. dics.
to sece/de. v. n. [secedo, lat..] to withdraw from fellow-
ship in any affair.
sece'der. n.s.. [from secede.] one who discovers his disap-
probation of any proceedings by withdrawing himself.
to sece'rn. v. a. [sexerno, lat.] to separate finer from
grosser matter; to make the separation of substances in the
body.
bid. are better meat than beasts, because their flesh doth
assimilate more finely, and secerneth more subtilly. bacon.
the
prior.
bacon.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e c
s e c
•
the pituite or mucus secerned in the nose and windpipe, is
not an excrementitious but a laudable humour, necessary for
defending those parts, from which it is secerned, from exco-
riations. arbuthnot.
sece'ssion. n.s.. [secessio, latin.]
i. the act of departing.
the accession of bodies upon, or secession thereof, from the
earth's surface, perturb not the equilibration of either hemi-
sphere. - - brown.
2. the act of withdrawing from councils or actions.
se'cle, n. s. [fircle, french; seculum, latin.] . a century.
of a man's age, part he lives in his father's lifetime, and
part after his son's birth; and thereupon it is wont to be said
that three generations make one secle, or hundred years in the
genealogies. hammond's pract. catech.
to seclu’de. v. a. [secludo, latin.] to confine from ; to
shut up apart; to exclude.
none is secluded from that funetion of any degree, state, or
calling. whitgifte.
some parts of knowledge god has thought fit to seclude from
us, to fence them not only, as he did the interdicted tree,
by combination, but with difficulties and impossibilities.
decay of piety.
the number of birds described may be near five hundred,
and of fishes, secluding shell-fish, as many; but if the shell-
fish be taken in, more than six times the number. ray.
inclose your tender plants in your conservatory, secluding
all entrance of cold. evelyn's kalendar.
let eastern tyrants from the light of heaven
seclude their bosom slaves. thomson.
se"cond. m. s. [second, french; secundus, latin.] it is ob-
servable, that the english have no ordinal of two, as the latins
and the nations deriving from them have none of duo. what
the latins call secundus, from sequor, the saxons term o'en,
or aerzena.] .
i. the next in order to the first; the ordinal of two.
sunk were their hearts with horror of the crime,
nor needed to be warn’d a second time,
but bore each other back. -
2. next in value or dignity; inferiour.
i shall not speak superlatively of them, lest i be suspected of
partiality; but this i may truly say, they are second to none in
the christian world. bacon's advice to williers.
none i know -
second to me, or like; equal much less. milton.
my eyes are still the same; each glance, each grace,
keep their first lustre, and maintain their place,
not second yet to any other face.
not so huge bolts, by which the giants slain,
lay overthrown on the phlegrean plain;
‘twas of a lesser mould and lighter weight;
they call it thunder of a second rate.
by a sad train of miseries alone -
distinguish’d long, and second now to none. pope.
persons of second rate merit in their own country, like birds
of passage, thrive here, and fly off when their employments
are at an end. swift.
se"cond-hand. m. s. possession received from the first pos-
sessor.
se'cos d-h and is sometimes used adjectively.
not primary.
some men build so much upon authorities, they have but a
second-hand or implicit knowledge. docke.
they are too proud to cringe to second-hand favourites in a
great family. swift to gay.
at second-hand. in imitation; in the second place of order;
by transmission; not primarily; not originally.
they pelted them with satyrs and epigrams, which perhaps
had been taken up at first only to make their court, and at
frcond-hand to flatter those who had flattered their king. temple.
in imitation of preachers at second-hand, i shall transcribe
dryden.
dryden.
addison.
not original;
from bruyere a piece of raillery. tatler.
spurious virtue in a maid;
a virtue but at second-hand. swift.
se"cond. n.s.. [second, french; from the adjective.]
1. one who accompanies another in a duel to direct or defend
him.
their seconds minister an oath,
which was indifferent to them both,
that on their knightly faith and troth
no magick them supplied;
and sought them that they had no charms,
wherewith to work each other's harms,
but came with simple open arms
to have their causes tried. drayton's nymphid.
their first encounters were very furious, ’till after some toil
and bloodshed they were parted by the seconds. addison.
personal brawls come in as seconds to finish the dispute of
opinion. watts.
2. one who supports or maintains; a supporter; a main-
tal ner.
he propounded the duke as a main cause of divers infirmi-
second sight. m. s.
ties in the state, being sure enough of seconds after the first
onset. wotton,
courage, when it is only a second to injustice, and falls on
without provocation, is a disadvantage to a character. collier,
3. a second minute, the second division of an hour by fixty; the
sixtieth part of a minute.
four flames of an equal magnitude will be kept alive the
space of sixteen second minutes, though one of these flames
alone, in the same vessel, will not last above twenty-five or at
most thirty seconds. wilkins's math. magic.
sounds move above 1140 english feet in a second minute of
time, and in seven or eight minutes of time about 100 english
miles. locke.
to secon d. v. a. [seconder, fr. secundo, lat. from the noun.]
1. to support; to forward; to assist ; to come in after the ag
as a maintainer.
the authors of the former opinion were presently seconded
by other wittier and better learned, who being loth that the
form of church polity, which they sought to bring in, should
be otherwise than in the highest degree accounted of, took
first an exception against the difference between church polity
and matters of necessity to salvation. hocker.
though we here fall down, - -
we have supplies to second our attempt ; -
if they miscarry, theirs shall scand them. shak. henry vi.
i to be the power of isfael's god
avow, and challenge dagon to the test,
off'ring to combat thee his champion bold,
with th' utmost of his godhead seconded. milton.
familia, ovid tender thoughts inspires,
and nature seconds all his soft desires. roscommon.
if in company you offer something for a jest, and no bod
second you in your laughter, you may condemn their taste;
but in the mean time you make a very indifferent figure. swift.
in human works, though labour'd on with pain,
a thousand movements scarce one purpose gain;
in god’s, one single can its ends produce,
yet serves to second too some other use. pope.
2. to follow in the next place.
you some permit
to second ills with ills. shakespeare.
having formerly discoursed of a maritimal voyage, i think
it not impertinent to second the same with some necessary rela-
tions concerning the royal navy. raleigh.
he saw his guileful act
by eve, though all unweeting, seconded
upon her husband. milton's paradis. loft.
sin is seconded with fin; and a man seldom commits one fin
to please, but he commits another to defend himself. south.
the power of seeing things future, or
things distant: supposed inherent in some of the scottish
islanders.
as he was going out to steal a sheep, he was seized with a
fit of second sight: the face of the country presented him with
a wide prospect of new scenes, which he had never seen be-
fore. addison's freeholder.
second sighted, adj. [from second sight.] having the second
sight.
sawney was descended of an ancient family, renowned for
their skill in prognosticks: most of his ancestors were second
sighted, and his mother but narrowly escaped for a witch. add.
se condarily. adv. [from secondary.] in the second degree;
in the second order; not primarily; not originally; not in
the first intention.
these atoms make the wind primarily tend downwards,
though other accidental causes impel them secondarily to a
sloping motion. digby.
he confesses that temples are erected, and festivals kept, to
the honour of saints, at least secondarily. stillingsleet.
it is primarily generated out of the effusion of melancho-
lick blood, or secondarily out of the dregs and remainder of a
phlegmonous or cedematick tumour. harvey.
second ariness. n. s. [from secondary..] the state of being
secondary.
that which is peculiar and discriminative must be taken
from the primariness and secondariness of the perception. norris.
secondary. adj. [secundarius, latin.]
1. not primary; not of the first intention. -
two are the radical differences: the secondary differences
are as four. bacon's natural history.
2. succeeding to the first; subordinate.
wheresoever there is moral right on the one hand, no so-
condary right can discharge it. l’estrange.
gravitation is the powerful cement which holds together
this magnificent structure of the world, which stretcheth the
north over the empty space, and hangeth the earth upon
nothing, to transfer the words of job from the first and real
cause to the secondary. bentley.
3. not of the first order or rate.
if the system had been fortuitously formed by the conven-
ing matter of a chaos, how is it conceivable that all the pla–
nets, both primary and secondary, should revolve the same way
from
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e c
s e c
from the west to the east, and that in the same plane
- bentley.
4. acling by transmission or deputation.
that we were form'd then, say’s thou ? and the work
of secondary hands, by task transfer'd
from father to his son 3
as in a watch's fine machine,
though many artful springs are seen,
the added movements which declare
how full the moon, how old the year,
derive their secondary pow'r
from that which simply points the hour. p, for.
5. a secondary sever is that which arises after a crisis, or the
discharge of some morbid matter, as after the declension of
the small-pox or measles. - &amp;#incy.
second ary. n.s.. [from the adjestive..] a delegate ; a deputy.
secon dly. adv. [from second.) in the second place.
first, she hath disobeyed the law; and secondly, trespassed
against her husband. exclus; xxiii. 23.
milton's parads: loft.
first, metals are more durable than plants; and scondly,
they are more solid and hard. bacon.
he house of commons in ireland, and, secondly, the privy
council, addressed his majesty against these half-peace. swift.
secon d r at e. m. s. [second and rate.] - -
1. the second order in dignity or value.
they call it thunder of the secondrate. adeson's ovid.
2. it is sometimes used adjectively, one of the second order. a
colloquial license. -
he was not then a secondrate champion, as they would have
him, who think fortitude the first virtue in a hero. dryden.
se"crecy. m. s. [from secret.]
1. privacy; state of being hidden; concealment.
that's not suddenly to be perform’d,
but with advice and silent see ey.
the lady anne,
whom the king hath in focrecy long married,
this day was view’d in open as his queen.
in nature's book of infinite screty,
a little can i read. shakoff. ant, and cleopatra.
2. solitude; retirement; not exposure to view.
thou in thy secrecy, although alone,
best with thyself accompany'd, seek'st not
social communication. milton's paradise loft.
there is no such thing as perfeot secrecy, to encourage a ra-
tional mind to the perpetration of any base action; for a man
must first extinguish and put out the great light within him,
his conscience; he must get away from himself, and shake off
the thousand witnesses which he always carries about him, be-
fore he can be alone. - south's serzo.s.
3. forbearance of discovery.
it is not with publick as with private prayer: in this rather
secrecy is commanded than outward shew ; whereas that being
the publick act of a whole society, requireth accordingly more
care to be had of external appearance. hooker.
4. fidelity to a secret; taciturnity inviolate; close silence.
for secrecy no lady closer.
secre y and fidelity were their only qualities.
secret. adj. [secret, french ; secretus, latin, j
1. kept hidden; not revealed; concealed.
the secr t things belong unto the lord our god; but those
things which are revealed belong unto us.
be this or ought
than this more secret now design'd, i haste
to know.
2. retired; private ; unseen.
thou open'st wisdom's way,
and giv'st access, though scret she retire:
and i perhaps am secret.
there secret in her sapphire cell
he with the nais wont to dwell.
3. faithful to a secret entrusted.
secret romans, that have spoke the word. r
and will not palter : shakop. julius caesar.
4. private ; affording privacy. ,
the secret top
of orch or of sinai.
5. occult; not apparent.
or sympathy, or some connatural force
pow'rful at greatest distance to unite
with secret amity things of like kind, n
by secretest conveyance.
my heart, which by a secret harmony
still moves with thine, join'd in connexion swcet. milton.
6. privy; obscenc. -
se'cre r. m. s. [secret, french ; scretum, latin.]
1. something studiously hidden.
infected minds
to their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets. shakesh.
there is no secret that they can hide sron thee. lock. xxviii.
we not to explore the secrets ask
of his eternal empire.
* a thing unknown; something not yet discovered.
vol. ii.
shak. henry vi.
shak. h. viii.
shakespeare.
burnet.
deut. xxix. 29.
milton.
milton.
fonton.
milton.
milton.
milton.
all blest secrets,
all you unpublish’d virtues of the earth. of king l ar.
all secrets of the deep, all nature's works. a/ilton.
the romans seem not to have known the secret of paper-
credit. a buthnot.
3. privacy; secrecy; invisible or undiscovered state.
bread eaten in secret is pleasant. prov. ix. 17.
- in secret, riding through the air she comes. 44, it n.
to se or k r. v. g. [troin the noun..] to keep private.
great cate is to be used of the clerks of the council, for the
secreting of their consultations. bacon's advice to piliers.
słock et ar is hip. m. s. [secretaire, fr. from secretary.) the
office of a secretary.
secretary. m. s. [secretaire, fr. secretarius, low latin.] one
entrusted with the management of busines; one who writes
for another.
call gardiner to me, my new scretary. shakes.
that which is most of all profitable is acquaintance wish
the secretaries, and employed men of ambassadors,
cortington was secretary to the prince.
to secrete. v. a. s.secretus, latin.]
1. to put aside; to hide.
2. [in the animal ceconomy. ] to secern; to separate.
secretion. m. s. [from secretus, latin.]
1. that agency in the animal economy that consists in separating
the various fluids of the body.
2. the fluid secreted.
secretit 19 us. adj. [from secretus, latin.] parted by ani-
mal secretion. -
they have a similitude or contrariety to the scretitious hu-
mours in taste and quality. flyer on the humours.
se'cretist. n.s.. [from scret..] a dealer in secrets.
some things i have not yet thought fit so plainly to reveal,
not out of any envious design of having them buried with me,
but that i may barter with those secretis's, that will not part
with one secret but in exchange for another. boyle.
se"crer ly. adv. [from secret.]
1. privately; privily ; not openly; not publickly; with inten-
tion not to be known.
bacon.
clarendon.
give him this letter, do it secretly. shakespeare.
now secretly with inward grief she pin'd ;
now warm resentments to his griefs he join'd. addis n.
some may place their chief satisfaction in giving so, ety
what is to be distributed ; others, in being the open and
avowed instruments of making such distributions. alterbury.
2. latently; so as not to be obvious ; not apparently.
those thoughts are not wholly mine; but either they are
secretly in the poet, or may be fairly deduced from him. dryd,
se'cretn ess. n. s. [from scret.]
1. state of being hidden.
2. quality of keeping a secret.
i could musher up
my giants and my witches too,
which are vast constancy and secretness. donne,
se'cretory. adj. [from secretus, latin.] performing the
office of secretion, or animal separation. -
all the glands are a congeries of vessels complicated toge-
ther, whereby they give the blood time to seporate through
the capillary vessels into the secretory, which afterwards exone-
rate themselves into one duct. -
sect. m. s. [scoe, french ; seola, latin, from sofand.]
1. a body of men following some particular master, or united
in some settled tenets. often in a bad sense.
we'll wear out,
in a wall'd prison, packs and sedis of great ones,
that ebb and flow by th’ moon. shakesp. king lear.
the greatest viciitude of things is the vicinitude of so,
and religions: the true religion is built upon the rock; the rest
are tosied upon the waves of time. bacon's essays,
the jealous se&amp;is that dare not trust their cause
so far from their own will as to the laws,
you for their umpire and their synod take. dryden.
the academics were willing to admit the goods of fortune
into their notion of felicity; but no sects of old philosophers
did ever leave a room for greatness.
a sect of freethinkers is a sum of cyphers.
2. in shakespeare it seems to be misprinted for set. -
of our unbitted luffs, i take this that you call love to be a
so or cion. shakesp. othello.
se"ct ar 1s m. n.s.. [from so..] disposition to petty sects in
opposition to things established. -
nothing hath more marks of schism and soarison than this
presbyterian way. king charles.
se"ct ary. m. s. ss oire, french : from so.]
1. one who divides from publick establishment, and joins with
those distinguished by some particular whims.
my lord, you are a sociary,
that’s the plain truth. shakeshcare.
romish catholick tenets are inconsistent, on the one hand,
with the truth of religion professed and protested by the church
of england, whence we are called protestants ; and the ana-
baptists, and separatists, and sociaries, on the other hand,
23 l whose
ray.
dryden.
bently.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e c
s e c
whose tenets are full of schism, and inconsistent with mo-
narchy. bacon."
the number of seolaries does not concern the clergy in point
of intercft or conscience. swift.
2. a follower; a pupil.
the socłaries of my celestial skill,
that wont to be the world's chief ornament,
they under keep. spensor.
secta"ror. m. s. ssociateur, fr. solator, latin.] a follower ;
an imitator; a disci, le.
hereof the wiser sort and the best learned philosophers were
not ignorant, as cicero witnesseth, gathering the opinion of
aristotle and his sediators. raleigh.
se'orion, n. s. [section, french; solio, latin.)
1. the act of cutting or dividing.
in the so?ion of bodies, man, of all sensible creatures, has
the fullest brain to his proportion. //otton.
2. a part divided from the rest. . -
3. a small and distinct part of a writing or book.
instead of their law, which they might not read openly,
they read of the prophets, that which in likeness of matter
came nearest to each secsion of their law. hooker.
the production of volatile salts i reserve 'till i mention
them in another section. boyle.
without breaking in upon the connection of his language,
it is hardly possible to give a distinct view of his several argu-
ments in distinet sessions. locke.
se'cror. m. s. [secteur, french.] in geometry.
secor is an instruinent made of wood or metal, with a joint,
and sometimes a piece to turn out to make a true square,
with lines of fines, tangents, secants, equal parts, rhumbs,
polygons, hours, latitudes, metals and solids. it is generally
useful in all the practical parts of the mathematicks, and par-
ticularly contrived for navigation, surveying, astronomy, dial-
ling, and projection of the sphere. all the lines of the seclor
can be accommodated to any radius, which is done by taking
off all divisions parallel wise, and not lengthwise; the ground
of which practice is this, that parallels to the base of any plain
triangle bear the same proportion to it as the parts of the legs
above the parallel do to the whole legs. harris.
secular. adj. [secularis, latin; seculier, french.]
1. not spiritual; relating to affairs of the present world; not
holy ; worldly.
this, in every several man's actions of common life, ap-
pertaine th unto moral; in publick and politick secular affairs,
unto civil wisdom. hooker.
then shall they seek t'avail themselves of names,
places, and titles; and with these to join
secular pow'r, though feigning still to agt
by spiritual. milton's paradise lost.
2. [in the church of rome.] not bound by monastick rules.
those northern nations easily embraccd the religion of those
they subdued, and by their devotion gave great authority and
reverence, and thereby case to the clergy, both secular and re-
gular. temple.
in france vast numbers of ecclesiasticks, scular and reli-
gious, live upon the labours of others. addison.
3. [s.culaire, french..] happening or coming once in a secle or
century.
the scular year was kept but once in a century. addison.
secul a'rity. m. s. [from secular..] worldliness; attention to
the things of the present life.
littleness and secularity of spirit is the greatest enemy to
contemplation burnet's theory of the earth.
to se cul arize. v. a. [seculariser, fr. from secular.]
1. to convert from spiritual appropriations to common use.
2. to make worldly.
se cu larly. adv. [from secular.] in a worldly manner.
se"cula f. s fss. n.f [from secular.] worldliness.
se cu nd1: e. a. s. s secondines, secondes, fr. secundar, viz. partes
facd nascenton insaniem sequantur. ainsw.] the membrane
in which the embryo is wrapped; the after-birth.
the casiing of the skin is by the ancients compared to the
breaking cf the foundine, or cawl, but not rightly ; for the
secundine is but a gcneral cover, not shaped according to the
parts, but the fin is. bacon's natural hislory.
future ages lie
wrapp'd in their sacred secondine asleep. cotosy.
if the fetus be taken out of the womb inclosed in the scun.
dines, it will continue to live, and the blood to circulate. ray.
secu’r e. adj. [your us, latin.]
1. free it om fear; exempt from terrour; easy ; assured.
co., force then bore thee on so, ure
to meet no danger. milton.
2. consident; not dorustful: with of.
but thou, fore of soul, unbent with woes ;
the roote the fortune frowns, the more oppose. dryden,
one maid the had, belov’d above the resi;
&amp; cure of her, the secret she confess'd. drydon.
the portion of their wealth they design for the uses of the
poor, they may throw into one of these publick repositories,
so tore that it will be well copioyed. atterboy.
*
3. sure; not doubting: with of.
it concerns the most secure of his strength, to pray to go!
not to expose him to an enemy. roger;
in lethe's lake souls long oblivion taste; • - - -
of future life secure, forgetful of the past. dryan
haply too secure of our discharge -
from penalty. milton.
we live and act as if we were perfeołly scure of the fin.
event of things, however we may behave ourselves. alterbury.
4. careless; wanting caution ; wanting vigilance.
gideon smote the host, for the host were secure. judget.
5. free from danger; safe.
let us not then suspect our happy state,
as not secure to fingle or combin'd. milton,
mesoapus next,
secure of steel, and fated from the fire,
in pomp appears. dryden.
secure from fortune's blows, -
secure of what i cannot lose,
in my small pinnace i can sail. dryden's horace,
6. it has sometimes of before the object in all its senses; but
more properly from before evil, or the cause of evil.
to secu'r.e. v a... [from the adjective.]
1. to make certain ; to put out of hazard; to ascertain.
nothing left
that might his happy state secure,
secure from outward force. milton,
aetions have their preference, not according to the tran-
sient pleasure or pain that accompanies or follows them here,
but as they serve to focuse that perfect durable happiness here.
after. locke.
truth and certainty are not secured by innate principles;
but men are in the same uncertain floating estate with as with.
out theon. - lock.
that prince who shall be so wise as by established laws of
liberty to secure protection to the honest industry of mankind,
against the oppression of power, will quickly be too hard for
his neighbours. locke.
deeper to wound, she shuns the fight;
she drops her arms to gain the field:
secures her conquest by her flight,
and triumphs when she seems to yield. prior,
nothing can be more artful than the address of ulysses: he
secures himself of a powerful advocate, by paying an ingenu.
ous and laudable deference to his friend. broom.
2. to protect ; to make safe.
i spread a cloud before the victor's fight,
sustain'd the vanquish'd, and secur'd his flight;
ev’n then secur'd him, when i sought with joy
the vow’d destruction of ungrateful troy. dryden.
where two or three sciences are pursued at the same time,
if one of them be dry, as logick, let another be more enter-
taining, to secure the mind from weariness. waits.
3. to insure.
secu'rely. adv. [from secure.]
1. without fear; carelessly.
love, that had now long time securely slept
in venus' lap, unarmed then and naked,
'gan rear his head, by clotho being waked. spensor.
'tis done like hector, but securely done,
a little proudly, and great deal misprizing
the knight oppos'd. shakesp. troilus and crossida.
his daring foe securely him defy'd. milton,
a soul that can scurely death defy,
and count it nature's privilege to die. dryden's juvenal.
whether any of the reasonings are inconsistent, i securely
leave to the judgment of the reader. atterbury.
2. without danger; safely.
we upon our globe's last verge shall go,
and view the ocean leaning on the sky;
from thence our rolling neighbours we shall know,
and on the lunar world securely pry. dryden.
sfcu r em ent. m. s. [from secure.] the cause of safety; pro-
techion; defence.
they, like judas, desire death; cain, on the contrary, grew
afraid thereof, and obtained a securement from it.
brown's i woar irrours.
security. m. s. [sourite, fr. securitas, lat. from secure.]
1. carclesiness; freedom from fear. -
marvellous security is always dangerous, when men will not
believe any bees to be in a hive, until they have a sharp sense
of their stings. … a 4.
2. vitious catelessness ; confidence; want of vigilance.
how senseless then, and dead a soul hath he,
which thinks his soul doth with his body die;
or thinks not so, but so would have it be,
that he might sin with more security? davies.
3. protection; defence.
if the providence of god be taken away, what security have
we against those innumerable dangers to which human nature
is continually exposed ? till tson.
4. any thing given as a pledge or caution; insurance; iiiu-
isa i, cc
.o
*
o
f
o
o
o
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s e d
s e d
rance for any thing ; the act of giving caution, or being
bound.
there is scarce truth enough alive to make societies secure;
but scurity not h to make fellowships accurst. shakespeare.
hen they had taken so, wity of jason, they let them go.
ac's, xvii. 9.
it is possible for a man, who hath the appearance of reli-
gion, to be wicked and an hypocrite; but it is impossible for
a man, who openly declares against religion, to give any rea-
sonable security that he will not be false and cruci. swift.
exchequer bills have been generally reckoned the surest and
most sacred of all securities. swift's examiner.
the romans do not seem to have known the secret of paper
credit, and scurities upon mortgages. artuthnot on coins.
5. safety; certainty.
some, who gave their advice for entering into a war, al-
leged that we should have no security for our trade, while spain
was subject to a prince of the bourbon family. swift.
seda'n. m. s. a kind of portable coach ; a chair. i believe
because first made at sedan.
some beg for absent persons, feign them sick,
close mew'd in their sedans for want of air,
and for their wives produce an empty chair. drydon.
by a tax of cato's it was provided, that women's wearing
cloaths, ornament and sedan, exceeding 121 l. 1 s. 1 od. half-
penny, should pay 30 s. in the hundred pound value. a butln.
sedate, adj. [sedatus, lat.] calm; quiet; still ; un-
ruffled; undisturbed ; serene.
with count'nance calm and soul sedate,
thus turnus. dryden’s aem.
disputation carries away the mind from that calm and se-
date temper which is so necessary to contemplate truth. watts.
seda rely. adv. [from sedate.] calm'y; without disturbance.
that has most weight with them that appears s datesy to
come from their parents reason. locłe.
sedate ness. n.s.. [from sedate.] calmness; tranquillity;
ferenity ; freedom from disturbance.
there is a particular seateness in their conversation and be-
haviour that qualifies them for council, with a great intrepi-
dity that fits them for action. addison on the 14%r.
sedentariness. m. s. [from sedentary.j the state of being
sedentary ; inactivity.
set) entary. adj. [sedentaire, fr. s.l...ntario, ital an ; so-
dentarius, from sedeo, lat.]
1. passed in fitting still ; wanting motion or a sion.
a sedintary life, appropriate to all students, crushes the
bowels; and, for want of stirring the body, suffers the spirits
to lie dormant. harvey on con options,
the blood of labouring people is more dense and heavy than
of those who live a sedentary life. arbuthnot.
2. torpid ; inactive; sluggish ; motionless.
the sidentary earth,
that better might with far less compass move,
serv’d by more noble than herself, attains
her end without least motion.
*till length of years
and sodontary numbness, craze my limbs
to a contemptible old age obscure. milton's agonisłes.
the soul, considered abstractedly from its passions, is of a
remiss sedentary nature, slow in its resolves, and languishing
in its executions. aoison's spediator.
sedge. m. s. [raecz, saxon; whence, in the provinces, a
narrow flag is called a sag or seg. j a growth of narrow flags;
a narrow flag.
the current, that with gentle murmur glides,
thou know'st, being stopp'd, impatient'y doth rage;
but when his fair course is not hindered,
he makes sweet musick with th' enamel'd stones,
giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
he overtaketh in his pilgrimage ;
and so by many winding nooks he strays,
with willing sport, to the wild ocean.
adonis, painted by a running brook,
and cytherea all in sedges hid ; -
which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
even as the waving sedges play with wind. shakspeare.
in hotter countries a fly called lucciole, that shineth as the
glow-worm, is chiefly upon fens and marshes; yet is not
seen but in the height of summer, and sedge or other green of
milton.
shakes care.
the fens give as good shade as bushes. bacon.
he hid himself in the sedges adjoining. sanjs.
my bonds brake,
fled from my guards, and in a muddy lake,
amongst the solo, all the night lay hid. don'am.
niphates, with inverted urn,
and drooping sedge, sha'] his artnenia mourn. drydon.
se'd g.y. adj. [from sedge..] overgrown with narrow flags.
on the gentle severn's fodgy bank,
in fingle opposition, hand to hand,
he did confound the best part of an hour, - -
in changing hardiment with great glendower. soco, h. iv.
old father thames rais’d up his reverend head,
but fear'd the fate of simoeis would return :
deep in his ooze he sought his sody bed,
* and shrunk his waters back into his urn. drydo,
sepiment: , s: [sediment, fr. sedimentum, lat.] that which
subsides or settles at the bottom.
the salt water rises into a kind of scum on the top, and
partly goeth into a sediment in the bottom, and so is rather a
separation than an evaporation. bacon's nat. history.
it is not bore agitation, but the sediment at the bottom, that
troubles and defiles the water. south's sermons.
that matter sunk not down 'till last of all, settling at the
, surface of the sediment, and covering all the rest. woodward.
septorios. m. s. [sedition, fr. /editio, lat.] a tumult; an
insurrection ; a popular commotion; an uproar.
that sunshine brew’d a show', for him,
that wash'd his father's fortunes forth of france,
and heap'd sedition on his crown at home. shak. h. vi.
in soothing them we nourish, 'gainst our senate,
the cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition. shak, coriolan.
s; diorious. adj. [seditieux, fr. jeditiosus, lat.] factious with
tumult; turbulent.
the cause, why i have brought this army hither,
is to remove proud somerset from the king,
seditious to his grace and to the state. shakoff. h. vi.
very many of the nobility in edenborough, at that time,
did not appear yet in this seditious behaviour. clarendon.
thou return'st
from flight, fed ticus angel.
but if she has deform'd this earthly life
with murd’rous rapine and seditious strife,
in everlasting darkness must she lie;
still more unhappy that she cannot die
sed "riously. adv. [from seditious.]
sastious turbulence.
septorious n ess. n.s.. [from seditious.] turbulence; disposi-
tion to sedition. -
to seduce. v. a. [se 'uco, lat, sodwire, fr.] to draw aside
from the right ; to tempt ; to corrupt ; to deprave; to mis-
lead; to deceive.
'tis mect
that noble minds keep ever with their likes ;
for who so firm that cannot be sou.'d o shao. jul. ces.
me the gold of france did not so duce,
although i did admit it as a motive,
the sooner to effect what i intended.
a beauty-waining and distrested widow,
seduc’d the pitch and height of all his thoughts
to base declension. shakes). r. iii.
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving
hced to so using spirits. 1 tim. iv. 1.
i shall never gratify the spightfulness of a few with any
finister thoughts of all their allegiance, whom pious frauds
have seduced. king charlos.
subtle he needs must be who could soluce
milton.
prior.
tumultuously ; with
shakes). h. v.
• angels. milton,
nor let false friends seduce thy mind to fame,
by arrogating johnson's hostile name;
let father flecknoe fire thy mini with praise,
and uncle ogleby thy envy raise. dryden.
sedu cf ment. m. s. [from so oce. j prastice of seduction ; art
or means used in order to scouce.
to season them, and win them early to the love of virtue
and true labour, ere any flattering so face:nent or vain principle
seize them wandering, some easy and delightful book of edu-
cation should be read to them. asilion on education.
her hero's dangers touch'd the pitying pow'r,
the nymph’s sidu, ements, and the magick bow'r. pope.
sf pu'cer. m. s. [from seduce. j one who draws aside from the
right; a tempter ; a corrupter.
grant it me, o king; otherwise a seducer flourishes, and a
poor maid is undone. - shakespeare.
there is a teaching by restraining seducers, and so removing
the hind ances of knowledge. south.
the soft so lurer, with enticing looks,
the bellowing rivals to the fight provokes. dryden.
he whose firm faith no reason could remove,
will melt before that soft seducer, love. drydon.
sepuscible, adj. [from sodice..] corruptible ; capable of being
drawn aside from the right.
the vicious example of ages past poisons the curiosity of
the present, affording a hint of fin unto seducible spirits. brown.
we owe much of o or errour to the power which our affec-
tions have over our so easy fou:ilic understandings. glanville.
sepuscrios. m. s. [ s locțion, fr. so, lat..] the act of
seducing; the act of drawing aside.
whatsoever mens faith, patience, or perseverance were,
any remarkable indulgence to this fin, the soduction of balaam,
were sure to bring judgments. hammond.
to procure the miseries of others in those extremities,
wherein we hold an hope to have no society ***
taln
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- s e. e.
s e. e.
strain above lucifer, and a project beyond the primary seduc-
tion of hell. brown's sugar errors.
the deceiver soon found out this soot place of adam's, and
innocency itself did not secure him from this way of seditorio”.
glanville's scotsis.
helen ascribes her seduction to venus, and mentions nothing
of paris. pope.
a woman who is above flattery, and despises all praise, but
that which flows fom the approbation of her own heart, is,
morally speaking, out of reach of sodioion. claris”.
se du'lity. m. s. ssdulitas, lat.] diligent affiduity; labo-
riousness; industry; application ; intenseness of endeavour.
man oftentimes pursues, with great sodality and earnestness,
that which cannot stand him in any stead for vital purpose.
hooker.
let there be but the same propensity and bent of will to
religion, and there will be the same sedulity and indefatigable
industry in mens enquiries into it. . . . south.
selulous. adj. [sodulus, lat..] assiduous; industricus ;
laborious; diligent ; painful.
not sedulous by nature to indite
wars, hitherto the only argument
heroick deem'd. milton's paradise los.
what signifies the sound of words in prayer, without the
affection of the heart, and a sedilous application of the proper
means that may naturally lead us to such an end. l'e/irange.
the goat, now bright amidst her fellow stars,
kind amalthaea reach'd her teat, disłent
with milk, thy early food : the sedulous bee
disill'd her honey on thy purple lips. prizr.
the bare majority of a few representatives is often procured
by great industry and application, wherein those who engage
in the pursuits of malice are much more sedulous than such as
would prevent them. swift.
se'pulously. adv. [from sedulous.] affiduously; industriously ;
laboriously; diligently ; painfully.
the ritual, preceptive, prophetick, and all other parts of
sacred writ, were most sedulously, most religiously guarded by
them. government of the tongue.
all things by experience
are most improv’d ; then sedulously think
to meliorate thy stock, no way or rule
be unessay’d. philips.
sepulous n ess. n.s.. [from sedulous.] assiduity; assiduous-
ness; industry; diligence.
see. n.s.. [sodes, lat.] the seat of episcopal power; the di-
ocess of a bishop.
you, my lord archbishop,
whose see is by a civil peace maintain'd,
whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touch'd,
whose learning and good letters peace hath tutor’d,
whose white investments figure innocence,
the dove and every blessed spirit of peace ;
wherefore do you so ill translate yourself
out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace,
into the harsh and boist’rous tongue of war : -
shakespeare's henry iv.
it is a safe opinion for their sees, empires, and kingdoms;
and for themselves, if they be wise. bacon.
the pope would use these treasures, in case of any great
calamity that should endanger the holy see. addison.
episcopal revenues were so low reduced, that three or four
ses were often united to make a tolerable competency. swift.
13 see. v. a. preter. i saw ; part, pass, seen. [reon, saxon ;
sien, dutch..]
1. to perceive by the eye.
dear son edgar,
might i but live to see thee in my touch,
i'd say i had eyes again. shakos. king lear.
i was bowed down at the hearing of it; i was dismayed at
the seeing of it. as xxi. 3.
i speak that which i have seen with my father, and ye do
that which you have seen with yours. jo. viii. 33.
he'll lead the life of gods, and be -
py gods and heroes seen, and gods and heroes see. dryden.
it was a right answer of the physician to his patient, that
had fore eyes: if you have more pleasure in the taste of wine
than in the use of your fight, wine is good for you ; but if
the pleasure of seeing be greater to you than that of drinking,
wine is naught. locke.
i see her sober over a sampler. pope.
2. to observe ; to find.
seven other kine came up, lean fleshed, such as i never saw
for badness. - gen. xli. 19.
such command we had,
to se that none thence issu’d forth a spy. aloilozn.
give them first one simple idea, and see that they perfectly
comprehend it, before you go any farther. ocee.
the thunderbolt we for used by the greatest poet of augus-
tus's age, to express irresisłłule force in battle. addison.
3. to discover ; to descry.
7
w
who is so gross
as cannot see this palpable device?
yet who so bold but says he sees it not ?
when such ill dealings must be seen in thought. sha's car.
4. to converse with.
the main of them may be reduced to language, and to an
improvement in wisdom and prudence by seeing men, and con-
versing with people of different tempers and customs. lock.
5. to attend ; to remark.
i had a mind to see him out, and therefore did not care for
contradicling him. addison's freeholder.
to se e. v. n.
1. to have the power of fight; to have by the eye perception
of things distant.
who maketh the seeing or the blind have not i the lord?
ex. iv. 11.
air hath some secret degree of light; otherwise cats and
owls could not see in the night. bacon's natural history.
2. to discern without deception.
many sagacious persons will find us out, will look under
our mask, and see through all our fine pretensions, and dis-
cern the absurdity of telling the world that we believe one
thing when we do the contrary. ziloson.
could you see into my secret soul,
there you might read your own dominion doubled. drydon.
you may see into the spirit of them all, and form your pen
from those general notions. felton.
3. to enquire; to distinguish. -
see whether fear doth make thee wrong her. shakoff arc.
4. to be attentive.
mark and perform it, so thou; for the fail
of any point in't shall be death. shak sheart.
5. to scheme; to contrive.
cesio's a proper man: let me see now ;
to get his place. shakespeare's otoll.
sef. interosion, [originally the imperative of the verb so.]
lo; look; observe ; behold.
see, se! upon the banks of boyne he stands,
by his own view adjusting his commands.
see / the sole bliss heav'n could on all bestow,
which who but feels can taste, but thinks can know? pop.
see what it is to have a poet in your house. pope.
seed. m. s. [rab, saxon; seed, danish; sacd, dutch.]
i. the organised particle produced by plants and animals, from
which new plants and animals are generated.
if you can look into the seeds of time,
and say which grain will grow and which will not,
speak then to me. shakespeare's macbeth.
seed of a year old is the best, though some seed and grains
last better than others. bacon's natural hisłry.
that every plant has its seed is an evident sign of divine
providence. more.
did they ever see any herbs, except those of the grass-
leaved tribe, come up without two seed leaves; which to me
is an argument that they came all of seed, there being no rea-
son else why they should produce two seed leaves different from
haifax,
the subsequent. aay.
just gods! all other things their like produce;
the vine arises from her mother's juice:
when feeble plants or tender flow’rs decay,
they to their seed their images convey. prior,
in the south part of staffordshire they go to the north for
sed corn. mortimer.
2. first principle ; original.
the seed of whatsoever perfeoł virtue groweth from us, is
a right opinion touching things divine. plazer.
3. principle of production.
- praise of great acts he scatters as a seed,
which may the like in coming ages breed.
4. progeny ; offspring ; descendants.
next him king lear in happy peace long reign'd;
but had no issue male him to succeed,
but three fair daughters which were well uptrain’d
in all that seemed fit for kingly seed. fairy queen.
the thing doth touch
the main of all your states, your blood, your seed. daniel.
when god gave canaan to abraham, he thought fit to put
his seed into the grant too. locke.
5. race ; generation ; birth.
of mortal seed they were not held,
which other mortals so excei’d ;
and beauty too in such excess,
as your's, zelinda claims no less.
to seed. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to grow to perfeot maturity so as to shed the seed.
whate'er i plant, like corn on barren earth,
by an equivocal birth,
seeds and runs up to poetry.
2. to shed the seed.
they pick up all the old roots, czcept what they design for
seed, which they let stand to seed the next year. a sortimer,
se'ed caks.
l/aller.
waller,
swift.
sto
l,
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">se'epcake. n.s.. [seed and cake.] a sweet cake interspersed
with warm aromatick seeds.
remember, wife,
the seedcake, the pasties, and furmenty pot. tsir.
se’ed lip. } m. s. a vessel in which the sower carries his
se’e dlop. seed. ainsworth.
se'edpearl: n.s.. [seed and pearl.] small grains of pearl.
in the dissolution of seedpearl in some acid menstruum, if a
good quantity of the little pearls be cast in whole, they will be
carried in swarms from the bottom, to the top. boyle.
seedplot. n.s.. [seed and plot.] the ground on which plants
are sowed to be afterwards transplanted.
to counsel others, a man must be furnished with an uni-
versal store in himself to the knowledge of all nature: that is,
the matter and seedplot ; there are the seats of all argument
and invention. ben. johnson.
humility is a seedplot of virtue, especially christian, which
thrives best when 'tis deep rooted in the humble lowly heart.
hammond.
it will not be unuseful to present a full narration of this re-
bellion, looking back to those passages by which the seedplots
were made and framed, from whence those mischiefs have
successively grown. clarendon.
seedtime. n.s.. [seed and time.] the season of sowing.
while the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest shall not
cease. gen. viii. 22.
if he would have two tributes in one year, he must give
them two seedtimes, and two harvests. bacon.
the first rain fell upon the seedtime about oetober, and was
to make the seed to root ; the latter was to fill the ear. brown.
day and night,
seed:ime and harvest, heat and hoary frost,
shall hold their course, ’till fire purge all things. milton.
their very seedtime was their harvest, and by sowing tares
they immediately reaped gold. decay of piety.
he that too curiously observes the face of the heavens, by
missing his seedtime, will lose the hopes of his harvest. atterb.
se"f dling. m. s. [from seed.] a young plant just risen from
the seed.
carry into the shade such seedlings or plants as are for their
choiceness reserved in pots. eve/n's kalendar.
seedness. m. s. [from seed.] seedtime ; the time of sowing.
blossoming time
from the secanes; the bare fallow brings
to teeming foyson. shakes. measure for measure.
se'ed's man. a. s. [sed and man.]
1. the sower ; he that scatters the seed.
the higher nilus swells
the more it promises: as it ebbs, the seedsman
upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
and shortly comes to harvest. shak. ait, and cleopat.
2. one that sells seeds.
see'dy. adj. [from seed j. abounding with seed.
see in g. m. s. [from see. j sight; vision.
love adds a precious seeing to the eye. shakespeare.
see’ing. adv. [vic que, french ; from see. it would be
see ing that. } more grammatically written, as wit que, peurvic
que, in french ; seen that, or provided that.j since; fith; it
being so that.
why should not they be as well victualled for so long time,
as the ships are usually for a year, seeing it is easier to keep
victuals on land than water 2 spensor on ireland.
how shall they have any trial of his doctrine, learning,
and ability to preach, seeing that he may not publickly either
teach or exhort, because he is not yet called to the ministry :
ishitgifte.
seeing every nation affords not experience and tradition
enough for all kind of learning, therefore we are taught the
languages of those people who have been most industrious
after wisdom. milton on education.
seeing they explained the phenomena of vision, imagination,
and thought, by certain thin fleeces of atoms that flow from
the surfaces of bodies, and by their subtlety penetrate any ob-
stacle, and yet retain the exact lineaments of the several bodies
from which they proceed: in consequence of this hypothesis
they maintained, that we could have no phantasy of anything,
but what did really subsist either intire or in its several parts.
bentley's sermons.
to seek. v. a. pret. i sought; part. pass sought. [recan, sax.
joecken, dutch. j
1. to look for ; to search for : often with out.
he did range the town to seek me out.
i have a venturous fairy, that shall seek
the squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee thence new nuts. shak.
because of the money returned in our sacks, are we brought
in, that he may seek occasion against us, and take us for bond-
shakespeare.
intil. gen. xliii. 18.
he sesseth unto him a cunning workman, to prepare a gra-
ven image. if xi. 20.
seek thee a man which may go with thee. tob. v. 3.
sweet peace, where do'st thou dwell ?
i humbly crave,
vol. ii,
let me once know;
i sought thee in a secret cave, - - -
and ask'd if peace were there, herbert,
the king meant not to seek out nor to decline fighting with
them, if they put themselves in his way, clarendon.
so fatal 'twas to seek temptations out !
most confidence has still most cause to doubt.
we must seek out some other ori
vernment of politicks than this of
none at all in the world.
2. to solicit; to endeavour to gain.
others tempting him, sought of him a sign. lu, xi. 16.
the young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat
from god. - ps. ci -
god hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares, 's civ. 21.
and not molest us, unless we ourselves
seek them with wandering thoughts.
dryden.
ginal of power for the go-
adam, or else there will be
locke.
- milton.
oft our alliance other lands desir’d,
and what we seek of you, of us requir’d. dryden.
3. to go to find. - -
let us seek death, or, he not found, supply
his office. milton.
dardanus, though born
on latian plains, yet sought the phrygian shore. dryden.
like fury seiz'd the rest; the progress known,
all seek the mountains, and forsake the town. dryden.
ince great ulysses sought the phrygian plains,
within these walls inglorious filence reigns. pope.
indulge one labour more,
and seek atrides on the spartan shore. pope.
4. to pursue by machinations.
i had a son,
now outlaw'd from my blood; he sought my life. shakesh.
david saw that saul was come out to seek his life. i sa. xxiii.
to seek. v. m.
1. to make search ; to make inquiry.
seek ye out of the book of the lord, and read. ss. xxxiv.
i have been forced to relinquish that opinion, and have en-
deavoured to seek after some better reason. addison's spectator.
2. to endeavour.
why should he mean me ill, or seek to harm 2 milton.
ask not what pains, nor further seek to know
their process, or the forms of law below. dryden.
3. to make pursuit.
violent men have sought after my soul. ps. lxxxvi. 14.
if thy brother's ox or sheep go astray, it shall be with thee
until thy brother seek after it. deut. xxii. 2.
4. to apply to ; to use solicitation.
all the earth sought to solomon, to hear his wisdom. i k.
unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt
conne. deut. xii. 5.
5. to endeavour after.
being a man of experience, he wished by wisdom to order
that which the young prince sought for by war. knolles.
to seek. [an adverbial mode of speech..] at a loss; without
measures, knowledge, or experience.
being brought and transferred from other services abroad,
though they be of good experience in those, yet in these they
will be new to seek; and before they have gathered experience,
they shall buy it with great loss to his majesty. spenser.
unpractis'd, unprepar'd, and still to seek. amilton.
but they misplace them all ;
and are as much to seek in other things,
as he that only can design a tree,
would be to draw a shipwreck. roscommon.
see’ke r. n.s. (from seek.]
1. one that seeks; an inquirer.
though i confess that in philosophy i'm a sesser, yet can.
not believe that a sceptick in philosophy must be one in divi-
nity. glanville.
a language of a very witty volatile people, seekers after no-
velty, and abounding with variety of notions. locke.
2. the name of a sect which professed no determinate religion.
see’ksor row. m. s. [seek and sorrow.] one who contrives to
give himself vexation.
afield they go, where many lookers be,
and thou seeksorrow, klaius, them among :
indeed thou saidst it was thy friend to see,
strephon, whose absence seem’d unto thee long. sidney.
to seel. v. a. [sceller, to seal, french..] to close the eyes.
a term of falconry, the eyes of a wild or haggard hawk being
for a time seeled or closed. -
now she brought them to see a seled dove, who the blinder
she was, the higher she strave. sidney.
mine eyes no more on vanity shall feed,
but seled up with death shall have their deadly meed. f. 2.
come, seeling night,
scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day. shakesp. macbeth:
some ambitious men seem as screens to princes in matters of
danger and envy; for no man will take such parts, unless he
be like the seeled dove, that mounts and mounts, because he
cannot see about him. bacon.
23 m since,
** -
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 1</div><p class="text">s e e
s. e. e.
o
since, blinded with ambition, he did soar
like a seled dove, his crimes shall be his punishment,
to be depriv'd of fight. denham's sophy.
to seel. v. n. [ryllan, saxon.] to lean on one side.
- when a ship feels or rowls in foul weather, the breaking
loose of ordnance is a thing very dangerous. raleigh.
seel or seeling. n.s.. [from see!...] the agitation of a ship in
foul weather. ainsworth.
seely. adj. [from reel, lucky time, saxon.] o
1. lucky; happy.
my sely sheep like well below,
for they been hale enough and trow,
and liken their abode, spenser.
2. silly; foolish ; simple. spensor.
- peacock and turkie, that nibbles off top,
are very ill neighbours to seely poor hop. tosor.
to seem. v. n. [sembler, fr. unless it has a teutonick ori-
ginal, as seemly certainly has.] -
1. to appear; to make a show ; to have semblance.
my lord, you’ve lost a friend, indeed ;
and i dare swear, you borrow not that face
of seeming sorrow ; it is sure your own. shakes?. h. iv.
speak: we will not trust our eyes
without our ears: thou art not what thou seem's. shakesp.
so spake th’ omnipotent; and with his words
all seem'd well pleas'd ; all seem’d, but were not all. milton.
in holy nuptials ty'd;
a seaming widow, and a secret bride. dryden.
observe the youth
already seems to snuff the vital air.
2. to have the appearance of truth.
it seems to me, that the true reason why we have so few
versions which are tolerable, is because there are so few who
have all the talents requisite for translation. dryden.
3. in shakspeare, to seem, perhaps, significs to be beautiful.
sir, there she stands :
if aught within that little seeming substance
may fitly like your grace,
she’s there, and she is your’s. shakoff. king lear.
4. it sf exis. a phrase hard to be explained. it sometimes
signifies that there is an appearance, though no reality; but
generally it is used ironically to condemn the thing mentioned,
like the latin silicot, or the old english forsooth. id mihi
datur negotii scilicet. this, it seems, is to be my task.
the earth by these, ’tis said,
this single crop of men and women bred;
who, grown adult, so chance, it seems, enjoin'd,
did male and female propagate. blackmore's creation,
5. it is sometimes a slight affirmation.
2 a prince of italy, it seems, entertained his mistress upon a
great lake. - - addison's guardian.
the raven, urg’d by such impertinence, -
grew passionate, it seems, and took offence, addison.
he had been a chicf magistrate ; and had, it seems, executed
that high office justly and honourably. atterbury.
it seems that when first i was discovered sleeping on the
ground, the emperor had early notice. . gulliver.
6. it appears to be.
here's another discontented paper,
found in his pocket too; and this, it seems, -
rodorigo meant to have sent. shakespeare's otheslo.
it seems the camel's hair is taken by painters for the skin
with the hair cn. brown's sugar errours.
see mer. m. s. [from stem.] one that carrics an appearance.
- angelo scarce confesses
that his blood flows, or that his appetite
is more to bread than stone: hence shall we see,
if pow'r change purpose, what our seemers be. shakspeare.
see'm in g. m. s. [from seem.]
1. appearance; show ; semblance.
all good seeming, - -
by thy revolt, oh husband, shall be thought
put on for villainy. shakespeare’s cymbeline.
give him hecdful note ;
and, after, we will both our judgments join
in censure of his seeming. shakespeare's hamlet.
2. fair appearance. f
for you there's rosemary and rue ; these keep
seeming and favour all the winter long. shakspeare.
3. opinion.
dryden's an.
nothing more clear unto their seeming, than that a new je-
rusalem, being often spoken of in scripture, they undoubtedly
were themselves that new jerusalem. ihooker.
- his persuasive words impregn'd
with reason to her seeming. milton.
see'm ingly. adv. [from seeming.] in appearance; in show ;
in semblance. - -
. to this her mother's plot,
she seemingly obedicat, likewise hath -
made promise to the doctor. shak. merry wives of winds.
- they to their viands fell, not seemingly
the angels, nor in mist, milton.
- - -
i have touched upon them, though semingly collateral to
my scope; and yet i think they are more than jeoningly so,
since they pertinently illustrate my design. clany. soft
the city dame was so well bred, as seemingly to take all in
good part. - l'oirange,
the king and haughty empress, to our wonder,
if not aton’d, yet seemingly at peace. drydon,
this the father seemingly complied with ; but afterwards re-
fusing, the son was likewise set aside. addson's f, echolder.
they depend often on reinote and seemingly disproportioned
causes. - ztterbury.
seeming ness. n.s.. [from seeming.] plausibility; fair al-
pearance.
the seemingnes of those reasons persuades us on the other
side. digby.
see’m lin ess. n.f. [from semily.] decency; handsomeness;
comeliness ; grace ; beauty.
when substantialness combineth with delightfulness, semi-
nos, with portliness, and currentness with stayedness, how can
the language sound other than full of sweetness : camden.
see(mly. adj. [sommeligt, danish ; from some, islandick.
honour or decency..] decent ; becoming ; proper; fit. .
suspence of judgment and exercise of charity were safer and
seemier for christian men, than the hot pursuit of these con-
troversies. - - £iozar.
i am a woman, lacking wit -
to make a semy answer to such persons. shakes. h. viii.
the wife safest and sermliest by her husband stays. millon.
may we enjoy -
our humid products, and with semy draughts -
enkindle mirth and hospitable love. philipi.
see mly. adv. [from the adjective..] in a decent manner; in
a proper manner.
there, seemly rang'd in peaceful order, stood
ulysses' arms, now long disus’d to blood. pope.
seen. a.j. o skilled ; versed.
petruchio shall offer me, disguis'd in sober robes,
to old baptista as a schoolmasier
well seen in musick. -
- noble boyle, not less in nature seen,
than his great brother read in states and men. drydon.
seer. n. s. [from see.]
1. one who sees.
we are in hopes that you may prove a dreamer of dreams,
and a ster of visions. ddison's speciator.
2. a prophet; one who foresees future events.
how soon hath thy prediction, seer blest |
measur'd this transient world the race of time,
*till time stand fix’d 44ilton's paradio lo?.
by day your frighted seers
shall call for fountains to express their tears,
and wish their eyes were floods : by night from dreams
of opening gulphs, black storms, and raging flames,
starting amaz'd, shall to the people show -
emblems of heav'nly wrath and mystick types of woe. pri.
seer wood. m. s. see sear wood. dry wood.
caught, like dry stubble fir’d, or like searwood;
yet from the wound ensu’d no purple flood,
but look’d a bubbling mass of frying blood. dryden.
see's aw, n. / [from saw.] a reciprocating motion.
his wit all seesaw, between that and thiss ;
; pope.
shakspeare.
now high, now low, now master up, now miss,
and he himself one vile antithesis.
73 see's aw. v. n. [from saw.] to move with a reciprocating
motion. -
sometimes they were like to pull john over, then it went
all of a sudden again on john's side; so they went seesawing
up and down, from one end of the room to the other. arbuth.
72 seeth. v. a. preterite i sa or seethed; part, pass. sodden.
so, saxon ; soiden, dutch..] to boil; to decoet in hot
1quor. -
the scythians used to seeth the flesh in the hide, and so do
the northern irish. spensor.
- go, suck the subtile blood o' th' grape,
*till the high fever seeth your blood to froth,
and so 'scape hanging. - shakespeare's timen.
set on the great pot, and seth pottage for the sons of the
prophets. 2 kings, iv.
to seeth. v. m. to be in a state of ebullition; to be hot.
the boiling baths at cairbadon,
which seeth with secret fire eternally,
and in their entrails, full of quick brimston,
nourish the flames, which they are warm'd upon.
fairy queen.
i will make a complimental assault upon him; for my bu-
siness seeths, shakesp. i roilus and crossida.
lovers and madmen have their secting brains,
such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
more than cool reason ever comprehends.
with a flesh hook, and stuck it into the pan.
see"i her. m. s. [foom seeth..] a boiler; a pot.
the
shakespeare.
the priest’s servant came, while the flesh was in yong,
i sa. ii. 13.
of 7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 2</div><p class="text">s e i
the fire thus form’d, she sets the kettle on 3
like bonish'd gold the little seether shone. dryden.
se"gment. m. s. [sogment, fr. sigmentum, lat..] a figure
contained between a chord and an arch of the circle, or so
much of the circle as is cut off by that chord.
unto a parallel sphere, and such as live under the poles for
half a year, some segments may appear at any time, and under
any quarter, the sun not setting, but walking round. brown.
their segments or arcs, which appeared so numerous, for
the most part exceeded not the third part of a circle. newton.
se'gnity. m. s. [from signis, lat.] sluggishness; inactivity.
die?.
t. se:gregate. v. a. s.sgrego, lat. segreger, fr.] to
set apart; to separate from others.
segreg a tion. m. s. [segregation, fr.
ration from others.
what shall we hear of this
a sigregation of the turkish fleet;
for do but stand upon the foaming shore,
the chiding billows seem to pelt the clouds. shak, oool.
se'iant. adj. [in herally.) sitting.
seigneurial. adj. [from seignir.j
powers; independant.
those lands were signeurial.
seignior. m. s. [from senior, lat. signeur, fr.]
the title of honour given by italians.
se'ignioky. n.s.. [segmurie, fr. from signior.] a jord.hip ;
a territory.
o'neal never had any signiory over that country, but what
by incroachment he got upon the english. speoser.
were you not restor'd -
to all the duke of norfolk's seigniories 2 shao. h. iv.
hosea, in the person of god, fayeth of the jews, they have
reigned, but not by me; they have set a seigniory over them.
selves: which place proveth plainly, that there are govern-
ments which god doth not avow. bacon.
william, earl of pembroke, being lord of all leinster, had
royal jurisdiction throughout that province, and every cne of
his five sons enjoyed that seigniory successively. 12...wies.
se19 nok agf. a. s. [signeurage, fr. from seignior.] autho-
rity; acknowledgment of power.
hey brought work to the mint, and a part of the money
from sgregate.] sepa-
invested with large
tompse.
a lord.
coined to the crown for seignorage. locke.
to se 1g no rise. v. a. [from seignior.] to lord over.
as fair he was as cytherea's make,
as proud as he that seign:risoth hell. fairfax.
seine. m. s. [rone, saxon; sline, jenne, some, fr.] a net
used in fishing.
they have cock-boats for passengers, and sline boats for
taking of pilchards. carew.
se’iner, n.s.. [from seine.] a fisher with nets.
seiners complain with open mouth, that these drovers work
much prejudice to the commonwealth of fishermen, and reap
small gain to themselves. carew's survey of cornwal.
to sel ze. v. a. [saisir, fr.]
1. to take hold of ; to gripe; to grasp.
then as a tiger who by chance hath spy'd
in some purlieu two gentle fawns at play,
strait couches close, then rising, changes oft
his couchant watch, as one who chose his ground,
whence rushing he might surest size them both,
both grip'd in each paw.
2. to take possession of by force.
- at last they seize
the scepter, and regard not i javid's sons. ..]/ilton.
3. to take possession of; to lay hold on ; to invade suddenly.
in her sad breast the prince's fortunes rowl,
and hope and doubt alternate seize her soul.
4. to take forcible posiession of by law.
an escheator of london had arrested a clothier that was
outlawed, and seized his goods. camdon.
it was judged by the highest kind of judgment, that he
should be banished, and his whole estate conficated and seized,
and his houses pulled down. - lacon.
5. to make possessed ; to put in posi'ssion of.
so th’ one for wrong, the other stroves for right:
as when a griffin, seized of his prey,
a dragon fierce encount’reth in his flight,
through wildest air making his idie way.
so pluto, seiz'd of pioserpine, convey’d
to hell's tremenduous gloom th’ affrighted maid,
there grimly finil'd, pleas'd with the beauteous prize,
nor envy'd jove his sunshine and his skies. addis. catz.
to seize. v. n. to fix the grasp or the power on any thing.
fairest cordelia, -
thee and thy virtues here isoze upon :
be’t lawful i take up what's cast away ? shakesh. k. lear.
where there is a design of supplanting, that necessarily re-
quires another of accusing : even jezebei projects not to seize
on naboth's vineyard without a precedent charge. lec. of p.
seizis. n. s. [ sasoie, fr.]
1. [in law. j is of two sorts: son in fact, and seisin in law.
. sojin in fact, is when a corporal position is taken : yes/n in
milton -
pope.
fairy q'een.
law, is when something is done which the law accounteth a
jo", as an inrolment. this is as much as a right to lands
and tenements, though the owner be by wrong dificized of
them. cowel.
2. the aet of taking possession. - -
every indulged in gives satan livery and seisin of his heart,
and a power to dispose of it as he pleases. decay of piety.
seisin the same in the canon saw as livery and seisin at the
connnnon la w. o 2007.
3. the things possessed. a, iffe's parergon
many recoveries were had as well by heirs as successors of
the seizin of their predecessors. hale.
se'izu re. m. s. [from seize.]
1. the act of seizing.
2. the thing seized.
sufficient that thy pray'rs are heard, and death,
then due by sentence when thou did'st transgress,
defeated of his seizure, many days
giv'n thee of grace.
3. the act of taking forcible possession.
thy lands, and all things that thou do's call thine,
worth seizure, do we seize into our hands. shakespeare.
in the general town he maintained a seizure, and pottedion
of the whole. jottom.
henry continued to burn protestants, after he had cast off
the pope ; and his seizure of ecclesiastical revenues cannot be
a4ilton's paradise loft,
reckoned as a mark of the church's liberty. swift.
4. gripe; possession.
and shall these hands, so lately purg’d of blood,
unyoke this seizure, and this kid regret shakspeare.
make o'cr thy honour by a deed of trust,
and give me seizure of the mighty wealth. dryden.
5. catch. - -
lot there be no sudden seizure of a lapsed syllable to play
upon it. //atts.
sel cour h. adj. [relo, rare, sax. and cruth, known.] rarely
known ; uncommon. spensor. the same with un-out).
so l120m, adv. [re'san, rarely; reloon, more rarely; rel-
bore, most rarely. sclean is supposed to be contracted from
rooden, or rels, rare, and praenne, when, saxon; sellen,
dutch soltan, german.] rarely; not often; not fre-
quently.
wisdom and youth are sellom joined in one ; and the ordi-
nary course of the world is more according to job’s observa-
tion, who giveth men advice to seek wisdom amongst the an-
cients, and in the length of days understanding. hooker.
there is true joy conveyed to the heart by preventing grace,
which paidoning grace sellom gives. south's sermons.
where the flight of fancy is managed with good judgment,
the seldomer it is teen it is the more valuable. grew.
seldoris ess. m. s. [from seldom.] uncommonness; infre-
quency ; rarencss; rarity. little used.
degrees of well-doing there could be none, except perhaps
in the slamnes, and oftenness of doing well. hooker.
seldshows. adj. [seld and shown.] seldom exhibited to view.
soldshown flamins -
do press among the popular throngs. shakso. corio'anos.
to sel!. c. f. v. a. [selectio, lat. to chuse in preference
to others rejected. -
the footmen, selected out of all the provinces, were greatly
diminished, being now scarce eight thousand strong. knollei.
the pious chief -
a hundred youths from all his train soloss. dryden.
select. adj. [from the verb..] nicely chosen; choice ; called
out on account of superiour excellence.
- to the nuptial bow'r
i led her, blushing like the morn: all heav'n,
and happy constellations, on that hour
shed their selecios influence. a silton's paradis. loft.
s. lect from vulgar herds, with garlands gay,
a hundred bulls ascend the sacred way. prior.
sele"ction. m. s. [selectio, lat, from select.] the aci of cul-
ling or chufing ; choice.
while we single out several dishes, and reject others, the
sole; ion seems but arbitrary. brown's wulgar errours.
sele"ct n ess. m. s. [from select.] the state of being select.
sele'cror. m. s. [from select.] he who selects.
selenog raphical. q adj. [selenographique, fr. from selenogra-
sele no graphic k. ! phy. j belonging to selenography.
sele'nog raphy, n.s.. [selenographie, fr. town and %2%.]
a description of the moon.
hevelius, in his accurate selenography, or description of the
moon, hath well translated the known appellations of regions,
seas, and mountains, unto the parts of that luminary. brown.
self. pronoun, plur. selves. [siba, gothick; rop, rylpa, sax.
jef, selve, dutch..] - - -
1. it's primary signification seems to be that of an adjective;
very : particular ; this above others; sometimes, one's own.
shoot another arrow that sef way
which you did shoot the first. -
shakes eare’s marchant of penice.
the cruel ministers, by self and violent hands.
took off her life. - shakspeare.
on
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 3</div><p class="text">s e l
s e l
on these sof hills the air is so thin, that it is not sufficient
to bear up the body of a bird. raleigh.
at that self moment enters palamon
the gate of venus. dryden.
2. it is united both to the personal pronouns, and to the neu-
tral pronoun it, and is always added when they are used reci-
procally, or return upon themselves: as, i did not hurt him,
he hurt himself; the people his me, but i clap myself; thou loves?
thyself, though the world scorns thee.
they cast to build a city,
and get themselves a name. milton.
he permits
within himself unworthy pow'rs to reign
over free reason. milton.
self is that conscious thinking thing, which is sensible or
conscious of pleasure and pain, capable of happiness and mi-
sery, and so is concerned for itself, as far as that consciousness
extends. locke.
. it is sometimes used emphatically in the nominative case: as,
myself will decide it; i myself will come; himself shall revenge
it. this use of self, thus compounded, without the pronoun
personal, is chiefly poetical.
4. compounded with him, a pronoun substantive, self is in ap-
pearance an *:::::: joined to my, thy, our, your, pronoun
adjectives, it seems a substantive. even when compounded
with him it is at last found to be a substantive, by its variation
in the plural, contrary to the nature of english adjectives, as
o themselves.
o more he mention'd then of violence
against ourselves, or wilful barrenness. milton.
5. myself, himself, themselves, and the rest, may, contrary to
the analogy of my, him, them, be used as nominatives.
6. it often adds only emphasis and force to the pronoun with
which it is compounded: as, he did it himself.
a horse well bitted which himself did dress. dryden.
and touch'd with miseries myself have known,
i learn to pity woes so like my own. dryden.
7. it significs the individual, as subject to his own contemplation
or action.
the spark of noble courage now awake,
and strive your excellent self to excel. fairy queen.
next to the knowledge of god, this knowledge of our
solves seems most worthy of our endeavour. hale.
since consciousness always accompanies thinking, and it is
that that makes every one to be what he calls self, and thereby
distinguishes himself from all other thinking things; in this
alone consists personal identity, i. e. the sameness of a rational
being. - locke.
it is by the consciousness it has of its present thoughts and
a&amp;ions, that it is self to o, now, and so will be the same
self, as far as the same consciousness can extend to agions past
or to come. locke.
the fondness we have for self, and the relation which other
things have to our selves, furnishes another long rank of pre-
judices. j/atts.
8. it is much used in composition, which it is proper to explain
by a train of examples. it is to be observed, that its compo-
fition in shakespeare is often harsh.
then held she her tongue, and cast down a self-accusing
look, finding that in herself she had shot out of the bow of
her affection a more quick opening of her mind than she
minded to have done. sidney.
alas! while we are wrapt in foggy mist
of our self-love, so passions do deceive,
we think they hurt when most they do affist. sidney.
*till strephon's plaining voice him nearer drew,
where by his words his self-like case he knew. sidney.
ah! where was first that cruel cunning found,
to frame of earth a vessel of the mind,
where it should be to self-destruction bound sidney.
before the door sat self-consuming care,
day and night keeping wary watch and ward. fa. 2ween.
my strange and self abuse, -
is the initiate fear that wants hard use. shakesp. macbeth.
i have heard so much,
and with demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
but being over-full ofalfoil,
my mind did lose it. shakesp. midsum. night's dream.
nor know i aught
by me that's said or done amiss this night,
unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
and to defend ourselves it be a fin,
when violence assails us. shakespeare's othello.
he walks, and that self-chain about his neck,
which he forswore. shakespeare.
it is in my power, in one self-born hour,
to plant and o'erwhelm custom. shakesp. winter's tale.
his treasons will fit blushing in his face,
notable to endure the fight of day,
but self-affrighted tremble at his fin. shak. rich. ii.
the stars above us govern our conditions;
else one#. and mate could not beget
such different issues.
shakespeare.
i'm made of that soft-metal as my sister,
and prize me at her worth. shałoff. king lear.
in my school-days, when i had lost one shaft,
i shot his fellow of the self same flight
the self-same way, with more advised watch,
to find the other forth. shakespear.
he may do some good on her:
a peevish self-will'd harlotry it is, shak. romeo and julia,
but left myself be guilty of self-wrong,
i'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song. shakespear,
he conjunct and flatt'ring his displeasure,
tript me behind: being down, insulted, rail'd,
got praises of the king,
for him attempting who was self-subdu'd. shakespeare.
the everlasting fixt
his canon 'gainst self slaughter.
shakesp. hamlet,
know if his lait purpose hold, -
or whether since he is advis'd by aught -
to change the course he's full of alteration,
and self-reproving. shakesp. king lear,
more nor less to others paying,
than by self-offences weighing:
shame to him whose cruel striking,
kills for faults of his own liking ! shakespeare.
bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
confronted him with self-caparisons,
point against point. shakesp. macbeth.
self-love, my liege, is not so vile a fin
as self-neglecting. shakesp. henry v.
anger is like
a full hot horse, who, being allow'd his way,
self-mettle tires him. shakespear.
his lords desire him to have borne
his bruised helmet and his bended sword
before him through the city; he forbids it,
being frce from vainness and self glorious pride.
you promis'd
to lay aside self harming heaviness,
and entertain a cheerful disposition. shaks). rih. iii,
in their anger they slew a man, and in their sof-will they
digged down a wall. - gen. xlix, 6.
the most ordinary cause of a fingle life is liberty, especially
in certain self-pleasing and humorous minds, which are so fen-
fible of every restraint as to think their girdles and garters to
be bonds and shackles. - bacon,
haft thou set up nothing in competition with god; no
shakesp.
pride, profit, self-love, or self-interest of thy own duppa.
up through the spacious palace passed she,
to where the king's proudly reposed head,
if any can be soft to tyranny,
and self-tormenting sin, had a soft bed. crashow.
with a joyful willingness these self loving reformers took
possession of all vacant preferments, and with reluctance others
parted with their beloved colleges and subsistence. walton,
repent the fin; but if the punishment
thou can'st avoid, self preservation bids. milton,
him fast sleeping soon he found,
in labyrinth of many a round self-roll’d. milton,
oft times nothing profits more
than self-esteem, grounded on just and right,
well manag’d. milton's paradis. loft.
self-knowing, and from thence
magnanimous, to correspond with heav'n, milton,
so virtue giv'n for lost, -
deprest and overthrown, as seem’d,
like that self-begotten bird,
in th’arabian woods embost,
that no second knows nor third,
and lay ere while a holocaust,
from out her ashy womb now teen'd. milton's agonises,
he sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
my motions in him : longer than they move,
his heart i know how variable and vain,
self-left.
seneca approves this self-homicide.
thyself from flatt'ring self-conceit defend,
nor what thou do'st not know, to know pretend. denham.
man's that savage beast, whose mind,
from reason to self-love declin'd,
milton,
haketvil.
delights to prey upon his kind. denham.
farewel, my tears;
and my just anger be no more confin'd
to vain complaints, or self-devouring filence. denham.
they are yet more mad to think that men may rest by death,
though they die in self-murder, the greatest fin. graunt.
are not these strange self-delusions, and yet attested by
common experience 2 south's sermoni.
if the image of god is only sovereignty, certainly we have
been hitherto much mistaken, and hereafter are to beware of
making ourselves unlike god, by too much self-denial and
humility. south.
if a man would have a devout, humble, fin-abhorring, self-
denying
... 3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 4</div><p class="text">s e l
denying frame of spirit, he cannot take a more efficacious
course to attain it than by praying himself into it. south.
let a man apply himself to the difficult work of self-exa-
mination by a strict scrutiny into the whole estate of his
soul. - south.
a fatal self-imposture, such as defeats the design, and de-
stroys the force of all religion. south.
when he intends to bereave the world of an illustrious
person, he may cast him upon a bold self-opinioned physician,
worse than his distemper, who shall make a shift to cure him
into his grave. south.
neglect of friends can never be proved rational, 'till we
prove the person using it omnipotent and self-sufficient, and
fuch as can never need any mortal affistance. south.
by all human laws, as well as divine, jelf-murder has ever
been agreed on as the greatest crime. temple.
a self-conceited fop will swallow any thing. l'e/lrange.
from atreus though your ancient lineage came;
yet my self conscious worth, your high renown,
your virtue, through the neighb'ring nations blown. dryd.
he has given you all the commendation which his self-
sufficiency could afford to any. dryden,
below yon sphere
there hangs the ball of earth and water mixt,
self-center'd and unmov’d. dryden's state of innocence.
all these receive their birth from other things,
but from himself the phoenix only springs;
self-born, begotten by the parent flame
in which he burn'd, another and the same. dryden.
the burning fire that shone so bright, -
flew off all sudden with extinguish'd light,
and left one altar dark, a little space;
which turn'd self kindled, and renew'd the blaze. dryden,
thou first, o king ! release the rights of sway ;
pow'r, sof-restrain'd, the people best obey. dryden.
eighteen and nineteen are equal to thirty-seven, by the same
self-evidence that one and two are equal to three. locke.
a contradiction of what has been said is a mark of yet
greater pride and self conceitedness, when we take upon us to
set another right in his story. locke.
i am as justly accountable for any action done many years
since, appropriated to me now by this self-consciousness, as i
am for what i did the last moment. locke.
each intermediate idea agreeing on each side with those two,
it is immediately placed between : the ideas of men and self-
determination appear to be conne&amp;ted. locke.
this self-existent being hath the power of perfection, as
well as of existence in himself; for he that is above, or exist-
eth without, any cause, that is, hath the power of existence
in himself, cannot be without the power of any possible exist-
cil cc, grew's cosmologia sacra.
body cannot be sof-existent, because it is not self-movent;
for motion is not of the essence of body, because we may have
a definitive conception of body, abstracted from that of mo-
tion: wherefore motion is something else besides body, some-
thing without which body may be conceived to exist. grew.
confidence, as opposed to modesty, and distinguished from
decent assurance, proceeds from self-opinion, occasioned by
ignorance or flattery. colier of confidence.
bewilder'd i, my author cannot find,
*till some first cause, some self-existent mind, }
who form’d, and rules all nature, is assign'd. blackm.
if a first body may to any place
be not determin'd in the boundless space,
‘tis plain it then may absent be from all,
who then will this a self-existence call blackmore.
shall nature, erring from her first command,
self-preservation fall by her own hand 2 granville.
low nonsense is the talent of a cold phlegmatick temper :
a writer of this complexion gropes his way softly amongst
j. f. contradiction, and grovels in absurdities. addison.
this fatal hypocrisy and self-deceit is taken notice of in
these words, who can understand his errours ? cleanse thou
me from secret faults. addison's speciator.
the guilt of perjury is so self-evident, that it was always
reckoned amongst the greatest crimes, by those who were only
governed by the light of reason. addison.
self-sufficiency proceeds from inexperience. addison.
mien had better own their ignorance than advance doctrines
which are self-contradictory. stealator.
light, which of all bodies is nearest allied to spirit, is also
most diffusive and self-communicative. norris.
thus we sce in bodies, the more of kin they are to spirit in
subtilty and refinement, the more spreading are they and self-
diffusive. o norris.
god, who is an absolute spiritual act, and who is such a
pure light as in which there is no darkness, must needs be in-
finitely self-imparting and communicative. . . . . . norris.
.very animal is conscious of some individual, self-moving,
sof-determining principle. pope and arbuthn. mart. scrib.
nick does not pretend to be a gentleman: he is a trades-
man, a self-secking wretch. arbuthnot's john bull,
vol. ii. -
by the blast of self-opinion mov’d,
v (e. with to charm, and seek to be belov’d.
living and understanding substances do clearly demonstrate
to philosophical inquirers the necessary self-existence, power,
wisdom, and beneficence of their maker. bentley.
if it can intrinsically stir itself, and either commence or
alter its course, it must have a principle of self activity, which
is life and sense. bentle 's sermons
this desire of existence is a natural affeaion .# the soul;
'tis self-preservation in the highest and truest meaning.
the philosophers, and even the epicureans, #:
jolf-sufficiency of the godhead, and seldom or never sacrificed
at all. - - - bentley.
matter is not endued with self-motion, nor with a power to
alter the course in which it is put : it is merely passive, and
must ever continue in that state it is settled in. co.
i took not arms, 'till urg'd by self-defence,
the eldest law of nature. rowe's amb. stepmother.
his labour and study would have shewn his early mistakes,
and cured him of self-flattering delusions. //atts.
this is not to be done in a rash and self-sufficient manner;
but with an humble dependance on divine grace, while we
prior.
walk among snares. watts.
the religion of jesus, with all its self-denials, virtues, and
devotions, is very practicable. j/atts.
i heard in crete, this island's name;
for ’twas in crete, my native soil, i came
self-banish'd thence. pope's odyssy.
achilles's courage is furious and untradable; that of ajax
is heavy and self-confiding. pope.
i doom, to fix the gallant ship,
a mark of vengeance on the sable deep;
to warn the thoughtless self confiding train,
no more unlicens'd thus to brave the main. pope.
what is loose love a transient gust,
a vapour fed from wild desire,
a wand'ring self-consuming fire. pope.
in dubious thought the king awaits,
and self-considering, as he stands, debates. pope.
by mighty jove's command,
unwilling have i trod this pleasing land;
for who self-mov’d with weary wing would sweep
such length of ocean : pope.
they who reach parnassus’ lofty crown,
employ their pains to spurn some others down;
and while self-love each jealous writer rules,
contending wits become the sport of fools. pope.
it may be thought that ulysses here is too ostentatious, and
that he dwells more than modesty allows upon his own accom-
plishments; but self-praise is sometimes no fault. broome.
no wonder such a spirit, in such a situation, is provoked
beyond the regards of religion or self-conviction. swift.
self heal. n.s.. [brunella, latin.] a plant. the same with
sanicle ; which see.
self is h. adj. [from self.] attentive only to one's own inte-
rest; void of regard for others.
what could the most aspiring soft/h man desire more, were
he to form the notion of a being to whom he would recom-
mend himself, than such a knowledge as can discover the least
appearance of perfection, and such a goodness as will propor-
tion a reward to it 2 addison's speciator.
passions, though selfish, if their means be fair,
list under reason, and deserve her care;
those that imparted court a nobler aim,
exalt their kind, and take some virtue's name. pope.
se'lf is hn ess. m. s. [from selfish..] attention to his own in-
terest, without any regard to others; self-love.
this sublimer love, being, by an intimate conjunction with
its object, throughly refined from all base dross of softshnes;
and interest, nobly begets a perfect submisfion of our wills to
the will of god. boyle's seraphick love.
se'lfishly. adv. [from sessh.] with regard only to his own
interest; without love of others.
he can your merit selfishly approve,
and shew the sense of it without the love. pope.
se'lfs ame. adj. [self and same.]. exactly the same.
i have no great cause to lock for other than the self-same
portion and lot, which your manner hath been hitherto to lay
on them that concur not in opinion with you. hooker. prof.
flight pursu'd one way the self-same hour. a4ilton.
i have been base, -
base ev'n to him from whom i did receive
all that a son could to a parent give :
behold me punish’d in the self-same kind;
th'ungrateful does a more ungrateful find. dryden.
se'lion. n.s.. [selio, low latin.) a ridge of land. . ainsw.
sell. pronoun. [for self.] sell is retained in scotland for self,
and sells in the plural for selves.
they turn round like grindle-stones,
which they dig out fro’ the dells,
for their bairns bread, wives and sells. ben. johnson.
sell. n.s.. [selle, french; sella, latin.] a saddle, 9bsolete.
23 n turning
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 5</div><p class="text">s e. m.
s e m
turning to that place, in which
he left his lofty steed with golden sel's,
and goodly gorgeous barbes, him found not there. fa. q#.
to sell. v. a. [ryllan, saxon; sela, lilandick.]
1. to give for a price; the word correlative to buy; to vend.
the midianites sold him unto egypt, unto potiphar. gen.
let us sell him to the ishmaelites. gen. xxxvii. 27.
this sense is likewise mistress of an art,
which to soft people sweet perfumes doth sell. davies.
all the inns and publick-houses are obliged to furnish them-
selves with corn, which is sold out at a much dearer rate than
'tis bought up. addison on italy.
you have made an order that ale should be sold for three
half-pence a quart. swift.
2. to betray for money: as, he sold his country.
you would have sold your king to slaughter,
his princes and his peers to servitude. shakespeare.
to sell. v. m. to have commerce or traffick with one.
i will buy with you, sell with you; but i will not eat with
ou. shakesp. merchant of wenice.
consult not with a buyer of selling. ecclus, xxxvii. 11.
se'll ander. m. s. a dry scab in a horse's hough or pas-
tern. ainsworth.
se'll er. m. s. [from sell.] the person that sells; vender.
to things of sale a seller's praise belongs. shakespeare.
the name of the agent, of the seller, notary, and witnes-
ses, are in both instruments. addison on italy.
se’lv age. m. s. (of this word i know not the etymology.
skinner thinks selvage is said as salvage, from its saving the
cloth.] the edge of cloth where it is closed by compli-
cating the threads.
make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from
the salvage in the coupling. exod. xxvi. 4.
selves. the plural of self.
consciousness being interrupted, and we losing fight of our
past seves, doubts are raised whether we are the same. locłe.
se"mblable. adj. [semblable, french.] like; resembling.
then be abhorr'd
all feasts, societies, and throngs of men
his somblable, yea himself, timon disdains. shakespeare.
with semblable reason we might expect a regularity in the
winds. brown's /ulgar errours.
se'mblably. adv. [from simblable.] with resemblance.
a gallant knight he was, his name was blunt;
sembiably furnish'd like the king himself. shakesp. h. iv.
se'mblan ce. n.s.. [semblance, fr. from semblant. j
1. likeness; resemblance ; similitude; representation.
solicit henry with her wond’rous praise;
bethink thee cn her virtues, that surmount
her natural graces, that extinguish art:
repeat their somblance often. shakespeare.
she’s but the sign and semblance of her honour:
behold how like a maid she blushes here !
o, what authority and shew of truth
can cunning fin cover itself withal |
he with high words, that bore
semblance of worth, not substance, gently rais'd
their fainting courage, and dispell'd their fears. milton.
this last effort brought forth the opinion, that these bodies
are not what they seem to be ; that they are no shells, but
mere sportings of active nature, and only semblances or imita-
tions of shells. jwoodward.
it is not his meaning that we put on the outward face and
jemblance of virtue, only to conceal and disguise our vice. rog.
2. appearance; show; figure.
be you the soldier; for you likest are,
for manly semblance and for skill in war. spenser.
their semblance kind, and mild their gestures were,
peace in their hands, and friendship in their face. fairfax.
all that fair and good in thy divine
semblance, and in thy beauty's heav'nly ray,
united i beheld. milton's paradis lost.
semblant. adj. [semblant, french.j. like ; resembling;
having the appearance of any thing. little used.
thy picture, like thy fame,
entire may last ; that as their eyes survey
the semblant shade, men yet unborn may say,
thus great, thus gracious look'd britannia's queen;
her brow thus smooth, her look was thus serene. prior.
semblant. n. s. show ; figure ; resemblance; representa-
tion. not in use.
her purpose was not such as she did feign,
ne yet her person such as it was seen;
but under simple shew, and semblant plain,
lurks false duessa, secretly unseen. fairy queen.
full lively is thesemblant, tho’ the substance dead. spens.
semblative. adj. [from semblant..] suitable; accommodate;
fit; resembling.
diana's lip
is not more smooth and ruby ; thy small pipe
is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound;
and all is semblative a woman's part. shak. twelfth night.
shakespeare.
7% semble. v. n. [sembler, fr.] to represent; to make a
likeness. little used.
let europe, sav'd, the column high erect,
than trajan’s higher, or than antonine's,
where sembling art may carve the fair effect,
and full atchievement of thy great designs. prior.
se 441, m. s. [latin.] . a word which, used in composition
signifies half: as semicircle, half a circle. 2
semia’nnu lar. adj. [semi and annulus, a ring.] half round.
another boar tusk, somewhat slenderer, and of a jemian-
mular figure. - grew's musaun,
se'mibr ef. n. s. [semibreve, french.j
semibref is a note in musick relating to time, and is the last
in augmentation. it is commonly called the master-note, or
measure-note, or time-note, as being of a certain determinate
measure or length of time by itself; and all the other notes of
augmentation and diminution are adjusted to its value. harrio,
he takes my hand, and as a still which stays
a semibros, 'twixt each drop, he niggardly,
as loth to enrich me, so tells many a lye. donne.
semici rclf. m. s. [jemicirculus, lat. semi and circle.] a half
round; part of a circle divided by the diameter.
black brows
become some women best, so they be in a semicirck,
or a half-moon, made with a pen. shakespeare.
has he given the lye
in circle, or oblique, or semicircle, -
or direct parallel ? shakespeare.
the chains that held my left leg gave me the liberty of
walking backwards and forwards in a semicircle. swift.
::::::::::. ! adj. [semi and circular.] half round.
the firm fixure of thy foot would give an excellent mo-
tion to thy gait, in a semicircled farthingale. shakespeare.
the rainbow is caused by the rays of the sun falling upon a
rorid and opposite cloud, whereof some refle&amp;ted, others re-
fracted, beget the semicircular variety we call the rainbow.
brown's wulgar errouri.
the seas are inclosed between the two semicircular moles
that surround it. addison on italy,
semico'lon. m. s. (semi and x&amp;xay.] half a colon; a point
made thus [;] to note a greater pause than that of a comma,
semidia meter. m. s. [semi and diameter.] half the line
which, drawn through the centre of a circle, divides it into
two equal parts; a streight line drawn from the circumference
to the center of a circle.
their difference is as little confiderable as a semidiameter of
the earth in two measures of the highest heaven, the one
taken from the surface of the earth, the other from its centre:
the disproportion is just nothing. more.
the force of this instrument consists in the disproportion
of distance betwixt the semidiameter of the cylinder and the
semidiameter of the rundle with the spokes. wilkins.
semidi aphane"ity. n.s.. [semi and diaphaneity.] half trans-
parency; imperfect transparency.
the transparency or semidiaphaneity of the superficial cor-
puscles of bigger bodies may have an interest in the produc-
tion of their colours. boyle on colours.
se midia phanous, adj. [semi and diaphanous.] half trans-
parent; imperfeołly transparent.
another plate, finely variegated with a semidiaphanous grey
or sky, yellow and brown. woodward on fossil.
se'midouble. n. s. [semi and double.] in the romish bre-
viary, such offices and feasts as are celebrated with less solem-
nity than the double ones, but yet with more than the single
ones. bailey.
sem, flo'sculous, adj. [semi and fostulus, latin.] having a
semifloret. bailey,
se miflor et. m. s. [semi and foret.] among florists, an half
flourish, which is tubulous at the beginning like a floret, and
afterwards expanded in the form of a tongue. baily.
semiflu'id, adj. [semi and fluid..] imperfeotly fluid.
phlegm, or petuite, is a sort of semifluid, it being so far
solid that one part draws along several other parts adhering to
it, which doth not happen in a perfeot fluid, and yet no part
will draw the whole mass, as happens in a perfect solid.
arbuthnot,
semilu'nar. }* [semilunaire, fr. semi and luna, latin.]
semi lu’nary. s. reseinbling in form a half moon.
the eyes are guarded with a semilunar ridge. gretc.
se’mimetal. n.s.. [semi and metal.] half metal ; imperfect
metal. -
semimetals are metallic fosfils, heavy, opake, of a bright
glittering surface, not malleable under the hammer; as quick-
silver, antimony, cobalt, the arsenicks, bismuth, zink, with
its ore calamine: to these may be added the semimetallick re-
crements, tutty and pampholyx. hill.
se’m1n al. adj. [seminal, french; sominis, latin.]
1. belonging to seed.
2. contained in the seed ; radical.
had our senses never presented us with those obvious seminal
principles of apparent generations, we should never have
- suspected
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
--
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 6</div><p class="text">s e m
suspected that a plant or animal would have proceeded from
such unlikely materials. --- glanville's scepsis.
though we cannot prolong the period of a commonwealth
beyond the decree of heaven, or the date of its nature, any
more than human life beyond the strength of the seminal vir-
tue, yet we may manage a sickly constitution, and preserve a
strong one. - swift.
seminality. m. s. [from semen, latin.]
1. the nature of seed.
as though there were a seminality in urine, or that, like the
seed, it carried with it the idea of every part, they conceive
we behold therein the anatomy of every particle. brown.
2. the power of being produced.
in the seeds of wheat there lieth obscurely the seminality of
darnel. brown's pulgar errours.
se'm in ary. m. s. [seminaire, fr. sminarium, from semino, lat.]
1. the ground where any thing is sown to be afterwards trans-
planted; seed-plot.
some, at the first transplanting trees out of their seminaries,
cut them off about an inch from the ground, and plant them
like quickset. mortimer's husbandry.
2. the place or original stock whence any thing is brought.
this stratum is expanded, serving for a common integu-
ment, and being the jeminary or promptuary that furnisheth
forth matter for the formation and increment of animal and
vegetable bodies. woodward.
3. seminal state.
the hand of god, who first created the earth, hath wisely
contrived them in their proper seminaries, and where they best
maintain the intention of their species. brown.
4. principle ; causality.
nothing subministrates apter matter to be converted into
pestilent siminaries, sooner than steams of nasty folks and beg-
gars. harvey on the plague.
5 breeding-place; place of education, from whence scholars
are transplanted into life.
it was the seat of the greatest monarchy, and the sominary
of the greatest men of the world, whilst it was heathen. bacon.
the inns of court must be the worst instituted seminaries
in any christian country. wist.
sem.ina tio n. n.s.. [from semino, lat.]. the aet of sowing.
to: [semen and facio, latin.] productive of
sem in 1. fick. seed.
we are made to believe, that in the fourteenth year males
are seminifical and pubescent; but he that shall inquire into
the generality, will rather adhere unto aristotle. brown.
sem in ific aotion. m. s.
s. minification is the propagation from the seed or seminal
parts, hale's origin of mankind.
semiop acous. adj. [semi and opacus, latin.] half dark.
semiopacous bodies are such as, looked upon in an ordinary
light, and not held betwixt it and the eye, are not wont to be
discriminated from the rest of opacous bodies. boyle.
sem ipedal. adj. [semi and pedis, latin.] containing half a
foot.
semiper spi'cuous. adj. [semi and perticuus, latin.] half
transparent; impersectly clear.
a kind of amethystine flint, not composed of crystals or
grains ; but one entire massy stone, semiperspicuous, and of a
pale blue, almost of the colour of some cow's horns. grew.
semio'rd in at e. n.s. [in conick sections.] a line drawn.
at right angles to and bifle&amp;ted by the axis, and reaching from
one side of the scction to another; the half of which is pro-
perly the semiordinate, but is now called the ordinate. harris.
semifellucid, adj. [semi and pellucidus, latin.] half clear;
imperfectly transparent.
a lightgrey semipallucid flint, of much the same complexion
with the common indian agat. //oadward.
sem if roof. n.s.. [semi and proof..] the proof of a single evi-
dence. bailey.
six igua'dr. at e. w. n.s.. [in astronomy..] an aspect of the
sem199 artile. } planets when distant from each other forty-
five degrees, or one sign and a half. bailey.
sem 101: a v er. m. s. [in musick.] a note containing half the
quantity of the quaver. bailey.
sesirogi's rile. n.s. [[n astronomy..] an aspest of the pla-
nets when at the distance of thirty-six degrees from one an-
other. bailey.
sf mistorile. n.s. [in astronomy.] a semifixth ; an aspect of
the planets when they are distant from each other one twelfth
part of a circle, or thirty degrees. bailey.
semispherical. a j. [semi and spherical.] belonging to half
a sphere. ailey.
sf misplie ro'idal. adj. [semi and so heroidal.] formed like a
half spheroid.
semite r11an. m. s. [simi and tertian.] an ague com-
pounded of a tertian and a quotidian. bailey.
the natural product of such a cold moist year are tertians,
semitertians, and some quartans. arbuthnot on air.
se'mitone. n.f. [semiton, french.] in musick, one of the
degrees of concinuous intervals of concords. bailey.
st mivowel. n. s. [soni and vowel..] a consonant which
s e n
makes an imperfeoł sound, or does not demand a total occlu-
sion of the mouth. -
when homer would represent any agreeable object, he
makes use of the smoothest vowels and most flowing semi-
vowels. broome.
semper viy e. m. s. [semper and vivus, latin; that is, always
alive..] a plant.
the greater sempervive will put out branches two or three
years; but they wrap the root in an oil-cloth once in half a
year. bacon.
z - - -
sempit e'r nal, adj. [sempiternel, fr. sempiternus, from semper
and acternus, latin.]
1. eternal in futurity ; having beginning, but no end.
those, though they suppose the world not to be eternal, a
parte ante, are not contented to suppose it to be sempiternal,
or eternal a parte post ; but will carry up the creation of the
world to an immense antiquity. hale.
2. in poetry it is used simply for eternal.
should we the long-depending scale ascend
of sons and fathers, will it never end ?
if 'twill, then must we through the order run,
to some one man whose being ne'er begun;
if that one man was simpiternal, why
did he, since independant, ever die? blackmore,
sempiternity. m. / [/empiternitas, latin.] future dura-
tion, without end.
the future eternity, or sempiternity of the world, being ad-
mitted, though the eternity a parte ante be denied, there will
be a future infinity for the emanation of the divine good-
ness. hale.
semstr fss. m. s. [reamerone, saxon.) a woman whose
business is to few ; a woman who lives by her needle.
two hundred sem/?resses were employed to make me shirts,
and linen for bed and table, which they were forced to quilt
together in several folds. gulliver's travels,
the tuck'd up som/?res; walks with hasty strides. swift.
senary. adj. isonorius, seni, latin.] belonging to the num-
ber six ; containing six.
senate. n.s.. [senatus, latin ; senat, french..] an assembly
of counsellors ; a body of men set apart to consult for the
publick good. -
we debase
the nature of our seats, which will in time break ope
the locks o' th' senate, and bring in the crows
to peck the eagles. shaky?. coriolanus.
i here they shall found
their government, and their great senate chuse. milton.
he had not us'd excursions, spears, or darts,
but counsel, order, and such aged arts;
which, if our ancestors had not retain'd,
the senate's name our council had not gain'd.
gallus was welcom'd to the sacred strand,
the senate rising to salute their guest. . dryden.
senate house. n. s. [senate and house.] place of publick
council.
the nobles in great earnestness are going
all to the senatehouse; some news is come. shakespeare.
se'nator. m. s. [senator, latin; senateur, french.] a pub-
lick counsellor.
most unwise patricians,
you grave but reckless senators.
as if to ev'ry fop it might belong, -
like senators, to censure, right or wrong. granville.
sena to r1 al. nadj [senatorius, lat. senatorial, senatorien, fr.]
senat of rian. ; belonging to senators; befitting senators.
to send. v. a. preterite and part. pass. sent. [sandgan, go-
thick; renban, saxon ; senden, dutch.]
1. to despatch from one place to another : used both of per-
sons and things.
he sent letters by posts on horseback. esther.
his citizens sent a message after him, saying, we will not
have this man to reign over us. luke, xix. 14.
there have been commissions
sent down among them, which have flaw'd the heart
of all their loyalties. shakesp. henry viii.
my overshadowing spirit and might with thee
denham.
shakesp. coriolanus.
i send along. milton,
to remove him i decree,
and send him from the garden forth to till
the ground whence he was taken, fitter soil. milton.
his wounded men he first sends off to shore. dryden.
servants, sent on messages, stay out somewhat longer than
the message requires. swift.
2. to commission by authority to go and act.
i have not sent these prophets, yet they ran. jer.
but first whom shall we send
in search of this new world : here he had need
all circumspection, and we now no less
choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send,
the weight of all and our last hope relies.
3. to transmit by another ; not to bring.
they sent it to the elders by the hands of barnabas. 4;
4. 1 o
milton.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 7</div><p class="text">s e n
s e n
4. to dismiss another as agent ; not to go.
god will deign
to visit oft the dwellings of just men
delighted, and with frequent intercourse,
thither will send his winged messengers
on errands of supernal grace. milton,
5. to grant as from a distant place: as, if god send life.
i pray thee send me good speed this day, and shew kindness
unto my master. gen. xxiv. 12.
o send out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me. ps.
6. to inflict, as from a distance. . -
the lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and re-
buke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto. deut. xxviii.
7. to emit; to immit; to produce.
the water sends forth plants that have no roots fixed in the
bottom, being almost but leaves. bacon's nat. history.
the senses send in only the influxes of material things, and
the imagination and memory present only their pictures or
images, when the objects themselves are absent. cheyne.
8. to diffuse; to propagate.
cherubic songs by night from neighb'ring hills
aereal music send. milton.
when the fury took her stand on high,
a hiss from all the snaky tire went round :
the dreadful signal all the rocks rebound,
and through the achaian cities send the sound.
9. to let fly; to cast or shoot.
to send. v. n.
1. to despatch a message.
i have made bold to send in to your wife:
my suit is that she will to desdemona
procure me some access. shakespeare's othello.
this son of a murderer hath sent to take away my head.
kings.
they could not attempt their perfeot reformation in church
and state, ’till those votes were utterly abolished; therefore
they sent the same day again to the king. clarendon.
2. to send for. to require by message to come, or cause to
be brought. -
go with me some few of you, and see the place; and then
pope. }
you may send for your fick, which bring on land. bacon.
he sent for me; and, while i rais'd his head,
he threw his aged arms about my neck,
and, seeing that i wept, he press'd me close. dryden.
se’nder. m. s. [from send.] he that sends.
this was a merry message.
—we hope to make the sender blush at it. shak. h. w.
love that comes too late,
like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
to the great sender turns a four offence. shakespeare.
best with the best, the sender, not the sent. 44ilton.
sen escen ce. m. s. [sensco, lat.] the state of growing old;
decay by time.
the earth and all things will continue in the state wherein
they now are, without the least senescence or decay, without
jarring, disorder, or invasion of one another. woodward.
se’n esch al. n.f. [songschal, fr. of uncertain original.]
1. one who had in great houses the care of feasts, or domestick
cercmonies.
john earl of huntingdon, under his seal of arms, made fir
john arundel, of trenice, seneschal of his houshold, as well
in peace as in war. carew's survey of cornwal.
marshal’d feast,
serv’d up in hall with sewers and seneschals;
the skill of artifice, or office, mean milton's par. loft.
the senschal rebuk'd, in haste withdrew;
with equal haste a menial train pursue.
2. it afterwards came to signify other offices.
se'n green. m. s. [sedum.] a plant.
se/nile. adj. [senilis, lat.] belonging to old age; conse-
quent on old age.
my green youth made me very unripe for a task of that na-
ture, whose difficulty requires that it should be handled by a
person in whom nature, education, and time have happily
matched a senile maturity of judgment with youthful vigour of
fancy. boyle on colours.
senior. m. s. [senior, lat.] -
1. one older than another ; one who on account of longer
time has some superiority. -
how can you admit your seniors to the examination or al-
lowing of them, not only being inferior in office and calling,
pope's odyssey.
but in gifts also : jwhitgifte.
2. an aged person.
a senior of the place replies,
well read, and curious of antiquities. dryden.
seniority. m. s. (from senior.] eldership; priority of birth.
as in insurreotions the ringleader is looked on with a pecu-
har severity, so, in this case, the first provoker has, by his
seniority and primogeniture, a double portion of the guilt.
: government of the tongue.
he was the elder brother, and ulysses might be consigned
to his care, by the right due to his seniority. broome.
se'nna. n.s.. [sena, lat.] a physical tree. miller,
what rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug, -
would scour these english hence shak. macbeth.
senna tree is of two sorts:... the bastard senna, and the scor-
pion senna, both which yield a pleasant leaf and flower. mort.
se'nnight. n. s. (contracted from sevennight.] the space of
seven nights and days; a week. see for tnight.
if mention is made on monday, of thursday sennight, the
thursday that follows the next thursday, is meant. -
time trots hard with a young maid between the contrađ
of her marriage and the day it is solemnized: if the interim be
but a sennight, time's pace is so hard that it seems the length
of seven years. shakespeare's as you like it.
sen9'cula r. adj. [soni and oculus, latin.] having six eyes.
most animals are binocular, spiders octonocular, and some
senocular. derham's physico-theology.
sensa rion. m. s. [sensation, fr. sensatio, school latin.] pe.
ception by means of the senses.
diversity of constitution, or other circumstances, vary the
sensations ; and to them of java pepper is cold. glauv. steps.
the brain, distempered by a cold, beating against the root
of the auditory nerve, and protracted to the tympanum, causes
the sensation of noise. harvey on consumptions.
this great source of most of the ideas we have, dependin
wholly upon our senses, and derived by them to the under.
standing, i call senation. locke.
when we are asleep, joy and sorrow give us more vigorous
sensations of pain or pleasure than at any other time. addison.
the happiest, upon a fair estimate, have stronger sensations
of pain than pleasure. ogers.
sense. m. s. [sens, fr. sensus, lat.]
1. faculty or power by which external objects are perceived;
the fight; touch ; hearing; snell; taste.
this pow'r is sense, which from abroad doth bring
the colour, taste, and touch, and scent, and sound
the quantity and shape of ev'rything
within earth's centre, or heav'n's circle found :
and though things sensible be numberless,
but only five the sense's organs be ;
and in those five, all things their forms express,
which we can touch, taste, feel, or hear or see. davies.
then is the soul a nature, which contains
the pow'r of sense within a greater pow'r,
which doth employ and use the sense's pains;
but sits and rules within her private bow'r, davis,
both contain
within them ev’ry lower faculty -
of sonse, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste. milt.
of the five senses, two are usually and most properly called
the senses of learning, as being .# capable of receiving com-
munication of thought and notions by selected signs; and these
are hearing and seeing. holder's elements of speech.
2. perception by the senses; sensation.
in a living creature, though never so great, the sense and
the affects of any one part of the body instantly make a trans-
cursion throughout the whole. bacon's natural history.
if we had nought but sense, then only they
should have sound minds which have their senses sound;
but wisdom grows when senses do decay,
and folly most in quickest sense is found.
such is the mighty swiftness of your mind,
that, like the earth's, it leaves the sense behind. dryden.
3. perception of intelle&amp;t; apprehension of mind.
this basilius, having the quick sense of a lover, took as
though his mistreis had given him a secret reprehension. sidn.
god, to remove his ways from human sense,
plac'd heav'n from earth so far.
4. sentibility; quickness or keenness of perception.
he should have liv'd,
save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sonse.
might in the times to come have ta'en revenge. shakespeare.
5. understanding ; soundness of faculties; strength of natural
reason.
opprest nature sleeps:
this rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses. shakes.
god hath endued mankind with powers and abilities, which
we call natural light and reason, and common sense. bentley.
there's something previous ev'n to taste ; 'tis sense,
good sense, which only is the gift of heav'n,
and, though no science, fairly worth the sev’n :
a light within yourself you must perceive;
jones and le nôtre have it not to give,
6. reason; reasonable meaning.
he raves; his words are roose
as heaps of sand, and scattering wide from sense:
you see he knows not me, his natural father;
that now the wind is got into his head,
and turns his brains to frenzy.
7. opinion; notion; judgment. -
i speak my private but impartial sense
davies.
milton.
with freedom, and, i hope, without offence. foscrimen.
8. consciousness ; conviction.
in
pope.
dryd, spanish fryar.
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 7</div><p class="text">s e n
s e n
in the due sons: of my want of learning, i only make a con-
fession of my own faith. dryden.
. moral perception.
some are so hardened in wickedness, as to have no sons of
the most friendly offices. l’estrange.
1c. meaning ; import.
in this sets to be preserved from sin is not impossible. hack.
my hearty friends,
you take me in too dolorous a sons. shakespeare.
a haughty presumption, that because we are encouraged to
believe that in some sense all things are made for man, that
therefore they are not made at all for themselves. more.
all before richard i. is before time of memory; and what
is since, is, in a legal sense, within the time of memory. hale.
in one sense it is, indeed, a building of gold and filver upon
the foundation of christianity. tillotson.
when a word has been used in two or three sons, and has
made a great inroad for error, drop one or two of those senses,
and leave it only one remaining, and affix the other senses or
ideas to other words. j/atts's logick.
se/nsed. part. [from sense. j perceived by the senses. a word
not in use.
let the sciolist tell me, why things must needs be so as his
individual senses represent them: is he sure that objects are not
otherwise sensed by others, than they are by him? and why
must his sense be the infallible criterion ? it may be, what is
white to us, is black to negroes. glanville's scepsis.
sense ft. l. adj. [from sense and full.] reasonable; judicious.
not used.
men, otherwise sons ful and ingenious, quote such things
out of an author as would never pass in conversation. norris.
sen seless. adj. [from sense.]
1. wanting sense ; wanting life; void of all life or perception.
the charm and venom, which they drunk,
their blood with secret filth infected hath,
being diffused through the sons-les; trunk,
that through the great contagion direful deadly stunk.
fairy queen.
the ears are sensels that should give us hearing,
to tell him his cointnandment is fulfill’d. shak. hamlet.
you blocks, you worse than senseles, things | shakespeare.
it is as repugnant to the idea of senseless matter, that it should
put into itself sense, perception, and knowledge, as it is re-
pugnant to the idea of a triangle, that it should put into itself
greater angles than two right ones. locke.
2. unfeeling; wanting sympathy. -
the sii/oss grave feels not your pious sorrows. rowe.
3. unreasonable; stupid : doltish ; blockish.
they would repent this their sons-less perverseness when it
would be too late, and when they found themselves under a
power that would destroy them. clarendon.
if we be not extremely foolish, thankless, or sons-loss, a great
joy is more apt to cure sorrow than a great trouble is. taylor.
the great design of this author's book is to prove this,
which i believe no man in the world was ever so senseles, as to
deny. tillotson.
she saw her favour was misplac'd;
the fellows had a wretched taste :
she necds must tell them to their face,
they were a senseless stupid race. swift.
4. contrary to true judgment; contrary to reason.
it is a sons-loss thing, in reason, to think that one of these
interests can stand without the other, when, in the very order
of natural causes, government is preserved by religion.
s sooth's sermons.
other creatures, as well as monkeys, little wiser than they,
destroy their young by sessels; fondness, and too much em-
bracing. locke.
5. wanting sensibility; wanting quickness or keenness of per-
ception. not in use.
to draw mars like a young hippolytus, with an effeminate
countenance, or that hot-spurred harpalice in virgil, pro-
ceedeth from a sensoles, and overcold judgment. peacham,
6. wanting knowledge ; unconsciotis : with of.
the wretch is drench'd too deep;
his soul is stupid, and his heart asleep,
fatten’d in vice; so callous and so gross,
he fins and sees not, senseless of his loss.
hear this,
you unhous'd, lawless, rambling libertines,
softles of any charm in love, beyond
the prostitution of a common bed. southern.
se'sses, ess ly. adv. [from soft loss j in a senseless manner;
stupidly; unreasonably.
if any one should be found so sons, lossy arrogant as to sup-
pose man alone knowing and wife, but yet the product of
mere ignorance and chance, and that all the rest of the uni-
verse acted only by that blind hap-hazard, i shall leave with
him that very rational and emphatical rebuke of tully: locke.
senselesso f3s. n.s.. [from senselos...] folly; unreasonable-
ness; absurdity ; stupidity.
the sensel sn's of the tradition of the crocodile's moving
vol. ii.
dryden.
his upper jaw, is plain from the art
s with the neck, and the nether
ensibility. m. s. [sensibilite
1. quickness of sensation. &gt;
2. quickness of perception; delicacy.
. modesty is a kind of quick and delicate feeling in the soul:
it is such an exquisite sonsibility, as warns a woman to shun the
first appearance of every thing hurtful. addison's spectator.
se'nsible. adj. [sensible, fr. fensilis, lat.]
1. having the power of perceiving by the senses.
would your cambrick were as sonsible as your finger, that
you might leave pricking it for pity *** *
- - shak -
these be those discourses of god, whose effeas to:
live witness in themselves; the sensible in their sensible natures
the reasonable in their reasonable souls. roo.
s” ”
a blind man conceives not colours, but under -
of some other sensible faculty. &gt; o .
2. perceptible by the senses. -
by reason man attaineth unto the knowledge of things that
are and are not sensible : it resteth, therefore, that we search
how man attaineth unto the knowledge of such things unsen-
sible as are to be known. hooker.
is this a dagger which i see before me,
the handle tow'rd my hand? come, let me clutch thee:
i have thee not, and yet i see thee still:
art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
to feeling as to fight shakespeare's macbeth.
the space left and acquired in every sensible moment in such
slow progressions, is so inconsiderable, that it cannot possibly
move the sense. glanville's scepsi.
it is manifest that the heavens are void of all sonsible resist-
ance, and by consequence of all sonsible matter. newton.
the greater part of men are no otherwise moved than by
sense, and have neither leisure nor ability so to improve their
power of reflection, as to be capable of conceiving the divine
perfections, without the assistance of sensill. objects. rogers.
air is sensible to the touch by its motion, and by its resistance
to bodies moved in it. arbuthnot on air.
3. perceived by the mind.
idleness was punished by so many stripes in publick, and
the disgrace was more sensible than the pain. temple.
4. perceiving by either mind or senses; having perception by
the mind or senses.
this must needs remove
the sensible of pain. milion.
i saw you in the east at your first arising: i was as soon
fossible as any of that light, when just shooting out, and be-
ginning to travel upwards to the meridian. dryden.
i do not say there is no soul in man, because he is not sensole
of it in his sleep; but i do say, he cannot think at any time,
waking or sleeping, without being sensible of it. locke.
the versification is as beautiful as the description complete;
every ear must be softle of it. broome's notes on the oasy.
5. having moral perception; having the quality of being affected
by moral good or ill. -
if thou wert sonsible of courtesy,
i should not make so great a shew of zeal. shakespeare.
6. having quick intellectual feeling; being easily or strongly
affected. c
even i, the bold, the sensible of wrong,
restrain’d by shame, was forc'd to hold my tongue. dryden.
. convinced ; persuaded. a low use.
they are very sensible that they had better have pushed their
conquests on the other side of the adriatick; for then their
territories would have lain together. addison.
8. in low conversation it has sometimes the sense of reasonable;
judicious ; wife.
i have been tired with accounts from sensible men, furnished
with matters of fact, which have happened within their own
knowledge. addison,
sensible n ess. n. s. [from sensible.]
1. possibility to be perceived by the senses.
2. actual perception by mind or body.
3. quickness of perception; sensibility.
the sensibleness of the eye renders it subject to pain, as also
unfit to be dressed with sharp medicainents. sharp.
4. painful consciousness.
there is no condition of soul more wretched than that of
the senseless obdurate sinner, being a kind of numbness of
soul ; and, contrariwise, this feeling and sensibleness, and sor-
row for fin, the most vital quality. hammond.
5. judgment; reasonableness. an use not admitted but in con-
versation.
se'nsibly. adv. [from sonsible.]
1. perceptibly to the senses.
he is your brother, lords ; sensibly fed -
of that self-blood, that first gave life to you... shakespeare.
a sudden pain in my right foot increased sens?ly. temple.
the salts of human urine may, by the violent motion of
the blood, be turned alkaline, and even corrosive; and so
they affect the fibres of the brain more sensibly than other parts.
arbuthnot.
23 o 2. with
- ticulation of the occiput
jaw with the upper. grew.
fr.]
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 7</div><p class="text">s e n
s e. n.
2. with perception of either mind or body.
3. externally; by impression on the senses, -
that church of christ, which we properly term his body
mystical, can be but one; neither can that one be sonsibly dis-
cerned by any, inasmuch as the parts thereof are some in
heaven already with christ. hooker.
4. with quick intellectual perception.
5. [in low language.] judiciously ; reasonably. -
se'nsitive. adj. [sensitif, fr.] having sense or perception,
but not reason.
the sensitive faculty may have a sensitive love of some son-
sitive objects, which though moderated so as not to fall into
fin ; yet, through the nature of man's sense, may express it-
self more sensitively towards that inferior object than towards
god: this is a piece of human frailty. hammond.
all the aelions of the sensitive appetite are in painting called
passions, because the soul is agitated by them, and because
the body suffers and is sensibly altered. dryden.
bodies are such as are endued with a vegetative soul, as
plants; a sensitive soul, as animals; or a rational soul, as the
body of man. ray.
se nsitive plant. n.s.. [mimosa, lat.] a plant.
the flower consists of one leaf, which is shaped like a fun-
nel, having many stamina in the centre : these flowers are col-
lected into a round head: from the bottom of the flower rises
the pistijlum, which afterwards becomes an oblong flat-jointed
pod, which opens both ways, and contains in each partition
one roundish seed. of this plant the humble plants are a
species, which are so called, because, upon being touched, the
pedicle of their leaves falls downward; but the leaves of the
scositive plant are only contracted. miller.
vegetables have many of them some degrees of motion, and,
upon the different application of other bodies to them, do
very briskly alter their figure and motion, and so have obtained
the name of sensitive plants, from a motion which has some re-
semblance to that which in animals follows upon sensation.
locke.
whence does it happen, that the plant which well
we name the sensitive, should move and feel
whence know her leaves to answer her command,
and with quick horror fly the neighb'ring hand prior.
the sensitive plant is so call’d, because, as soon as you touch
it, the leaf shrinks. mortimer.
se'nsitiv ely. adv. [from sensitive..] in a sensitive manner.
the sensitive faculty, through the nature of man's sense,
may express itself more sensitively towards an inferior object
than towards god: this is a piece of frailty. hammond.
nso’ - -
§§o } n. s. [latin.]
j. the part where the senses transmit their perceptions to the
mind; the seat of sense.
spiritual species, both visible and audible, will work upon
the sensories, though they move not any other body. bacon.
as sound in a bell or musical string, or other founding
body, is nothing but a trembling motion, and the air nothing
but that motion propagated from the object, in the sensorium
'tis a sense of that motion under the form of sound. newton.
is not the sensory of animals the place to which the sensitive
substance is present, and into which the sensible species of
things are carried through the nerves of the brain, that there
they may be perceived by their immediate presence to that sub-
stance newton's optics,
2. organ of sensation.
that we all have double sonsories, two eyes, two ears, is
an effectual confutation of this atheistical sophism. bentley.
se'nsual. adj. [sensuel, fr.]
1. consisting in sense; depending on sense; affecting the senses.
men in general are too partial, in favour of a sensual appe-
tite, to take notice of truth when they have found it. l’e/lr.
far as creation's ample range extends,
the scale of sensual, mental pow'rs ascends. pope.
2. pleasing to the senses; carnal; not spiritual.
the greatest part of men are such as prefer their own pri-
vate good before all things, even that good which is sensual
before whatsoever is most divine. płooker.
3. devoted to sense; lewd ; luxurious.
from amidst them rose
belial, the dissolutest spirit that fell,
the sensualles'; and, after asmodai,
the fleshliest incubus. milton.
no small part of virtue consists in abstaining from that
wherein sensual men place their felicity. atterbury.
se'nsualist. n.s.. [from sensual.] a carnal person; one de-
voted to corporal pleasures.
let atheists and sensualis's satisfy themselves as they are
able; the former of which will find, that, as long as reason
keeps her ground, religion neither can nor will lose her’s. south.
sensu a'lity. m. s. [from sensual.] devotedness to the senses;
addiction to brutal and corporal pleasures.
but you are more intemperate in your blood
than venus, or those pamper'd animals
that rage in savage sensuality. shakespeare.
*...*
o
kill not her quick'ning pow'r with surfeitings
mar not her sense with sensuality:
cast not her serious wit on idle things;
make not her free-will slave to vanity. davier,
sensuality is one kind of pleasure, such an one as it is. south.
they avoid dress, left they should have affections tainted
by any sensuality, and diverted from the love of him who is to
be the only comfort and delight of their whole beings. adjon.
impure and brutal sensuality was too much confirmed by the
religion of those countries, where even venus and bacchus
had their temples. bently.
to se nsu alize. v. a. [from sensual.] to fink to sensal
pleasures; to degrade the mind into subjection to the senses.
not to suffer one's self to be jessalized by pleasures, like
those who were changed into brutes by circe. pope.
se'nsu ally. adv. [from sensual.] in a sensual manner.
sensuous. adj. [from sense j tender ; pathetick; full of
passion. not in use.
to this poetry would be made precedent, as being les,
subtile and fine; but more simple, sensuous, and passionate.
milton.
sent. the participle passive of send.
i make a decree that all israel go with thee; forasmuch as
thou art sent of the king. ezra, vii. 14.
sentence. n.s.. [sentence, fr. sententia, lat.]
1. determination or decision, as of a judge civil or criminal.
the rule of voluntary agents on earth is the sentence that
reason giveth, concerning the goodness of those things which
they are to do. hooker.
if we have neither voice from heaven, that so pronounceth
of them, neither sentence of men grounded upon such manifest
and clear proof, that they, in whose hands it is to alter them,
may likewise infallibly, even in heart and conscience, judge
them so ; upon necessity to urge alteration, is to trouble and
disturb without necessity. hooker.
how will i give sentence against them. jor. iv. 12.
if matter of fact breaks out with too great an evidence to
be denied, why, still there are other lenitives, that friendship
will apply, before it will be brought to the decretory rigouis
of a condemning sentence. south's sermoss.
let him set out some of luther's works, that by them we
may pass sentence upon his doctrines. 4tterlury.
2. it is usually spoken of condemnation pronounced by the
judge ; doom.
by the consent of all laws, in capital causes, the evidence
must be full and clear ; and if so, where one man’s life is in
question, what say we to a war, which is ever the sintence of
death upon many bacon's holy jor.
what rests but that the mortal sentence pass : asilion.
3. a maxim ; an axiom, generally moral.
a sentence may be defined a moral instruction couched in a
few words. broome's notes on the ods.y.
4. a short paragraph ; a period in writing.
an excellent spirit, knowledge, understanding, and shew-
... ing of hard sentences were found in daniel. dan. v. 12.
to se'n ten ce. v. a. [sentencier, fr. from the noun.]
1. to pass the last judgment on any one.
after this cold confid’rance, sentence me;
and, as you are a king, speak in your state,
what i have done that misbecame my place. shakes care.
came the mild judge and intercessor both, -
to sentence man. milton.
2. to condemn; to doom to punishment.
could that decree from our brother come
nature herself is sentenc'd in your doom :
piety is no more. dryden.
idleness, sentenced by the decurions, was punished by so
many stripes. temple.
sententio'sity. n.s.. [from sententious.] comprehension in a
sentence.
vulgar precepts in morality carry with them nothing above
the line, or beyond the extemporary sententisty of common
conceits with us. brown's sugar errours.
sente'ntious. adj. [sentencioux, fr. from sentenc..]
1. abounding with short sentences, axioms, and maxims, short
and energetick.
he is very swift and sententious. shakesp. as you like it.
eyes are vocal, tears have tongues:
sententious showers o let them fall;
their cadence is rhetorical. crashaw.
eloquence, with all her pomp and charms,
foretold us useful and sententious truths. /7 aller.
how he apes his fire,
ambitiously sententious. addison's cats.
2. comprising sentences.
the making of figures being tedious, and requiring much
room, put men first upon contracting them; as by the most
ancient egyptian monuments it appears they did : next, in-
stead of sententious marks, to think of verbal, such as the chi-
nese still retain. grew’s cosmol.
sente'ntiously, adv. [from sententious.) in short sentences;
with striking brevity. -
they
of n:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 7</div><p class="text">s e fo
they describe her in part finely and elegantly, and in part
gravely and jententiously; they say, look how many feathers
the hath, so many eyes she hath underneath. bacon's essays.
nausicaa delivers her judgment sintentiously, to give it more
weight. broame.
sente'ntious ness... n.s [from sententious.] pithiness of sen-
tences; brevity with strength.
the medea i esteem for the gravity and sintentiousness of it,
which he himself concludes to be suitable to a tragedy. dryden.
se'ntery. m. s. [this is commonly written sentry, corrupted
from sentinel.] one who is set to watch in a garrison, or in
the outlines of an army.
what strength, what art can then
suffice, or what evasion bear him safe
through the strict senteries, and stations thick
of angels watching round 2 milton.
sentient. adj. [sentiers, lat.j perceiving; having percep-
tion.
this acting of the sontient phantasy is performed by a pre-
sence of sense, as the horse is under the sense of hunger, and
that without any formal syllogism presseth him to eat hale.
sentient. m. s. [from the adjective..] he that has perception.
if the sentient be carried, possibus aquis, with the body,
whose motion it would observe, supposing it regular, the re-
move is insensible glanville's scotsis.
sentiment. n. s. [sentiment, fr.]
1. thought; notion; opinion.
the consideration of the reason, why they are annexed to
so many other ideas, serving to give us due sentiments of the
wisdom and goodness of the sovereign disposer of all things,
may not be unsuitable to the main end of these enquiries. looke.
alike to council or th’ assembly came,
with equal souls and sentiments the same. pope.
2. the sense considered distinetly from the language or things;
a striking sentence in a composition.
those who could no longer defend the conduct of cato,
praised the sentiments. dennis.
se'n' (nel. m. s. [sentinelle, fr. from sntio, lat..] one who
watches or keeps guard to prevent surprise.
norfolk, nie thee to thy charge ;
use careful watch, chuse trusty sentinels. shakesp. r. iii.
counsellors are not commonly so united, but that one
counsellor keepeth sontinel over another; so that if any do
counsel out of faction or private ends, it commonly comes to
the king's ear. bacon's essays.
first, the two eyes, which have the seeing pow'r,
stand as one watchman, spy, or sentinel,
being plac'd aloft, within the head's high tow'r ;
and though both see, yet both but one thing tell. davies.
love to our citadel resorts,
: denham.
through those deceitful fallyports;
our sentinel, betray our forts.
the senses are situated in the head, as sentinels in a watch-
tower, to receive and convey to the soul the impressions of
external objects. ra, on the creation.
perhaps they had sentinels waking while they slept ; but even
this would be unfoldierlike. brozme.
sentry. m. s. [corrupted, i believe, from sontinel.]
1. a watch ; a sentinel ; one who watches in a garrison, or
army, to keep them from surprise.
if i do send, dispatch
those sentries to our aid; the rest will serve
for a short holding. shakespeare's coriolanus.
the youth of heli strict guard may keep,
and set their sentries to the utmost deep.
one goose they had, 'twas all they could allow,
a wakeful sntry, and on duty now.
2. guard ; watch ; the duty of a sentry.
thou, whose nature cannot sleep,
o'er my slumbers sentry keep ;
guard me 'gainst those watchful foes,
whose eyes are open while mine close. brown.
here toils and death, and death's half brother, sleep,
forms terrible to view, their sentry keep. dryden.
separab1*11'ry. n. s. [from separable.] the quality of ad-
mitting disunion or discerption. - - -
separability is the greatest argument of real distinetion. gian.
the greatest argument of real distinetion is sparability, and
actual separation; for nothing can be separated from itself.
norris.
separable. adj [separable, fr. sparabilis, lat. from separate.]
1. susceptive of disunion; discerptible.
the infusions and decoctions of plants contain the most
sparable parts of the plants, and convey not only their nutri-
tious but medicinal qualities into the blood. arbuthnot.
2. possible to be disjoined from something : with from.
expansion and duration have this farther agreement, that
though they are both considered by us as having parts, yet their
parts are not sparable one from another. locke.
separableness. n.s. [from separable.] capableness of being
feparated.
dryd. 77.
dryden.
2
- trials permit me not to doubt of the sparableh's of a yellow
tiore from gold. oyle.
t3 se parate. v. g. ssparo, lat, separer, fr.] -
1. to break ; to divide into parts.
2. to disunite ; to disjoin.
i'll to england.
—to ireland, i: our separated fortunes
shall keep us both the safer. shakespeare's machoth,
resolv’d,
rather than death, or aught than death more dread,
shall separate us. milton,
3. to sever from the rest.
can a body be inflammable, from which it would puzzle a
chymist to separate an inflammable ingredient bao'e.
death from sin no power can separate. amilton.
4. to set apart; to segregate.
separate me barnabas and saul, for the work whereunto i
have called them. acis, xiii. 2.
david separated to the service those who should prophesy.
i chron. xxv. 1.
5. to withdraw.
sefarate thyself from me: if thou wilt take the left, i will
go to the right. gen. xiii. 9.
to separate. v. n. to part; to be disunited.
when there was not room enough for their herds to feed,
they by consent sparated, and enlarged their pasture. locłe,
separate. adj. [from the verb.]
1. divided from the rest.
't were hard to conceive an eternal watch, whose pieces
were never separate one from another, nor ever in any other
form. - burnet's theory of the earth.
2. disjoined; withdrawn,
eve sofarate he wish'd. milton.
3. secret; secluded.
in a secret vale the trojan sees -
a sporate grove. dryden,
4. disunited from the body; disengaged from corporeal nature.
an emphatical sense.
whatever ideas the mind can receive and contemplate with-
out the help of the body, it can retain without the help of the
body too; or else the soul, or any separate spirit, will have
but little o 'vantage by thinking. locke.
sep: r a solo to [from sparate.] apart; fingly; not in
union ; untincily; partical riy.
it is of singular use to princes, if they take the opinions of
their council, both separately and together, for private opiaion
is more free, but opinion before others is more reserved. bac.
if you admit of many figures, conceive the whole together,
and not every thing sparately and in particular. dry-sen.
se/parate ness. n.s. from sparate.] the state of being fe-.
parate.
separa'tion. n. s. [sparatio, lat. sparation, fr. from spa-
rate.
1. the aet of separating; disjunetion,
they have a dark opinion, that the soul doth live after the
fparation from the body. aboof,
any part of our bodies, vitally united to that which is con-
scious in us, makes a part of ourselves ; but upon separation
from the vital union, by which that consciousness is commu-
nicated, that which a moment since was part of ouiselves, is
now no more so. locke.
2. the state of being separate; disunion.
as the confusion of tongues was a mark of separation, so
the being of one language was a mark of union. bacon.
3. the chymical analysis, or operation of disuniting things
mingled.
a fifteenth part of silver, incorporate with gold, will not
be recovered by any matter of separation, unless you put a
greater quantity of silver, which is the last refuge in separa-
tions. bacon.
4. divorce; disjunetion from a married state.
did you not hear
a buzzing of a separation
between the king and cath’rine * shakespeare.
se'paratist. m. s. [sparatiffe, fr. from separate.] one who
divides from the church ; a schismatick; a seceder.
the anabaptists, separatists, and sectaries tenets are full of
schism, and inconsistent with monarchy. bacon.
our modern sparatis’s pronounce all those heretical, or car-
nal, from whom they have withdrawn. decay of piety.
says the separatist, if those, who have the rule over you,
should command you any thing about church affairs, you
ought not, in conscience, to obey them. south's sermons.
8e para to r. n. s. [from sparate.] one who divides; a di-
wider.
se'para tory. adj. [from sparate.] used in separation.
the most conspicuous gland of an animal is the system of
the guts, where the lacteals are the emissary vessels, or sepa-
ratory ducts. cheyne's phil. prin.
se'pilible. adj. [setia, lat.] that may be buried. bailey.
sr piment. n.s. isipimentum, lat..] a hedge; a fence. bailey.
seposition,
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 11</div><p class="text">s e p
s e q_
seposition. n.s.. [spons, lat.] the act of setting apart ;
segregation.
sept. n.s.. [septum, lat..] a clan ; a race ; a family; a ge-
neration. a word used only with regard or allusion to lze-
land, and, i suppose, irish.
this judge, being the lord's brehon, adjudgeth a better
share unto the lord of the soil, or the head of that sept, and
also unto himself for his judgment a greater portion, than unto
the plaintiffs. spenser on ireland.
the english forces were ever too weak to subdue so many
warlike nations, or septs, of the irish as did possess this island.
davies on ireland.
the true and ancient russians, a sept whom he had met
with in one of the provinces of that vast empire, were white
like the danes. boyle.
septa'ngular. adj. [septem and angulus, lat..] having seven
corners or sides.
septe/mber. m. s. [latin; septembre, fr.] the ninth month
of the year; the seventh from march.
september hath his name as being the seventh month from
march: he is drawn with a merry and cheerful countenance,
in a purple robe. peacham on drawing.
se(ptenary. adj. [septenarius, lat..] consisting of seven.
- every controversy has seven questions belonging to it; tho’
the order of nature seems too much neglected by a confine-
ment to this septenary number. watts.
septe'nary. m. s. the number seven.
the days of men are cast up by septenaries, and every se-
venth year conceived to carry some altering chara&amp;ter in tem-
per of mind or body. brown's vulgar errours.
these constitutions of moses, that proceed so much upon
a septenary, or number of seven, have no reason in the nature
of the thing. burnet.
septe’nnial. adj. [soptennis, lat.]
1. lasting seven years.
2. happening once in seven years.
being once dispensed with for his soil visit, by a holy
instrument from petropolis, he resolved to govern them by
subaltern ministers. howel's vocal forest.
septentr1on. n.s. [french; septentrio, lat..] the north.
thou art as opposite to every good,
as the antipodes are unto us, -
or as the south to the septentrion. shakesp. hen. vi.
septe'ntrion. adj. [septentrionalis, latin ; septentrional,
septentrion al. } fr.] northern.
back'd with a ridge of hills,
that screen'd the fruits of th’ earth and seats of men
from cold septemirion blasts. milton's par. regain'd.
if the spring
preccding should be destitute of rain,
or blast septentrional with brushing wings
sweep up the smoaky mists and vapours damp,
then woe to mortals. philips.
septentrion a'lity. m. s. [from septentrional j northerli-
ness.
septe'n trion ally. adv. [from septentrional.] towards the
north ; northerly.
if they be powerfully excited, and equally let fall, they
commonly sink down, and break the water, at that extreme
whereat they were septentrionally excited. brown.
to septentrio"nate. v. n. [from septentrio, lat.] to tend
northerly.
steel and good iron, never excited by the loadstone, septen-
trionate at one extreme, and australize at another. brown.
se'ptical. adj. [a-molix};..] having power to promote or pro-
duce putrefaction.
as a septical medicine, galen commended the ashes of a sa-
lamander. brown's vulgar errours.
septilateral. adj. [septem and lateris, lat.] having seven
fides.
by an equal interval they make seven triangles, the bases
whereof are the seven sides of a septilateral figure, described
within a circle. brown's vulgar errours.
septua"genary. adj. [septuagenarius, lat. septuagenaire, fr.]
consisting of seventy.
the three hundred years of john of times, or nestor, can-
not afford a reasonable encouragement beyond moses's septua-
ginary determination. brown's vulgar errours.
septuage's imal. adj. [septuagesimus, lat.] consisting of
seventy.
in our abridged and septuagesimal age, it is very rare to be-
hold the fourth generation. brown's vulgar errours.
septuagint. n.s.. [septuaginta, lat.] the old greek ver-
sion of the old testament, so called as being supposed the
work of seventy-two interpreters.
which way soever you try, you shall find the product great
enough for the extent of this earth; and if you follow the
foptuagint chronology, it will still be far higher. burnet.
se ptuple. adj. [septuplex, lat, j seven times as much. a
technical term.
sepu'lchr al. adj. [sepulcral, fr. japukralis, from sepulchrum,
latin.] relating to burial; relating to the grave; monu.
mental.
whilst our souls negotiate there,
we like sepulchral statues lay ;
all day the same our postures were,
and we said nothing all the day. donne
mine eye hath found that sad sepulchral rock, -
that was the casket of heav'n's richest store. 44ilion.
sepulchral lies our holy walls to grace,
and new-year odes. pope's dunciad
sepulchre. n.s.. [soukre, fr. sepulchrum, lat.] a grave:
a tomb. …)
to entail him and’s heirs unto the crown,
what is it but to make thy sepulchre 2 shak. henry vi,
flies and spiders get a sepulchre in amber, more durable than
the monument and embalming of any king. bawn.
there where the virgin's son his doctrine taught,
his miracles, and our redemption wrought;
where i, by thee inspir'd, his praises sung,
and on his sepulchre my offering hung. sandy,
perpetual lamps for many hundred years have continued
burning, without supply, in the sepulchres of the ancients. wilk,
if not one common sepulchre contains
our bodies, or one urn our last remains,
yet ceyx and alcyone shall join. dryden,
to se'pulchre. v. a. [from the noun. it is accented on the
second syllable by shakespeare and milton ; on the first, more
properly, by johnson and prior.] to bury; to entomb.
go to thy lady's grave, and call her thence;
or, at the least, in her’s sepulchre thine.
i am glad to see that time survive,
where merit is not sepulcher'd alive;
where good men's virtues them to honours bring,
and not to dangers. ben. johnson,
thou so sepulcher'd in such pomp do'st lie, w -
shakespeare.
that kings for such a tomb would wish to die. milton.
disparted streams shall from their channels fly,
and, deep surcharg’d, by sandy mountains lie,
obscurely sepulcher'd. prior.
sepulture. m. s. [sepulture, fr. spultura, lat.] interment;
burial.
that niobe, weeping over her children, was turned into a
stone, was nothing else but that during her life she ereded
over her spultures a marble tomb of her own. brown.
where we may royal sepulture prepare;
with speed to melesinda bring relief,
recall her spirits, and moderate her grief. dryden.
in england sepulture, or burial of the dead, may be deferred
and put off for the debts of the person deceased. ajliff.
sequa’cious. adj. [sequacis, lat.]
1. following ; attendant.
orpheus could lead the savage race,
and trees uprooted left their place,
sequacious of the lyre;
but bright cecilia rais'd the wonder higher:
when to her organ vocal breath was giv'n,
an angel heard and straight appear'd,
mistaking earth for heav'n.
above those superstitious horrours that enslave
the fond sequacious herd, to mystick faith
and blind amazement prone, th’ enlighten’d few
the glorious stranger hail
2. ductile; pliant. -
in the greater bodies the forge was easy, the matter being
ductile and sequacious, and obedient to the hand and stroke of
the artificer, and apt to be drawn, formed, or moulded. ray.
seq9a city. m. s. [from squax, lat.] duaility; toughness.
matter, whereof creatures are produced, hath a closeness,
lentor, and sequacity. bacon's natural history.
se'quel. m. s. [sequelle, fr. sequela, lat.]
1. conclusion; succeeding part.
if black scandal or foul-fac’d reproach
attend the sequel of your imposition,
your meer enforcement shall acquittance me.
shakespeare's richard iii:
was he not a man of wisdom yes, but he was poor: but
was he not also successful ? true, but still he was poor: grant
this, and you cannot keep off that unavoidable sequel in the
next verse, the poor man's wisdom is despised. south.
2. consequence; event,
let any principal thing, as the sun or the moon, but once
cease, fail, or swerve, and who doth not easily conceive that
the sequel thereof would be ruin both to itself and whatsoever
dryden,
thomson.
dependeth on it? azor.
in these he put two weights,
the sequel each of parting and of fight. milton,
3. consequence inferred; consequentialness.
what sequel is there in this argument? an archdeacon is
the chief deacon: ergo, he is only a deacon. i?’hitgifts.
se'qy ence. n. s. [from squor, lat.]
i. order of succession. an elegant word, but little used.
f
3
how
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 12</div><p class="text">s e r
s e. r.
how art thou a king,
but by fair sequence and succession shakesp. r. ii.
2. series; arrangement ; method.
the cause proceedeth from a precedent sequence, and series
of the seasons of the year. bacon's natural history.
sequent. aft. [sequens, lat.]
1. following ; succeeding.
let my tryal be mine own confession:
immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
is all the grace i beg. shakes. mas, for measure.
there he dies, and leaves his race
growing into a nation; and now grown
suspected to a sequent king, who seeks
to stop their overgrowth. milton's paradise lof.
2. consequential.
so "...s.. [from the adjective..] a follower. not in
u!c.
here he hath framed a letter to a sequent of the stranger
ueen's, which accidentally miscarried. shakespeare.
to sequester. v. a. [sequosi, er, fr. focroslar, spanish;
squgstro, low latin.]
1. to separate fom others for the sake of privacy.
why are you sequester'd from all your train? shakespeare.
to the which place a poor sequester'd stag,
that from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
did come to languish. shakesp. a you like it.
in shady bow'r,
more sacred and sequester'd, though but feign'd,
pan or sylvanus never slept. milton.
ye sacred nine ! that all my soul possess,
whose raptures fire me, and whose visions bless,
bear me, oh bear me to sequester'd scenes
of bow'ry mazes, and surrounding greens. pope.
2. to put aside ; to remove.
although i had wholly sequestered my civil affairs, yet i set
down, out of experience in business, and conversation in
books, what i thought pertinent to this affair. bacon.
3. to withdraw ; to segregate.
a thing as seasonable in grief as in joy, as decent being
added unto actions of greatest weight and solemnity, as being
used when men most sequester themselves from action. hooker.
4. to set aside from the use of the owner to that of others; as,
his annuity is seque/fred to pay his creditors.
5. to deprive of possessions.
it was his taylor and his cook, his fine fashions and his
french ragou's, which sequestered him ; and, in a word, he
came by his poverty as sinfully as some usually do by their
riches. south.
seque's trable. adj. [from sequestrate.]
1. subject to privation.
2. capable of separation.
hartshorn, and divers other bodies belonging to the animal
kingdom, abound with a not uneasily seque/orable salt. boyle.
to seque's trate. v. n. to sequester; to separate.
in general contagions more perish for want of necessaries
than by the malignity of the disease, they being sequestrated
from mankind. arbuthnot on air.
sequestration. m. s. [sequestration, fr. from seque/frate.]
1. separation; retirement.
his addiction was to courses vain;
i never noted in him any study,
any retirement, any sequestration
from open haunts and popularity. shakesp. henry v.
there must be leisure, retirement, solitude, and a seque/fra-
tion of a man's self from the noise of the world; for truth
scorns to be seen by eyes much fixt upon inferior objects.
sauth.
2. disunion ; disjunetion.
the metals remain unsevered, the fire only dividing the
body into smaller particles, hindering rest and continuity,
without any sequestration of elementary principles. boyle.
3. state of being set aside.
since henry monmouth first began to reign,
before whose glory i was great in arms,
this loathsome sequestration have i had. shakesp. h. vi.
4. deprivation of the use and profits of a possession.
if there be a single spot in the glebe more barren, the reetor
or vicar may be obliged, by the caprice or pique of the bishop,
to build upon it, under pain of sequestration. swift.
sequestrator. m. s. [from sequestrate.] one who takes from
a man the profit of his possessions.
i am fallen into the hands of publicans and sequgs?rators, and
they have taken all from me. taylor.
sfra'glio. n.s. [italian, perhaps of oriental eriginal. the
g is lost in the pronunciation.] a house of women kept for
debauchery.
there is a great deal more solid content to be found in a
constant course of well living, than in the voluptuousness of
a seraglio. norris.
slraph. m. s. [.ox-ty] one of the orders of angels.
he is infinitely more remote in the real excellency of his
nature, from the highest and perfectest of all created beings,
than the purest seraph is from the most contemptible part of
vol. ii.
matter, and consequently must infinitely exceed what our nar.
row understandings can conceive of him, locke.
- as full, as perfect in vile man that mourns,
o- as the rapt seraph that adores and burns. pope.
ser aphical. * - /* - .
ser a phick. ! adj. [seraphique, fr. from seraph.]
1. angelick; angelical.
love is curious of little things, desiring to be of angelical
purity, of perfect innocence, and joraphical fervour. taylor.
seraphick arms and trophies. milton
2. pure; refined from sensuality.
'tis to the world a secret yet,
whether the nymph, to please her swain,
talks in a high romantick strain;
or whether he at last descends
to like with less seraphick ends. swift
se'raphim. n.s. [this is properly the plural of scraph a
therefore cannot have added ; yet, in compliance with our
language, seraphims is sometimes written..] angels of one of
the heavenly orders.
to thee cherubim and serahim continually do cry. c. pr.
then flew one of the seraphins unto me, having a live coal
in his hand. is. vi. 6.
of seraphim another row. milton.
sere. adj. [reanian, saxon, to dry.j dry; withered; no
longer green. see sear.
the muscs, that were wont green bays to wear,
now bringen bitter elder-branches sere.
he is deformed, crooked, old, and sire,
ill-fac'd, worse bodied, shapeless every where;
vicious, o: shakesp. comedy of errourt.
.re this diurnal star
leave cold the night, how we his gather'd beams
spenser.
refle&amp;ted, may with matter sere foment. milton.
they sere wood from the rotten hedges took,
and seeds of latent fire from flints provoke. dryden.
on a sere branch,
low bending to the bank, i sat me down,
musing and still. rowe's royal convert.
sere. m. s. [of this word i know not the etymology, nor, ex-
sept from this passage, the meaning. can it come, like sheers,
from reynan, saxon, to cut: j claw; talon.
two eagles,
that, mounted on the winds, together still
their strokes extended; but arriving now
amidst the council, over every brow
shook their thick wings, and threatning death's cold fears,
their necks and cheeks tore with their eager seros. chapm.
serena de. m. s. [serenade, fr. serenata, italian, whence, in
4/ilton, serenate, from serenus, latin, the lovers commonly at-
tending their mistresses in fair nights.] musick or songs with
which ladies are entertained by their lovers in the night.
mixt dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball,
or serenate, which the starv'd lover sings
to his proud fair; best quitted with disdain. milton,
foolish swallow, what do'st thou
so often at my window do,
with thy tuneless serenade 2 cowley.
shall i the neighbours nightly rest invade,
at her deaf doors, with some vile serenade 2 dryden.
will fancies he never should have been the man he is,
had not he broke windows, and disturbed honest people
with his midnight serenades, when he was a young fellow.
addison.
to serena’d e. v. a. [from the noun..] to entertain with
nocturnal musick.
he continued to serenade her every morning, 'till the queen
was charmed with his harmony. spediator.
serene. adj. [serein, fr. serenus, lat.]
1. calm; placid; quiet.
spirits live inspher'd
in regions mild, of calm and serene air. milton.
the moon, serene in glory, mounts the sky. pope.
2. unruffled ; undisturbed; even of temper; peaceful or calm
of mind; shewing a calm mind.
there wanted yet a creature might erect
his stature, and upright with front serene
govern the rest. milton.
exciting them, by a due remembrance of all that is past,
unto future circumspection, and a serene expe&amp;tation of the
future life. grew's cosmos.
gutta serena. n.s. an obstruction in the optick nerve.
these eyes that roll in vain,
so thick a drop serene hath quench'd their orbs. milton.
sere'ne. n.s.. [from the adjective..] a calm damp evening.
where ever death doth please t'appear,
seas, serenes, swords, shot, sickness, all are there. b. johns.
to sere'ne. v. a. [serener, fr. sereno, lat.]
1. to calm; to quiet.
2. to clear; to brighten.
take care -
thy muddy bev'rage to serene, and drive
precipitant the baser ropy lees,
23 p
not proper.
philips.
sere'neix.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 13</div><p class="text">s e. r.
s e r
sere'nflv. adv. [from soreme.]
1. calmly ; quietly. - - :
the setting sun now shone screnely bright. pope.
2. with unruffled temper; coolly.
whatever practical rule is generally broken, cannot be sup-
posed innate; it being impossible that men would, without
thame or fear, confidently and serently break a rule, which they
could not but evidently know that god had set up. locke.
the nymph did like the scene appear,
serenely pleasant, calmly fair: }
soft fell her words as flew the air. prior.
serenen ess. n. s. [from serene..] serenity.
sere nitude. m. f. [from £rene.] calmness; coolness of
ruind. not in use.
from the equal distribution of the phlegmatick humour
will flow quietude and serenitude in the affections. wotton.
sere nity. m. s. [sorenite, fr. from serenus, latin.]
1. calmness; mild temperature.
in the constitution of a perpetual equinox, the best part of
the globe would be desolate; and as to that little that would
be inhabited, there is no reason to expect that it would con-
stantly enjoy that admired calm and serenity. bentley.
pure serenity apace
* induces thought, and contemplation still. thomson.
2. peace; quietness; not disturbance.
a general peace and serenity newly succeeded a general
trouble and cloud throughout all his kingdoms. temple.
3. evenness of temper; coolness of mind.
i cannot see how any men should ever transgress those mo-
ral rules, with confidence and serenity, were they innate, and
stamped upon their minds. locke.
serge. m. s. [serge, french; xerga, spanish, which covaru-
vias derives from xirica, arabick; skinner from serge, ger-
man, a mat.] a kind of woollen cloth.
the same wool one man felts into a hat, another weaves
into cloth, another into kersey or serge, and another into
arras. hale.
ye weavers, all your shuttles throw,
and bid broad-cloths and serges grow. gay.
se’rgeant. n. s. [sergent, french ; sergente, italian, from
serviens, latin.]
1. an officer whose business it is to execute the commands of
magistrates.
had i but time, as this fell sergeant, death,
is strict in his arrest, oh! i could tell. shakesp. hamlet.
when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying,
let these men go. 47s, xvi. 35.
2. a petty officer in the army.
this is the sergeant,
who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought. shak. macb.
3. a lawyer of the highest rank under a judge.
none should be made sergeants, but such as probably might
be held fit to be judges afterwards. bacon.
4. it is a title given to some of the king's servants: as, sergeant
chirurgeons ;.. that is, a chirurgeon servant to the king.
se’rgeantry. m. s. [from sergeant.]
grand sergeantry is that where one holdeth lands of the
king by service, which he ought to do in his own person unto
him : as to bear the king's banner or his spear, or to lead his
host, or to be his marshal, or to blow a horn, when he seeth
his enemies invade the land; or to find a man at arms to fight
within the four seas, or else to do it himself; or to bear the
king's sword before him at his coronation, or on that day to
be his sewer, carver, butler, or chamberlain. petit sergeantry
is where a man holdeth land of the king, to yield him yearly
some small thing toward his wars; as a sword, dagger, bow,
knife, spear, pair of gloves of mail, a pair of spurs, or such
like. cowel.
se’rgeantship. m. s. [from serjeant..] the office of a ser-
geant.
se’ries. m. s. [serie, fr. s.ries, latin.]
1. sequence; order.
draw out that antecedent, by refle&amp;ing briefly upon the
text as it lics in the series of the epistle. //ard of infidelity.
the chasms of the correspondence i cannot supply, having
destroyed too many letters to preserve any series. pope.
2. succession; course.
this is the series of perpetual woe,
which thou, alas ! and thine are born to know. pope.
serious. adj. [serieux, fr. serius, latin.]
1. grave; solemn ; not volatile; not light of behaviour.
ah! my friends ! while we laugh, all things are serious
round about us : god is serious, who exerciseth patience to-
wards us ; christ is serious, who shed his blood for us; the
holy ghost is serious, who striveth against the obstinacy of
our hearts; the holy scriptures bring to our ears the most
ferious things in the world; the holy sacraments represent the
most serious and awful matters; the whole creation is serious
in serving god, and us; all that are in beaven or hell are se-
rious: how then can we be gay ? to give these excellent
words their full force, it should be known that they came not
from the priesthood, but the court; and from a courtier as
eminent as england ever boasted. 1%ung.
&amp;
2. important; weighty ; not trifling.
i’ll hence to london on a seriods matter. shakoff. h. vi.
there's nothing serious in mortality;
all is but toys. shakesp. macbeth.
sk'riously. adv. [from serious.] gravely; solemnly ; in
earnest; without levity.
it cannot but be matter of very dreadful consideration to
any one, sober and in his wits, to think seriously with himself,
what horror and confusion must needs surprise that man, at
the last day of account, who had led his whole life by one
rule, when god intends to judge him by another. szuth.
all laugh to find
unthinking plainness so o’erspread thy mind,
that thou could'st seriously persuade the crowd
to keep their oaths, and to believe a god. dryden.
justin martyr, tertullian, lactantius, and arnobius, tell
us, that this martyrdom first of all made them seriously inqui-
fitive into that religion, which could endue the mind with so
much strength, and overcome the fear of death, nay, raise an
earnest desire of it, though it appeared in all its terrors. adds.
se’rious ness. n.s.. [from serious.] gravity; solemnity; ear-
nest attention.
that spirit of religion and seriousness vanished all at once,
and a spirit of libertinism and profaneness started up in the
room of it. atterbury's sermons.
the youth was received at the door by a servant, who then
conducted him with great silence and seriousness to a long gal-
lery, which was darkened at noon-day. addison's speciator.
ser mocin aotion. n. s. [sermocinatio, latin.] the act or
practice of making speeches.
sermocina"ror. m. s. [sermocinor, latin.] a preacher; a
speechmaker.
these obstreperous sermocinators make easy impresfion upon
the minds of the vulgar. howed.
se'rmon. n.s.. [sermon, fr. sermo, lat.] a discourse of instruc-
tion pronounced by a divine for the edification of the people.
as for our sermons, be they never so sound and perfect, god’s
word they are not, as the sermons of the prophets were ; no,
they are but ambiguously termed his word, because his word is
commonly the subject whereof they treat, and must be the
rule whereby they are framed. hacker.
this our life, exempt from publick haunt,
finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
sermons in stones, and good in every thing. shakespeare.
sermons he heard, yet not so many
as left no time to practise any :
he heard them reverently, and then
his practice preach'd them o'er again. crashaw.
many, while they have preached christ in their sermons,
have read a lecture of atheism in their practice. south.
his preaching much, but more his practice wrought;
a living sermon of the truths he taught. dryden.
to se’r mon. v. a. [sermoner, fr. from the noun.]
1. to discourse as in a sermon.
some would rather have good discipline delivered plainly by
way of precept, or sermoned at large, than thus cloudily in-
wrapped in allegorical devises. speoser.
2. to tutor; to teach dogmatically; to lesson.
come, sermon me no farther:
no villainous bounty yet hath past my heart. shak. timon.
se'rmountain. or seseli, n. s. [sex, lat..] a plant.
sero's it y. m. s. [serosite, fr.] thin or watery part of the
blood.
in these the salt and lixiviated scrofity is divided between the
guts and the bladder; but it remains undivided in birds. brown.
the tumour of the throat, which occasions the difficulty of
swallowing and breathing, proceeds from a serosity obstructing
the glands, which may be watery, oedematose, and schirrous,
according to the viscosity of the humour. arbuthnot.
se’rous. adj. [sereux, french; sorosus, latin.]
1. thin; watery. used of the part of the blood which sepa-
rates in congelation from the grumous or red part.
2. adapted to the serum. -
this disease is commonly an extravasation of serum, re-
ceived in some cavity of the body; for there may be also a
dropsy by a dilatation of the scrous vessels, as that in the ova-
rium. arbuthnot on diet.
setpent. n. s. iserpens, latin.] an animal that moves
by undulation without legs. they are often venomous. they
are divided into two kinds: the viper, which brings young ;
and the snake, that lays eggs.
she was arrayed all in lily white,
and in her right hand bore a cup of gold,
with wine and water filled up to the height;
hm which a serpent did himself enfold,
that horror made to all that did behold.
she struck me with her tongue,
most serpent like, upon the very heart. shaiso. ai. lear.
they, or under ground, or circuit wide,
with serpent error wand'ring, found their way.
the chief i challeng'd : he whose practis'd wit
knew all the serpent mazes of deceit,
eludes my search. -
fairy szczz.
-? ...r.o.
pop.'s o. : : - -
se r p e -&lt; 1 1 * * *
&amp;
s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 14</div><p class="text">s e r
s e. r.
------&gt;
se'rpentine. adj. [serpentinus, lat. from serpent.]
1. resembling a serpent.
i craved of him to lead me to the top of this rock, with
meaning to free him from so serpentine a companion as i
asll. sidney.
this of ours is described with legs, wings, a srpentine and
winding tail, and a crest or comb somewhat like a cock. brown.
nothing wants, but that thy shape
like his, and colour serpentine, may shew
thy inward fraud. amilton's paradis? loo.
the figures and their parts ought to have a serpentine and
flaming form naturally : these sorts of outlines have, i know
not what of life and seeming motion in them, which very
much resembles the activity of the flame and serpent. dryden.
2. winding like a serpent ; ansraetuous.
nor can the sun
perfeoł a circle, or maintain his way
one inch direct; but where he rose to-day
he comes no more, but with a cozening line
steals by that point, and so is serpentine. donne.
his hand the adorned firmament display’d,
those serpentine, yet constant motions made. sandys.
how many spacious countries does the rhine,
in winding banks, and mazes serpentine,
traverse, before he splits in belgia's plain,
and, lost in sand, creeps to the german main blackmore.
se’rpentin e. m. s. [dracantium.] an herb. ainsworth.
se’r pentin e stone. n.s.
there were three species of this stone known among the
ancients, all resembling one another, and celebrated for the
same virtues. the one was green, variegated with spots of
black, thence called the black ophites; another, called the
white ophites, was green also, but variegated with spots of
white: the third was called tephria, and was of a grey co-
lour, variegated with small black spots. the ancients tell
us, that it was a certain remedy against the poison of the bite
of serpents; but it is now justly rejected. hill's mat. med.
accept in good part a bottle made of a serpentine stone, which
hath the quality to give any wine or water, that shall be in-
fused therein for four and twenty hours, the taste and opera-
tion of the spaw-water, and is very medicinable for the cure
of the spleen and gravel. wotton.
se’rpents tongue. m. s. sophioglosson.] an herb. ainsworth.
se’rpet. n. s. a basket. ainsworth.
serpi'ginous. adj. [from serpigo, latin.] diseased with a
serpigo.
the skin behind her ear downwards became serpiginous, and
was covered with white scales. //seman.
saapigo. m. s. [latin.] a kind of tetter.
for thy own bowels, which do call thee fire,
do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum, -
for ending thee no sooner. shakespeare.
she had a node with pains on her right leg, and a serpigo
on her right hand. wiseman.
to serr. v. a. [serrer, french..] to drive hard together; to
crowd into a little space. not received into use, nor deserving
reception.
the frowning and knitting of the brows is a gathering or
ferring of the spirits, to resist in some measure; and also this
knitting will follow upon earnest studying, though it be with-
out dislike. bacon's natural history.
heat attenuates and sends forth the spirit of a body, and
upon that the more gross parts contract and serr themselves
together. bacon.
se’rrat e. }* [sorratus, latin.] formed with jags or .
se’rrated. $ indentures like the edge of a saw.
all that have serrate teeth are carnivorous. ray.
the common heron hath long legs for wading, a long neck
answerable thereto to reach prey, a wide throat to pouch it,
and long toes with strong hooked talons, one of which is re-
markably serrate on the edge. derham's physico-theology.
this stick is usually knotted, and always armed : one of
them with a curious shark's tooth near an inch long, and in-
dented or serrated on both edges: a scurvy weapon. grew.
serra'tion. n. s. [from serra, latin.] formation in the
shape of a saw.
serrature. n. s. [from serra, latin.] indenture like teeth
of saws.
these are serrated on the edges; but the serratures are
deeper and grosser than in any of the rest. woodward.
to se'rry. v. a. s.serrer, french; serrato, italian ] to press
close; to drive hard together. for serry bacon uses serr; but
neither serr nor serry are received.
with thern rose
a forest huge of spears; and thronging helms
appear'd, and serried shields in thick array,
of death immeasurable. milton's paradio lys.
foul dissipation follow'd, and forc’d rout;
, nor serv’d it to relax their serried files. milton's par. loft.
se’rvas f. n. s. [servant, french ; servus, latin.]
* 9we who attends another, and asts at his command. the
sorvelative of master. used of man or woman.
*
we are one in fortune; both
fell by our servants, by those men we lov'd most. shosh,
i had rather be a country servant maid,
than a great queen with this condition.
- shak. r. iii.
he disdain’d not
thenceforth the form of servant to assume. milton.
for master or for servant here to call
was all alike, where only two were all. drydin.
2. one in a state of subjection. unusual.
being unprepar’d,
our will became the servant to defest,
which else should free have wrong’d. shakes?. macbeth.
3. a word of civility used to superiours or equals.
this subjection, due from all men to all men, is something
more than the compliment of course, when our betters tell us
they are our humble servants, but understand us to be their
*
slaves. swift.
t2 iovası. v. a. [from the noun..] to subject. not in
ulle,
my affairs
are servanted to others: though i owe
my revenge properly, remission lies
in volscian breasts. - shakesp. coriolanus.
to serve. v. a. [servir, french; servio, latin. j
i. to work for. -
because thou art my brother, should'st thou therefore serve
me for nought 2 gen. xxix. 15.
2. to attend at command.
a goddess among gods ador'd, and serv'd
by angels numberless, thy daily train. milton.
3. to obey servilely or meanly.
when wealthy, shew thy wisdom not to be
to wealth a servant, but make wealth serve thee. denham.
4. to supply with food ceremoniously.
others, pamper'd in their shameless pride,
are serv’d in plate, and in their chariots ride. dryden.
5. to bring meat as a menial attendant: with in or up; with
in, as meat dressed in the kitchen is brought into another
room; with up, as the room of repast is commonly higher
than the kitchen.
bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will
come in to dinner. shakesp. merchant of venice.
soon after our dinner was served in, which was right good
viands, both for bread and meat: we had also drink of three
sorts, all wholsome and good. bacon.
besmeared with the horrid juice of sepia, they danced a lit-
tle in phantastick postures, retired a while, and then returned
jerving up a banquet as at solemn funerals. taylor.
some part he roasts; then serves it up so drest,
and bids me welcome to this humble feast:
mow’d with disdain,
i with avenging flames the palace burn'd. dryden.
the same mess should be served up again for supper, and
breakfast next morning. arbuthn. history of john bull.
6. to be subservient or subordinate to.
bodies bright and greater should not serve
the less not bright. milton.
7. to supply with any thing : as, the curate served two
churches.
they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the tribes of
israel. ezek. xlviii. 19.
8. to obey in military actions: as, he served the king in three
campaigns.
9. to be sufficient to. -
if any subject, interest, or fancy has recommended, their
reasoning is after their fashion; it serves their turn. locke.
10. to be of use to ; to assist; to promote.
when a storm of a sad mischance beats upon our spirits,
turn it into some advantage, by observing where it can serve
another end, either of religion or prudence. taylor.
he confider'd every creature
most opportune might serve his wiles. milton.
11. to help by good offices.
shall he thus serve his country, and the muse
the tribute of her just applause refuse 2 tate.
12. to comply with 5 to submit to.
they think herein we serve the time, because thereby we
either hold or seek preferment. hooker.
13. to satisfy ; to content.
as the former empty plea served the sottish jews, this
equally serves these to put them into a fool's paradise, by feed-
ing their hopes, without changing their lives. south.
nothing would serve them then but riding. l’estrange.
one half-pint bottle serves them both to dine,
and is at once their vinegar and wine. -
14. to stand instead of anything to one.
the dull flat falsehood serves for policy,
and in the cunning, truth itself’s a lye. pope.
15. [se servir de, french.] to serve himself of. to make use
of. a mere gallicism. - " .
a complete brave man must know solidly the main end he
is in the world for ; and withal how to serve o the
iv ligg is
pope,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 15</div><p class="text">s e r
s e r
divine's high contemplations, of the metaphysician's subtile
speculations, and of the natural philosopher's minute obser-
vations. digby on the soul.
they would serve themselves of this form. taylor.
i will serve myself of this concession. chillingworth.
it is much more easy for men to serve their own ends of
those principles, which they do not put into men, but find
there. tillotson.
if they elevate themselves, ’tis only to fall from a higher
place, because they serve themselves of other men's wings,
neither understanding their use nor virtue. dryden's dufresn.
16. to treat; to requite: in an ill sense: as, he served me un-
gratefully.
17. [in divinity.]. to worship the supreme being.
matters hid leave to god, him serve and fear. , milton.
18. to serve a warrant. to seize an offender, and carry to
justice.
19. to serve an office. to disgrace any onerous and publick
duty.
to sovo. ov. 77.
1. to be a servant, or slave.
israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep. hos.
we will give thee this also, for the service which thou
fhalt serve with me. gen. xx. 27.
2. to be in subjection.
thou hast made me to serve with thy fins; thou hast wearied
me with thine iniquities. isa. xliii. 24.
3. to attend ; to wait.
martha was cumbered about much serving, and said, lord,
do'st thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone *
luke, x. 4o.
4. to engage in the duties of war under command.
both more or less have given him the revolt;
and none serve with but constrained things,
whose hearts are absent too. shakes. macbeth.
many noble gentlemen came out of all parts of italy, who
had before been great commanders, but now served as private
gentlemen without pay. knolles's history of the turks.
5. to produce the end desired. -
the look bewrayed, that as she used these ornaments, not
for herself, but to prevail with another, so she feared that all
would not serve. sidney.
6. to be sufficient for a purpose.
take it, she said; and when your needs require,
this little brand will serve to light your fire. dryden.
7. to suit; to be convenient.
we have the summary of all our griefs, -
when time shall serve to shew in articles. shakesp. h. iv.
as ...oft. this noble queen
and prince shall follow with a fresh supply. shakesp. h. vi.
read that; 'tis with the royal signet sign'd,
and given me by the king, when time should serve,
to be perus’d by you. dryden's spanish fryar.
8. to conduce; to be of use.
churches, as every thing else, receive their chief perfec-
tion from the end whereunto they serve. hooker.
our speech to worldly superiors we frame in such fort as
ferveth best to inform and persuade the minds of them, who
otherwise neither could nor would greatly regard our neces-
sities. hooker.
who lessens thee, against his purpose serves
to manifest the more thy might. milton.
first investigate the variety .# motions and figures made by
the organs which serve for articulation, and the *} of
matter to which those articulations are severally applied. hold.
fashion is, for the most part, nothing but the ostentation
of riches ; and therefore the high price of what serves to that,
rather increases than lesiens its vent. locke.
our victory only served to lead us on to further visionary
prospects. swift.
9. to officiate or minister: as, he served at the publick din-
ner,
se'rvice. n.s.. [service, fr. servitium, latin.]
1. menial office; low business done at the command of a
master.
the banish’d kent, who in disguise
follow'd his king, and did him service
improper for a slave.
2. attendance of a servant.
both fell by our servants, by those men we lov'd most:
a most unnatural and faithless service. shakespeare.
3. place; office of a servant.
i have served prince florizel; but now i am out of sor-
vice. shakespeare.
by oppresfing and betraying me,
thou might'st have sooner got another service. shakesp.
these that accuse him are a yoke of his discarded men;
very rogues, now they be out of service. shakespeare.
a court, properly a fair, the end of it trade and gain; for
none would go to service that thinks he has enough to live
well of himself. temple.
4. anything done by way of duty to a superior,
shakesp. k. lear.
that service is not service, so being done,
but being so allow'd. shakesp. cymbeline.
this poem was the last piece of service i did for my master
king charles. 121j.sen.
5. attendance on any superior.
madam, i entreat true peace of you
which i will purchase with my duteous service. shake?.
riches gotten by service, tho' it be of the best rise, yet when
gotten by flattery, may be placed amongst the worst. bacon.
6. profession of respect uttered or sent. -
i am a woman, lacking wit,
to make a seemly answer to such persons,
pray do my service to his majesty. shakesp. hen. viii.
7. obedience; submission.
thou, nature, art my goddess; to thy law
my services are bound. shakesp. k. lear.
god requires no man's service upon hard and unreasonable
terms. tillotson's sermons.
8. act on the performance of which possession depends.
although they built castles and made freeholders, yet were
there no tenures and services reserved to the crown; but the
lords drew all the respect and dependency of the common
people unto themselves. bavies's state of ireland.
9. actual duty; office.
the order of human society cannot be preserved, nor the
jervices requisite to the support of it be supplied, without a dis-
tinetion of stations, and a long subordination of offices. rogers.
10. employment; business.
if stations of power and trust were constantly made the re-
wards of virtue, men of great abilities would endeavour to ex-
cel in the duties of a religious life, in order to qualify then-
selves for publick service. swift.
11. military duty.
when he cometh to experience of service abroad, or is put
to a piece or pike, he maketh a worthy soldier. spenser.
at the parliament at oxford his youth and want of expe-
rience in sea-service had somewhat been shrewdly touched,
even before the sluices of popular liberty were yet set open.
wotton's buckingham.
12. a military atchievement.
such fellows will learn you by rote where services were
done, at such and such a breach. shakesp. hen. w.
13. purpose; use.
all the vessels of the king's house are not for uses of ho-
nour, some be common stuff, and for mean services, yet pro-
fitable. spelman.
14. useful office; advantage conferred.
the stork's plea, when taken in a net, was the service she
did in picking up venomous creatures. l'a/trunge,
the clergy prevent themselves from doing much service to
religion, by affecting so much to converse with each other,
and caring so little to mingle with the laity. swift.
gentle streams visit populous towns in their course, and
are at once of ornament and service to them. pope.
that service may really be done, the medicine must be
given in larger quantities. 44tad.
15. favour.
to thee a woman's services are due,
my fool usurps my body.
16. public office of devotion.
according to this form of theirs, it must stand for a rule,
no sermon, no service. hocker.
if that very service of god in the jewish synagogues, which
our lord did approve and sanctify with his own presence, had
so large portions of the law and prophets, together with the
many prayers and psalms read day by day, as equal in a man-
ner the length of ours, and yet in that respect was never
thought to deserve blame; is it now an offence that the like
measure of time is bestowed in the like manner * hooker.
i know no necessity why private and single abilities should
quite justle out and deprive the church of the joint abilities and
concurrent gifts of many learned and godly men, such as the
composers of the service-book were. k charles.
the congregation was discomposed, and divine servise
broken off. watts.
17. course; order of dishes.
cleopatra made anthony a supper sumptuous and royal ;
howbeit there was no extraordinary service seen on the
board. hakewill.
18. a tree and fruit. [sorbus, latin.]
the flower consists of several leaves, which are placed or-
bicularly, and expand in form of a rose, whose flower-cup
afterwards becomes a fruit shaped like a pear or medlar : to
which must be added, pennated leaves like that of the
ash. miller.
october is drawn in a garment of yellow and carnation ;
in his left hand a basket of services, medlars, and other fruits
that ripen late. peacharn.
se’r vice able. adj. [servisable, old french ; from service.]
r. active; diligent; officious.
he was sent to the king's court, with letters from that
officer, containing his own serviceable diligence in discovering
i &amp;
shaky?. k. lear.
... --"
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 16</div><p class="text">s e. r.
so great a personage ; adding withal more than was true of his
conjectures. - sidney.
i know thee well, a serviceable villain;
as duteous to the vices of thy mistress
as badness could desire. shakesp. k. lear.
2. useful; beneficial.
religion hath force to qualify all sorts of men, and to make
them, in publick affairs, the more serviceable; governors the
apter to rule with conscience ; inferiors, for conscience sake,
the willinger to obey. hooker.
so your father charg'd me at our parting,
be serviceable to my son. shakespeare.
his own inclinations were to confine himself to his own
business, and be serviceable to religion and learning. atterbury.
a book to justify the revolution, archbishop tillotson re-
commended to the king as the most serviceable treatise could
have been published then. swift.
se’r v ice a blen ess. m. s. [from serviceable.]
1. officiousness ; activity.
he might continually be in her presence, shewing more
humble serviceablenes; and joy to content her than ever be-
fore. sidney.
2. usefulness; beneficialness.
all action being for some end, its aptness to be command-
cd or forbidden must be founded upon its serviceablenes, or dis-
serviceableness to some end. norris.
se rv11. e. adj. [servil, french ; servilis, latin.]
1. slavith; dependant; mean.
fight and die, is death destroying death:
where fearing dying, pays death servile breath.
from imposition of striel laws to free
acceptance of large grace, from servile fear
to filial. milton.
ev’n fortune rules no more a servile land,
where exil'd tyrants still by turns command. pope.
2. fawning ; cringing.
the most servise flattery is lodged the most easily in the
gross st capacity; for their ordinary conceit draweth a yield-
ing to their greaters, and then have they not wit to discern
shakesp.
the right degrees of duty. sidney.
she must bend the servile knee,
and fawning take the splendid robber's boon. thomson.
slr v il ely. adu. [from servile. j meanly; slavishly.
to each changing news, they chang'd affections bring,
and servilely from fate expect a king. dryd. aurengzebe.
he affects a singularity in his actions and thoughts, rather
than servilely to copy from the wisest. swift.
s: r v ile n ess. -
szko i'll ty. ; n. s. [from servile.]
1. subjection; involuntary obedience.
what, besides this unhappy servility to custom, can possibly
reconcile men that own chriliian:ty to a practice widely
distant from it : government of the tongue.
2. meanness; dependance; baseness.
3. submission from fear.
the angels and daemons, those by their subserviency, and
these by the servility of their obedience, manifestly declared
christ and his apostles to be vested with an authority derived
from their lord. j//l.
4. slavery ; the condition of a slave.
to be a queen in bondage, is more vile
than is a slave in base servility;
for princes should be free. shake?. hen. vi.
se’r v ing man. m. s. [serve and man.]. a menial servant.
your niece did more favours to the duke's serving man, than
ever she bestowed on me. shakesp. twelfth night.
just in the nick; the cook knock'd thrice,
and all the waiters in a trice
his summons did obey;
each serving-man, with dish in hand,
march'd boldly up, like our train'd band,
presented and away.
with dennis you did ne'er combine,
not you, to steal your master's wine ;
except a bottle now and then,
to welcome brother serving-men.
servitor. m. s. [serviteur, french.)
1. servant; attendant. a word obsolete.
this workman, whose servitor nature is, being only one,
the heathens imagining to be more, gave him in the sky the
name of jupiter; in the air, of juno ; in the water, of nep-
su, kling.
- swift.
tune; in the earth, of vetta; and ceres. hooker.
thus are poor servitors,
when others sleep upon their quiet beds,
constrain'd to watch in darkness, rain and cold. shakesp.
fearful commenting
is leaden servitor to dull delay;
delay leads impotent and snail-pac'd beggary. shakesp.
2. one who acts under another ; a follower.
our norman conqueror gave away to his servitors the lands
and possessions of such as did oppose his invasion. davies.
3. one who professes duty and obedience.
vol. ii.
my noble queen, let former grudges pass, o
and henceforth i am thy true servitor. shakesh, hen. vi.
4. one of the lowest order in the university.
ti his learning o o of a size with his birth and educa-
ion ; no more of either than what a poor hungry servitor can
be expected to bring with him from his ...; y st swift.
se'rvitude. m. s. [servitude, fr. servitus, lat.]
i. slavery; state of a slave; dependance. -
aristotle speaketh of men, whom nature hath framed for
the state of servitude, saying, they have reason so far forth
as to conceive when others direct them. hooker.
you would have sold your king to slaughter,
his princes and his peers to servitude,
his subjects to opprefion and contempt. shakesp. hen. v
unjustly thou deprav'st it with the name
of servitude, to serve whom god ordains,
or nature: god and nature bid the same,
when he who rules is worthiest. milton.
tho' it is necessary, that some persons in the world should
be in love with a splendid servitude, yet certainly they must
be much beholding to their own fancy, that they can be
pleased at it; for he that rises up early, and goes to bed late,
only to receive addresses, is really as much abridged in his
freedom, as he that waits to present one.
south.
2. servants colle&amp;tively. not in use.
after him a cumb’rous train -
of herds, and flocks, and numerous servitude. milton.
se’rum. m. s. [latin.]
1. the thin and watry part that separates from the rest in any
liquor, as in milk the whey from the cream.
2. the part of the blood, which in coagulation separates from
the grume.
blood is the most universal juice in an animal body: the
red part of it differs from the serum, the serum from the symph,
the lymph from the nervous juice, and that from the several
other humours separated in the glands. arbuthnot.
sesquialter. ! adj. [s/quiallere, fr. souiaster, lat.]
sesquial ter al. in geometry, is a ratio, where one quan-
tity or number contains another once and half as much more,
as 6 and 9. dic7.
in all the revolutions of the planets about the sun, and of
the secondary planets about the primary ones, the periodical
times are in a sosuialter proportion to the mean distance.
cheyne.
as the six primary planets revolve about the sun, so the se-
condary ones are moved about them in the same sesquialteral
proportion of their periodical motions to their orbs. bentley.
se's quiplicate. adj. [in mathematicks.] is the proportion
one quantity or number has to another, in the ratio of one half.
the periodical times of the planets are in sesquiplicate pro-
portion, and not a duplicate proportion of the distances from
the center or the radii; and consequently the planets cannot
be carried about by an harinonically circulating fluid.
cheyne's phil. prin.
se’sqj pe dal. } adj. issuipedals, lat..] containing a
sesquipedalian. foot and a half.
as for my own part, i am but a sosuspedal, having only
six foot and a half of stature. addison's guardian.
hast thou ever measured the gigantick ethiopian, whose
stature is above eight cubits high, or the sesquipedalian pig-
mey arbuthnot and pope.
sesquit ertian. [in mathematicks.] having such a ratio, as
that one quantity or number contains another once and one
third part more ; as between 6 and 8. dici.
sess. n. s. [for affs, ces, or cense..] rate ; cess charged; tax.
his army was so ill paid and governed, as the english suf-
fered more damage by the sess of his soldiers than they gained
profit or security by abating the pride of their enemies.
davies's history of ireland.
se’ssion. n.s.. [session, fr. ssio, lat.]
1. the aet of fitting.
he hath as man, not as god only, a supreme dominion
over quick and dead; for so much his ascension into heaven,
and his session at the right hand of god do import. hooker.
many, tho' they concede a table-gesture, will hardly allow
this usual way of session. brown's wulgar errours.
2. a stated assembly of magistrates or senators.
- they are ready t'appear
where you shall hold your session.
summon a session that we may arraign
our most disloyal lady.
the old man mindful still of moan,
weeping, thus bespake the session. chapman's hom. odys.
of their softon ended they bid cry
shakesp. k. lear.
shakespeare,
the great result. milton.
call'd to council all the achaian states,
nor herald sworn the session to proclaim. pope's odyssey.
3. the space for which an assembly fits, without intermission
or recess.
it was contrary to the course of parliament, that any bill
that had been rejected should be again preferred the same ss-
jion. clarendon.
23 q. o the
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 17</div><p class="text">s e. t.
s e t
the second nicene council affords us plentiful assistance,
in the first ssion, wherein the pope's vicar declares that me-
letius was ordained by arian bishops, and yet his ordination
was never questioned. stilling fleet.
many decrees are enaeted, which at the next softon are re-
pealed. norris.
4. a meeting of justices: as the sessions of the peace.
se'ster ce. n.s.. [softerce, fr. josiertium, lat.] among the
romans, a sum of about 81. 1 s. 5d. half-penny slerling.
idic7.
several of them would rather chuse a sum in softerces, than
in pounds serling. addison on medals.
to set. v. a. preterite i set ; part, pass. i am set. [satgan, or
fatyan, gothick; reccan, saxon; setten, dutch.]
1. to place; to put in any situation or place ; to put.
ere i could
give him that parting kiss which i had st
betwixt two charming words, comes in my father. shakes.
but that my admirable dexterity of wit, counterfeiting the
action of an old woman, delivered me, the knave constable
had set me i' th' common stocks for a witch. shakespeare.
they that are younger have me in derision, whose fathers
i would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.
job, xxx. 1.
he that hath received his testimony, hath set to his seal,
that god is true. john, iii. 33.
they have set her a bed in the midst of the slain. ezek. xxxii.
god set them in the firmament, to give light upon the
-
earth. gen. i. 17.
she sets the bar that causes all my pain;
one gift refused, makes all their bounty vain. 1)ryden.
the lives of the revealers may be justly enough set over
against the revelation, to find whether they agree. atterb.
2. to put into any condition, state, or posture.
they thought the very disturbance of things established an
hire sufficient to set them on work. hooker.
that man that sits within a monarch's heart,
would he abuse the count'nance of the king,
alack what mischiefs might he set abroach : shakespeare.
our princely general,
will give you audience; and wherein
it shall appear that your demands are just,
you shall enjoy them; ev'ry thing set off
that might so much as think you enemies.
this present enterprize set off his head,
i do not think a braver gentleman
is now alive. shakespeare's henry iv.
ye caused every man his servant, whom he had set at li-
berty, to return. jer. xxxiv. 16.
every sabbath ye shall set it in order. lev. xxiv. 8.
i am come to set a man at variance against his father. mat.
thou shalt pour out into all those vessels, and set aside that
which is full. 2 kings, iv. 4.
the beauty of his ornament he set in majesty, but they
made images; therefore have i set it far from them. ezek.
the gates of thy land shall be set wide open. nah. iii. 13.
the fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children's
tecth are set on edge. jer. xxxi. 20.
the shipping might be set on work by fishing, by trans-
portations from port to port. bacon.
this wheel set on going, did pour a war upon the vene-
tians with such a tempest, as padua and trevigi were taken
from them. bacon.
that this may be done with the more advantage, some
hours must be set apart for this examination. duppa.
finding the river fordable at the foot of the bridge, he set
shakespeare.
over his horse. hayward.
by his aid aspiring
to set himself in glory above his peers. milton.
equal success had set these champions high,
and both resolv'd to conquer, or to die. jwaller.
nothing renders a man so inconsiderable; for it sets him
above the meaner sort of company, and makes him intolerable
to the better. government of the tongue.
some are reclaimed by punishment, and some are set right
by good nature. i’estrange.
the fire was form’d, she sets the kettle on. dryden.
leda's present came,
to ruin troy, and set the world on flame. dryden.
sct calf betimes to school, and let him be
instructed there in rules of husbandry. dryden.
over labour'd with so long a course,
'tis time to set at ease the smoking horse. dryden,
the punish'd crime shall set my soul at ease,
and murm'ring manes of my friend appease. dryden.
jove call'd in haste
the son of maia with severe decree,
to kill the keeper, and to set her free. dryden.
if such a tradition were at any time endeavoured to be set
on foot, it is not easy to imagine how it should at first gain
entertainment. tillotson.
when the father looks sour on the child, every body else
should put on the same coldness, till forgiveness asked, and a
reformation of his fault has set him right again, and restored
him to his former credit, locee on education.
his practice must by no means cross his precepts, unless he
intend to set him wrong. locke on education.
if the fear of absolute and irresistible power set it on upon
the mind, the idea is likely to sink the deeper. locke.
when he has once chosen it, it raises desire that propor-
tionably gives him uneasiness which determines his will, and
fits him at work in pursuit of his choice, on all occasions.
locke.
this river,
when nature's self lay ready to expire,
quench'd the dire flame that set the world on fire. milson.
a couple of lovers agreed at parting, to set aside one half
hour in the day to think of each other. addison,
your fortunes place you far above the necessity of learning,
but nothing can set you above the ornament of it. felton.
their first movement and impressed motions demand the
impulse of an almighty hand to set them agoing. cheyne.
that the wheels were but small, may be guessed from a cus.
tom they have of taking them off, and setting them on. pope.
be frequent in setting such causes at work, whose effects
you desire to know. watts,
3. to make motionless ; to fix immoveably.
struck with the sight, inanimate she seems,
set at her eyes, and motionless her limbs. garth.
4. to fix; to state by some rule.
hereon the prompter falls to flat railing in the bitterest
terms; which the gentleman with a set gesture and counte-
nance still soberly related, until the ordinary, driven at last
into a mad rage, was fain to give over. carew.
the town of bern has handsome fountains planted, at set
distances, from one end of the streets to the other. addison.
5. to regulate ; to adjust.
in court they determine the king's good by his desires, which
is a kind of setting the sun by the dial. suckling.
god bears a different respect to places set apart and conse-
crated to his worship, to what he bears to places designed to
common uses. south.
our palates grow into aliking of the seasoning and cookery,
which by custom they are set to. locke.
he rules the church's blest dominions,
and sets men's faith by his opinions. prior,
against experience he believes,
he argues against demonstration;
pleas'd when his reason he deceives,
and sets his judgment by his passion. prior.
6. to fit to musick; to adapt with notes.
set thy own songs, and sing them to thy lute.
grief he tames that fetters it in verse ;
but when i have done so,
some man, his art or voice to show,
doth set and sing my pain;
and by delighting many, frees again
grief, which verse did restrain. donne.
i had one day set the hundredth psalm, and was singing the
first line, in order to put the congregation into the tune. spo.
drydon,
7. to plant, not sow.
whatsoever fruit useth to be set upon a root or a slip, if it
be sown, will degenerate. bacon's natural hylary.
i prostrate fell,
to shrubs and plants my vile devotion paid,
and set the bearded leek to which i pray'd. prizr.
8. to intersperse or variegate with any thing.
as with stars, their bodies all
and wings were set with eyes. milton.
high on their heads, with jewels richly set,
each lady wore a radiant coronet. dryden.
the body is smooth on that end, and on this ’tis set with
ridges round the point. joaodward.
. to reduce from a fractured or dislocated state.
can honour set to a leg? no ; or an arm no: honour hath
no skill in surgery then no. shakespeare's henry iv.
considering what an orderly life i had led, i only com-
manded that my arm and leg should be set, and my body
anointed with oil. herbert.
the fracture was of both the focils of the left leg: he had
been in great pain from the time of the setting. i/iseman.
credit is gained by course of time, and seldom recovers a
strain ; but if broken, is never well set again. temple.
io. to fix the affection; to determine the thoughts.
set your affection on things above, not on things on the
earth. col. iii. 2.
they should set their hope in god, and not forget his
works. ps. lxxviii. 7.
because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, the heart of men is fully set in them to do evil. eccl.
some i found wond’rous harsh,
contemptuous, proud, set on revenge and spite. milton.
set not thy heart
thus overfond on that which is not thine, amilton.
when
:
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 18</div><p class="text">s e t
when we are well, our hearts are set,
which way we care not, to be rich or great. denham.
our hearts are so much set upon the value of the benefits
received, that we never think of the bestower. l’estrange.
these bubbles of the shallowest, empties: sorrow,
which children vent for toys, and women rain
for any trifle their fond hearts are set on. dryden and lee.
should we set our hearts only upon these things, and be able
to taste no pleasure but what is sensual, we must be extremely
miserable when we come unto the other world, because we
should meet with nothing to entertain ourselves. tillotson.
no sooner is one action dispatched, which we are /et upon,
but another uneasiness is ready to set us on work. locke.
minds, altogether set on trade and profit, often contract a
certain narrowness of temper. addison.
men take an ill-natured pleasure in disappointing us in what
our hearts are most set upon. addison's speciator.
an englishman, who has any degree of reflection, cannot
be better awakened to a sense of religion in general, than by
observing how the minds of all mankind are set upon this im-
portant point, and how every nation is attentive to the great
business of their being. addison.
i am much concerned when i see young gentlemen of for-
tune so wholly set upon pleasures, that they neglect all im-
provements in wisdom and knowledge. aadison.
11. to predetermine; to settle.
we may still doubt whether the lord, in such indifferent
ceremonies as those whereof we dispute, did frame his people
of set purpose unto any utter dissimilitude with egyptians, or
with any other nation. hooker.
he remembers only the name of conon, and forgets the
other on set purpose, to shew his country swain was no great
scholar. dryden.
12. to establish ; to appoint; to fix. -
of all helps for due performance of this service, the greatest
is that very set and standing order itself, which, framed with
common advice, hath for matter and form prescribed whatso-
ever is herein publickly done. hocker.
it pleased the king to send me, and i set him a time. neh. ii.
he setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out all perfec-
tion. job, xxviii.
in studies, whatsoever a man commandeth upon himself, let
him set hours for it ; but whatsoever is agreeable to his nature,
let him take no care for any set times: for his thoughts will
fly to it of themselves, so as the spaces of other business or stu-
dies will suffice. bacon.
for using set and prescribed forms, there is no doubt but
that wholsome words, being known, are aptest to excite ju-
dicious and fervent affections. king charles.
his seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head. allion.
though set form of prayer be an abomination,
set forms of petitions find great approbation. denham.
set places and set hours are but parts of that worship we
owe. south.
that law cannot keep men from taking more use than you
set, the want of money being that alone which regulates its
price, will appear, if we consider how hard it is to set a price
upon unnecessary commodities; but how impossible it is to set
a rate upon victuals in a time of famine. locłe.
set him such a task, to be done in such a time. locke.
take set times of meditating on what is future. atterbury.
should a man go about, with never so set study and design,
to describe such a natural form of the year as that which is at
present established, he could scarcely ever do it in so few
words that were so fit. j/oodward.
13. to appoint to an office ; to assign to a post.
am i a sea, or a whale, that thou sette/l a watch over me !
job, vii. 12.
as in the subordinations of government the king is offended
by any insults to an inferior magistrate, so the sovereign ruler
of the universe is affronted by a breach of allegiance to those
whom he has set over us. addison.
14. to exhibit; to display : with before.
through the variety of my reading, i set bosore me many
examples both of ancient and later times. d. 971.
reject not then what offer'd means: who knows
but god hath set bosore us, to return thee -
home to thy country and his sacred house : milton.
long has my soul desir'd this time and place,
to set before your sight your glorious race. dryden.
a spacious veil from his broad shoulders flew,
that set th’ unhappy phaeton to view:
the flaming chariot and the steeds it shew’d,
and the whole fable in the mantle glow’d.
when his fortune sets before him all
the pomps and pleasures that his soul can wish, .
his rigid virtue will accept of none. addison's cato.
he supplies his not appearing in the present scene of action,
by setting his character before us, and continually forcing his
patience, prudence, and valour upon our observation. broome.
15. to propose to choice. -
addison.
s e to
all that can be done is to set the thing before men, and to
offer it to their choice. tillotson:
16. to value; to estimate; to rate.
be you contented
to have a son set your decrees at nought
to pluck down justice foom your awful bench : shakespeare:
.the backwardness parents shew in divulging their faults
will make them set a greater value on their credit themselves.
and teach them to be the more carefit. preserve the ood
opinion of others. e.
if we act by several broken views, and will not only be o:
tuous, but wealthy, popular, and every thing that . a value
jet upon it by the world, we shall live and die in misery. addis;
have i not set at nought my noble birth y. adds:
a spotless fame, and an unblemish'd race, &gt;
!. . of innocence, and pride of virtue :
ly prodigality has giv'n thee all. rowe' o
though the same run, with all diffusive o, jane shore.
blush in the rose and in the diamond blaze, &gt;
we prize the stronger effort of his pow'r,
and always set the gem above the flow'r,
17. to stake at play. pope.
what sad disorders play begets
desp'rate and mad, at length he sets
those darts, whose points make gods adore. prior.
18. to offer a wager at dice to another.
who sets me else i'll throw at all.
19. to fix in metal.
think so vast a treasure as your son
too great for any private man's possession;
and him too rich a jewel to be set
in vulgar metal or vulgar use. dryden.
he may learn to cut, polish, and set precious stones. locke.
20. to embarrass; to distress; to peoplex. [this is used, i
think, by mistake, for best : as, &gt;
adam, hard lost, replied. milton.]
. those who raise popular murmurs and discontents against
his majesty's government, that they find so very few and so
very improper occasions for them, shew how hard they are
set in this particular, represent the bill as a grievance. alds.
*...* fix in an artificial manner, so as to produce a particular
cii to ct.
the proud have laid a snare for me, they have set gins. ps,
23. to apply to something, as a thing to be done. j
unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury, that the
lord may bless thee in all that thou settos; thine hand to. dout.
with whate'er gali thou fet/? thyself to write,
thy inoffensive satires never bite.
23. to fix the eyes.
i will sit mine eyes upon them for good, and bring them
again to this land. jer. xxiv. 6.
joy salutes me when i st
my blest eyes on amoret.
24. to offer for a price.
these is not a more wicked thing than a covetous man ;
for such an one soteth his own soul to sale. ecclus, x. 9.
25. to place in order; to frame.
after it was framed, and ready to be set together, he was,
with infinite labour and charge, carried by land with camels,
shakesp. r. ii.
dryden. .
waller.
through that hot and sandy country. knolles.
26. to station; to place.
coenus has betray'd
the bitter truths that our loose court upbraid:
your friend was set upon you for a spy,
and on his witness you are doom'd to die. dryden.
27. to oppose.
will you set your wit to a fool's 2 shakespeare.
28. to bring to a fine edge: as, to set a razor.
29. to point out, without noise or disturbance: as, a dog sett
birds.
30. to set about. to apply to.
they should make them play-games, or endeavour it, and
/ct themselves about it. locke.
31. to se t agains. to place in a state of enmity or opposition.
the king of babylon set himself against jerusalem. ezek.
the devil hath reason to set himself against it; for nothing
is more destructive to him than a soul armed with prayer. .
duppa.
there should be such a being as assists us against our worst
enemies, and comforts us under our sharpest sufferings, when
all other things set themselves against us. tillotson.
3; to set against. to oppose; to place in rhetorical oppo-
1tion.
this perishing of the world in a deluge is set agains, or
compared with, the perishing of the world in the conflagra-
tion. burnet's theory of the earth.
33. to set apart. to negle&amp;t for a season.
they highly commended his forwardness, and all other
matters for that time set apart. knolles.
34. to set aside. to omit for the present,
srt
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 19</div><p class="text">s e t'
s e. t.
set your knighthood and your soldiership aside, and give me
leave to tell you that you lie in your throat. shakesp. h. iv.
in 1585 followed the prosperous expedition of drake and
carlile; in the which i set aside the taking of st. jago and st.
domingo, as surprizes rather than encounters. bacon,
my highest interest is not to be deceived about these mat-
ters; therefore, setting aside all other considerations, i will
endeavour to know the truth, and yield to that. tillotson.
35. to set aside. to reject.
i'll look into the pretensions of each, and shew upon what
ground 'tis that i embrace that of the deluge, and set aside all
the rest. woodward's natural history.
no longer now does my neglected mind
its wonted stores and old ideas find:
fix'd judgment there no longer does abide,
to taste the true, or set the false aside.
36. to set aftde. to abrogate; to annul.
several innovations, made to the detriment of the english
prior.
merchant, are now intirely set aside. addison.
there may be
reasons of so much pow'r and cogent force,
as may ev'n set aside this right of birth:
if sons have rights, yet fathers have 'em too. rowe.
he shows what absurdities follow upon such a supposition,
and the greater those absurdities are, the more strongly do they
evince the falsity of that supposition from whence they flow,
and consequently the truth of the doctrine set aside by that sup-
position. atterbury.
37. to set by. to regard; to esteem.
david behaved himself more wisely than all, so that his
name was much set by. i sa. xviii. 30.
38. to set by. to reject or omit for the present.
you shall hardly edify me, that those nations might not, by
the law of nature, have been subdued by any nation that had
only policy and moral virtue ; though the propagation of the
faith, whereof we shall speak in the proper place, were set by,
and not made part of the case. bacon.
39. to set down. to explain, or relate in writing.
they have set down, that a rose set by garlick is sweeter,
because the more fetid juice goeth into the garlick. bacon.
some rules were to be set down for the government of the
army. - clarenden.
the reasons that led me into the meaning which prevailed
on my mind, are set down. locke.
an eminent instance of this, to shew what use can do, i
shall set down. locke.
i shall set down an account of a discourse i chanced to have
with one of these rural statesmen. addison.
40. to set down. to register or note in any book or paper; to
put in writing. -
let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set
down for them. shakespeare's hamlet.
every man, careful of virtuous conversation, studious of
feripture, and given unto any abstinence in diet, was set down
in his calendar of suspected prischlianists. hooker.
take
one half of my commission, and set down
as best thou art experienc'd, since thou know'st
thy country's strength and weakness. shak. coriolanus.
i cannot forbear setting down the beautiful description clau-
dian has made of a wild beast, newly brought from the woods,
and making its first appearance in a full amphitheatre. addison.
41. to set down. to fix on a resolve.
finding him so resolutely set down, that he was neither by
fair nor foul means, but only by force, to be removed out of
his town, he inclosed the same round. knolles.
42. to set down. to fix; to establish.
this law we may name eternal, being that order which
god before all others hath set down with himself, for himself
to do all things by. - hooker.
43. to set forth. to publish ; to promulgate; to make ap-
pcar.
my willing love,
the rather by these arguments of fear,
set forth in your pursuit. shakesp. twelfth night.
the poems, which have been so ill set forth under his name,
are as he first writ them. j/aller.
44. to set forth. to raise; to send out on expeditions.
our merchants, to their great charges, set forth fleets to
descry the seas. abbot.
the venetian admiral had a fleet of sixty gallies, set forth
by the venetians. knolles's history of the turks,
45. to set forth. to display; to explain; to represent.
as for words to set forth such lewdness, it is not hard for
them to give a goodly and painted shew thereunto, borrowed
even from the praises proper to virtue. spenser,
whereas it is commonly set forth green or yellow, it is in-
clining to white. brown's vulgar errours.
e. have these false colours dishonoured painting, that
they have only served to set forth her praise, and to make her
merit further known, dryden's dufresnoy.
46. to set forth. to arrange; to place in order.
up higher to the plain, where we'll set forth
in best appointment all our regiments. shakesp. k. john
47. to set forth. to show ; to exhibit. o
to render our errours more monstrous, and what unto a
miracle sets forth the patience of god, he hath endeavoured to
make the world believe he was god himself. brown.
to set forth great things by small. amilton,
the two humours of a chearful trust in providence, and a
suspicious diffidence of it, are very well set forth here for our
instruction. l'esirange.
when poor rutilus spends ali his worth,
in hopes of setting one good dinner forth,
'tis downright madness. dryden's juvenal,
48. to set forward. to advance; to promote.
they yield that reading may set forward, but not begin the
work of salvation. hooker.
amongst them there are not those helps which others have,
to set them forward in the way of life. ' hooker.
in the external form of religion, such things as are appa-
rently or can be sufficiently proved effectual, and generally fit
to set forward godliness, either as betokening the greatness of
god, or as beseeming the dignity of religion, or as concurring
with celestial impressions in the minds of men, may be reve:
rently thought of. hooker.
they marmy path, they set forward my calamity. job.
dung or chalk, applied seasonably to the roots of trees, aoth
set them forwards. bacon's natural hislory.
49. to set in. to put in a way to begin.
if you please to assist and set me in, i will recollea myself.
collier.
50. to set off. to decorate; to recommend; to adorn; to
embellish. it answers to the french relever.
like bright metal on a sullen ground,
my reformation, glittering o'er my fault,
shall shew more goodly, and attract more eyes,
than that which hath no foil to set it off. shak. h. iv.
the prince put thee into my service for no other reason
than to set me off. shakespeare's henry iv.
neglect not the examples of those that have carried them-
selves ill in the same place; not to set off thyself by taxing their
memory, but to direct thyself what to avoid. bacan.
may you be happy, and your sorrows past
set off those joys i wish may ever last. //aller.
the figures of the groupes must contrast each other by
their several positions: thus in a play some characters must be
raised to oppose others, and to set them off. dryden,
the men, whose hearts are aimed at, are the occasion that
one part of the face lies under a kind of disguise, while the
other is so much set off, and adorned by the owner. addison.
their women are perfect mistresses in shewing themselves
to the best advantage : they are always gay and sprightly, and
set off the worst faces with the best airs. addison.
the general good sense and worthiness of his charaster,
makes his friends observe these little fingularities as foils, that
ratherset off than blemish his good qualities. addison.
the work will never take, if it is not set off with proper
scenes. addisow.
claudian sets off his description of the eridanus with all the
poetical stories. addison on italy.
51. to set on or upon. to animate; to instigate; to incite.
you had either never attempted this change, set on with
hope, or never discovered it, stopt with despair. sidney.
he upbraids iago, that he made him
brave me upon the watch; whereon it came
that i was cast; and even now he spake
iago set him on. shakespeare's othello.
thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this. shakespeare.
baruch setteth thee on against us, to deliver us unto the
chaldeans. jer. xliii. 3.
he should be thought to be mad, or set on and employed by
his own or the malice of other men to abuse the duke. claren.
in opposition fits
grim death, my son and foe, who sets them on. milton.
the vengeance of god, and the indignation of men, will
join forces against an insulting baseness, when backed with
greatness and set on by misinformation. south's sermons.
the skill used in dressing up power, will serve only to give
a greater edge to man's natural ambition : what can this do
but set men on the more eagerly to scramble 2 locłe.
a prince's court introduces a kind of luxury, that sets every
particular person upon making a higher figure than is consistent
with his revenue. addison.
52. to set on or upon. this sense may, perhaps, be rather
neutral. to attack; to assault.
there you missing me, i was taken up by pyrates, who
putting me under board prisoner, presently set upon another
ship, and maintaining a long fight, in the end put them all
to the sword. sidney.
cassio hath here been set on in the dark :
he's almost slain, and rodorigo dead. shake?. othello.
se
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 20</div><p class="text">s e t
. so other foes may set upon our back. shaoff. h. vi.
alphonsus, captain of another of the galleys, suffering his
men to straggle too far into the land, was set upon by a turk-
ish pyrate, and taken. knolles.
of one hundred ships there came scarce thirty to work: how-
beit with them, and such as came daily in, we set upon them,
and gave them the chace. bacon's i/ar with spain.
if i had been set upon by villains, i would have redeemed
that evil by this which i now suffer. taylor.
when once i am set upon, 'twill be too late to be whetting
when i should be fighting. l’estrange.
when some rival power invades a right,
flies set on flies, and turtles turtles fight. garth's dispens.
53. to set on. to employ as in a task.
- set on thy wife t' observe. shakespeare's othell.
54. to set on or upon. to fix the attention; to determine to
*} thing with settled and full resolution.
t becomes a true lover to have your heart more set upon her
good than your own, and to bear a tenderer respect to her ho-
nour than your satisfaction. sidney.
55. to set out. to assign; to allot.
the rest, unable to serve any longer, or willing to fall to
thrift, should be placed in part of the lands by them won, at
better rate than others, to whom the same shall be set out. spens.
the squaring of a man's thoughts to the lot that provi-
dence has set out for him is a blessing. l'i./trange.
56. to set out. to publish. -
i will use no other authority than that excellent proclama-
tion set out by the king in the first year of his reign, and an-
nexed before the book of common prayer. bacon.
if all should be set out to the world by an angry whig, the
consequence must be a confinement of our friend for some
months more to his garret. swift.
57. to set out. to mark by boundaries or distinetions of
space. -
time and place, taken thus for determinate portions of
those infinite abysies of space and duration, set out, or supposed
to be distinguished from the rest by known boundaries, have
each a twofold acceptation. locke.
58. to set out. to adorn ; to embellish.
an ugly woman, in a rich habit set out with jewels, nothing
can become. dryden.
59. to set out. to raise; to equip.
the venetians pretend they could set out, in case of great
necessity, thirty men of war, a hundred gallies, and ten
galeases. addison on italy.
6o. to set out. to show ; to display ; to recommend.
barbarossa, in his discourses concerning the conquest of
africk, set him out as a most fit instrument for subduing the
kingdom of tunis. knolles.
i could set out that best side of luther, which our author, in
the picture he has given us of him, has thrown into shade,
that he might place a supposed deformity more in view. alterb.
61. to set out. to show ; to prove.
those very reasons set out how heinous his sin was. alterb.
62. to set up. to erect; to establish newly.
there are many excellent institutions of charity lately set
up, and which deserve all inanner of encouragement, particu-
larly those which relate to the careful and pious education of
poor children. atterbury's sermons.
63. to enable to commence a new business.
who could not win the mistress, woo'd the maid,
set up themselves, 2nd drove a sep'rate trade. pope.
64. to set up. to build; to erect.
their ancient habitations they neglect,
and set up new : then, if the echo like not
in such a room, they pluck down those. ben. johns catil.
jacob took the stone, that he had for his pillow, and set it
wp for a pillar. gen. xxviii. 18.
such delight hath god in men
obedient to his will, that he vouchsafes
among them to set up his tabernacle. , milton's par. loft.
images were not set up or worshipped among the heathens,
because they supposed the gods to be like them. . stiling fleet.
statues were set up to all those who had made thern selves
eminent for any noble action. dryden.
. i shall shew you how to set up a forge, and what tools you
must use. . moxon's mech. exer.
patrons, who sneak from living worth to dead,
with-hold the pension, and set up the head. pope.
65. to ser up. to raise; to exalt ; to put in power.
he was skilful enough to have lived still, if knowledge could
be set up against mortality. shakspeare.
s’ll translate the kingdom from the house of saul, and set
1p the throne of david over israel. 2 sa. iii. 10.
of those that lead these parties, if you could take off the
major number, the lesser would govern; nay, if you could
take off all, they would set up one, and follow him. suckling.
homer took all occasions of setting up his own countrymen
the grecians, and of undervaluing the trojan chiefs. dryden.
66. to establish; to appoint; to fix. -
whatever practical rule is generally broken, it cannot be
vol. ii.
opposed innate; it being imposible that men should, without
shame or fear, serenely break a rule which they could not but
evidently know that god had set up. - locke.
67. to set up. to place in view. -
he hath taken me by my neck, shaken me to pieces, and
set me up for his mark. job, xvi. 12.
scarecrows are sit up to keep birds from corn and fruit. bac.
thy father's merit sets thee up to view,
and shows thee in the fairest point of light, -
to make thy virtues or thy faults conspicuous. addison.
68. to set up. to place in repose; to fix; to rest.
whilst we set up our hopes here, we do not so seriously, as
we ought, consider that god has provided another and better
place for us. jwake.
69. to set up. to raise by the voice.
my right eye itches, some good luck is near ;
perhaps my amaryllis may appear;
i’ll set up such a note as she shall hear. o
76. to set up. to advance; to propose to reception.
the authors that set up this opinion were not themselves
satisfied with it. burnet's theory of the earth.
71. to set up. to raise to a sufficient fortune. -
in a soldier's life there's honour to be got, and one lucky
hit sets up a man for ever. l’estrange.
72. this is one of the words that can hardly be explained other-
wise than by various and multiplied exemplification. it is
scarcely to be referred to any radical or primitive; it very frer
quently includes the idea of a change made in the state of the
subject, with some degree of continuance in the state superin-
duced.
to set. v. n.
1. to fall below the horizon, as the sun at evening. -
the sun was set. gen. xxviii. i 1.
whereas the setting of the pleiades and seven stars is de-
signed the term of autumn and the beginning of winter, unto
some latitudes these stars do never set. brown's vulgar err.
that sun once set, a thousand meaner stars
gave a dim light to violence and wars. waller.
now the latter watch of wasting night,
and sitting stars, to kindly rest invite. dryden's aen.
not thicker billows beat the libyan main,
when pale orion sets in wintry rain,
than stand these troops. dryden’s acn.
my eyes no object met, *
but distant skies that in the ocean st. ... dryden's ind, emp.
the julian eagles here their wings display,
and there like setting stars the decii lay. garth.
2. to be fixed hard.
a gathering and serring of the spirits together to resist,
maketh the teeth to set hard one against another. bacon.
. to be extinguished or darkened, as the sun at night.
ahjah could not see ; for his eyes were set, by reason of his
age. i kings, xiv. 4.
4. to fit musick to words.
that i might sing it, madam, to a tune,
give me a note: your ladyship can set. . .
—as little by such toys as may be possible.
5. to become not fluid ; to concrete.
that fluid substance in a few minutes begins to set, as the
tradesmen speak; that is, to exchange its fluidity for firmness.
boyle.
shakespeare.
6. to begin a journey. -
so let him land, * *
and solemnly see him set on to london. shakes. h. v.
on wednesday next, harry, thou shalt set forward ;
on thursday we ourselves will march. shakespeare.
the king is set from london, and the scene
is now transported to southampton. shakesh. hen. v.
7. to put one's self into any state or posture of removal.
the faithless pirate soon will set to sea, -
and bear the royal virgin far away. dryden.
when sits he forward -
—he is near at hand. dryden's ind. emp.
he with forty of his gallies, in most warlike manner ap-
pointed, so forward with solyman's ambassador towards con-
ftantinople. knolles's history of the turks.
8. to catch birds with a dog that sets them, that is, lies down
and points them out ; and with a large net.
when i go a hawking or setting, i think myself beholden
to him that assures me, that in such a field there is a covey of
partridges. boyle.
9. to plant, not sow.
in gard’ning ne'er this rule forget,
to sow dry, and set wet. old proverb.
10. it is commonly used in conversation for sit, which, though
undoubtedly barbarous, is sometimes found in authors.
if they set down before's, 'fore they remove,
bring up your army.
11. to apply one's self.
if he sess industriously and fincerely to perform the com-
mands of christ, he can have no ground of doubt; g but it
shall prove successful to him. pfanmond.
23 r - 12. to
shakespeare.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 21</div><p class="text">s e. t.
s e. t.
12, t, ser about. to fall to ; to begin.
we find it most hard to convince them, that it is necessary
now, at this very present, to set about it: we are thought a
little too hot and hasty, when we press wicked men to leave
their fins to-day, as long as they have so much time before
them to do it in. calamy's sermons.
how preposterous is it, never to set about works of charity,
whilst we ourselves can see them performed atterbury.
13. to set in. to become settled in a particular state.
when the weather was set in to be very bad, i have taken
a whole day's journey to see a gallery furnished by great mas-
ters. addison's speciator.
as november set in with keen frosts, so they continued
through the whole of that month, without any other altera-
tion than freezing with more or less severity, as the winds
changed. ellis's voyage.
a storm accordingly happened the following day; for a
southern monsoon began to set in. gulliver’s travels.
14. to set on or upon. to begin a march, journey, or enter-
prize.
be’t your charge
to see perform'd the tenor of our word:
set on. shakespeare's henry iv.
he that would seriously set upon the search of truth, ought
to prepare his mind with a love of it. locke.
he understanding would presently obtain the knowledge
it is about, and then set upon some new inquiry. locke.
15. to set on. to make an attack.
hence every leader to his charge;
for on their answer we will set on them. shak. hen. iv.
16. to set out. to have beginning.
if any invisible casualty there be, it is questionable whether
its activity only set out at our nativity, and began not rather in
the womb. brown's vulgar errours.
17. to set out. to begin a journey, or course.
at their setting out they must have their commission from
the king. bacon.
i shall put you in mind where you promised to set out, or
begin your first stage. hammond.
me thou think'st not slow,
who fince the roorning-hour set out from heav'n,
where god resides, and ere mid-day arriv'd
in eden. milton's paradise lost.
my soul then mov'd the quicker pace;
your's first set out, mine reach'd her in the race. dryden.
these doctrines, laid down for foundations of any science,
were called principles, as the beginnings from which we must
set out, and look no farther backwards. locke.
he that sets out upon weak legs will not only go farther,
but grow stronger too, than one who with firm limbs only sits
still. locke.
for these reasons i shall set out for london to-morrow. add.
look no more on man in the first stage of his existence, in
his setting out for eternity. 'addison,
the dazzling lustre to abate,
he set not out in all his pounp and state,
clad in the mildest lightning. addison.
if we slacken our arms, and drop our oars, we shall be hur-
ried back to the place from whence we first set out. addison.
18. to set out. to begin the world.
he, at his first setting out, threw himself into court. add.
eugenio set out from the same university, and about the
same time with corusodes. swift.
19. to set to. to apply himself to.
i may appeal to some, who have made this their business,
whether it go not against the hair with them to set to any thing
else. government of the tongue.
20. to set up. to begin a trade openly.
we have stock enough to set up with, capable of infinite
advancement, and yet no less capable of total decay. dec. p.
a man of a clear reputation, though his bark be split, yet
he saves his cargo; has something left towards setting up again,
and so is in capacity of receiving benefit not only from his
own industry, but the friendship of others. gov. of the tongue.
this habit of writing and discoursing was acquired during
my apprenticeship in london, and a long residence there after
i had set up for myself. swift.
21. to set up. to begin a scheme of life.
eumenes, one of alexander's captains, setting up for him-
self after the death of his master, persuaded his principal offi-
cers to lend him great sums; after which they were forced to
follow him for their own security. arbuthnot.
a severe treatment might tempt them to set up for a repub-
lick. addison on italy.
22. to set up. to profess publickly.
scow'ring the watch grows out of fashion wit;
now we set up for tilting in the pit. dryden.
can polyphemus, or antiphates,
who gorge themselves with man,
set up to teach humanity, and give,
by their example, rules for us to live * dryd, juvenal.
those who have once made their court to those mistresses
without portions, the muses, are never like to jet up for for.
tunes. pope,
it is found by experience, that those men who set up for
morality, without regard to religion, are generally but vir-
tuous in part. swift,
set. part. adj. [from the verb.] regular ; not lax; made in
consequence of some formal rule.
rude am i in my speech,
and little bless'd with the set phrase of peace. shak. othell.
th’ indictment of the good lord hastings,
in a set hand fairly is ingross'd. shakesp. richard iii.
he would not perform that service by the hazard of onest
battle, but by dailying off the time. knoles.
set speeches, and a formal tale,
with none but statesmen and grave fools prevail. drydon.
in ten set battles have we driv'n back
these heathen saxons, and regain'd our earth. dryden.
what we hear in conversation has this general advantage
over set discourses, that in the latter we are apt to attend more
to the beauty and elegance of the composure than to the mat-
ter delivered. rogers.
set. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. a number of things suited to each other ; things considered
as related to each other; a number of things of which one
cannot conveniently be separated from the rest.
sensations and passions seem to depend upon a particular st
of motions. collier.
all corpuscles of the same set or kind agree in everything.
woodward.
'tis not a set of features or complexion,
the tineture of a skin, that i admire. addison.
i shall here lay together a new set of remarks, and observe
the artifices of our enemies to raise such prejudices. addison.
homer introduced that monstrous chara&amp;ter to show the
marvellous, and paint it in a new set of colours. broome.
he must change his comrades;
in half the time he talks them round,
there must another set be found. swift.
they refer to those criticks who are partial to some parti-
cular set of writers to the prejudice of others. pope,
perhaps there is no man, nor set of men, upon earth,
whose sentiments i intirely follow. js/atts.
2. anything not sown, but put in a state of some growth into
the ground.
'tis raised by sets or berries, like white thorn, and lies the
same time in the ground. mortimer's husbandry.
3. the apparent fall of the sun, or other bodies of heaven, be-
low the horizon.
the weary sun hath made a golden set ;
and, by the bright track of his fiery car,
gives signal of a goodly day to-morrow. shak. r. iii.
when the battle's lost and won.
—that will be ere set of sun. shakes eare's macbeth.
before set of sun that day, i hope to reach my winter-
quarters. atterbury to pope.
4. a wager at dice.
that was but civil war, an equal set,
where piles with piles, and eagles eagles fight. dryden.
5. a game.
have i not here the best cards for the game,
to win this easy match plaid for a crown?
and shall i now give o'er the yielded set p shakespeare.
when we have match'd our rackets to these balls,
we will, in france, play a set
shall strike his father's crown into the hazard. shak. h. v.
set ageous. adj. [seta, lat..] bristly; set with strong hairs ;
consisting of strong hairs.
the parent inse&amp;t, with its stiffsetaceous tail, terebrates the
rib of the leaf when tender, and makes way for its egg into
the very pith. - derham.
set foil. n. s. [tormentilia, lat.] an herb.
seton... n.s.. [seton, fr. from seta, lat.]
a seton is made when the skin is taken up with, a needle,
and the wound kept open by a twist of silk or hair, that hu-
mours may vent themselves. farriers call this operation in
cattle rowelling. &lt;2*incy.
i made a seton to give a vent to the humour. wiseman.
sette‘e. n.s. a large long seat with a back to it.
setter. n.s.. [from set.]
1. one who sets.
when he was gone i cast this book away: i could not look
upon it but with weeping eyes, in remembering him who was
the only setter on to do it. a cham.
shameless warwick, peace!
proud setter up and puller down of kings shakes. h. vi.
he seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods. zołs, xvii.
2. a dog who beats the field, and points the bird for the sports-
men.
3. a man who performs the office of a setting dog, or finds out
persons to be plundered. -
another set of men are the devil's setters, who continually
beat their brains how to draw in some innocent unguarded
o
heir
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 22</div><p class="text">s e. t.
s e v
o
heir into their hellish net, learning his humour, prying into
his circumstances, and observing his weak side. south.
setter wort. m. s. an herb; a species of hellebore.
setting dog. m. s. scane sentacchione, ital. setting and dog.]
a dog taught to find game, and point it out to the sportsman.
will. obliges young heirs with a setting dog he has made
himself. addison.
settle, n. s. [rezol, sax.] a seat; a bench; something
to sit on. -
from the bottom to the lower settle shall be two cubits.
ezek.
the man, their hearty welcome first exprest,
a common settle drew for either guest,
inviting each his weary limbs to rest. dryden.
to settle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to place in any certain state after a time of fluctuation or
disturbance.
i will settle you after your old estates, and will do better
unto you than at your beginnings. ezek. xxxvi. 11.
in hope to find
better abode, and my afflicled powers
to settle here. milton.
2. to fix in any way of life.
the father thought the time drew on
of settling in the world his only son. dryden.
3. to fix in any place.
settl"d in his face i see
sad resolution. milton.
4. to establish; to confirm.
- justice submitted to what abra pleas'd :
her will alone could settle or revoke,
and law was fix’d by what she latest spoke. prior.
5. to determine; to affirm; to free from ambiguity.
this exactness will be troublesome, and therefore men will
think they may be excused from settling the complex ideas of
mixed modes so precisely in their minds. locke.
medals give a very great light to history, in confirming
such passages as are true in old authors, and settling such as are
told after different manners. addison.
6. to fix; to make certain or unchangeable.
his banish'd gods restor'd to rites divine,
and settl’d sure succession in his line. dryden's aen.
this, by a settled habit in things, whereof we have fre-
quent experience, is performed so quick, that we take that
for the perception of our sensation which is an idea formed
by our judgment. locke.
if you will not take some care to settle our language, and
put it into a state of continuance, your memory shall not be
preserved above an hundred years, further than by imperfeot
tradition. swift.
7. to fix; not to suffer to continue doubtful in opinion, or
desultory and wavering in conduct.
a pamphlet that talks of slavery, france, and the pre-
tender; they desire no more : it will settle the wavering, and
confirm the doubtful. swift.
8. to make close or compa&amp;t.
cover ant-hills up, that the rain may settle the turf before
the spring. mortimer's husbandry.
9. to fix unalienably by legal sanetions.
i have given him the parsonage of the parish, and, because
i know his value, have settled upon him a good annuity for
life. addison's spectator.
io. to fix inseparably.
exalt your passion by direeting and settling it upon an ob-
ject, the due contemplation of whose loveliness may cure per-
fe&amp;tly all hurts received from mortal beauty. boyle.
1 1. to affect so as that the dregs or impurities sink to the
bottom.
so do the winds and thunders cleanse the air;
so working seas settle and purge the wine. davies.
- 12. to compose; to put into a state of calmness.
when thou art settling thyself to thy devotions, imagine
thou hearest thy saviour calling to thee, as he did to martha,
why art thou so careful ? duppa.
to settle. v. n.
1. to subside; to sink to the bottom and repose there.
that country became agained ground by the mud brought
down by the §. which settled by degrees into a firm land.
brown's vulgar errours.
2. to lose motion or fermentation; to deposite faeces at the
bottom.
your fury then boil’d upward to a foam;
but since this message came, you sink and settle,
as if cold water had been pour’d upon you. dryden.
a government, upon such occasions, is always thick before
it settles. addison's freeholder.
3. to fix one's self; to establish a residence,
the spinetae, descended from the pelesgi, settled at the
mouth of the river po. arbuthnot.
4. to chuse a method of life; to establish a domestick state.
as people marry now, and settle,
fierce love abates his usual mettle ;
worldly desires, and houshold cares,
disturb the godhead's soft affairs. priore
5. to become fixed so as not to change.
the wind came about and settled in the west, so as we
could make no way.
6. to quit an irregular and desultory for a methodical life.
7. to take any lasting state.
according to laws established by the divine wisdom, it was
wrought by degrees from one form into another, 'till it settled
at length into an habitable earth. burnet,
chyle, before it circulates with the blood, is whitish : by
the force of circulation it runs through all the intermediate
colours, ’till it settles in an intense red.
8. to rest; to repose.
when time hath worn out their natural vanity, and taught
them discretion, their fondness settles on its proper object. spect.
warm'd in the brain the brazen weapon lies,
and shades eternal settle o'er his eyes.
9. to grow calm.
*till the fury of his highness settle,
come not before him. shakespeare's jointer's tale.
io. to make a jointure for a wife. -
he fighs with most success that settles well. garth,
ii. to contract.
one part being moist, and the other dry, occasions its st-
tling more in one place than another, which causes cracks and
jettlings in the wall. mortimer's husbandry.
settledness. n.s.. [from settle.] the state of being settled;
confirmed state.
what one party thought to rivet to a settlednes; by the
ftrength and influence of the scots, that the other rejects and
contenns. king charles,
settle ment, n.s.. [from settle.]
1. the aa of settling; the state of being settled.
2. the aet of giving possession by legal sanction.
my flocks, my fields, my woods, my pastures take,
with settlement as good as law can make. dryden,
3. a jointure granted to a wife.
strephon figh’d so loud and strong,
he blew a settlement along ;
and bravely drove his rivals down
with coach and six, and house in town. swift.
4. subsidence; dregs.
fullers earth left a thick settlement. mortimer's husbandry.
5. act of quitting a roving for a domestick and methodical life.
every man living has a design in his head upon wealth,
power, or settlement in the world. l’estrange.
6. a colony; a place where a colony is established.
se’t wal. n.s. [valeriana, lat..] an herb. pici,
se'ven. adj. [reopon, saxon.]
1. four and three ; one more than six. it is commonly used in
poetry as one syllable.
let ev'ry man be master of his time
*till seven at night. shakespeare's macbeth.
qf every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens. gen.
pharmis, king of the medes, it is said, he overthrew and
cruelly murdered, with his seven children. raleigh.
sev'n bullocks, yet unyok'd, for phoebus chuse;
and for diana sev'n unspotted ewes. dryden's aon.
se've nfol d. adj. [seven and fold.] repeated seven times;
having seven doubles ; encreased seven times.
upon this dreadful beast with sevenfold head,
he set the false duena for more awe and dread. fa. queen.
the sevenfold shield of ajax cannot keep
the battery from my heart. shakesp. ant. and cleopat.
not for that filly old morality,
that as these links were knit, our loves should be,
mourn i, that i thy sevenfold chain have lost,
nor for the luck's sake, but the bitter cost.
what if the breath that kindled those grim fires
awak'd, should blow them into sevenfold rage. milton.
fair queen,
who sway'st the sceptre of the pharian isle,
and sev’nfold falls of disemboguing nile. dryden,
se’ve nfold. adv. in the proportion of seven to one.
whosoever slayeth cain, vengeance shall be taken on him
sevenfold. gen. iv. 15.
wrath meet thy flightsvenfold. milton.
se've nnight. n.s. [seven and night.]
-1. a week; the time from one day of the week to the next day
of the same denomination preceding or following ; a week,
numbered according to the practice of the old northern nations,
as infortnight.
rome was either more grateful to the beholders, or more
noble in itself, than justs with the sword and lance, main-
tained for a sevennight together. sidney.
iago's footing here anticipates our thoughts
a se’nnight's speed. shakespeare's othello.
shining woods, laid in a dry room, within a sevennight lost
their shining. bacon's natural hisłor:
2. we use still the word sevennight or se’nnight in computing
time ; as, it happened on monday was sevennight, that is, on
the
o
aco,
arbuthnot.
popee
donne.
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 23</div><p class="text">s e v
s e v.
the monday before loft monday; it will be done on monday
sevenmight, that is, on the monday after next monday. -
this comes from one of those untucker'd ladies whom you
were so sharp upon on monday was selennight. addison.
se've nsco r.e. adj. [seven and score.] seven times twenty; an
hundred and forty. -
the old countess of desmond, who lived till she was seven-
score years old, did dentize twice or thrice ; casting her old
teeth, and others coming in their place. bacon.
se’v ente en. adj. [reopontyne, saxon.] seven and ten ; se-
ven added to ten. -
se’ve nteenth, adj. [reoponteosa, saxon.] the seventh after
the tenth ; the ordinal of seventeen.
in the six hundredth year of noah's life, the second month,
the seventeenth day, were all the fountains of the great deep
broken up. * - gen. vii. 1 1.
the conquest of ireland was perfeołed by the king in the
seventeenth year of his reign., judge hale.
se've nth. adj. [reopoca,-saxon.]
1. the ordinal of seven ; the first after the sixth.
the child born in the seventh month doth commonly.
&amp;c.0??,
thy air is like the first :
a third is like the former. filthy hags
why do you shew me this a fourth start, eye
what ' will the line stretch to the crack of doom *
another yet a seventh / i'll see no more. shakespeare.
so pharaoh, or some greater king than he,
provided for the seventh necessity:
taught from above his magazines to frame;
that famine was prevented e'er it came.
2. containing one part in seven.
se’v enthly. adv. [from sluenth.] in the seventh place; an
ordinal adverb,
seventhly, living bodies have sense, which plants have not.
- - - bacon.
se've ntieth. adj. [from seventy.] the tenth seven times re-
peated; the ordinal of seventy. -
se’v enty. adj. [hanbyeogonzig, saxon.] seven times ten.
worthy marcius, -
had we no quarrel else to rome, but that
thou art thence banish'd, we would master all,
from twelve to seventy. shakespeare's coriolanus.
we call not that death immature, if a man lives till seventy.
* * * *** - taylor.
dryden.
the weight of soventy winters prest him down,
he bent beneath the burthen of a crown. dryden.
in the hebrew, there is a particle consisting but of one
single letter, of which there are reckoned up seventy several
significations. locke.
to sever. v. a. s. sovrer, fr. sparo, lat.]
1. to part by violence from the rest.
forgetful queen, who severed that bright head,
which charm'd two mighty monarchs to her bed. granv.
2. to divide; to part; to force asunder.
they are not so far disjoined and severed, but that they come
at length to meet. plooker.
our force by land
hath nobly held; our sever'd navy too
have knit again, and float. shakesp. ant. and cleop.
what thou art is mine :
our state cannot be sever'd, we are one,
one flesh; to lose thee were to lose myself. milton.
3 to separate ; to segregate; to put in different orders or
places. --
the angels shall sover the wicked from among the just. mat.
he, with his guide, the farther fields attain’d ;
where sever'd from the rest the warrior souls remain'd.
dryden.
4. to separate by chimical operation.
5. to divide by distinctions.
- this axiom is of large extent, and would be severed and
refined by trial. bacon.
6. to disjoin ; to disunite.
- look, love, what envious streaks
do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
how stiff is my vie sense,
that i stand up and have ingenious feeling
of my huge sorrows better i were distract,
so should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs;
and woes by wrong imaginations, lose
the knowledge of themselves. shakespeare.
the medical virtues lodge in some one or other of its prin-
ciples, and may therefore usefully be sought for in that prin-
ciple sever'd from the others.
7. to keep distinet ; to keep apart.
- three glorious suns, each one a perfect fun;
not separated with the racking clouds, -
but sover'd in a pale clear shining sky. shakeshcare.
i will sever goshen, that no swarms of flics shall be
there. laad. viii. 22.
to se’ver. v. n.
shakespeare.
boyle. se v eralty. m. s.
1. to make a separation; to make a partition. -
~. the lord shall sever between the cattle of israel and of
fgypt. exod. ix. #
there remains so much religion, as to know how to so.
between the use and abuse of things. j. clarks.
better from me thou sever not. ill.i.
2. to suffer disjunction.
- fortune, divorce -
pomp from the bearer, 'tis a suffrance panging,
as soul and body's sev’ring. shaftop. hen, viii.
se’v fral. adj. [from sever.]
i. i.)ifferent ; distinet from one another.
divers sorts of beasts came from several parts to drink; and
so being refreshed, fall to couple, and many times withs.
ral kinds. - bacon's natural hjor.
the conquest of ireland was made piece and piece, yj.
veral attempts, in several ages. davies's hisł. of ireland.
four several armies to the field are led,
which high in equal hopes four princes head. dryden.
2. divers; many. it is used in any number not large, and more
than two. -
this country is large, having in it many people, and sove-
ral kingdoms. abbot's description of the isrh.
this else to several spheres thou must ascribe. ashan.
we might have repaired the losses of one campaign by the
advantages of another, and after several victories gained over
us, might have still kept the enemy from our gates. addison,
3. particular; single.
each several ship a victory did gain,
as rupert, or as albemarle were there.
4. distinct; appropriate.
the parts and passages of state are so many, as, to express
them fully, would require a several treatife. davies's iowa,
like things to like, the rest to several place -
disparted.
each might his sev'ral province well command,
would all but stoop to what they understand. -
se’ver al. m. s. [from the adjective.]
1. a state of separation, or partition. this substantive has a
plural. . . . -
more profit is quieter found - “
where pastures in several be,
of one silly aker of ground - - - . . . . ;
than champion maketh of three.' … toffer's husbandy,
2. each particular singly taken. . .” -- " " - - - - -
this by some severals or "
of head-piece extraordinary, lower messes”
dryan,
milton.
pope.
-
perchance are to this business purblind." shakoffrare.
there was not time enough te hear " -
the severals. - shakespeare,
that will appear to be a methodical successive observation
of these severals, as degrees and steps preparative the one to the
other. - hammond's fundamental;.
several of them neither rose from any conspicuous family,
nor left any behind them. addison's freeholder.
3. any inclosed or separate place.
they had their several for heathen nations, their fiveral
for the people of their own nation, their several for men, their
several for women, their several for their priests, and for the
high priest alone their several. - hocker.
4. inclosed ground.
there was a nobleman that was lean of visage, but imme-
diately after his marriage he grew pretty plump and fat. one
said to him, your lordship doth contrary to other married men;
for they at first wax lean, and you wax fat. sir walter ra-
leigh stood by and said, there is no beast, that if you take him
from the common, and put him into the several, but will wax
fat. bacon.
sever ally. adv. [from several.] distinetly; particularly;
separately ; apart from others.
confider angels each of them severally in himself, and their
law is, all ye his angels praise him. hazker.
nature and scripture, both jointhy and not severally, either
of them, be so complete, that unto everlasting felicity we
need not the knowledge of any thing more than these two may
easily furnish our minds with. hocker.
th’apostkes could not be confin'd
to these or those, but severally design'd
their large commission round the world to blow. dryden.
we ought not so much to love likeness as beauty, and to
chuse from the fairest bodies soverally the fairest parts. dryden.
others were so very small and close together, that i could
not keep my eye steady on them severally so as to number
them. - newton's optics.
[from several.] state of separation from the
rest.
the jointure or advancement of the lady was the third part
of the principality of wales, the dukedom of cornwal, and
earldom of chester, to be set forth in soveralty. bacari.
having considered the apertions in severally, according to
their particular requisites, i am now come to the casting and
contexture of the whole work. włott: ".
se’v e r an ce.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 24</div><p class="text">s e. w.
sever anck, n.s.. [from sever.] separation; partition.
those rivers enclose a neck of land, in regard of his fruit-
fulness, not unworthy of a severance. carew's survey of cornw.
seve'r.e. adj. [severe, french ; severus, latin.] -
1. sharp; apt to punish ; censorious ; apt to blame; hard; ri-
gorous.
let your zeal, if it must be expressed in anger; be always
more sovere against thyself than against others. taylor.
soon mov’d with touch of blame, thus eve: -
what words have pass'd thy lips, adam severe? milton.
what made the church of alexandria be so severe with
origen for, but holding the incense in his hands, which those
about him cast from thence upon the altar yet for this he
was cast out of the church. stillingfleet.
2. rigid ; austere; morose ; harsh; not indulgent.
am i upbraided ? not enough severe
it seems, in thy restraint. . .
in his looks serene,
when angry most he seem'd and most severe,
what else but favour shone * milton.
nor blame severe his choice,
warbling the grecian woes. pope's odyssy.
3. cruel; inexorable.
his severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword. i/sl.
4. regulated by rigid rules; strict.
truth, wisdom, sanetitude, severe and pure, -
severe, but in true filial freedom plac'd, milton.
5. exempt from all levity of appearance; grave; sober; sedate.
- his grave rebuke,
severe in youthful beauty, added grace.
your looks must alter, as your subject does,
from kind to fierce, from wanton to severe.
taught by thy practice steadily to steer
from grave to gay, from lively to severe. pope.
6. not lax; not airy; close; strictly methodical; rigidly exact.
their beauty i leave it rather to the delicate wit of poets,
than venture upon so nice a subject with my severer style. more.
7. painful; afflictive.
these piercing fires are soft as now severe.
8. close; concise; not luxuriant.
the latin, a most severe and compendious language, often
expresses that in one word, which modern tongues cannot in
more. dryden.
seva’rely. adv. [from severe.]
1. painfully; afflictively,
we have wasted our strength to attain ends different from
those for which we undertook the war, and often to effect
others, which after a peace we may severely repent. swift.
2. ferociously; horridly.
more formidable hydra stands within;
whose jaws with iron teeth soverely grin.
3. strictly; rigorously. -
to be or fondly or severely kind.
seve'rity.. n.s.. [severitas, latin.]
1. cruel treatment; sharpness of punishment.
i laugh to fee your ladyship so fond,
to think that you have ought but talbot's shadow
whereon to practise your severity. shakespeare.
he shall be thrown down the tarpeian rock
with rigorous hands; he hath resisted law,
and therefore law shall scorn him further trial
than the severity of publick power,
which he so sets at nought. shakesp. coriolanus.
never were so great rebellions expiated with so little blood,
as for the severity used upon those taken in kent, it was but
upon a scum of people. bacon.
there is a difference between an ecclesiastical censure and
feverity: for under a censure we only include excommunica:
tion, suspension, and an interdict; but under an ecclesiastical
feverity every other punishment of the church is intended; but
according to some, a censure and a severity is the same. ayliffe.
2. hardness; power of distresfing. -
though nature hath given inseots sagacity to avoid the win-
ter cold, yet its severity finds them out. hale's orig. of mank.
3. strictness; rigid accuracy.
confining myself to the severity of truth, becoming, i must
pass over many instances of your military skill. dryden.
4. rigour; austerity; harshness ; want of mildness ; want of
indulgence.
sevocation. n.s.. [sovoco, latin.] the aet of calling aside.
to sew, for suc. *. to follow.
to sew. v. n. [suo, latin.] to alter any thing by the use of
the needle. -
a time to rent and a time to sow. eccl. iii. 7.
to sew. v. a. to join by threads drawn with a needle.
no man soweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment.
mark, ii. 21.
milton,
milton,
waller.
milton.
dryden.
savage.
to sew up. to inclose in any thing sewed.
if ever 1 said loose bodied gown, sow me up in the skirts
of it. shakespeare's taming of the shrew.
my transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up
mine iniquity, job, xiv. 17.
vol. ii.
£o sew. v. a. to drain a pond for the fish. aosario.
sewer. v. n. [scuyer trenchant, french; or asseour, old french :
from 4/oir, to set down; for those officers set the dishes on
the table, newton's milton.]
1. an officer who serves up a feast.
marshall'd feast,
serv'd up in hall with sewers and seneshals:
the skill of artifice or office mean.
the cook and sewer, each his talent tries,
. in various figures scenes of dishes rise.
2. [from issue, issuer..] cowel. a passage for water to run
-through, now corrupted to shore.
the fenmen hold that the sewers must be kept so, as the
water may not stay too long in the spring till the weeds and
sedge be grown up. bacon.
men suffer their private in judgment to be drawn into the
common sewer, or stream of the present vogue. k. charles.
as one who long in populous city pent,
where houses thick, and sewers annoy the air,
forth issuing on a summer's morn, to breathe
among the pleasant villages and farms
adjoin'd, from each thing met conceives delight.
3. he that uses a needle.
sex. n.s. [sexe, french ; sexus, latin.]
1. the property by which any animal is male or female.
these two great sexes animate the world.
...under his forming hands a creature grew,
manlike, but different sex.
2. womankind; by way of emphasis.
unhappy sex / whose beauty is your snare;
expos'd to trials; made too frail to bear, dryden.
shame is hard to be overcome; but if the sex once get the
better of it, it gives them afterwards no more trouble. garth.
se'xagenary. adj. [sexagonaire, french; sexagenarius, latin.]
aged sixty years.
sexagesima. m. s. [latin.] the second sunday before lent.
sexage'sim al. adj. [from sexagosimus, latin.] sixtieth ;
numbered by fixties. -
sex a(ngle d. !"; [from sex and angular, latin.] having
sexa‘ngular. § fix corners or angles; hexagonal.
the grubs from their sexangular abode -
crawl out unfinish’d like the maggot's brood. bryden.
sexa’ngularly. adv. [from sexangular..] with six angles;
hexagonally.
sexe nnial. adj. [six and annus, latin.] lasting six years;
happening once in six years.
so n. s. [froth sextans, sex, latin.] a stanza of six
ines.
sext ant. n.s.. [sextant, french..] the sixth part of a circle.
sextak y. m. s. [sextarius, latin.] a pint and a half.
:::::::: }n. f. the same as sacristy. dici.
se?:tile. adj. [sextilis, latin.] is such a position or aspect
of two planets, when at 60 degrees distant, or at the distance
of two signs from one another, and is marked thus *. har.
planetary motions and aspects, -
in sextile, square, and trine. milton.
the moon receives the duskylight we discern in its sextile
aspect from the earth's benignity. glanville.
se'xton. m. s. [corrupted from sacrisian.] an under officer of
the church, whose business is to dig graves.
a stool and cushion for the sexton. shał speare.
when any dies, then by tolling a bell, or bespeaking a grave
of the sexton, the same is known to the searchers corresponding
with the said sexton. graunt.
se xtons hip. m. s. [from sixton.] the office of a sexton.
they may get a dispensation to hold the clerkship and six-
tonship of their own parish in commendam. swift.
sextu'ple. adj. [sextupius, latin.) sixfold; fix times told.
man's length being a perpendicular from the vertex unto
the sole of the foot, is sextuple unto his breadth, or a right
line drawn from the ribs of one side to another. brown.
to shab. v. m. to play mean tricks; a low barbarous cant
word. -
sha'brily adv. [from shabby. ] meanly; reproachfully;
despicably; paltrily. a cant word.
sha’bbiness. n. s. [from shabby..] meanness; paltriness.
he exchanged his gay shabbiness of clothes fit for a much
younger man, to warm ones that would be decent for a much
older one. speciator.
sha’bby. adj. [a word that has crept into conversation and
low writing;' but ought not to be admitted into the lan-
guage.] mean; paltry.
the dean was so shabby, and look'd like a ninny,
that the captain suppos'd he was curate to jenny. swift.
to sha’ckle. v. a. [from the noun, shackles, shaeckelen, dutch.]
to chain; to fetter; to bind.
- it is great,
to do that thing that ends all other deeds; -
which shackles accidents, and bolts up change. shake?.
you must not slackle and tie him up with rules about indif-
fercnt matters. locke.
23 s no
milton,
milton.
milton.
milton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 25</div><p class="text">s h a
- no trivial price
should set him free, or small should be my praise
to lead him shackled. - philips,
so the stretch'd cord the shackled dancer tries, -
as prone to fall as impotent to rise. smith.
sha’ckies. n. s. wanting the singular. [reacul, saxon,
schaeckels, dutch..] fetters ; gyves; chains for prisoners.
himself he frees by secret means unseen,
his shackles empty left, himself escaped clean. fa. queen.
a servant commonly is less free in mind than in condition ;
his very will seems to be in bonds and shackles, and desire
itself under durance and captivity. south.
the forge in fetters only is employed;
our iron mines exhausted and destroyed
in shackles. dryden's juvenal.
shad. n.s.. [clupea.] a kind of fish.
shade. m. s. [rcabu, saxon; shade, dutch.]
1. the cloud or opacity made by interception of the light.
spring no obstacle found here nor shade,
but all sunshine.
2. darkness; obscurity.
- the weaker light unwillingly declin'd,
and to prevailingshades the murmuring world resign'd. rose.
3. coolness made by interception of the sun.
antigonus, when told that the enemy had such vollies of
arrows that hid the sun, said, that falls out well; for this is
milton.
hot weather, and so we shall fight in the shade. bacon.
that high mount of god whence light and shade
shine both. milton.
4. an obscure place, properly in a grove or close wood by
which the light is excluded.
let us seek out some desolate shade, and there
weep our sad bosoms empty. shakespeare.
regions of sorrow, doleful shades. milton.
then to the desart takes his flight;
where still from shade to shade the son of god,
after forty days fasting, had remain'd. milton.
the pious prince then seeks the shade,
which hides from sight his venerable maid. dryden.
5. screen causing an exclusion of light or heat; umbrage.
let the arched knife
well sharpen'd now assail the spreading shades
of vegetables, and their thirsty limbs dissever. philips.
in brazil are trees which kill those that sit under their shade
in a few hours. arbuthnot.
6. protection; shelter.
7. the parts of a picture not brightly coloured.
'tis ev'ry painter's art to hide from fight,
and cast in shades what seen would not delight. dryden.
8. a colour; gradation of light.
white, red, yellow, blue, with their several degrees, or
jhades and mixtures, as green come in only by the eyes. locke.
9. the figure formed upon any surface corresponding to the bo-
dy by which the light is intercepted; the shadow.
envy will merit as its shade pursue. pope.
10. the soul separated from the body; so called as supposed by
the ancients to be perceptible to the fight, not to the touch.
a spirit; a ghost; manes.
to trachin swift as thought, the flitting shade
thro' air his momentary journey made.
ne'er to these chambers where the mighty rest,
since their foundation, came a nobler guest;
nor e'er was to the bow’rs of bliss convey'd
a fairer spirit or more welcome shade.
to shade. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to overspread with opacity.
thou shad'st
the full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud
thy skirts appear.
2. to cover from the light or heat; to overspread.
a scraph six wings wore to shade
his lineaments divine. milton.
and after these, came arm'd with spear and shield
an host so great, as cover'd all the field:
and all their foreheads like the knights before,
dryden.
tickel.
milton.
with laurels ever-green were shaded o'er. dryden.
i went to crop the sylvan scenes, -
and shade our altars with their leafy greens. dryden.
sing, while beside the shaded tomb i mourn,
and with fresh bays her rural shrine adorn. pope.
3. to shelter; to hide.
ere in our own house i do shade my head,
the good patricians must be visited. shakespeare.
4. to protect; to cover; to screen.
leave not the faithful side
that gave thee being, still shades thee and protects. milton.
5. to mark with different gradations of colours.
the portal shone, inimitable on earth
by model, or by shading pencil drawn.
6. to paint in obscure colours.
sha din ess. n. s. [from shady..] the state of being shady;
umbrageousness. 6
amilton.
sha'bow. n.s. [rcabu, saxon; shaduwe, dutch..] .
1. the representation of a body by which the light is intercepted.
poor tom! proud of heart, to ride over four-inch'd bridges,
to course his own shadow for a traitor. shakespeare,
life's but a walking shadow, a poor player,
that struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
and then is heard no more.
- such a nature, -
tickl’d with good success, disdains the shadow
which he treads on at noon. shakespeare.
the body, though it moves, yet not changing perceivable
distance with some other bodies, the thing seems to stand still,
shakespeare,
as in the hands of clocks, and shadows of sun-dials. locke.
2. opacity ; darkness; shade.
by the revolution of the skies
night's sable shadows from the ocean rise. denham,
his countrymen probably lived within the shake of the
earthquake and shadow of the eclipse. addison.
3. shelter made by any thing that intercepts the light, heat, or
influence of the air. -
in secret shadow from the sunny ray,
on a sweet bed of lillies softly laid. fairy queen,
here, father, take the shadow of this tree
for your good host. shakesp. k. lear,
4. obscure place. -
to the secret shadows i retire
to pay my penance till my years expire. jdryden.
5. dark part of a picture.
a shadow is a diminution of the first and second light. the
first light is that which proceeds immediately from a lightened
body, as the beams of the sun. the second is an accidental
light spreading itself into the air or medium proceeding from
the other. shadows are threefold: the first is a single shadow,
and the least of all; and is proper to the plain surface where it
is not wholly possessed of the light. the second is the double
jhadow, and it is used when the surface begins once to for-
sake your eye, as in columns. the third shadow is made by
crossing over your double shadow again, which darkeneth b
a third part. it is used for the inmost shadow, and jo.
from the light, as in gulfs, wells, and caves. peacham,
after great lights there must be great shadows. dryden.
6. any thing perceptible only to the sight ; a ghost ; a spirit,
or shade.
- hence, terrible shadow / --
unreal mock’ry, hences shakespeare.
7. an imperfeoł and faint representation: opposed to substance.
if substance might be call'd that shadow seem'd. milton.
in the glorious lights of heaven we perceive a shady of
his divine countenance. z.
without the least impulse or shadow of fate. milton.
amongst the creatures are particular excellencies scattered,
which are some shadows of the divine perfections. yillotson.
8. inseparable companion.
sin and her shadow, death. milian;
thou my shadow -
inseparable must with me be long. milton,
9. type; mystical representation.
types and shadows of that destin'd seed. milton.
io. protection; shelter; favour.
keep me under the shadow of thy wings. psalms.
to sha'dow. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to cover with opacity.
the warlike elf much wondered at this tree,
so fair and great, that shadowed all the ground. spenser.
the assyrian was a cedar with fair branches, and with a
shadowing shroud. ezek. xxxi. 3.
2. to cloud; to darken.
mislike me not for my complexion;
the shadow’d livery of the burning sun
to whom i am a neighbour.
shakespeare.
3. to make cool or gently gloomy by interception of the light
or heat.
a gentle south-west wind comes creeping over flowery fields
and shadowed waters in the extreme heat of summer. sidney.
4. to conceal under cover; to hide ; to screen.
let every soldier hew him down a bough,
and bear’t before him; thereby shall we shadow
the number of our host, and make discov'ry
err in report of us. shakespeare.
5. to protect ; to screen from danger; to shroud.
god shall forgive you coeur de lion's death,
the rather, that you give his offspring life,
shadowing their right under your wings of war. shakespeare.
6. to mark with various gradations of colour, or light.
turnsoil is made of old linen rags dried, and laid in a
saucer of vinegar, and set over a chafing-dish of coals till it
boil; then wring it into a shell, and put it into a little gum
arabick: it is good to shadow carnations, and all yellows. peach.
from a round globe of any uniform colour, the idea im-
printed in our minds is of a flat circle, variously shadowed with
different degrees of light coming to our eyes. locee.
more broken scene, made up of an infinite variety of in-
equalities
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 26</div><p class="text">s h a
s h a
equalities and 44% wing, that naturally arise from an agree-
able mixture of bills, groves, and vallies. addison.
to paint in obscure colours.
7. if the parts be too much distant, so that there be void spaces
which are deeply /hadowed, then place in those voids some fold
to make a joining of the parts. dryden's dufresnoy.
3. to represent imperfectly.
whereat i wak'd and found
before mine eyes all real, as the dream
had lively shadow’d... a4ilton's paradis, loft.
augustus is shadowed in the person of æneas. dryden.
i have shadowed some part of your virtues under another
name. - dryden.
9. to represent typically.
many time; there are three things said to make up the sub-
flance of a sacrament ; namely, the grace which is thereby
offered, the element which shadoweth or fignifieth grace, and
the word which expresseth what is done by the element. hook.
the shield being to defend the body from weapons, aptly
shadows out to is the continence of the emperor, which made
him proof to all the attacks of pleasure. addison.
sha'powo rass; n.s.. [from shadow and gras; ; gramen solvaticum,
lat.] a kind of grass.
sha'powy, adj. [from shadow.]
1. full of shade ; gloomy.
this shadowy desart, unfrequented woods,
i better brook than flourishing peopled towns. shałospeare.
with shadowy verdure flourish'd high,
a sudden youth the groves enjoy. fonton.
1. not brightly luminous.
- more pleasant light
shadowy sets off the face of things. milion.
3. faintly representative; typical.
when they see
law can discover fin, but not remove
save by those shadowy expiations weak,
the blood of bulls and goats; they may conclude
some blood more precious must be paid for man.
4. unsubstantial ; unreal.
milton has brought into his poems two actors of a shadowy
and fictitious nature, in the persons of fin and death ; by which
he hath interwoven in his fable a very beautiful allegory. addis.
5. dark; opake.
by command, ere yet dim night
her shadowy cloud withdraws, i am to haste
homeward. milton's paradjo loft.
sha’dy. adj. [from shade.]
1. full of shade; mildly gloomy.
the wakeful bird
sings darkling, and in shadist covert hid
tunes her nocturnal notc. milton's paradse losł.
stretch'd at ease you fing your happy loves,
and amarillis fills the shady groves.
2. secure from the glare of light; or sultriness of heat.
cast it also that you may have rooms shady for summer, and
warm for winter. bacon.
shaft. m. s. [] ceart, saxon.]
1. an arrow ; a missive weapon.
to pierce pursuing shield,
by parents train'd, the tartars wild are taught,
with shafts shot out from their back-turned bow.
who in the spring, from the new sun,
already has a fever got,
too late begins those shafts to shun,
which phoebus thro’ his veins has shot. j/aller.
they are both the archer and soft taking aim afar off, and
then shooting themselves directly upon the desired mark. more.
so lofty was the pile, a parthian bow
with vigour drawn, must send the shaft below. dryden.
2, [shaft, dutch..] a narrow, deep, perpendicular pit.
they fink a shaft or pit of six foot in length. carew.
the fulminating damp, upon its accension, gives a crack
like the report of a gun, and makes an explosion so forcible as
to kill the miners, and force bodics of great weight from the
bottom of the pit up through the shaft. j/oodward.
suppose a tube, or as the miners call it, a shyst, were sunk
from the surface of the earth to the center. arbuthnot.
3. anything strait; the spire of a church. -
pracise to draw small and easy things, as a cherry with the
leaf, the shaft of a steeple. peacham.
shag. m. s. [rce acja, saxon.]
1. rough wooly hair.
full often like a shag-hair’d crafty kern,
hath he conversed with the enemy;
and given me notice of their villanies.
where is your husband
he's a traitor.
thou liest thou shag-ear'd villain. shakespeare.
from the sag of his body, the shape of his legs, his having
little or no tail, the slowness of his gate, and his climbing up
of trees, he seems to come near the bear kind. grew.
milton.
dryden.
sidney.
shakespeare.
true w itney broad cloth, with i ri
- - with it
be this the horseman's fence. ith its shag unshorh,
2. a kind of cloth. gay,
shag. m. s (phalacrocorax lat.] a -
- - seabird.
among the first sort we reckon aago, duck, and mallard.
sha’cced. - carew.
sha'goy. } adi. [from shag.]
i. rugged; roughly ; hairy.
they change their hue, with haggard eyes they stare,
lean are their looks, and shagged at * - - -
- th
a lion's hide to: eir hair, dryden.
about his shoulders hangs the so m-:
the teeth and gaping ; *::::::::::
from the frosty north
the early valiant swede draws forth his wings
in battailous array, while volga's stream 2.
sends opposite, in shaggy armour clad
her borderers; on mutual slaughter bent.
2. rough ; rugged.
they pluck'd the seated hills with all their load
rocks, waters, woods, and by the /haggy tops -
uplifting bore them in their hands. 44ilt. parad loft.
there, where very desolation dwells, - -
by grots and caverns shagg'd with horrid shades,
she may pass on with unblench'd majesty,
be it not done in pride.
through eden went a river large,
nor chang'd his course, but through the shaggy hill
dryden.
philips,
amilton,
pass'd underneath ingulph'd. mill
how would the olf king smile orra
to see you weigh the paws when tip'd with gold,
and throw the shaggy spoils about your shoulders. addison.
ye rugged rocks which holy knees have worn,
ye grots and caverns shagg'd with horrid thorn. pope.
shagreen. m. s. [chagrin, fr.] the skin of a kind of fish
or skin made rough in imitation of it. &gt;
to sha'green. v. a. [chagriner, fr.] to irritate; to pro-
voke. both should be written chagrin.
to shail. v. n. to walk sideways. a low word.
child, you must walk strait, without skiewing and sailing
to every step you set. l’estrange.
to shake. v. a. preterit. shook; part, pass shaken, or also :
[rceacan, saxon ; shecken, dutch..]
1. to put into a vibrating inotion; to move with quick returns
backwards and forwards ; to agitate. -
who honours not his father,
henry the fifth that made all france to quake,
shake he his weapon at us, and pass by. shakespeare.
i will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil
to their servants. zech. ii. 9.
i shook my lap and said, so god sake out every man from
his house, even thus be he shaken out and emptied. n. h. v.
the stars fell unto the earth, even as a fig-tree casteth her
untimely figs when she is shaken of a mighty wind. rev. vi.
he shook the sacred honours of his head:
with terror trembled heav'n's subsiding hill,
and from his shaken curls ambrosial dews disti!. dryden.
she first her husband on the poop espies,
shaking his hand at distance on the main ;
she took the sign, and shook her hand again. dryden.
2. to make to totter or tremble.
the rapid wheels shake heav'n's basis. 44 ston.
let france acknowledge that her shaken throne
was once supported, fir, by you alone. roscommon.
3. to throw down by a violent motion.
macbeth is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
put on their instruments. shakosheart.
the tyrannous breathing of the north
shakes all our buds from blowing. shakespeare.
when ye depart, shake off the dust of your feet. ajat. x.
he looked at his book, and, holding out his right leg, put
it into such a quivering motion, that i thought he would have
jhaked it off. tatler.
4. to throw away; to drive off.
'tis our first intent
to shake all cares and business from our age,
conferring them on younger strengths, whilst we
unburthen’d crawl towards death. shakespeare.
5. to weaken ; to put in danger.
when his doctrines grew too frong to be shook by his ene-
mies, they persecuted his reputation. atterbury.
6. to drive from resolution ; to depress; to make afraid.
a sly and constant knave, not to be shak'a. shakos. cymb.
this respite shook
the bosom of my conscience. shakoff. henry viii.
be not soon shaken in mind, or troubled, as that the day
of christ is at hand. 2 thos. ii. 2.
not my firm faith
canby his fraud be shaken or seduc’d. milton.
this phrase, from the aaion used among
friends
7. to shake hands.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 27</div><p class="text">s h a
sh a
friends at meeting and parting, sometimes signifies to join with,
* but commonly to take leave of. - - to -
with the slave, , z ; , ; ; " -
he ne'er shook hands, nor bid farewel to him, -
*till he unseam'd him from the nape to th’ chdps. shakes.
nor can it be safe to a king to tarry among them who are
soaking hands with their allegiance, underpretenco of laying
faster hold of their religion. . . . . ... . . . king charles.
8.7, shake off. to rid himself of ; to free from ; to divest
of. - - o a . . . .
be pleas'd that i shake off these names you give me : :
antonio never yet was thief or pirate. . . … shakoffeare.
. if i could shake off but one seven years,. . . . . . .
from these old arms and legs, or so -
i'd with thee every foot. shakespeare's coriolanus.
say, sacred bard what could bestow
courage on thee, to soar so high ...?' "
tels me, brave friend what help'd thee so
to shake off all mortality ? iwaller.
him i reserved to be answered by himself, after i had shaken
o
off the lesser and more barking creatures, , stillingfleet.
can i want courage for so brave a deed? .
i've shook it off: my soul is free from fear. , dryden.
here we are free from the formalities of custom and respect:
we may shake off the haughty impertinent. collier.
how does thy beauty smooth -
the face of war, and make even horrour smile ! :
at fight of thee my heart shakes off its sorrows. addison.
t, shake. v. n.
i. to be agitated with a vibratory motion. - -
darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of
a spear. job, xli. 29.
2. to totter. -
under his burning wheels
the stedfast empyrean shook throughout,
all but the throne itself of god.
3. to tremble; to be unable to keep the body still.
thy fight, which should -
make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts,
constrains them weep, and shake with fear and sorrow. shak.
what said the wench, when he rose up again :
—trembled and shook; for why, he stamp'd,
milton.
as if the vicar meant to cozen him. shakespeare.
a shaking through their limbs they find,
like leaves saluted by the wind. waller.
4. to be in terrour; to be deprived of firmness.
he short of succours, and in deep despair,
shook at the dismal prospect of the war. dryd. æn.
shake. n.s. [from the verb.]
1. concussion suffered.
if that thy fame with ev'ry toy be pos'd,
'tis a thin web, which poisonous fancies make ;
but the great soldier's honour was compos'd
of thicker stuff, which could endure a shake:
wisdom picks friends; civility plays the rest,
. a toy shunn'd cleanly passeth with thee best.
2. impulse; moving power.
the freeholder is the basis of all other titles: this is the
substantial stock, without which they are no more than blos-
soms that would fall away with every shake of wind. addison.
3. vibratory motion. -
several of his countrymen probably lived within the shake of
the earthquake, and the shadow of the eclipse, which are re-
corded by this author. addison.
4. motion given and received. -
our salutations were very hearty on both fides, consisting
of many kind shakes of the hand. addison.
sha’ker. n.s.. [from shake.] the person or thing that shakes.
go then, the guilty at thy will chastise,
he said; the shaker of the earth replies. pope's odyssey,
shal e. m. s. [corrupted, i think, for shell.] a husk; the
case of seeds in siliquous plants.
behold yon poor and starved band,
and your fair shew shall suck away their souls,
leaving them but the shales and husks of men. shakespeare.
shall. v. defective. [rceal, sax, is originally i owe, or i ought.
in chaucer, the faithe 1 shall to god, means the faith i owe to
god: thence it became a sign of the future tense. the french
use devoir, dois, doit, in the same manner, with a kind of fu-
ture signification; and the swedes have skall, and the islanders
słal, in the same sense. it has no tenses but shall future, and
should imperfeot.
the explanation of shall, which foreigners and provincials
confound with will, is not easy; and the difficulty is increased
by the poets, who sometimes give to shall an emphatical sense
of will ; but i shall endeavour, craffa minerva, to show the
meaning of shall in the future tense.]
1. i shall love. it will so be that l must love; i am resolved
to love. -
herbert.
2. shall i love? will it be permitted me to love? will you
permit me to love? will it be that i must love :
*
5. he shall love.
3. thou shalt love. i command thee to love; it is permitted
thee to love : [in poetry or solemn diction] it will be that thou
must love. '
4. shalt thou love? will it be that thou must love will it
be permitted to thee to love
it will be that he must love; it is com-
manded him that he love. - -
it is a mind, that shall remain. -
shall remain
hear you this triton of the minnows? mask you
his absolute shall 8 shakespeare's coriolanus,
see romulus the great: -
this prince a priestess of your blood shall bear, - -
and like his sire in arms he shall appear. dryden's an,
that he shall receive no benefit from christ, is the affirma-
tion whereon all his despair is founded; and the one way of
removing this dismal apprehension, is to convince him that
christ's death, and the benefits thereof, either do, or, if he
perform the condition required of him, ahall certainly belong
to him. - hammond's fundamental.
6. shall he love 2 is it permitted him to love in solemn lan-
guage, will it be that he must love? -
7. the plural persons follow the signification of the fingulars.
sha’lloon. n.s. a slight woollen stuff.
in blue shalloon shall hannibal be clad,
and scipio trail an irish purple plaid. swift,
sha'llop. m. s. [chaloupe, fr.] a small boat.
you were resolved, after your arrival into orognoque, to
pass to the mine; and, to that end, you defired to have fir
john fearne's shallop : i do not allow of that course, because
ye cannot land so secretly but that some indians on, the river
side o discover you, who giving knowledge of your passage
to the spaniards, you may be cut off before you can recover
your boat. raleigh.
our hero set -
in a small shallop, fortune in his debt. waller.
sha'llow. adj. [this word is probably compounded of sical
and low.] - -
1. not deep ; having the bottom at no great distance from the
surface or edge. -
i had been drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and
shallow; a death that i abhor. shakes merry wives of winds.
that inundation, though it were shallow, had a long con-
tinuance, whereby they of the vale, that were not drowned,
perished for want of food. - aacon.
the like opinion he held of meotis palus, that by the
floods of tanais, and earth brought down thereby, it grew
observably shallower in his days, and would in process of time
become a firm land. brown's vulgar errourt.
i am made a shallow forded stream, * * * * * * *
seen to the bottom: all my clearness scorn’d, - -
and all my faults expos'd. dryden's all for love,
shallow brooks, that flow’d so clear, * . *
the bottom did the top appear. , dryden.
in shallow furrows vines securely grow. , , , dryden.
2. not intellectually deep ; not profound ; not very knowing or
wise; empty ; trifling; futile; filly.
i'll shew my mind,
according to my shallow simple skill.
this is a very shallow monster:
afraid of him : a very shallow monster, -
the man i' th' moon | a most poor credulous monster.
shakespeare.
the king was neither so shallow nor so ill advertised as not
to perceive the intention of the french king, for the investing
himself of britaigne. bacon's henry vii.
uncertain and unsettled he remains, -
deep verst in books, and shallow in himself. milian.
one would no more wonder to see the most shallow nation
of europe the most vain, than to find the most empty fellows
in every nation more conceited than the rest. . . . addison.
3. not deep of sound. *... . . .
if a virginal were made with a double concave, the one all
the length of the virginal, and the other at the end of the
strings, as the harp hath, it must make the sound perfeoter,
and not so shallow and jarring. , ; bacon.
sha'llow. n.s.. [from the adjective..] a shelf; a sand; a
flat; a shoal; a place where the water is not deep.
i should not see the sandy hour-glass run, . . .
shiffan.
&gt;
but i should think of shallows and of flats; … :
and see my wealthy andrew dock'd in sand, - 1, 1 o.
veiling her high top lower than her ribs, -
to kiss her burial. shakesh. cariolanus.
a swift stream is not heard in the channel, but upon
shallows of gravel. bacon's natural history.
having but newly left those grammatick flats and /hallows,
where they stuck unreasonably, to learn a few words with la-
mentable construction, and now on the sudden transported, to
be tost with their unballasted wits in fathomless and unquiet
deeps of controversy, they do grow into hatred of learning.
- assistan.
you
l
o
.o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 28</div><p class="text">s ha
s h a
you that so oft have sounded
and fathom'd all his thoughts, that know the deeps
and shallows of his heart, should need no instruments
to advance your ends. - denham.
he sounds and o him, to find
llows of his soul. dryden's spanish fryar.
the sha the wary dutch y panish fry
behind their treach'rous shallows now withdraw,
and there lay snares to catch the british host.
three more fierce eurus in his angry mood
dish'd on the shallows of the moving sand,
and in mid ocean left them moor'd a-land. dryd. æn.
in arms of the sea, and among islands, there is no great
depth, and some places are plain shallows. burnet.
heir spawn being lighter than the water, there it would
not sink to the bottom, but be buoyed up by it, and carried
away to the /hallows.... ray on the creation.
with the use of diligence, and prudent conduct, he may
decline both rocks and shallows. norris.
the sea could not be much narrower than it is, without a
reat loss to the world; and must we now have an ocean of
hereflats and shallows, to the utter ruin of navigation bentley.
saxilowan ained, adj. [shallow and brain..] foolish; fu-
tile; trifling; empty.
it cannot but be matter of just indignation to all good men
to see a company of lewd/hallowbrained huffs making atheism,
and contempt of religion, the sole badge of wit. south.
saatlowly, adv. [from shallow.]
... with no great depth.
the load lieth open on the grass, or but shallowly covered.
- carew.
2. simply; foolishly.
. most shallowly did you these arms commence,
fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence. shakespeare.
sha'elowness. n.s. (from shallow.]
1, want of depth.
1. want of thought want of understanding ; futility ; filli-
ness; emptiness.
by it do all things live their measur'd hour:
we cannot ask the thing which is not there,
blaming the shallowns of our request. herbert.
i cannot wonder enough at the shallownes, and impertinent
real of the vulgar sort in druina, who were carried away
with such an ignorant devotion for his successes, when it little
concerned their religion or security. howel.
shalm. n.s. (german.] a kind of musical pipe.
every captain was commanded to have his soldiers in readi-
ness to set forward upon the sign given, which was by the
sound of a shalm or hoboy. knolles's hist, of the turks.
shalt. second person of shal'.
t, sham. v. n. [/hommi, welsh, to cheat.]
1. to trick; to cheat ; to fool with a fraud; to delude with
false pretences. a low word.
men tender in point of honour, and yet with little regard
to truth, are sooner wrought upon by shame than by con-
icience, when they find themselves fooled and shammed into a
conviction. l'eslrange.
then all your wits that flear and sham,
down from don quixote to tom tram,
from whom i jests and puns purloin,
and flily put them off for mine,
fond to be thought a country wit.
1. to obtrude by fraud or folly.
we must have a care that we do not, for want of laying
things and things together, sham fallacies upon the world for
current reason. l'estrange.
sham, n.s.. [from the verb.] fraud; trick; delusion ; false
pretence; imposture. a low word.
no sham so gross but it will pass upon a weak man, that is
pragmatical and inquisitive. l'estrange.
it goes a great way when natural curiosity and vulgar pre-
judice shall be affisted with the shams of astrological judgments.
l’estrange.
he that first brought the sham, wheedle, or banter in use,
put together, as he thought fit, those ideas he made it stand
for. - locke.
that in the sacred temple needs would try
without a fire th’ unheated gums to fry,
believe who will the solemn sham, not i. addison.
sham. adj. false; counterfeit; fictitious ; pretended.
never join the fray,
where the sham quarrel interrupts the way. gay.
shambles. n.s. [of uncertain etymology. scannaglia, ital.]
1. the place where butchers kill or sell their meat ; a butchery.
far be the thoughts of this from henry's heart,
to make a shambles of the parliament-house. shaft. h. vi.
i hope my roble lord esteems me honest.
-oh, ay, as summer-flies are in the shambler,
that quicken ev'n with blowing. shakes care's othells.
he warned a flock of sheep, that were driving to the sham-
tles, of their danger; and, upon uttering some sounds, they
all fled. arbuthnot.
vol. ii. |
dryden.
prior.
* it is here improperly used.
to:. poon is made the jest of the mob, or his back
the shambles of the executioner, there is no more conviction
in the one than in the other. watts
-
sha'mhling. adj. [see sc -
*; § low ...tood moving aukwardly
y that/hambling in his walk, it -
gomez, whom i knew at gold o .
so when nurse nokes to ad young ammon tries yar.
with shambling logo, long chin, and foolish. ...”
with dangling hands he strokes th: imperial #:
and with a cuckold's air commands th: globe 3.
shame. m. s. [rceam, saxon; schaemte, dutch..]
1. the passion felt when reputation is supposed to be lost
passion expressed sometimes by blushes.
lamenting sorrow did in darkness lye,
and shame his ugly face did hide from living eye.
peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.
-urge neither charity nor shame to me;
uncharitably with me have you dealt,
and shamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd :
my charity is outrage, life my shame;
and in my shame still lives my sorrow's rage. shak. r. iii,
hide, for shame,
romans, your grandfires images,
that blush at their degenerate progeny. dryden.
in the schools men are allowed, without shame, to deny the
agreement of ideas; or out of the schools, from thence have
learned, without shame, to deny the connection of ideas. lock.
2. the cause or reason of shame; disgrace; ignominy.
the more shame for him that he sends it me;
for i have heard him say a thousand times,
his julia gave it him at his departure. shakespeare.
god deliver the world from such guides, who are the shame
of religion.
smith.
; the
spensor.
south.
this jest was first of the other house's making,
and, five times try’d, has never fail'd of taking ;
for 'twere a shame a poet should be kill'd,
under the shelter of so broad a shield. dryden.
oshame to manhood! shall one daring boy
the scheme of all our happiness destroy pope's odyssy.
3. reproach ; infliction of shame.
a foul shame is upon the thief. ecclus. v. 14.
applause
turn'd to exploding hiss, triumph to shame,
cast on themselves from their own mouths.
to shame. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to make ashamed; to fill with shame.
to tell thee of whom deriv'd,
were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
shakespeare.
if thou hast power to raise him, bring him hither,
and i've power to shame him hence:
oh, while you live tell truth and shame the devil. shakesp.
hyperbolus by suffering did traduce
amilton.
the ostracism, and sham'd it out of use. cleaveland.
despoil'd
of all our good, sham'd, naked, miserable. amilton.
what hurt can there be in all the slanders and disgraces of
this world, if they are but the arts and methods of providence
to shame us into the glories of the next. south.
were there but one righteous man in the world, he would
hold up his head with confidence and honour; he would shame
the world, and not the world him. south.
he in a loathsome dungeon doom'd to lie,
in bonds retain’d his birthright liberty, }
and sham'd oppression, 'till it set him free. dryden.
the coward bore the man immortal spite,
who sham'd him out of madness into flight. dryden.
who shames a scribbler, breaks a cobweb through ;
he spins the slight self-pleasing thread a-new.
2. to disgrace.
certes, sir knight, ye been too much to blame,
thus for to blot the honour of the dead,
and with foul cowardice his carcass shame.
to shame. v. n. to be ashamed.
great shame it is, thing so divine in view,
made for to be the world's most ornament,
to make the bait her gazers to embrew ;
good shames to be to ill an instrument. spensor.
sham's thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
to let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart? shakspeare:
to the trunk of it authors give such a magnitude, as i
/hame to repeat. raleigh's history of the world.
cruel auster thither hy'd him;
and with the rush of one rude blast,
sham'd not spitefully to waste
all his leaves, so fresh, so sweet,
and lay them trembling at his feet. crashaw.
sha'mefaced. adj. [shame and face.] modest; bashful; easily
put out of countenance. -
philoclea, who blushing and withal smiling, making shame:
23 t facedness
pope.
fairy queen.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 29</div><p class="text">. s h a
s. h. a
facedu-s, pleasing, and pleasure shamefaced, tenderly moved
her feet, unwonted to feel the naked ground. sidney.
conscience is a blushing shamefac’d spirit, that mutinies in
a man's bosom: it fil's one full of obstacles. shak. r. iii.
a man may be shamefaced, and a woman modest, to the de-
gree of scandalous. . . .
your shamefar'd virtue shunn'd the people's praise,
and senate's honours. * * * * * * dryden.
from this time we may date that remarkable turn in the
behaviour of our fashionable englishmen, that makes them
/hamefaced in the exercise of those duties which they were sent
into the world to perform. addison's freeholder.
shamef ackdly. adv. [from shamefaced.] modestly; bash-
-
full v. ~~~
soiraetosis. n. s. [from shamefaced.] modesty; bash-
fulness; timidity. . . . . . -
dorus, having had all the while a free beholding of the
fair pamela, could well have defended the assault he gave unto
her face with bringing a fair stain of shamefacednes; into it.
- - - * sidney.
she is the fountain of your modesty;
you shamesac'd are, but shamefusiness itself is she. fa. qu.
none but fools, rout of shamefacedness, hide their ulcers,
which, if shown, might be healed. dryden's dufresnoy.
sha’meful. adj. [shame and full.]
1. disgraceful; ignominious;"infamous; reproachful.
this all through that great princess pride did fall,
and came to shameful end. fairy queen.
for this he shall:live hated, be blasphem’d,
seiz'd on by force, judg’d, and to death condemn'd,
a shameful and accurst ! . . " - milton.
his naval preparations were not more surprising than his
quick and shameful retreat; for he returned to carthage with
only one ship, having fled without striking one stroke. arbuth.
the knave of diamonds tries his wily arts,
and wins, o shameful chance! the queen of hearts. . pope.
2. full of indignity or indecency; raising shame in another.
phoebus flying so most shameful fight, :
his blushing face in foggy cloud implies,
and hides for shame. -
sha’mefully. adv. [from shameful.]
1. disgracefully; ignominiously infamously; reproachfully.
. . but i his holy secret
presumptuously have publish'd, impiously,
weakly at least, and shamefully. milton's agonistes.
- would she shamefully fail in the last act in this contrivance
of the nature of man f : . . . . . . . . ." . more.
those who are ready enough to confess him, both in judg-
ment and profession, are, for the most part, very prone to
deny him shamefully in their doings. south's sermons.
2. with indignity; with indecency; so as ought to cause
shame. . . - -
none but that saw, quoth he, would ween for truth,
how shamefully that maid he did torment. fairy queen.
shameless. adj. [from shame.] wanting shame; wanting
modesty; impudent; frontless; immodest; audacious."
o, tell thee whence thou cam'st, of whom deriv'd,
were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameles.
shakespeare's henry vi.
fairy queen.
beyond imagination is the wrong
that she this day hath, shameless, thrown on me. shakesp.
the shameles, denial hereof by some of their friends, and
the more shameless justification by some of their flatterers, makes
it needful to exemplify, which i had rather forbear. raleigh.
god deliver the world from such hucksters of souls, the
very shame of religion, and the shameless subverters of morality.
". south's sermons.
such shameles, bards we have ; and yet ’tis true,
there are as mad abandon'd criticks too.
sha'melessly. adv. [from shameless.]
ciously; without shame.
the king to-day, as one of the vain fellows, shamelessly un-
covereth himself. 2 sa. vi. 20.
he must needs be shamelessly wicked that abhors not this li-
centiousness. hale.
sha’melessness. m. s. [from shameles...] impudence; want of
shame; immodesty.
being most impudent in her heart, she could, when she
would, teach her cheeks blushing, and make shamefacedness
the cloak of shamelessness. sidney.
he that blushes not at his crime, but adds shamelessness to
his shame, hath nothing left to restore him to virtue. taylor.
sha’mmer. n.s. [from sham..] a cheat; an impostor. a
low word. - -
sha'mois. m. s. [chamois, fr.] see chamois. a kind of
wild goat.
pope.
impudently; auda-
i'll bring thee -
to clustring filberds, and sometimes i'll get thee
young shamois from the rocks. shakespeare.
sha'mrock, n. s. the irish name for three leaved grass.
if they found a plot of watercresses, or shamrocks, there they
flocked as to a scast for the time. spersor on ireland.
o
l’estrange.
shank. n.s...[rceanca, saxon; johenckel, dutch..]... .
1. the middle joint of the leg; that part which reaches from
the ankle to the knee. * * * . . .
eftsoons her white strait legs were altered , ..., ,
to crooked crawlingshanks, of marrow emptied ;
and her fair face to foul and loathsome hue,
and her fine corps to a bag of venom grew,
- the sixth age shifts
into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
with spectacles on nose, and pouch on side;
his youthful hose, well sav'd, a world too wide
for his shrunk shanks. shakesp. 4 you like it
. . a stag says, if these pitiful shanks of mine were but answer.
able to this branching head, i can't but think how i should
defy all my enemies. i'estrange
2. the bone of the leg. ". -- -
shut me nightly in a charnel-house, -
o'er cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones, s
with reeky shanks, and yellow chapless skulls. shakespears,
3. the long part of any instrument. -
the shank of a key, or some such long hole, the punch can.
not strike, because the shank is not forged with substance of,
ficient. asaxon.
shank. m. s. [bryonia, lat..] an herb. . .
shanked. adj [from shank.j having a shank.
shank.e.r. m. s. [chancre, fr.] a venereal excrescence.
to shape. v. a. preter. shaped; part, pass, shaped and aapen.
[rcyppan, saxon; scheppen, dutch.]
1. to form ; to mould with respect to external dimensions.
i that am not shap'd for sportive tricks, - -
nor made to court an am’rous looking-glass;
i, that am rudely stampt, and want love's majesty,
to strut before a wanton ambling nymph. $ot. r. iii,
those nature hath shaped with a great head, narrow breast,
and shoulders sticking out, seem much inclined to a consump-
tion. - - harvey.
mature the virgin was, of egypt's race;
grace soap'd her limbs, and beauty deck'd her face. prior,
2. to mould to cast; to regulate ; to adjust. . . .
drag the villain hither by the hair,
nor age nor honour shall shape privilege. ... , ,
- shakespeare's titus andranius,
mr. candish, when without hope, and ready to shape his
course by the east homewards, met a ship which came from
the philippines. - raleigh,
to the stream, when neither friends nor force,
nor speed nor art avail, he shapes his course. . . denham,
charm'd by their eyes, their manners i acquire,
and shape my foolishness to their desire.
3. to image; to conceive.
lovers and madmen have their seething brains,
such shaping fantasies that apprehend
more than cool reason ever apprehends.
it is my nature's plague -
to spy into abuse, and oft my jealousy
shapes faults that are not. shakesp. othelh.
when fancy hath formed and shaped the perfeotest ideas of
blessedness, our own more happy experiences of greater must
disabuse us. boyle.
4. to make ; to create. obsolete.
i was shapen in iniquity, and in fin did my mother conceive
ne. ps. li. 5.
shape. n.s.. [from the verb.] - -
1. form; external appearance.
he beat me *..." in the shape of a woman; for in the
/hape of a man, master brook, i fear not goliah with a wea-
spasir,
; : it o'
prior,
*
shahjari,
ver's beam. shakespeare.
the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared for
battle. rev. ix. 7.
the other shape, -
if shape it may be call'd that shape had none,
distinguishable in member, joint, or limb. milton,
in vegetables and animals the shape we most fix on, and are
most led by. lotke.
2. make of the trunk of the body.
first a charming shape enslav'd me,
an eye then gave the fatal stroke;
*till by her wit corinna sav'd me,
and all my former fetters broke. addison,
fathers and mothers, friends and relations, seem to have
no other wish towards the little girl, but that she may have a
fair skin, a fine shape, dress well, and dance to admiration.
law.
3. being, as moulded into form.
before the gates there sat -
on either fide a formidable shape. milton's paradis. loft.
4. idea ; pattern. - -
thy heart
contains of good, wise, just, the perfeot shape. amiłon.
5. it is now used in low conversation for manner.
sha'peless, adj. [from shape.] wanting regularity of form;
wanting symmetry of dimeniions.
you
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 30</div><p class="text">s h a
s h a
you are born
to set a formupon that indigest,
which he hath left so shapels, and so rude. shakespeare.
he is deformed, crooked, old and sere;
ill-fac'd, worse-bodied, shapels; ev'ry where. shakespeare.
thrice had i lov'd thee,
before i knew thy face or name;
so in a voice, so in a shapeles; flame,
angels affect us oft, and worshipp'd be. donne.
now the victor stretch'd his eager hand,
where the tall nothing stood, or seem'd to fland;
ashapels, shade, it melted from his fight,
like forms in clouds, or visions of the night ! pope.
some objects please our eyes,
which out of nature's common order rise, }
the shapels, rock, or hanging precipice. pope.
rhapesmith: n.s.. [shape and smith..] one whb undertakes
to improve the form of the body. a burlesque word.
no shapesmith yet set up and drove a trade,
to mend the work that providence had made. garth:
shapeliness. ” j. [from shapely..] beauty or proportion of
orm.
so. adv. [from shape.] symmetrical; well formed.
shard. n.s.. [schaerde, trisick.]
1. a fragment of an earthen vessel.
for charitable prayers,
shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her; .
yethere she is allow'd her virgin chants, -
her maiden strewments.
2. [chard.] a plant.
shards or mallows for the pot, -
keep the loosen'd body sound. dryden's horace.
3. it seems in spensor to signify a frith or strait. it is used, says
upton, in the west, for a gap.
upon that shore he spied atin stand,
there by flis master left, when late he far'd
in phedria's fleet bark, over that per’lous shard. fa. queen.
4. a sort of fish. s - -
sharpsor n. adj. [/hard and born.] born or produced among
broken stones or pots. perhaps shard in shakesfeare may sig-
nify the sheaths of the wings of insects.
ere to black hecat's summons -
the shardborn beetle with his drowsy hums -
hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
a deed of dreadful note. - shakespeare.
sha‘aped. adj. [from shard.] inhabiting shards.
often shall we find
the sharded beetle in a safer hold,
than is the full-wing'd eagle. shakespeare's cymbeline.
t, share. v. n. [rceanan, rcynan, saxon.]
1. to divide, to part among many.
good fellows all, s
the latest of my wealth i'll share amongst you. shakespeare,
any man may make trial of his fortune, provided he ac-
knowledge the lord's right, by sharing out unto him a toll.
carew.
shakes. hamlet.
well may he then to you his cares impart,
and share his burden where he shares his heart. dryden.
in the primitive times the advantage of priesthood was
equally shared among all the order, and none of that character
had any superiority. collier.
though the weight of a falshood would be too heavy for
one to bear, it grows light in their imaginations when it is
aarod among many. addison's spediator.
suppose i share my fortune equally between my children
and a stranger, will that unite them f swift.
1. to partake with others; to seize or possess jointly with an-
other.
the captain, half of whose soldiers are dead, and the other
quarter never mustered or seen, comes shortly to demand pay-
ment of his whole account; where, by good means of some
great ones, and privy sharings with the officers of other some,
he receiveth his debt. spenser on ireland.
in vain does valour bleed,
while avarice and rapise share the land. mlton.
go, silently enjoy your part of grief,
and share the sad inheritance with me. dryden.
wav'd by the wanton winds his banner flies,
all maiden white, and shares the people's eyes. dryden.
this was the prince decreed
toshare his sceptre. dryden's acn.
not a love of liberty, nor thirst of honour,
drew you thus far; but hopes to share the spoil
of conquer'd towns and plonder'd provinces. addis. cato.
all night it rains, the shews return with day; -
great jove with caesar /lores his sov’reign sway. jogie.
3. to cut; to separate; to sheer. (from rean, saxon.]
with swift wheel reverse deep ent'ring shar'd
all his right side. milton.
scalp, face, and shoulders the keen steel divides,
and the shard visage hangs co, “ual sides. dryden.
7? share. v. n. to have part; to have a dividend.
i am the pri ce of wales; and think not, percy,
to share with the in glory any more. shakesp. henry iv.
had greater haste these sacred rites prepar’d,
ome guilty mouths had in your triumphs shar'd;
o o . year is i your own. dryden:
right of inheritance gave e - ... . ~...~".
goods of his father. gave every one a title to share o:
this is dutch partnership, to share in all our beneficial
bargains, and exclude us wholly from theirs. swift.
share. n.s. [from the verb.] ' - -
i. * allotment; dividend obtained.
every just man, that now pines with ** *
had but a flodeon. beseeming %. want,
of that which lewdly-pamper'd luxury
now heaps upon some with vast exces. milton
the subdued territory was divided into greater and smaller
shares, besides that reserved to the prince. temple
i'll give you arms; burn, ravish, and destroy:
for my own share one beauty i design; -
engage your honours that she shall be mine. dryden.
while fortune favour’d,
i made some figure; nor was my name
- obscure, nor i without my share of fame. dryd. æn.
the youths have equal share
in marcia's wishes, and divide their sister. addis. cato.
in poets, as true genius is but rare,
true taste as seldom is the critick's share. pope.
he who doth not perform that part assigned him, is a very
mischievous member of the publick; because he takes his
/*are of the profit, and yet leaves his share of the burden to be
born by others. swift.
2. to go shares ; to partake.
they went a hunting, and every one to go share and share
alike in what they took. l’esrange.
by being desirous that every one should have their full/hare
of the favors of god, they would not only be content, but
glad to see one another happy in the little enjoyments of this
transitory life. law.
3. a part contributed.
these, although they bear a share in the discharge, yet have
different offices in the composition. brown's pusar. erro.
4. [scean, saxon.] the blade of the plow that cuts the ground.
- nor laws they knew, nor manners, nor the care
of lab’ring oxen, nor the shining share. dryden.
great cities shall with walls be compass'd round,
and sharpen'd shares shall vex the fruitful ground. dodon.
incumbent o'er the shining share - ~
the master leans, removes th' obstructive clay. thomson.
for clay the coulter is long and bending, and the share
narrow. . .
share bon e. m. s. [share and bone.] the os pubis; the bone
that divides the trunk from the linbs. - -
the cartilage bracing together the two offa pubis, or share-
bones, bartholine faith, is twice thicker and laxer in women
than men. perham.
sha’rer. m. s. [from share.]
1. one who divides, or apportions to others; a divider.
2. a partaker ; one who participates any thing with others.
most it seem'd the french king to import,
as sharer in his daughter's injury. daniel’s citi! is ar.
people not allowed to te sharers with their companions in
good fortune, will hardly agree to be sharers in bad. l’estr.
an overgrown estate falling into the haids of one that has
many children, it is broken into so many portions as render
the sharers rich enough. - 4.daison.
you must have known it.
—indeed i did, then favour’d by the king,
and by that means a sharer in the secret.` rowe.
if, by taking on himself human nature at large, he hath a
compassionate and tender sense of the infirmities of mankind in
general, he must needs, in a peculiar manner, feel and com-
miserate the infirmities of the poor, in which he himself was
so eminent a sharer. attraury.
i suffer many things as an author militant, whereof in your
days of probation you have been a sharer. pope to swift.
shar k. m. s. scanis charcherias, lat. j
1. a voracious sea-fish.
his jaws horrifick arm'd with threefold fate,
the diseful shark. thomson's summer.
2. a greedy artful fellow ; one who fills his pockets by sly tricks.
a low word.
david's messengers are sent back to him, like so many
sha, as and runnagates, only for endeavouring to complinert
an ili nature out of itself, and seeking that by petition which
they might have commanded by their sword. south.
3. trick; fraud; petty rapine. a low word.
wretches who live upon the sha, k, and other mens sins,
the common poisoners of youth, equally desperate in their
fortunes and their manners, and getting their very bread by
the damnation of souls, south.
7%
or timer.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 31</div><p class="text">s h a
s h a
to shark. v. a. to pick up hastily or slily. o
young fontinbras,
of unimproved mettle, hot and full, -
hath in the skirts of norway, here and there,
shark'd up a list of landless resolutes. shakesp. hamlet.
to shark. v. m.
1. to play the petty thief. a low word.
the fly leads a lazy, voluptuous, scandalous, sharking life,
hateful wherever she comes. i’estrange.
2. to cheat; to trick. a low word. ainsworth.
there are cheats by natural inclination as well as by cor-
ruption : nature taught this boy to shark, not discipline.
d'estrange.
the old generous english spirit, which heretofore made
this nation so great in the eyes of all the world, seems utterly
extinet , and we are degenerated into a mean, sharking, falla-
- cious, undermining converse, there being a snare and a trapan
, almost in every word we hear, and every action we see. south.
. to shark. to fawn upon for a dinner.
####. adj. [rceamp, saxon; scherpe, dutch.]
1. keen; piercing; having a keen edge ; having an acute point;
not blunt.
she hath tied
sharp tooth’d unkindness like a vulture here. shakespeare.
in ireland have i seen this stubborn cade
oppose himself against a troop of kerns;
and fought so long, 'till that his thighs with darts
were almost like a sharp quill'd porcupine. shak. h. vi.
thy tongue deviseth mischiefs, like a sharp razor working
deceitfully. psa. lii. 2.
with edged grooving tools they cut down and smoothen
away the extuberances left by the sharp pointed grooving tools,
and bring the work into a perfeot shape. moxon.
2. terminating in a point or edge; not obtuse.
the form of their heads is narrow and sharp, that they may
the better cut the air in their swift flight. more.
there was seen some miles in the sea a great pillar of light,
not sharp, but in form of a column or cylinder, rising a great
way up towards heaven. bacon.
to come near the point, and draw unto a sharper angle,
they do not only speak and practise truth, but really desire its
enlargement. brown's wulgar errours.
their embryon atoms
light arm'd or heavy, sharp, smooth, light or slow. milton.
it is so much the firmer by how much broader the bottom
and sharper the top. temple.
in shipping such as this, the irish kern,
and untaught indian, on the stream did glide,
ere sharp keel'd boats to stem the flood did learn,
. or fin-like oars did spread from either side. dryden.
3. acute of mind; witty; ingenious; inventive:
now as fine in his apparel as if he would make me in love
with a cloak, and verse for verse with the sharps witted lover
in arcadia. - sidney,
if we had nought but sense, each living wight,
which we call brute, would be more sharp than we. davies.
sharp to the world, but thoughtless of renown,
they plot not on the stage, but on the town. dryden.
there is nothing makes men sharper, and sets their hands
and wits more at work, than want. addison an italy.
many other things belong to the material world, wherein
the sharpest philosophers have never yet arrived at clear and
distinct ideas. watts.
4. quick, as of sight or hearing.
as the sharpes' eye discerneth nought,
except the sun-beams in the air do shine;
so the best soul, with her reflecting thought,
sees not herself, without some light divine. davies.
to sharp-ey'd reason this would seem untrue;
but reason i through love's false opticks view. dryden.
5. sour without astringency; sour but not austere; acid.
so we, if children young diseased we find,
anoint with sweets the .#. foremost parts,
to make them taste the potions sharp we give;
they drink deceiv'd, and so deceiv'd they live. spensor.
sharp tasted citrons median climes produce;
bitter the rind, but generous is the juice. dryden.
different simple ideas are sometimes expressed by the same
word, as sweet and sharp are applied to the objects of hearing
and tasting. watts.
6. shrill; piercing the ear with a quick noise; not flat.
in whistling you contract the mouth, and, to make it more
sharp, men use their finger. bacon's natural history.
let one whistle at the one end of a trunk, and hold your
ear at the other, and the sound strikes so sharp as you can scarce
endure it. bacon.
for the various modulation of the voice, the upper end of
the windpipe is endued with several cartilages to contract or
dilate it, as we would have our voice flat or sharp. ray.
7. severe; harsh; biting; sarcastick.
if he should intend his voyage towards my wife, i would
turn her loose to him ; and what he gets more of her than
sharp words, let it lie on my head. se shakespear,
how often may we meet with those who are one whi.
courteous, but within a small time after are so supercilious
aharp, troublesome, fierce and exceptious, that they are no:
only short of the true character of friendship, but become the
very sores and burdens of society - south
cease contention: be thy words severe, o
sharp as he merits; but the sword forbear. dryden
8. severe; quick to punish; cruel; severely rigid. o
there, gentle hermia, may i marry thee;
and to that place the sharp athenian law
cannot pursue us.
9. eager; hungry; keen upon a quest.
my faulcon now is sharp and passing empty,
and, 'till she stoop, she must not be full gorg'd;
shakespears.
for then she never looks upon her lure. shake
the sharp desire i .# *.
of tasting. milton.
io. painful; affliclive.
that she may feel
how sharper than a serpent's tooth it is,
to have a thankless child. shakso. king lear.
he caused his father's friends to be cruelly tortured; grieving
to see them live to whom he was so much beholden, and there:
fore rewarded them with such sharp payment, knolles.
death becomes
his final remedy; and after life
try'd in sharp tribulation, and refin'd
by faith, and faithful works. milton's paradis? loft.
it is a very small comfort that a plain man, lying under a
aharp fit of the stone, receives from this sentence. tillotson,
11. fierce; ardent; fiery.
their piety feign'd, *
in sharp contest of battle found no aid. milton.
a sharp assault already is begun;
their murdering guns play fiercely on the walls. dryden.
12. attentive; vigilant.
sharp at her utmost ken she cast her eyes,
and somewhat floating from afar descries. dryden.
is a man bound to look out sharp to plague himself, and to
take care that he slips no opportunity of being unhappy? collier.
a clergyman, established in a competent living, is not un-
der the necessity of being so sharp and exacting. swift.
13. acrid ; biting; pinching ; piercing, as the cold.
the windpipe is continually moistened with a glutinous
humour, issuing out of small glandules in its inner coat, to
fence it against the sharp air. roy.
nor here the sun's meridian rays had pow'r,
nor wind sharp piercing, nor the rushing show'r,
the verdant arch so close its texture kept. pope's odyssey.
14. subtile ; nice; witty; acute: of things.
sharp and subtile †: procure very great applause; but
being laid in the balance with that which sound experience
plainly delivereth, they are overweighed. hooker.
the instances you mention are the strongest and sharpeft
that can be urged. digby.
15. [among workmen.] hard.
they make use of the sharpes sand, that being best for mor-
tar, to lay bricks and tiles in. amoxon's mech. exer.
16. emaciated ; lean. -
his visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare. milton.
sharp. m. s. [from the adjective.]
1. a sharp or acute sound.
it is the lark that sings so out of tune,
straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. shakespeare.
2. a pointed weapon; small sword; rapier. low word.
if butchers had but the manners to go to sharps, gentlemen
would be contented with a rubber at cuffs." collier.
to sharp. v. a. [from the noun..] to make keen. *
whom the whetstone sharps to eat, -
ben. johnson.
they cry, milstones are good meat.
to sharp. v. n. [from the noun..] to play thievish tricks.
i live upon what's my own; whereas your scandalous life
is only cheating or sharping one half of the year, and starving
the other. l’estrange.
to sha'rpen. v. a. [from sharp.] a
1. to make keen; to edge; to point.
the weaker their helps are, the more their need is to sharper
the edge of their own industry. j hooker.
the israelites went down to the philistines to sharpen overy
man his share and his coulter. 1 sam. xiii. 20.
his severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword. wisd. v. 20.
the grating of a saw, when sharpen'd, offends so much as
it setteth the teeth on edge. • bacon.
th’squadron bright, sharp'ning in mooned horns
their phalanx. aftstan.
it may contribute to his misery, heighten the anguish, and
sharpen the sting of conscience, and so add fury to the ever-
lasting flames, when he shall refle&amp; upon the abuse of wealth
and greatness, scurh.
no :
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 32</div><p class="text">s h a
mo: 'tis resistance that inflames desire;
sharpen, the darts of love, and blows the fire. dryden.
ere ten moons had /harpen'd either horn,
to crown their bliss, a lovely boy was born. dryden.
her nails are sharpen'd into pointed claws,
her hands bear half her weight and turn to paws. addison.
to make quick, ingenious, or acute.
overmuch quickness of wit, either given by nature, or
paper'd by study, doth not commonly bring greatest learning,
fest manners, or happiest life in the end. ascham.
to make quicker of sense.
3. th’air sharpen'd his visual ray
to objects distant far.
4. to make eager or hungry.
epicurean cooks
sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetitc. shakespeare.
such an assurance as will sharpen mens desires, and quicken
their endeavours for obtaining a lesser good, ought to inspire
men with more vigour in pursuit of what is greater. tillotson.
5. to make fierce or angry.
mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.
6. to make biting, sarcastick, or severe.
my haughty soul would swell;
sharpen each word, and threaten in my eyes.
... to make less flat; more piercing to the ears.
enclosures not only preserve found, but increase and sharpen
bacon.
milton.
job, xvi. 9.
smith.
it.
8. to make sour.
sha'rpe.r. m.s.. [from sharp.] a tricking fellow; a petty thief;
a rascal.
sharper; as pikes, prey upon their own kind. l'e/orange.
he should retrench what he lost to sharpers, and spent upon
puppet plays, to apply it to that use. arbuthnot.
i only wear it in a land of hectors,
thieves, supercargoes, sharpers, and dircaors. pope.
sha'rply. adv. [from sharp.] -
1. with keenness; with good edge or point.
2. severely ; rigorously; roughly.
they are more sharply to be chastised and reformed than
the rude irish, which being very wild at the first, are now
become more civil. speoser.
3. keenly ; acutely; vigorously.
" . the mind and memory are more //arply excrcised in com-
rehending another man's things than our own. ben. johnson.
4. aflictively; painfully.
at the arrival of the fnglish ambassadors the soldiers were
farply affailed with wants. hayward.
5. with quickness.
you contract your eye when you would see sharply; and
erect your ear when you would hear attentively. bacon.
6. judiciously; acutely ; wittily.
sharpn ess. m. s. [from sarp. j
1. keenaess of edge or point.
palladius neither suffering us nor himself to take in hand
the party till the afternoon; when we were to fight in troops,
not diocring otherwise from earnest, but that the sharpness of
the weapons was taken away. sidney.
a second glance came gliding like the first;
and he who saw the soapness of the dart,
without defence receiv'd it in his heart. dryden.
2, not obtuse:ess.
force consisteth in the roundings and raisings of the work,
according as the limbs do more or less require it; so as the
beholder shall spy no sharpness in the bordering lines. j/attan.
, scurness without autocreness.
there is a slurpos; in vinegar, and there is a sharpnes in
pain, in sorrow, and in reproach ; there is a sharp eye, a
jharp wit, and a sharp sword: but there is not one of these
several sharpness the same as another of them; and a sharp
east wind is different from them all. //atts's logick.
provoking swcat extremely, and taking away all sharpness
from whatever you put in, must be of good effect in the cure
of the gout. temple.
4. severity of language; satyrical sarcasm.
there's gold for thee,
thou must not take my former sharpnes, ill,
i will employ thee back again. shakespeare.
some did all folly with just /arpnes, blame,
while others laugh’d and scorn'd them into shame ;
but, of these two, the last succeeded best,
as men aim rightest when they shoot in jest. dryden.
the sharons of his satyr, next to himself, falls most hea-
vily on his friends. dryden.
this is a subject of which it is hard to speak without saty-
rical sharpnos; and particular refle&amp;tions on many churches of
christians. - spratt.
5. painfulness; ashaiveness.
- at this time -
we sweat and bleed; the friend hath lost his friend;
and the best quarrels in the heat are curst
by those that feel their sharpness. shakosheare.
*:: fingle death only that then attended this profession ;
ol. 11.
*phos of it was redoubled in the manner
south.
but the terror and so
and circumstances.
6. intelle&amp;tual acuteness; ingenuity; wit.
till arianism had to - -
- - ad made it a matter of great sor; d
* - - - - great soarpness, an
subtilty of wit to be a sound believing christian, o:
not curious what syllables or particles of speech they used.
- hocker.
the daring of the soul proceeds from thence, f
#. of wit and active diligence. dryden
he son returned with strength of constitution, sharpnos of
understanding, and skill in languages. - zison
7. quickness of senses. o wo/27.
- if the understanding or faculty of the soul be like unto bo-
dily fight, not of equal /harpnos; in all; what can be more
$onvenient than that, even as the dark fish... is directed
by the clear about things visible, so likewise in o:
deeper discourse the wise in heart doth show the simple where
his way lieth. - -
-- 11ooker.
sharp-set, a j. [sharp and set.] -02a or
1. hungry; ravenous.
the secly dove
two sharp-sit hawks do her on each side hem,
and she knows not which way to fly from them. prown.
an eagle/harp set, looking about her for her prey, spy'd a
leveret. loange.
2. eager; vehemently desirous.
basilius forced her to stay, tho' with much ado, she being
aost upon the fulfilling of a shrewd office, in overlookin.
philoclea. sio.
our senses are sharp-st on pleasures. l'e/irange.
a comedy of johnson's, not ben, held seven nights; for
the town is sharp-set on new plays. pope.
sharp-sight ed. adj. [/arp and soot.] having quick fight.
if she were the body's quality, ~
then would she be with it fick, maîm'', and blind;
but we perceive, where these privations be,
an healthy, pers ot, and sharp-sighted mind. jxavies.
i am not so sharp-solted as those who have discerned this re-
bellion contriving from the death of q. elizabeth. caroon.
your majesty's clear and sharps tod judgment has as
good a title to give law in matters of this nature, as in any
other. penham.
nothing so fierce but love will soften, nothing so sharp-
shted in other matters but it throws a most before the eyes
on't. - l'aol, anoe.
sharp-vis agfd. a j. [/arp and vsgod.j iiaving a ship
countci) ance.
the welsh that inhabit the mountains are commonly
shop-visord. 1'.' '. origin of lood.
to sha’rt e.r. v. a. ssheteroi, dutch..]
1. to break at once into many pieces; to break so as to scatter
the parts. -
he rais'd a sigh so pitcous and profound,
that it did seem to shutter all his bulk,
and rend his being. -
ye myrtles brown, with ivy never scar,
i come to pluck your berries harsh and crude,
and with forc’d fingers rude
shatter your leaves before the mellowing year. a son.
they escape dissolution, because they can scarce cyer meet
with an agent minute, and swiftly enough noved, to shatter
or dissociate the combined parts. - boyle.
a monarchy was shattered to picces, and divided amongst re-
volted subjects, into a multitude of little governments. locke.
black from the stroke above, the smould ring pine
stands as a slotter'd trunk. thomson's summer.
2. to dissipate ; to make incapable of close and continued at-
tention.
a man of a loose, volatile and shattered humour, thinks
only by fits and starts. norris.
to sha tter. v. n. to be broken, or to fall, by any fore
applied, into fragments.
of bodies, some are fragil; and some are tough and not
fragil; and in the breaking, soone fragil bodies break but where
the force is ; some shatter and fly in many places. bacon.
shatter. m. s. [from the verb...] one part of many into
which any thing is broken at once. -
stick the candle so loose, that it will fall upon the glass of
the sconce, and break it into flatters. swis.
shatter brain ed. . adj. [from shatter 'rain and fute.] i nat-
shatter pate d. } tentive; not consistent. a low word.
sha’rt er y. adj. [from shatter.] disunited ; not compost ;
easily falling into many parts; loose of texture.
a brittle shattery fort of spar, found in form of a white
sand chiefly in the perpendicular fisiures amongst the orcs of
metal. //codward.
to shavf. v. a. preterite shaved, part-shaved or saten. [rce. fan,
saxon ; shaven, dutch..] -
1. to pare off with a razor.
he that is to be cleansed shall shave off all his hair. let’t.
zclim was the first of the ottomans that did shave his beard :
a bashaw ask'd, why he altar'd the custom of his predecessors?
23 u h2
swałezeare.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 33</div><p class="text">s h e
s h i.
he answered, because you bashaws may not lead me by the
beard, as you did them. bacon.
dost thou not know this shaven pate 2 truly it is a great
man's head. knolles's history of the turks.
i caused the hair of his head to be shaved off. wiseman.
2. to pare close to the surface.
sweet birds
thee chauntress, oft the woods among,
i wooe to hear the evening song:
and missing thee, i walk unseen
on the dry smooth shaven green.
the bending scythe
shaves all the surface of the waving green.
3. to skim by passing near, or slightly touching.
he shaves with level wing the deep; then soars
up to the fiery concave tow’ring high.
4. to cut in thin slices.
make some medley of earth, with some other plants bruis’d
or shaven in leaf or root.
5. to strip; to oppress by extortion; to pillage.
shave-grass. n.s.. [equisetum, lat.] an herb.
sha’v eling. m. s. [from shave..] a man shaved; a friar, or
religious. used in contempt.
of elses, there be no such things; only by bald friars and
knavish slavelings so feigned. spenser.
sha’ver. n.s.. [from shave.]
1. a man that practises the art of shaving.
2. a man closely attentive to his own interest.
my lord
was now dispos'd to crack a jest,
and bid friend lewis go in quest;
this lewis is a cunning shaver.
3. a robber; a plunderer. -
they fell all into the hands of the cruel mountain-people,
living for the most part by theft, and waiting for wrecks, as
hawks for their prey: by these shavers the turks were stript of
all they had. knolles.
sha’v ing. m. s. [from shave..] any thin slice pared off from
any body.
take lignum aloes in gross shavings, steep them in sack,
changed twice, till the bitterness be drawn forth; then take
the shavings forth and dry them in the shade, and beat them
to powder. bacon.
by electrick bodies i do not conceive only such as take up
shavings, straws, and light bodies, but such as attract all bo-
dies palpable whatsoever. brown's wulgar errours.
the savings are good for the fining of wine. mort.
shaw. n.s. [rcua, saxon; schawe, dutch; sougga, islandick.]
a thicket; a small wood. a tuft of trees near litchfield is
called gentle shaw.
sha’w fow l. m. s. [shaw and fowl.] an artificial fowl made
by fowlers on purpose to shoot at.
sha’w m. n. s. [from schawme, teutonick.] a hautboy; a
cornet: written likewise shalm.
with trumpets also and shawms.
she. pronoun. in oblique cases her.
sche, old english.]
1. the female pronoun demonstrative; the woman; the wo-
man before mentioned.
she, of whom the ancients seem'd to prophesy,
when they call’d virtues by the name of sle;
she, in whom virtue was so much refin'd,
that for allay unto so pure a mind
jmilton.
gay.
milton.
swift.
psalm common prayer.
[s, gothick; reo, sax.
she took the weaker sex. donne.
this once disclos'd,
the ladies did change favours, and then we
following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she. shakesp.
what, at any time, have you heard her say? shakesp.
the most upright of mortal men was he ;
the most sincere, and holy woman, she. dryden.
2. it is sometimes used for a woman absolutely, with some de-
gree of contempt.
the sles of italy shall not betray
mine interest, and his honour.
lady, you are the cruell'st she alive,
if you will lead these graces to the grave,
and leave the world no copy. shakesp. twelfth night.
i was wont
to load my she with knacks, i wou’d have ransack'd
the pedlar's silken treasury, and have pour’d it
to her acceptance. shakespeare's j/inter's tale.
3. the female; not the male.
i would outstare the sternest eyes that look,
pluck the young sucking cubs from the she bear,
to win thee, lady. shakesp. merchant of venice.
the nightingale, if she would sing by day,
when every goose is cackling, wou’d be thought
no better a musician than the wren. shakespeare.
he-lions are hirsute, and have great manes, the shes are
shakesp. cymbeline.
smooth like cats. - bacon.
stand it in judah’s chronicles confest,
that david's son, by impious passion mov’d,
smote a she-slave, and murder'd what he lov’d. prior.
bacon.
sheaf. n.s. sheaves plural. [rceap, saxon; schoof, dutch.j
1. a bundle of stalks of corn bound together, that the ears may
dry.
these be the sheaves that honour's harvest bears,
the seed thy valiant acts, the world the field.
he beheld a field,
part arable and tilth; whereon were sheaves
fairfax,
new-reap'd : the other part sheep-walks and folds, mih,
the reaper fills his greedy hands,
and binds the golden sheaves in brittle bands. dryden,
2. any bundle or colle&amp;tion held together.
she vanish'd;
the sheaf of arrows shook and rattled in the case. dryden.
in the knowledge of bodies, we must glean what we can;
since we cannot, from a discovery of their real effences, grasp
at a time whole sheaves; and in bundles comprehend the na-
ture of whole species. locke.
to she al. v. a. to shell. see shale.
thou art a shealed peasecod. shakesp. k. lear.
to shear. preter. shore, or sheared; part, pass shorn. [rceanan;
rcynen, saxon. this word is more frequently written sheer,
but sheer cannot analogically form shore or shorn; /bear, sher,
fhorn; as tear, tore, torn.]
1. to clip or cut by interception between two blades moving
on a tivet.
so many days, my ews have been with young;
so many weeks, ere the poor fools will yean;
so many months, ere i shall sheer the fleece. shakes.
laban went to sheer his sheep. gen. xxxi. 19.
when wool is new shorn, they set pails of water by in the
same room to increase its weight. bacon's nat. hist,
to lay my head and hollow pledge
of all my strength, in the lascivious lap
of a deceitful concubine, who shore me,
like a tame weather, all my precious fleece. (milton,
the same ill taste of sense would serve to join
dog foxes in the yoke, and sheer the swine. dryden.
may'st thou henceforth sweetly sleep,
sheer, swains, oh sheer your softest sheep
to swell his couch. gay.
o'er the congenial dust injoin'd to shear
the graceful curl, and drop the tender tear. pope,
2. to cut by interception.
the sharp and toothed edge of the nether chap strikes into
a canal cut into the bone of the upper; and the toothed pro-
tuberance of the upper into a canal in the nether: by which
means he easily sheers the grass whereon he seeds. grew.
to shear. v. n. [in navigation.] to make an indireet course.
shear. : n. s. [from the verb. it is seldom used in the
shears. singular, but is found once in dryden.]
1. an instrument to cut, consisting of two blades moving on a
pin, between which the thing cut is intercepted. shears are
a larger, and scissars a smaller instrument of the same kind.
pope uses shears for scissars.
alas ! thought philoclea to herself, your sheers come too
late to clip the bird's wings that already is flown away.
sidney.
why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
think you i bear the shears of destiny ?
have i commandment on the pulse of life?
the fates prepar'd their sharpen'd sheers.
when the fleece is shorn,
then their defenceless limbs the brambles tear;
short of their wool, and naked from the sheer.
that people live and die, i knew
an hour ago, as well as you ;
and if fate spins us longer years,
or is in haste to take the shears,
i know, we must both fortunes try,
and bear our evils, wet or dry. prior.
how happy should we be if we had the privilege of em-
ploying the sheers, for want of a mint, upon foreign gold, by
shakespeare.
dryden.
dryden,
clipping it into half-crowns ! swift.
fate urg'd the sheers and cut the sylph in twain,
but airy substance soon unites again. pope.
beneath the shears they felt no lasting smart, -
they lost but fleeces, while i lost a heart. gay,
2. the denomination of the age of sheep.
when sheep is one shear, they will have two broad teeth
before ; when two shear, four ; when three, six; when four,
eight: and after that, their mouths break. martimer.
3. anything in the form of the blades of shears.
4. wings, in spenser.
two sharp-wing'd sheers
deck'd with divers plumes, like painted jays,
were fix’d at his back to cut his airy ways. spensor.
sheard. m. s. [rceano, sax.] a fragment. it is now com-
monly written shard, and applied only to fragments of earthen
ware.
in the bursting of it, not a sherd to take fire from the hearth,
or to take water out of the pit. isa. xxx. 14.
she a rer. n. s. [from shear.] one that clips with shears ;
particularly one that fleeces sheep. of
2
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 34</div><p class="text">of other care they little reck'ning make,
than how to scramble at the shearers feast,
and shove away the worthy bidden guest.
was he to be led as a lamb to the slaughter, patient and
resigned as a sheep before her shearers * rogers.
farman. n. s. [shear and man.] he that shears.
sh thy father was a plaisterer,
and thou thy self a shearman. shakespeare.
sasasawato", ". s: [laurus niger.] a fowl. ainsworth.
§.th. n.s. iro, saxon.] the case of any thing; the
£abbard of a weapon:
the dead knight's sword out of his sheath he drew,
with which he cut a lock off all their hair. fa. queen.
doth not each look a flash of light'ning feel,
which spares the body's sheath, yet melts the steel? cleav.
swords, by the lightning's subtile force distill’d,
and the cold/heath with running metal fill’d.
t. shoo. 4 v. a. [from the noun.]
1, sheat ho. -
1. to inclose in a sheath or scabbard; to inclose in any case.
this drawn but now against my sovereign's breast,
before 'tis sheath'd, shall give him peace and rest. waller.
in his hair one hand he wreaths,
his sword, the other, in his bosom sheaths.
is this her hate to him, his love to me !
'tis in my breast she sheath; her dagger now.
the left foot naked, when they march to fight,
but in a bull's raw hide they sheath the right. dryden.
the leopard, and all of this kind as goes, keeps the claws
of his forefect turned up from the ground and sheathed in the
skin of his toes, whereby he preserves them sharp for rapine,
extending them only when he leaps at the prey.
2. [in philosophy..] to obtund any acrid particles.
those active parts of a body are of differing natures when
fall d up, or wedged in amongst others in the texture of a
concrete; and when extricated from these impediments. boyle.
other substances opposite to acrimony are called demulcent
or mild; because they blunt or sheath those sharp salts as pease,
and beans. arbuthnot.
3. to fit with a sheath.
there was no link to colour peter's hat,
waster's dagger was not come from sheathing. shakespeare.
4. to defend the main body by an outward covering.
it were to be wished that the whole navy throughout were
seatbed as some are. . raleigh.
saeathwi so ep. adj. [sheath and wing.] having hard cases
which are folded over the wings.
some insects fly with four wings, as all vaginipennous, or
/hoto winged insects, as beetles and dorrs. brown.
she athy, aff. [from sheath. j forming a sheath.
with a needle put aside the short and sheathy cases on ear-
wigs backs, and you may draw forth two wings. brown.
she'cklatch. n.s.
he went to fight against the giant in his robe of shecklaton,
which is that kind of gilded leather with which they use to
addison.
denham.
dryden.
grew.
embroider the irish jackets. spensor.
t. shed. v. a. [rcebun, saxon.]
1. to effuse ; to pour out; to spill.
the painful service, and the drops of blood
shea for my thankless country, are requited
but with that surname of coriolanus. shakespeare.
cromwell, i did not think to shed a tear
in all my miseries. shakspeare.
for this is my blood which is shed for many, for the remis-
son of sins. matth. xxvi. 28.
some think one gen'ral soul fills ev'ry brain,
as the bright sun shed, light in ev'ry star.
around its entry nodding poppies grow,
and all cool simples that sweet rest bestow ;
night from the plants their sleepy virtue drains,
and passing, sh'd; it on the silent plains.
you seem'd to mourn another lover dead,
my fighs , ou gave him, and my tears you shed.
unhappy man! to break the pious laws
of nature, pleading in his children's cause:
'tis love of honour, and his country's good ;
the consul, not the father, shed; the blood.
in thes one walls, their days eternal bound,
these moss grown domes with spiry turrets crown'd,
where awful arches make a noon-day night,
and the dim windows shed a solemn light;
thy eyes diffus'd a reconciling ray,
and gleams of glory brighten’d all the day.
2. to scatter; to let sail.
trees that bring forth their leaves late, and cast them late,
are more lating than those that sprout their leaves early, or
jhed them betimes. bacon's nat. hisł.
so the returning year be blest,
as his infant months bestow,
springing wreaths for william's brow;
as his funner's youth shall shed
eternal sweets around maria's head.
davies.
dryden.
dryden.
dryden.
pope.
prior,
milton. .
to shep. v. n. to let fall its parts.
w.” are apt to shed most as they lie, and black as
they stand. mortimer's hoshandry.
she d. m. s. [supposed by skinner to b *-i- or-r
1. a slight temporary joo." o be corrupted from shade.]
the first aletes born in lowly sed
of parents base, a rose sprung .. 'bride.
- fairfax:
though he his house of polish'd marble build, f
with jasper floor'd, and carved cedar ceil'd;
yet shall it ruin like the moth's frail cell,
or shed of reeds, which summer's heat repel. sandji.
in such a season born, when scarce a shed
§. be o to shelter him or me
"rom the bleak air. milton' -
so all our minds with his conspire to o s par. reg.
the gentiles great apostle, and deface
those state-obscuring sheds, that like a chain
seem'd to confine and setter him again.
j/aller.
those houses then were caves, or homely shed, aller
with twining offers fenc'd, and moss their beds. dryden.
an hospitable house they found,
a homely shed; the roof, not far from ground,
was thatch'd with recds and straw together bound. dryden.
then out he steals, and finds where by the head
their horse hung fasten’d underneath a shod. betterton.
her various kinds by various fortunes led,
commence acquaintance, underneath a shed.
swift.
weak as the roman chief, who strove to hide
his father's cot, and once his father's pride,
by casing a low shed of rural mould
with marble walls, and roof adorn'd with gold. harte.
2. [in composition.] effusion; as blood shed.
she'dder. n.s.. [from shed.]. a spiller; one who sheds.
a shedder of blood shall surely die. ezek. xviii. io.
she en. }*. [this was probably only the old pronunciation
shee'ny. of shine.] bright; glittering; shewy. a word
now not in use. -
that lewd ribbald, with vile lust advanc'd,
laid first his filthy hands on virgin clean,
to spoil her dainty corse so fair and sheen.
when he was all dight, he took his way
into the forest, that he might be seen
of the wild beats, in his new glory sheen.
now they never meet in grove or green,
by fountain clear, or spangled star-light sheen. shakspeare.
up arose each warrior bold and brave,
glittering in filed steel and armour sheen.
out of the hierarchics of angels sheen,
the gentle gabriel call'd he from the rest.
by the rushy fringed bank,
where grows the willow and the osier dank,
my sliding chariot stays,
which set with agat, or the azure sheen,
of turcois blue, and emerald green.
or did of late earth's sons besiege the wall
of sheeny heav'n. milton.
she en. m. s. [from the adjective..] brightness; splendouf.
not now used.
mercy will fit between,
fa. 9tten.
hubberd's tale.
fairfax.
fairfax.
milton-
thron’d in celestial sheen. milton.
far above, in spangled sheen,
celestial cupid, her fam'd son advanc'd,
holds his dear psyche sweet entranc'd. milton.
sheep. m. s. plural likewise sheep. [rceap, saxon; of which
the plural was reep; schaep, dutch. j
1. the animal that bears wool: reinarkable for its usefulness and
innocence.
fire the brambles, snare the birds, and steep
in wholesome water-falls the fleecy sheep. dryden.
of substances there are two sorts of ideas; one of single
substances, as they exist separately, as a man or sheep. locke.
2. [in contempt.]_a foolish filly fellow. ainsworth.
3. in theology.] the people, considered as under the direction
of god, or of their pastour.
we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. psalms.
t. sheep bite. v. n. [sheep and bite.] to use petty thefts.
shew your knave's visage, with a pox to you ; shew vour
sheepbiting face, and be hanged. shakspeare.
siebop bit er. m. s. [from sheepbite.] a petty thief.
his gate like a shopbiter fleering aside. toffor.
wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally
/httpbiter come to some notable shame? shakespeare.
there are political sheepbiters, as well as pastoral : betrayers
of publick trusts, as well as of private. l'estrange.
shee'pcot. n.s. [sheep and cot.] a little inclosure for sheep.
bedlam beggars, with roaring voices,
from low farms, sheepcots and mills
inforce their charity.
up to a hill anon his steps he rear'd,
from whose high top to ken the prospect round,
if cottage were in view, sheepcot or herd;
but cottage, herd, or sheepcot none he saw.
shakesp. k. lear.
milton.
sheepf o'ld.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 35</div><p class="text">'s h e
s h e
sheerro'. d. m. s. [stop and fold.] the place where sheep
are inclosed. - -
the bear, the lion, terrors of the plain, -
the sheepfold scatter'd and the shepherd slain. prior.
sheephook. n.s.. [sheep and hook.] a hook fastened to a pole
by which shepherds lay hold on the legs of their sheep.
the one carried a crosier of balm-wood, the other a pasto-
ral staff of cedar like a sheep-hook. bacon's new atlantis.
if you dare think of deserving our charms,
away with your sheephook, and take to your arms. dryden.
shee'pish. adj. [from sheep.] bashful; over-modest; timo-
rously and meanly diffident. -
wanting change of company, he will, when he comes
abroad, be a sheepsh or conceited creature. locke.
she epishi, ess. m. s. [from sheepish..] bashfulness; mean and
timorous diffidence. -
thy gentry bleats, as if thy native cloth
transfus’d a sheepishness into thy story. herbert.
sheep:/nes, and ignorance of the world, are not consequen-
ces of being bred at home. ... locke.
without success, let a man be never so hardy, he will have
some degree of shepishness. grew.
sheep master. n.s.. [sheep and mosler.] a feeder of sheep.
a nobleman was a great grafier, and sheepmaster. . bacon.
sheepshearing. m. s. [sheep and shear.] the time of thcar-
ing sheep; the feast made when sheep are shorn.
there happening a solemn festivity, such as the she fishear-
ings used to be, david begs some small repast. south.
sheep's eye. n.s.. [sheep and eye.]. a modest diffident look,
such as lovers cast at their mistresses.
cast a sheep’s eye behind you : in before me. dryden.
sheep was lk, n.s.. [sheep and walk..] pasture for sheep.
he beheld a field,
part arable and tilth ; whereon were sheaves
new reap'd ; the other part sheepwalks and folds. milton.
sheer. adj. [rcyn, saxon.] pure; clear; unmingled.
if she say, i am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer
ale, score me up for the lying'st rogue in christendom.
shakespeare.
sheer argument is not the talent of the man; little wrested
... sentences are the bladders which bear him up, and he sinks
downright, when he once pretends to swim without them.
- atterbury.
sheer. adv. [from the adjective..] clean; quick; at once.
not now in use, except in low language.
thrown by angry jove
sheer o'er the crystal battlements; from morn
to noon he fell, from noon to dewy cye,
a summer's day; and with the setting sun,
jdrop'd from the zenith, like a falling star, -
milton.
on lemnos.
the sword of satan, with steep force to smite
descending, and in half cut sheer. milton.
due entrance he disdain'd, and in contempt
at one slight bound high overleap'd all bound
of hill or highest wall, and sheer within -
lights on his feet. milton.
to sheer. v. a. [see shear.]
i keep my birth day; send my phillis home
at sheering-time. dryden.
to sheer off. v. n. to steal away; to slip off clandestinely.
sheers. n.s. [see she ars.]
sheet. m. s. [rceaz, saxon.]
1. a broad and large piece of linen.
he saw heaven opened, and a vessel descending unto him,
as a great sheet, knit at the four corners. aoi, x. ii.
2. the linen of a bed.
if i die before thee, shroud me
in one of these same sheets. shakespeare.
you think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.
- shakespeare.
some unequal bride in nobler sheets
receives her lord. dryden.
3. [ecoutes, french; echoten, dutch..] in a ship are ropes bent
to the clews of the sails, which serve in all the lower sails to
hale or round off the clew of the sail; but in topsails they
draw the sail close to the yard arms. dic.— dryden seems to
understand it otherwise.
the little word behind the back, and undoing whisper, like
pulling off a sheet-rope at sea, slackens the sail. suckling.
fierce boreas drove against his flying sails,
and rent the sheets.
4. as much paper as is made in one body.
as much love in rhime,
as could be cramm’d up in a sheet of paper,
writ on both sides the leaf, margin and all. shakespeare.
when i first put pen to paper, i thought all i should have
to say would have been contained in one sheet of paper. locke.
i let the refracted light fall perpendicularly upon a sheet of
white paper upon the opposite wall. newton's opticks.
5. a single complication or fold of paper in a book.
6. anything expanded.
dryden.
such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder
i never remember to have heard. shakspeare's king lor
rowling thunder roars, in i
and sheets of lightning blast the standing field. dryden
an azure sheet it rushes broad, ...) too.
and from the loud resounding rocks below,
dash'd in a cloud of foam. 77ons,
7. sheets in the plural is taken for a book.
to this the following sheets are intended for a full and di.
stinet answer. waterland
sheet-anchor. m. s. [sheet and anchor.] in a ship is the larges.
anchor ; which, in stress of weather, is the mariners last i.
fuge, when an extraordinary stiff gale of wind happens. baily
to sheet. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to furnish with sheets.
2. to enfold in a sheet.
3. to cover as with a sheet.
like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,
the barks of trees thou browsed'st. - shałoszar,
she'kel. m. s. [.opw] an ancient jewish coin equal to so
attick drachms, or four roman denarii, in value about 2 s. 6;
fterling. dii
the jews, albeit they detested images, yet imprinted up.
their sheckle on one side the golden pot which had the manna
and on the other aaron's rod. como.
the huge iron head six hundred shekels weighed,
and of whole bodies but one wound it made,
able death's worst command to overdoe
destroying life at once and carcase too. cowly,
this coat of mail weighed five thousand shekels of brass. dr.
shf'ld a ple. m. s. a chaffinch. -
she'ldrake. m. s. a bird that preys upon fishes.
shelf. m. s. [rcy!p, saxon; self, dutch.
1. a board fixed against a supporter, so that any thing may be
placed upon it.
about his shelves
a beggarly account of empty boxes. shakes eart.
bind fast, or from their shelves
your books will come and right themselves. swift.
2. a sand bank in the sea ; a rock under shallow water.
our transported souls shall congratulate each other their
having now fully escaped the numerous rocks, shelves, and
quick-sands. boyle.
... near the shelves of circe's shores they run,
a dang'rous coast.
he call'd his money in ;
but the prevailing love of pcif
soon split him on the former shelf,
he put it out again. dryden.
3. the plural is analogically shelves; dryden has shelf, probably
by negligence.
- he seiz'd the helm, his fellows cheer’d,
turn'd short upon the ses, and madly steel'd.
she'lfy. adj. [from she's...] .
1. full of hidden rocks or banks; full of dangerous shallows.
glides by the syren's cliffs a she'sy coast,
long infamous for ships and sailors lost,
and white with bones. dryden.
2. i know not well the meaning in this passage, perhaps rocky.
the tillable fields are in some places so tough, that the
plough will scarcely cut them ; and in some so she's that the
corn hath much ado to fasten its root. carew.
sh e l l. m. s. [rcyll, rce all, saxon ; schale, shelle, dutch.]
'1. the hard covering of anything; the external crust.
the sun is as the fire, and the exterior earth is as the shell
of the eolipile, and the abyss as the water within it; now
when the heat of the sun had pierced through the shell and
reach'd the waters, it rarefy'd them. burmet's theory.
whatever we fetch from underground is only what is lodged
in the shell of the carth. lake.
2. the covering of a testaceous or crustaceous animal.
- her women wear
the spoils of nations in an ear;
chang'd for the treasure of a shell,
and in their loose attires do swell.
albion
was to neptune recommended ;
peace and plenty spread the sails:
venus, in her shell before him,
from the sands in safety bore him. dryden's albion.
the shells served as moulds to this sand, which, when con-
solidated, and afterwards freed from its investient shell, is of
dryden.
dryden.
ben. johns. catiline.
the same shape as the cavity of the shell. j/oodward.
he, whom ungrateful athens could expel,
at all times just, but when he sign'd the shell. pope.
3. the covering of the seeds of siliquous plants.
some fruits are contained within a hard shell, being the seeds
of the plants. arbuthnot.
4. the covering of kernels.
chang'd loves are but chang'd sorts of meat;
and when he hath the kernel eat,
who doth not throw away the shell * dzzzzzz.
5. the
i
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 36</div><p class="text">s h e
s h e
the covering of an egg. ...,
5. think him as a serpent's egg,
which, hatch'd, would, as his kind, grow mischievous,
and kill him in the shell. shakesp. julius cæsar,
t. the outer part of an house.
the marquis of medina sidonia made the shell of a house,
that would have been a very noble building, had he brought
it to perfection. - addison w/1 italy,
it is used for a musical instrument in poetry, from tesłud,
latin; the first lyre being said to have been made by straining
firings over the shell of a tortoise.
less than a god they thought there could not dwell
within the hollow of that shell,
that spoke so sweetly. dryden.
8. the superficial part.
so devout are the romanists about this outward shell of re-
ligion, that if an altar be moved, or a stone of it broken, it
ought to be reconsecrated. ayliffo's parergon.
t, shell. v. a. [from the noun..] to take out of the shell 5
, to strip of the shell.
shell. t. h.
o fall off as broken shells.
the ulcers were cured, and the scabs shelled off. isosoman,
2. to cast the shell.
she'll duck. m. s. a kind of wild duck.
to preserve wild ducks, and shelducks, have a place walled
in with a pond. mortimer's husbandry.
she'llfish, n. s. [shell and f/h.] fish invested with a hard
covering, either testaceous, as oysters, or crustaceous, as
lobsters.
the shells, being sound, were so like those they saw upon
their shores, that they never questioned but that they were the
exuviae of shellfish, and once belonged to the sea. j/o:dward.
she'lly, adj. [from shell.]
1. abounding with shells.
the ocean rolling, and the sely shore,
beautiful objects, shall delight no more. prior.
2. consisting of thesis.
the co-ceit of anaximander was, that the first men and all
animals were bred in some warm moisture, inclos. d in crusha-
ceous skins, as lobsters; and so continued 'till their shelly pri-
sons, growing dry and breaking, nade way for them. lently.
she lte.r. m. s. [of this word the etymology is unknown :
sonner deduces it from shell, davies from reylo, a shield,
saxon.]
2. a cover from any external injury or violence.
we hear this fearful temp it fin z,
yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm. shaos. r. ii.
they wish the mountains now might be again
thrown on them, as a , eter room his re. ..]sion.
heroes of old, when wounded, she ter sought;
but he who meets all dariers with disdain,
ev’n in their face his ship to anch r brought,
and steeple high stood propt upon the main. dryden.
they may learn experie, ce, and avoid a cave as the worst
jolier from rain, when they have a lover in company. dryaen.
the healing plant sha's aid,
from storms a sh iter, and from heat a shade. pope.
2. a protector; a defender ; one that gives security.
thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from
the enemy. i's lai. 3.
3. the state of being covered; protection; security.
low at his foot a spacious plain is plac'd,
between the mountain and the stream embrac'd ;
which shade and selter from the hill derives,
while the kind river wealth and beauty gives. d.nham,
who into shelter takes their tender bloom,
and forms their minds to fly from ills to come : 2%ung.
t. she lter. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to cover from external violence.
we befought the deep to shelter us. milton.
those ruins / eller'd once his sacred head,
when he from wor'ster's fatal battle fled,
watch'd by the genius of this royal place. dryden.
2. to defend; to protect; to succour with refuge; to harbour.
what endiess honour shall you gain,
to save and shelter troy's unhappy train. dryden's on.
3. tobetake to cover.
they solored themselves under a rock. a bat.
comfort thyself with such thoughts, chiefly when all carthly
comforts fail thee: then do thou particularly retreat to those
considerations, and shelter thyself under them. atterbury.
4. to cover from notice. this scens less proper.
in vain i strove to check my growing flame,
or shelter passion under friendship's name 3 -
you saw my heart. prior,
t. she’lthr. j. m.
i. to take shelter.
there the indian herdsman, shunning heat, -
shelters in cool. milton.
2. to give shelter,
vol. ii.
7.
then seeks the farthes: ooze, the shelt'ring weed,
the cavern'd bank, his old focure atode. thomson.
shooteries. *}. [from shelter.] harbourless; without
home or refuge.
now sad and joherlos, perhaps, she lies,
s where o winds blow sharp. rowe's jane shore.
iie, l v in g. a.sy. - * - - - - - - - - -
clivity. 9. [from shelf.] sloping; inclining; having de-
her chamber is aloft, far from the ground;
and built so solving, that one cannot climb it,
without apparent hazard of his lif.
amidst the brake a hollow den was found
- with rocks and sle'ving arches vaulted round. addison
she'lvy. adj. [from shoff.] shallow ; rocky; full of banks -
i had been drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and fift-
low. shaos. merry jove, of windsor.
to shop. v. a. preter. and past. pass. shent. [rcenban, saxon;
schenden, dutch..]
1. to ruin; to spoil; to mis hief.
provide for thy wife, or else look to be /*ent,
good milchcow for winter, another for lent. tassor.
shepherds, should it not y?ent
your roundels fresh, to hear a doleful verse
of rosalind, that colin made : speoser.
such a dream i had of dire portent,
that much i fear my body will be shent;
it bodes i shall have wars. dryden.
2. to disgrace; to degrade; to blame; to reproach.
debateful strife, and cruel enmity,
the famous name of knighthood foully shend. fa. queen,
sore bruised with the fail, he slow uprose,
and all enraged thus, thus him loudly sent,
disleal knight, whose coward courage chose
to wreak iself on beast.
my tongue and soul in this be hypocrites,
how in my words socwer she be short,
to give them seals never my soul consent. shafts). haml.
3. to overpower ; to crush ; to surpass.
she pass'd the rest as cynthia doth slend
the lesler stars sponsor.
4. it is, though us d by drydon, wholly obsolete.
she'phh r d. m. s. [rceap, sheep, and pins, a keeper, saxon,
reap. p no )
1. one who tends sheep in the pasture.
i am sophora to another nan,
and do not sheer the fleeces that i graze. shakespeare,
a shopherd next
more meek came with the firstlings of his flock. a silion.
2. a swain ; a rural lover.
if that the world and love were young,
and truth in ev'ry shepherd's tongue,
these pretty pleasures might we move
to live with thee, and be thy love. raleigh.
3. one who tends the congregation; a pastor.
lead up all those who heard thee, and believ'd ;
"midst thy own flock, great shepherd, be receiv'd,
and glad all heav'n with millions thou hast sav'd. prior.
she ph e r of ss. n.s.. [fron sopherd..] a woman that tends
sheep; a rural lais. -:
she put herself into the garb of a sopherds, and in that
disguise lived many years; but discovering herself a little be-
fore her death, did profess herself the happiest person alive,
not for her condition, but in enjoying him she first loved; and
that she would rather, ten thousand times, live a sopherd's in
contentment and satisfaction. sidney.
these your unusual weeds to each part of you
do give a life: no shepherds, but flora
peering in april's front. shałop. honter's tile.
she like some sopherd's did show,
shakespeare,
fairy queen.
who sat to bathe her by a river's side. dryden.
his dorick dialect has incomparable sweetness in its clown-
ishness, like a fair she herds, in country russet. dryden.
shepherd's needle. n.s. [/candiz, lat. j venus comb. an
herb.
shepherds purse, or pouch. m. s. [bursa foris, lat..] a
common weed. -
she'pherds rod. m. s. tease!, of which plant it is a species.
she'pherd is h. adj. [from shepherd...] resembling a shepheid;
suiting a shepherd ; pasioral; rustick. not in use.
he would have drawn her eldest fifter, esteemed her match
for beauty, in her shepherdish attire. sidney.
she saw walking from her ward a man in shopherdish apparel.
sidney.
she'reet. m. s. [ sarbat, arabick.] the juice of lemons or
oranges mixed with water and sugar. d.&amp;#.
they prefer our beer above all other drinks; and consider-
ing that water is with the rarest, especially in this clime, the
dearest of sherbets, and plenty of barley, it would prove infi-
nitely profitable to such as should bring in the use thereof. sand.
sherd. m. s. [rce arb, saxon.] the fragment of broken earthen
ware, sce shard.
23 x the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 37</div><p class="text">s - s h i
+
h i
the trivet-table of a foot was lame ; -
she thrusts beneath the limping leg a sherd. dryden.
she riff. m. s. [rcyne, epera, saxon, from reyne, a shire,
and neve, a steward. it is sometimes pronounced shrieve,
which some poets have injudiciously adopted.]. an officer to
whom is intrusted in each county the execution of the laws.
a great pow'r of english and of scots -
are by the sheriff of yorkshire overthrown. shakspeare.
concerning ministers of justice, the high sheriffs of the
counties have been very ancient in this kingdom. . bacon.
now may’rs and shrieves all hush'd and satiate lay. pope.
she'riff alty. - -
she riff dom. u n. s. [from sheriff.] the office or jurisdic-
she r ffs h 1 p. tion of a sheriff.
she rif fw 1 ck.
there was a resumption of patents of gaols, and reannex-
ing of them to the sheriffwicks; privileged officers being no less
an interruption of justice than privileged places. bacon.
sherr is. ; n. s. [from yeres, a town of andalusia in
she'rr is sa.k. spain..] a kind of sweet spanish wine.
sherry.
- your sherris warms the blood, which before, cold and set-
tled, left the liver white, which is the badge of pusilanimity;
but the sharris makes it course from the inwards to the parts
extrenne. .* shakespeare.
good sherris sack ascends me into the brain, dries me there
all the foolish dull vapours, and makes it apprehensive.
- shakespeare.
sir fw. see show.
sh 1d e. m. s. [from reeaban, to divide, saxon.] a board; a
cutting. skinner.
| shif1. d. m. s. [rcy'o, saxon.] -
1. a buckler; a broad piece of defensive armour held on the
- left arm to ward off blows.
| now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
with hearts more proof than shields. shakesp. coriolanus.
his pond'ious shield,
ethereal temper, massy, large and round,
| behind him cast; the broad circumference
hung on his shoulders like the moon.
2. defence; protection.
3. one that gives protection or security.
the terror of the trojan field,
the grecian honour, ornament, and shield,
high on a pile th' unconquer’d chief is plac'd,
to shield. v. a. [from the noun.]
j. to cover with a shield.
2. to defend; to protect; to secure.
- were’t my fitness to let these hands obey my boiling blood,
they’re apt cnough to dislocate and tear
thy flesh and bones: howe'er
a woman's shape doth shield thee. shakesh. king lear.
* shouts of applause ran ringing through the field,
to see the son the vanquish’d father shield.
* hear one that comes to shield his injur’d honour,
and guard his life with hazard of her own.
3. to keep off; to defend against.
out of their cold caves and frozen habitations, into the sweet
foil of europe, they brought with them their usual weeds, fit
mill0?!,
dryden.
dryden.
solish.
to shield the cold, to which they had been inured. spenser.
my lord, i must intreat the time alone.
— god shield i should disturb devotion. shakespeare.
to shift. v. n. [of this word the original is obscure : sliota,
runick, is to change.]
1. to change place.
vegetables being fixed to the same place, and so not able to
shift and seek out after proper matter for their increment, it
was necessary that it should be brought to them. j/oodward.
2. to change; to give place to other things.
if the ideas of our minds constantly change and shift, in a
continual succession, it would be impossible for a man to think
long of any one thing. locke.
3. to change cloaths, particularly the linen.
she begs you just would turn you while she shifts. 1%ung.
4. to find some expedient; to act or live though with difficulty.
we cannot shift : being in, we must go on. daniel.
men in distress will look to themselves, and leave their
companions to shift as well as they can. l’estrange.
since we desire no recompence nor thanks, we ought to be
dismissed, and have leave to shift for ourselves. swift.
5. to practise indirect methods. - -
all those schoolmen, though they were exceeding witty,
yet better teach all their followers to shift than to resolve by
their distinctions. raleigh.
6. to take some method for safety.
nature instructs every creature how to soft for itself in
cases of danger. l'eir ange.
to shift. v. a.
1. to change; to alter.
it was not levity, but absolute necessity, that made the fish
shift their condition. 4 orange.
*
come, assist me, muse obedient;
let us try some new expedient ;
shift the scene for half an hour,
time and place are in thy pow'r. swift.
2. to transfer from place to place.
pare saffron between the two st. mary's days,
or set or go shift it that knowest the ways. tuftr.
3. to put by some expedient out of the way.
i shifted him away,
and laid good 'scuses on your ecstasy. shakesh. othel,
the wisdom of all these latter times, in princes affairs, is
rather fine deliveries, and shiftings of dangers and mischics,
when they are near, than solid and grounded courses to kee,
them aloof. bacon,
4. to change in position.
neither use they sails, nor place their oars in order upon
the sides; but carrying the oar loose, shift it hither and thither
at pleasure. - aalogh.
where the wind
veers oft, as oft she steers and shifts her sail. milton.
we strive in vain against the seas and wind;
now shift your sails. dryden's en.
5. to change, as cloaths, -
i would advise you to slist a shirt: the violence of a&amp;ion
hath made you reek as a sacrifice. shakesp. cymbeline.
6. to dress in fresh cloaths.
as it were to ride day and night, and not to have patience
to shift me. shakespeare's henry iv.
7. to shift off. to defer; to put away by some expedient.
the most beautiful parts must be the most finished, the
colours and words most chosen: many things in both, which
are not deserving of this care, must be shifted off, content with
vulgar expressions. dryden's dufresny.
struggle and contrive as you will, and lay your taxes as you
please, the traders will shift it off from their own gain. loe.
by various illusions of the devil they are prevailed on to
shift off the duties, and neglect the conditions, on which sal-
vation is promised. fogers's sermons.
shift. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. expedient found or used with difficulty; difficult means.
she redoubling her blows, drave the stranger to no other
jhift than to ward and go back; at that time seeming the
image of innocency against violence. sidney.
if i get down, and do not break my limbs,
i’ll find a thousand shifts to get away. shakes. k. john,
this perfect artifice and accuracy might have been omitted,
and yet they have made shift to move up and down in the
water. more's antidote against athesia,
not any boast of skill, but extreme shift
how to regain my sever'd company,
compell'd me to awake the courteous echo,
to give me answer from her mossy couch. asilion.
a fashionable hypocrisy shall be called good manners, so we
make a shift somewhat to legitimate the abuse. l’estrange.
those little animals provide themselves with wheat; but
they can make shift without it. addison.
our herbals are sufficiently stored with plants, and we have
made a tolerable shift to reduce them to classes. baker.
2. indirect expedient; mean refuge; last recourse.
the very custom of seeking so particular aid and relief at
the hands of god, doth, by a secret contradiction, withdraw
them from endeavouring to help themselves, even by those
wicked shifts, which they know can never have his allowance
whose assistance their prayers seek. hooker.
to say, where the notions cannot fitly be reconciled, that
there wanteth a term, is but a shift of ignorance. bacon.
slow to resolve, but in performance quick;
so true, that he was aukward at a trick;
for little souls on little shifts rely.
3. fraud; artifice ; stratagem.
know ye not ulysses' shifts 2
their swords less danger carry than their gifts.
4. evasion ; elusory practice.
as long as wit, by whetting itself, is able to find out any
/hist, be it never so slight, whereby to escape out of the hands
of present contradiction, they are never at a stand. hooker.
of themselves, for the most part, they are so cautious and
wily-headed, especially being men of so small experience and
practice in law matters, that you would wonder whence they
borrow such subtilities and sly shifts. sponsor.
here you see your commission ; this is your duty, these are
your discouragements: never seek for shifts and evasions frcm
worldly afflictions: this is your reward, if you perform it;
this your doom, if you decline it. south.
5. a woman's linen.
shifter. m. s. [from shift.] one who plays tricks; a man
of artifice. - -
'twas such a shifter, that, is truth were known,
death was half glad when he had got him down.
sh1'frless. adj. [from shift.]
means to act or live.
dryden.
denham.
al milton.
wanting expedients ; wanting
for
.
, so
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 38</div><p class="text">s h i
s h i -
for the poor shiftles, irrationals, it is a prodigious ast of the
reat creator's indulgence, that they are all ready furnished
ith such cloathing. perham's physico-theology.
... n.s. (rolling, sax, and eise; shelling, dut.) a
so of various value in different times. it is now twelve
*. of these pence made their shilling, which they called
filling, probably from soilingus, which the romans used for
the furth part of an ounce ; and forty-eight of these sciitings
made their pound, and four hundred of these pounds were a
legacy for a king's daughter, as appeareth by the last will of
ig alfred. ---- - camden’s remains.
#he very same shilling may at one time pay twenty men in
twenty days, and at another rest in the same hands one hun-
died days. - - locke.
who with much pains exerting all his sense,
can range aright his shillings, pounds and pence 2 young.
soo--shall-'. a corrupt reduplication of shall i the
question of a man hesitating. to stand shill-1 shall-i, is to
ontinue hesitating and procrastinating.
i am somewhat dainty in making a resolution, because when
i make it, i keep it : i don't stand shill. i shall-i then ; if i
fy't, i'll do". congreve's iłay of the horld.
shi'iy, aft'. [from sy.] not familiarly; not frankly.
sun, n.s. (rena, saxon; schien, german.] the forepart of
we leg.
o touised my shin the other day with playing at sword and
dagger. shakesp. merry joves of iłzndsor.
the shin bone, from the knee to the instep, is made by sha-
dowing one half of the leg with a single shadow. pea, ham.
his leg, then broke,
had got a deputy of ook;
for when a shin in fight is cropt,
the knee with one of timber's propt.
as when to an house we come,
to know if any one's at home,
we knock; so one must kick your shin,
ere he can find your soul's within. anonymous.
t, shine. v. n. preterite i shone, i have shone; sometimes i
joined, 1 have shined [rcinan, saxon; schijnen, dutch.)
1.to have bright resplendence; to glitter ; to glitten to
gleam.
hudibras.
to-day the french,
all clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
shone down the english; and to morrow
made britain india: ev'ry man that stood,
shew'd like a mine. shakespeare.
true paradise inclos'd with shining rock. //ilton.
we can dismiss thee ere the morning shine. milton.
fair daughter, blow away these mists and clouds,
and let thy eyes shine forth in their full luitre. denham.
the sun shines when he sees it. locke.
1. to be without clouds.
the moon shines bright: in such a night as this,
when the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
and they did make no noise. shak. march. of venice.
how bright and goodly shines the moon!
the moon! the fun: it is not moonlight now. shakespeare.
clear pools greatly comfort the eyes when the sun is over-
cast, or when the moon shineth. bacon.
3. to be glossy.
they are waxen fat, they soire. er. v. 28.
fish with their fins and shining scales. milton.
the colour and shining of bodies is nothing but the different
arrangement and refraction of their minute parts. locke.
4. to be gay; to be splendid.
so proud she shined in her princely state,
looking to heaven; for earth she did disdain,
and fitting high.
5. to be beautiful.
of all th’ enamel'd race, whose silv'ry wing
waves to the tepid zephyrs of the spring,
or swims along the fluid atmosphere,
once brightest shin'd this child of heat and air.
6. to be eminent or conspicuous.
if there come truth from them,
as upon thee, macbeth, their speeches shine,
why, by the verities on thee made good,
may they not be my oracles as well’
her face was veil’d, yet to my fancied fight
love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shin'd
so clear, as in no face with more dei ght.
cato's soul
shire; out in every thing she acts or speaks;
while winning mildness and attractive smiles
dwell in her looks, and, with becoming grace,
soften the rigour of her father's virtues. addison.
the reformation, in its first establishment, produced its
proper fruits, and distinguished the whole age with shining in-
stances of virtue and morality. adijan's freeholder.
the courtier smooth, who forty years had shin'd
an humble servant to all human kind. poe.
fairy queen.
pope.
shakspeare.
milton.
-
--
few are qualified to sline in company; but it is in most
mens power to be agreeable. swift
7. to be propitious. -
the lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious.
* . . num. vi. 25.
8. to give light real or figurative. 5
s o o: ... hath not soined unto us, and the
un of righteousness rose not upon us. 'ild.
c."" j/ijdom, v. 6.
shine inward, and the mind through
irradiate. o
shinf. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. fair weather.
be it fair or foul, or rain or shine. dryden
he will accustom himself to heat and cold, and shine and
rain; all which if a man's body will not endure, it will serve
him to very little purpose. locke.
2. brightness; splendour ; lustre. it is a word, though not
unanalogical, yet ungraceful, and little used. b
he that has inured his eyes to that divine splendour, which
results from the beauty of holiness, is not tazzled with the
glittering shine of gold, and considers it as a vein of the same
earth he treads on. decay of piety.
say, in what mortal soil thou deign'st to grow?
fair op'ning to some court's propitious shine,
or deep with di'monds in the flaming mine pope.
sh1's ess. n. j. [from shy.] unwillingness to be tractable or
familiar.
an incurable shines is the vice of irish horses, and is hardly
ever seen in flanders, because the winter forces the breeders
there to house and handle their colts. temple.
they were famous for their justice in commerce, but to:
treme shiness to strangers: they exposed their goods with the
price marked upon them, and then retired. arbuthnot.
sh1'ngle. m. s. [schindel, germ.] a thin board to cover houses.
the best to cleave, is the most useful for pales, laths,
shingles, and wainscot. mortimer’s husbandry.
sh1'ng lfs. n.s. wants fingul. [cingulum, latin; zona morbus,
plinio.] a kind of tetter or herpes that spreads itself round
the loins.
such are used successfully in erysipelas and shingles, by a slen-
der diet of decoctions of farinaceous vegetables, and copious
drinking of cooling liquors. arbuthnot on diet.
sh1'ny. adj [from stine.] bright ; splendid; luminous.
when aldeboran was mounted high,
above the shiny cassiopeia's chair,
one knocked at the door, and in would fare.
the night
is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
by th' second hour o' th' morn. shak. ant, and cleopatra.
while from afar we heard the cannons play,
like distant thunder on a shiny day,
for absent friends we were asham'd to fear. dryden.
ship. [rcip, rcyp, saxon; shap, dutch..] a termination
noting quality or adjunct, as lordship; or office, as steward-
all her powers
milton,
fa. queen.
op.
ship. m.s. [rcup, saxon; shippen, dutch..] a ship may be
defined a large hollow building, made to pass over the sea with
sails. //atif.
all my followers to the eager foe
turn back, and fly like ships before the wind.
shakespeare's henry vi.
there made forth to us a small boat, with about eight per-
sons in it, whereof one of them had in his hand a tipstaff,
who made aboard our ship. bacon.
two other ships loaded with victuals were burnt, and some
of the men saved by their shipboats. kncies.
nor is indeed that man less mad than these,
who freights a ship to venture on the seas,
with one frail interposing plank to save
from certain death, roll'd on by ev'ry wave. dryden.
instead of a ship, he should levy upon his country such a
sum of money, and return the same to the treasurer of the
navy: hence that tax had the denomination of ship-money,
by which accrued the yearly sum of two hundred thousand
pounds. clarendon.
a ship-carpenter of old rome could not have talkcd, more
judiciously. adaisza-
to ship. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to put into a ship.
my father at the road
expects my coming, there to see me slipp'd. sha's eart.
the enperor, shipping his great ordnance, departed down
the river. kozlles's history of the turks.
all the timber was cut down in the mountains of cilicia,
and shipped in the bay of attalia, from whence it was by sea
transported to pelusium. anzio.
a breeze from shore began to blow,
the sailors ship their oars, and cease to row ; .
then hoist their yards a trip, and all their fails
let fall. drydon.
in d ! d.
2. to transport in a ship andronicus,
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 39</div><p class="text">s h i
s h i
andronicus, would thou wert shipt to hell,
rather than rob me of the people's hearts.
the sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,
but we will ship him hence. shakespeare's hamlet.
in portugal men spent with age, so as they cannot hope for
above a year, ship themselves away in a brazil fleet. temple.
3. it is sometimes enforced by off.
a single leaf can waft an army o'er,
or ship off senates to some distant shore, pope.
the canal that runs from the sea into the arno gives a con-
venient carriage to all goods that are to be shipped off. addison.
sh1 pboard., n. s. [ship and board. see board.]
1. this word is seldom used but in adverbial phrases: a ship-
board, on shipboard, in a ship.
let him go on shipboard, and the mariners will not leave
their starboard and larboard. bramhall.
friend,
what do'st thou make a shipboard 2 to what end ? dryden.
ovid, writing from on shipboard to his friends, excused the
faults of his poetry by his misfortunes. dryden.
2. the plank of a ship.
they have made all thy shipboards of fir-trees, and brought
cedars from lebanon to make masts. ezek. xxvii. 5.
shipbox. n.s.. [ship and boy..] boy that serves in a ship.
few or none know me: if they did, -
this shipboy's semblance hath disguis'd me quite. shakesp.
sh1 pman. m. s. [ship and man.] sailor; seaman.
i myself have the very points they blow,
all the quarters that they know
i' th' shipman's card. shakespeare's macbeth.
hiram sent in the navy shipmen that had knowledge of the
sea. 1 kings, ix. 27.
sh1'pmast er. n.s. master of the ship.
the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, what
meanest thou o sleeper l arise, call upon thy god. jon, i. 6.
sh1'pping. m. s [from ship.]
1. vessels of navigation; fleet.
before caesar's invasion of this land, the britons had not
any shipping at all, other than their boats of twigs covered
with hides. raleigh.
the numbers and courage of our men, with the strength
of our shipping, have for many ages past made us a match for
the greatest of our neighbours at land, and an overmatch for
the strongest at sea. temple.
fishes first to shipping did impart;
their tail the rudder, and their head the prow. dryden.
2. passage in a ship. .
they took shipping and came to capernaum, seeking for
jesus. - - jo. vi. 24.
sh1'pwreck. m. s. [ship and wreck.]
1. the destruction of ships by rocks or shelves.
bold were the men, which on the ocean first
spread their new sails, when shipwreck was the worst. j/aller.
we are not to quarrel with the water for inundations and
fhipwrecks. - l’estrange.
this sea war cost the carthaginians five hundred quinqui-
remes, and the romans seven hundred, including their ship-
wrecks. a luthnot.
2. the parts of a shattered ship.
they might have it in their own country, and that by ga-
thering up the shipwrecks of the athenian and roman theatres.
dryden.
shakespeare.
3. destruction; miscarriage.
holding faith and a good conscience, which some having
put away, concerning faith, have made shipwreck. 1 tim, i.
to sh1'pw reck. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to destroy by dashing on rocks or shallows.
whence the sun 'gins his refle&amp;tion,
shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break. shakoffeare.
2. to make to suffer the dangers of a wreck.
thou that can'st still the raging of the seas,
chain up the winds, and bid the tempests cease,
redeem my shipwreck’d soul from raging gusts
of cruel passion and deceitful lusts. prior.
a square piece of marble shews itself to have been a little
pagan monument of two persons who were shipwrecked. addis.
3. to throw by loss of the vessel.
shipwreck'd upon a kingdom, where no pity,
o friends, no hope no kindred weep for me. shakes care.
sh1'pwfight. n. s. [ship and wright.] a builder of ships.
why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
does not divide the sunday from the week. shakespeare.
a miserable shame it were for our shipwrights, if they did
not exceed all others in the setting up of our royal ships.
raleigh.
vast numbers of ships in our harbours, and shipwrights in
our sea-port towns. swift.
the roman fleet, although built by shipwrights, and con-
ducted by pilots, both without experience, defeated that of
the carthaginians. arbuthnot.
as when a shipwright stands his workmen o'er,
who ply the wimble some huge beam to bore,
urg'd on all hands it nimbly spins about,
the grain deep piercing, 'till it scoops it out. po,
shire. m. s. [rcio, from reinan, to divide, saxon.) a do.
sion of the kingdom; a county ; so much of the **'sloa, as is
under one sheriff.
his blazing eyes, like two bright shining shields,
did burn with wrath, and sparked living fire;
as two broad beacons, set in open fields, -
send forth their flames far off to every shire. fa. sueen,
the noble youths from distant shires resort. prior
shirt, n.s. [shiert, danish ; resnc, rcynic, saxon.] th:
under linen garment of a man.
shift a shirt : the violence of action hath made you reck as
a sacrifice. - shakesbeare's cymbelin,
i take but two shirts out with me, and i mean not to sweet
extraordinarily. shakespeare's henry iv,
when we lay next us what we hold most dear,
like hercules, envenom'd shirts we wear,
and cleaving mischiefs. dryden.
several persons in december had nothing over their shoul-
ders but their shirts. addison an italy.
to shirt. v. a. [from the noun..] to cover; to clothe as in
a shirt.
ah! for so many souls, as but this morn
were cloath'd with flesh, and warm'd with vital blood,
but naked now, or shirted but with air. dryden.
sh1'rtless. adj. [from shirt.] wanting a shirt.
linsey-woolsey brothers,
grave mummers | sleeveless some, and shirtles; others. pope.
s n. s. a sort of precious wood, of which 41-se:
shit tim. made the greatest part of the tables, altars, and
planks belonging to the tabernacle. the wood is hard, tough,
smooth, without knots, and extremely beautiful. it grows
in arabia. cant.
i will plant in the wilderness the sittah tree. . . . i. 19.
bring me an offering of badgers skins and shitiim-wood. e.
sh1'rt lecock, nos. [commonly and perhaps as properly shut-
tlecock. of shitte or shuttle the etymology is doubtful: skin-
ner derives it from schutteln, german, to shake; or rcearan,
saxon, to throw. he thinks it is called a cock from its sea.
thers. perhaps it is properly suitle.ork, a cork driven to and
fro, like the instrument in weaving, and softened by frequent
and rapid utterance from cork to cock.j a cork stuck with
feathers, and driven by players from one to another with bat-
tledoors. - -
you need not discharge a cannon to break the chain of his
thoughts: the pat of a slittlecock, or the cleaking of a jack,
will do his business. c.
shiy e. m. s. [shyve, dutch.]
1. a slice of bread.
easy it is
of a cut loaf to steal assive. shakesp. titus a.d onicut.
2. a thick splinter, or lamina cut off from the main substance.
shavings made by the plane are in some things differing
from those shives, or thin and flexible pieces of wood, that
are obtained by borers. boyle.
to shiv er. v. n. [shawren, german.] to quake; to
tremble ; to shudder, as with cold or fear.
any very hash noise will set the teeth on edge, and make
all the body shiver. bacon.
what religious palsy's this,
which makes the boughs divest their bliss 2
and that they might her footsteps straw,
drop their leaves with shivering awe. claveland.
why stand we longer shivering under fear 2 a4ilton.
the man that shiver'd on the brink of fin,
thus steel'd and harden'd, ventures boldly in. dryden.
he described this march to the temple with so much horror,
that he shivered every joint. - addison.
give up laius to the realms of day,
whose ghost, yet shiv'ring on cocytus' sand,
expects its passage to the farther strand. p.pe.
prometheus is laid
on icy caucasus to shiver,
while vultures eat his growing liver. swift,
to shi’v er. v. n. [from shive.] to fall at once into many
parts or shives.
had'st thou been aught but goss'mer, feathers, air,
so many fathom down precipitating,
thoud'st shiver'd like an egg. shakesh. king john.
upon the breaking and slivering of a great state, you may
be sure to have wars. - bacon.
the natural world, should gravity once cease, or be with-
drawn, would instantly shiver into millions of atoms.
j7224 ward.
to shi’v er. v. a. to break by one act into many parts; to
shatter.
the ground with shiver'd armour strown. milton.
show’rs of granado's rain, by sudden burst
disploding murd’rous bowels; fragments of steel
a thousand ways at once, the shiver'd orbs
fly diverse, working torment. . . philos.
sh 1 v er.
sm
: sh
10
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 40</div><p class="text">s h o
s h o
shi've". n. s. [from the verb.] one fragment of many into
which any thing * broken. - - - -
he would pound thee into shiver; with his fist, as a sailor
breaks a biscuit. - shakesp. troilus and crossida.
as brittle as the glory is the face;
for there it is crack'd in an hundred shivers. shakespeare.
if you strike a solid body that is brittle, it breaketh not only
where the immediate force is, but breaketh all about into
r; and fritters. bacon's nat. history.
surging waves against a solid rock,
though all to shivers dash'd, th'assault renew,
vain batt'ry, and in froth or bubbles end. a milton.
shi’ver y. aff. [from shiver.] loose of coherence; incom-
aa; easily falling into many fragments.
there were observed incredible numbers of these shells thus
flatted, and extremely tender, in slivery stone. //codward.
shoadstos f. m. s.
w shaadiane is a small stone, smooth without, of a dark liver
colour, and of the s-me colour within, only with the addi-
tion of a faint purple. it is a fragment broke of an iron
vein. joaodward on fossils.
certain tin stones lie on the face of the ground, which they
call shad, as shed from the main load, and made somewhat
round by the water. carew's survey of cornwall.
the loads or veins of metal were by this action of the de-
parting water made easy to be found out by the shoads, or
frains of metallick fragments born off from them, and lying
in trains from those veins towards the sea, in the same course
that water falling thence would take. j/vodward.
shoal. n. s. [rcole, soon ]
i. a croud; a great multitude; a throng.
when there be great shoas, of people, which go on to po-
pulate, without forcseeing means of sustentation: once in an
ise they discharge their people upon other nations. bacon.
a league is made against such routs and shales of people as
have utterly degenerated from nature. bacon.
the vices of a prince draw sales of followers, when his vir-
tue leaves him the more eminent, because single. decay of piety.
a shoal of silver fishes glides
and plays about the barges. jvaller.
god had the command of famine, whereby he could have
carried them off by soal. jwoodward.
around the goddess roll
broad hats, and hoods, and caps, a sable shoal,
thick, and more thick the black blocade extends.
2. a shallow; a sand-bank.
the haven's mouth they durst not enter, for the dangerous
/*za's. alb.:'s desiript. of the j/orld.
he heaves them off the sales. dryden.
the depth of your pond should be six foot; and on the sides
some //cles for the fish to lay their spawn. a1:rtimer.
t. sho al. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to croud ; to throng.
the wave-sprung entrails, about which fausens and fish
did shale. chapman.
1. to be shallow; to grow shallow.
what they met
solid, or slimy, as in raging sea,
tost up and down, together crouded drove,
from each side shoaling tow'ids the mouth of hell. milton.
shoal. adj. shallow ; obstructed or incumbered with banks.
$hoa liness. m. s. [from shoay.] shallowness; frequency of
shallow places.
shoaly, adj. [from shoal.] full of shoals; full of shallow
places.
f ive
pope.
those who live
where with his shoay fords vulturnus roars. dryden.
the watchful hero felt the knocks, and sound
the tossing vessel fail'd on shoaly ground. dryden.
shock. n.s. [chor, french ; shocken, dutch..]
1. conflict; mutual impression of violence ; violent con-
course.
thro' the slo. a
of fighting clements on all sides round
environ'd, wins his way.
2. concussion; external violence.
it is inconceptible how any such man that hath flood the
fock of an eternal duration, without corruption or alteration,
should after be corrupted or altered. judge hale.
these strong unshaken noun's resist the shocks
of tides and seas tempest:tous, while the rocks,
that secret in a long continu'd vein
milton.
pass through the earth, the pond'ious pile sustain. black.
such is the haughty man, his tow'ring soul,
"midst all the shocks and injuries of fortune, -
rises superior and looks down on caesar. addison.
long at the head of his few faithful friends, • *-
he stood the slack of a whole host of socs. addison.
the tender apples from their parents rent,
by stormy socks must not neglected lic, ---
the prey of worms. philips.
3. the conflict of enemies.
vol. ii.
the adverse legions t less hideous ioin'd
too, on
thos - mihon,
nose that run away are in more danger than the others
that stand the shock. l'estrange.
the mighty force •
of edward twice o'errund their desp'rate king:
twice he arose, and join'd the horrid/hock. philips.
4. offence; impression of disgust.
fewer shocks a statesman gives his friend. 1%ung.
5. [soho, old dutch.j a pole of sheaves of corn.
corn tithed, sir parson, together to get,
and cause it on shocks to be by and by set. tosor.
in a full age, like as a shock of corn cometh in, in his sea-
son. job.
thou, full of days, like weighty socks of corn,
in season reap'd, shall to thy grave be born. sandys.
behind the master walks, builds up the socło,
feels his heart heave with joy. thomson.
6. [from shagg.] a rough dog.
i would fain know why a shock and a hound are not distina
species. locke.
to shock. v. a. [shocken, dutch..]
1. to shake by violence.
2. to meet force with force; to encounter.
these her princes are come home again:
come the three corners of the world in arms, -
and we will shock them. shakso. k. john.
3. to offend; to disgust.
supposing verses are never so beautiful, yet if they contain
any thing that shocks religion or good manners, they are
persus inopes rerum nugrquat canora. dryden.
1y son,
i bade him love, and bid him now forbear:
if you have any kindness for him, still
advise him not to shock a father's will.
julian, who lov'd each sober mind to shock,
who laugh'd at god, and offer'd to a cock. harte.
those who in reading homer are shock'd that 'tis always a
lion, may as well be angry that 'tis always a man. pope.
to shock. v. n.
1. to meet with hostile violence.
and now with shouts the shocking armies clos'd,
to lances lances, shields to shields oppos'd;
commutual death the fate of war confounds,
each adverse battle goi'd with equal wounds.
2. to be offensive. -
the french humour, in regard of the liberties they take in
female conversations, is very shocking to the italians, who are
naturally jealous. adison's r marks on italy.
to shock. v. n. [srom the noun..] to build up pics of
sheaves.
reap well, scatter not, gather clean that is shorn,
bind fast, shock apace, have an eye to thy corn tosor.
shop. for shoed, the preterite and participle passive of to so.
strong axletreed cart that is clouted an shall. tuffor.
shoe. m. s. plural shoes, anciently show. [rceo, rcoo, saxon ;
shoe, dutch..] the cover of the foot; of horses as well as
in ci1.
your hose should be u gartered, your sloe untied, and every
thing about you demonstrating a careless desolation. shakos.
spare none but such as go in clouted soon,
for they are thrifty honest men. a has so. hon. vs.
this hollow cylinder is fitted with a sucker, upon which
is nailed a good thick piece of tanned shoe-leather. doyle.
unknown and like esteem’d, and the dull swain
treads on it daily with his clouted shown,
and yet more medic'nal than that moly
that hermes once to wise ulysses gave ;
he call'd it haemony. milton.
i was in pain, pulled off my shoe, and some case that gave
ne. tomple.
to shoe. v. a. preterite ishod; participle passive sod. [from
the noun.]
1. to fit the foot with a shoe: used commonly of horses.
the smith's note for soccing and plough irons. soakesh.
he doth nothing but talk of his horse; and makes it a great
appropriation to his own good parts, that he can size him
himself. shakespeare.
tell your master that the horses want seeing. swift.
2. to cover at the bottom.
the wheel compos'd of crickets bones,
and daintily made for the nonce,
for fear of rattling on the stones,
with thistle down they shod it. drayton.
siioecoy. m. s. [shoe and loy..] . a boy that cleans shoes.
if i employ a shoeboy, is it in view to his advantage, or my
own convenience swift.
shoe is g. horn. m. s. [shoe and horn )
1. an horn used to facilitate the admission of the foot into a nar-
row shoe. - - --- -
2. any thing by which a transastion is facilitated ; any thing
used as a medium : in contempt.
most
23 y
dryden.
p. *.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 41</div><p class="text">s h o
s h o
most of our fine young ladies retain in their service super-
numerary and insignificant fellows, which they use like whif-
flers, and commonly call shoeing horns. spectator.
i have been an arrant shoeing-horn for above these twenty
years. i served my mistress in that capacity, above five of
the number before she was shod. though she had many who
made their applications to her, i always thought myself the
best shoe in her shop. spectator.
sh of mask er. m. s. [shoe and maker.] one whose trade is to
make shoes.
a cobler or shoemaker may find some little fault with the
latchet of a shoe that an appelles had painted, when the
whole figure is such as none but an appelles could paint. watts.
shoe'ry e. m. s. [shoe and tye.] the ribband with which wo-
men tie their shoes.
madam, i do as is my duty,
honour the shadow of your shoetye. hudibras.
shog. m. s. [from shock.] violent concussion.
another's diving bow he did adore,
which, with a shog, casts all the hair before, dryden.
he will rather have the primitive man to be produced, in a
kind of digesting balneum, where all the heavier lees may
subside, and a due aequilibrium be maintained, not disturbed
by any such rude and violent songs that would ruffle and break
all the little stamina of the embryon. bentley.
t, shoc. v. a. to shake; to agitate by sudden interrupted
impulses.
after it is washed, they put the remnant into a wooden
dish, the which they softly shog to and fro in the water, until
the earthy substance be flitted away. carew.
shone. the preterite of shine. -
all his father in him shone. milton.
shook. the preterite and in poetry participle passive of shake.
taxallan shock by montezuma's pow'rs,
has, to resist his forces, call'd in ours. dryden.
t. shoor. v. a. preterite, i shot ; participle, shot or shotten.
[rcebtan, saxon.] . . - - -
1. to discharge any thing so as to make it fly with speed or vio-
lence.
light
shoots far into the bosom of dim night
a glimmering dawn.
2. to discharge as from a bow or gun.
i owe you much, and, like a witess youth,
that which i owe is lost; but if you please
to shoot an arrow that self way
which you did shoot the first, i do not doubt
to find both.
this murtherous shaft that's shot
hath not yet lighted; and our safest way
is to avoid the aim.
a pomp of winning graces waited still,
and from about her shot darts of desire
into all eyes to wish her still in fight.
3. to let off; used of the instrument.
the men shoot strong shoots with their bows. abbot.
the two ends of a bow shot off, fly from one another. boyle.
men who know not hearts should make examples;
which, like a warning-piece, must be shot off,
to fright the rest from crimes. dryden.
4. to strike with anything shot.
not an hand shall touch the mount, but he shall be stoned
or shot through. exod. xix. 13.
5. to emit new parts, as a vegetable.
none of the trees exalt themselves, neither shoot up their
top among the thick boughs. ezek. xxxi. 14.
a grain of mustard groweth up and shooteth out great
branches. - mark, iv. 32.
tell like a tall old oak, how learning shoots,
to heaven her branches, and to hell her roots.
6. to emit; to dart or thrust forth.
that gently warms
the universe, and to each inward part
with gentle penetration, though unseen,
milton,
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
milton.
denham.
shoots invisible virtue ev'n to the deep. milton.
ye who pluck the flow’rs,
beware the secret snake that shoots a sting. dryden.
the last had a star upon its breast, which shot forth pointed
beams of a peculiar lustre. addison.
fir’d by the torch of noon, to tenfold rage,
th’ infuriate hill forth shoots the pillar'd flame. . thomson,
7. to push suddenly. so we say, to shoot a bolt or lock.
i have laugh’d sometimes when i have reflected on those
men who have shot themselves into the world; some bolting
out upon the stage with vast applause, and some hissed off,
quitting it with disgrace. bryden.
the liquid air his moving pinions wound,
and, in the moment, shoot him on the ground. dryden.
8. to push forward.
they that see me shoot out the lip, they shake the head. ps.
9. to fit to each other by planing; a workman's term.
strait lines in joiners language are called a joint; that is,
two pieces of wood that are shot, that is plained or else paired
with a pairing-chisel. 41oxon.
1o. to pass through with swiftness.
thus having said, she sinks beneath the ground,
with furious haste, and shoots the stygian sound.
to shoot. v. n.
1. to perform the aet of shooting, or emitting a missile wea-
on .
p the archers have sorely grieved him and shot at him. gen.
when he has shot his best, he is sure that none ever did
shoot better. - temple.
a shining harvest either host displays,
and shoots against the sun with equal rays.
when you shoot, and shut one eye,
you cannot think he would deny
to lend the t'other friendly aid,
or wink, as coward and afraid.
2. to germinate; to increase in vegetable growth.
such trees as love the sun do not willingly descend far into
the earth; and therefore they are commonly trees that shoot
dryden.
dryden, ,
prior.
up much. bacon.
onions, as they hang, will shoot forth. bacon.
the tree at once both upward shoots,
and just as much grows downward to the roots. clav.
the monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
shoots rising up, and spreads by slow degrees. dryden.
nor will the wither'd stock be green again,
but the wild olive shoots and shades the ungrateful plain. dry.
new creatures rise,
a moving mass at first, and short of thighs;
till shooting out with legs and imp'd with wings. dryden.
the corn laid up by ants would shoot under ground, if they
did not bite off all the buds; and therefore it will produce
nothing. addison.
a wild, where weeds and flow’rs promiscuous shoot,
or garden, tempting with forbidden fruit. pope.
3. to form itself into any shape.
if the menstruum be overcharged, metals will shoot into
crystals. bacon.
although exhaled and placed in cold conservatories, it will
crystallize and shoot into glacious bodies. brown.
that rude mass will shoot itself into several forms, till it make
an habitable world: the steady hand of providence being the
invisible guide of all its motions. burmet's theory.
express'd juices of plants, boiled into the consistence of a
syrup, and set into a cool place, the essential salt will short
upon the sides of the vessels. arbuthnot on aliments.
4. to be emitted.
there shot a streaming lamp along the sky,
which on the winged light'ning seem'd to fly. dryden.
tell them that the rays of light shoot from the sun to our
earth, at the rate of one hundred and eighty thousand miles
in the second of a minute, they stand aghast at such talk. watts.
the grand aetherial bow
shoots up immense.
5. to protuberate; to jet out.
the land did shoot out with a very great promontory, bend-
ing that way. abbot's descript. of the world.
this valley of the tirol lies enclosed on all sides by the
alps, though its dominions shoot out into several branches
among the breaks of the mountains. addison on italy.
6. to pass as an arrow.
thy words shoot thro' my heart,
melt my resolves, and turn me all to love.
7. to become any thing by sudden growth.
materials dark and crude,
of spir’tous fiery spume, till touch'd
with heaven's ray, and temper'd, they shoot forth
so beauteous, opening to the ambient light.
let me but live to shadow this young plant
from blites and storms: he'll soon shoot up a hero. dryden.
8. to move swiftly along.
thomson.
addison,
milton,
a shooting star in autumn thwarts the night. milton,
where tigris at the foot of paradise
into a gulf shot under ground, till part
rose up a fountain by the tree of life. milton.
at first she flutters, but at length she springs,
to smoother flight, and shoots upon her wings. drydin.
the broken air loud whistling as she flies,
she stops and listens, and shoots forth again,
and guides her pinions by her young ones cries. dryden.
heav'n's imperious queen shot down from high,
at her approach the brazen hinges fly,
the gates are forc’d. dryden.
she downward glides,
lights in fleet-ditch, and shoots beneath the tides. gay.
where the mob gathers, swiftly shoot along,
nor idly mingle in the noisy throng. gay.
not half so swiftly shoots along in air
the gliding light'ning. post.
9. to feel a quick glowing pain.
shoot, n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 42</div><p class="text">s h o
the at or impression of anything emitted from a distance.
i. the turkish bow giveth a very forcible shoot, insomuch as
the arrow hath pierced a steel target two inches thick; but
the arrow, if headed with wood, hath been known to pierce
through a piece of wood of eight inches thick. bacon.
1. the act of striking, or endeavouring to strike with a missive
weapon discharged by any instrument.
the noise of thy cross-bow
will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
shakesp.
but come the bow; now mercy goes to kill,
and shooting well is then accounted ill.
thus will i save my credit in the shoot,
not wounding, pity would not let me do't. shakespeare.
o as a country-fellow was making a shoot at a pigeon, he
trod upon a snake that bit him. - - - l'estrange.
3. [schute", dutch..] branches issuing from the main stock.
they will not come just on the tops where they were cut,
. - -
- but out of those shoots which were water-boughs. bacon.
i saw them under a green mantling vine,
plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots. milton.
prune of superfluous branches and shoots of this second
spring; but expose not the fruit without leaves sufficient. evel,
the hook she bore,
to lop the growth of the luxuriant year,
to decent form the lawless shoots to bring,
and teach th' obedient branches where to spring.
now, should my praises owe their truth
to beauty, dress, or paint, or youth,
'twere grafting on an annual stock
that must our expectations mock;
and making one luxuriant shoot,
die the next year for want of root. swift.
pride push'd forth buds at ev'ry branching soot,
and virtue shrunk almost beneath the root. harte.
shooter. m. s. [foom shoot..] one that shoots; an archer; a
gunner:
the shooter ewe, the broad-leav'd sycamore.
pope,
fairfax.
we are shooters both, and thou dost deign
to enter combat with us, and contest
with thine own clay. h. left.
the king with gifts a vessel stores;
and next, to reconcile the shooter god,
within her hollow sides the sacrifice he stow'd. dryden.
shop. m. s. [rceop, saxon, a magazine; schoppe, french;
sopa, low latin. ainsworth.]
1. a place where anything is sold.
our windows are broke down,
and we for fear compell'd to shut our shops.
in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
an alligator stuft, and other skins
of ill-shap'd fishes; and about his shelves
a beggarly account of empty boxes. shakespeare.
scarce any sold in shops could be relied on as faithfully pre-
pared. boyle.
his shop is his element, and he cannot with any enjoyment
of himself live out of it. south's sermons.
what a strange thing is it, that a little health, or the poor
business of a soap, should keep us so senseless of these great
things, that are coming so fast upon us! law.
2. a room in which manufactures are carried on.
your most grave belly thus answer'd;
true is it, my incorporate friends,
that i receive the general food at first,
which you do live upon; and fit it is,
because i am the storehouse and the shop
of the whole body. shakespeare.
we have divers mechanical arts and stuffs made by them ;
and shops for such as are not brought into vulgar use. bacon.
shopboa'rd. n.s.. [shop and board.] bench on which any work
is done.
that beasily rabble, that came down
from all the garrets in the town,
and stalls, and shopboards, in vast swarms,
with new-chalk'd bills, and rusty arms. hudibrar.
it dwells not in shops or workhouses; nor till the late age
was it ever known, that any one served seven years to a
smith or a taylor, that he should commence doctor or divine
from the shipboard or the anvil; or from whistling to a team
come to preach to a congregation. south's sormons.
sao pbook. n. s. [shop and book.] book in which a tradesman
keeps his accounts. -
they that have wholly negleaed the exercise of their un-
derstandings, will be as unfit for it as one unpractised in
figures to cast up a shopbook. locke.
shopkeep er. n.s. [shop and keep.] . a trader who sells in a
shop; not a merchant who only deals by wholesale. -
nothing is more common than to hear a shopkeeper defiting
his neighbour to have the goodness to tell him what is a
clock. addison.
shopman. n. s. [shop and man.] a petty trader. -
garth, gen'rous as his muse, prescribes and gives,
the shipman sells, and by destruction lives. dryden.
shakespeare,
shore. the preterite of shear.
!'m glad thy father's dead:
thy match was mortal to hi d pu -
shore his old thread in .." and pure grief
shakespears.
smoke. m. s. [rcone, saxon.] a'so
1. the coast of the sea.
- sea cover'd sea; -
sea without shore. milton
2. the bank of a river. a licentious use. ---of-
beside the fruitful /hore of muddy nile
}. o bank outstretched lay, &gt;
to monstrous length, a mighty crocodil ”s.
3. a drain; properly jo. ghty crocodile. spenser.
4. [schooren, dutch
buttress.
when i use the word shore,
of land near the sea,
to support a building.
to shore. v. a. [shoren, dutch.]
1. to prop; to support.
they undermined the wall, and, as they wrought, shored
it up with timber. -&gt; knolles.
he did not much strengthen his own subsistence in court
but stood there on his own feet, for the most of his asio
rather leaned upon him than shored him up. //otton.
there was also made a souring or under-propping act for
the benevolence; to make the sums which any person had
agreed to pay leviable by course of law. bacon's hen. vii.
2. to set on shore. not in use.
i will bring these two blind ones aboard him; if he think
it fit to shore them again, let him call me rogue. shokespeare.
sito reless. adj. [from shore.] having no coast.
this ocean of felicity is so shorels, and bottomless, that all
the saints and angels cannot exhaust it. boyle.
stig r.i.n.g. m. s. [from shear, shore.] the felt or skin of a
sheep shorn.
shoks. the participle passive of scar: with of:
so rose the danite strong,
slorn f his strength. milton.
vile shrubs are shorn for browze: the tow'ring height
of unctuous trees are torches for the night. dryden.
he plunging downward shot his radiant head;
dispell'd the breathing air that broke his flight;
shorn of his beams, a man to mortal sight.
short. adj. [rce one, saxon.]
1. not long; commonly not long enough.
weak though i am of limb, and short of fight,
far from a lynx, and not a giant quite,
i'll do what mead and chese!den advise,
to keep these limbs, and to preserve these cycs.
2. not long in space or extent.
this less voluble carth,
by shorter flight to the east, had left him there.
though short my stature, yet my name extends
to heaven itself, and earth's remotest ends.
3. not long in time or duration. -
they change the night into day: the light is short, because
of darkness. job, xvii. 12.
nor love thy life, nor hate, but what thou liv'st,
to prop.] the support of a building; a
i may intend thereby a coast
or a drain to carry off water, or a prop
//atts's logick.
dryden,
pope-
milton.
pope.
live well, how long or short permit to heav'n. milton.
short were her marriage joys: for in the prime
of youth her lord expir'd before his time. dryden.
4. repeated by quick iterations.
her breath then short, seem'd loth from home to pass,
which more it mov’d, the more it sweeter was. sidney.
thy breath comes short, thy darted eyes are fixt
on me for aid, as if thou wert pursu'd. dryden.
my breath grew short, my beating heart sprung upward,
and leap'd and bounded in my heaving bosom. smith.
5. not adequate; not equal: with of before the thing with
which the comparison is made.
immoderate praises the foolish lover thinks short of his
mistress, though they reach far beyond the heavens. sidney.
some cottons here grow, but short in worth unto those of
smyrna. sandys.
the turks give you a quantity rather exceeding than short
of your expectation. sandys.
i know them not; not therefore am i short
of knowing what i ought. milton's paradise rog.
to attain
the height and depth of thy eternal ways,
all human thoughts come short, supreme of things. milton.
o glorious trial of exceeding love,
engaging me to emulate but short
of thy perfection, how shall i attain milton,
to place her in olympus' top a guest,
among th’ immortals, who with nectar feast : .
that poor would seem, that entertainment short * or
of the true splendor of her present court, j/aller.
we err, and come short of science, because we are so fre-
quently misled by the evil conduct of our imaginations. glan.
as in many things the knowledge of philosophers was o,
&amp;
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 43</div><p class="text">s h o
s h o
of the truth, so almost in all things their praslice foll short of
their knowledge: the principles by which they walked were
as much below those by which they judged, as their feet were
below their head. south's sermons.
he wills not death should terminate their strife;
and wounds, if wounds ensue, be short of life. dryden.
virgil exceeds theocritus in regularity and brevity, and
falls short of him in nothing but simplicity and propriety of
style. pope.
defect in our behaviour, coming short of the utmost grace-
fulness, often escapes our observation. locke.
if speculative maxims have not an actual universal assent
from all mankind, practical principles coine short of an uni-
versal reception. locke.
the people fall short of those who border upon them, in
strength of understanding. addison.
a neutral indifference falls short of that obligation they lie
under, who have taken such oaths. addison.
when i made these, an artist undertook to imitate it ; but
using another way of polishing them, he fell much short of
what i had attained to, as i afterwards understood. newton.
it is not credible that the phoenicians, who had established
colonies in the persian gulph, stopt short, without pushing
their trade to the indies. arbuthnot.
doing is expressly commanded, and no happiness allowed to
any thing short of it. - south's sermons.
the signification of words will be allowed to fall much short
of the knowledge of things. -- baker.
6. defective; imperfect; not attaining the end ; not reaching
the intended point. -
since higher i fall short, on him who next
provokes my envy. milton.
that great wit has fallen short in his account. amore.
where reason came short, revelation discovered on which
side the truth lay. locke.
men express their universal ideas by signs; a faculty which
beasts come short in. locke.
7. not far distant in time.
he commanded those, who were appointed to attend him,
to be ready by a short day. clarendon.
8. scanty; wanting. -
the english were inferior in number, and grew short in
their provisions. hayward.
they short of succours, and in deep despair,
shook at the dismal prospect of the war. dryden.
9. not fetching a compass.
so soon as ever they were gotten out of the hearing of the
cock, the lion turned short upon him, and tore him to pieces.
l’estrange.
he seiz'd the helm, his fellows cheer'd,
turn'd short upon the shelves, and madly steer'd.
for turning short, he struck with all his might
full on the helmet of th' unwary knight.
io. not going so far as was intended.
as one condemn'd to leap a precipice,
who sees before his eyes the depth below,
stops short.
11. defective as to quantity.
when the fleece is shorn,
when their defenceless limbs the brambles tear,
short of their wool, and naked from the sheer.
12. narrow ; contracted.
men of wit and parts, but of short thoughts and little me-
ditation, are apt to distrust every thing for a fancy. burnet.
they, since their own short understandings reach
no farther than the present, think ev'n the wise
dryden.
dryden.
dryden,
dryden.
like them disclose the secrets of their breasts. rowe.
13. brittle ; friable.
his flesh is not firm, but short and tasteless. jwalton.
marl from derbyshire was very fat, though it had so great
a quantity of sand, that it was so short, that wet you could not
work it into a ball, or make it hold together. mortimer.
14. not bending.
the lance broke short, the beast then bellow'd loud,
and his strong neck to a new onset bow’d. dryden.
short. n. s. [from the adjective..] a summary account.
the short and long is, our play is prefer'd. shakespeare.
in short, she makes a man of him at fixteen, and a boy all
his life after. - l’estrange.
repentance is, in short, nothing but a turning from fin to
god, the casting off all our former evils, and, instead there-
of, constantly practising all those christian duties which god
requireth of us. duty of man.
if he meet with no reply, you may conclude that i trust to
the goodness of my cause: the short on’t is, ’tis indifferent to
your humble servant whatever your party says. dryden.
from medway's pleasing stream
to severn’s roar be thine:
in short, restore my love, and share my kingdom. dryden.
the proprieties and delicacies of the english are known to
few : 'tis impossible even for a good wit to understand and
practise them, without the help of a liberal education and long
reading; in short, without wearing off the rust which he con-
tracted while he was laying in a stock of learning.: dryden.
the short is, to speak all in a word, the possibility of being
found it; a salvable state cannot be sufficiently secured, with:
out a possibility of always persevering in it. . . , norris.
to see whole bodies of men breaking a coastitution; in
short, to be encompassed with the greatest dangers from with-
out, to be torn by many virulent factions within, then to be
secure and senseless, are the most likely symptoms, in a state,
of sickness unto death. - swift.
short, adv. [it is, i think, only used in composition.] not
long. * -
o beauty and youth, - -
and sprightly hope and short-enduring joy. . . dryden,
one strange draught prescribed by hippocrates for a short-
breathed man, is half a gallon of hydromel, with a little
vinegar. --- - arbuthnot.
to sho'rten. v. a. [from short.] .
1. to make short, either in time or space.
because they see it is not fit or possible that churches should
frame thanksgivings answerable to each petition, they shorten
somewhat the reins of their censure. płooker.
would you have been so brief with him, he would
have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
for taking so the head, the whole head's length. shakes.
to shorten its ways to knowledge, and make each perception
more comprehensive, it binds them into bundles, - . locke.
none shall dare - - - -
with shorten’d sword to stab in closer war, - -
but in fair combat. dryden.
war, and luxury's more direful rage,
thy crimes have brought, to shorten mortal breath,
with all the num’rous family of death. dryden.
whatever shortens the fibres, by insinuating themselves into
their parts, as water in a rope, contracts. arbuthnot.
2. to contract; to abbreviate.
we shorten’d days to moments by love's art,
whilst our two souls …
perceiv'd no passing time, as if a part
our love had been of still eternity.
3. to confine; to hinder from progression. - -
. the irish dwell altogether by their septs, so as they may
conspire what they will; whereas if there were english
placed among them, they should not be able to stir but that it
should be known, and they shortened according to their de-
merits. - - spenser.
to be known, shortens my laid intent;
my boon i make it, that you know me not. shakes care.
here, where the subject is so fruitful, i am shortened by my
suckling.
chain, and can only see what is forbidden me to reach. dryd.
4. to lop. - - -
dishonest with lopt arms the youth appears,
spoil'd of his nose, and shorten’d of his ears. dryden.
shorthand. n.s.. [short and hand.] a method of writing in
compendious characters.
your follies and debauches change
with such a whirl, the poets of your age
are tir’d, and cannot score them on the stage,
unless each vice in shorthand they indite,
ev’n as notcht 'prentices whole sermons write. dryden.
boys have but little use of shorthand, and should by no
-
means practise it, 'till they can write perfectly well. locke.
in shorthand skill’d, where little marks comprise
whole words, a sentence in a letter lies. creech.
as the language of the face is universal, so 'tis very com-
prehensive: no laconism can reach it: 'tis the shorthand of the
mind, and crowds a great deal in a little room. collier.
sho'rt live d. adj. [short and live.] not living or lasting
long. -: -
unhappy parent of a shortliv'd son 1
why loads he this embitter'd life with shame? drydon.
the joyful shortliv'd news soon spread around,
took the same train. dryden.
some vices promise a great deal of pleasure in the commis-
sion; but then, at best, it is but shortlived and transient, a
sudden flash presently extinguished. calamy’s sermons.
the frequent alterations in publick proceedings, the variety
of shortlived favourites that prevailed in their several turns un-
der the government of her successors, have broken us into
these unhappy distincions. - addison's freeholar.
a piercing torment that shortlived pleasure of your's must
bring upon me, from whom you never received offence. addis.
all those graces - - - - -
the common fate of mortal charms may find; "|
content our shortliv'd praises to engage, -
the joy and wonder of a single age. addison.
admiration is a shortlived passion, that immediately decays
upon growing familiar with its object, unless it be still fed
with fresh discoveries, -- addison.
then palaces shall rise ; the joyful son -
shall finish what his shortliv'd fire begun. pope.
sho‘rtly. adv. [from short.] -
7 1. quickly ;
:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 44</div><p class="text">s h o
uickly; soon; in a little time. it is commonly used re-
"...yof future time, but clarendon seems to use it abso-
loft, ust leave thee, love, and shortly too. shakespeare.
thou art no friend to god, or to the king:
open the gates, or i'll shut thee out shortly. shak. h. vi.
the armies came/hortly in view of each other. clarendon.
the time will shortly come, wherein you shall more rejoice
for that little you have expended for the benefit of others, than
in that which by so long toil you shall have saved. calamy.
he celebrates the anniversary of his father's funeral, and
after arrives at cumae. dryden.
a. o: he, whose soul now melts in mournful lays,
| shall shortly want the gen'rous tear he pays. pope.
i. in a few words ; briefly.
| i could express them more shortly this way than in prose,
and much of the force, as well as grace of arguments, de-
nds on their conciseness. pope.
shortness. n. s. [from art.]
1. the quality of being short, either in time or space.
i'll make a journey twice as far, t' enjoy
a second night of such sweet shortness, which
was mine in britain. - shakesp. cymbeline.
they move strongest in a right line, which is caused by the
artros; of the distance. bacon's natural history.
i will not trouble my readers with the aortnos of the time
in which i writ it. dryden.
may they not justly to our climes upbraid
shortnos of night, and penury of shade 2 prior.
think upon the vanity and shortness of human life, and let
death and eternity be often in your minds. law.
2. fewness of words; brevity; conciseness.
the necessity of shortness causeth men to cut off impertinent
discourses, and to comprise much matter in few words. hook.
sir, pardon me in what i have to say,
your plainness and your shortnos; please me well. shakes.
the prayers of the church will be very fit, as being most
tas; for their memories, by reason of their shortness, and yet
containing a great deal of matter. duty of man.
, want of reach ; want of capacity.
whatsoever is above these proceedeth of shortnos; of me-
mory, or of want of a stayed attention.
4. deficience; imperfection.
another account of the shortness of our reason, and easiness
of deception, is the forwardness of our understanding's assent
to flightly examined conclusions. glanville's scepsis.
from the instances i had given of human ignorance, to our
fortness in most things else, 'tis an easy inference. glanville.
it may be easily conceived, by any that can allow for the
lameness and shortness of translations, out of languages and
manners of writing differing from ours. temple.
sho‘rtr ibs. n. / [short and ribs...] the bastard ribs; the ribs
below the sternum.
a gentleman was wounded in a duel : the rapier entered
into his right side, slanting by his shortribs under the muscles.
j/seman's surgery.
bacon.
sho'rtsic ht f d. adj. [short and sight.]
1. unable by the convexity of the eye to see far.
shortsighted men see remote objects best in old age, therefore
they are accounted to have the most lasting eyes. mewton.
2. unable by intelle&amp;tual fight to see far.
the foolish and shortsighted die with fear
that they go no where, or they know not where. denham.
other propositions were designed for snares to the short-
f:hud and credulous. l'e/orange.
shortsight ed ness. m. s. [short and sight.]
1. defect of sight, proceeding from the convexity of the eye.
2. defe&amp;t of intellectual sight.
cunning is a kind of shortsghtedness, that discovers the mi-
nutest objects which are near at hand, but is not able to dis-
cern things at a distance. addison's speciator.
sho'rtwaisted. adj. [short and waist.] having a short body.
duck-legg'd, shortwaisled; such a dwarf she is,
that she must rise on tip-toes for a kiss. dryden's juv.
sho'rtwinded. adj. [short and wind..] shortbreathed; alth-
matick; pursive; breathing by quick and faint reciprocations.
sure he means brevity in breath ; shortwinded. shak. h. iv.
so shaken as we are, so wan with care,
find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
and breathe shortwinded accents of new broils,
to be commenc'd in strands afar. shakes. h. iv.
with this the mede shortwinded old men eases,
and cures the lungs unsavory diseases. may's virgil.
short winged. adj. [short and wing.] having short wings.
hawks are divided into long and short winged.
shortwing’d, unfit himself to fly,
his fear foretold foul weather. dryden.
sho'oy. adj. [from shore.] lying near the coast. -
cre is commonly a declivity from the shore to the middle
part of the channel, and those shory parts are generally but
some fathoms deep. burnet'; theory of the earth.
vol. ii.
shor. the preterite and
on the other fide a
as shot up high, full
that dedicated is to olympick jove. fairy queen.
#. .# *arrow shot out, it speaketh deceit. jr.
modiousness i. made his advantage of the com-
the d
preserving the harbour ground, and shot rather at a safe
from sudd -
than to withstand any great navy. en attempts of *:::::
he only thought to crop the flow'r,
new shot up from a vernal show". ' milton.
from before her vanish’d night 11/071,
shot through with orient beam.”
sometimes they shot out in length like rivers, and sometimes
they flew into remote countries in colonies. burnet
the same metal is naturally shot into quite different fi ur.
as quite different kinds of them are of the same figure. }.
he prone on ocean in a moment flung, s -
stretch'd wide his eager arms, and shot the seas al -
shor. n. s. [schot, don. from so along. pope.
1. the aet of shooting.
a shot unheard gave me a wound unseen. sidney.
proud death !
what feast is tow'rd in thy infernal cell,
that thou so many princes at a shot
so bloodily hast struck - shakso. hamlit.
he caused twenty shot of his greatest cannon to be made at
the king's army. clarendon.
2. the misfile weapon emitted by any instrument.
i shall here abide the hourly shot
of angry eyes. shakespeare's cymbeline.
at this booty they were joyful, for that they were supplied
thereby with good store of powder and shot. hayward.
above one thousand great shot were spent upon the walls,
without any damage to the garrison. clarendon.
impatient to revenge the fatal shot, -
his right hand doubly to his left succeeds. dryden.
3. the flight of a missile weapon.
she sat over against him, a good way off, as it were a bow
/hot. - gen. xxi. 16.
4. [escot, french..] a sum charged; a reckoning.
a man is never welcome to a place, ’till some certain shot
be paid, and the hostess say welcome. shakespeare.
as the fund of our pleasure, let each pay his slot;
far hence be the sad, the lewd fop, and the sot. ben. johns.
shepherd, leave decoying,
pipes are sweet a summer's day;
but a little after toying,
women have the shot to pay. dryden.
he touch'd the pence when others touch'd the pot;
the hand that sign'd the mortgage paid the shot. swift.
shot e. m. s. [rceota, saxon; trutta minor, lat.] a fish.
the shote, peculiar to devonshire and cornwal, in shape
and colour resembleth the trout; howbeit, in bigness and
goodness cometh far behind him.
shoot fr e e. adj. [shot and free.]
1. clear of the reckoning.
though i could 'scape shotfree at london, i fear the shot
here: here's no scoring but upon the pate. shakesp. h. iv.
2. not to be hurt by shot.
3. unpunished.
shott e.n. adj. [from shoot.]
1. having ejected the spawn.
gothy ways, old jack; die when thou wilt, if good man-
hood be not forgot upon the earth, then an i a shotten herring.
shakespeare's henry iv.
ask for what price thy venal tongue was sold !
tough wither'd treuffles, ropy wine, a dish
of shotten herrings, or stale stinking fish. dryden.
2. curdled by keeping too long.
to show e. v. a. [rcupan, saxon; shuyven, dutch.]
1. to push by main strength.
the hand could pluck her back, that shov'd her on. shaft.
in the corrupted currents of this world,
offence's gilded hand may shove by justice ;
and oft the wicked prize itself
buys out the law. shakspeare.
i sent your grace
the parcels and particulars of our grief,
the which hath been with scorn show'd from the court.
shakespeare.
participle passive of aut.
pleasant grove
of the stately tree
milton's paradis; loss.
carew.
of other care they little reck'ning make,
than how to scramble at the shearers feast,
and shove away the worthy bidden guest. milton.
there the british neptune stood,
beneath them to submit th' officious flood,
and with his trident slov'd them off the sand. dryden,
showing back this earth on which i fit,
i'll mount. dryd. tyrannick love.
a strong man was going to shove down st. paul's cupola.
arbuthnot.
23 z 2. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 45</div><p class="text">s h o
s h o
2. to drive by a pole that reaches to the bottom of the water ;
as, he shoved his boat.
3. to push; to rush against. -
• he used to save and elbow his fellow-servants to get near
his mistress, when money was a-paying or receiving. arbuth.
behold a rev'rend sire -
crawl through the streets, show'd on or rudely press'd,
by his own sons. pope.
you've play’d and lov’d, and eat and drank your fill;
walk sober off, before a sprightlier age
come titt'ring on, and shove you from the stage. pope.
make nature still incroach upon his plan,
and shove him off as far as eler we can. pope.
eager to express your love,
you ne'er consider whom you shove,
but rudely press before a duke.
to shov e. v. n.
1. to push forward before one.
swift.
the seamen towed, and i shoved 'till we arrived within
gulliver’s travels.
forty yards of the shore.
2. to move in a boat, not by oars but a pole.
- he grasp'd the oar,
receiv'd his guests aboard, and show'd from shore. garth.
shove. n.s. [from the verb.] the aet of shoving ; a push.
i was forced to swim schind, and push the boat forward
with one of my hands; and the tide favouring me, i could
feel the ground: i rested two minutes, and then gave the boat
another shove. o gulliver’s travels.
shovel. n.s. [rcopl; saxon; schoff:l, dutch.j. an instru:
ment consisting of a long handle and broad blade with raised
edges. * * * - - - o
§ a handbarrow, wheelbarrow, shovel and spade. toffer.
the brag of the ottoman, that he would throw malta into
- the sea, might be performed at an easier rate than by the shove's
of his janizarics. glanville's scopsis.
to sho've l. v. a. [from the noun.] . . . .
1. to throw or heap with a shovel. . . . . . . .
- i thought - s - * * * * * * * * * * ~ * *
to die upon the bed my father dy'd,
to lie close by his honest bones ; but now - *
some hangman must put on my shrowd, and lay me ,
where no priest shovels in dust. shakesp. //inter's tale.
2. to gather in great quantities.
- ducks shovel them up as they swim along the waters ; but
divers inse&amp;ts also devour them. - derham.
shov elboard. m. s. [shovel and board.] a long board on
which they play by sliding metal pieces at a mark. “
so have i secn, in hall of lord,
a weak arm throw on a long shovelboard;
he barely lays his piece. - dryden.
shov eller, or shovelard. m. s. [from shovel; platea.] a bird.
shoveller, or spoonbill: the former name the more proper,
the end of the bill being broad like a shovel, but not concave
like a spoon, but perfectly flat. grew's museum.
- pewets, gulls, and shovellers feed upon flesh, and yet are
good meat. - bacon.
this formation of the wizzon is not peculiar to the swan;
but common unto the platea, or shovelard, a bird of no musi-
cal throat. - brown's pulgar errours.
shough. n.s.. [for shock.]. a species of shaggy dog; a shock.
in the catalogue ye be for men, " . "
as hound and greyhounds, mungrels, spaniels, curs, .
shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are 'cleped
all by the name of dogs. shakespeare's machath.
shoul d. v. n. [stude, dutch ; recoloan, saxon.]
1. this is a kind of auxiliary verb used in the conjunetive
mood, of which the signification is not easily fixed.
. i should go. it is my business or duty to go.
. if i should go. if it happens that i go.
. thou should'st go. thou oughtest to go.
. if thou should'st go. if it happens that thou goest.
. the same significations are found in all the other persons fin.
gular and plural. -
let not a desperate action more engage you . .
than safety should. ben. johnson's catiline.
some praises come of good wishes and respects, when by
- telling men what they are, they represent to them what they
* *
!
--
~ *
* = a + -a &lt; * * *
* *
i
jhould be. bacon.
to do thee honour h will shed their blood,
which the just laws, if i were faultless, should. if aller.
so subjects love just kings, or so they should. dryden.
i conclude, that things are not as they should be. swift.
7. should be. a proverbial phrase of slight contempt or irony.
the girls look upon their father as a clown, and the boys
think their mother no better than she should le. addison.
8. there is another signification now little in use, in which
/hould has scarcely any distinet or explicable meaning. it should
be differs in this sense very little from it is.
there is a fabulous narration, that in the northern coun-
tries there should be an herb that groweth in the likeness of a
lamb, and feedeth upon the grass. bacon's nat. history.
zo
o
shoulder... n.f srculose, saxon; shellr, dutch.]
1. the joint which connects the arm to the body.
i have seen better faces in my time, .
than stand on any soulder that i see . of . .
before me. . . . . . . . . . ." o shakeshcare,
it is a fine thing to be carried on mens soulders; but give
god thanks that thou art not forced to carry a rich fool upon
thy shoulders, as those poor spen do. . . . . . . aylor.
the head of the shouller bone being round, is inserted into
so shallow a cavity in the scapula, that, were there no other
guards for it, it would be thrust out upon every occasion.
wiseman.
*** *.*.
2. the upper joint of the foreleg of edible animals. .
. we must have a shoo of shutton for a property. shaloft.
. . he took occasion, from a sociolor of mution, to cry up the
plenty of england. . . . . ... . addison's freeholder.
3. the upper part of the back. . . . . . . . . .
emily dress'd herself in rich array; "
fresh as the month, and as the morning fair,
adown her shoulder; fe's her length of hair. . . . . drydon.
4. the shoulders are used as emblems of strength, or the act of
supporting. . . . . . . - -
ev’n as thou wilt, sweet warwick, let it be ;
for on thy shoulders do i build my seat. , shakes. h. vi.
the king has cur'd me ; and from these shoulders,
these ruin'd pillars, out of pity taken . . -
a load would sink a navy. … shakes. henry viii.
5. a rising part ; a prominence. a term among artificers.
when you rivet a pin into a hole, your pin must have a
shoulder to it thicker than the hole is wide, that the shoulder
flip not through the hole as well as the shank. moxon.
to sgou lder. v. a. [from the noun. * * --
1. to push with insolence and violence. . . . . .
the rolling billows beat the ragged shore,
. . as they the earth would shoulder from her seat. , fa. queen.
- dudman, a well-known foreland to ingst sailors, here
solors out the ocean, to shape the same a large boson be:
’’twech itself. - " " ' " " carew's §. of cornwal.
&amp; you debase yourself, - - ,
to think of mixing with th' ignoble herd :... . . **.
what, shall the people know their god-like prince,
headed a rabble, and profan'd his person, * -
- -
shoulder'd with filth . . . . * - dryden,
so vast the navy now at anchor rides, , , , . . .
that underneath it the press'd waters fail,
and, with its weight, it shoulders off the tides. dryda.
around her numberless the rabble flow'd,
should ring each other, crowding for a view.
- rowe's jane shore.
when hopkins dies, a thousand lights attend
the wretch, who living sav'd a candle's end;
should'ring god's altar a vile image stands,
belies his features, nay extends his hands.
2. to put upon the shoulder. -
archimedes's lifting up marcellus's ships finds little more
credit than that of the giants shouldering mountains. glanw.
shoulder belt. m. s. [shoulder and belt..] a belt that comes
across the shoulder. . - *
thou hast an ulcer, which no lecch can heal,
though thy broad soulderbes; the wound conceal. dryden.
sho'ul der blade. m. s. the scapula; the plate bone to which
the arm is connected. - - -
if i have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, when i
saw my help in the gate, then let mine arm fall from my
fhoulderblade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.
. . . - - ab, xxxi. 22.
one who af-
pope.
sh3'ulder clapper. m.j. [shoulder and clap.]
fects familiarity, or one that mischicss privily.
a fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough;
a back friend, a shoulderclapper, one that commands
the passages of alleys. shakesp. comedy of errouri.
sho'uldershot ten. adj. [shoulder and shot..] strained in the
shoulder. o -
his horse waid in the back, and shouldershotten. shakespeare,
sho'uld frslip, n. s. [shoulder and slip.] dislocation of the
shoulder.
the horse will take so much care of himself as to come off
with only a strain or a shoulderslip. swift.
to shout. v. n. [a word of which no etymology is known.]
to cry in triumph or exhortation.
they shouted thrice: what was the last cry for shakespeare.
shout unto god with the voice of triumph. p/. xlvii. 1.
it is not the voice of them that shout for mastery. ex. xxxii.
the shouting for thy summer fruits and harvest is fallen. if,
he storms and shouts; but flying bullets now
to execute his rage appear too slow :
they miss, or sweep but common souls away;
for such a loss opdam his life must pay. waller.
there had been nothing but howlings and shoutings of poor
, naked men, belabouring one another with snagged sticks.
- - a sore.
all
t
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 46</div><p class="text">s h o
all clad in skins of beasts the jav'lin bear,
and shrieks and shouting, rend the suff'ring air. dryden.
what hinders you to take the man you love?
the people will be glad, the soldier shout ;
and bertran, though repining, will be aw'd. dryden.
smoor. m. s. [from the verb.] a loud and vehement cry of
‘’iumph or exhortation. . .
thanks, gentle citizens :
this general applause, and chearful sout,
argues your wisdom and your love to richard. shakespeare.
the rhodians, seeing the enemy turn their backs, gave a
great out to derision. agelo's history of the iurks.
then he night have dy'd of all admir’d,
and his triumphant soul with // outs expir’d. dryden.
shou ter. m. s. [from / out...] he who shouts.
a peal of loud applause rang out,
and thinn'd the air, 'till cwen the birds fell down
upon the shouters heads. dryden's cleomenes.
7, show. m. a. poo showed and shown ; part, pass, shown.
[rce ran: saxon ; showo, dutch. this word is frequently
written show; but since it is always pronounced and often
written show, which is favoured likewise by the dutch showen,
i have adjusted the orthography to the pronunciation.]
1. to exhibit to yiew, as an agent. -
if i do feign, *
o let me in my present wildness die,
and never live to show th' incredulous world
the noble change that i have purposed. shaks. h iv.
wilt thou show wonders to the dead : shall the dead arise
and praise thee * ps. lxxxviii. 1 o.
men should not take a charge upon them that they are not
fit for, as if singing, dancing, and showing of tricks, were
ualifications for a governor. l'islrange.
1 through the ample air, in triumph high,
shull lead hell captive, maugre hell, and/ow -
the pow'rs of darkness bound. milton.
1. to aford to the eye of notice; as a thing containing or ex-
hibiting. - -
nor want we skill or art, from whence to raise -
magnificence; and what can heav'n show more ? milton.
a mirrour in one hand collective shows,
varied and multiplied the groupe of woes. savage,
3. to make to see.
not higher that hill, nor wider, locking round,
whereon for different cause the tempter set
our second adam in the wilderness, -
to show him all carth's kingdoms and glory. milton.
yet him, god the most high vouchsafes
to call by vision from his father's house,
his kindred and false gods, into a land -
which he will show him. - * a slizn.
1. to make to perceive.
th’ inclement seasons, rain, ice, hail and show,
which now the sky with various face begins
to slow us in this mountain, while the winds
blow moist and keen. - asoon.
5. to make to know.
hirn the most high,
rapt in a balmy cloud with winged fleeds
did, as thou saw's, receive, to walk with god
high in salvation and the climes of bliss,
exempt from death; to show thee what reward -
awaits the good. milton.
a shooting star
in autumn thwarts the night, when vapors fir’d
impress the air, and shows the mariner
from what point of his compass to beware
impetuous winds. milton.
know, i am sent
to sow thee what shall come in future days
to thes and to thy offspring; good with bad
expect to hear. milton.
6. to give proof of ; to prove.
this i urge to show
invalid that which thee to doubt it mov’d. milton.
i'll to the citadel repair,
and show my duty by my timely care. dryosen.
achates' diligence his duty shows. dryden.
7. to publish; to make publick; to proclaim.
ye are a chosen generation, that ye should show forth the
praises of him who hath called you out of darkness. 1 pet. ii.
8. to inform; to teach : with of. -
i shall no more speak in proverbs, but show you plainly of
the father. jo. kvi. 25.
9. to make known.
i raised thee up to show in thee my power.
nothing wants, but that thy shape,
like his, and color serpentine, may so
thy inward fraud, to warn all creatures from thee. milton.
10. to conduit. to show, in this sense, is to show the way.
she taking him for some cautious city patient, that came
- for privacy, jhews him into the dining-room. swift.
ex. ix. 16.
11. to offer; to afford. - - -
o him that is afted, pity should be /*ewed from his
: ---- - . . . . . 729, vi. 14.
felix, willing to sew the jews a pleasure, jest w. lo.
- . . . alo, xxiv. 27.
thou shalt utterly deflroy them; make no room. wo
them, no show mercy unto them. dei. vii 2
12. to explain ; to expound. * . . . . . . . . .
forasmuch as knowledge an
and dissolving of doubts, were
him be called.
. . . . . . . . . .
d showing of hard sentences,
found in the same, daniel let
- . . - i) - -
13. to discover ; to point out. 47. w. 12
t by so o sooring under scars,
nat show no end but death : milton
to sh ow. v. n. - tarious
1. to appear; to look ; to be in appearance.
she shows a body rather than a life, . . .
a statue than a brother. shaos?. mit. and ci of atra.
jus, such she slow, before a rising form. dryden
still on we prefs; and here renow the cost o, ,127 yaen.
so great, that, in the stream, the moon/owd pipe. pino
2. to have appearance; to becomic well of ill. 1 * *
my lord of york, it better slow'd with you,
when that your flock assembled by the beli, -
envirled you to hear with rev'rence . . " . "
your exposition on the holy text,
than now to see you here an iron man,
cheering a rout of icbels with your drum. shaft. han, iv.
show. n.s.. [from the verb.] ‘ ‘ * -
1. a spectacle; something publickly exposed to view for monev.
i do not know what she may produce me; but, provided
it be a show, i shall be very well satisfied. * - addison.
the dwarf kept the gates of the show room. arbuthnot.
2. superficial appearance; not reality. . .
mild heav'n . . . . … "
disapproves that care, though wise in show, -
that with superfluous builden loads the day. milton,
3. ostentatious display. . . . . - . . . .
nor doth his grandour and in jestick slow . . . .
of luxury, though co's ti-shilicence, . . . . . .
allure mine eye. 4fton's parads: rogail'd,
stand before her in a golden dream ; * * * * * *
sct all the pleasures of the world to so, !
and in vain joys let her loose spirits ow. " . . . dryon.
the radiant sun -
sends from above ten thousand blogs down,
nor is he set so high for show alone. gra:::".
never was a charge, maintained with such a show of gra-
vity, which had a flighter foundation. o - atterlury.
i covy none their pagantry and / ov, .
i envy none the gilding of their woe. . . . 22ung.
4. object attracting notice. . -
the city itself makes the nobles show of any in the world :
the houses are most of then parted on the outside, so that
-
-
they look cotienney gay and lively. . . . . . addison.
- - - * * * * * * * * *
5. publick appearance: contrary to concealment. ! . .
jesus, rising from his grave, . . .
spoil’d principalities and pow'rs, triumph'd ". . .
in open show, and with ascension bright . . . . .
captivity led captive. - . . . . asoo’i.
6. semblance; likeness. “. . . . . .
when devils will their blackest fins put on, “
they do suggest at first with heav'nly shows. soak. othell.
he through pass'd the midst unmark'd, … "
in show plebeian angel militant. . . - milton.
7. speciousness; slausibility. - *
the places of ezechie have some slow in them ; for there
the lord commandeth the levites, which had committed
idolatry, to be put from their diggity, and serve in inferior
ministries. * , - - - 17% ofte,
the kindred of the slain forgive the decid; - -
but a short exile must for show pic-cdc. . . dolen.
8. external appearance. - s
shall i say o zelmane alas, your wor's be against it.
shall i say prince pyrocles wretch that i ath, your show is
manifest against it. . sidney.
fierce was the fight on the proud belgians side, *
for honour, which they soldom sought before ;
but now they by their own vain boats were ty'd,
and forc'd, at least in sew, to prize it more. drydn.
9. exhibition to view. ... "
i have a letter from her ; - r
the mirth whereof's so larded with my matter, * -
that neither singly can be manifested, -
without the show of both. sha's care.
io. pomp; magnificent spectacle. -
as for trium; hs, masks, feasts, and such s. vs, men need
not be put in mind of them. - * * lacon.
i 1. phantoms; not realitics. - a
what you saw was all a fairy slow ; -
and all those airy shapes you now vehold, : ..
were human bodies once. dyson.
12. representative
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 47</div><p class="text">s h. r.
s h r
12. representative action.
florio was so overwhelmed with happiness, that he could
not make a reply, but expressed in dumb show those sentiments
of gratitude that were too big for utterance. addison.
sho'w bread, or shewbread, n.s.. [show and bread..] among
the jews, they thus called loaves of bread that the priest of
the week put every sabbath-day upon the golden table, which
was in the sanetum before the lord. they were covered
with leaves of gold, and were twelve in number, representing
the twelve tribes of israel. they served them up hot, and at
the same time took away the stale ones, and which could not
be eaten but by the priest alone. this offering was accom-
panied with frankincense and salt. calmet.
set upon the table showbread before me. £x. xxv. 30.
sho’wer. m. s. [scheure, dutch.]
1. rain either moderate or violent.
if the boy have not a woman's gift,
to rain a shower of commanded tears, -
an onion will do well for such a shift. shakespeare.
the ancient cinnamon was, while it grew, the dryest; and
in showers it prospered worst. bacon.
4. storm of any thing falling thick.
i’ll set thee in a shower of gold, and hail
rich pearls upon them. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
give me a storm; if it be love,
like danae in the golden shower,
i swim in pleasure.
with show’rs of stones he drives them far away;
the scatt'ring dogs around at distance bay.
3. any very liberal distribution.
he and myself
have travell'd in the great shower of your gifts,
and sweetly felt it. shakespeare's timon.
to show er. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to wet or drown with rain.
serve they as a flow'ry verge, to bind
the fluid skirts of that same wat'ry cloud,
lest it again dissolve, and show'r the earth 2
the sun more glad impress'd his beams,
than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow,
when god hath show'r'd the earth. milton's paradise loft.
4. to pour down. -
these, lull'd by nightingales, embracing slept ;
and on their naked limbs the flow'ry roof
shower'd roses, which the morn repair’d. milton's par. loft.
3. to distribute or scatter with great liberality.
after this fair discharge, all civil honours having showered
on him before, there now fell out occasion to action. wotton.
caesar’s favour,
that show’rs down greatness on his friends, will raise me
to rome's first honours. addison's cato.
to show er. v. n. to be rainy.
show ery. adj. [from shower..] rainy.
a hilly field, where the stubble is standing, set on fire in
the showery season, will put forth mushrooms. bacon.
murranus came from anxur's show'ry height,
with ragged rocks and stony quarries white,
seated on hills. addison on italy.
the combat thickens, like the storm that flies
from westward, when the show'ry winds arise,
showish. adj. [from show.]
1. splendid; gaudy. -
the escutcheons of the company are showish, and will look
carew.
pope.
milton.
addison.
magnificent. swift.
2. ostentatious.
shown. pret. and part, pass of to show. exhibited.
mercy shown on man by him seduc’d. milton.
show y. adj. [from show.] ostentation.
men of warm imaginations neglect solid and substantial
happiness for what is showy and superficial. addison.
shrank. the preterite of shrink. .
the children of israel eat not of the sinew which shrank
upon the hollow of the thigh. gen. xxxii. 32.
to shred. v. a. pret. shred. [rcneaban, saxon.] to cut into
small pieces. commonly used of cloth or herbs.
it hath a number of short cuts or shreddings, which may be
better called wishes than prayers. hooker.
one gathered wild gourds, and shred them. 2 kings.
where did you whet your knife to-night, he cries,
and shred the leeks that in your stomach rise :
dryden's juvenal,
shred. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a small piece cut off.
gold, grown somewhat churlish by recovering, is made
more pliant by throwing in shreds of tanned leather. bacon.
the mighty tyrian queen, that gain’d
with subtle shreds a trađt of land,
did leave it with a castle fair
to his great ancestor. hudibras.
a beggar might patch up a garment with such shreds as the
world throws away.
2. a fragment.
they said they were an hungry; figh’d forth proverbs,
that hunger broke stone walls; that dogs must eat:
and with these shreds they vented their complainings.
shakespeare,
shreds of wit and senseless rhimes
blunder'd out a thousand times. swift.
his panegyrick is made up of half a dozen sored, like a
schoolboy's theme, beaten general topicks. swift,
shrew, n.s.. [schreyen, german, to clamour.] a peevish,
malignant, clamorous, spiteful, vexatious, turbulent woman.
[it appears in robert of gloucester, that this word signified an-
ciently any one perverse or obstinate of either sex.
there dede of hem vor hunger a thousand and mo,
and yat nolde the screwen to none pes go. robert of glouceslar.
be merry, be merry, my wife has all ;
for women are shrews both short and tall.
shakespeare's henry iv.
by this reckoning he is more shrew than ifie. shakespeare.
a man had got a shrew to his wife, and there could be no
quiet in the house for her. l’estrange.
her sallow cheeks her envious mind did shew,
and ev'ry feature spoke aloud the shrew. dryden.
every one of them, who is a shrew in domestick life, is
now become a scold in politicks. addison's freeholder.
shr ewd. adj. [contracted from shrewed.]
1. having the qualitics of a shrew ; malicious; troublesome;
mischievous.
her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd,
that 'till the father rids his hands of her,
your love must live a maid. shakespeare.
2. maliciously sly; cunning; more artful than good.
it was a shrewd saying of the old monk, that two kind of
prisons would serve for all offenders, an inquisition and a bed-
lam: if any man should deny the being of a god, and theim-
mortality of the soul, such a one should be put into the first,
as being a desperate heretick; but if any man should profess to
believe these things, and yet allow himself in any known
-wickedness, such a one should be put into bedlam. tilson.
a spiteful saying gratifies so many little passions, that it
meets with a good reception; and the man who utters it is
looked upon as a shrewd satirist. addison.
corruption proceeds from employing those who have the
character of shrewd worldly men, instead of such as have had
a liberal education, and trained up in virtue. addison.
3. bad ; ill-betokening.
scarce any man passes to a liking of fin in others, but by
first prastising it himself; and consequently we may take it for
a shrewd indication, and sign, whereby to judge of those who
have sinned with too much caution, to suffer the world to
charge sins dire&amp;thy upon their conversation. south.
4. painful; pinching; dangerous; mischievous.
every of this number,
that have endur'd shrewd nights and days with us,
shall share the good of our returned fortune. shakespeare.
when a man thinks he has a servant, he finds a traitor that
eats his bread, and is readier to do him a mischief, and a
/hrewd turn, than an open adversary. south.
no enemy is so despicable but he may do a body a shrewd
turn. l'estrange.
shre/wdly. adv. [from shrewd.]
1. mischievously; destructively.
this practice hath most shrewdly past upon thee. shakes.
at oxford, his youth and want of experience in maritime
service, had somewhat been shrewdly touched, even before the
sluices of popular liberty were set open. wotton.
2. vexatiously. it is used commonly of slight mischief, or in
ironical expression.
the obstinate and schismatical are like to think themselves
/hrewdly hurt, forsooth, by being cut off from that body which
they choose not to be of. south.
this last allusion rubb’d upon the sore;
yet seem'd she not to winch, tho’ shrewdly pain'd. dryden.
3. with good guess. -
four per cent. encreases not the number of lenders; as any
man at first hearing will shrewdly suspect it. locke.
shre/wdness. n.s.. [from shrewd.]
1. sly cunning; archness.
her garboiles, which not wanted shrewdnes of policy too,
did you too much disquiet. shakespeare.
the neighbours round admire his shrewdness,
for songs of loyalty and lewdness.
2. mischievousness; petulance.
shre’ wish. adj. [from shrew.] having the qualities of a shrew;
froward; petulantly clamorous.
angelo, you must excuse us;
my wife is shrewish when i keep not hours.
swift.
shakespeare.
shre'wishly. adv. [from shrewish.] petulantly ; peevishly ;
clamorously; frowardly.
he speaks very shrewishly; one would think his mother's
milk were scarce out of him. shakespeare.
pope. shre'wishness. n.s.. [from shrewish.] the qualities of a
shrew ; frowardness; petulance; clamorousness.
i have
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 48</div><p class="text">so h. r.
s h r
i have no gift in shrewiftness, * *
i am a right maid for my cowardice;
ict her not strike me. . . . . shakespeare.
sassow moo. n. s. [rcreapa, saxon.] a mouse of which
the bite is generally supposed venomous, and to which vulgar
indition affigns fuch malignity, that she is said to lame the
tower which she runs. i am informed that all these re-
orts are calumnious, and that her feet and teeth are equally
harmless with those of any other little mouse. our ancestors
jwever looked on her with such terrour, that they are sup-
jed to have given her name to a scolding woman, whom
for her venom they call a shrew. - -
s, shriek. "...” [skrieger, danish ; scricciolare, italian.] to
cry out inarticulately with anguish or horrour; to scream.
on top whereof ay dwelt the ghastly owl,
shrieking his baleful note. • fairy queen.
it was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal belman
which gives the sternest good-night.
were 1 the ghost that walk'd,
i'd shriek, that even your ears should rift to hear me. shak.
in a dreadful dream
i saw my lord so near destruction,
then shriek't myself awake.
shakespeare.
denham.
hark! peace | -
at this she shriek'd aloud; the mournful trai
eccho'd her grief. dryden's knight's tale.
why did you shriek out dryden's spanish fryar.
sisirk. m. s. [/oro, danish; sriccio, italian.] an inarticu-
lite cry of anguish or horrour.
una hearing evermore
his rueful shrios and groanings, often tore
her guiltless garments, and her golden hair,
for pity of his pain. fairy queen.
time has been my senses wou'd have cool’d,
to hear a night shriek, and mv fell of hair
wou'd at a dismal treatise route and stir
as life were in’t. shakes care's macb.th.
the corps of almon, and the rest are shown,
shrieks, ciamours, murmurs, fill the frighted town. dryd.
shrift. n, f, [rcist, saxon.] confession made to a priest. a
word out of use.
off with
bernardine's head: i will give a present shrift,
and will advise him for a better place. shakosheare.
my lord shall never rest;
i'll watch him tame, and talk him out :
his bed shall seem a school, his board a shrist. shaky?.
the duke's commands were absolute,
therefore my lord, address you to your shrift,
and be yourself; for you must die this instant. r::ve.
suright, for shrieked spenser.
shrill. [a word supposed to be made per cnzmat-fariam, in
imitation of the thing expressed, which indeed it images very
happily. j sounding with a piercing, tremulous, or vibratory
found.
thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them,
and fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth. shakspeare.
the cock that is the trumpet to the morn,
doth with his lofty and shrill sounding throat
awake the god of day. shakes eart's hamlet.
look up a height, the shrill gorg’d lark so far
cannot be seen or heard. shakespeare's king lear.
upsprings the lark, shrill voic'd and loud. thomson.
t. shrill. v. n. [from the adjective.] to picree the car with
sharp and quick vibrations of found.
the sun of all the world is dim and dark;
o heavy herse,
break we our pipes that shrill'd as loud as lark,
o careful verse. speiser,
hark how the minstrels 'gin to shrill aloud
their merry musick that refounds from far,
the pipe, the tabor, and the trembling crowd
that well agree withouten breach or jar. spensor.
a shrilling trumpet sounded from on high,
and unto battle bade themselves address. shakespeare.
here, no clarion's shrilling note
the muse's green retreat can perce; -
the grove, from i.e. y camps remote,
o y - -
s only vocal with my verse. fenton's ode to lord gower.
the females round,
maids, wives, and matrons mix a shrissing sound. pope.
soutly. adv. [from shrill.] with a shrill noise. - -
shri'lln ess. o, s. [from shrill.] the quality of being shrill.
shrmp. n.s. [shrimps, a wrinkle, german; scryops, da-
nish.]
i. a small crustaccous vermiculated fish.
o; shell-fish there are wrinkles, shrimps, crabs. carew.
hawks and gulls can at a great height see mice on the earth,
and shrimps in the waters. derham.
2. a little wrinkled man; a dwarf. in contempt.
it cannot be, this weak and writhlcd/rimp
should strike such terrour in his enemies. shafts eart.
vol. ii.
he hath found,
within the ground,
at last, no /krimp,
whereon to imp
his jolly club. b h
shrine. m. s. [rcin, saxon init on. 7. oft.
something i. is o ton, lat.] a case in which
oo:: living power. enclos'd in flately srine
growing trees; you rural gods that wield
a y our scepters here, if to your cares divine
voice may come, which troubl - -
a!! o: world come ed foul doth yield. sidney.
t.ooo ;o breathing saint. shakespeare.
y yi, and i will help thee.
they often plac'd shakespeare:
within his sanctu'ry itself their firino,
abominations ! and with cursed things
his holy rites profan'd. … -- c
falling on his knees before her shrine,
he thus implor’d her pow'r, o dryden.
lovers are in rapture at the name of their fair idol ; the
lavish out all their incense upon that /rine, and cannot bear
... the thought of admitting a bienish therein. watts.
to shrink. v. m. preterite, 1 sorunk, or shrank; participle,
foroken. (renuncan, saxon.] -
1. to contract itself into less room; to shrivel; to be drawn
together by some internal power.
but to be still hot summer's tantlings, and -
the shrinking slaves of winter. shakespeare's cymbeline.
i am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen
upon a parchment, and against this fire
do i shrink up. shałoffeare's king john.
i have not found that water, by mixture of ashes, will
frink or draw into less room. bacon's nat. history.
ill-weav'd ambition how much art thou shrunk /
when that this body did contain a spirit,
a kingdom for it was too small a bound :
but now two paces of the vileft earth
isroom cnough.
2. to withdraw as from danger.
the noise encreases,
she comes, and feeble nature now i find
sorino back in danger, and forsakes my mind. dryden,
nature stands agast;
and the fair light which gilds this new made orb,
shorn of his beams, shrinks in. dryden,
love is a plant of the most tender kind, -
that sorios and shakes with ev'ry ruffling wind. grano.
all fibres have a contractile power, whereby they shorten;
as appears if a fibre be cut transverfly, the ends shrink, and
make the wound gape. arbuthnot.
philosophy that touch'd the heav'ns before,
shrinks to her hidden cause, and is no more. pope.
3. to express fear, horrour, or pain, by shrugging, or con-
tracting the body.
there is no particular object so good, but it may have the
fhew of some difficulty or unpleasant quality annexed to it, in
respect whereof the will may shrink and decline it. hooker.
the morning cock crew loud,
and at the sound it shrunk in haste away,
milton.
shakespeare.
and vanish’d from our fight. shakespeare's hamlet.
i'll embrace him with a soldier's arm,
that he shall/rink under my courtesy. . shak's care.
when he walks, he moves hike an engine,
and the ground shrink, before his treading. shakosheare.
4. to fall back as from danger.
many shrink, which at the first would dare,
and be the foremost men to execute. ixanies's civil j/ar.
i laugh, when those who at the spear are bold
and vent’rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
to cndure exile, ignominy, bonds. moistan.
if a man accustoms himself to slight those first motions to
good, or shrinkings of his conscience from cvil, conscience will
by degrees grow du!! and unconcerned. south's sermons.
the sky shrunk upward with unusual dread,
and trembling tyber div'd beneath his bed. dryden.
the gold-fraught vessel which mad tempests beat,
he sees now vainly make to his retreat ;
and, when from far the tenth wave does appear,
shrinks up in silent joy, that he's not there. dryden.
the fires but faintly lick'd their prey,
then loath'd their impous food, and would have shrunk
away. dryden.
fall on : behold a noble beast at bay,
and the vile huntsmen shrink. dryden.
inuring children to suffer some pain, without shrinking, is
a way to gain firmness and courage. - locłc.
what happier natures shrink at with affight,
the hard inhabitant contends is right. pope.
t, shrisk. v. a. participle pass. shrink, /orano, or s”.
to make to shrink. not in use. -
24 a o mighty
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 49</div><p class="text">s h. r.
s h r
o mighty caesar! dost thou lie so low
are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
shrunk to this little measure : shakespeare.
the sixth age shifts
into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon.
his youthful hose well fav'd, a world too wide
for his shrunk shank. shakspeare.
if he lesiens the revenue, he will also shrink the neces-
fity. - taylor.
keep it from coming too long, lest it should shrink the corn
in measure. 44ortimer.
shr ink.. n.f. [from the verb.]
1. corrugation; contraction into less compass.
there is in this a crack, which seems a shrink, or con-
traction in the body since it was first formed. //oodward.
2. contraction of the body from fear or horrour.
this publick death, receiv'd with such a chear,
as not a figh, a lock, a shrink bewrays
the least felt touch of a degenerous fear. daniel's civ. j/ar.
shri'nk er. m. s. [from shrink.] he who shrinks.
shr1'v alty. n.s. corrupted for she riff alty ; which see.
to shrivg. v. a. [rcnipan, saxon.] to hear at confession.
not in use.
what, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain
your honour hath no shriving work in hand. shakespeare.
he shrives this woman,
else ne'er could he so long protract his speech. shakesp.
if he had the condition of a saint, and the complexion of a
devil, i had rather he should shrive me than wive me. shak.
shrive but their title, and their monies poize,
a laird and twenty-pence pronounc'd with noise,
when constru’d but for a plain yeoman go,
and a good sober two-pence, and well so. cleaveland.
7% shr 1 v el. v. n. [schrempelo, dutch..] to contract itself
into wrinkles.
leaves, if they shrival and fold up, give them drink. evel.
if she smelled to the freshest nosegay, it would shrivel and
wither as it had been blighted. arbuthnot.
to shri'v el. v. a. to contract into wrinkles.
he burns the leaves, the scorching blast invades
the tender corn, and shrively up the blades.
when the fiery suns to fiercely play,
and shrive’d herbs on witn’ring stems decay.
the wary ploughman, on the mountain's brow, -
undams his wat'ry stores. dryden.
shri'v e. r. n. s. [from shrive..] a confessor. not in use.
- the ghostly father now hath done his shrift,
when he was made a shriver 'twas for shift.
shrou d. m. s. [rcrub, saxon j
1. a shelter; a cover.
it would warm his spirits,
to hear from me you had left anthony,
and put yourself under his shroud, the universal land-
lord. shaksp. aut, and cleop.
by me invested with a veil of clouds,
and swaddlcd, as new-born, in sable shroud,
for these a receptacle i design'd.
the winds
blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks
of these fair spreading trees; which bids us seek
some better sh; oud, some better warmth, to cherish
our limbs benumb’d. 4.ilton's paradise lo/?.
2. the dress of the dead; a winding-sheet. o
now the wasted brands do glow ;
whilst the screech-owl screeching loud,
puts the wretch that lies in woe
dryden.
shakespeare.
sandys.
in remembrance of a shroud. shakspeare.
they drop apace; by nature some decay,
and some the blasts of fortune sweep away;
*till naked quite of happiness, aloud
we call for death, and shelter in a shroud. 1%ung.
3. the fail-ropes. it seems to be taken sometimes for the
sails.
i turned back to the mast of the ship; there i found my
sword among some of the shrouds. sidney.
the tackle of my heart is crackt and burnt;
and all the shraud; wherewith my life should fail,
are turned to one little hair. shakspeare.
a weather-beaten vessel holds
gladly the port, tho’ shroud; and tackle torn. milton.
the flaming shrewd, so dreadful did appear,
all judg’d a wicck could no proportion bear. dryden.
he summons strait his denizens of air;
the lucid squadrons round the sails repair:
soft o'er the shrouds aerial whispers breathe,
that seem’d but zephyrs to the croud beneath. pope.
. to shroud. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to shelter ; to cover from danger as an agent.
under your beams i will me safely soroud. fa. queen.
he got himself to mege, in hope to shroud himself, until
such time as the rage of the people was appeased. knolles.
the governors of corfu caused the suburbs to be plucked
down, for fear that the turks shrouding themselves in them,
should with more ease besiege the town. knoller.
besides the faults men commit, with this immediate avowed
aspect upon their religion, there are others which slily shroud
themselves under the skirt of its mantle. decay of piety.
2. to shelter as the thing covering.
one of those trees, with all his young ones, may shroud
four hundred horsemen. faleigh.
3. to dress for the grave.
if i die before thee, shroud me
in one of these ame sheets. shakespeare's othell.
the ancient egyptian mummies were shrouded in a number
of folds of linen, befineared with gums, like serecloth. bacon.
whoever comes to shroud me, do not harm
that subtile wreath of hair about mine arm.
4. to clothe; to dress.
5. to cover or conceal.
that same evening, when all shrouded were
in careless sleep, all, without care or fear,
they fell upon the flock. spensor.
under this thick-grown brake we’ll shroud ourselves,
for through this land anon the deer will come,
and in this covert will we make our stand,
culling the principal. shakespeare's henry vi.
moon, slip behind some cloud: some tempest rise,
and blow out all the stars that light the skies,
to shroud my shame. •
thither the loud tumultuous winds resort,
and on the mountain keep their boist’rous court,
that in thick show’rs her rocky summit shrouds,
and darkens all the broken view with clouds.
6. to defend ; to protect.
so venus from prevailing greeks did sorowd
the hope of rome, and sav'd him in a cloud.
to shroud. v. n. to harbour; to take shelter.
if your stray attendance be yet lodg’d,
or shroud within these limits, i shall know
ere morrow wake. milton.
sh rove tide. ! n: s [from sorove, the preterite of shrive.]
shr ovet ues day. the time of confession; the day be-
fore ash-wednesday or lent, on which anciently they went
to confession.
at shrovetide to shroving. tussor.
shr u b. m. s. [rcnibbe, saxon.]
1. a bush ; a small tree.
trees generally shoot up in one great stem or body; and
then at a good distance from the earth spread into branches;
thus gooieberries and currants are shrubs; oaks and cherries
ase t. ccs. locke.
donne.
dryden.
addison.
walkr.
he came unto a gloomy glade,
cover'd with boughs and shouls from heaven's light. fa. q.
th’ humble shrub and bush with frizzled hair. milton.
all might have been as well brushwood and shrubs. more.
comedy is a representation of common life, in low subjects,
and is a kind of juniper, a shrub belonging to the species of
cedar. - dryden.
i’ve liv'd
amidst these woods, gleaning from thorns and shrubs
a wretched sustenance. - addison.
2. [a cant word..] spirit, acid, and sugar mixed.
shru’bby. adj. [from shrub.]
1. resembling a shrub. - -
plants appearing weathered, shrubby and curled, are the
effects of immoderate wet. martimer's ho/jandry,
2. full of shrubs; bushy.
gentle villager,
what readiest way would bring me to that place :
due west it rises from this shrubby point. milton.
3. consisting of shrubs.
- on that cloud-piercing hill
plimlimmon, the goats their shrully browze
gnaw pendent. philips.
shruff. m. s. dross; the refuse of metal tried by the
fire. : dic7.
to sh rugg. v. n. [schricken, dutch, to tremble.] to ex-
press horror or dissatisfaction by motion of the shoulders of
whole body.
like a fearful deer that looks most about when he comes to
the best feed, with a shrugging kind of tremor through all her
principal parts, she gave these words. sidney.
. the touch of the cold water made a pretty kind of shrug-
ging come over her body like the twinkling of the fairest
among the fixed stars. sidney.
be quick, thou wert best
to answer other business; shrug/l thou malice f shaks.
he grins, smacks, shrugs, and such an itch endures,
as 'prentices or school-boys which do know
of some gay sport abroad, yet dare not go. ixonne.
they grin, they sor:g,
they bow, they snarl, they scratch, they hug. swift.
to sh ru g. v. a. to contract or draw up.
he shrugs his shoulders when you talk of securities. addisox.
- - he
;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 50</div><p class="text">s h u
s h. c.
he shrig'd his sturdy back,
as if he felt his shoulders ake. hudibras.
earl g. n.s.. [from, the verb.] a motich of the shoulders
usually expressing dislike or aversion.
and yet they ramble not to learn the mode,
how to be drest, or how to lisp abroad,
to return knowing in the spanish shrug. cleaveland.
as spaniards talk in dialogues,
of heads and shoulders, nods and shrugs. hudibras.
put on the critick's brow, and fit
at will's, the puny judge of wit.
a nod, a shrug, a scornful smile,
with caution us'd may serve a while.
a third, with mystick shrug and winking eye,
suspects him for a dervise and a spy.
shrusk. the preterite and part. passive of shrink.
leaving the two friends alone, ishrunk aside to the banquet-
ing-house where the pictures were. sidney.
the wicked shrunk for fear of him, and all the workers of
iniquity were troubled. 1 maccabees.
shru's ken. the part, passive of shrink.
she weighing the decaying plight,
and shrunken finews of her chosen knight,
would not a while her forward course pursue. fa. queen.
if there were taken out of mens minds vain opinions, it
would leave the minds of a number of men, poor shrunken
things, full of melancholy. bacon.
t. she pof r. v. a. [schuldren, dutch..] to quake with fear,
of with aversion.
all the other passions fleet to air,
as doubtful thoughts, and rash embrac'd despair,
and solo ing fear. shakespeare.
the fight was general; but the female band
with horror /aii'ring on a heap they run.
i love, -a as i sowinr at the name,
my blood runs backward, and my fault'ring tongue
sticks at the found.
cesar will sh; if k to hear the words thou utter'st,
and shu iter in the midst of all his conquests. aioison.
t. shuffle. v. a. [r reling, saxon, a bustle, a tumult.
1. to throw into di order; to agitato tumultuously, so as that
one thing takes the place of another ; to confuse ; to throw
together tum. ltuously.
when the heavens solo all in one,
the torrid with the f. 2 in zone,
then, sybil, thou and i will grect. cravelin l.
from a new song a d disposition of the component par-
ticles of a body, night not nature compose a body disloluble
in water boyle.
in most things good and evil lie suffed, and thrust up to-
gether in a confused he op; and it is study which must draw
them forth and rom e them. south.
when lots are // 5...d together in a lap or pitcher, what
reason can a man oc top, clume, that he shall draw a white
stone rather than a black :
swift.
harte.
dryden.
sm ith.
south.
a glimpie of moonshine sheath'd with red,
a shoes, su'len and uncertain log it
that dances thro’ the clouds and shuts again. dryden.
children should not lose the consideration of human nature
in the / offings of outward conditions. the more they have,
the better humoured they should be taught to be. locke.
we shall in vain, shuffling the little money we have from
one ancther's hands, cindeavour to prevent our wants; decay
of trade will quickly waite all the remainder. locke.
these vapours soon, miraculous event,
shuff'd by chance, and mix’d by accident. blackmore.
shuff"d and entang!'d in their race,
they clasp each other. backmore.
he has shuffled the two ends of the sentence together, and
by taking out the middle, makes it speak just as he would
have it. atterbury.
'tis not strange that such a cre should believe, that things
were blindly shifted and hurled about in the world; that the
elements were at constant strife with each other, 11 ozoward.
2. to change the position of cards with respect to each other.
the motions of slofting of cards, or casting of dice, are
very light. bacon.
we sure in vain the cards condemn,
ourselves both cut and shuff", them. prior.
3. to remove, or introduce with some artificial or fraudulent
tumult.
her mother,
now firm for docior caius, hath appointed
that he shall likewise shuffle her away. shałosłcare.
it was contrived by your cnemies, and /offed into the
papers that were seiz'd. dryden.
4. to shuffle off. to get rid off.
in that fleep of death, what dreams may come,
when we have shifted off this mortal coil,
must give us pause. shakespeare.
i can no other answer make, but thanks;
and oft good turns
are/hood off with such uncurrent pay.
5. to shuffle up.
3. to struggle ; to shift.
4. to move with an irregular gait.
sii u'r fle. n.s. (from the verb.] -
1. the act of disordering things, or making them take con-
2. a trick; an artifice.
sisu’s less. adj. [from shun.]
v thiro hors ... - ~ : -- - - - - -
if *} ong hits, we take it to ourselves; if it miscarries,
we shifte it 47 to our neighbours. l'eorange.
if, when a child is o -
77- - - --&gt; ---&gt; questioned for any thing, he perfists to
so offic it off with a o, he must be cood - locke.
- o form tumultuously, or fraudulently.
they sent forth their precepts to convent them before a
court of commission, and there used to shoffe up a summary
proceeding by examination, without trij
+ or " - of jury. bacon.
- he suffed up a peace with the cedar, in which the bune-
lians were excluded. howel
- - o -
to sh 9 ffle. v. m.
1. to throw the cards into a new order. w
- ... ** - - -
a sharper both soft's and cuts. l'e/irange.
cards we play
a. round or two; when us'd, we throw away,
take a fresh pack; nor is it worth our grievin
or
who cuts or / offies with our dirty leaving.
5
granville.
2. to play mean tricks; to practise fraud; to evade fair que-
stions.
i myself, leaving the fear of heaven on the left hand, and
hiding mine honour in my necessity, am fain to shuffle. shak.
i have nought to do with that shoffing sect, that doubt eter-
nally, and question all things. glanvill's defence.
the crab advised his companion to give over shoffng and
doubling, and practise good faith. l'eiringe.
to these arguments concerning the novelty of to earth,
there are some shuffling excuses made. . burret's theory.
if a steward be suffered to run on, without bringing him to
a reckoning, such a sottish sorbearance will teach him to
shuffle, and strongly tempt him to be a cheat. south.
though he durst not directly break his appointment, he
made many a suffing excuse. aria:hnst's hji. of join bull.
your life, good master, to
must softe for itself. sha'e?eare's cynochine.
- - -
mincing poetry,
'tis like the forc’d gait of a song nag. shak scarc.
fusedly the place of each other.
ls it not a firmer foundation for contentment, to believe
that aii things were at first created, and are continually dis-
posed for the best, than that the whole universe is mere bung-
ling, nothing offected for any purpose, but all ill-favouredly
cobied and jumbled together, by the unguided agitation and
rude shoes of matter. bently's sermons.
the gifts of nature are beyond all shams and/or. l'eor.
shuff: ecap. m. s. [shift and cap.] a play at which money
is shaken in a hat.
he lost his money at chuck-farthing, soft.ca", and all-
fours. arbuthnot's hist. of john bull.
shuffler. m. s. [from soft..] he who plays trick, or shuf-
fles.
shufflingly. adv. [from so so...] with an irregular gait.
i may go so offingly, for i was never before walked in tram-
mels; yet i shall drudge and moi! at constancy, 'tiil i have
worn off the hitching in my pace. dryden.
7, shu n v. a. sarcunian, saxon.] to avoid; to decline;
to endeavour to escape ; to eschew.
consider death in itself, and nature teacheth christ to shun
it. hooker.
the lark still shuns on lofty boughs to build,
her humble nest lies silent in the field. - jpaler.
birds and beasts can fly their foe: - --
so chanticleer, who never saw a fox,
yet shun'd him as a sailor shuns the rocks. dryden.
cato will train thee up to great
and virtuous deeds: do but observe him well,
thou'lt shun misfortunes, or thou’itlearn to bear them. addis.
inevitable; unavoidable.
alone he enter'd
the mortal gate of the city, which he painted
with shunks, destiny. shakespeare's coriolinur.
to shut. v. a. preterite, i shut ; part, passive, shut. [rcitzan,
saxon; shutten, dutch..]
1. to cloic so as to prohibit ingress or regress; to make not
onen.
t kings shall slut their mouths at him. isaiah, lii. 15.
to a strong tower fled all the men and women, and shut
it to them, and gat then up to the top. judges, ix. 51.
we see more exquisitely with one eye shut than with both
open ; for that the spirits visual unite more, and become
stronger. bacon's natural history.
she open'd, but to shut
excell'd her pow'r, the gates wide open stood.
milton.
2. to inclose; to confine.
before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up un-
to the faith, which should afterwards be revealed. gal. iii.
they went in male and female of all flesh; and the lord
shut him in. gen. vii. 16.
shakespeare. 3. to prohibit; to bar.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 51</div><p class="text">s h y
s i c -
shall that be shut to man, which to the beast
is open
4. to exclude:
on various seas, not only lost,
but shut from ev’ry shoar, and barr'd from ev'ry coast. dryd.
5. to contract; not to keep expanded.
harden not thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor
brother. deut. xv. 7.
6. to shut out. to exclude; to deny admission to.
beat in the reed,
milton.
| the juster you drive it to shut off the rain. tuser's huso.
in such a night
to shut me out p pour on i will endure. shakespeare.
wisdom at one entrance quite shut out. milton.
he in his walls confin'd,
shut out the woes which he too well divin'd. dryden's aon.
sometimes the mind fixes itself with so much earnestness on
the contemplation of some objecls, that it shuts out all other
| t thoughts. locke.
7. to shut up. to close; to make impervious ; to make
impassable, or impossible to be entered or quitted. up is
sometimes little more than emphatical.
woe unto you scribes; for you shut up the kingdom of hea-
ven against men. matth. xxiii. 13.
dangerous rocks shut up the passage. raleigh.
w what barbarous customs
shut up a desart shore to drowning men,
and drive us to the cruei seas agen. dryden's aeneid.
his mother shut up half the rooms in the house, in which
her husband or son had died. addison.
8. to shut up. to confine; to inclose; to imprison.
thou hast known my soul in adversities; and not shut me
wp into the hand of the enemy. psalms, xxxi. 8.
a loss at sea, a fit of sickness, are trifles, when we consi-
der whole families put to the sword, wretches shut up in dun-
geons. addison's speciator.
lucullus, with a great fleet, shut up mithridates in pi-
tany. arbuthnot on coins.
9. to shut up. to conclude:
the king's a-bed,
he is shut up in measureless content. shakesh. macbeth.
although he was patiently heard as he delivered his em-
bassage, yet, in the shutting up of all, he received no more
but an insolent answer. knolles's history of the turks.
to leave you blest, i would be more accurst
than death can make me; for death ends our woes,
and the kind grave shuts up the mournful scene. dryden.
when the scene of life is shut up, the slave will be above
his master, if he has acted better. collier of envy.
to shut. v. n. to be closed ; to close itself: as, flowers
open in the day, and shut at night.
shut. participial adjective. rid; clear; free.
we must not pray in one breath to find a thief, and in the
next to get shut of him. i’estrange.
shut. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. close; act of shutting.
i sought him round his palace, made enquiry
of all the slaves: but had for answer,
that since the shut of evening none had seen him. dryden.
2. small door or cover.
the wind-gun is charged by the forcible compression of air,
the imprisoned air serving, by the help of little falls or shuts
within, to stop the vents by which it was admitted. jwilk.
in a very dark chamber, at a round hole, about one third
part of an inch broad, made in the shut of a window, i placed
a glass prism. newton's opticks.
there were no shuts or stopples made for the animal's ears,
... that any loud noise might awaken it. ray's creation.
shutter. m. s. [from shut.]
i. one that shuts. -
2. a cover; a door.
- the wealthy,
in lofty litters borne, read and write, -
or sleep at ease, the shutters make it night. dryden's juven.
shu’ttle. n.s.. [schistspoele, dutch ; soutul, islandick.] the
instrument with which the weaver shoots the cross threads.
i know life is a shuttle. shak. merry wives of windsor,
like shuttles through the loom, so swiftly glide
my feather'd hours. * sandys,
- what curious loom does chance by ev'ning spread
* with what fine shuttle weave the virgin's thread,
which like the spider's net hangs o'er the mead | blackon.
shuttle cock. n.s. [see sh1ttlecock.] . a cork stuck
with feathers, and beaten backward and forward.
with dice, with cards, with billiards far unfit,
with shuttlecocks misseeming manly wit. hubberd's tale.
shy. adj. [showe, dutch; schiso, italian.]
1. reserved; not familiar; not free of behaviour.
i know you shy to be oblig'd,
and still more loth to be oblig'd by me. southern.
what makes you so shy, my good friend? there's no body
loves you better than i. arbuthn, hist, of john bull.
2. cautious; wary; chary.
i am very shy of employing corrosive liquors in the prepara-
tion of medicines. - boyle,
we are not shy of assent to celestial informations, becaus:
they were hid from ages. glanville's stops,
we grant, although he had much wit, "
h' was very shy of using it,
as being loth to wear it out,
and therefore bore it not about. --- o hudibrar.
3. keeping at a distance; unwilling to approach.
ashy fellow was the duke; and, i believe, i know the cause
of his withdrawing. shakoff. measure for mosor,
she is represented in such a shy retiring posture, and covers
her bosom with one of her hands. addison's guardian.
but when we come to seize th' inviting prey,
like a shy ghost, it vanishes away. orris,
4. suspicious; jealous ; unwilling to suffer near acquaintance.
the bruise imposthumated, and turned to a stinking ulcer,
which made every body shy to come near her. arbuthnot.
. the horses of the army, having been daily led before me,
were no longer shy, but would come up to my very feet, with.
out starting. swift.
princes are, by wisdom of state, somewhat shy of their sic-
cessors; and there may be supposed in queens regnant a little
proportion of tenderness that way more than in kings, j/ation.
s1(bilant. adj. [sibilans, latin.] hissing, *.
it were easy to add a nasal letter to each of the other pair
of lisping and sibilant letters, holder's elements of speech.
sibilation. n. s. [from solilo, latin, j a hissing sound.
metals, quenched in water, give a sibilation or hissing sound.
bacon's natural hisloy.
a pipe, a little moistened on the inside, maketh a more
solemn found than if the pipe were dry; but yet with a sweet
degree of sibilation or purling. bacon's nat. hjoy.
s1(camore. m. s. [ scamorus, latin.] a tree.
of trees you have the palm, olive, and scamore. patham.
to s1’ccate. v. a. [sicco, latin.] to dry.
sicca^tron. n.s.. [from siccate.] the aet of drying.
sicci'fick. adj. [siccus and fiv, latin.] causing driness.
siccity. m. s. [siccite, fr. siccitas, from scous, latin.j dri-
ness; aridity; want of moisture.
that which is coagulated by a fiery scrity will suffer coli-
quation from aqueous humidity, as salt and sugar. brown.
the reason some attempt to make out from the siccity and
driness of its flesh. brown's vulgar errouri,
in application of medicaments, consider what degree of heat
and siccity is proper. wiseman's surgery,
sice. n.f. [six, french.] the number six at dice.
my study was to cog the dice,
and dext’rously to throw the lucky sce;
to shun ames-ace, that swept my stakes away.
sich. adj. such. see such. *
i thought the soul would have made me rich;
but now i wote it is nothing sch;
for either the shepherds been idle and still,
and led of their sheep what they will. spensor's pastoral,
sick. adj. [reoc, saxon; sieck, dutch.]
1. afflicted with disease: with of before the disease.
'tis meet we all go forth,
to view the sick and feeble parts of france.
in poison there is physick; and this news,
that would, had i been well, have made mesick,
dryden,
shak. h. w.
being sick, hath in some measure made me well. shakesp.
cassius, i am sick of many griefs. shakesp. ful. casar.
where's the stoick can his wrath appease,
to see his country sick of pym's disease? cleaveland.
despair
tended the sick, busiest from couch to couch. milton,
a spark of the man-killing-trade fell sick. dryden.
visit the sok and the poor, comforting them by some sea-
sonable assistance. nelson.
nothing makes a more ridiculous figure in a man's life,
than the disparity we often find in him sick and well. pott,
2. disordered in the organs of digestion; ill in the stomach.
3. corrupted. -
what we oft do best;
by sick interpreters, or weak ones, is
not ours, or not allow'd: what worst, as oft
hitting a grofler quality, is cried up
for our best act.
4. disgusted.
i do not, as an enemy to peace,
troop in the throngs of military men:
but rather shew a while like fearful war,
to diet rank minds sick of happiness,
and purge th’obstructions, which begin to stop
our very veins of life. shakes eare:
he was not so sick of his master as of his work. l'asirange.
why will you break the sabbath of my days,
now sick alike of envy and of praise pope,
to sick. v. n. [from the noun.j. to ficken; to take a dis-
case. not in use,
shakoff. henry viii.
a little
s
:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 52</div><p class="text">s i c
s i d
a little time before
our great grandfire edward sick'd and died. shakesp. h.iv.
1, sickes. 9...a strosio]
to make sick 3, to disease. -
i. why should one earth, one clime, one stream, one breath,
raise this to strength, and sicken that to death?
eaken ; to impair.
1. tow kinsmen of mine have
by this off. their estates, that never
hey sha | abound as formerly. shakesp. henry viii.
i, sicken. o.o. - -
1. to grow sick; to fall into disease.
i know the more one sickens, the worse he is. shakespeare.
the judges that sat upon the jail, and those that attended,
find upon it, and died.
merely to drive away the time, he sicken'd,
fainted, and died; nor would with ale be quicken'd. mill.
2. to be satiated ; to be filled to disgust.
though the treasure
of nature's germins tumble all together,
ev’n till destruction sicken, answer me
to what i ask you. shakesp. macbeth.
3. to be disgusted, or disordered with abhorrence. -
the ghosts repine at violated ni ht,
and curse th' invading fun, and / on at the fight. dryden.
4. to grow weak; to decay; to languish.
ply'd thick and close, as when the fight begun,
their huge unwieldy navy wastes away:
so soften waining moons too near the sun,
bacon.
and blunt their crescents on the edge of day. dryden.
abstract what others feel, what others think;
all pleasures sicken, and all glories sink. pope,
sicker, adj. [sizer, welsh ; joker, dutch..] sure ; certain;
firm. obsolete.
being some honest curate, or some vicar,
content with little, in condition sicker.
socker, adv. surely; certainly. obsolete.
sicker thou's but a lazy loord,
and rekes much of thy swink,
that with fond terms and withess words,
to bleer mine eyes do'st think. spensor.
sickle. m. s. [ricol, saxon ; sickel, dutch, from secale, or
foula, latin.] the hook with which corn is cut; a reaping-
hook.
god's harvest is even ready for the sole, and all the fields
yellow long ago. spensor on ireland,
time should never,
in life or death, their fortunes sever;
but with his rudy so to now
both down tooetoer at a blow. hudibras.
when corn has once felt the sole, it has no more benefit
from the sunshire. south's sermons.
o'er whom time gently shakes his wings of down,
hubberd's tale.
'till with his silent / to they are mown. dryden.
si'ckle m.a.n. ! o -
- m. / i from sickle. | a reaper.
sicklfr. s [from sickle.] p
you sunburnt so emer, of august weary,
come hither from the turrow, and be merry. shakes care.
their sicklers reap the corn another sows. sandys.
sickliness. m. s. [from sickly..] disposition to sickness; ha-
bitual disease.
impute
his words to wayward scolines; and age. shakesh. r. ii.
next compare the sickline 3, healthfulness, and fruitfulness
of the several years. graunt.
sickly, adv. [from sick.] not in health.
we wear our health but sickly in his life,
which in his death were perfect. shakso. macloth.
sickly. adj. [from sick.]
1. not healthy; not sound; not well; somewhat disordered.
i'm fall'n out with more headier will,
to take the indispos'd and silky fit
for the sound man. shakespeare's king lear.
bring me word, boy, if thy lord looks well;
for he went sickly forth. shako/p. julius casar.
a pleasing cordial, buckingham,
is this thy vow unto my soly heart. shakesp. r. iii.
time seems not now beneath his years to stoop,
nor do his wings with sickly feathers droop. dryden.
would we know what health and ease are worth, let us ask
one that is soly, or in pain, and we have the price. grew.
there affectation, with a soy mien,
shows in her cheek the roses of eighteen;
practis'd to lisp, and hang the head aside,
aints into airs, and languishes with pride.
when on my sickly couch i lay,
impatient both of night and day,
then stella ran to my relief. swift.
our bodies are not only poor and perishing like your
clothes, but, like infected ciotics, fill you with all diseases
and distempers, which oppress the soul with sockly appetites,
and vain cravings. law.
vol. ii.
pope.
- prior."
2. faint; weak; languid.
the moon
-
grows soly at the fight of day,
and early cocks have summond so away. dryan,
..to animate the doubtful fight,
namur in main expects that ray;
in vain france hopes the so asy light
should shine near willian, fuller day. prior.
to sickly. v. a. (from ** a jective.] to make diseased;
to taint with the hue of disease. not in us.
the native hue of resolution
is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thou
si'ckness. n. / [from sick.]
1. state of being diseased,
i do lament the sicknes of the king,
as loth to lose him. - shakesp. rich. iii.
2. disease; malady. - - - - -
my people are with sicknes, much enfeebled, -
my numbers lessen'd. shakesp. henry v.
himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknjo. m.
when i say every so ones, has a tendency to death, i mean
every individuals. knos as well as every kind. j/atts.
trust not too much your now resistless charms;
those age or si...ones, soon or late disarms.
e disorder in the organs of digestion.
side. m. s. [rice, saxon; side, dutch.]
i. the parts of animals fortified by the ribs.
when two boats with rankling malice meet,
their gory sides fresh bleeding fiercely fret,
ere the soft fearful people to the flood
commit their woolly sides. . . -- thomson.
2. any part of any body opposed to any other part. --
the tables were written on both their sides, on the one side
and on the other. - exod. xxxii. 15.
the force of these outward streams might well enough
serve for the turning of the screw, if it were so that both its
sides would equiponderate. wilkins.
3. the right or left. -
the lovely thaïs by his side -
‘.…
roscommon.
ght. shakespeare.
pope.
fairy queen.
sat like a blooming eastern bride -
in flow'r of youth, and beauty's pride,
4. margin; edge; verge.
or where hydaspes’ wealthy sile
pays tribute to the persian pride.
poor wretch! on stormy leas to lose thy life;
for now the flowing tide
had brought the body nearer to the side.
the temple of diana chaste,
a sylvan scene with various greens was drawn, -
shades on the sides, and in the midst a lawn. dryden.
i could see persons dressed in glorious habits, with garlands
upon their heads, lying down by the sides of fountains.
jdryden.
addison.
5. any kind of local respect.
they looking back, all the eastern sole b-held
of paradisc. 44.on.
if our substance be indeed divine,
and cannot cease to be, we are at worst
on this side nothing. milton.
6. party; interest; faction; sect.
their weapons only -
seem'd on our side; but for their spirits and souls,
this word rebellion, it had froze them up, .
as fish are in a pond.... - shakesp. henry iv.
favour, custom, and at last number, will be on the side of
grace. spratt.
men he always took to be
his friends, and dogs his enemy -
who never so much hurt had done him,
as his own side did falling on him. hudibras.
in the serious part of poetry the advantage is wholly on
chaucer's side. - dryden.
that person, who fills their chair, has justly gained the
esteem of all sides by the impartiality of his behaviour. addis.
let not our james, though foil'd in arms, despair,
whilst on his side he reckons half the fair. tickel.
some valuing those of their own side, or mind,
still make themselves the measure of mankind :
fondly we think we honour merit then,
when we but praise ourselves in other men.
he from the taste obscene reclaims our youth,
and sets the passions on the side of truth;
forms the soft bosom with the gentlest art,
and pours each human virtue in the heart. pope,
7. any part placed in contradistinction or opposition to another.
it is used of persons, or propositions respecting each other.
there began a sharp and cruel fight, many being slain and
wounded on both sides. knolles's history of the turks.
the plague is not easily received by such as continually are
about them that have it: on the other side, the plague taketh
soonest hold of those that come out of a fresh air. bacon.
i am too well satisfied of my own weakness to be pleased
with any thing i have written; but, on the other /ide, my
24 b reason
pope,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 53</div><p class="text">s i d
s i e
reason tells me, that what i have long considered ". 23
just as what an ordinary judge will condemn. ryden.
my secret wishes would my choice decide;
but open justice bends to neither side. dryden.
it is granted on both sides, that the fear of a deity doth
universally possess the minds of men. tillotson.
two nations still pursu'd
peculiar ends, on each side resolute
to fly conjunction. - philips.
8. it is used to note consanguinity; as, he's cousin by his mother's
or father's fide,
yet here and there we grant a gentle bride,
whose temper betters by the father's side,
unlike the rest that double human care,
fond to relieve, or resolute to share. parnel.
side. adj. [from the noun.]
1. lateral.
• take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts, and
on the upper door post of the houses. ex. xii. 7.
2. oblique; indirect.
they presume that the law doth speak with all indifferency,
that the law hath no side respect to their persons. hooker.
people are sooner reclaimed by the side wind of a surprize,
than by downright admonition. l’estrange,
one mighty squadron with a side wind sped. "dryden.
the parts of water, being easily separable from each other,
will, by a side motion, be easily removed, and give way to the
... approach of two pieces of marble. locke.
what natural agent could turn them aside, could impel
them so strongly with a transverse side blow against that tre-
mendous weight and rapidity, when whole worlds are a fall-
ing. - bentley's sermons.
he not only gives us the full prospects, but several unex-
pe&amp;ted peculiarities, and side views, unobserved by any painter
but homer. pope's preface to the iliad.
my secret enemies could not forbear some expressions,
which by a side wind reflected on me. swift.
to side. v. n. [from the noun.] -
i. to lean on one side.
all rising to great place is by a winding stair; and if there
be factions, it is good to side a man's self whilst rising, and
balance himself when placed. bacon.
2. to take a party; to engage in a faction.
vex'd are the nobles who have sided
in his behalf. shakesh. coriolanus.
as soon as discontents drove men into sidings, as ill hu-
mours fall to the disaffected part, which causes inflammations,
so did all who affe&amp;ted novelties adhere to that side. k. charles.
terms rightly conceived, and notions duly fitted to them,
require a brain free from all inclination to siding, or affection
to opinions for the authors sakes, before they be well under-
stood. - digby on bodies.
not yet so dully desperate
to side against ourselves with fate;
as criminals, condemn'd to suffer,
are blinded first, and then turn'd over. hudibras.
the princes differ and divide; -
some follow law, and some with beauty side. granville.
it is pleasant to see a verse of an old poet revolting from its
original sense, and siding with a modern subject. addison.
all side in parties, and begin th’ attack. pope.
those who pretended to be in with the principles upon
which her majesty proceeded, either absented themselves where
the whole cause depended, or sided with the enemy. swift.
the equitable part of those who now side against the court,
will probably be more temperate. swift.
si'deboard. m. s. [side and board.] the side table on which
conveniencies are placed for those that eat at the other table.
at a stately sideboard by the wine
that fragrant smell diffus’d. milton's par. regain'd.
no sideboards then with gilded plate were dress'd,
no sweating slaves with massive dishes press'd. dryden.
the snow white damask ensigns are display'd,
and glitt'ring salvers on the sideboard laid. king.
the shining sideboard, and the burnish’d plate,
let other ministers, great anne, require. prior.
africanus brought from carthage to rome, in silver vessels,
to the value of 1 1966 l. 15s. 9 d. a quantity exceeded after-
wards by the sideboards of many private tables. arbuthnot.
s1 debox. n.s.. [side and box.] seat for the ladies on the side
of the theatre.
why round our coaches crowd the white-glov’d beaus
why bows the sidebox from its inmost rows : pope.
s1’defly. m. s. an inse&amp;t.
from a rough whitish maggot, in the intestinum reotum of
horses, the sidesy proceeds. derham's physico-theology.
to si’dle. v. n...[from side.]
1. to go with the body the narrowest way.
the chaffering with dissenters is but like opening a few
wickets, and leaving them no more than one can get in at a
time, and that not without stooping and sidling, and squeezing
his body. " swift.
i passed very gently and sidling through the two principal
streets. swift,
2. to lye on the side.
a fellow nailed up maps in a gentleman's closet, some
sidling, and others upside down, the better to adjust them to
- o. swift.
s1 delong. adj. [side and long..] lateral; oblique; not in
front; not direct. . -
she darted from her eyes a sidelong glance, *
just as she spoke, and, like her words, it flew ;
seem'd not to beg what she then bid me do. dryden,
the deadly wound is in thy soul:
when thou a tempting harlot do'st behold,
and when she casts on thee a sidelong glance,
then try thy heart, and tell me if it dance 2 dryden.
the reason of the planets motions in curve lines is the at-
traction of the sun, and an oblique or sidelong impulse. locka,
the kiss snatch'd hasty from the sidelong maid. thomson,
sid elong. adv.
1. laterally ; obliquely; not in pursuit; not in opposition.
as if on earth
winds under ground, or waters, forcing way,
sidelong had push'd a mountain from his seat,
half sunk with all his pines. milton's paradise loft.
as a lion, bounding in his way, -
with force augmented bears against his prey,
sidelong to seize. dryden's ceyx and alcyone.
2. on the side.
if it prove too wet, lay your pots sidelong; but shade those
which blow from the afternoon sun. evelyn's kalendar.
si’d er. m. s. see cii er.
s1(deral. adj. [from sidus, lat.] starry; astral.
- these changes in the heav'ns, though slow, produc’d
like change on sea, and land; sideral blast,
vapour and mist, and exhalation hot,
corrupt and pestilent milton's paradise loft,
the musk gives
sure hopes of racy wine, and in its youth,
its tender nonage, loads the spreading boughs
with large and juicy offspring, that defies
the vernal nippings and cold sideral blasts. philips,
so. adj. [from sideratus, latin.] blasted; planet
ruck.
parts cauterized, gangrenated, siderated, and mortified,
become black; the radical moisture, or vital sulphur, suffer-
ing an extinetion. brown's vulgar errours.
sideration. m. s. [sideration, fr. sideratio, lat.] a sudden
mortification, or, as the common people call it, a blast; or a
sudden deprivation of sense, as in an apoplexy.
the contagious vapour of the very eggs produce a morti-
fication or sideration in the parts of plants on which they are
laid. . ray on the creation.
s1 desaddle. . m. s. [side and saddle..] a woman's seat on
horseback. - *
si'desman. n.s.. [side and man.] an assistant to the church-
warden.
a gift of such goods, made by them with the consent of
the sidesmen or vestry, is void. ayliffe's parergon.
s1’deways. } adv. [from side and way, or wise..] laterally ;
sidewis e. on one side.
the fair blossom hangs the head
sideways, as on a dying bed ; *
and those pearls of dew she wears,
prove to be presaging tears. - milton.
if the image of the sun should be drawn out into an oblong
form, either by a dilatation of every ray, or by any other ca-
sual inequality of the refractions, the same oblong image
would, by a second resraelion made sideways, be drawn out as
much in breadth by the like dilatation of the rays, or other
casual inequality of the refraction sideways. sewton's optics.
sieg e. m. s. [siege, fr.]
1. the act of besetting a fortified place ; a leaguer.
- our castle's strength
will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie,
*till famine eat them up. shakespeare's macbeth.
it seemed, by the manner of their proceeding, that the
turks purposed rather by long siege than by assault to take
the town. knolles's history of the turks.
the more i see pleasures about me, so much more 1 feel
torment within me, as from the hateful siege
of contraries. milton's paradise loz.
2. any continued endeavour to gain possession.
beat away the busy meddling fiend,
that lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul,
and from his bosom purge this black despair. shakes. h. vi.
give me so much of your time, in exchange of it, as to
lay an amiable siege to the honesty of ford's wife. shakespeare.
love stood the siege, and would not yield his breaft.
dryder:-
3. [siege, french..] seat; throne. obsolete.
drawing to him the eyes of all around,
from lofty singe began these words aloud to sound. fr. qu.
~:
4. place ;
o
o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 54</div><p class="text">s i g
s i g
place; class; rank. obsolete. *
4. i fetch my life and being
from men of royal siege.
your sum of parts
did not together pluck such envy from him,
as did that one, and that in my regard
of the unworthiest siege.
[sige, fr.] stool.
5. it entereth not the veins, but taketh leave of the permeant
parts, as the mouths of the meseraicks, and accompanieth the
inconvertible portion unto the sige. brown's pulgar errours.
1, sieg e. v. 4. [/irger, fr. from the noun...] to besiege. a
word not now in use.
him he had long opprest with tort,
and fast imprisoned in sieged fort. fairy queen.
sirve. n.s. [from soft. j hair or lawn strained upon a hoop,
by which flower is separated from bran, or fine powder from
coarse; a boulter ; a searce.
thy counsel
falls now into my cars as profitless
as water in a sove.
in a sieve i'll thither sail,
and like a rat without a tail,
i'll jo–i'll do—i’ll do. shakespeare's macbeth.
an innocent found a sieve, and presently fell to stopping the
hol l'e/trange.
shakespeare's othello,
shakespeare's hamlet.
shakespeare,
es.
if life sunk through you like a leaky sieve,
accuse yourself you liv'd not while you might.
t, sift. v. a. [riptan, saxon ; sisten, dutch.]
1. to separate by a sieve.
in the sisting of such favour all that came out could not be
expeded to be pure meal, but must have a mixture of padar
drydon.
and bran. j/otton.
1. to separate ; to part.
when yellow sands are sisted from below,
the glitt'rong billows give a golden show. dryden.
3. to examine ; to try.
we have sisted your objections against those pre-eminences
roval. hooker.
all which the wit of calvin could from thence draw, by
fing the very utmost sentence and syllable, is no more than
that certain speeches seem to intimate, that all christian
churches ought to have their elderships. hocker.
i fear me, if thy thoughts were sisted,
the king thy sovercign is not quite exempt
from envious malice of thy swelling heart. shak. hon. vi.
as near as i could sist him on that argument. shakespeare.
opportunity i here have had
to try thee, so thee, and confess have sound thce
proof against all temptation as a ro k
of adamant. a filton's paradise regain'd.
one would think, that every member who embraces with
vehemence the principles of eithcr of these parties, had tho-
roughly sisted and examined them, and was secretly convinced
of their preference to those he rejects. addison.
s'ftfr. m. s. [from so.) he who fifts.
sig was used by the saxons for victory: sigbert, famous for
victory ; sigward, victorious preserver ; , sigard, conquering
temper: and almost in the same sense are nicocles, nicomya-
chus, nicander, victor, victorinus, vincentius, &amp;c. gibson.
t. sich. v. n. [rican, riceczan, saxon ; suchten, dutch..] to
emit the breath audibly, as in grief.
i lov'd the maid i married ; never man
sigh’d truer breath. shakespeare's coriolanus.
i'll not be made a soft and dull-ey'd fool,
to shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
to christian intercessors. shakesp. merch. of venice.
he sched deeply in his spirit, and faith, why doth this ge-
neration seek after a sign : a far. viii. 1 2.
for the oppression of the poor, for the sshing of the needy
will i arise. ps, xii. 5.
happier he,
who socks not pleasure through necessity,
than such as once on flipp'ry thrones were plac'd,
and chasing, sigh to think themselves are chas'd. ixryden.
the nymph too longs to be alone;
leaves all the swains, and sghs for one. prior.
t. sich. v. a. to lament; to mourn. not in use.
ages to come, and men unborn, -
shall bless her name, and sigh her fate. prior.
sich. n. s. [from the verb j a violent and audible emission
of the breath which has been long retained, as in sa 'ness.
full often has my heart swoln with keeping my fighs im-
prisoned; full often have the tears i drove back from mine
“yes, turned back to drown my heart. sidney.
love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sh; ;
being purg'd, a fire sparking in lovers eyes. shakespeare.
what asgh is there ! the heart is forely charg''. shop.
laughing, if loud, ends in a deep joh; and …" pleasures
have a iting in the tail, though they carry beauty on the face.
tay lor.
6
3. act of seeing or beholding; view.
* venus' temple, on the fides were seen
sigo":#; that smok'd along the wall.
1. perception by
- bryden,
*ree, saxon; sight, gescht, dutch.]
the eye the sense of seeing.
if bees go forth right to a place, they must needs *::::
o loss of sight, of thee i most complain agents
blind among enemies, o wors. than chains, -
dungeon of beggary, decrepit age milton's agonisłet.
things invisible to mortal sight. amilton
'tis still the same, although their airy shape -
all but a quick poetick/ght escape. p
my eyes are somewhat dimish grown ;
for nature, always in the right,
to your decays adapts my fight.
enham.
- - - - - - - swift.
2. open view ; a situation in which nothing obstructs the wift
undaunted hotspur eye.
brings on his army, eager unto fight,
and plac'd the same before the king in sight. daniel
æneas cast his wond'ring eyes around, -
and all the tyrrhene army had in sight,
stretch'd on the spacious plain from left to right. dryden.
i met brutidius in a mortal fright;
he's dipt for certain, and plays least in fight. dryd juv,
nine things to sight required are;
the pow'r to see, the light, the visible thing,
being not too small, toothin, too nigh, too far,
clos space and time, the form distinct to bring. davier.
mine eye pursu'd him still, but under shade
lost sight of him. milton's paradis? loft,
what form of death could him affright, -
who unconcern'd, with sledfast sight,
could view the surges mounting steep,
and monsters rolling in the deep dryden's horace.
having little knowledge of the circumstances of those st.
paul writ to, it is not strange that many things lie concealed
to us, which they who were concerned in the letter under-
stood at first soot. locke.
4. notice; knowledge.
it was writ as a private letter to a person of piety. upon
an assurance that it should never come to any one's sight, but
her own. wake.
5. eye ; instrument of seeing,
from the depth of hell they list their sight,
and at a distance see superior light. dryden.
6. aperture pervious to the eye, or other point fixed to guide
the eye; as, the sights of a quadrant.
their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel. shakes.
7. spectacle; show; thing to be seen.
thus are my eyes still captive to one sight; *
thus all my thoughts are slaves to one thought still. sidney.
them seem'd they never saw a sight so fair
of fowls so lovely, that they sure did deem
them heavenly born.
not an eye
but is a-weary of thy common sight,
save mine, which hath desir'd to see thee more. shakespeare.
moses said, i will turn aside and see this great sight why
the bush is not burnt. - x. iii. 3.
i took a felucca at naples to carry me to rome, that i
spensor.
might not run over the same sights a second time, addison.
not proud olympus yields a noblersight,
though gods assembled grace his tow ring height,
than what more humble mountains offer here,
where, in their blessings, all those gods appear.
pope.
before you pass th’ imaginary sights -
of lords and earls, and dukes and garter'd knights,
while the spread fan o'ershades your closing eyes,
then give one flirt, and all the vision flies.
pope.
s1 ghted. adj. [from sight.] seeing in a particular manner.
it is used only in composition, as quick/ghted, shortsghted.
as they might, to avoid the weather, pull the joints of the
coach up close, so they might put each end down, and remain
as discovercq and open sighted as on horseback. sidney.
the king was very quick sighted in discerning difficulties,
and raising objections, and very slow in mastering them.
- clarendon.
s1 ghtfulness. m. s. [from sight and full.] perspicuity; clear-
ness of sight. not in use. -
but still, although we fail of perfeot rightfulness,
seek we to tame these childish superfluities;
let us not wink, though void of purest sightfulness. sidney.
s1’g htle'ss. adj. [from sight.]
1. wanting sight; blind.
the latent tracts, the giddy heights explore,
of all who blindly creep, or sightless soar. pope.
2. not fightly; offensive to the eye; unpleasing to look at.
full of unpleasing blots and sightle's stains,
patch'd with foul moles, and eye-offending marks. shak.
si's htly.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 55</div><p class="text">s i g
s i g
sightly. adj. [from soht.] pleasing to the eye; striking to
the view. . - . . . . .
. it lies as sightly on the back of him,
as great alcides shews upon an ass. shakes). k. john.
their having two eyes and two ears so placed, is more
sqhtly and useful. more's antidote against atheism.
- a great many brave sghtly horses were brought out, and
only one plain nag that made sport. l’estrange.
we have thirty members, the most sightly of all her majesty's
subjects: we elected a president by his height. addison.
s1. gil. n. s. isgillum. lat.] seal; signature.
sorceries to raise th' infernal pow'rs,
to . and sigils fram'd in planetary hours.
sign. m. s. [signe, fr. signum, lat.] -
1. a token of anything; that by which anything is shown.
signs must resemble the things they fignify. hooker.
signs for communication may be contrived from any variety
of objects of one kind appertaining to either sense. holder.
to express the passions which are seated in the heart by
outward signs, is one great precept of the painters, and very
difficult to perform. dryden's dufresnoy.
when any one uses any term, he may have in his mind a
to determined idea which he makes it the sign of, and to which
he should keep it steadily annexed. - locke.
2. a wonder ; a miracle ; a prodigy.
if they will not hearken to the voice of the first sign, they
dryd. knight's tale.
will not believe the latter sign. ex. iv. 8.
compell’d by signs and judgments dire. milton.
3. a pieurehung at a door, to give notice what is sold within.
. . . i found my miss, struck hands, and pray’d him tell,
to hold acquaintance still, where he did dwell;
he barely nam'd the street, promis'd the wine;
but his kind wife gave me the very sign.
underneath an alehouse' paltry sign.
true sorrow's like to wine,
- that which is good does never need a sign. suckling.
. . . wit and fancy are not employed in any one article so much
: as that of contriving signs to hang over houses. swift.
4. a monument; a memorial. 2
. . . . an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace.
ommon prayer.
... the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men, and they
: became a sign. um. xxvi. io.
5. a constellation in the zodiack.
there stay until the twelve celestial signs
have brought about their annual reckoning. shakespeare.
now did the sign reign, and the constellation was come,
... under which perkin should appear. bacon's henry vii.
after ev'ry foe subdu'd, the sun -
thrice through the sgns his annual race shall run. dryden.
6. note or token given without words.
donne.
shakesp. h. vi.
they made siggs to his father. luke.
7. mark of distinction ; cognizance.
... ... the ensign of messiah blaz'd,
aloft by angels borne, his sign in heaven. milton.
8. typical representation ; symbol.
- the holy symbols or sons are not barely significative; but
what they represent is as certainly delivered to us as the sym-
bols themselves. ... . . - brerewood.
9. a subscription of one's name: as, a sign manual.
to sign. v. a. [signo, lat.] -
1. to mark.
. you sign your place and calling in full seeming
with meekness and humility ; but your heart
is cramm'd with arrogancy. shakesp. henry viii.
2. [signer, french..] to ratify by hand or seal. -
be pleas'd to sign these papers: they are all
- of great concern - dryden’s cleomenes.
3. to betoken; to signify 5 to represent typically.
the sacraments and symbols are just such as they seem ;
but because they are made to be figns of a secret mystery, they
receive the names of what themselves do sign. taylor.
signal.. n.s. [signal, french; sennale, spanish..] notice
given by a sign ; a sign that gives notice.
the weary sun hath made a golden set,
and, by the bright track of his firy car,
gives signal of a goodly day to-morrow.
- shakes?eare's richard iii.
scarce the dawning day began to spring,
as at a signal giv'n, the streets with clamours ring. dryden.
sa'gnal. adj. [signal, french..] eminent; memorable; re-
markable.
he was esteemed more by the parliament, for the signal acts
of cruelty committed upon the irish. clarendon.
. the thames frozen twice in one year, so as men to walk
on it, is a very signal accident. swift.
signa lity. m. s. [from signal.j quality of something re-
markable or memorable.
of the ways whereby they enquired and determined its sig-
mality, the first was natural, arising from physical causes.
brown.
3
it seems a signality in providence, in ere&amp;ting your society
in such a juncture of dangerous humours. glanvili,
to signalize., v. a. [signaler, fr.] to make eminent; to
make remarkable. o
many, who have endeavoured to sgnalize themselves b
works of this nature, plainly discover that they are not ac'.
quainted with arts and sciences. addison.
some one eminent spirit, having signalized his valour and
fortune in defence of his country, or by popular arts at home
becomes to have great influence on the people. swift.
si'gnally. adv. [fron sgnal.] eminently; remarkably; fl.
morably.
persons signally and eminently obliged, yet misfing of the
utmost of their greedy designs in swallowing both gifts and
giver too, instead of thanks for received kindnesses, have bel
took themselves to barbarous threatnings. south,
sign ation. m. s. [from signo, latin.]. sign given; act of
betokening.
a horseshoe baptista porta hath thought too low a sona.
tion, he raised unto a lunary representation. - brown.
signature. m. s. [signature, fr. signatura, from signs, lat.]
1. a sign or mark impressed upon anything; a stamp; a mark.
the brain being well furnished with various traces, signa.
tures, and images, will have a rich treasure always ready to
be offered to the soul. - j/atts.
that natural and indelible sgnature of god, which human
souls, in their first origin, are supposed to be stampt with,
we have no need of in disputes against atheisin. bently.
- vulgar parents cannot stamp their race
with signatures of such majestick grace. pope's odyssey.
2. a mark upon any matter, particularly upon plants, by which
their nature or medicinal use is pointed out.
all bodies work by the communication of their nature, or
by the impression and signatures of their motions: the diffusion
of species visible, seemeth to participate more of the former,
and the species audible of the latter. bacon's nat. history.
some plants bear a very evident signature of their nature and
use. - a4%re against atheism,
seek out for plants, and signatures,
to quack of universal cures. hudoras.
herbs are described by marks and sgnatures, so far as to
distinguish them from one another. baker on learning.
3. proof drawn from marks.
the most despicable pieces of decayed nature are curiously
wrought with eminent signatures of divine wisdom. glanvil.
some rely on certain marks and signatures of their election,
and others on their belonging to some particular church or
seoł. rogers.
4. [among printers.] some letter or figure to distinguish dif-
ferent sheets. -
si’o naturist. n.s.. [from signature.] one who holds the
doctrine of signatures. a word little used.
signaturios seldom omit what the ancients delivered, draw-
ing unto inference received distinctions.
sison er. m. s. [from sign.] one that figns.
s1 g net. m. s. s.signette, fr.] a seal commonly used for the
seal-manual of a king.
i’ve been bold
to them to use your signet and your name. shakes). timon.
here is the hand and seal of the duke : you know the cha-
raeter, i doubt not, and the signet. shakesp. meas, for meas.
give thy signet, bracelets, and staff. gen. xxxviii. 18.
brown.
he delivered him his private sgnet. knollis.
proof of my life my royal signet made. dryden.
the impression of a signet ring. ayliffo's parergon.
signi'ficance. -
signi'ficancy. } m. s. [from signify.]
1. power of signifying ; meaning.
speaking is a sensible expression of the notions of the mind
by discriminations of utterance of voice, used as signs, having
by consent several determinate significancies. holder.
if he declares he intends it for the honour of another, he
takes away by his words the significance of his action. stillings.
2. force : energy; power of impresfing the mind.
the clearness of conception and expression, the boldness
maintained to majesty, the significancy and sound of words,
not strained into bombast, must escape our transient view upon
the theatre. dryden.
as far as this duty will admit of privacy, our saviour hath
enjoined it in terms of particular significancy and force. atters.
i have been admiring the wonderful significancy of that word
persecution, and what various interpretations it hath acquired.
- swift,
3. importance; moment; consequence. .”
how fatal would such a distinetion have proved in former
reigns, when many a circumstance of less significancy has been
construed into an overt act of high treason f addison.
signi'ficant. adj. [signifiant, fr. significans, lat.]
1. expressive of something beyond the external mark.
since you are tongue-ty'd, and so loth to speak,
in dumb fignificant; proclaim your thoughts. shakes. h. vi.
2. betokening ;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 56</div><p class="text">s i g
peakening; standing as a sign of something.
it was well said of plotinus, that the stars were sgnificant,
but not officient. - - - raleigh.
3. expressive of representative in an eminent degree; forcible to
impress the intended meaning.
whereas it may be objected, that to add to religious duties
such rites and ceremonies as are significant, is to institute new
sacraments. ... . . hooker.
common life is full of this kind of fignificant expressions,
by knocking, beckoning, frowning, and pointing; and dumb
persons are logous in the use of them. holder on speech.
the romans joined both devices, to make the emblem the
more /ignificant; as: indeed, they could not too much extol
the larning and military virtues of this emperor. addison.
1. important; momentoos. a low word.
significantly. adv. [rom significant j. with force of ex-
ression.
christianity is known in scripture by no name so significantly
as by the simplicity of the gospel. south.
signification. m. s. [..signification, fr. sonificatio, lat. from
*ntry.
i. #. aa of making known by figns.
a lye is properly a species of injustice, and a violation of
the right of that person to whom the false speech is directed ;
for all speaking, or sonification of one's mind, implies an act
or address of one man to another. south.
1. meaning expressed by a sign or word.
an adjective requireth another word to be joined with him,
to show his signification. accidence.
brute animals make divers motions to have several significa-
tons, to call, warn, cherish, and threaten. holder.
sics: ficative. adj. [/gnif.otif, fr. from signiff.]
1. betokening by an external sign.
the holy symbols or signs are not barely significative, but
what by divine institution they represent and testify unto our
souls, is truly and certainly delivered unto us. brerewood.
2. forcible; strongly expresive.
neither in the degrees of kindred they were destitute of
softative words; for whom we call grandfather, they called
ealdfader; whom we call great-grandfather, they called thirda-
fader. camden's remaint.
significator y. m. s. [from sonisy..] that which signifies
or betokens.
here is a double sonificatory of the spirit, a word and a sign.
taylor.
2.
7, si:gnify. v. a. [sonifer, fr. sonific, lat.]
1. to declare by some token or sign; sometimes simply to de-
clare.
stephano, s-roy
within the house your mistress is at hand.
the maid from that ill omen turn'd her eyes,
nor knew what signiff'd the boding fign,
but found the pow'rs displeas'd. dryden.
those parts of nature, into which the chaos was divided,
they signied by dark and obscure names; as the night, tar-
torus, and oceanus. burnet's theory of the earth.
1. to mean ; to express. -
life's but a walking shadow; a poor player,
that struts and frcts his hour upon the stage,
and then is heard no more ' it is a tale,
told by an ideot, full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing ! shakespeare's macbeth.
by scripture, antiquity, and all ecclesiastical writers, it is
constantly appropriated to saturday, the day of the jews sab-
bath, and but of late years used to sons, the lord's day.
nelson.
3. to import; to weigh. this is seldom used but interroga-
tively, what signific, * or with much, little, or nothing.
though he that fins frequently, and repents frequently,
gives reason to believe his repentances before god signify
nothing; yet that is nothing to us. taylor.
iłzat signifies the splendor of courts, considering the slavish
attendances that go along with it l’estrange.
he hath one way more, which although it sonify little to
men of sober reason, yet unhappily hits the suspicious humour
of men, that governors have a design to impose. tillotson.
if the first of these fail, the power of adam, were it never
so great, will sons, nothing to the present societies in the world.
locke.
joat sonife, the people's consent in making and repealing
laws, if the person who administers hath no tie. swift.
4. to make known; to declare.
i'll to the king, and sons; to hin,
that thus i have resign'd to you my charge. shao. r. iii.
he sent and/orif d it by his angel unto john. rev. i. i.
the gover on should ority to the protestants of ireland,
that want of fiver is not to be remedied. swift.
7, siosity. v. r. to express meaning with force.
if the word be but comely and so, and the scnse
gon:le, there is juice; but were that wanteth, the language
s stain. ion. joson.
* \tory. m. s. (signoria, italian.]
shaos care.
vol. ii.
-
s i l f
1. lordship; dominion.
at that time
through all the seniories it was the first,
and prospero the prime duke. shaks). to
- - - … at p. to. s?.
the earls, their titles and their signiories
they must restore again. daniel's civil war,
my brave progenitors, by valour, zeal
gain'd those high honours, princely sig o o
- *so to 2
and proud prerogatives.
2. it is used by shakspeare for seniority.
if ancient sorrow be most reverent,
give mine the benefit of signiary, -
, and let my griefs frown on the upper hand. shaos. r. iii.
signpost. n.s.. [sign and post.] that upon which a
he should share with them in the preserving
a shed or signpost. ben. johnson's catolio.
this noble invention of our author's hath been copied by fo
many signpost dawbers, that now 'tis grown ful some, rather
by their want of skill than by the commonness. drydon.
si’ke r. adj. and adv. the old word for sure, or surry. speyer.
sroker ness. n.s.. [from siker.] sureness; safety.
s1 len ce. m. s. [silence, fr. silentium, lat. 1
1. the state of holding peace; forbearance of speech.
unto me men gave car, and waited and kept force at my
counsel. jab, xxix. 21.
i suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over
the man, but to be in silence. 1 lim. ii. 12.
first to himself he inward silence broke. azilton.
speech submissively withdraws
from rights of subjects, and the poor man's cause,
then pompous silence reigns, and stills the noisy laws. pope.
here all their rage, and ev'n their murmurs cease,
and sacred silence reigns, and universal peace.
2. habitual taciturnity; not loquacity.
i think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence,
and discourse grow commendable in none but parrots. shak.
3. secrecy. -
4. stilness; not noise.
hail happy groves, calm and secure retreat
of sacred/i.ence, rest's eternal seat.
5. not mention; oblivion ; obscurity.
nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell;
for strength from truth divided, and from just,
illaudable, nought merits but dispraise
and ignominy; yet to glory aspires,
vain-glorious, and through infamy seeks fame;
therefore eternal silence be their doom.
thus fame shall be atchiev’d.
j.7./?.
sign hangs.
poe.
rosemino”.
also:7.
and what most merits fame in silence hid. a.iom.
silence. inters. an authoritative restraint of specch.
sir, have pity; i'll be his surety.—
–silence : one word more
shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. shakespeare,
to sile ncs. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to oblige to hold peace ; to forbid to speak.
we must suggest the propic, that to spow'r
he wou'd have made then mules, sooned their pleaders, and
dispropertied their freedoms. shase pare.
the ambassador is silenc'd, sorore's lon. viii.
silence that dreadful bell; it frights toe isle
from her propriety. soare's othe'o.
this passed as an oracle, and silenced those that moved the
question. bacon's henry vil.
thus could not the mouths of worthy martyrs be silenced,
who being exposed unto wolves, gave loud expretions of their
faith, and were heard as high as incave in. pratton.
this would since all further opposition. !arendon.
since in dark sorrow i my days did spend,
i could not silence my complaints. derham.
had they duly considered the extent of infinite knowledge
and power, these would have silenced their scruples, and they
had adored the amazing myttery. rogers.
if it please him altogether to silence me, so that i shall not
only speak with difficulty, but wholly be disabled to open my
mouth, to any articulate utterance; yet i hope he will give
me grace, even in my thoughts, to praise him. jvase.
2. to still.
these dying lovers, and their floating sons, * r *
suspend the fight and since all our guns. waller.
the thundrer spoke, nor dust the queen reply; -
a reverend horror silenc'd all the sky. pope’s iliad.
si'len r. adj. [siens, lat.]
1. not speaking ; mute. - -
o my god, i cry in the day time, and in the night season
i am not silent. 'salms, xxii. 2.
silent, and in face
confounded long they sat as stricken mute.
2. not talkative; not lcquacious.
ulysses, id: he, o the most eloquent and most sont of
men; he knew that a word spoken never wrought to much
milton.
good as a word conceal’d. broome.
still ; having no noise.
3. still ; -&gt; 24 c deep
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 57</div><p class="text">s i l
s i l
ideep night, dark night, the silent of the night,
the time of night when troy was set on fire,
the time when screech-owls cry, and ban-dogs howl. shak.
now is the pleasant time,
the cool, the silent, save where silence yields
to the night-warbling bird. *
4. wanting efficacy. i think an hebraism.
second and instrumental causes, together with nature itself,
without that operative faculty which god gave them, would
become silent, virtueless and dead, raleigh's history.
the sun to me is dark, -
and silent as the moon,
when she deserts the night,
hid in her vacant interlunar cave...
5. not mentioning. -
this new created world, whereof in hell
fame is not silent. *
si'i. ent ly. adv. [from silent.]
i. without speech. .
when with one three nations join to fight,
they silenty confess that one more brave.
for me they beg, each silently
demands thy grace, and seems to watch thy eye.
2. without noise.
you to a certain victory are led ;
your men all arm'd stand silently within.
. without mention. -
the difficulties remain still, till he can show who is meant
by right heir, in all those cases where the present possessor hath
no son: this he silently pasies over. locke.
silicious. adj. [from cilicium.] it should be therefore written
cilicious. mlade of hair. -
the silicious and hairy vests of the striotest orders of friars,
derive their institution from st. john and elias, brown.
s;1.1"culos e. adi. [silicula, lat.] husky : full of busks. die?.
st. i'd inos e. adj. [saiginosus, lat.] made of fine wheat. dici.
si(l).o.o. n.f. [latin.] -
1. [with gold finers.]. a carat of which six make a scruple.
milton.
milton.
dryden.
dryden.
dryden.
-
2. [si quo, fr. with botanists.] the seed-vessel, husk, cod,
or shool of such plants as are of the pulse kind.
si'liquose. adj. [from siliqua, latin.]
si(liquous. } capsula.
all the tetrapetalo is siliquoso plants are alkalescent.
sir k.m. s. [reole, saxon.)
1. the thread of the worm that turns afterwards to a butterfly.
the worms were hallow'd that did breed the silk;
and it was dy’d in mummy, which the skilful
conserv'd of maiden's hearts. shakespeare's othello.
2. the stuff made of the worms thread.
let not the creaking of shoes, or rustling of silks betray thy
poor heart to woman. shakespeare.
he caused the shore to be covered with persian silk for him
to tread upon. knolles.
without the worm, in persian silks we shine. j/aller.
si'lk en. adj. [from silk.] -
1. made of silk. -
men counsel and give comfort to that grief
which they themselves not feel; but tasting it,
their counsel turns to passion, which before
would give preceptial medicine to rage;
fetter strong madness in a si'ken thread ;
charmach with air, and agony with words.
now, will we revel it
with siken coats, and caps, and golden rings. shakes eare.
she weeps, and words address'd seem tears dissolv’d,
dic.
having a pod, or
arbuth.
shakespeare.
wetting the borders of her silken veil. 41ilton.
2. soot; tender.
full many a jady fair, in court full oft
beholding them, him set ictly envide,
and wisht that two such fans, so silken soft, -
and golden fair, her love would her provide. spensor.
all the youth of england are on fire,
and silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies. shakesh. hen. v.
for then the hills with pleasing shades are crown'd,
and sleeps are sweeter on the silken ground. dryden.
dress up virtue in ail the beauties of oratory, and you will
find the wild passions of men too violent to be restrained by
such mild and silken language. jwatts on the mind.
3. dressed in silk.
sha'] a beardless boy,
a cocker'd, silken wanton, brave our fields,
and flesh his firit in a warlike soil,
mocking the air with colours idly spread,
and find no check shakespeare's king john.
s11 km ercer. m. s. [sil, and mercer.] a dealer in silk.
silk we av er. m. s. [ silk and weaver.] one whose trade is to
weave silken manufactures.
true english hate your monsieurs paltry arts ;
for you are all silk-weavers in your hearts.
the chinese are ingenious silk-weavers.
s11 kwo rm1, n.s.. [sao and worm.]
iiik.
dryden.
l?atts.
the worm that spins
-- - - milton.
grashoppers eat up the green of whole countries, and so-
worms devour leaves swiftly. bacon's natural history,
broad were the banners, and of snowy hue,
a purer web the silk-worm never drew.
si'lky. adj [from silk.]
1. made of silk.
2. soft ; pliant.
these kind of knaves, in plainness,
harbour more craft, and more corrupter ends
than twenty silky ducking observants, -
that stretch their duties nicely. shakespeare's king lear.
sill. m. s. [ryl, saxon ; soil, french ; sulle, dutch..] the
timber or stone at the foot of the door.
the farmer's goose,
grown fat with corn and fitting still,
can scarce get o'er the barn-door sill:
and hardly waddles forth. swift.
si'll abu b. m. s. [this word has exercised the etymologists.
alsinshow thinks it corrupted from swillingbubbles. junius
omits it. henshaw, whom skinner follows, deduces it from
the dutch sulle, a pipe, and buyck, a paunch ; because silla-
bubs are commonly drunk through a spout, out of a jug with
a large belly. it seems more probably derived from effl, in
old english ving r, sil a touc, vinegar for the mouth, vinegar
made pleasant.] curus made by milking upon vinegar.
joan takes her neat rubb'd pail, and now -
she trips to milk the sand-red cow ;
where, for some sturdy foot-ball swain,
joan strokes a sillabub or twain.
a feast,
by some rich farmer's wife and sister drest,
might be resembled to a sick man's dream,
where all ideas huddling run so fast,
that silialubs come first, and soups the last.
sil lily, adv. [from sity.]
ishly. -
i wonder much, what thou and i
did till we lov’d were we not wean'd till then,
but suck'd on childish pleasures siliy `
or slumber'd we in the seven sleepers den? donne.
we are caught as solily as the bird in the net. l’eirange.
do, do, look siliff, good colonel; 'tis a decent melancholy
after an absolute defeat. dryden.
si'll in ess. m. s. [from so!!y.] simplicity ; weakness; harm-
less folly.
the hows of the person does not derogate from the dig-
nity of his characier. l'erange.
si'll y. adj. [slig, german. skinner.]
1. harmless; ingocent; inoffensive; plain; artless.
2. weak; helpless.
after long storms,
in dread of death and dangerous dismay,
with which my silly bark was tossed fore,
dryden.
wotton.
king. -
in a 3.5 manner; simply; fool-
i do at length descry the happy shore. spensar.
3. foolish ; withess.
perhaps their loves, or else their sheep,
was that did their silly thoughts so busy keep. morzz.
the meanest subjects censure the actions of the greatest
prince; the sillis' servants, of the wisest master. temple.
i have no discontent at living here; besides what arises from
a silly spirit of liberty, which i resolve to throw off. swift.
such parts of writings as are stupid or silly, false or mistaken,
should become subjects of occasional criticism. //arts.
he is the companion of the filliest people in their most silly
pleasure, he is ready for every impertinent entertainment and
diversion. * lazo.
si’i lyhow. m. s. [perhaps from reliz, happy, and peopt, the
head..] the membrane that covers the head of the foetus.
great conceits are raised, of the membranous covering
called the solyhow, sometimes found about the heads of chil-
dren upon their birth. brown's pulgar errours.
silt. n. s. mud ; slime. -
several trees of oak and fir stand in firm earth below the
moor, near thorny, in all probability covered by inundation,
and the sit and moorish earth exaggerated upon them. hale.
silv a.n. adj. [from silva, lat..] woody full of woods.
betwixt two rows of rocks, a silvan scene
appears above, and groves for ever green.
silver. m. s. [reoiren, saxon; silver, dutch..]
1. silver is a white and hard metal, next in weight to gold.
dryden.
//atts's logi. 8.
2. anything of soft splendour.
pallas, piteous of her plaintive cries,
in slumber clos'd her silver streaming eyes.
3. money made of silver.
s1 lver. adj.
1. made of silver.
pope.
put my silver cup in the sack's mouth. gen. xliv. 2.
he nec had the huntress dian her dread bow,
fair silver-shafted queen for ever chastc. alos. 2:-
the sor-shafted goddess of the place. pope's coy.
2. white like silver,
of
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 58</div><p class="text">s i m
s i mi
y
\o - -
..o. of all the race of silver-winged flies
*ww. - - -
y was none more favourable, nor more fair, . .
* than clarion. spensor.
old salisbury, shame to thy sover hair, - - -
thou mad misleader of thy brain-sick son. shakoff care.
the great in honour are not always wise, --
th; nor judgment under silver tresses iies. sands.
so others on sover jakes and rivers bath'd -
their downy breast. milton,
3. having a pale lustre. - -
so sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
to those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
as thy eye beams, when their fresh rays have smote
the night of dew that on my cheeks down flows;
nor shines the silver moon one half so bright,
through the transparent bosom of the deep,
as doth thy face through tears of mine give light. shak.
4. soft of voice: this phrase is italian, voce argentina.
from all their groves, which with the heavenly noises
of their swcet instruments were wont to found,
and th’ hollow hills, from which their silver voices
were wont redoubled ecchoes to rebound,
did now rebound with nought but rueful cries,
and yelling shrieks thrown up into the skies. spenser.
it is my love that calls upon my name, -
how silver sweet sound lovers tongues by night,
a like softest musick to attending ears. . shakespeare.
to silv er. v. a. [from the noun. -
1. to cover superficially with silver.
there be fools alive, i wis,
t
s silver'd o'er, and so was this. ... ', shakoffeare. ,
the splendour of silver is more pleasing to some eyes, than
* that of gold ; as in cloth of silver, and silver'd rapiers. bacon.
silvering will fully and canker more than gilding. bacon.
a gilder shewed me a ring silver'd over with mercurial fumes,
which he was then to restore to its native yellow. boyle.
2. to adorn with mild lustre. -- -
here retir'd the sinking billows sleep, ;
- and smiling calmness silver'd o'er the deep. pope.
. . . siolv er beater. m. s. [silver and beat..] one that foliates fil-
- - wer. o
silverheaters chuse the finest coin, as that which is most ex-
tensive under the hammer. boyle.
s1’lv erling.. n.s. a silver coin.
a thousand vines, at a thousand silverlings, shall be for
briars and thorns. “ . . . isaiah, vii. 23.
siolv erly. adv. [from silver.] with the appearance of silver.
let me wipe off this honourable dew
that silverly doth progress on thy cheeks. shałeshcare.
si’i.v ersmith. n. s. [silver and saith..] one that works in
silver.
o, demetrius a silversmith, made shrines for diana. a:is, xix.
o, so n. s. [acanthium vulgare, lat.] pl
si lv erw eed. n. s. [argentina, lat.] lants.
silv ertre e. m. s. [conocarpodendron, lat.] a plant. miller.
si’lv ery. adj. [from silver.] besprinkled with silver.
a gritty stone, with small spangles of a white silvery talc in
- - //oodward on fissils.
of all th' enamel'd race whose sov’ry wing
waves to the tepid zephyrs of the spring,
once brightest shin'd this child of heat and air. dunciad.
si’mar. n. s. [/imarre, fr.] a woman's robe.
the ladies dress'd in rich simiars were seen,
of florence fattin, flower'd with white and green. dryden.
§:...} adj. [similaire, fr. from similis, lat.]
1. homogeneous; having one part like another; uniform.
minerals appear to the eye to be persectly similar, as metals;
or at least to consist but of two or three distinct ingredients,
as cinnabar. o boyle.
2. resembling; having resemblance.
the laws of england, relative to those matters, were the
original and exemplar from whence those similar or parallel
laws of scotland were derived. hale's coon. law of england.
s: xi 11. a r ry. m. s. (from similar.] likeness ; uniformity.
the blood and chyle are mixed, and by attrition attenuated;
by which the mixture acquires a greater degree of fluidity and
similarity, or homogeneity of parts. arbuthnot.
. si v1.11. e. m. s. [ simile, lat.) a comparison by which anything
- is illustrated or aggrandized.
their rhimes,
full of protest, of oath, and big compare,
want similes. shakspeare's troilus and croftia.
lucentio slip'd me, like his greyhound, -
it.
o
. vvhich runs himself, and catches for his master— -
—a good swift solio, but something currish. soaks care.
in argumcat, -
-. similes are like songs in love,
* to: they much describe; they nothing prove. prior.
3 to poets, to give a joose to a was m fancy, not only expatiate
2- in their similes, but introduce them too frequently. garth.
* - sim is lit ude. w.j. (somilitade, fr. jonilitudo, lat, j
i. likeness ; resemblance. - -
similitude of substance would cause attraction, where the
body is wholly freed from the motion of gravity; for then lead
would draw lead. - - - bacon's natural history.
our immortal souls, while righteous, are by god himself
beautified with the title of his own image and similitude. ral.
let us make man in our image, man
in our similitude, and o rule . . . * * * * -
over the fish and fowl: " ' ' ' - milton.
similitude to the deity was not regarded in the things they
- - - - * 4 - - - - -&gt;
gave divine worship to, and looked on as symbols of the god
they worshipped. - -, - . ... stillingfict.
if we compare the picture of a man, drawn at the years of
seventeen, with that of the same person at the years of three-
score, hardly the least trace of similitade of ong face can be
found in the other. souto.
fate some future bard shall join, - -
in sad similitude of griefs to mine, - - - -
condemn’d whole years in absence to deplore,
and image charms he must behold no more. pope.
2. comparison ; simile. -- - -
plutarch, in the first of his trastates, by sundry smilitudes,
shews us the force of education. - i/otton.
taslo, in his similitudes, never departed from the woods;
that is, all his comparisons were taken from the country.
- o . . . dryden.
sim it ar. m. s. [see c1'meter.] a crooked or falcated sword
with a convex edge. - - - - -
to simmer. v. n. [a word made probably from the sound, but
written by skinner, sinler.] to boil gently ; to boil with a
gentle hissing. - . . . . . .
place a vessel in warm sand, increasing the heat by degrees,
till the spirit simmer or boil a little. - boyle.
their vital heat and moisture may always. not only simber
in one sluggish tenour, but sometimes boil u higher, and
feeth over ; the fire of life being more than ordinarily kindled
upon some emergent occasion. 4 sore agains? 4th, son.
simnel. m. s. [/imnelius, low latin.] a kind of sweet bread
or cake. -
simo ni‘ack. m. s. [simonia;ue, fr. soloniacus, lat..] one who
buys or sells preferment in the church.
if the bishop alleges that the person presented is a smoniac,
or unlearned, they are to proceed to trial. ayliffe.
sim on 1’acal. adj. [from simoniac.] guilty of buying or sell-
ing ecclesiastical preferment.
add to your criminals the smoniacal ladies, who seduce the
sacred order into the difficulty of breaking their troth. spei.
si(mo'ny. m. s. [somonie, fr. solonia, lat..] the crime of
buying or selling church preferment. . . "
one that by suggestion ". . . .
tied all the kingdom ; simony was fair play, - * -
his own opinion was his law. shakespeare's henry viii.
many papers remain in private hands, of which one is of
smony; and i wish the world might see it, that it might un-
deceive some patrons, who think they have discharged that,
great trust to god and man, if they take no money for a
living, though it may be parted with for other ends less justi-
fiable. . . //alton's life of bishop sands son.
no simony nor sinecure is known;
there works the bee, no honey for the drone. garth.
to st mper. v. m. [from rymbelan, saxon, to keep holiday,
skinner. he derives sooner from the same word, and con-
frns his etymology by writing it simber. it is perhaps de-
rived from simmer, as it may seem to imitate the dimples of
. gently boiling.] to satile ; generally to foile fool-
1inly.
a made countenance about her mouth between simpering
and smiling, her head bowed somewhat down, seemed to lan-
guish with over-much idleness. sidney.
1 charge you, o men, for the love you bear to women, as
i perceive by your simpering none of you hate them, to iike
as much as pleases them. shakspeare's as you like it.
stars above simper and shine, -
as having keys unto thy love, while poor i pine. herbert.
let then the fair one beautifully cry,
or drest in smiles of sweet cecilia shine,
with solip'ring angels, palms asid harps divine. pope.
si(mper. m. s. [from the verb.] smile ; generally a foolish
smile. -
the wit at his elbow stared him in the face, with so be-
witching a grin, that the whitter relaxed his fibres into a kind
of simper, and at length burst out into an open laugh. addis.
great tibbald nods: the proud parnassian sneer,
the conscious simper, and the jealous leer,
mix on his look.
si(mple. adj. [simplex, latin; simple, french.)
1. plain; artless; unskilled ; undesigning; sincere; harmless.
were it not to satisfy the minds of the simpler sort of men,
these nice curiosities are not worthy the labour which we be-
pope's danciad.
stow to answer them. pizzier.
they meet upon the way,
a simple husbandman in garments grey. hubberd"; tule.
i am<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 59</div><p class="text">s i m
s i n
-
i am a simple woman, much too weak
to oppose your cunning. shakes care’s hen. viii.
o ethelinda,
my heart was made to fit and pair with thine,
simple and plain, and fraught with artless tenderness. rowe.
in simple manners all the secret lies,
be kind and virtuous, you'll be blest and wise, , , 1%ung.
2. uncompounded; unmingled; single; only one; plain ; not
complicated.
to make the compound pass for the rich metal simple, is an
adulteration or counterfeiting. . bacon.
simple philosophically signifies single, but vulgarly o:
- - afts.
among substances some are called simple, some compound,
whether taken in a philosophical or vulgar sense. if we take
finple and compound in a vulgar sense, then all those are son:-
ple substances which are generally esteemed uniform in their
natures: so every herb is called a simple, and every metal a
mineral; though the chymist perhaps may find all his several
elements in each of them. - j/atts's logick.
let newton, pure intelligence, whom god
to mortals lent, to trace his boundless works,
from laws, sublimely simple, speak thy fame
in all philosophy. thomson's summer.
3. silly; not wise; not cunning. * * *
the simple believeth every word; but the prudent man
looketh well to his going. prov. xv.
dick, simple odes too many show ye,
my servile complaisance to chloe. prizr.
su'mple. m. s. [simple, french..] a single ingredient in a me-
dicine; a drug. it is popularly used for an herb.
of simples in these groves that grow,
we'll learn the perfeot skill;
the nature of each herb to know,
which cures, and which can kill.
our foster nurse of nature is repose,
the which he lacks; that to provoke in him,
e are many simples operative, whose power
will close the eye of anguish. shakespeare’s k. lear.
he would ope his leathern scrip,
and shew me simples of a thousand names, -
telling their strange and vigorous faculties. milton.
what virtue is in this remedy lies in the naked smple itself,
as it comes over from the indies. - temple.
around its entries nodding poppies grow,
and all cool simples that sweet rest bestow ;
night from the plants their sleepy virtue drains,
and passing, sheds it on the filent plains.
med'cine is mine: what herbs and so ples grow
in fields and forests, all their pow'rs l know.
to s1’mple. v. m. to gather simples.
as once the foaming boar he chas'd,
lascivious circe well the youth survey’d, -
as simpling on the flow'ry hills he stray’d. garth.
si(mplen ess. n.s.. [from simpl..] the quality of being simple.
i will hear that play:
for never any thing can be amiss,
when simplems; and duty tender it. shakespeare.
such perfeot elements may be found in these four known
bodies that we call pure ones; for they are least compounded,
and approach most to the simplenes of the elements. digby.
simple.r. m. s. [from simple..] a simplist. an herbarist.
s1'mpl ess. n.s.. [simpliffe, french.j simplicity; filliness; folly.
an obsolete word. -
their weeds been not so nighly were,
such simplese mought them shend,
they been yelad in purple and pall, o
they reign and rulen over all. spensor's pastorals.
si'mpleton. n.s. [from simple..] a silly mortal; a trifler; a
foolish fellow. a low word. -
a country farmer sent his man to look after an ox; the
simpleton went hunting up and down. l’estrange.
those letters may prove a discredit, as lasting as mercenary
scribblers, or curious simpletons can make it. pope.
simpl1(city. m. s. [simplicitas, latin; simplicite, french.]
1. plainness; artiessness; not subtilty; not cunning; not de-
ceit.
the sweet-minded philoclea was in their degree of well-
doing, to whom the not knowing of evil serveth for a ground
of virtue, and hold their inward powers in better form, with
an unspotted simplicity, than many who rather cunningly seck
to know what goodness is, than willingly take unto them-
selves the following of it. sidney.
they keep the reverend simplicity of ancienter times. hooker.
in low simplicity,
he lends out money gratis, and brings down
the rate of usance. - shakes eare.
marquis dorict, a man for his harmless simplicity, neither
misliked nor much regarded, was created duke. haywood.
suspicion sleeps
at wisdom's gate, and to simplicity
resigns her coarse.
drayton's cynthia.
dryden.
dryden,
milton.
of manners gentle, of affections mild ;
in wit a man, simplicity a child. po:
the native elegance and simplicity of her manners were 3.
companied with real benevolence of heart. female qozi.
2. plainness; not subtilty; not abstruseness. -
those enter into farther speculations herein, which is the
itch of curiosity, and content not themselves with the jimpli-
city of that doctrine, within which this church hath contained
herself. hammond's fundamental;
3. plainness; not finery. -
they represent our poet, when he left mantua for rome
dressed in his best habit, too fine for the place whence.
came, and yet retaining part of its simplicity. dryden.
4. singleness; not composition; state of being uncompounded.
mandrakes afford a papaverous unpleasant odour in the leaf
or apple, discoverable in their simplicity and mixture. .
- - - brown's wulgar erreurs,
we are led to conceive that great machine of the world to
have been once in a state of greater simplicity than now it is,
as to conceive a watch once in its first and simple mate.
ria's. burnet.
5. weakness; filliness.
many that know what they should do, would nevertheless
dissemble it, and, to excuse themselves, pretend ignorance
and simplicity, which now they cannot. azofer.
how long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and fools
hate knowledge - prov. i. 22.
simplist. m. s. [from simple..] one skilled in simples.
a plant so unlike a rose, it hath been mistaken by some good
simplifts for amomum. brown's vulgar errouri,
simply. adv. [from simple.]
1. without art; without subtlety; plainly; artlessly.
accomplishing great things by things deem'd weak;
subverting worldly strong and worldly wise,
by simply meek. milton's parads, lyl.
2. of itself; without addition.
this question about the changing of laws concerneth only
such laws as are positive, and do make that now good or evil,
by being commanded or forbidden, which otherwise of itself .
were not simply the one or the other.
3. merely; solely.
under man, no creature in the world is capable of felicity
and bliss; because their chiefest perfection consisteth in th:
which is best for them, but not in that which is simply best,
as ours doth. iizzier.
i will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
as captain shall; simply the thing i am
shall make me live. saks eart.
to say, or to do ought with memory and imitation, no pur-
pose or respect should sooner move us, than simply the love of
god and of mankind. asilion,
4. foolishly ; sillily.
simul.a.r. m. s. [from simula, latin.] one that counterfeits,
hide thee, thou bloody hand,
thou perjurer, thou simular of virtue, -
that art incestuous. shakespeare’s king lear.
simula's ros. m. f. [simulation, french; simulatio, from simula,
latin. that part of hypocrisy which pretends that to be
which is not.
simulation is a vice rising of a natural falseness, or fear-
fulness; or of a mind that hath some main faults; which
because a man must needs disguise, it maketh him practise
simulation. bacon.
for the unquestionable virtues of her person and mind,
he well expressed his love in an act and time of no simula-
tion towards his end, bequeathing her all his mansion-houses,
and a power to dispose of his whole personal estate. wotton.
for distinetion sake, a deceiving by word is commonly
called a lie; and deceiving by actions, gestures, or behavi-
our, is called simulation or hypocrisy. south.
simulta necus. adj. [simultaneus, latin.] aeting toge-
ther; existing at the same time.
if the parts may all change places at the same time, with-
out any respect of priority or posteriority to each other’s mo-
tion, why may not bullets, closely crouded in a box, move
by a like mutual and simultaneous exchange : glanville,
sin. m. s. iryn, saxon.]
1. an act against the laws of god; a violation of the laws of
religion. -
it is great son to swear unto a sin,
hocker.
but greater sin to keep a sinful oath. shakespears,
how hast thou the heart,
being a divine, a ghostly confessor, o
a sin absolver, and my friend profest,
to mangle me with that word banishment? soa's eart.
but those that sleep, and think not on their sons,
pinch them. shakespeare's a serry isives of iłonor.
thou know.csi, lord, that i am pure from all sort with
tran. 7.5. iii. 14.
2, habitual negligence of religion.
- - sin, death, and hell, have set their marks upon him,
and all ther ministers attend on him. shore.
- disions:
3
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 60</div><p class="text">s i n
dishonest shame -
of nature's works: honour dishonourables
sin bred how have ye troubled all mankind a sistan.
i would not soil these pure ambrosial weeds,
with the rank vapours of the son worn mould. a milton.
is there no means, but that a sin-fick land
should be let blood with such a boist'rous hand 2 panies.
vice or virtue chiefly imply the relation of our actions to
men in this world; sin and holiness rather imply their relation
to god and the other world. j/atts's logic.
light from her thought, a summer's careless robe,
fell each affection of this sin-worn globe. brooke.
. it is used by shakespeare cmphatically for a man enormously
wicked.
thy ambition,
thou scarlet sin, robb'd this bewailing land
of noble buckingham. shakspeare's henry viii.
t, sin. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to neglect the laws of religion; to violate the laws of reli-
osl.
stand in awe and sin not. palms, iv. 4.
many also have perish'd, errod, and sinn'd for women. e. dr.
he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that son not
unto death. 1 john, v. 16.
2. to offend against right.
i am a man,
more san’d against than sinning.
and who but wishes to invert the laws
of order, sins against th' eternal cause. pope's esly on man.
sisce, adv. [formed by contraction from sithence, or /ith thence,
from rise, saxon.]
1. because that.
since the clearest discoveries we have of other spirits, be-
sides god and our own souls, are imparted by revelation, the
information of them should be taken from thence. locke.
since truth and constancy are vain,
since neith or love, nor sense of pain,
nor force of reason, can persuade,
then let example be obey'd.
2. from the time that.
am not i thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since
i was thine unto this day numb. xxii. 30.
he is the most improved mind since you saw him that ever
was. pope.
3. ago; before this.
about two years since, it so fell out, that he was brought
to a great lady's house. sianoy.
spies held me in chace, that i was forc'd to wheel
three or four miles about; else had i, sir,
half an hour since, brought my report. shakes?. corio'anus.
a law was made no longer since than the twenty-eighth of
henry the eighth. davies's hyt. of ireland.
how many ages since has virgil writ! roscommon.
since, preposition. after ; reckoning from some time past to the
time present.
he since the morning hour set out from heav'n. milton.
if such a man arise, i have a model by which he may build
shakes care.
granville.
a nobler poem than any extant since the ancients. dryden.
siscere. adj. [/inverus, latin; sincere, french.]
1. unhurt; uninjured.
he try’d a tough well chosen spear;
th' inviolable body stoody.ncere. dryden.
2. pure; unmingled.
pardon my tears, 'tis joy which bids them flow :
ajoy which never was sincere till now ; -
that which my conquest gave, i could not prize,
or’twas imperfect till i saw your eyes. drydon.
the pleasures of sense beasts taste sincere and pure always,
without mixture or allay, without being distracted in the pur-
suit, or disquieted in the use of them. atterbury.
animal substances differ from vegetable, in that being re-
duced to ashes, they are perfectly insipid, and in that there
is no sincere acid in any animal juice. a but not on aliments.
in english i would have all gallicisms avoiced, that our
tongue may be sincere, and that we may keep to our own lan-
guage. felton on the cofficks.
3 honest; undissembling; uncorrupt.
this top proud fellow,
whom from the flow of gall i name not, but
from sincer, motions by intelligence
i do know to be corrupt. shakosheare's hen. viii.
nor troubled at these tidings from the earth,
which your sincers care could not prevent;
foretold so lately what would come to pass, -
when first this tempter cross'd the gulf from he'l. also on.
the more sincere you are, the better it will fare with you at
the great day of account. in the mean while, give us leave
to be sincere too, in condemning heartily what we heartly
disapprove. j/ater land.
through the want of a sincere intention of pleasing god in
o actions, we fall into such irregularities of lite as, by
ol. ii.
*** -- 1:.. • * * * *
only **ns of grace, we should have power to
woi (1.
law.
since'rely. adv. [from sincere.
crisy; with purity of heart.
- the poor ****, our religion is, the worthier effea,
it hath in them who redfastly and sincerely embrace it. hooker.
- t hat you may, fair lady,
perceive i speak sinceroy, the ki.
does purpose honour to you. s
in your whole reasoning, k - -
o: "o 3 ***p your mind sincerely intent
the pursuit of truth. sincerely n
six ce'k en ess. - - watts's logick.
sin ce(rity. {* / [sincerite, french; from sincere.]
1. honesty of intention; purity of mind.
jesus christ has purchased for us terms of reconciliation
who will accept of sincerity instead of perfection; butt. ii.
since it, implies our honest endeavours to do our utmost. rogers
2. freedom from hypocrisy. "sts j.
in thy consort cease to fear a foe;
for thee she feels sincerity of woe.
si's ros. m.s. (latin.) a fold; a wrapper.
there were found a book and a letter, both written in fine
patchment, and wrapped in /ind.ns of linen. bacon.
sine. m. s. [sinus, latin.] a right sine, in geometry, is a
right line drawn from one end of an arch perpendicularly upon
the diameter drawn from the other end of that arch ; or it is
half the chord of twice the arch. harris.
whatever inclinations the rays have to the plane of inci-
dence, the sine of the angle of incidence of every ray, consi-
dered apart, shall have to the sine of the angle of refraion a
constant ratio. cheyne's phil. princ.
si's ecure. m. s [sine, without, and cura, care, latin.] an
office which has revenue without any employment.
j honestly ; without hypo-
's majesty
shakesh. henry viii.
pope's odissy.
a sinecure is a benefice without cure of souls. ayliffe.
no simony nor some are were known,
nor would the bee work honey for the drone. garth,
sinevv, n. s. [renfe, saxon ; somewen, dutch..]
1. a tendon ; the ligament by which the joints are moved.
the torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
with lusty sinews. shakesp. julius cæsar.
the rooted fibres rose, and from the wound
black bloody drops distill'd upon the ground:
mute and amaz'd, my hair with terror stood;
fear shrunk my sizews, and congeal'd my blood. dryden.
a snow cracked seldom recovers its former strength. locke.
2. applied to whatever gives strength or compactness: as, money
is the sinews of war.
some other sinews there are, from which that overplus of
strength in persuasion doth arise. hooker.
such discouraging of men in the ways of an active consor-
mity to the church's rules, cracks the somews of government;
for it weakens and damps the spirits of the obedient. south.
in the principal figures of a picture the painter is to em-
ploy the sinews of his art; for in them consists the principal
beauties of his work. dryden's lufrynoy.
3. muscle or nerve.
the feeling pow'r, which is life's root,
through ev'ry living part itself doth shed
by sirews, which extend from head to foot;
and, like a net, all o'er the body spread. davies.
to s1 new. v. a. [from the noun.j. to knit as by finews.
not in use.
ask the lady bona for thy queen;
so shalt thousinew both these lands together. shak. h. vi.
si’s ew en. adj. [from somew.]
1. furnished with finews. -
strong/new’d was the youth, and big of bone. dryden.
2. strong; firm; vigorous. -
he will the rather do it, when he sees
ourselves well snowed to our defence. shakes. king john.
si’s ews: runk. adj. [/new and shrunk.] a horse is said to
be/newjrunk when he has been over-ridden, and so fat gued
that he becomes gaunt bullied by a stiffness and contraction of
the two sinews which are under his belly. farrier's dic.
si’s ew y. adj. [from snow..]
1. consisting of a sinew; nervous. the nerves and sinews are
in poetry often confounded, from nervus, latin, which fig-
nifies a finew.
the snowy thread my brain lets fall
through every part,
can tie those parts, and make me one of all.
2. strong ; nervous ; vigorous ; forcible. -
and for thy vigour, bull-bearing milo his addition yields
to sincivy ajax. shakespeare's troilus and croftia.
worthy follows, and like to prove
most snowy swordsmen. shakespeare.
the northern people are large, fair-complexioned, strong,
snowy, and courageous. hale's origin of .11am find.
fainting as he reach'd the shore,
he dropt his sinewy arms: his knees no more
perform'd their office.
24 d
donne.
pop.'s odsey.
s1 nful.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 61</div><p class="text">s i n
s i n
si'nful. adj. [sin and full.]
1. alien from god; not holy; unsanetified.
drive out the sinful pair,
from hallow’d ground th’ unholy. miltom.
2. wicked; not observant of religion; contrary to religion. it
is used both of persons and things.
thrice happy man, said then the father grave,
whose staggering steps thy steddy hand doth lead,
and shews the way his sinful soul to save,
who better can the way to heaven aread fairy queen.
nature herself, though pure of sinful thought,
wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turn'd. milton.
the stoicks looked upon all passions as sinful defe&amp;ts and ir-
regularities, as so many deviations from right reason, making
passion to be only another word for perturbation. 'outh.
s1'nfully. adv. [from sinful..] wickedly; not piously; not
according to the ordinance of god.
all this from my remembrance brutish wrath
sinfally pluckt, and not a man of you
had so much grace to put it in my mind. shaksp. r. iii.
the humble and contented man pleases himself innocently
and easily, while the ambitious man attempts to please others.
sinfully and difficulty, and perhaps unsuccessfully too. south.
si’nfulness. m. s. [from sinful..] alienation from god;
neglect or violation of the duties of religion; contrariety to
religious goodness.
i am sent
to shew thee what shall come in future days
to thee, and to thy offspring: good with bad
expect to hear; supernal grace contending
with sinfulness of men. milton.
peevishness, the general fault of sick persons, is equally to
be avoided for the folly and sinfulness. j/ake.
to sing. v. m. preterite isang, or sung ; participle pass, sung.
[ringan, saxon; singia, islandick; singhen, dutch..]
1. to form the voice to melody; to articulate musically.
orpheus with his lute made trees,
and the mountain tops that freeze,
bow themselves when he did sing:
to his musick plants and flowers
ever sprung, as sun and showers
there had made a lasting spring.
shakso. henry viii.
then they for sudden joy did weep, -
and some for sorrow sung.
shaksp. king lear.
- they rather had beheld
dissentious numbers pestering streets, than see
our tradesmen singing in their shops, and going
about their funetions friendly. shakesp. coriolanus.
the morning stars sang together. job.
then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of
the lord.
1 chron. xvi. 33.
their airy limbs in sports they exercise,
some in heroick verse divinely sing. dryden.
2. to utter sweet sounds inarticulately.
the time of the singing of birds is come. cant. ii. 12.
you will sooner bind a bird from singing than from fly-
ing. bacon.
join voices all ye birds,
that singing up to heav'n's gate ascend. milton.
and parrots, imitating human tongue,
and singing birds, in silver cages hung. dryden's ovid.
oh! were i made, by some transforming pow'r,
the captive bird that songs within thy bow'r,
then might my voice thy list’ning ears employ,
and i those kisses he receives enjoy. pope's summer.
3. to make any small or shrill noise.
a man may hear this shower sing in the wind.
you leaden messengers,
fly with false aim ; pierce the still moving air,
shakespeare.
that sings with piercing ; do not touch my lord. shakesp.
we hear this fearful tempest sing. shakespeare.
o'er his head the flying spear
sung innocent, and spent its force in air. pope.
4. to tell in poetry.
bid her exalt her melancholy wing,
and rais'd from earth, and sav'd from passion, sing
of human hope by cross event destroy'd,
of useless wealth and greatness unenjoy’d. prior,
to sing. v. a.
1. to relate or mention in poetry.
all the prophets in their age the times.
of great messiah sing. milton.
i sing the man who judah's sceptre bore,
in that right hand which held the crook before. cowley.
arms and the man i sing. dryden's aen.
well might he sing the day he could not fear,
and paint the glories he was sure to wear. smith.
2. to celebrate; to give praises to, in verse.
the last, the happiest british king,
whom thou shalt paint or i shall sing. addison.
3. to utter harmoniously.
incles, caddisses, cambricks, lawns, why
he sing; them over as they were gods and goddesses. slai,
they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, sing us
one of the songs of zion.
how could we to his godhead sing
forc’d hallelujahs milton.
to singe. v. a. [raenzan, saxon; singhen, dutch..] to
scorch ; to burn slightly or superficially.
they bound the doctor,
whose beard they have sing’d off with brands of fire. shat,
drake, in the vaunting stile of a soldier, would call this
enterprize the singeing of the king of spain's beard. bacon.
that neither was singed in the combustion of phaeton, nor
overwhelmed by the inundation of deucalion.
they leave a singed bottom all involv’d
with stench and smoke. milton's parad's lyl.
i singed the toes of an ape through a burning-glass, and he
ps. cxxxvii. 3-
brown.
never would endure it after. l'estrange.
thus riding on his curls, he seem'd to pass
a rolling fire along; and singe the grass. dryden.
s1’nger. m. s. [from sing..] one that sings; one whose pro-
fession or business is to fing.
his filching was like an unskilful singer, he kept not time.
shakesp. merry wives of i/indsor.
i gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of
the sons of men. eccl. ii. 8.
to the chief singer on my stringed instruments. hab. iii.
cockbirds amongst singing birds are ever the better singers,
because they are more lively. bacon's natural history.
thy heart no ruder than the rugged stone,
i might, like orpheus, with my num'rous moan
melt to compassion: now my trait’rous song
with thee conspires to do the singer wrong. waller.
the birds know how to chuse their fare;
to peck this fruit they all forbear:
those cheerful singers know not why
they should make any haste to die. jwaller.
the grecian tragedy was at first nothing but a chorus of
singers. dryden.
s1’ng ing master. m. s. [sing and master.] one who teaches
to sing.
he employed an itinerant singingmaster to instruct them
rightly in the tunes of the psalms. addison's spectator,
sl‘ngle. adj. [singulus, latin.]
1. one ; not double ; not more than one.
the words are clear and easy, and their originals are of
single signification without any ambiguity. south.
some were single acts, though each compleat;
but ev'ry act stood ready to repeat.
then theseus join'd with bold pirithous came,
a single concord in a double name.
high alba,
a lonely desart, and an empty land,
shall scarce afford, for needful hours of rest,
a single house to their benighted guest. aidison on italy.
where the poesy or oratory shines, a single reading is not
sufficient to satisfy a mind that has a true taste; nor can we
make the fullest improvement of them without proper re-
views. jwatts on the mind.
2. particular ; individual.
as no single man is born with a right of controuling the
opinions of all the rest, so the world has no title to demand
the whole time of any particular person. pope.
if one single word were to express but one simple idea, and
nothing else, there would be scarce any mistake. j/atts.
. not compounded.
as simple ideas are opposed to complex, and single ideas to
compound, so propositions are distinguished: the english
tongue has some advantage above the learned languages, which
have no usual word to distinguish single from simple. watts.
4. alone ; having no companion; having no assistant.
servant of god, well hast thou fought
the better fight, who single hast maintain'd
against revolted multitudes the cause of truth.
his wisdom such,
three kingdoms wonder, and three kingdoms fear,
whilst single he stood forth. denham.
in sweet possession of the fairy place,
single and conscious to myself alone,
of pleasures to th’ excluded world unknown.
. unmarried.
is the single man therefore blessed ? no : as a walled town is
more worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a married
man more honourable than the bare brow of a batchelor.
dryden.
dryden.
milton.
dryden.
shakes care.
pygmalion
abhorr'd all womankind, but most a wife;
so single chose to live, and shunn'd to wed,
well pleas'd to want a consort of his bed. dryden.
6. not complicated ; not duplicated.
to make flowers double is effected by cften removing them
§:
in to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 62</div><p class="text">s i n
into new earth; as, on the contrary, double flowers, by ne-
leang and not removing, prove single. bacon's nat. hył.
7. pure; uncorrupt; not double-minded; simple. a scriptural
inse.
se the light of the body is the eye : if thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light. -
8. that in which one is opposed to one.
he, when his country, threaten'd with alarms,
shall more than once the punick bands affright,
shall kill the gaulish king in single fight. dryden's afn.
t, si's cle. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. to chuse out from among others.
i saw him in the battle range about,
and how he singled clifford footh. shakes. henry vi.
every man may have a peculiar favour, which, although
not perceptible, unto man, is yet sensible unto dogs
hereby can single out their master in the dark.
do's thou already single me? i thought
gyves and the mill had tam'd thee.
begin, auspicious boy, to cast about
thy infant eyes, and with a smile thy mother single out.
dryden.
41att. vi. 22.
, who
brown.
milton's agonisłes.
single the lowliest of the am’rous youth;
ask for his vows, but hope not for his truth. prior.
2. to sequester; to withdraw.
yea simply, faith basil, and universally, whether it be in
works of nature, or of voluntary choice, i see not any thing
done as it thould be, if it be wrought by an agent singling it.
self from consorts. hooker.
. to take alone.
many men there are, than whom nothing is more com-
mendable when they are singled; and yet, in society with
others, none less fit to answer the duties which are looked for
at their hands. 11.2&amp;er.
4. to separate. -
hardly they herd, which by good hunters singled are. sidney.
singleness. n.s.. [from single. j simplicity; sincerity; honest
plainness.
it is not the decpness of their knowledge, but the singlens;
of their belief, which god accepteth. 112.2%ar.
men must be obliged to go through their business with
singleness of heart.
singly. adv. [from single.]
1. individually; particularly.
if the injured person be not righted, every one of them is
wholly guilty of the injustice, and therefore bound to restitu-
tion singly and entirely. taylor's rule of living holy.
they ten,' to the perfestion of human nature, and to make
men /ogy and personally good, or tend to the happiness of
society. till son's sermons.
2. only ; by himself. -
look thee, ’tis so ; thousingly honest man,
here take: to rods out of try misery
have sent the c trosure. shaosp. timon of athens.
3. without partners or associates.
belinda
burns to eacounter two advent'rous knights,
at ombre singly to decide their doom.
4. honestly ; tımply ; sincerely.
singular. adj. [singulier, fr. singularis, latin.]
1. single; not complex ; not compound.
that idea which represents one particular determinate thing
is called a singular idea, whether simple, complex, or coin-
pound. js atts.
a. [in grammar.] expressing only one ; not plural.
if st. paul's speaking of himself in the first person singular
has so various meanings, his use of the first person plural has
a greater latitude. lo.{e.
3. particular ; unexampled.
so singular a sadness
must have a cause as strange as the effect. denham's sophy.
doubtless, if you are innocent, your case is extremely
hood, yet it is not singular. female &amp;ixote.
4. having something not common to others. it is commonly
used in a sense of disapprobation, whether applied to persons
or things.
law.
pope.
his zeal -
none seconded, as soular and rash. milton.
it is very commendable to be singular in any excellency, and
idigion is the greatest excellency: to be singular in any thing
that is wife and worthy, is not a disparagement, but a
praise. tillosin.
5. aloe; that of which there is but one.
these buffs of the emperors and empresses are all very
farce, and some of them almost singilar in their kind. addison.
sisgularity. n. s. [/; gularite, fr. from singular.] -
1. some character or quality by which one is distinguished from
all, or from most others.
piny addeth this singularity to that soil, that the second year
the very falling down of the seeds yieldeth corn. raleigh.
2. c thing remarkable; a curiosity; uncommon character or
qstn.
h your gallery
*** ** pass'd through, not without much content
in "*y singularities; but we saw not
that which ony daughter came to look upon, -
o: statue of her mother, shakesp. winter's tale.
- took notice of this little figure for the singularity of the
instrument: it is - s”: 3.t.
- t is not unlike a violin. addison on italy.
3. pattiolar privilege or prerogative.
st. gregory, being himself a bishop of rome, and writing
against the title of universal bishop, faith thus: none of all
my predecessors ever consented to use this ungodly title; no
bishop of rome ever took upon him this name of singu-
larity. - - - - - - hooker.
catholicism, which is here attributed unto the church,
must be understood in opposition to the legal singularity of the
jewish nation. pearson.
4. character or manners different from those of others.
- the spirit of singularity in a few ought to give place to pub-
lick judgment. hooker.
though, according to the prastice of the world, it be sin-
gular for men thoroughly to live up to the principles of their
religion, yet sigularity in this matter is a singular commenda-
tion of it. of illotson's sermons.
singularity in fin puts it out of fashion, since to be alone in
any practice seems to make the judgment of the world against
it; but the concurrence of others is a tacit approbation of that
in which they concur. south.
to scularize. v. a. [s, singulariser, fr. from //ngular.]
to make single.
si's gui. arly. adv. [from singular.) particularly; in a man-
ner not common to others. -
solitude and singularity can neither daunt nor disgrace him,
unless we could suppose it a disgrace to be singularly good. south.
si's gult. n.s.. [singustus, latin.]. a figh. spensor.
si'n 1st er. adj. [/int/ler, latin.]
1. being on the left hand; left; not right; not dexter. it
seems to be used with the accent on the second syllable, at
least in the primitive, and on the first in the figurative
sense. -
my mother's blood
runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinisher
bounds in my fire's. shakesp. troilus and cressia.
captain spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war.
here on his sinisfor check. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
but a rib, crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
more to the part sinisher from me drawn. milton.
the spleen is unjustly introduced to invigorate the sinister
side, which, being dilated, would rather infirm and debili-
tate it. brown's pulgar errours.
in his sinisłer hand, instead of ball,
he plac'd a mighty mug of potent ale. dryden.
2. bad, perverse; corrupt; deviating from honesty; unfair.
is it so strange a matter to find a good thing furthered by ill
men of a sinister intent and purpose, whose forwardness is not
therefore a bridle to such as favour the same cause with a better
and sincere meaning hooker.
the duke of clarence was soon after by sniffer means made
clean away. spenser on ireland.
when are there more unworthy men chosen to offices,
when is there more strife and contention about cle&amp;tions, or
when do partial and sinister affections more utter themselves,
than when an election is committed to many ishitgifte.
he professes to have received no sinister measure from his
judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determina-
tion of justice. shakesp. measure for measure.
those may be accounted the left hands of courts; persons
that are full of nimble and sniffer tricks and shifts, whereby
they pervert the plain courses of courts, and bring justice into
oblique lines and labyrinths. bacon's essays.
the just person has given the world an assurance, by the
constant tenor of his practice, that he makes a conscience of
his ways, and that he scorns to undermine another's interest
by any sinister or inferior arts. south.
3. [sinistre, french.) unlucky; inauspicious. the accent
is here on the second syllable.
tempt it again: that is thy ast, or none:
what all the several ilis that visit earth,
brought forth by night, with a sinister birth,
plagues, famine, fire, could not reach unto,
the sword, nor surfeits, let thy fury do. ben. johnson.
sinistrous. adj. [sinister, latin.] absurd ; perverse ;
wrong-headed: in french gauche.
a knave or fool can do no harm, even by the most
sinjirous and absurd choice. bentley.
si nisrrously. adv. [from sinisłrous.]
1. with a tendency to the left. -
many in their infancy are sniffrcus; disposed, and divers
continue all their life left-handed, and have but weak and
imperfe st use of the right. brown's pu'ar errours.
2. perversely; absurdly. r
t, sink. v. n. pret. i sunk, anciently sank; part sun" or son.
[rencan, saxon; sensen, german-l
1. to
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 63</div><p class="text">1. to fall down through any medium; not to swim ; to go to
the bottom. - *.*.*, * *
as rich with prize, --- - -
as is the oozy bottom of the sea • * ~ *
- with sunken wreck and sumless treasuries. shakoff. h. v."
in with the river funk, and with it rose, -
satan, involv’d in iiting mist; then sought - -
where to lie hid. . . milton's parad's loft.
he swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies. milton.
the pirate sinks with his ill-gotten gains, --
and nothing to another's use remains. dryden.
- supposing several in a tempest will rather perish than work,
would it not be madness in the rest to chuse to sink together,
rather than do more than their share addison on the war.
2. to fall gradually. - - - -- *
the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down in his
chariot. - - * * - 2 kings, ix. 24.
3. to enter or penetrate into any body. . - - - -
david took a stone and slang it, and smote the philistine,
that the stone sunk into his forehead. i sam. xvii. 49.
4. to lose height; to fall to a level. * -
in vain has nature form'd
mountains and oceans to oppose his passage;
he bounds o'er all, victorious in his march;
the alps and pyreneans sink before him. addison's cato.
5. to lose or want prominence. - o
-what were his marks : a lean cheek, a blue eye and
sunken. . * - shakesp. as you like it.
deep dinted wrinkles on her cheeks she draws; -
sunk are her eyes, and toothless are her jaws. dryden.
6. to be overwhelmed er depressed. -
our country sinks beneath the yoke;
it weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash o
is added to her wounds. shakesp. macbeth.
they arraign'd shall sink
beneath thy sentence. * *
but if you this ambitious pray’r deny,
then let me sink beneath proud arcite's arms;
and, i once dead, let him possess her charms. dryden.
7. to be received; to be impressed.
let these sayings sink down into your ears. luke, ix. 44.
truth never sinks into these mens minds, nor gives any
tin&amp;ture to thern. - locke.
8. to decline; to decrease; to decay.
"then down the precipice of time it goes,
and sinks in minutes which in ages rose. dryden.
this republick has been much more powerful than it is at
present, as it is still likelier to sink than increase in its domi-
nions. addison on stay.
let not the fire sink or slacken, but increase. 44.rliner.
9. to fall into rest or indolence. -
would'st thou have me sink away
in pleasing dreams, and lose myself in love,
when every moment cato's life's at stake addison's cato.
10. to fall into any state worse than the former; to tend to
ruin. -
nor urg’d the labours of my lord in vain,
a sinking empire longer to sustain. dryden's zheid.
to sink. v a. -
1. to put under water; to disable from swimming or floating.
a small fleet of english made an hostile invasion, or incur-
sion, upon their havens and roads, and fired, sunk, and car-
ried away ten thousand ton of their great shipping. bacon.
2. to delve ; to make by delving.
at saga in germany they dig up iron in the fields by sink-
ing ditches two feet deep, and in the space of ten years the
ditches are digged again for iron since produced. boyle.
near geneva are quarries of freestone, that run under the
lake: when the water is at lowest, they make within the bor-
ders of it a little square, inclosed within four walls: in this
square they sink a pit, and dig for freestone. addison.
3. to depress; to degrade. - *
a mighty king i am, an earthly god;
i raise or sink, imprison or set free;
and life or death depends on my decree. - prior.
trifling painters or sculptors bestow infinite pains upon the
most insignificant parts of a figure, ’till they sink the grandeur
of the whole. pope's essay on homer.
4. to plunge into destruction. - -
. . heav'n bear witness,
and if i have a conscience, let it sink me, -
ev’n as the ax falls, if i be not faithful. shakes care.
5. to make to fall. * * *
these are so far from raising mountains, that they over-
turn and fling down some before standing, and undermine
others, sinking them into the abyss. 1/2cdward.
6. to bring low; to diminish in quantity. -
when on the banks of an unlook’d-for stream,
you sunk the river with repeated draughts, -
who was the last in all your host that thirsted addison.
7. to crush ; to overbear; to depress.
that he&amp;tor was in certainty of death, and depressed with
**
milton.
* *
the conscience of an ill cause: if you will not grant the first of
these wiil sink the spirit of a hero, you'll at least allow th:
second may." - - pope
8. to diminish ; to degrade. - - -
they catch at all opportunities of ruining our trade, and
* sinking the figure which we make. . addison on the war.
i mean not that we should sink our figure out of covetos.
ness, and deny ourselves the proper conveniences of our sta-
tion, only that we may lay up a superfluous treasure. rogers.
9. to make to decline. -
thy cruel and unnatural lust of power . .
has sink thy father more than all his years,
and made him wither in a green old age. . o faw.
to labour for a sunk corrupted state. . . . . lyttle.
io. to suppress; to conceal ; to intervert. o
if sent with ready money to buy any thing, and you happen
to be out of pocket, sink the money, and take up the goods
on account. - swift's rules to servants,
sink. m. s. [rinc, saxon.]
1. a drain ; a jakes. - - --
should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,
who is the sink o' th' body. . shakes. coriolanus.
bad humours gather to a bile, or as divers kennels flow to
one sink, so in short time their numbers increased. hayward.
gather more filth than any sink in town. o * granville.
returning home at night, you’ll find the sink
strike your offended sense with double stink. • swift.
2. any place where corruption is gathered.
what sink of monsters, wretches of lost minds,
mad after change, and desperate in their states,
weared and gall'd with their necessities,
durst have thought it ben. johnson's catiline,
our soul, whose country's heav'n, and god her father,
into this world, corruption's sink, is sent;
yet so much in her travail she doth gather,
- that she returns home wifer than she went. donne.
s1 nl ess, adj. [from son.] exempt from fin. '
led on, yet sinles, with desire to know,
what nearer might concern him. milton,
at that tasted fruit
the sun, as from thyestean banquet, turn’d
his course intended; else how had the world
inhabited, though sinless, more than now
avoided pinching cold, and scorching heat? milton,
internal ghosts and hellish furies round
fnviron'd thee; some howl’d, some yell’d, some shriek'd,
some bent at thee their fiery darts, while thou
satt'st unappal'd in calm and sinless peace. milton,
no thoughts like mine his sinless soul profane,
observant of the right. dryden's ovid,
did god, inde d, insist on a sinl/ and unerring observance
of all this multiplicity of duties; had the christian dispensa-
tion provided no remedy for our lapses, we might cry out with
balaam, alas! who should live, if god did this rogers.
si'nless n ess. n. s. [from sinless.] exemption from fin.
we may the less admire at his gracious condescensions to
those, the sinlessness of whose condition will keep them from
turning his vouchsafements into anything but occasions of joy
and gratitude. boyle's seraphick love.
s1 nner. m. s. [from sin.]
1. one at enmity with god; one not truly or religiously
ood.
let the boldest sinner take this one consideration along with
him, when he is going to sin, that whether the sin he is about
to act ever comes to be pardoned or no, yet, as soon as it is
aeled, it quite turns the balance, puts his salvation upon the
venture, and makes it ten to one odds against him. south.
never consider yourselves as persons that are to be seen,
admired, and courted by men; but as poor sinners, that are
to save yourselves from the vanities and follies of a miserable
world, by humility, devotion, and self-denial. law.
2. an offender; a criminal. - -
here's that which is too weak to be a sinner, honest water,
which ne'er left man i' th' mire. shakespeare's timon.
over the guilty then the fury shakes -
the sounding whip, and brandishes her snakes, {
and the pale sinner with her sisters takes. dryden.
thither, where sinners may have rest, i go, .
where flames refin'd in breasts seraphick glow. pope.
whether the charmer sinner it or saint it,
if soily grows romantick, i must paint it. pope.
s1'nofff ring. m. s. [sin and offering j an expiation or sacri-
fice for sin. - -
the flesh of the bullock shalt thou burn without the camp:
it is a sinoff ring. ex. xxix. 14.
si'nope r, or sinople. m. s. [terra pontica, latin.] a species of
earth ; ruddle. - ain, overth.
1. s. (nua te. v. a. [sinuo, latin j. to bend in and out.
another was very perfect, somewhat less with the margin,
and more /inuated. - * j/oodward on f.s.l.
sinu aotion. m. s. [from sinuate.] a bending in and out.
the human brain is, in proportion to the body, much larger
* th-a
w
j
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 64</div><p class="text">s i s
than the brain. of brutes, in proportion to their bodies, and
fuller of anfrastus, or sinuations..., hale's origin of asahind.
o ..s [from sinuous.] the quality of being si
go'sity.” s [ - ne q y of being jinuous.
3. adj. [sinueux, fr. from sinus, lat.] bending in and
*†, with what disadvantage the voice will be carried in an
horn, which is a line arched; or in a trumpet, which is a
just retorted; or in some pipe that were sinuous.
these, as a line, their long dimension drew,
streaking the ground with sinuous trace. milt. parad. loft.
in the dissections of horses, in the concave or sinuous part of
the liver, whereat the gall is usually seated in quadrupeds, i
scover an hollow, long, membranous substance.
sfnus. m. s. [latin.] -
a bay of the sea; an opening of the land.
"plato supposeth his atlantis to have sunk all into the sea:
whether that be true or no, i do not think it impossible that
some arms of the sea, or sinus's, might have had such an ori-
burnet's theory of the earth.
bacon.
brown.
ginal. -
2. any fold or opening:
7, sip. v. a. iropan: saxon; sppen, dutch.]
1. to drink by sma's draughts; to take at one apposition of the
of to the mouth no more than the mouth will contain.
soft yielding minds to water glide away, -
and sip with nymphs their elemental tea.
1. to drink in small quantities.
- find out the peaceful hermitage;
the hairy gown and mossy cell,
where i may sit and rightly spell
of ev'ry star that heav'n doth shew," l
and every herb that sp; the dew.
3. to drink out of.
the winged nation o'er the forest flies:
then stooping on the meads and leafy bow'rs,
they skim the floods and sp the purple flow'rs.
i, sip. v. m. to drink a small quantity.
she rais'd it to her mouth with sober grace;
then sipping, cffer'd to the next. dryden's aen.
sir. n.s.. [from the verb.] a small draught; as much as the
mouth will hold.
her facc o' fire
with labour, and the thing she took to quench it
she would to each one sp. shatosp. //inter's tale.
one sip of this
will bathe the drooping spirits in delight,
beyond the bliss of dreams: milton.
si'phoo. n.s. [rifoy ; sphe, lat. sphon, fr.] a pipe through
which liquors are conveyed. -
beneath th' inceslant weeping of these drains
i see the rocky siphons stretch'd immense,
the mighty reservoirs of harden'd chalk,
of stiff compacted clay. thomson's autumn.
sipper. m. s. [from sp.] . one that fips.
sippit. n.f. [sp, /p, sopot.) a small sop."
sia, n. s. [sire, fr. seignior, ital. senor, spanish ; senior, lat.]
1. the word of respect in compellation. -
speak on, sir,
idare your worst objections: if i blush,
it is to see a nobleman want manners.
but, sirs, be sudden in the execution;
pope.
milton -
dryden.
shakosh. h. viii.
withal obdurate; do not let him plead. shakesp. r. iii.
sir king,
this man is better than the man he flew. shakespeare.
at a banquet the ambassador desired the wise men to deliver
every one of them some sentence or parable, that he might
report to his king, which they did : only one was silent, which
the ambassador perceiving, said to him, sir, let it not displease
you; why do not you say somewhat that i may report’. he
f answered, report to your lord, that there are that can hold
their peace. bacon's apophthegms.
+. the title of a knight or baronet. this word was anciently
so much held cliential, that the jews in their addresses ex-
pressed it in hebrew characters. - - - -
sir horace vere, his brother, was the principal in the
4&amp;tive part. bacon's war with spain.
the court forsakes him, and sor balaam hangs. pope.
3. it is sometimes used for man.
i have adventur'd
to try your taking of a false report, which hath
honour'd with confirmation your great judgment, -
in the election of a sir so rare. shakesp. cymbeline.
4. a title given to the loin of beef, which one of our kings
knighted in a fit of good humour.
he lost his roast-beef stomach, not being able to touch a
fir-loin which was served up. addison.
and the strong table groans
beneath the snoakingfir-loin, stretch'd immense
from fide to fide. thomson's autumn.
it would be ridiculous, indeed, if a spit which is strong
enough to turn a fir-loin of beef, should not be able to turn a
lark. . swift.
sire. n: s [sire, fr. senior, lat.]
vol. ii.
. a father. used in poetry.
he, but a duke, would
and raise his issue like a lo
i
have his son a king,
- - - ving sire. shakesp. he -
to virgin o mother, too, oakesp. henry vi
e pow'r of the most hi th. milton' -
and now i leave the o: ilton's paradse loft.
ue and just s
of legal princes and of honest o, upports
whose/iras, great partners in my father's cares
saluted their young king at hebron crown'd &gt;
whether his hoary fire he spies, -
while thousand grateful thoughts arise,
or meets his spouse's fonder eye.
2. it is used in common speech o
good sire, but a bad dam.
3. it is used in composition: as, grand-fire, great. -
to sir.e. v. a. to beget; to profic. is, &gt; 8 grand-size.
cowards father cowards, and base things sire the base. .
- shakespeare.
sir en: n.s. (latin.] a goddess who enticed men by so
and devoured them ; any mischievous coticer. -
oh train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note,
to drown me in thy sister's flood of tears;
sing, siren, to thyself, and i will dote;
spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hair, -
and as a-bed i'll take thee, and there lie. saal speare.
siri asis. m. s. solet-ris j. an inflammation of the brain aud
its membrane, through an excessive heat of the sun. . . dzi.
si rius. n.s. [latin.j the dogstar.
sirocco. m. s. [italian; syrus ventus, latin.] the south-east
or syrian wind. -
forth rush the levant and the ponent winds, o
eurus and zephyr, with their lateral noise,
si occo and libecchio. milton,
sir r a h. " so [sir, ha! minshaw.] a compellation of re-
proach and insult.
go, sirrah, to my cell;
take with you your companions: as you look
to have my pardon, trim it handsomely. shałoso. tempoff.
sirrah, there's no room for faith, troth, or nonesty in
this bosom of thine. . shakespeare's henry iv.
it runs in the blood of your whole race, sirrah, to hate our
family.
prior.
pope's chorus to brutus.
beats; as, the horse bad a
l'e/irange.
guess how the goddess greets her son, -
come hither, so rah; no, begone. prior.
si'rop. ! m. s. [arabick.] the juice of vegetables boiled wish
s1 rup. sugar. - -
shall i, whose ears her mournful words did seize,
her words in strup laid of sweetest breath,
relent. - - sidney.
not poppy, nor mandragora, -
nor all the drowly sirups of the world f
shall ever med'cine thee to that sweet sleep,
which thou owed'st yesterday. shakespeare's othello.
and first, behold this cordial julap here, .
that flames and dances in his crystal bounds,
with spirits of balm, and fragrant sorops mixt. milton.
those exprefied juices contain the true essential salt of the
plant; for if they be boiled into the consistence of a strup,
and set in a cool place, the essential salt of the plant will shoot
upon the sides of the vessels. - , arbuthnot.
si'r uped. adj. [from strup.] sweet, like sirup; bedeved with
sweets.
yet when there haps a honey fall,
we'll lick the syrupt leaves:
and tell the bees that their's is gall.
s1'r upy. adj. [from strup.] resembling sirup.
apples are of a strupy tenacious nature. -
sise. n.s. [contracted so offize.] -
you said, if i reto...hed next size in lent,
i should be in remitter of your grace. " -
si'skin, n.f. [chloris, lat.] a bird ; a green finch. .
s1’s te r. n.s. [rpeopten, saxon; zusler, dutch.]
1. a woman born of the same parents; correlative to brother.
her sister began to scold. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
i have said to corruption, thou art my father : to the worm,
thou art my mother and my solor. job, xvii. 14.
2. woman of the same faith; a christian. one of the same
nature, human being. - - -
if a brother or syler be naked, and destitute of food, and
you say unto them, depart in peace, be you warmed and fill-
ed: notwithstanding you give them not those things which
are needful to the body, what doth it profit james, ii. 15.
3. a female of the same kind.
he chid the sisters,
and bade them speak to him. całespeare's macleth.
4. one of the same kind; one of the same condition.
the women, who would rather wrest the laws,
than let a sister-plaintiff lose the cause,
as judges on the bench more gracious are,
and more attent to brothers of the bar, -
cry'd one and all, the suppliant should have right:
and to the grandame hag adjudg'd the knight. dryden,
24 e. there
drayton.
mortimer.
donne.
-
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 65</div><p class="text">s i t
there grew two olives, closest of the grove,
with roots entwin'd, and branches interwove:
alike their leaves, but not alike they smil’d
with fifter-fruits: one fertile, one was wild.
si'ster in law. n.s. a husband or wife's sister. -
thyssler in law is gone back unto her people: return thou
after thy softer in law. . ruth, i. 15.
s1’s terhoop. m. s. [from sifter.]
1. the office or duty of a sister.
pope.
- he abhorr'd
her proper blood, and left to do the part 4 *
of sisterhood, to do that of a wife. daniel’s civil war.
2. a set of sisters. . ** * *
3. a number of women of the same order.
- i speak,
wishing a more strict restraint -
upon the sifterhood, the votarists of saint clare. shakespeare.
a woman who flourishes in her innocence, amidst that spite
and rancour which prevails among her exasperated sisterhood,
appears more amiable. addison's freeholder.
si's terly. adj. [from fifter.] like a sister; becoming a fifter.
* after much debatement, ',
myslery remorse confutes mine honour,
and i did yield to him. . . . shakespeare.
to sir. v. n. preterite, i sat. [stan, gothick; ritzan, sax.
setten, dutch.] - -
1. to rest upon the buttocks. - . . .
- their wives dosit beside them carding wool. may's virgil.
aloft in awful state, -
*
the godlike hero sat
on his imperial throne. - i}ryden.
2. to perch. *- or
all new fashions be pleasant to me,
i will have them whether i thrive or thee,
… . now i am a frisker, all men on me look,
what should i do but sit cock on the hoop?
what do i care if all the world me fail,
i will have a garment reach to my tail.
... to be in a state of rest, or idleness.
shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here? num.
why sit we here each other viewing idly? milton.
a. to be in any local position. - *
- * ~ * i should be still - - -
plucking the grass to know where sits the wind: -
peering in maps for *. shakesp. march of venice.
-" o; f : ... hose -
bourd.
appointed to sit there had left their charge. milton.
the ships are ready, and the wind sits fair. a. philips.
5. to rest as a weight or burthen.
" ... your brother's death sits at your heart. shakespeare.
when god lets loose upon us a sickness, if we fear to die,
then the calamity sits heavy on us. . . . . . taylor.
. . to toss and fling, and to be restless, only galls our sores,
... and makes the burden that is upon us sit more uneasy. tillots.
fear, the last of ills, remain’d behind, -
and horrour, heavy sat on every mind. . dryden.
our whole endeavours are intent to get rid of the present
evil, as the first necessary condition to our happiness. . no-
thing, as we passionately think, can equal the uneasiness that
sits so heavy upon us. locke.
6. to settle; to abide.
that this new comer shames
there sit not and reproach us. milton.
when thetis blush'd, in purple not her own,
and from her face the breathing winds were blown;
a sudden silence sate upon the sea, ' ' ...
and sweeping oars, with struggling, urg'd their ". de
* - -- t - - ry *.
he to the void advanc'd his pate,
pale horrour sat on each arcadian face. dryden.
t;. to brood; to incubate. -
as the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not, so
he that getteth riches not by right, shall leave them in the
midst of his days. - - ' jer. xvii. 1 r.
the egg laid and sever'd from the body of the hen, hath
no more nourishment from the hen; but only a quickening
heat when she sittath. " ' " . bacon's natural history.
she mistakes a piece of chalk for an egg, and sits upon it
in the same manner. - - addison.
8. to be adjusted; to be with respect to fitness or unfitness,
decorum or indecorum. * - - - -
this new and gorgeous garment, majesty,’
sits not so easy on me as you think.
* heav'n knows, - - -
by what by-paths, and indirea crook'd ways
i met this crown; and i myself know well,
how troublesome it sate upon my head;" " . .
to thee it shall descend with better quiet, shakespeare.
your preferring that to all other confiderations does, in the
o: of all men, sit well upon you. ". . . locks.
9. to be placed in order to be painted. * * *
shakespeare.
finds in the author he translates, than a painter is to make
every face that sits to him handsome. garth.
io. to be in any situation or condition. o
as a farmer cannot husband his ground so well, if heft at
a great rent; so the merchant cannot drive his trade so well,
if he sit at great usury. bacon.
suppose all the church-lands were thrown up to the laity,
would the tenants sit easier in their rents than now swift.
11. to be settled, as an assembly of a publick or authoritative
kind; to hold a session; as, the parliament sits: the loft general
countil sate at trent. -
12. to be placed at the table. , -
whether is greater he that stieth at meat, or he that serv-
eth 2 luke, xxii. 27.
13. to exercise authority. . . .
the judgment shall sit, and take away his dominion. dan.
asses are ye that sit in judgment. judges, v. 10.
down to the golden chersonese, or where
the persian in ecbatan sate. milton.
one council sits upon life and death, the other is for taxes,
and a third for the distributions of justice. addison.
assert, ye fair ones, who injudgment sit,
your ancient empire over love and wit. rowe.
14. to be in any solemn assembly as a member.
three hundred and twenty men sat in council daily. 1 mac.
15. to sit down. down is little more than emphatical.
go and sit down to meat, luke, xvii. 7.
when we sit down to our meal, we need not suspect the in-
trusion of armed uninvited guests. decay of piety,
16. to sit down. to begin a siege.
nor would the enemy have sate down before it, till they
had done their business in all other places. clarendon.
17. to sit down. to rest; to cease as satisfied.
here we cannot sit down, but still proceed in our search,
and look higher for a support. rogers.
18. to sit down. to settle; to fix abode.
from besides tanais, the goths, huns, and getes sat
down. spensor.
19. to sit out. . to be without engagement or employment.
they are glad, rather than sit out, to play very small game,
and to make use of arguments, such as will not prove a bare
inexpediency. bishop sanderson's judgment,
20. to sir up. to rise from lying to fitting.
he that was dead, sat up, and began to speak. luke, vii.
21. to sit up. to watch; not to go to bed.
be courtly,
and entertain, and feast, sit up, and revel;
call all the great, the fair and spirited dames
qf rome about thee, and begin a fashion
of freedom. ben.johnson]
some sit up late at winter-fires, and fit
their sharp-edg’d tools. may.
most children shorten that time by fitting up with the com-
pany at night. t
to sit. v. a.
1. to keep the seat upon.
hardly the muse can sit the head-strong horse,
nor would she, if she could, check his impetuous force.
prior.
2. [when the reciprocal pronoun follows fit, it seems to be an
adive verb.] to place on a seat.
the happiest youth viewing his progress through,
what perils past, what crosses to ensue,
would shut the book, and fit him down and die. shakesh.
he came to visit us, and calling for a chair, sat him down,
and we sat down with him. bacon,
thus fenc'd,
but not at rest or ease of mind,
they sat them down to weep. milton,
3. to be settled to do business.
the court was sat before fir roger came, but the justices
made room for the old knight at the head of them. addison,
site. n.s.. [stus, lat.] - - -
1. situation ; local position.
the city self he strongly fortifies,
three fides by site it well defenced has. fairfar:
. manifold streams of goodly navigable rivers, as so many
chains, environed the same site and temple. bacon.
if we consider the heart in its constituent parts, we shall
find nothing singular, but what is in any muscle. 'tis only
the site and posture of their several parts that give it the form
and functions of a heart. pentley,
" . before my view appear'd a structure fair,
its site uncertain if on earth or air. pope.
2. it is taken by thomson for posture, or fituation of a thing
with respect to itself; but improperly.
and leaves the semblance of a lover fix’d
in melancholy site, with head declin'd,
and *::::::: eyes. - thomson's spring.
sr"trast, n, s. [st and fast.]
a hard knob growing under the saddle. farrier's dies.
one is under no more obligation to extol every thing bec sith. adv. irree, saxon.]. since; seeing that. obsolete.
what
th
ts:
.
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 66</div><p class="text">s i t
s i z
i
what ceremony of odours used about the bodies of the
dead aster which custom notwithstanding, sith it was their
custom, our lord was contented that his own most precious
blood should be intombed. hooker.
i thank you for this profit, and from hence
i'll love no friend, sith love breeds such offence. shakespeare.
sithe. n.s. [ribe, saxon. this word is very variously writ-
ten by authors: i have chosen the orthography which is at
once most simple and most agreeable to etymology.] the
instrument of mowing; a crooked blade joined at right angles
to a long pole.
let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
live registred upon our brazen tombs;
and then grace us in the disgrace of death:
when, spight of cormorant devouring time,
th’ endeavour of this present breath may bu
that honour which shall 'bate his sythe's keen edge :
and make us heirs of all eternity. software.
time is commonly drawn upon tombs, in gardens, and
other places, an old man, bald, winged, with a sithe, and an
hour-glass. - peacham on drawing.
there rude impetuous rage does storm and fret;
and there, as master of this murd'ring brood,
swinging a huge scithe, stands impartial death,
with endless business almost out of breath. crashaw.
while the milk-maid fingeth blithe,
and the mower whets his scithe. milton.
the brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
but useless lances into sther shall bend,
and the broad faulchion in a plough-share end. pope.
grav'd o'er their seats the form of time was found,
his sythe revers'd, and both his pinions bound. pope.
but, stelia, say, what evil tongue
reports you are no longer young
that time sits with his sthe to snow
where crit sat cupid with his bow.
sirhe, n. s. time. obsolete.
the foolish man thereat woxe wond’rous blith,
and humbly thanked him a thousand sith. spensor.
sı'thence, adv. [now contracted to since. see since..] since;
in latter times.
this over-running and wasting of the realm was the begin-
ning of all the other evils which sitkence have afflicted that land.
speoser's state of ireland.
spensor. of irela
swift.
storhiness. adv. since.
sitter. n.s. (from sit..]
1. one that sits.
the turks are great sitters, and seldom walk; whereby
they sweat less, and need bathing more. bacon.
a bird that broods.
the oldest hens are reckoned the best sitters; and the young-
est the best layers. asortimer's husbandry.
sitting. m. s. [from sit.]
1. the posture of sitting on a seat.
2. the act of resting on a seat.
thou knowest my down-sitting and mine up rising.
. a time at which one exhibits himself to a painter.
few good pictures have been finished at one sitting; neither
psal.
tan a good play be produced at a heat. dryden,
1. a meeting of an assembly.
i'll write you down ;
the which shall point you forth at every sitting,
what you must say. shakespeare.
i wish it may be at that sitting concluded, unless the neces-
fity of the time press it. . bacon.
5. a course of study unintermitted.
for the understanding of any one of st. paul's epistles, i
read it all through at one sitting. locke.
6. a time for which one fits, as at play, or work, or a visit.
what more than madness reigns,
when one short sitting many hundred drains,
and not enough is left him to supply -
board-wages, or a footman's livery.
7, incubation.
whilst the hen is covering her eggs, the male bird takes
his stand upon a neighbouring bough, and amuses her with
his songs during the whole time of her sitting. addison.
situate. part, adj. [from stus, lat.j
1. placed with respest to any thing else.
he was resolved to chuse a war, rather than to have bre-
tagne carried by france, being so great and opulent a duchy,
and situate so opportunely to annoy england. bacon.
within a trading town they long abide, -
full fairly situate on a haven's fide. dryden's nun's prieff.
the eye is a part so artificially composed, and commodi-
ously situate, as nothing can be contrived better for use, orna-
ment, or security. ray on the creation.
* placed; consisting.
earth hath this variety from heav'n,
of pleasure situate in his and dale. milton's parad. loft.
sirvation. n.f. [from situate; situation, fr.]
1. local respect; position.
dryden.
prince cesarini has a palace in a pleasant situati d so
off with many beautiful p to on; set
...outwalk. addison's italy,
. though this is *a*ation of the greatest ease and tranquillity
iii human life, yet this is by no means fit to be the subject of
all men's petitions to god. rogers's sermons.
3. temporary state ; circumstances. used of persons in a dra-
matick scene.
six. of [so, fr.]. twice three; one more than five.
no incidentin the piece or play but must carry on the main
design; all things else are like /* fingers to the hand, when
nature can do her work with five. - b; den
that of six hath many respects in it, not only for so.
of the creation, but its natural consideration, as being a per-
fe&amp;t number. brown's vulgar eriuri.
six and seven...". s. to be at six and seven, is to be in a state of
jisorder and confusion. a ludicrous expression that has been
long in use. -
all is uneven,
and every thing is left at six and seven. shakespeare,
in 1588, there sat in the see of rome a fierce thundring
friar, that would set all at six and seven, or at fix and five, if
you allude to his name. bacon,
what blinder bargain ere was driv'n,
or wager laid at six and seven. hudibrar.
john once turned his mother out of doors, to his great
sorrow ; for his affairs went on at sixes and sevens, arbuthnot.
the goddess would no longer wait;
but raising from her chair of state,
left all below at six and seven,
harness'd her doves and flew to heav'n. swift.
sroxpenco. m. s. [six and pense.] a coin; half a shilling.
where have you left the money that i gave you?
oh !—sixpence that i had. - shakespeare.
the wisest man might blush,
if d–lov’d sixpence more than he. pope.
sixsco's e. adj. [six and score.] six times twenty.
sixscore and five miles it containeth in circuit. sandyr.
the crown of spain hath enlarged the bounds thereof with-
in this last sixstore years, much more than the ottomans.
bacon.
sixtee"n. adj. [rix: one, saxon.] six and ten.
it returned the voice thirteen times; and i have heard of
others that it would return sixteen times. bacon.
if men lived but twenty years, we should be satisfied if they
died about sixteen or eighteen. taylor.
sixteenth. adj. [rixteoca, saxon.] the sixth after the
tenth ; the ordinal of sixteen.
the first lot came forth to jehoiarib, the sixteenth to im-
ner. 1 chron. xxiv. 14.
sixth. adj. [rixta, saxon.] the first after the fifth; the or:
dinal of six. -
you are more clement than vile men,
who of their broken debtors take
a sixth, letting them thrive again. shakespeare.
there succeeded to the kingdom of england james the
sixth, then king of scotland. bacon.
sixth. m. s. [from the adjective..] a fixth part.
only the other half would have been a tolerable seat for
rational creatures, and five sixths of the whole globe would
have been rendered useless. cheyne's philos. principles.
s1(xthly. adv. [from six.] in the sixth place.
sixthly, living creatures have more diversity of organs than
plants. bacon.
sixtieth. adj. "[rixteozoosa, saxon.] the tenth six times
repeated; the ordinal of sixty.
let the appearing circle of the fire be three foot diameter,
and the time of one entire circulation of it the sixtieth part of
a minute, in a whole day there will be but 86400 such parts.
digby on bodies.
sixty, adj. [rixziz, saxon.] six times ten.
when the boats were come within sixty yards of the pillar,
they found themselves all bound, and could go no farther.
- bacon.
of years 7 times 9, or the year 63, is conceived to carry
with it the most considerable fatality. brown's vulgar errours.
size. n.s. [perhaps rather rise, from incisa, latin; or from
assis, french.] -
1. bulk; quantity of superficies; comparative magnitude.
i ever verified my friends,
with all the size that verity
would without lapsing suffer. shakespeare's coriolanus.
if any decayed ship be new made, it is more fit to make her
a size less than bigger. raleigh.
the distance judg’d for shot of ev'ry size,
the linstocks touch, the pond’rous ball expires. dryden.
objects near our view are thought greater than those of a
larger size, that are more remote. lotke.
the martial goddess,
like thee, telemachus, in voice and size, ..
with speed divine, from street to street she flies. pope.
2. (asso, old french.] a settled quantity. in the *:::
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 67</div><p class="text">s k e
s k i
passage it seems to signify the allowance of the table: whence.
they say a sizer at cambridge. .." .
'tis not in thee
to cut off my train, to scant my sizes,
and, in conclusion, to oppose the bolto o
against my coming in.
3. figurative bulk; condition,
this agrees too in the contempt of men of a less size and
quality. - - - l’estrange.
they do not consider the difference between elaborate dis-
courses, delivered to princes or parliaments, and a plain ser-
mon, for the middling or lower size of people. , swift.
4. [sisa, stalian.] any viscous or glutinous substance.
to size. v. a. [from the noun j * -
1. to adjust, or arrange according to size. - *
the foxes weigh the geese they carry,
and ere they venture on a stream,
know how to size themselves and them. . . .
two troops so match'd were never to be found,
such bodies built for strength, of equal age, , , ,
ln statute siz'd. dryden's knight's tale.
2. [from afts. j. to settle; to fix. -
* there was a statute for dispersing the standard of the ex-
chequer throughout england; thereby to size weights and
measures. - bacon's henry vii.
3. to cover with glutinous matter; to besmear with size.
$1.2ep. adj, [from size.j having a particular magnitude.
- what my love is, proof hath made you know,
and as my love is siz'd, my fear is so. shakespeare.
that will be a great horse to a welshman, which is but a
fmall one to a fleming ; having, from the different breed of
“ their countrics, taken several azca ideas, to which they com-
pare their great and their little. - locke.
size arle. adj. [from size. j reasonably bulky; of just pro-
ortion to others. -
he should be purged, sweated, vomited, and starved, till
he come to a so-calle bulk. a buthnot.
s1’z er, or s. vior, n. s. a certain rank of students in the uni-
versities. . . . *
they make a scramble for degree :
masters of all sorts and of all ages,
keepers, sub-sers, lackeys, pages.
s. zers. m. s. see sciss ars.
a buttrice and pincers, a hammer and naile,
an apron and sizers for head and for taile.
s1’z.iness. m. s. [from sizy..] glutinousness; viscosity.
* in rheumatisms, the sizings, passes off thick contents in the
urine, or glutinous sweats. floyer on the humours.
cold is capable of producing a szines, and viscosity in the
blood. arbuthnot.
$1(zy. adj. [from size.] viscous ; glutinous. . . " , -
the blood is szy, the alkalescent salts in the serum pro-
ducing coriaceous concretions. arbuthnot on diet.
ska'ddle, n.s. [rcea snorre, saxon; scath is barm; thence
scatble, scaddle.] hurt; damage. dicf.
ska'o do ns. m. s. the embryos of bees. bailey.
sf fin. m. s. [eftaigne, fr.] a knot of thread or silk wound
and doubled, . . .
why art thou then exasperate, thou idle immaterial skein
of sley'd silk, thou tassel of a prodigal's purse 2 shakespeare.
o our stile should be like a skein of silk, to be found by the
right thread, not ravell'd or perplexed. then all is a knot,
a heap. ben. johnson.
besides, so lazy a brain as mine is, grows soon weary when
it has so entangled a skein as this to unwind. digby,
skain smat e. m. s. [f suppose from stain, or skean, a knife,
and mate.] a messinate. it is remarkable that mes, dutch,
is a knife. - -
scurvy knave, i am none of his flirt gills;
i am none of his stainsnates. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
skate. m. s. [rceaboa, saxon.] -
1. a flat sea fish.
2. a sort of shoe armed with iron, for sliding on the ice.
- they sweep
on sounding skates a thousand different ways,
in circling poise swift as the winds. thomson.
skean. m. s. [irish and erse; razene, saxon.] a short sword;
a knife, -
any disposed to do mischief, may under his mantle privily
carry his head piece, skean, or pistol, to be always ready. .
- ... . . . spenser.
the irish did not fail in courage or fierceness, but o:
only armed with darts and skeines, it was rather an execution,
than a fight upon them. bacon's henry vii.
skeg. m. s. a wild plum.
ske'gcer. m. s.
little salmons called skeggers, are bred of such fick salmon
that might not go to the sea, and though they abound, yet
never thrive to any bigness. //alton's angler.
skeleton.n, s, [axex floo, greek.] -
1. [in anatomy. ]. the bones of the body preserved together
as much as can be in their natural situation. - ouincy.
hudibras.
bp. corbit.
tuffer.
shakespeare's king lear. .
when rattling bones together fly,
from the four corners of the sky;
when finews o'er the skeletons are spread,
those cloth'd with flesh, and life inspires the dead. dryden.
though the patient may from other causes be exceedingly
emaciated, and appear as a ghastly skeleton, covered only with
a dry skin, yet nothing but the ruin and destruction of the
lungs denominates a consumption. blackmore.
i thought to meet, as late as heav'n might grant,
a skeleton, ferocious, tall and gaunt,
whose loose teeth in their naked sockets shook,
and grinn'd terrific, a sardonian look.
2. the compages of the principal parts.
the great structure itself, and its great integrals, the hea-
venly and elementary bodies, are framed in such a position
and situation, the great skeleton of the world. hak.
the schemes of any of the arts or sciences may be analyzed
in a sort of skeleton, and represented upon tables, with the va-
rious dependencies of their several parts. lsatis.
skellum. n.s.. [selm, german.] a villain; a scoundrel.
- skinner.
arty,
ske p. m. s. [rceppen, lower saxon, to draw.]
1. skep is a sort of basket, narow at the bottom, and wide at
the top to fetch corn in. -
a pitchforke, a doongforke, seeve, skep, and a bin. taser.
2. in scotland, the repositories where the bees lay their honey
... is still called sop. -
ske'ptick. n.s.. [axe-lo, gr. sceptique, fr.]
doubts, or pretends to doubt of every thing.
, , bring the cause unto the bar; whose authority none must
disclaim, and least of all those scepticks in religion. dec, of p.
o survey -
nature's extended face, then scepticks say,
in this wide field of wonders can you find --
no art. - - blarimore.
with too much knowledge for the stepticks side,
with too much weakness for the stoicks pride,
man hangs between. pope's essay on man.
. . . the dogmatist is sure of every thing, and the sorptio be.
lieves nothing. - matt's logick
skeptical, adj. [from sorptick.] doubtful; pretending to
universal doubt.
may the father of mercies confirm the sceptical and wa-
vering minds, and so prevent us that stand fast, in all our do-
ings, and further us with his continual help. bently,
ske"pricism. n. s. [scepticisme, fr. from sceptick.] universal
doubt; pretence or profession of universal doubt. "
i laid by my natural diffidence and scepticism for a while, to
take up that dogmatick way. dryden,
sketch. n.f. [schedula, lat.] an outline; a rough draught;
a first plan.
i shall not attempt a character of his present majesty, having
one who
already given an imperseason of it." • addison.
as the lightest sketch, if justly trac'd, -
is by ill colouring but the more disgrac'd, -
. . . so by false learning is good sense defac’d. pope.
to sketch. v. n. [from the noun.] " **
1. to draw, by tracing the outline.
if a pieture is daubed with many glaring colours, the vul-
gar eye admires it; whereas he judges very contemptuously of
some admirable design sketched out only with a black pencil,
though by the hand of raphael. . iłaiti's logick.
2. to plan, by giving the first or principal notion.
the reader i’ll leave in the midst of silence, to contemplate
those ideas which i have only sketch'd, and which every man
must finish for himself. dryden's dufresnoj.
skewer. n.s.. [skere, danish..] a wooden or iron pin, used
to keep meat in form. .*- : * &gt; -
sweet breeds and collops were with skewers prick'd , .
about the sides. dryden's iliad.
i once may overlook,"
a skewer sent to table by my cook. king.
from his rug the skewer he takes,
and on the stick ten equal notches makes. saft.
send up meat well stuck with skewers, to make it look round;
and an iron skewer, when rightly employed, will make it look
handsomer. swift's directions to the cook.
to skewer. v. a. [from the noun..] to fasten with skewers.
ski f.f. m. s. sesquife, fr. scapha, lat..] a small light boat. .
if in two skiffs of cork, a loadstone and steel be placed with-
in the orb of their activities, the one doth not move, the other
standing still ; but both steer into each other. brown.
in a poor skiff he pass'd the bloody main, -
choak’d with the slaughter'd bodies of his train. dryden.
. . . on garrway cliffs -
a savage race by shipwreck fed, " '' .
lie waiting for the founder'd stiff, *
and strip the bodies of the dead. -- * * swift.
ski'l ful. adj, [skill and full.] knowing; qualified with skill;
possessing any art; dexterous; able. it is, in the following
examples, used with of, at, and in, before the subject of skill.
of seems poetical, at ludicrous, in popular and proper." h
!.
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 68</div><p class="text">s k i
his father was a man of tyre, skilful to work in gold and
silver. - - 2 chron. ii. 14.
they shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as
aff ilful of iamentation, to wailing. . - . amos, v. 16.
wijs vafer is /kiful at finding out the ridiculous fide of a
thing: and placing it in a new light. . - tatler.
say, stella, feel you no content, -
reflecting on a life well spent; -
your skilful hand employ'd to save
despairing wretches from the grave:
and then supporting with your store -
those whom you uragg'd from death before. swift.
instructors should not only be skilful in those sciences which
they teach ; but have skil, in the method of teaching, and pa-
tioce in the practice. ... watts on the mind.
$xislfully. *. [from /*issal.] with skill; with art; with
uncommon ability ; dexterously.
as soon as he came near me, in fit distance, with much
fity, but with fury £ifully guided, he ran upon me. sidney.
ulysses builds a ship with his own hands, as skilfully as a
shipwright. broome.
skrifulness. m. s. [from skilful..] art; ability; dextrous.
ness. -
he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and
guided them by the sofulness of his hands. psalm lxxviii. 72.
skill. n. s. [soil, islandisk.]
1. knowledge of any practice or art; readiness in any practice;
knowledge; dexterity ; artfulness.
still in the weapon is nothing without sack.
... you have
as little skill to fear, as i have purpose
to put you to"t. shakespeare.
ott nothing profits more
than self-estceum grounded on just and right, or
well manag'd ; of that skill the more thou know'st
shakespeare.
the more she will acknowledge thee her head. milton,
i will from wond’rous principles ordain
a race unlike the first, and try my skill again. dryden.
phocion the athenian general, then ambassador from the
state, by his great wisdom and skill at negotiations, diverted
alexander from the conquest of athens, and restored the
athenians to his favour. swift.
2. any particular art.
learned in one skill, and in another kind of learning un-
skilful. booker.
to skill. v. n. [skilia, islandick.]
1. to be knowing in ; to be dextrous at: with of.
they that skill not of so heavenly matter,
all that they know not, envy or admire. spensor.
the overseers were all that could skill of instruments of mu-
sick. 2 chron. xxxiv. 12.
one man of wisdom, experience, learning, and direction,
no logo better in those things that he can skill of, than ten
thousand others that be ignorant. whitgifte.
2. (siilia, 'slandick, signifies to distinguish.] to differ; to
make difference; to interest; to matter. not in use.
whether the commandments of god in scripture be gene-
ral or special, it skilleth not. booker.
what skill; it, if a bag of stones or gold
about thy neck do drown thee raise thy head,
take stars for money ; stars not to be told,
by any art : yet to be purchas'd.
none is so wastful as the scraping dame,
she loseth three for one ; her soul, rest, fame. herbert.
he intending not to make a summer business of it, but a
resolute war, without term prefixed, until he had recovered
france, it stilled not much when he began the war, especially
having calais at his back where he might winter. bacon.
skilled, adj. [from skill.] knowing; dextrous; acquainted
with: with of poetically, with in popularly.
of these nor skilled nor studious. milton.
moses, in all the egyptian arts was skill'd,
when heav'nly power that chosen vessel fill’d. , denham.
he must be very little skill"d in the world, who thinks that
a voluble tongue shall accompany only a good *;
0cart.
ski'lloss. adj. [from skill.] wanting skill; artless. not in
use.
nor have i seen
more that i may call men than you :
how features are abroad i'm skills, f.
jealously what might befal your travel,
being skills, in these parts; which to a stranger
unguided and unfriended, often prove
rough and unhospitable. shakspeare's twelfth night.
thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
mishapen in the conduct of them both,
like powder in a skills, soldier's flask
ls set on fire. shakespeare's romeo and juliet,
skriler. m. s. [osullette, fr.] a small kettle or boiler.
when light-wing'd toys
offeather'd cupid foll with wanton dullness
vol. ii.
shakespeare.
my (polative and offic'd instruments,
et house-wives make a skillet of my helm,
#nd all indign and base adversities
make head against my estimati 3. -
n..."...o.o.
fire and in a kettle or skillet set it over a soft
- - mortimer's husb-ndry.
skilt. m. s. [a word used by cleaveland, of which i know o:
either the etymology or meaning !
s smeitymnus shal what aft:
yriack? qr arabick orwelsh what it p
ap all the bricklayers that babel built. fki cleaveland.
to skimo v. a. sproperly to stum, from sum 3 escume, fr.
1. to clear off from the u art, by pass - -
below the surface. ppor part, by passing a vessel a little
my coz tom, or his coz mary,
who hold the plough or skim the dairy,
my fav'rite books, and pictures sell.
prior,
2. to take by skimming. - rior
she boils in kettles must of wine, and skimo
with leaves the dregs that overflow the brims. dryden.
his principal studies were after the works of titian, whose
cream he has skimm'd. dryden's dufresnoy.
the surface of the sea is covered with its bubbles, while it
rises, which they skin off into their boats, and afterwards se-
parate in pots. addison.
whilome i've seen her skim the cloated cream, -
and press from spongy curds the milky stream. gay,
3. to brush the surface slightly; to pass very near the surface.
nor seeks in air her humble flight to raise,
content to skim the surface of the seas. * dryden.
the swallow skims the river's watry face. dryden,
a winged eastern blast just skimming o'er
the ocean's brow, and sinking on the shore. prior,
4. to cover superficially. improper. perhaps originally skin.
dang'rous flats in secret ambush lay,
where the false tides skim o'er the cover'd land,
and seamen with dissembled depths betray. dryden,
to skim. v. n. to pass lightly ; to glide along.
thin airy shapes o'er the furrows rise,
a dreadful scene and skim before his eyes. addison,
when ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,
the line too labours, and the words move slow;
not so when swift camilla scours the plain,
flies o'er th' unbending corn, and skims along the main.
pope,
such as have active spirits, who are ever skimming over &amp;
surface of things with a volatile spirit, will fix nothing in their
memory. watts on the mind.
they skim over a science in a very superficial survey, and
never lead their disciples into the depths of it. watts.
ski’mbleskamble. adj. [a cant word formed by reduplica-
tion from scamble.j wandering ; wild.
a couching lion and a ramping cat,
and such a deal of /kimbleskamble stuff,
as puts me from my faith. shakespeare.
ski'mmer. m. s. [from skim.] a shallow vessel with which
the scum is taken off. . - -
wash your wheat in three or four waters, stirring it round;
and with a skimmer, each time, take off the light. amortimer.
ski'mmilk. n.s.. [skim and milk.] milk from which the cream
has been taken.
then cheese was brought: says slouch, this e'en shall roll;
this is skimmilk, and therefore it shall go.
skin. m. s. [skind, danish.)
1. the natural covering of the flesh. it consists of the cuticle,
outward skin, or scarf skin, which is thin and insensible, and
the cutis, or inner skin, extremely sensible.
the body is consumed to nothing, the skin feeling rough
and dry like leather. harvey on consumptions.
the priest on skins of off’rings takes his ease,
and nightly visions in his slumber sees. dryden's aen.
2. hide; pelt; that which is taken from animals to make parch-
ment or leather. -
on whose top he strow'd
a wilde goat's shaggy skin; and then bestow'd
his own couch on it.
3. the body; the person : in ludicrous speech. ... . -
we meet with many of these dangerous civilities, wherein
'tis hard for a man to save both his skin and his credit. l'e/ir.
4. a husk.
to skin. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to flay, to strip or divest of the skin.
the beavers run to the door to make their escape, are there
intangled in the nets, seized by the indians, and immediately
fkinned. - ellis's voyage.
2. to cover with the skin.
it will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
whilst rank corruption, mining all within,
insects unseen.
authority, though it err ...”
has yet a kind of medicine in itself,
#. the vice o' th' top. shakes?. meas for moss.
24 f the
king.
chapman.
shakespeare.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 69</div><p class="text">s k i
f s k i
the wound was skinned; but the strength of his thigh was
not reitored. . - dryden.
it only patches up and skins it over, but reaches not to the
bottom of the fore. - - locke.
the latt stage of healing, or skinning over, is called cica-
trization. sharp's surgery.
3. to cover supcificially. -
what i took for solid earth was only heaps of rubbish,
skinned over with a covering of vegetables. addison.
ski'n flint. n.s.. [skin and flint.] a niggardly person.
skink. m. s. [renc, saxon.]
1. drink; any thing potable.
2. pottage. -
- scot, h skink, which is a pottage of strong nourishment, is
made with the knees and sinews of beef, but song boiled : jelly
also of knuckles of veal. bacon's natural hyłory.
to ski nk. v. n. [rcencan, saxon.] to serve drink. both
noun and verb are wholly obsolete. - -
ski'nke r. m. s. [from skink.] one that serves drink.
i give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapt even now into
my hand by an under skinker; one that never spake other eng-
lish in his life, than eight shillings and six pence, and you
are welcome, sir.
hang up all the poor hop-drinkers, -
'cries old sym, the king of skinkers. ben. johnson.
his mother took the cup the clown had fill'd :
the reconciler bowl went round the board, .
which, empty'd, the rude skinker still restor'd. dryden.
sk (nn ep. adj. [from skin..] having the nature of skin or lea-
ther ; hard ; callous.
when the ulcer becomes foul, and discharges a nasty ichor,
the edges in process of time tuck in, and, growing skinned
and hard, give it the name of callous. sharp's surgery.
ski'n's er. m. s. [from skin..] a dealer in skins, or pelts.
ski'nn in ess. n. j. [from skinny..] the quality of being skinny.
ski'nn.y. a j, thom skin..] consisting only of skin; wanting
flesh. -
f
her choppy finger laying
upon her o: } ing shakespeare's macbeth.
last the asperity of these cartilages of the windpipe should
hurt the gullet, which is tender, and of a skinny substance,
these annulary grilles are not made round ; but where the
gullet touches the windpipe, there, to fill up the circle, is
only a soft unenbrane, which may easily give way.
ray on the creation.
his fingers meet ,
in skinny films, and shape bis oary fect. addison's ovid.
to sk. p. v. n. [squittire, italian ; esquirer, fr. i know not
whether it snay not come, as a diminutive, from scape.] to
fetch quick bounds; to pass by quick leaps 3 to bound lightly
and joyfully. . . . . . . * - . . . . . . .
- was not israel a derision unto thee : was he found among
thieves : for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedo for joy.
- . . . jer. xlviii. 27.
the queen, bound with love's powerful’st charm,
sat with pig wiggen arm in arm : . . . o {
her merry maids, that thought no harm,
about the room were skipping. drayton.
at spur or switch no more he skitt, - -
or mended pace, than spaniard whipt. hudibras.
the earth-born race . . . .
o'er ev'ry hij} and verdant pasture stray,
skip o'er the lawns, and by the rivers play. blackmore.
john skipped from room to room, ran up fairs and down
stairs, peeping into cvery cranny. a batha. hist, off. bull.
thus each hand promotes the pleasing pain, -
and quick sensations skip from vein to vein. pope's dunciad.
the lamb thy riot dooms to-bleed to-day,
had he thy reason, would he skip and play :
to sk: p over. to pass without notice. .
pope pius ii. was wont to say, that the former popes did
wisely to set the lawyers a-work to debate, whether the dona--
tion of constantine the great to sylveiter of st. peter's patri-
mony were good or valid in law or no ; the better to skip over
the matter in fact, waether there was ever any such thing at
all or no. bacon's apophthogons.
a gentleman made it a rule, in reading, to skip over all
sentences wiere he spied a note of admiration at the end. swift.
to ski p. v. a. sesquirer, fr.] -
1. to miss; to pass.
let not thy sword skip one : -
pity not honour’d age for his white beard ; -
he is an usurer. chakespeare's timon of athens.
they who have a mind to see the iliue, may skip these two
chapters, and proceed to the following. burmet.
2. in the following example skip is active or neuter, as over is
thought an adverb or preposition. - o
although to engage very far in such a metaphysical specu-
lation were unfit, when i only endeavour to explicate fluidity,
yet we dare not quite skip it over, lett we be accused of over-
seeing it. boyle.
skip. n.f. [from the verb..] a light leap or bound. -
pope.
shakspeare's henry iv.
he lookcd very curiously upon himself, sometimes fetchin
a little skip, as if he had said his strength had not yet forsake.
him. - sidney.
you will make so large a skip as to cast yourself from the
land into the water. al/are's antidote agains: atheism,
ski'pj ack. m. s. [skip and jac{..] an upstart. -
the want of shame or brains does not presently entitle every
little skipjack to the board's end in the cabinet. l'ajirango,
ski pkennel. n.s.. [skip and kennel.] . a lackey ; a footboy.
ski'pper. m. s. [shipper, dutch..] a shipmater or shipboy,
are not you afraid of being drowned too : no, not i, says
the skipper. - - i. aftrange,
no doubt you will return very much improved. yes,
refined like a dutch skipper from a whale-fishing. congred.
sk i'ppet. m. s. [probably from skiff.] a small boat. not used.
- upon the bank they sitting did espy
a dainty damsci, dressing of her hair,
by whom a little skippet floating did appear. fairy queen.
sk1'rmish. n.s.. [from ys and carm, welsh, the shout of war:
whence y/garm, and y/garmes, old british words. maes a
naw 'soames a wnan, says an ancient writer. es armouche,
french.] -
1. a slight fight: less than a set battle.
one battle, yes, a skirmish more there was
with adverse fortune fought by cartismand;
her subjecls most revolt. philips' briton.
2. a contest; a contention.
there is a kind of merry war betwixt fignior benedick and
her: they never meet but there's a skirmish of wit. shakes.
these skirmishes expire not with the first propugners of the
opinions: they perhaps began as single duellers; but then
they soon have their partisans and abettors, who not only en-
hance but intail the feud to posterity. decay of piety.
to ski rm 1sh. v. n. [escarmoucher, fr. from the noun j. to
fight loosely ; to fight in parties before or after the shock of
the main battle. - a -
ready to charge, and to retire at will ; ..
though broken, scatter'd, fled, they skirmish still. fairfax.
a gentleman volunteer, skirmishing with the enemy before
worcester, was run through his arm in the middle of the
biceps with a sword, and shot with a musket-bullet in the
same shoulder. - //iseman's surgery.
i'll pass by the little skirmishings on either side. atterbury,
ski rmisher. m. s. [from skirmish..] he who skirmishes. ain.
to ski rre. v. a. [this word seems to be derived from rein,
saxon, pure, clean; unless it shall be rather deduced from
ax;142.] to scour; to ramble over in order to clear.
send out more horses, skirre the country round;
hang those that talk of fear. ... • shakesheare's macbeth.
to skirre. v. n. to scour; to scud; to run in haste.
... we'll make them skirre away as swift as stones -
enforced from the old assyrian slings. shakesp. henry v.
ski'rret. n. s. [ssarum, lat..] a plant.
skirrets are a sort of roots propagated by seed.
skirt. n. s. [ skiorte, swedish..] -
1. the loose edge of a garment; that part which hangs loose
- below the waist. . . . . - - - -
it's but a nightgown in respect of yours; cloth of gold and
cuts, side sleeves and skirts, round underborne with a bluish
tinsel. . shakesp. much ado about nothing.
as samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent. 1 sa. xv. 27.
2. the edge of any part of the dress. -
. . a narrow lace, or a small ski t of ruffled linen, which runs
along the upper part of the stays before, and crosses the breast,
being a pait of the tucker, is called the modesy-piece. addis.
3. edge; margi, ; border ; , extreme part. . -
he should feat himself at athie, upon the skirt of that un-
quiet country. . . . . . . s. enjer on ireland.
yemists, that rise - - - - -
"from hill or steaming lake, dusky or grey.
*till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold,
mortimer.
… in honour to the world's great author rise. as lon.
though i fled him angry, yet recall'd -
to life prolong’d, and promis'd race, i now
cladly behold, though but his utmost ski to
of glory, and far off his steps adore. + aloon.
the northern skirts that join to syria have entered into the
conquests or commerce of the four great empires; but that
which seeins to have secured the other is the stony and sandy
desarts, through which no army can pass. - ‘i erople.
- upon the skirts . . .
of arragon our squander'd troops he rallies. dryzo.
7% skirt. v. a. [from the noun..] to torder; to run along
the edge. - -
temple skirteth this hundred on the waste side.
- of all these bounds,
with shadowy forests and with champions rich'd,
with plenteous rivers and wide ski ted meads,
we make thee lady. -
the middle pair
skirted his loins and thighs with downy gold.
car.w.
smoor, -
a filton.
a spacious
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 70</div><p class="text">s k u
a spacicus circuit on the hill there flood,
level and wide, and skirted round with wood.
dark cypresses the sorting sides adorn'd,
and gloomy ough-trees, which for ever mourn'd. iła, te,
skittis: adi. [skyo, danish; show, dutch, j.
shy; easily orighted. -
* ". restiff sittish jade had gotten a trick of rising, starting,
and flying out at his own shadow. - l'estrange.
wanton ; volatile; hasty; precipitate. -
* "now expectation, tickling skittish spirits,
sets all on hazard. - shakosheare.
he still resolv'd, to mend the matter,
to adhere and cleave the obstimater;
and still the skittisher and looser,
her freaks appear'd to fit the closer. hudibras.
- changeable; fickle. -
3 some men sleep in sittish fortune's hall,
while others play the ideots in her eyes. shakespeare.
such as i am, all true lovers are ;
unsaid and fittish in all notions else,
save in the constant image of the creature - -
that is belov'd. - shakesh. twelfth night.
sr.'rtish ly. adv. [from skittish.) wantonly; uncertainly;
ckly.
so m. s [from sittish.j wantonness; fickle-
ness. -
skox.cf. n. s. [see scoxce.]
reinard ransacketh every corner of his wily stance, and be-
firreth the utmost of his nimble stumps to quit his coat from
their jaws. - carew.
skos. m. s. ses ran, esortin, french, which minshew derives
foom forniculum, latin. nini, violenter ut solet, says son-
air, which may be true as to one of the senses; but if the first
sense of soreen be a kind of coarse sieve or riddle, it may per-
haps come, if not from cribrium, from some of the descendants
of corn.) - -
1. a riddle or coarse sieve.
a skuttle or sorcer to rid soil fro’ the corn. tosor.
1. anything by which the suit or weather is kept off. -
to cheapen fans or boy a stroen. prior.
so long condemn'd to fires and sireens, -
you dread the waving of these grec.ns. 4am.
3. shelter; concealment.
fenc'd from day, by night's eternal soreen;
unknown to heav'n, and to myself unseen."
to sk r.e.e.n. v. a. [from the noun.] - - - -
1. to riddle; to fift. a term yet used among masons when
they fift sand for mortar. o -
1. to shade from sun or light, or weather. - -
3. to keep off light of weather. - -
the curtains closely drawn, the light to soreen:
thus cover'd with an artificial night, . .
seep did his office. - dryden.
the waters mounted up into the air: their interposition
betwixt the earth and the sun sorron and fence off the heat,
otherwise insupportable. j/32 ward's natural hysary.
1. to shelter ; to protest. --
ajax interpos'd - -
his sevenfold shield, and soreen's laertes' son,
- dry len.
o
-
when the insulting trojans urg'd him sore. philips.
he that travels with then is to skreen them, and get them
out when they have run themselves into the briars. locke.
his majesty encouraged his subjects to make mouths at their
betters, and afterward for them from punishment. speci.
the scales, of which the scarf skin is composed, are de-
signed to fence the orifices of the secretory ducts of the miliary
glands, and to sorron the nerves from external injuries. cheyne.
sour, aii. (of this word there is found no satisfactory deri-
vation.] oblique; sidelong. it is most used in the adverb
esar. - - . . . .
several have imagined that this or posture of the axis is a
most unfortunate thing ; and that if the poles had been erect
to the plane of the eclip.ick, all mankind would have cooyed
a very paradise. -
t. skulk. v. n. to hite; to lurk in fear or malice.
discover'd, and desented of your prev,
you so lo'd behind the fe:ce, and speak'd awry. dryot.
while fock good aloft in pomp they wield,
and private in-e-et oak, behind the shield. 1 arg.
skull n.s. (so n, 11 mock; so tri, island'ck, a head.]
1. the bone that incloses the head : it is made up of several
pieces, which, being joine together, form a considerable
cavity, which contain the brain as in a box, and it is pro-
portionate to the birness of the brain. qiaoy.
some lay in dead mens staff; ; and in those holes,
where eyes did once inha'it, there were crept,
as 'twere in corn of eyes, reflecting gems. shak. r. iii.
with redou','e' shook she joirs his head;
but drives the batter's so all within the brains. drydon.
2. [s. sole, saxon, a company. j a shoal. see sct: ll.
repair to the river where you have so: them swim in sou!';
or shoals. j7 a.47.
alison.
2. a plane of stone: as, a marble s.l.
§:::::: o, s. . a headpiece."
ku lic.a.r. h. / scaffoda, latin.1. 'an: -
sky. ...}}}. § - j. a plant. o
1. the region which surroun
sphere. it is taken for the
the mountains their b
into the clouds, their to
js this earth beyond the aton.
_ _ " - - - t * *
whole region without the earth.
road backs upheave
- - ps ascend the joy. - milton.
a o o, . argos, who with o cries, milton
nd imitated lowings, fol'd the so. c.---
- raise all th james r seminori.
- l . . - - - - -
} woods, with night is volve the s.s.” doyd
. . . . . a...' j. l'rvat?!
2. the heavens. o ~ ******
the thunderer's bolt you know,
so batters all rebelling coasis. ..oft. coil-line.
at is this knowledge but the systol’n f. -
for which the thief still chain’d in ice doth fift
wide is the fronting gate, and rais'd on high
with adamantine columns threats the sy. c”? dryd
- o yaen.
3. the weather; the climate.
thou wert better in thy graze, than to answer with th
uncovered body this extremity df the sies. shaios). k. lear
we envy not the warmer cline that lies … " -
in ten degrees of more indulgent skies;
nor at the coarseness of our heav'n repine,
though o'er our heads the frozen pleiads shine. alison.
sky ex. adj. [from soy. not very elegantly formed.] fitnessal.
a breath thou art, - - - - -
servile to all the syey influences, -
that do this habitation, where thou keep's,
hourly afflict. shakosh. ascosore for masore.
sky solour: "...s. (soy and colour.] an azare ‘olour, the
colour of the sky. . . . . - -
a solution as clear as water, with only a light touch of fly-
colour, but nothing near so high as the cerucous tincture of
silver. : - - - - boyle.
sky’s gloured, ad. [s, and color.j b'ac azure; like the sky.
this your ovid himself has histed, when he tells us that
the blue water-nymphs are dressed in sycoloure garments. add,
sky (dyfe. adi. (soy and dye.] coloured hke je fly. -
there figs, soyed, a purple hue disclose. ..., pope,
sky'ed. adj. [from sy.) eto'oped by tile skies. this is
unauthorise", and itslogant. ---
the pale delusic floats - --- -
o'er the so, a mountain to the shadowy vale. thomson.
sky isfi. al. iiron sy..] coloured by the ether; approaching
the sky. - - - -
of this flat a mountain you have mad
--&gt;
t’ o'er top old pelion, or the so, so head : .
of blue olympus. - soft. hamlet,
sky lark. v. f. [joy and sara.1 a lark, that mounts and
sings. . . - - -
he next proceeded to the solar}, mounting up by a proper
scale of notes, and afterwards falling to the ground with a
very easy descent. speciator.
skylight. n.s. (soy and sight.] a window placed in a room,
not laterally, but in the cicling.
a monstrous fowl dopt through the sysiot, near his wife's
apartment. a lushnat and pope.
skyrocker. r. s. s. soy and rocket.] a. kind of firework,
which flies high, and burns as it flies. - ... --
i considered a comet, or, in the language of the vulgar, a
blazing star, as a joyrocket discharged by an hand that is al-
davies.
mighty. . . . . . . ddeon.
sla b. m. s.
1. a puddle. -
- r
ain it 27 1/2.
slab. adj. a word, i supoose, of the same original with or,
of silver.] thick; viscous; glutinous. . .
nose of turk, and tarta's lips; "
finger of birth-strang!'d babe, -
litch. deliver'd by a dia', ; t { -
make the gruel thick and s. 5. " . " sasso. asa, both.
to sla bbr r. v. n. isoen, slaloeren, dutch..] -
1. to let the slittle fall from the mouth , to dive!..
2. to shed or our any thing.
to sla’oe e.r. v. a. [saver is the word used.]."
1. to snear with spit, le. - - -
* - - - -
- lently.
. he sout'. ed one all over, from check to check, with his great
tongue. arbuthnot". howry of jon lui.
2. to shed ; to spill. - -
the oilk-pan and cream-pot so sillo'o and tost,
that butter is wanting, and cheese is half lost. tuor.
sla enre er. m. s. (from jabber.] he who flabbers; an idiot.
sla bb y. adj. [the same with slab. j
1. thick; viscous. not used.
in the cure of an ulcer, with a moist intemperies, sally
and greasy medicaments are to be forboro, and drying to be
used. , so so'. sagery.
2. wet; floody: in low language. -
when waggish boys the stunted besom ply, -
to rid the slally pavements, pass not by. gay.
slack, adj. [reac, saxon; son, islandick; so, weish ;
luxus, lasia.j - -
1. not
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 71</div><p class="text">s l a
1. not tense; not hard drawn ; loose.
the vein in the arm is that which aretaeus commonly
opens; and he gives a particular caution in this case to make
a slack compression, for fear of exciting a convulsion. arbuthn.
2. relaxed; weak; not holding fast. . . . . . . .
- ** all his joints relax'd :
from his slack hand the garland wreath'd for eve . . . .
down dropp'd, and all the faded roses shed. milton.
3. remiss; not diligent; not eager; not fervent.
* * * *
*
thus much help and furtherance is more yielded, in that,
if so be our zeal and devotion to godward * the ala-
crity and fervour of others serveth as a present spur, . hooker,
seeing his soldiers slack and timorous, he reproved them of
cowardice and treason. - - - - - - - - anales.
nor were it just, would he resume that shape,
that slack devotion should his thunder 'scape. waller.
rebellion now began, for lack out a *
of zeal and plunder, to grow slack, , . hudibrats
4. not violent; not rapid. -
their pace was formal, grave, and slack:
his nimble wit outran the heavy pack. … . . dryden.
5. not intense. -- * -
a handful of slack dried hops spoil many pounds, by taking
away their pleasant smell... . martimer's husbandry.
to slack. } f - 12-fl: too - * -- * : * ~ *
to slacken. y." " [from the adjecive.] , - a
1. to be remiss; to neglect.... or co-o
... when thou shalt wow a vow unto the lord, slack not to pay
it. deut. xxiii. 21.
2. to lose the power of cohesion. -
the fire, in lime burnt, lies hid, so that it appears to be
cold; but water excites it again, whereby it sacks and crum-
bles into fine powder. moxon's mech. exer.
3. to abate. -
whence these raging fires -
will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames. . . milton.
4. to languish 5 to fail i to flag. | ainsworth.
to slack.
to sla’cken. ; o, as
1. to loosen; to make less tight.
ah! generous youth, that wish forbear;
slack all thy sails, and fear to come. dryden,
had ajax been employ'd, our slacken'd sails
• had still at aulis waited happy gales. dryden,
2. to relax; to remit.
this makes the pulses beat, and lungs respire;
this holds the sinews like a bridle's reins,
and makes the body to advance, retire,
to turn or stop, as she them slacks or strains. davier.
taught power's due use to people and to kings,
taught nor to slack nor strain its tender strings. pope.
3. to ease; to mitigate. philips seems to have used it by mis-
take for slake.
men, having been brought up at home under a strict rule of
duty, always restrained by sharp penalties from lewd beha-
viour, so soon as they come thither, where they see laws more
slackly tended, and the hard restraint, which they were used
unto, now slacked, they grow more loose. spenser.
if there be cure or charm
to respite or deceive, or slack the pain -
of this ill mansion. milton's paradis, loft.
- on our account has jove,
indulgent, to all moons some succulent plant
allow'd, that poor helpless man might slack
his present thirst, and matter find for toil. philips.
#. to remit for want of eagerness.
my guards
are you, great pow’rs, and th’ unbated strength
of a firm conscience; which shall arm each step
ta’en for the state, and teach me slack no pace. ben. johns.
with such delay well pleas'd, they slack their course.
- milton.
5. to cause to be remitted; to make to abate.
you may sooner by imagination quicken or slack a motion,
than raise or cease it; as it is easier to make a dog go slower
than make him stand still. bacon.
this doctrine must supersede and sacken all industry and en-
deavour, which is the lowest degree of that which hath been
promised to be accepted by christ; and leave nothing to us to
deliberate or attempt, but only to obey our fate. hammond.
extol not riches then, the toil of fools,
the wise man's cumbrance, if not snare ; more apt
to sacken virtue, and abate her edge,
than prompt her to do aught may merit praise. milton.
balls of this metal slack'd atlanta's pace,
and on the am’rous youth bestow'd the race. waller.
one conduces to the poet's aim, which he is driving on in
every line: the other slackens his pace, and diverts him from
his way. dryden.
6. to relieve; to unbend.
here have i seen the king, when great affairs
gave leave to slacken and unbend his cares,
--
or attended to the chase by all the flow':
of youth, whose hopes a nobler prey devour. denham.
7. to o to use ; liberally. prey mham,
he that so generally is good, must of necessity hold his vir.
tue to you, whose worthiness would stir it up where it wanted,
rather than slack it where there is such abundance. shaloft
8. to crumble ; to deprive of the power of cohesion. -
some unflacked lime cover with ashes, and let it stand till
rain comes to slack the lime; then spread them together.
* * * * * * amortimer's h.
9. to neglect. - . asland),
why might not you, my lord, receive attendance .
from those that she calls servants, or from mine?
–if then they chanc'd to slack ye, -
we could controul them. . . . shakesp. king lear
this good chance, that thus much favoureth, -
he slacks not. * * * * * * daniel’s civil war
slack not the good presage, while heav’n inspires •
our minds to dare, and gives,the ready fires. dryden,
10. to repress; to make less quick or forcible. . . . .
i should be griev’d, young prince, to think my presence
unbent your thoughts, and slacken'd 'em to arms. addison.
shack. m. s. [from the verb. to sack.] small coal; coal
broken in small parts: as, slacked lime turns to powder.
slackly. adv. [from slack.] . * . -
1. loosely; not tightly; not closely. * ,
2. negligently; remissly. . . : .
that a king's children should be so convey'd,
so sackly guarded, and the search so slow
that could not trace them. shakespeare's cymbeline,
sla'ckness. n. f. [from slack.] * . . -
1. looseness; not tightness. * * * * * * * *
2. negligence; inattention; remissness. * . . . .
it concerneth the duty of the church by law to provide, that
the looseness and sackness of men may not cause the com.
mandments of god to be unexecuted. hooker.
these thy offices, " . -
so rarely kind, are as interpreters
of my behind-hand sackness. shakesp. winter's tal,
from man's effeminate slacknes; it begins,
who should better hold his place
by wisdom, and superior gifts receiv'd. millon's par. loft.
3. want of tendency.
when they have no disposition to shootout above their lips,
there is a slackness to heal, and a cure is very difficultly cf.
fe8ted. sharp's surgery.
4. weakness; not force ; not intenseness.
through the slackness of motion, or long banishment from
the air, it might gather some aptness to putrefy. brerewood.
slag. m. s. the dross or recrement of metal.
not only the calces but the glasses of metal may be of dif-
fering colours from the natural colour of the metal, as i have
observed about the glass or slag of copper. boyle.
sla1e. m. s. a weaver's reed. ainsworth.
slain. the participle passive of slay.
the slain of the lord shall be many. isa. lxvi. 16.
the king grew vain, }
fought all his battles o'er again;
and thrice he routed all his foes, and thrice he slew the
slain. dryden.
to slake. v.a. [from slack, skinner; from sock, islandick,
to quench, mr. lye.]
1. to quench ; to extinguish.
he did always strive
himself with salves to health for to restore,
and slake the heavenly fire that raged evermore. spenser,
if i digg’d up thy forefathers graves,
and hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
it could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart. shak. h. vi.
she with her cold hand flakes
his spirits, the sparks of life, and chills his heart. crashaw.
from iulus’ head
a lambent flame arose, which gently spread ;
around his brows, and on his temples fed :
amaz'd, with running water we prepare
to quench the sacred fire, and slake his hair. dryden.
the fragrant fruit from bending branches shake,
and with the crystal stream their thirst at pleasure slake.
- - blackmore's creation.
coarse are his meals, the fortune of the chace;
amidst the running stream he slakes his thirst. addis. cato.
2. it is used of lime; so that it is uncertain whether the original
notion of to slack or sake lime be to powder or quench it.
that which he saw happened to be fresh lime, and gathered
before any rain had fallen to slake it. . woodward.
to slake. v. n. [this is apparently from slack i
1. to grow less tense ; to be relaxed.
if she the body's nature did partake,
her strength would with the body's strength decay;
but when the body's strongest finews sake,
then is the soul most active, quick, and gay. davies.
2. to go out 5 to be extinguished.
7 she
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 72</div><p class="text">s l a
s l a ''
she perceiving that his flame did sake,
and lov'd her only for his trophy's sake. brown.
t, slam. v. . [lema, islandick; /chlagen, dutch..] to slaugh-
ter; to crush. a word not used but lin low conversation.
t. slander. v. a. [of laundrie, french; standalum, latin.]
to censure falsely; to belie.
slander valentine
with falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent. shakes care.
he hath slandered thy servant unto the king. 2 sam. xix. 27.
give me leave to speak as earnestly in truly commending it,
as you have done in untruly and unkindly defacing and flan-
ing it. //hiteiste.
dering hou do'st with lies the throne invade, 'gif
by practice harden'd in thy slandering trade;
obtending heav'n for whate'er ills befall,
and sputt'ring under specious names thy gall. dryden.
of all her dears she never slander'd one,
but cares not if a thousand are undone. pope.
slander: n.s. [from the verb.]
1. false invective.
when slanders do not live in tongues;
when cut-purses conse not to throngs.
since that, wc hear he is in arms,
we think not so; .
yet charge the consul with our harms,
that let him go:
so in our censure of the state
we still do wander,
and make the careful magistrate
the mark of slander. ben. johnson's catiline.
we are not to be dejected by the slanders and calumnies of
bid men, because our integrity shall then be cleared by him
who cannot cro in judgment. melen.
2. disgrace; reproach.
thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb
thou loathed issue of thy father's ions. , shake?. r. iii.
3. disreputation ; ill name.
you shall not find me, daughter,
after the slander of most stepmothers,
ill-ey'd unto you. shakespeare.
sla's de rer. m. s. [from slander.] one who belies another;
one who lays false imputations on another.
in your servants suffer any offence against yourself rather
than against god: endure not that they should be railers or
slanderers, tell-tales or sowers of disiension. taylor.
thou shalt answer for this, thou sland.rer. dryden.
sla’nderous. adj. [from slander.]
1. uttering reproachful falsehoods.
what king so strong
can tie the gall up in the sland.rous tongue?
to me belongs
the care to shun the blast of sland’rous tongues:
let malice, prone the virtuous to defame,
thus with vile censure taint my spotless name.
1. containing reproachful falsehoods; calumnious.
i was never able till now to choke the mouth of such de-
trators, with the certain knowledge of their sanderous un-
truths. sployer on ireland.
we lay these honours on this man,
to ease ourselves of divers sland’rous loads. shak. jul. cars.
as by flattery a man opens his bosom to his mortal enemy,
so by detraction and a slanderous misreport he shuts the same to
his best friends. south.
slanderously. adv. [from slanderous.] calumniously; with
false reproach.
i may the better satisfy them who object these doubts, and
fland-rously bark at the courses which are held against that
traiterous earl and his adherents. spenser on ireland.
they did sanderously object,
how that they durst not hazard to present
in person their defences. daniel's civil war.
slang. the preterite of sing. - --
david sang a stone, and smote the philistinc. 1 sam. xvii.
slask. n.s. [aga marina. j. an herb. ainsworth.
slant. adj. [from slanghe, a serpent, dutch. skinner.]
isoring.: oblique; not direct; not perpendicular.
late the clouds
justling, or push'd with winds, rude in their shock,
tine the slant lightning; whose thwart flame driv'n down,
kindles the gummy bark of fir and pine. milton.
the sun found the globe describes th’aequator line,
by which wise means he can the whole survey
with a direct or with a santing ray, }
in the succession of a night and day. blackmore.
stantly, ladv, [from jiant..] obliquely; not perpendi-
slantwise. } cularly ; slope.
some maketh a hollowness half a foot deep,
with tower sets in it, set sanitwise asleep. tussor.
slap. n.s. ischlup, geoman.] a blow. properly with the
hand open, or with something rather broad than sharp.
the laugh, the slap, the jocund curse go round. thomson.
o: o [from the noun..] with a suddon and violent blow.
ol. ii.
shak. k. lear.
shakespeare.
pope.
omplained; and if they offered to come into
o *house, then strait went the yard slap over their
t. noddie. arbuthnot's history of john bull.
* slaf. v. a. [from the noun..] to strike with a flap.
dick, who thus long had passive sat,
here floak's his chin, and cock'd his hat s
then slapp'd his hand upon the board,
and thus the youth put in his word
sla'pdash. -
peg's servants c
i-----. f*- prior,
* [** slop and daff.] all at once: as any
thing broad falls wi - -
a 1. ...” s with a slap into the water, and dashes it about.
and yet, slapdosh, is all again
in ev'ry finew, nerve, and vein.
to slash. v. a. [siasa, to strike, islandick.]
1. to out; to cut with long cuts.
2. to lash. slash is improper.
daniel, a sprightly swain, that us'd to slash
the vig'rous fleeds that drew his lord's calash,
to peggy's side inclin'd.
* slash. v. n. to strike at random with a sword
about him.
the knights with their bright burning blades
broke their rude troops, and orders did confound,
hewing and slashing at their idle shades. fairy queen.
not that i'd lop the beauties from his book,
like/offing bentley with his desprate hook. pope.
slash. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. cut ; wound.
some few received some cuts and slashes that had drawn
blood. clarendon.
2. a cut in cloth.
what ' this a sleeve
here's snip and nip, and cut, and slish and slash,
prior,
king.
; to lay
like to a censor in a barber's shop. shakespears.
distinguish'd slashes deck the great, -
as each excels in birth or state:
his oylet-holes are more and ampler;
the king's own body was a sampler. prior.
slatch. n.s. (a sea term.] the middle part of a rope or
cable that hangs down loose. bailey.
slate. m. s. ifrom sit: slate is in some counties a crack; or
from solate, a tile, french..] a grey stone, easily broken
into thin plates, which are used to cover houses, or to write
upon.
a square cannot be so truly drawn upon a slate as it is con-
ceived in the mind. grew's cosmol.
a small piece of a flat slate the ants laid over the hole of
their nest, when they foresaw it would rain. addison's sped.
to slate. v. a. [from the noun..] to cover the roof; to tile.
sonnets and elegies to chloris,
would raise a house about two stories,
a lyrick ode would slate. swift.
slat er. n.s.. [from slate.] one who covers with slates or tiles.
slattern. m. s. [siaetti, swedish.] a woman negligent,
not elegant or nice.
without the raising of which sum,
you dare not be so troublesome
to pinch the slatterns black and blue,
for leaving you their work to do. hudibrar.
we may always observe, that a gossip in politicks is a slat-
tern in her family. addison's freeholder.
the sallow skin is for the swarthy put,
and love can make a slattern of a slut. dryden.
beneath the lamp her tawdry ribbands glare,
the new-scour'd manteau and the slattern air. gay.
slaty. adj. [from slate.] having the nature of slate.
all the stone that is slaty, with a texture long, and parallel
to the site of the stratum, will split only lengthways, or hori-
zontally; and, if placed in any other position, 'tis apt to give
way, start, and burst, when any considerable weight is laid
upon it. woodward on fossils.
slave. m. s. [eslave, french. it is said to have its original
from the slavi, or sclavonians, subdued and sold by the wene-
11a*s.
i. sonor to a master; not a freeman; a dependant.
the banish’d kent, who in disguise
follow'd his enemy king, and did him service
improper for a slave. shakesp. king lear.
thou elvish markt, abortive, rooting hog!
thou that wast seal’d in thy nativity
the slave of nature, and the son of hell.
of guests he makes them slaves
inhospitably. milton.
the condition of servants was different from what it is
now, they being generally slaves, and such as were bought and
sold for money. south.
perspective a painter must not want; yet without subjecting
ourselves so wholly to it, as to become slaves of it. ... dryden.
to-morrow, should we thus express our friendship,
each might receive a slave into his arms:
this sun perhaps, this morning sun's the last
that e'er shall rise on roman liberty. addison's cato.
24 g 2. one
shakoff. r. iii.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 73</div><p class="text">s l a
*s*l e
-- -
, 2. one that has lost the power of resistance. •.
slaves to our passions we become, and then
it grows impossible to govern men. isolar.
when once men are immersed in sensual things, and are
become slives to their passions and lusts, then are they most
disposed to doubt of the existence of god. jwilkins.
3. it is used proverbially for the lowest state of life.
. .… power shall not exempt the kings of the earth, and the
* great men, neither shall meanness excuse the poorest slave.
o - nesson.
to slave. v. n. [from the noun..] to drudge; to moil; to :
toil. -
-- . . . had women becn the makers of our laws,
the men should slave at cards from morn to night, swift.
o slaver. m. s... [saliva, latin ; slofa, islandick.j. spittle
running from the mouth ; drivel. -
mathiolus hath a passage, that a toad communicates its
venom not only by urine, but by the humidity and slaver of
its mouth, which will not consist with truth. brown.
of all mad creatures, if the learn'd are right, -
it is the slaver kills, and not the bite. "pope.
to sla’ve r. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. to be smeared with spittle.
… • ‘ should i
slaver with lips, as common as the stairs
-o-, that mount the capitol; join gripes with hands
made hard with hourly falsehood as with labour. shakesh.
2. to emit spittle. -
t. miso came with scowling eyes to deliver a slavering good-
morrow to the two ladies. - sidney.
why must he sputter, spawl, and slaver it,
in vain, against the people's favorite : - , swift.
t to sla v er. v. a. to smear with drive!. -
-** twitch'd by the slave, he mouths it more and more,
*till with white froth his gown is slaver'd o'er. dryden.
sla v er er. m. s. [ sabbaerd, dutch ; from slaver.] one who
cannot hold his pittle ; a driveller; an idiot.
sla v ery. m. s. [from slave..] servitude; the condition of a
- slave; the offices of a slave. . - . . . . ----
. . . . if my diflentings were out of errour, weakness, or obsti-
, - nacy, yet no man can think it other than the badge of slavery,
o, by savage rudeness and importunate obtrusions of violence to
e have the mist of his errour dispelled. king charles.
slaughter. r. s. sonrlaust, saxon, from raezan, rlezan,
… to strike or kill.) , massacre; destruction by the sword.
" . sinful macduff, . . . . . . .
they were all struck for thee! -
not for their own demerits, but for mine,
... fell slaughter on their souls. shakesp. macbeth.
on each hand slaughter and gigantick deeds. milton.
the pair you see, - -
... now friends below, in close embraces join ;
... but when they leave the shady realms of night,
* with mortal heat each other shall pursue:
what wars, what wounds, what slaughter shall ensue? dryd.
to sla’ughter. v. a. [from the noun..] to massacre; to
slay; to kill with the sword. -
your castle is surpriz’d, your wife and babes
...so savagely slaughter'd. shakes?. macbeth.
sla(ughter house... n. s. [slaughter and house.j house in
... which beasts are killed for the butcher. -
away with me, all you whose souls abhor
... th’ uncleanly favour of a slaughterhouse;
for i am stifl'd with the sine!! of fin.
sla'u ght erman. n. s. [slaughter and
in killing. -
. the mad mothers with their how's consus’d -
do break the clouds; as did the wives of jewry,
: " at herod's bloody hunting slaughtermen. shak. hen. v.
i. ten chas'd by one,
- ... are now each one the slaughterman of twenty.
see, thou fight'st against thy countrymen ;
- and join'st with them, will be thv slaughtermen. shak. h. vi.
sla’ughterous. adj. [from slaughter.] destructive; mur-
derous. . . -
i have supt sull with horrours:
direness familiar to my slaughterous thoughts
. . cannot once start me. - shakesh. macbeth.
sla vish. adj. [from slave..] servile; mean; base; dependant.
a thing -
more slavish did i ne'er, than answering
- a slave without a knock. shakesh. cymbeline.
you have among you many a purchas'd slave,
which, like your asses, and your dogs and mules,
you use in abject and in slavish part,
because you bought them. shakesp. merchant of penice.
the supreme god, t' whom all things ill
are but as slavish officers of vengeance,
would send a glist ring guardian, if need were,
-
* *
shakoffeare.
man.] one employed
shakespeare.
to keep my life and honour unassail'd. milton.
those are the labour'd births of slavish brains;
not the effect of poetry, but pains. denham.
slavish'bards our mutual loves rehearse
. in lying trains and ignominious verse.
slavis hly. adv. [from slavish..] servilely ; meanly.
sl avis hn ess. n.s.. [from slavish.] servility; meanness.
to slay. v. a. preter slew; part, pass.slain. [slahan, gothick;
rlean, sax. slachten, dutch, to strike..] to kill; to butcher;
to put to death.
her father's brother
would be her lord; or shall i say her uncle?
or he that slew her brothers and her uncle : shak. r. iii.
tyrant, shew thy face: -
if thou be'st slain, and with no stroke of mine, - -
my wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. shais.
i saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for
the word of god. * rev. vi. 2.
slay and make ready. gen. xliii. 16,
wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy sloyeth the filly
one. ob, v. 2.
o
prior,
of trojan chiefs he view’d a numerous train;
all much lamented, all in battle slain. dryden's acn,
he must: :" - - : -
by blood and battles pow'r maintain,
and slay the monarchs, ere he rule the plain. prior.
slayer... n. s. [from say..] killer; murderer; destroyer.
witness the guiltless blood poured oft on ground;
the crowned often slain, the slayer crown'd. fairy queen.
they flew those that were slayers of their countrymen. atb.
the slayer of himself yet saw i there;
the gore congeal’d was clotted in his hair:
with eyes half clos'd and gaping mouth he lay,
and grim as when he breath'd his fullen soul away. dryden.
sleave. n.s. (of this word i know not well the meaning:
fleave silk is explained by gouldman, foccus sericus, a lock of
silk ; and the women still say, sleave the silk, for wntwist it.
ainsworth calls a weaver's shuttle or reed a slay. to say is to
part a twist into single fibres.] - - - -
i on a fountain light,
whose brim with pinks was platted,
the banks with daffadillies dight
with grass like sleave was matted. drayton's cynthia.
sleazy. adj. [often written sleezy..] weak; wanting sub-
stance. this seems to be of the same race with slave, or
from to say.
s led. n.f. [/lad, danish; sledde, dutch..] a carriage drawn
without wheels. -
• the skd, the tumbril, hurdles, and the flail,
these all must be prepar’d.
sle'dded. adj. [from sled..] mounted on a sled.
so frown'd he once when in an angry parle,
he smote the sledded polack on the ice.
sledge. m. s. [rleez, saxon; sleggia, islandick.]
1. a large-heavy hammer.
they him spying, both with greedy force,
. at once upon him ran, and him beset,
with strokes of mortal steel, without remorse, o
and on his shield like iron sledges bet. fairy queen,
the painful smith, with force of fervent heat,
the hardest iron soon doth mollify, o
that with his heavy sledge he can it beat, be
and fashion to what he it list apply. spenser. o
the uphand sledge is used by under-workmen, when the
work is not of the largest, yet requires help to batter and draw
it out: they use it with both their hands before them, and
seldom lift their hammer higher than their head. al/oxon.
it would follow that the quick stroke of a light hammer
should be of greater efficacy, than any softer and more gentle
striking of a great sledge. wilkins's mathematical magick.
2. a carriage without wheels, or with very low wheels; pro-
perly a sled. see slep.
in lancashire they use a sort of sledge made with thick
wheels, to bring their marl out, drawn with one horse.
amortimer's husbandry.
.
dryden,
shakosheart.
sleek. n.s.. [seych, dutch..]
1. smooth; nitid ; glossy.
let me have men about me that are fat,
sleek-headed men, and such as sleep a nights.
how eagerly ye follow my disgrace,
as if it fed ye; and how sleek and wanton
y’appear in ev'rything may bring my ruin.
what time the groves were clad in green,
the fields all drest in flowers,
and that the sleek-hair'd nymphs were seen,
to seek them summer bowers.
as in gaze admiring, oft he bow’d
his turret crest, and sleek enamell'd neck,
fawning. - milton's paradis? loft.
thy head and hair are sleek,
shakhart.
shakes eart,
drayton.
and then thoukemb'st the tuzzes on thy cheek. dryden.
- - so sleek her skin, so faultless was her make,
... ev’n juno did unwilling pleasure take
to see so fair a rival. dryden,
2. not rough ; not harsh.
7 those
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 74</div><p class="text">s l e
those rugged names to our like mouths grow sleek,
that would have made quintilian stare and gasp. 41 lion.
t, slef k. v.” [from the adjective.]
to comb smooth and even.
" " yet are the men more loose than they,
more kemb'd, and bath'd, and rub'd, and trim’d,
more sleet'd, more soft, and slacker limb'j. b.o. johnson.
by dead parthenope's dear tomb,
anj fair ligea's golden comb,
where with the sits on diamond rocks,
skoking her soft alluring locks.
2. to render soft, smooth, or glossy.
gentle my lord, seek o'er your rugged looks :
be bright and jovial 'mong your guests to night. .
- - she does sleet shał seare.
with crumbs of bread and milk, and lies a-nights
in her neat gloves. ben. johnson's catline.
. the persuasive rhetorick -
that she'd his tongue, and won so much on eve,
so little here, nay lost. milton.
a sheet of well sketed marble paper did not cast any of its
distinct colours upon the wall.
milton.
- - - boyle.
a cruise of fragrance, form'd of burnish'd gold,
odour divine! whose soft refreshing flreams
skok the smooth skin, and scent the snowy limbs. poole.
slee kly. adu. [from slo. j smoothly; glossily. -
let their heads be seekly comb'd, and their blue coats brush'j.
- - - shaogore's toring of the shrew.
slee'kstos f. or. s. [/]-e: and ston.] a smoothing stone.
the purest pasteboard, with a sleet some rub smooth, and
as even as you can. - - peacham.
7, sleep. v. m. [sipati, gothick; ricepan, saxon; /apon,
dutch. -
1. to take rest, by suspension of the mental and corporal
powers. -
i've watch'd and travell'd hard : -
some time i shall flop out; the rest i'll whistle. sharesp.
where's pede: –go you, and where you find a maid,
that, ere she sleep, hath thrice her prayers said,
rein up the organs of her fantasy;
slop she as sound as careless infancy;
but those that sleep, and think not on their sins,
pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, fides, and shins.
shakspeare's morry solves of i/indsor.
if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge.
doxt.
peace, good reader do not weep;
peace the lovers are asleep :
they, sweet turtles' folded lic,
in the last knot that love could tie.
let them sloop, let them sloop on,
till this stormy night be gone,
and the eternal morrow dawn,
then the curtains will be drawn,
and they waken with that light,
whose day shall never sleep in night. crashaw.
those who at any time sloop without dreaming, can never
be convinced that their thoughts are for four hours busy with-
out their knowing it. locke.
2. to rest; to be motionless.
steel, if thou turn thine edge, or cut not out the burly-
bon'd clown in chines of beef ere thou slop in thy sheath, i
beseech jove on my knees thou may st be turned into hobnails.
shakespeare's honry vi.
how swect the moonlight skept upon this bank
here will we fit, and let the sounds of musick
creep in our ears. shakespeare's morchant of penice.
the giddy ship, betwixt the winds and tides,
forc'd back and forwards, in a circle rides,
stunn'd with the different blows; then shoots amain,
till counterbus 'd she stops, and sleeps again. dryden.
3. to live thoughtlessly. -
we so over out happiness, and want to be rouzed into a
quick thankful sense of it. attorbury.
4. to be dead; death being a state from which man will some
time awake. -
if we believe that jesus die i and rose again, even so them
also which so in jesus will god bring with him. i thos.
a person is said to be dead to us, because we cannot raise
from the grave; though he only slop; unto god, who can
raise from the chamber of death. aoiffe's paregon.
5. to be inattentive ; not vigilant.
heav'n will one day open
the king's eyes, that so long have soft upon
---- - . . - - r
this bold, bad man. shakspeare's henry viii.
6. to be unnoticed, or unattended.
you ever
hove wish'd the sleeping of this business, never
* . . - - - -- - i
desir'd it to be stirr'd. satosfeare's henry viii.
sleep, n. s. (from the verb.] repose; rest; suspension of the
mental and corporal powers; flamber.
s l e
methought i heart
i avoice cry sleep no more
macbeth doth murder sleep; the innocent sleep;
sleep * knits up the avoid sleeve of case ;
the birth of each day's life, fore labour's bath,
3 - -
balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
chief nourisher in life's feast. shakespeare's asa, both
that slope might fwectly seale -
his restfull *y*, he enter'd, and in his bel
jn filence took.
cold calleth the spirits to succour; and therefore they cap-
not so well close and go together in the head, which is ever
chapman.
g/u?. dryden.
dryden.
grew. -
pope.
reguisite to flop. and for the same cause ain and noi
- - - &gt; noise
hinder sleep; and darkness furthereth sleep. p bacon.
wax very fat, though they eat nothing. baco
his fasten’d hands the rudder ko, 44.277.
hermes o'er his head in air appear'd,
his hat adorn'd with wings discios'd the god,
infants spend the greatist part of their time in fleep, and are
pain forces the mind to perceive it. locke.
slee per. m. s. [from sleep. j
... sound musick; come my queen, take hand with me,
and rock the ground whereon these sloper, be. shakespeare.
that such an hideous trumpet calls to parley
the sleepers of the house shakespeare's macketh,
openeth in the morning, and openeth wide at noon ; the inha.
bitants say is a plant that sleepeth. there be sleepers enow
night is indeed the province of his reign; -
yet all his dark exploits no more contain - ;
- - dryden.
2. a lazy inactive drome.
he must be no great eater, drinker, nor eeper, that will
taking requires both.
3. that which lies dormant, or without effect.
grown unfit for the present time, be by wise judges confined
in the execution. baron.
slee p1ly. adv. [from sleepy. ]
1. drowsily ; with desire to sleep.
i rather chuse to endure the wounds of those darts, which
the easy ways of ancient mistakings. raleigh.
3. stupidly.
tended to authority, forgetting what he had sleepily owned
before. afterbury.
sleep; inability to keep awake.
watchfulness precedes too great sleepines, and is the most
sleepl ess. adj. [from sleep.j wanting sleep.
the field
though after sleople's night. 4.iiton's paradis, lo?.
while pensive poets painful vigils keep,
sleepy. adj. [from sleep. j
1. drowsy ; disposed to sleep.
why did you bring these daggers from the place 2
they must lie there. go, carry them and smear
she wak'd her sooty crew,
and rising hasty, took a short adieu. dryden.
we will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses unintelli-
gent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us,
let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
of that forgetful lake benumb not stil. milton,
ficians had mingled a sleepy potion in the wine. gulliver.
sleet. n.s. [perhaps from the danish, set.) a kind of snooth
now van to van the forcinost squadrons meet,
the midmost battles hatt’ning up behind,
beasts that sop in winter, as wild bears, during their sleep
and fix'd on heav'n, his eyes repel invadin
and in his hand the sleep compelling rod.
seldom awake but when hunger calls for the teat, or some
1. one who sleeps; one who is not awake.
what's the business,
in some countries, a plant which shutte‘s in the night,
then; for almost all flowers do the like. bacon.
than a spy taken, and a sloper slain.
discipline his senses, and exert his mind; every worthy under-
let penal laws, if they have been sleepers of long, or if
4. [exccactus.] a fish. answorth.
2. dully ; lazily.
envy casteth at novelty, than to go on safely and sleepiy in
he would make us believe that luther in these a&amp;tions pre-
slee pin ess. m. s. [from scopy.] drowsiness; disposition to
ill boding symptom of a fever. arbuthnot.
to labour calls us, now with sweat impos'd,
sleeples themselves to give their readers fleep.
2. not awake.
the sleepy grooms with blood. shakspeare's macbeth.
3. soporiferous; somniferous ; causing sleep.
as little accuse us. shakspeare's hoinier's tale.
i sleeped about eight hours, and no wonder; for the phy-
small hail or snow, not falling in flakes, but single particles.
who view, far off, the storm of falling sleet,
and hear their thunder rattling in the wind. dryden,
perpetual sleet and driving snow
obscure the skies, and hang on herds below.
huge oxen stand inclos'd in win:ry walls -
of snow congeal’d. dryden,
- - rains
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 75</div><p class="text">s l e
s l e
rains would have been poured down, as the vapours be-
came cooler; next sleet, then snow, and ice. cheyne.
to sleet. v m. [from the noun..] to snow in small particles,
intermixed with rain.
sleety. adj. [from the noun..] bringing fleet.
sleeve. n. s. [rlip, saxon.]
1. the part of a garment that covers the arms.
once my well-waiting eyes espy'd my treasure,
with sleeves turn'd up, loose hair, and breast enlarged,
her father’s corn, moving her fair limbs, measure. sidney.
the deep smock sleeve, which the irish women use, they
say, was old spanish; and yet that should seem rather to be
an old english fashion: for in armory, the fashion of the
manche, which is given in arms, being nothing else but a
sleeve, is fashioned much like to that sleeve. and knights, in
ancient times, used to wear their mistress's or love's sleeve upon
their arms; fir launcelot wore the sleeve of the fair maid of
asteloth in a tourney. spensor's ireland.
your hose should be ungarter’d, your sleeve unbutton'd,
your ihoe untied, demonstrating a careless desolation.
- shakespeare.
you would think a smock a she-angel, he so chants to the
jeeve-band, and the work about the square on't. shakespeare.
he was cloathed in cloth, with wide sleeves and a cape. bacon.
in velvet white as snow the troop was gown'd,
their hoods and sleeves the same. dryden.
.2. sleeve, in some provinces, signifies a knot or skein of silk,
which is by some very probably supposed to be its meaning in
the following passage. [see §.
the innocent sleep;
sleep that knits up the ravell'd steve of care. shakespeare.
3. sleeve, dutch, signifies a cover ; any thing spread over ;
which seems to be the sense of sleeve in the proverbial phrase.
a brace of sharpers laugh at the whole roguery in their
flieves. l'estrange.
men know themselves utterly void of those qualities which
the impudent sycophant ascribes to them, and in his sleeve
laughs at then for believing. - south's sermons.
john laughed heartily in his seeve at the pride of the esquire.
- - arbuthnot's hoft. of john bull.
4. to hang on a sleeve; to make dependent.
it is not for a man which doth know, or should know what
orders, and what peaceable government requireth, to ask
why we should hang our judgment upon the church's sleeve,
... and why in matteis of olders more than in matters of doctrine.
hooker.
5. [loligo, lat.] a fish. ainsworth.
slee’v ed. adj. [from sleeve..] having sleeves.
slee’v el ess. adj. [from sleeve.]
1. wanting sleeves ; having no sleeves.
his cloaths were strange, though coarse, and black, tho’
bare.
sleevels; his jerkin was, and it had been
velvet, but 'twas now, so much ground was seen,
become tufftaffaty.
they put on sleeveses; coats of home-spun cotton.
behold yon isle by palmers, pilgrims trod,
grave mummers | sleeveles; some, and shirtless others. pope.
2. wanting reasonableness; wanting propriety ; wanting so-
lidity. [this sense, of which the word has been long pos-
sessed, i know not well how it obtained; skinner thinks it
properly liveless or lifelos, to this i cannot heartily agree,
though i know not what better to suggest. can it come from
sleeve, a knot, or skein, and so signify unconneeted, hanging ill
together or from sleeve, a cover 3, and therefore means plainly
absurd; foolish without palliation ?]
this sleeveless tale of transubstantiation was brought into the
world by that other fable of the multipresence. płall.
my landlady quarrelled with him for sending every one of
her children on a sleeveless errand, as she calls it. foot,
sleight. n.s.. [slagd, cunning, islandick..] artful trick;
cunning artifice ; dexterous practice : as, sleight of hand; the
tricks of a juggler. this is often written, but less properly,
ight.
f he that exhorted to beware of an enemy's policy, doth not
give counsel to be impolite; but rather to be all prudent fore-
sight, left our simplicity be over-reached by cunning sleights.
hooker.
w
donne.
sandys.
fair una to the red cross knight
betrothed is with joy;
though false duessa it to bar,
her false sleights do employ.
upon the corner of the moon,
there hangs a vap’rous drop, profound;
i'll catch it ere it come to ground;
and that distill'd by magick sleights,
shall raise such artificial sprights,
as, by the strength of their illusion,
shall draw him on to his confusion.
out stept the ample size
of mighty ajax, huge in strength; to him, laertes’ son,
that crafty one as huge in sleight. chapman.
fairy queen.
shakespeare's macbeth.
she could not so convey
the massy substance of that idol great,
what sleight had she the wardens to betray
what strength to heave the goddess from her seat?
in the wily snake
whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark,
as from his wit, and native subtilty
proceeding.
doubtless the pleasure is as great
of being cheated, as to cheat;
as lookers on feel most delight, -
that least perceive the juggler's sleight. hadira.
good humour is but a sleight of hand, or a faculty makin
truths look like appearances, or appearances like truths.
- l'astrange.
when we hear death related, we are all willing to favour
the slight, when the poet does not too grossly impose upon us.
dryden.
f.airs.
44ilton,
while innocent he scorns ignoble flight,
his honest friends preserve him by a sleight.
sle'nder. adj. [slinder, dutch.]
1. thin ; small in circumference compared with the length;
not thick. . . . -
so thick the roses bushing round
about her glow'd ; half stooping to support
each ao. stalk. p s ppo
2. small in the waist; having a fine shape.
what slender youth bedev'd with liquid odours,
courts thee on roses in some pleasant cave.
beauteous helen shines among the rest,
tall, slender, straight, with all the graces blest.
3. not bulky flight ; not strong.
love in these labyrinths his slaves detains,
and mighty hearts are held in slender chains.
4. small ; inconsiderable; weak.
yet they, who claim the general assent of the whole world
unto that which they teach, and do not fear to give very hard
and heavy sentence upon as many as refuse to embrace the
fame, must have special regard, that their first foundations
and grounds be more than slender probabilities. hooker.
where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. shakespeare.
positively to define that season, there is no slender difficulty.
brown's vulgar errouri.
it is a very sendor comfort that relies upon this nice distinc.
tion, between things being troublesome, and being evils;
when all the evil of affliction lies in the trouble it creates to
lls. tillason.
5. sparing; less than enough as, a slender estate and slender
parts.
swift.
amilton,
milt0??s
dryden.
poft,
at my lodging,
the worst is this, that at so slender warning,
you're like to have a thin and sender pittance. shakespeare.
6. not amply supplied.
the good ostorius often deign'd
to grace my slender table with his presence. philips.
in obstructions inflammatory, the aliment ought to be cool,
slender, thin, diluting. arbuthnot.
sle'nderly. aav. [from slender.]
i. without bulk.
2. slightly ; meanly,
if the debt be not just, we know not what may be deemed
just, neither is it a sum to be slenderly regarded. hayward.
if i have done well, it is that which i desired; but if /len-
derly and meanly, it is that which i could attain to. 2 mac.
sle'nderness. n.s.. [from slender.]
1. thinness ; smallness of circumference.
small whistles give a sound because of their extreme slen-
dirness, the air is more pent than in a wider pipe. bacon.
their colours arise from the thinness of the transparent
parts of the feathers; that is from the slenderness of the very
fine hairs or capillamenta, which grow out of the sides of the
grosser lateral branches or fibres of those feathers. newton.
2. want of bulk or strength.
it is preceded by a spitting of blood, occasioned by its
acrimony, and too great a projectile motion, with slendernes,
and weakness of the vessels. - arbuthnot on diet.
3. slightness; weakness; inconsiderableness.
the slenderness of your reasons against the book, together
with the inconveniencies that must of necessity follow, have
procured a great credit unto it. whitgift.
4. want of plenty.
slept. the preterite of sleep.
silence; coeval with eternity,
thou wertere nature first began to be,
'twas one vast nothing all, and all slept fast in thee. pops.
slew. the preterite of slay.
he slew hamet, a great commander among the numidians,
and chased benchades and amida, two of their greatest prin-
ces, out of the country. anolles's history of the turks.
to to: v. n. [see to sleave j to part of twist into
threads.
why
st.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 76</div><p class="text">s l i -
s l i
why art thou then exasperate, thou immaterial skein of
of silk? shakespeare.
1, §: j. w. [rlzan, saxon.] 's
or cut into flat pieces. e
their cooks make no more ado, but flizing it into little
robbets, prick it on a prong of iron, and hang it in a fur-
nace. sandys's journey.
the residue were on foot, well furnished with jack and
skull, pikes and slicing swords, broad, thin, and of an excel-
ill
lent temper. hayward.
to cut into parts.
' ' nature lost one by ther, and therefore must
so one in two to keep her number just. cleaveland.
to cut off in a broad piece.
3 * when hungry thou stood'st staring, like an oaf,
1st'd the luncheon from the barley loaf. gay.
to cut; to divide. -
4. princes and tyrants slice the earth among them.
sirch. n.s. [rlite, saxon; from the verb.]
1. a broad piece cut off. -
hacking of trees in their bark, both downright and across,
so as you may make them rather in fices than in continued
hacks, doth great good to trees. brcan.
you need not wipe your knife to cut bread; because in
cutting a oice or two it will wipe itself. - swift.
he from out the chimney took,
a flutch of bacon off the hook,
and freely, from the fattest side,
cut-out large fires to be fry'd. - - swift.
2. a broad piece. -
then clap four sces of pilaster on't,
that lacod with bits of rustick, makes a front. pope.
3. a broad head fixed in a handle; a peel; a patula.
the pelican hath a beak broad and flat, m oth like the slice
of spothecaries, with which they spread plairers. ha'ewis'.
when burning with the iron in it, v in the see, clap the
cools upon the outside close together, to keep the heat in. a 10x.
slick, adj. [slickr, dutch. see sleek.) o -
whom silver-bow’d apollo bred, in the perian mead,
both slicke and daintie, yet were both in warre of wond’rous
dread. chapman.
glass attracts but weakly; some sick fl nes, and thick gafies
indifferently. - brown's sugar errours.
slid. the preterite of slide.
at first the silent venom slid with ease,
and seiz'd her cooler senses by de rees. dryden's znaid.
from the tops of heaven's steep hill she slid,
and strait the greeks swift ships the reach't.
sli'pp en. the participle passive of side.
why is this people slidden back, by a perpetual backsliding 2
jer. viii. 5.
1, slidder. v. n. [slidderen, dutch..] to slide with inter-
ruption.
, *
chapman.
go thou from me to fate,
now die: with that he dragg'd the trembling fire,
sidd’rng through clotted blood.
the tempter saw the danger in a trice;
for the man slidder'd upon fortune's ice. harte.
t, slide. v. m. slid, preterite; fidden, participle pass spliban,
risense, sliding, saxon solo, dutch ; y lithe, welsh.]
1. to pass along smoothly ; to slip , to glide.
sounds do not only file upon the surface of a smooth body,
but communicate with the spirits in the pores. bacon.
ulysses, stheneleus, tisarder slide
down by a rope, machaon was their guide.
2. to move without chanoe of the foot.
oh ladon. happy ladon, rather side than run by her,
left thou should it make her legs slip from her. sidney.
smooth sidin' without step. milton.
he that once fins, iike him that slides on ice,
goes swiftly down the dippery ways of vice :
though conscience checks him, yet those rubs gone o'er,
he sides on smoothly, and looks back no more. dryden.
3. to pass inadvertently.
make a door and a bar for thy mouth : beware thou slide
not by it. ecclus. xxviii. 26.
4. to pass unnoticed.
in the princess i could find no apprehension of what i said
or did, but with a calm carelessness, letting every thing side
justly, as we do by their speeches, who neither in matter nor
person do any way belong unto us. sidney.
5. to pass along by silent and unobserved progression.
thou shalt
hate all, shew charity to none;
butlet the famisht flesh slide from the bone,
ere thou relieve the beggar. shakespeare.
then no day void of bliss, of pleasure leaving,
dryden.
denham.
ages shall slide away without perceiving. dryden.
rescue me from their ignotle hands :
let me kiss yours when you my wound begin,
then easy death will slide with pleasure in. dryden.
vol. ii.
burnet.
their eye sides over the - - -
- - - - pages, or the words slide over their
eyes, and vanish like a rhapsody'of evening o #.
6. to pass filently and gradually from good to bad.
nor could they have slid into thos: brutish immoralities of
life, had they duly manured those - . . . .” -
dictates of right reason. ose first practical *::::
7. t; o *...". or obstruclion,
. such of them should be retained as slid, easis hers.”
into english compounds, without jo. oo:
begin with sense, of ev'ry art the soul - po.
parts answ'ring parts shall slide into a woole -
nature shall join you, time shall make it.
a work to wonder at. . po,
8, ows upon the ice by a first "puo, without change
the gallants dancing by the river side,
they bathe in summer, and in winter side. railr
9. to fall by errour. a lit!".
the discovering and reprehension of these colours
be done but out of a very universal knowledge of
t grow
cannot
- * - - things,
which so cleareth man's judgment, as it is the less apt to
slide into any errour. b
* * * * * aft277
io. to be not firm. - *
ye fair
re greatly cautious of your solding hearts. thomson.
11. to pass with a frce and gentle course or flow.
to slip e. v. a. to put imperceptibly.
little tricks of sophistry by sliding in, or leaving out such
words as entirely change the question, should be abandoned
by all fair disputants. - //atls.
slipe. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. smooth and easy passage.
we have some slides or relishes of the voice or strings, con-
tinued without notes, from one to another, rising or falling,
which are delightful. bacon's natural history.
kings that have able men of their nobility shall find ease
in employing them, and a better slide into their business; for
people naturally bend to them. bacon.
2. flow; even course.
there be, whose fortunes are like homer's verses, that have
a sode and easiness more than the verses of other poets. bacon.
st. 1'der. m. s. [from slide..] he who slides.
sl16 h r. adj. [/] ht, dutch..]
1. small; worthless; inconsiderable.
is caesar with antonius priz'd so slight 2 shakespeare:
their arms, their arts, their manners i disclose,
slight is the subject, but the praise not small, . .
if heav'n assist, and phoebus hear my call.
sight is the subject, but not so the praise;
if she inspire, and he approve my lays. pope.
2. not important; not cogent; weak.
some firmly embrace doctrines upon sight grounds, some
upon no grounds, and some contrary to appearance. locke.
3. negligent; not vehement; not done with effort.
the shaking of the head is a gesture of slight refusal. bacon.
he in contempt
dryden.
at one slight bound high overleap'd all bound. al/lion.
4. foolish; weak of mind. -
no beast ever was so flight -
for man, as for his god, to fight. jiudioras.
5. not strong; thin : as a slight silk.
slight. m. s. [from the adjective.]
1. neglect; contempt; act of scorn.
people in misfortune construe unavoidable accidents into
sights or neglects. clarisa,
2. artifice; cunning practice. see sleight.
as boosterous a thing as force is, it rarely atchieves any
thing but under the conduct of fraud. slight of hand has
done that, which force of hand could never do. sooth.
after nic had bambouzled john a while, what with slight
of hand, and taking from his own score, and adding to john's,
nic brought the balance to his own side. arbuthnot.
to st. ght. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. to neglect; to disregard. -
beware left they transgress and slight that sole command.
- milton.
you cannot expe&amp;t your son should have any regard for one
whom he sees you slight. - locke.
2. to throw carelessly, unless in this passage to slight be the
same with to sling.
the rogues slighted me into the river, with as little remorse
as they would have drowned puppies. shakespeare.
3. [slighten, dutch..] to overthrow; to demolish. junius,
skinner, and ainsworth. -
4. to slight over. to treat or perform carelessly.
these men, when they have promised great matters, and
failed most shamefully, if they have the perfection of bold-
ness, will but sight it over, and no more ado. bacon's essays,
his death and your deliverance .
were themes that ought not to be slighted over.
sli'ghter. n.s.. [from slight..] one who disregards.
24 h sli'ghtingly.
dryden.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 77</div><p class="text">s l i
s l i
sli'd htingly. adv, [from slighting..] without reverence ;
with contempt.
if my sceptick speaks slightingly of the opinions he opposes,
i have done no more than became the part. boyle.
slightly. adv. [from slight.]
1. negligently; without regard. -
words, both because they are common, and do not, so
strongly move the fancy of man, are for the most part but
flightly heard. hocker.
leave nothing fitting for the purpose
untouch'd, or slightly handled in discourse. shakespeare.
you were to blame
to part so slightly with your wife's first gift. . . . shakesheare.
the letter-writer dissembles his knowledge of this restriction,
and contents himself slightly to mention it towards the close of
his pamphlet. atterbury.
2. scornfully; contemptuously.
long had the gallick monarch uncontroul’d,
enlarg’d his borders, and of human force
opponent slightly thought.
3- weakly; without force. -
scorn not the facilgates of hell too sightly barr'd. milton.
4. without worth.
sli'ghtness. n.f. [from slight.]
1. weakness; want of strength.
2. negligence; want of attention;, want of vehemence.
where gentry, title, wisdom,
cannot conclude but by the yea and no
of gen'ral ignorance, it ic omit
real necessities, and give way the while -- -
to unstable slightness. shakespeare's coriolanus.
what strong cries must they be that shall drown so loud a
clamour of impieties and how does it reproach the slightness
of our sleepy heartless addresses : decay of piety.
sli'l y. adv. [from sy.) cunningly; with cunning secrecy 3
with subtile covertness. . .
were there a serpent seen with forked tongue,
that sily glided towards your majesty,
philips.
it were but necessary you were wak'd. shakespeare.
he, closely false and slily wise
cast how he might annoy them most from far. fairfax.
satan, like a cunning pick-lock, slily robs us of our grand
treasure. -- - decay of piety.
with this he did a herd of goats controul;
which by the way he met, and sily stole:
clad like a country swain.
may hypocrites,
that slily speak one thing, another think,
hateful as hell, pleas'd with the relish weak,
drink on unwarned, till by inchanting cups
infatuate, they their wily thoughts disclose,
and through intemperance grow a while sincere. philips.
slim. adv. [a cant word as it seems, and therefore not to be
used.] slender; thin of shape.
a thin sim-gutted fox made a hard shift to wriggle his body
into a henroost; and when he had stuft his guts well, squeezed
hard to get out again; but the hole was too little. l’estrange.
. i was jogg'd on the elbow by a slim young girl of seven-
teen. addison.
slime. m. s. [rlim, saxon; sligm, dutch..] viscous mire;
any glutinous substance.
the higher nilus swells
the more it promises: as it ebbs, the seedsman
upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain. shakespeare.
brick for stone, and slime for mortar. gen.
god, out of his goodness, caused the wind to blow, to dry
up the abundant slime and mud of the earth, and make the
land more firm, and to cleanse the air of thick vapours and
unwholsome mists. raleigh.
some plants grow upon the top of the sea, from some con-
cretion of slime where the sun beateth hot, and the sea stirreth
little. bacon's natural history.
and with asphaltick slime, broad as the gate,
deep to the roots of hell, the gather'd beach
they fasten’d. milton's paradise lost.
now dragon grown; larger than whom the sun
engender'd in the pythian vale on slime,
huge python 1 milton's paradise loft.
o foul descent! i'm now constrain'd
into a beast, to mix with bestial slime,
this essence to incarnate and imbrute. milton.
sli'miness. n.s.. [from slimy.] wiscosity; glutinous matter.
by a weak fermentation a pendulous sinniness is produced,
which answers a pituitous state. floyer.
sli'my. adj. [from slime.]
1. overspread with slime.
my bended hook shall pierce
their slimy jaws; and, as i draw them up,
i'll think them every one an antony. shakespeare.
some lay in dead men's skulls; and in those holes,
where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept
dryden,
2. a throw; a stroke.
as 'twere in scorn of cycs, refle&amp;ing gems,
that woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep,
and mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by. shak.
they have cobwebs about them, which is a sign of a slim,
dryness. bacon,
the rest are all by bad example led, .
and in their father's slimy track they tread, dryden,
eels for want of exercise, are fat and slimy. arbuthnot.
shoals of slow house-bearing do snails creep
o'er the ripe fruitage, paring slimy tracks
in the sleek rind. philips.
the swallow sweeps - -
the slimy pool, to build his hanging house thomson,
2. viscous; glutinous. - - - - -
then both from out hell-gates, into the waste,
wide anarchy of chaos, damp and dark,
hovering upon the waters, what they met
solid or slimy, as in raging sea, , , ; ;
toft up and down, together crowded drove. milton,
the astrological undertakers would raise men like vege-
tables, out of some fat and slimy soil, well digested by the
kindly heat of the fun, and impregnated with the influence
of the stars. - - - bently.
sli'ness. n.f. [from sly..] designing artifice.
by an excellent faculty in mimickry, my correspondent can
assume my air, and give my taciturnity a syness, which di-
verts more than any thing i could say. - addison.
sling. m. s. [rlingan, saxon; singen, dutch.] -
1. a misfive weapon made by a strap and two strings; the stone
is lodged in the strap, and thrown by loosing one of the
strings. - -
. the arrow cannot make him flee: sing stones are turned
with him into stubble. job, xli. 28.
dreads he the twanging of the archer's string
or singing stones from the phoenician sling * sandy.
slings have so much greater swiftness than a stone thrown
from the hand, by how much the end of the sling is farther off
from the shoulder-joint, the center of motion. jwilkins.
- the tuscan king -
laid by the lance, and took him to the sing;
thrice whirl'd the thong around his head, and threw
the heated lead, half melted as it flew. . dryden's aen,
whirl’d from a sing, or from an engine thrown,
amidst the foes, as flies a mighty stone, i. -- -
so flew the beast. - - dryden's ovid,
at one sing -
of thy victorious arm, well-pleasing son,
both fin and death, and yawning grave at last -
through chaps hurl’d, obstruct the mouth of hell. milion.
3. a kind of hanging bandage, in which a wounded limb is
sustained. - - -
to sling. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to throw by a sling.
2. to throw ; to cast. not very proper.
aetna's entrails fraught with fire,
that now casts out dark fumes and pitchy clouds,
incenst, or tears up mountains by the roots,
or sings a broken rock aloft in air.
3. to hang loosely by a string. -
from rivers drive the kids, and sling your hook;
anon i’ll wash ’em in the shallow brook.
4. to move by means of a rope.
coenus i saw amidst the shouts
of mariners, and busy care to sling
his horses soon ashore. dryden's cleomenes.
they sung up one of their largest hogsheads, then rolled
it towards my hand, and beat out the top. gulliver’s travels.
sli'nger. m. s." [from sling..] . one who slings or uses the sling.
the singers went about it, and smote it. 2 kings, iii. 25.
to slink. v. m. preter. sunk. [rlingan, saxon, to creep.] to
sneak; to steal out of the way.
we will slink away in supper time, disguise us at my lodg-
ing, and return all in an hour. shakesp. merch. of venice.
as we do turn our backs
from our companion, thrown into his grave,
so his familiars from his buried fortunes
slink away. shakespeare's timon of athens.
he, after eve seduc’d, unminded sunk
into the wood fast by. milton's paradis. loft.
not far from hence doth dwell
a cunning man, hight sidrophel,
to whom all people far and near
on deep importances repair;
when brass and pewter hap to stray,
and linen slinks out of the way. \ płodierds.
she sunk into a corner, where she lay trembling 'till the
addison:
dryden.
company went their way. * . l’e/orange.
he would pinch the children in the dark, and then sark
into a corner, as if no body had done it. t
arbuthnot's history of john ball.
. . a wease!
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 78</div><p class="text">s l i
s l i
a weasel once made shift to slink
in at a corn-loft through a chink;
but having amply stuff'd his skin,
could not get out as he got in. pope.
we have a suspicious, fearful, and constrained countenance,
often turning back, and sinking through narrow lanes. swift.
t, slink. * * to cast; to miscarry of. a low word.
to prevent a mare's sinking her foal, in snowy weather
keep her where she may have good spring-water to drink.
- amortimer.
o, slip. v. n. [rlipan, saxon; slippen, dutch.]
1. to slide; not to tread firm.
if a man walks over a narrow bridge, when he is drunk, it
is no wonder that he forgets his caution while he overlooks his
danger; but he who is sober, and views that nice separation
ic:ween himself and the devouring deep, so that, if he should
#, he sees his grave gaping under him, surely must needs
take every step with horrour and the utmost caution. south.
a skilful dancer on the ropes flips willingly, and makes a
seeming'stumble, that you may think him in great hazard,
while he is only giving you a proof of his dexterity. dryden.
if after some distinguish'd leap -
he drops his pole, and seems to slip,
straight gath'ring all his active strength, -
he rises higher half his length. prior.
2. to slide; to glide. - - -
oh ladon, happy ladon rather slide than run by her,
left thou shouldst make her legs sip from her. sidney.
they trim their feathers, which makes them oily and slip-
pery, that the water may slip off them. a sortiner.
... to move or fly out of place. - -
sometimes the ancle-bone is apt to turn out on either side,
by reason of relaxation, which though you reduce, yet, upon
the least walking on it, the bone slips out again. ioman.
to sneak; to slink. " .
from her most beastly company
i'gan refrain, in mind to slip away,
soon as appear'd safe opportunity. •. sponsor.
when judas saw that his host sopt away, he was fore
troubled. t 1 mac. ix. 7.
i'll flip down out of my lodging. dryden's don sebastian.
thus one tradesman slips away,
to give his partner faircr play. prior.
5. to glide; to pass unexpectedly or imperceptibly.
the banks of either side scening arms of the loving earth,
that fain would embrace it, and the river a wanton nymph,
which still would slip from it. sidney.
the biesling of the lord shall slip from thee, without doing
thee any good, if thou hast not ceased from doing evil. taylor.
soping from thy mother's eye thou went'st
alone into the temple; there was found
among the gravest rabbies disputant,
on points and questions fitting moses’ chair. milton.
thrice around his neck his arms he threw,
and thrice the flitting shadow sopp'd away,
like winds or empty dreams that fly the day. dodo. -
though with pale checks, wet beard, and dropping hair,
none but my ceyx could appear so fair,
i would have strain'd him with a strict embrace; -
but through my arms he slipt, and vanish'd from the place.
dryden.
when a corn slips out of their paws, they take hold of it.
again. addison's speciator.
wise men watch cwery opportunity, and retrieve every
mispent hour which has slipped from them. rogers.
i will impute no defect to those two years which have slipped
by since. swift to pope.
6. to fall into fault or errour.
if he had been as you,
and you as he, you would have soft like him ;
but he, like you, would not have been so stern. shakoff.
one softh in his speech, but not from his heart. eacts.
an eloquent man is known far and near ; but a man of un-
de:#anding knoweth when he soppeth. ecclus, xxi. 7.
7. to creep by oversight. -
some mistakes may have sip: into it; but others will be pre-
vented. pope.
8. to escape; to fall away out of the memory.
by the hearer it is still presumed, that if they be let slip for
the present, what good foever they contain is lost, and that
without all hope of recovery. płocker.
the mathematician proceeds upon propositions he has once
demonstrated; and though the demonstration may have slipt
out of his memory, he builds upon the truth. addison.
use the most proper methods to retain the ideas you have
acquired; for the mind is ready to let many of them slip, un-
lso some pains be taken to fix them upon the memory. watts.
t, slip. v.a.
1. to convey secretly.
in his officious attendance upon his mistress he tried to sip
*powder into her drink. arbuthn. hiss. of john luis.
2. to lose by negligence.
you are not now to think what's best to do,
* in beginnings; but what musi be done,
being thus enter'd s and slip in o advantage
to: may secure you. - ben. johnson's catiline.
o *****a*p th' occasion, whether scorn
satiate fury yield it from our foe. assion.
he ill man inay not think of the mischi l
slip the occasion. y e mischief he could do, or
- l'estrange.
to so the market, when thus fairly offered, is great in-
prudence. collier.
for watching occasions to correa others in their discourse,
and not to slip any opportunity of the wing their talents, scho-
lars are most blamed. i.
thus far my author has spt his first design; not a letter of
what has been yet said promoting *ny ways the trial. alterb.
3. to part twigs from the main body by liceration. s
the runners spread from the master-roots, and have lit, le
sprouts or roots to them, which, being cut four or five inches
long, make excellent sets: the branches also may be slipped
and planted. mortimer's husbandy.
4. to escape from ; to leave slily. , -,
this bird you aim'd at, though you hit it not.
—oh, fir, yo...}} me like his greyhound, .
which runs himself, and catches for his master. shikoff.
5. to let loose.
on eryx altars lays
drydon. }
a lamb new fallen to the stormy seas;
then sp; his haulsers, and his anchors weighs.
6. to let a dog loose.
the impatient greyhound, slipt from far,
bounds o'er the glebe, to course the fearful hare. drydon,
7. to throw of anything that holds one. -
forced to alight, my horse slipped his bridle, and ran away.
swift.
8. to pass over negligently.
. if our author gives us a list of his doctrines, with what
reason can that about indulgences be slipped over ? atlarbury.
slip. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the act of flipping; false step.
2. errour ; mistake fault.
there put on him -
what forgeries you please: marry, none so rank
as may di:honour him.
but, fir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips,
as are most known to youth and liberty. shakespeare. ,
of the promise there made, our master hath failed us, by
slip of memory, or injury of time. j%tton's architecture.
this religious affection, which nature has implanted in
man, would be the most enormous slip she could commit.
al/are.
one casual slip is enough to weigh down the faithful ser-
vice of a long life. - l'estrange.:
alonzo, mark the characters;
and if th’ impostor's pen have made a sop,
that shews it counterfeit, mark that and save me. dryden.
lighting upon a very easy slip i have made, in putting one
seemingly indifferent word for another, that discovery opened
to me this poson; view. - locke.
any little slip is more conspicuous and observable in a good
man's conduct than in another's, as it is not of a piece with
his charaster. addison', spectator.
3. a twig torn from the main stock.
in truth, they are fewer, when they come to be discussed
by reason, than otherwise they seem, when by heat of con-
tention they are divided into many slips, and of every brancil
an heap is made. hooker.
the slips of their vines have been brought into spain. abb.
adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
a native s!p to us from foreign seeds. shakespeare.
thy mother took into her blameful bed
some stern untutor'd churl, and noble stock
was graft with crab-tree slip, whose fruit thou art. shakes. .
trees are apparelled with flowers or herbs by boring holes
in their bodies, and putting into them earth holpen with muck,
and setting seeds or slips of violets in the earth. bacon.
so have i seen some tender slip,
sav'd with care from winter's nip,
the pride of her carnation train,
luck'd up by some unheedy swain. assion.
they are propagated not only by the seed, but many also by
the root, and some by slip; or cuttings. ray on the creation.
4. a leash or string in which a dog is held, from its being so
made as to flip or become loose by relaxation of the hand.
i see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, -
straining upon the start. shakespeare's henry v.
god is said to harden the heart permissively, but not ope-
ratively, nor effectively; as he who only lets loose a grey-
hound out of the slip, is said to hound him at the hare.
bramhal'.
5. an escape; a desertion. i know not whether to give the slip
be not originally taken from a dog that runs and leaves the
string or slip in the leader's hand. the
.azio
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 79</div><p class="text">s l i
s lo
the more shame for her goodyship,
to give to near a friend the slip. .
the daw did not like his companion, and gave him the slip,
and away into the woods. l'etrange.
their explications are not your's, and will give you the
slip. - locke.
6. a long narrow piece. - s
between these eastern and western mountains lies a slip of
lower ground, which runs across the island. addison.
sli'pboa r d. m. s. [sao an 'hoard. a board sliding in grooves.
i ventured to draw back the slipboard on the roof, contrived
on purpose to let in air. gulliver's travels.
sli'pknot. n.s.. [sp and knot..] a bowknot; a knot easily
untied. - -
they draw off so much line as is necessary, and fasten the
rest upon the line-rowl with a sli, knot, that no more line turn
off. a six-n’s mech. exer.
in large wounds a single knot first; o; et this a little linen
compress, on which is another single knot, and then a sop-
#not, which may be loosened up on inflammation. sharp.
sl1(pper, or slipshoe. m. s. [from slip.]
1. a shoe without leather behind, into which the foot slips
easily. ' -
a gown made of the finest wool,
which from our pretty lambs we pull;
fair lined slippers for the cold,
with buckles of the purest gold. rahigh.
if he went abroad too much, she'd use
to give him slippers, and lock up his shoes. king.
thrice rung the bell, the slipper knock'd the ground,
... and the press'd watch return’d a silver sound. pope.
2. tcrespis, lat.j an herb. - *
sl1(pper. adj. [ropun, saxon.] slippery; not firm. obso-
-' lete. perhaps never in use but for poetical convenience.
a trustless state of earthly things, and slipper hope
of mortal men, that swinke and sweat for nought. spensor.
sli'pperily. adv. [from sloppery.) in a slippery manner.
slipper iness. m. s. [from slippery.] -
1. state or quality of being slippery; smoothness; glibness.
we do not only fall by the slipperines of our to gues, but
we deliberately discipline them to mischief. gov. of the tongue.
the schirrus may be distinguished by its want of inflamma-
tion in the skin, its smoothness, and slipperiness deep in the
breast. . sharp's surgery.
2. uncertainty; want of firm footing.
sli'ppery. adj. [ripuri, saxon; sliperig, swedish.]
1. smooth; glib. -
they trim their feathers, which makes them oily and slip-
pery, that the water slips off. mortimer.
oily substances only lubricate and make the bowels slip-
ery. : . . . - arbuthnot.
2. not affording firm footing. -- " - -
did you know the art o' th' court,
as hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb,
is certain falling; or so slipp'ry, that
the fear's as bad as falling. shakesp. cymbeline.
his promise to trust to as slippery as ice. tuffer.
their way shall be asslippery ways in the darkness. fer. xxiii.
the slitp'ry tops of human state,
the gilded pinnacles of fate. cowley.
the higher they are raised, the giddier they are ; the more
slippery is their standing, and the deeper the fall. l'estrange.
the highest hill is the most slipp'ry place,
and fortune mocks us with a smiling face.
beauty, like ice, our footing does betray;
who can tread sure on the smooth slippery way?
3. hard to hold; hard to keep.
thus surely bound, yet be not overbold,
the slipp'ry god will try to loose his hold;
and various forms assume, to cheat thy fight,
and with vain images of beasts affright. dryden's georg.
4. not standing firm.
when they fall, as being slipp'ry standers,
the love that lean’d on them as slipp'ry too,
doth one pluck down another, and together
die in the fast. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
5. uncertain ; changcable; mutable; instable.
oh world, thy sippery turns ! friends now fast sworn,
whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart,
whose hours, whose bed, whose meal and exercise,
are still together; who twine, as 'twere, in love
unseparable, shall within this hour,
on a diffension of a doit, break out
idenham.
dryden.
to bitterest enmity. shakespeare.
he looking down .
with scorn or pity on the slippery state
of kings, will tread upon the neck of fate. denh. sophy.
6. not certain in its effect.
one sure trick is better than a hundred slippery ones. l'esir.
7. [lubrique, french..] not chaste. -
my wife is slippery. shakoff. winter's tale.
• * ~ *
hadibras.
sli'ppy, adv. [from sip.] slippery; easily sliding. a bar.
barous provincial word. - - -
the white of an egg is ropy, slippy, and nutritious. foyer,
sli'ps hop. adj. [slip and food.j having the shoes not pulled
up at the heels, but barely slipped on.
the slipshod 'prentice from his master's door
had par'd the dirt, and sprinkled round the floor.
sli'pslop. m. s. bad liquor.
cation of slip.
slish. n. s. a low word formed by reduplicating soft.
what! this a sleeve, * - . .
here's snip and nip, and so and flash,
like to a censor in a barber’s shop. shakosheart.
to slit. v. a. pset, and part, st and sitted. [rican, saxon.]
to cut longwise. “ -
to make plants medicinable, slit the root, and infuse into
it the medicine, as hellebore, opium, scammony, and then
bind it up. bacon's nat. hist.
- the deers of arginusa had their ears divided, occasioned at
first by slitting the ears. brown's pulgar errours.
. . . had it hit .
the upper part of him, the blow -
had slit, as sure as that below. hudibras.
we sit the preternatural body open. , 177%man's surrory,
a liberty might be est to the judges to inflict death, or some
notorious mark, by slitting the note, or brands upon the
cheeks. ' ' ' ' - temple.
if a tinned or plated body, which, being of an even thick-
ness, appears all over of an uniform colour, should be slot into
threads, or broken into fragments of the same thickness with
the plate, i see no reason why every thread or fragment should
not keep its colour. newton's opt.
he took a freak
swift.
- stift.
a low word formed by redupi-
to slit my tongue, and make me speak.
slit. n.s. [rlit, saxon.] a long cut, or narrow opening. .
in st. james’s fields is a conduit of brick, unto which
joineth a low vault, and at the end of that a round house of
stone; and in the brick conduit there is a window, and in the
round house a slit or rift of some little breadth: if you cry out
in the rift, it will make a searful roaring at the window. baton,
where the tender rinds of trees disclose
. their shooting gems, a swelling knot there grows:
• just in that place a narrow slit we make,
then other bu's from bearing trees we take;
inserted thus, the wounded rind we close. dryden.
i found, by looking through a sit or oblong hole, which
was narrower than the pupil of my eyes, and held close to it
parallel to the prisms, i could see the circles much distineter,
... and visible to a far greater number, than otherwise. newton.
to slive. q. v. a. s.r.ligan, saxon.] to split; to divide
to sli'ver. } longwise; to tear off longwise. -
liver of blaspheming jew,
gall of goat, and slips of yew,
sliver'd in the moon's eclipse. shakesp. macbeth.
sli've r. m. s. [from the verb.] a branch torn off. sliver, in
scotland, still denotes a slice cut off: as, he took a large sliver
of the beef.
there on the pendant boughs, her coronet weed
clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
when down her weedy coronet and herself
fell in the weeping brook. shakoff. hamlet.
slo ats. n.s. of a cart, are those underpieces which keep the
bottom together. bailey.
slo'bber. m. s. [glavneric, welsh.] slaver. see slaver.
to slock. v. n. [slick, to quench, swedish and scottish..] to
slake; to quench. ... "
sloe., n. j. [rla, saxon; slide, danish.] the fruit of the
blackthorn, a small wild pium.
the fair pomegranate might adorn the pine,
the grape the bramble, and the she the vine. blackmore.
when you fell your underwoods, sow haws and sles in
them, and they will furnish you, without doing of your woods
any hurt. - mortimer’s husbandry.
sloop. n. s. a small ship, commonly with only two masts.
to slop. v. a. [from lap, lop, slip.j. to drink grossly and
greedily.
slop. ; [from the verb.] mean and vile liquor of any kind.
generally some nauseous or useless medicinal liquor.
the fick husband here wanted for neither slops nor doc-
tors. - l’estrange.
but thou, whatever slops she will have bought,
be thankful. dryden’s juvenal.
stop. m. s. [rlop, saxon; slove, dutch, a covering.] trow-
sers; open breeches.
what said mr. dombledon about the sattin for my short
cloak and slops * shakesp. henry iv.
slope. adj. [this word is not derived from any satisfactory
original. junius omits it: skinner derives it from slap, lax,
dutch ; and derives it from the curve of a loose rope. per-
haps its original may be latent in loopen, dutch, to run, slope
being easy to the runner.] oblique not perpendicular. it
ls
*::
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 80</div><p class="text">s l o
ally used of acclivity or declivity; forming an angle
is o, }. with the o: of the ho &amp; o
so here there is a greater quantity of water, and space
enough, the water moveth with a sloper rise and fall.
murm'ring waters fall
wn the slope hills, dispers'd, or in a lake,
o to off. bank with myrtle crown'd
her crystal mirror holds, unite their streams. amilton,
storf. n.j [from the adjective.]
l an oblique direction; any thing obliquely direded.
declivity; ground cut or formed with declivity.
"growing upon slopes is caused for that moss, as it cometh of
moisture, so the water must but slide, not be in a pool. bacon.
my lord advances with majestick mien, -
and when up ten steep slope you've dragg'd your thighs,
just at o o he'll bless your eyes. pope.
. adv. bliquely; not perpendicularly.
slope to no of y
return'd on that bright beam, whose point now rais'd
bore him slope downward to the sun, now fall’n. milton.
i, siopf. v. a. [from the adjective.] to form to obliquity
or declivity; to direct obliquely,
though bladed corn be lodg’d, and trees blown down,
though palaces and pyramids do slope
their heads to their foundations. shaksp. macbeth.
on each hand the flames
driv'n backward, /* their pointing spires, and rowl'd
in billows, leave i' th' midst a horrid vale. 41ilton.
the star, that rose at evening bright,
toward beav'n's descent had sop'd his westering wheel. milt,
all night i slept, oblivious of my pain;
aurora dawn'd, and phoebus shin'd in vain:
nor 'till oblique he sop'd his evening ray,
had somnus dry'd the balmy dews away. pope's oosy.
7, slope. v. n. to take an oblique or declivous direction.
betwixt the midst and these the gods assign'd
two habitable seats for human kind;
and cross their limits cut a sloping way,
which the twelve signs in beauteous order sway. dryden.
there is a handsome work of piles made sloping athwart the
river, to stop the trees which are cut down, and cast into the
river. brown's travels.
upstarts a palace, lo' th' obelient base
slopes at its foot, the woods its sides embrace. pope.
there is a strait hole in every ant's nest half an inch deep;
and then it goes down sloping into a place where they have
their magazine. adison's speciator.
on the south aspest of a sloping hill,
whose skirts meand'ring penous washes still,
our pious lab’rer pass'd his yout ful days -
in peace and charity, in pray’r and praise. iiarte.
slo'pen ess. n.s.. [from slope..] obliquity; declivity; not per-
ndicularity. -
the italians give the cover a graceful pendence of spends,
dividing the whole breadth into nine parts, whereof two in all
serve for the elevation of the highest ridge so atton’. archite?.
$10'pewise, adj. [slope and wise.] obliq oly; not perpendi-
cular'v.
†. wear is a frith, reaching spewis through the ose
from the land to low-water mark, and having in it a bent or
cod with an eye-hook; where the fish entering, upon their
coming back with the cbb, are stopped from issuing out again,
forsaken by the water, and left dry on the cose. carew.
slopingly. adv. [from sloping..] obliquely; not perpendi-
cularly.
t. atoms do not descend always perpendicularly, but
sometimes sooing!y. digby on the soul.
sloppy, aff. [from sp.] miry and wet : perhaps rather
flabby. see slab.
t. stor. v. a. [/loghen, dutch..] to strike or clash hard.
slot. n.s.. [sed, islandick.] the track of a deer.
sloth. ... s. [rless, rless, saxon. it might therefore be not
improperly written soath, but that it seems better to regard
the orthography of the primitive slow.)
1. slowness; tardiness.
these cardina's trifle with me : i abhor
this dilatory sloth and tricks of rome. shao. henry viii.
2. laziness; sluggishness; idleness.
false of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand. ...
hog in sloth, fox in stealth. shosh, king l'ar.
the change their course to pleasure, case, and/oth. a1:..t.
lcdustry approach'd,
and rous'd him from his miserable sloth. toson's fata”.
3. an animal. -
the soth is an animal of so slow a motion, that he will be
three or four days at least in climbing up and coming down a
tice; and to go the length of fifty paces on plain go”
requires a whole day. - grew.
slothful, aj. [/ith and full j idle; lazy; sluggish; in-
active; indolent; dull of motion. -
he that is sitsui in his work, is brother to him that is a
great waster. prov. xviii. 9.
vol. ii.
bacon.
the desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hand. refuse
to labour. po xxi . o
to vice industrious; but to nobler deeds " * *
timorous and sotho.
- miller,
flora commons. those nymphs and knights, azuleo
who liv'd in slothful ease as loose delights,
who never acts of honour just pursue, z
the men inglorious knights the ladi
- "so adies all untrue. dryden.
in o "...oft. does cite&amp;tually but lie o:
senses. ody, and the whole man is totally given up to his
- l’estrange
another is deaf to all the moti lets, ... ostrange.
idle, slothful temper. lves to piety, by nus; an
sloth fully. adv [from slithsol.] idly; i laoye
o - azily ; with sloth
slothful n ess. n.s.. [from slothful...] i *y; - -
gishness; ...! sotoful..] idleness; laziness; slug-
to trust to labour without prayer, argueth impiety and
prophaneness; it maketh light of the providence of god'. ...
although it be not the intent of a religious mind, yet it is the
fault of those men whose religion wanteth light of a mature
judgment to direct it, when we join with our prayer slothful-
mes, and neglect of convenient labour. hooker.
sato/ain's casteth into a deep sleep, and an idle soul shall
suffer hunger.
slouch. n.s. (soff, danish, stupid.]
1. a downcast look; a depression of the head. in scotland,
an ungainly gait, as also the person whose gait it is.
our doctor has every quality that can make a man useful;
but, alas! he hath a sort of south in bis walk. swift.
2. a man who looks heavy and clownish. -
begin thy carrols then, thou vaunting south;
be thine the oaken staff, or mine the pouch. gay.
to slough. … n. [from the noun..] to have a downcast
clownish look.
sloven. n. s. [s]...s, dutch; syvn, welsh, nasty, shabby.]
a man indecciuy negligent of cleanliness; a man dirtily
dressed.
the ministers came to church in handsome holiday apparel,
and that himself did not think them bound by the law of god
to go like slovens. ihooker.
affect in things about thee cleanliness,
that all may gladly board thee as a flow'r :
\ovens take up their stock of noisoneness
beforehand, and anticipate their last hour. herbert.
you laugh, half beau, half soven if i stand;
my wig half powder, and all snuff my band.
their methods various, but alike their aim :
the sloven and the fopling are the same. 2%ung.
sloves li n ess. n.s.. [from slavenly.] indecent negligence of
dress; neglect of cleanliness.
slovenliness is the worst sign of a hard student, and civility
the best exercise of the remiss; yet not to be exact in the
phrase of compliment, or gestures of courtesy. j/otton.
slov enly. adj. [from slaven.] negligent of dress; negligent
of neatness; not neat; not cleanly.
aesop at last found out a sovenly lazy fellow, lolling at his
ease, as if he had nothing to do. l’estrange.
slov enly. adv. [from slaven.] in a coarse inelegant manner.
as i han: my clothes on somewhat slaveny, i no sooner
went in but he flowned upon me. pope.
slov enry. m. s. (from slaven.] dirtiness; want of neatness.
our gay nets and our gilt are all befruirch'd
with rainy marching in the painful field :
there's not a piece of feather in our host,
and time hath worn us into slavenny.
sloug h. n.s. [rlos, saxon.
1. a deep miny place ; a hole full of dirt.
the scots were in a fallow field, whercinto the english
could not criter, but over a cross ditch and a sough ; in pass-
ing whereof many of the english horse were plunged, and
some mired. hayward.
the ways being foul, twenty to one,
he’s here stuck in a sough, and overthrown. milton.
a carter had laid his waggon fast in a slogh. l'e/trange.
2. the skin which a serpent casts off at his periodical renova-
tion.
thy fates open their hands, let thy blood and spirit embrace
them; and to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast
thy humble sough, and appear fresh. shaftop. twelfth night.
when the mind is quicken'd,
the organs, though defunet and dead before,
break up their drowsy grave, and newly move,
with casted sough and fresh legerity.
oh let not sleep my closing eyes invade
in open plains, or in the secret ihade,
when he, renew’d in all the specki’d pride
of pompous youth, has cast his fough aside;
and in his summer liv'ry rolls along,
erect and brandishing his forky tongue. dryden.
the sough of an english viper, that is, the cuticula, they
cast of twice every year, at spring and faii; the eparation
begins at the head, and is finished in twenty-four hours. crew.
24 i the
prov. xix. 15.
pope.
shakop. h. v.
shakspeare,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 81</div><p class="text">s l o
s l u
the body, which we leave behind in this visible world,
is as the womb or sough from whence we issue, and are born
into the other. - - grew's cosmol.
3. it is used by shałoffeare simply for the skin.
as the snake, roll'd in a flow'ry bank,
with shining checker'd slough, doth sting a child,
that for the beauty thinks it excellent. shakesp. hen. vi.
4. the part that separates from a foul sore.
at the next dressing i found a slough come away with the
dressings, which was the sordes. //iseman on ulcers.
to slou gh. v. n. [from the noun..] to part from the sound
flesh. a chirurgical term. - -
slou ghy. adj. [from slough..] miry; boggy; muddy.
that custom should not be allowed, of cutting scraws in
low grounds sanghy underneath, which turn into bog. swift,
slow. adj. [rlap, rleap, saxon; sleeuw, frisick.]
1. not swift; not quick of motion; not speedy; not having
velocity; wanting celerity. -
me thou think'st not slow,
who since the morning-hour set out from heav'n,
where god resides, and on mid-day arriv'd -
in eden, distance inexpressible. ' milion.
where the motion is so slow as not to supply a constant train
of fresh ideas to the senses, the sense of motion is lost. locke.
2. late; not happening in a short time.
these changes in the heav'ns, though slow, produc’d
* like change on sea and land, sidereal blast. azillon.
3. not ready not prompt; not quick.
i am slow of speech, and a slow tongue. exod. iv. io.
mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut. amillon.
the slow of speech make in dreams unpremeditated ba-
rangues, or converse readily in languages that they are but little
acquainted with. addison.
- for though in dreadful whirls we hang
high on the broken wave,
i know thou wert not sow to hear,
nor impotent to save. addison.
'4. dull: inactive ; tardy; sluggish.
fix'd on defence, the trojans are not sow
to guard their shore from an expected foe. dryden.
5. not hasty; acting with deliberation; not vehement.
the lord is merciful, and slow to anger. common prayer.
he that is saw to wrath is of great understanding. prov.
the politick and wise
* ares'; slow things with circumspective eyes.
6. dull; heavy in wit.
the blockhead is a slow worm.
slow, in composition, is an adverb, slowly.
- this slow-pac’d soul, which late did cleave
t” a body, and went but by the body's leave,
twenty perchance or thirty mile a day,
dispatches in a minute all the way
*twixt heav'n and earth.
to the shame of slow endeavouring art
thy easy numbers flow.
this day's death denounc'd, if ought i see,
will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac'd evil,
a long day’s dying to augment our pain.
for eight flow-circling years by tempests tost.
- some demon urg'd
to explore the fraud with guile oppos'd to guile, .
slow-pacing thrice around th’ insidious pile. pope.
to slow. v. a. [from the adjective.] to omit by dilatoriness;
to delay; to procrastinate. not in use. the true word was
... forsaw.
now do you know the reason of this haste?
—i would i knew not why it should be slow'd. shakespeare.
slowly. adv. [from slow.]
1. not speedily; not with celerity; not with velocity.
the gnome rejoicing bears her gift away,
spreads his black wings, and slowly mounts to day.
2. not soon ; not early ; not in a little time.
the poor remnant of human seed peopled, their country
again slowly, by little and little. bacon.
our fathers bent their baneful industry
to check a monarchy that sowly grew;
but did not france or holland’s fate foresee,
whose rising pow'r to swift dominion flew.
we oft our slowly growing works impart,
while images reflect from art to art.
3. not hastily ; not rashly: as, he determines slowly.
4. not promptly; not readily: as, he learns slowly.
5. tardily; fluggishly. -
the chapel of st. laurence advances so very slowly, that 'tis
not impossible but the family of medicis may be extinct before
their burial-place is finished. addison on italy.
slow n ess. n.s.. [from sow.] -
1. smallness of motion; not speed; want of velocity; absence
of celerity or swiftness.
providence hath confined these human arts, that what any
invention hath in the strength of its motion, is abated in the
pope.
pope.
donne.
milton.
milton.
pope.
pope.
dryden.
pope.
slowlio of it; and what it hath in the extraordinary quickness
of its motion, must be allowed for in the great strength that is
required unto it. - //ilkins's math. magic.
motion is the absolute mode of a body, but swiftness or
sowness are relative ideas. - - watts,
2. length of time in which any thing acts or is brought to pass;
not quickness. -
d tyrants use what art they can to increase the slownes of
eath. -
3. dulness to admit conviction or affection.
christ would not heal their infirinities, because of the hard-
ness and slowns of their hearts, in that they believed him
• not. - bentley's sermoni,
4. want of promptness; want of readiness.
5. deliberation; cool delay.
6. dilatoriness ; procrastination.
slowworm. n.s. [rlapyrim, saxon.] the blind worm; a
large viper, not mortal, scarcely venomous. ,
though we have found formed snakes in the belly of the
cacilia, or slowworm, yet may the viper emphatically bear the
name. brown's pugar errouri.
to slu'bber. v. a. . [probably from lubber.]
i. to do any thing lazily, imperfectly, or with idle hurry.
nature shewed she doth not like men, who slubber up mat-
ters of mean account.
bassanio told him, he would make some speed
of his return : he answer'd, do not so, -
| subher not business for my fake. shakesp. merch, of ponio.
as they are slubbered over, the malignity that remains will
show itself in some chronick disease. jp'isman', surgery.
2. to stain; to daub. [this seems to be from slobber, flabber,
or slaver.] -
you must be content to shiller the gloss of your new for-
tunes with this more stubborn and boisterous expedition. shak,
3. to cover coarsely or carelessly. this is now not in use,
otherwise than as a low colloquial word. -
a man of secret ambitious ends, and proportionate coun-
fels, smothered under the habit of a scholar, and sluibered over
with a certain rude and clownish fashion, that had the sem-
blance of integrity. lso:ton.
slu'bber deg ullic n. m. s. [i suppose a cant word without
derivation.] a paltry, dirty, sory wretch.
quoth she, although thou hast deserv'd,
base subberd, gullion, to be serv'd o
. as thou didst vow to deal with me,
if thou hadst got the victory. hudibral,
sludge. m. s. [i suppose from rlog, slough. saxon.] mire;
dirt mixed with water. - “... "
the earth i made a mere soft //ge or mud. mortimer,
slug. m. s. [slug, danish, and slick, dutch, signify a glutton,
and thence one that has the sloth of a glutton.]
1. an idler; a drone; a flow, heavy, sleepy, lazy wretch.
fie, what a sing is hastings, that he comes not! shakoff,
2. an hindrance; an obstruction.
usury dulls and damps all improvements, wherein money
would be stirring, if it were not for this slig. bacon.
3. a kind of slow creeping snail. .
4. [slects, an hammerhead, saxon.] a cylindrical or oval piece
of metal shot from a gun.
when fractures are made with bullets or slugs, there the
scalp and cranium are driven in together. iłof man's surgery.
as, forc'd from wind-guns, lead itself can fly,
and pond’rous slugs cut swiftly through the sky. pope.
to slug. v. m. [from the noun.j. to lie idle; to play the
drone; to move slowly.
all be did was to deceive good knights,
and draw them from pursuit of praise and fame,
to slug in sloth and sensual delights, - -
and end their days with irrenowned shame. fairy queen.
he lay not all night slugging in a cabbin under his mantle,
but used commonly to keep others waking to defend their
lives. sponsor.
one went slugging on with a thousand cares. l'efirange.
slu'ggard. m. s. [from slug.] an idler; a drone; an inactive
lazy fellow.
cry mercy, lords, and watchful gentlemen,
that you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here. shakesp. r. iii.
this mighier sound shall make
the dead to rise,
and open tombs and open eyes,
ozier.
sidney,
to the long sluggards of five thousand years. cowly.
up, up, says avarice; thou shor's again,
stretcheit thy limbs, and yawn'st, but all in vain :
the tyrant lucre no denial takes; -
at his command th' unwilling sluggard wakes. dryden,
sprightly may commands our youth to keep
the vigils of her night, and breaks their sluggard sleep.
dryden.
to slu'gg ard1ze. v. a. (from suggord..] to make idie; to
make dronish.
rather see the wonders of the world abroad,
than, living dully sluggardiz'd at home,
wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness. shakesheare.
7 slu' g gus h.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 82</div><p class="text">s l u
stu's dish. adj. [from /*g.] dull; drowsy; lazy; slothsul;
idle; insipid ; slow; inactive; inert.
sluggish idleness, the nurse of fin,
upon a slothful as he chose to ride.
the dull billows, thick as troubled mire,
whom neither wind out of their seat could force,
nor tides did drive out of their sluggish source.
one, bolder than th: rost.
with his broad sword provok'd the /*ggish beast. if aller.
matter, being impotent, sluggish, and inactive, hath no
ower to sti, or move itself. - hoodward.
sit'ggishly, ov. . [from /loggi/}.] dully; not nimbly ;
lazily; idly ; slowly.
sluggish noss. m. s. [from slaggish j dulness; sloth; lazi-
ness; idleness; inertness.
the most of mankind are inclined by her thither, if the
would take the pains; no less than birds to fly, and horses to
run which if they lose, it is thro' their own sluggishness, and
by that moto become her prodigies, not her codies. b.johns.
it is of great monent to teach the mind to shake of its
foggio, and vigorously employ itself about what reason
shall direct. locke.
slu.c.e. n.s. (so so, dutch; esos, french; solus, italian.]
a waters are a floodgate ; a vent for water.
two other prc. ious drops that ready shood,
each in their crystal suice, he cre they fell
kiss'd, as the grocious signs of sweet remorse,
fairy queen.
speoser,
and pious awe, that fear'd to have offended. alsoston.
divine alpi, cus, who, by secret/sui.e.,
stole under seas to meet his arethuse. a //on.
if we receive them all, they were more than seven; if only
the natural soices, they were is wer. brown', /ulgar erraur.
as waters from her saics, flow'd
unbounded sorrow from her eyes.
each sluice of affluent fortune open'd soon,
and wealth flow'd in at morning, night and noon. hartz.
to sluice. v. a. [trom the noun..] to emit by floodgates.
i ke a traitor coward,
soo'd out his inn'cent soul through streams of blood. shaft.
veins of liquid ore suic'd from the lake. jolton.
you wrong me, if you think i'll so one drop
within these veins for pageants; but let honour
call for my blood, i'll slace it into streams;
turn fortune loose again to my pursuit, ,
and let me hunt her through embattl’d foes
in duty plains; there will i be the first. dryd, span. fryar.
slusiox. 45. (from juice..] failing in streams as from a fluice
or floodgate.
and off whole sheets descend of soy rain,
suck'd by the spongy clouds from of the main:
the lofty skies at once come pouring down,
the promisid crop and golden labours drown. drydon.
t, slumber. v. n. [rlumeran, saxon ; suymoren, dutch..]
1. to sleep lightly; to be not awake nor in profound sleep.
he that keepeth israel shall neither similar nor sleep. ps.
conscience wakes despair that onlord. al milton.
2. to sleep; to repose. sleep and oriter are often confounded.
god speaketh, yet man perceiveth it not : in a dream, in a
vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in
jumbering upon the bed. jo, xxxiii. i 5.
have ye chosen this place,
after the tool of battle, to repose
your wearied virtue, for the use you find
to surnier here : 2 son.
3. to be in a fiate of negligence and supineness.
why soonfers pope, who leads the tuneful train,
nor hears that virtue which he loves complain : loung.
t. slumber. v. a. -
1. to lay to sleep.
2. to sopify; to stun.
then up he took the sombered senseless corse,
and cre he could out of his swoon awake,
him to his castle brought. fairy queen.
to honest a deed after it was done, or to slumber his con-
science in the doing, he studied other incentives. j/otton.
sio mets. n.s. (from the verb.]
1. light fleep; so, p not profound.
and for his dreams, i wonder he's so fond
to trust the moc k”y of ungoes surnie's. shakes?. r. iii.
from caicosiness it shall as into somer, and from a son-
to it shall settle into a deep and long sleep; 'till at last, per-
haps, it sha'] sleep itself into a lethargy, and that such an one
that gothing but hell and judgment shali awaken it. south.
lobour and reso, that equal periods keep ;
co. do solars that can wake and weep. pope.
2. seep; rero;c.
boy! lucius' fast as en it is no matter ;
enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber. shakesp. jul. cats.
by a luit and envy fleep, but love denies
** to my soul, and somor to my eyes:
three days promis'd to attend toy doom,
and two long days and nights are }ct to come. dryden.
prior.
s l u -
stu'mff rous.
slu'mbery. }a}. inom/wor.]
1. inviting to sleep; soporiferous; causing sleep.
* not the timely dew of sleep,
now falling with soft slumborous, weight, inclines
our eyelids. e
while pensive in the filent slumborous shade,
sleep's geole pow'rs her drooping eyes invade;
minerva, life-like, on embodied air
impress'd the form of iphthema.
there every eye with /*m'rous chains she
and dash'd the flowing goblets to the
2. sleepy : not waking.
a great perturbation in nature to receive at once the be-
nefit of sleep, and do the effects of **hing: in this slami,
agitation, what have you heard her say shakesp. ...
slung. the preterite and participle passive of sling. -
slusk. the preterite and participle passive of so. f
silence accompany'd; for beat, and bird,
they to their grassy couch, there to their nests,
were sunk. milton's parads: loso,
to slur. v. a. s soor's, dutch, nasty; shore, a slut.]
1. to fully; to soil; to contaminate.
2. to pass lightly; to balk; to miss.
the atheists laugh in their fleeves, and not a little triumph
to see the cause of theism thus betrayed by its professed friends,
and the grand argument surred by them, and so their work
done to their hands.
studious to please the genius of the times,
with periods, points, and tropes, he slurs his crimes;
he robb’d not, but he borrow'd from the poor,
and took but with intention to restore. dryden.
3. to cheat; to trick.
what was the publick faith found out for,
but to slar men of what they fought for
- come, seven's the maiu,
cries ganymede: the usual trick: - -
seven, slur a fix; eleven, a nick. - - prior,
s.u.r. m. / [from the verb.] faint reproach ; flight disgrace.
here's an ape made a king for showing tricks; and the fox
is then to put a slur upon him, in exposing him for sport to
the scorn of the people. l'estrange.
no one can rely upon such an one, either with safety to
his affairs, or without a sour to his reputation ; since he that
trusts a knave has no other recompcince, but to be accounted
a fool for his pains. south's sermons
slut, n.s. iyiodie, dutch.] ... -
i. a dirty woman.
cricket, to windsor chimnies shalt thou cap:
where fires thou find it unrak'd, and hearths unswept,
there pinch the maids as blue as bio-erry; -
our radiant queen hates/ats and sluttery.
the veal's all rags, the butter's turn'd to oil;
and thus i buy good meat for slots to spoil. king.
2. a word of slight contempt to a woman.
hold up, you slits,
your aprons mountant; you're not oathable,
although i know you'll swear. shakesh. timon.
the fogs were ready to cap out of their skins of jov, 'till
she coy old/ut in the company advised them to consider a
little better on't, l'etrange.
siut tfr y. m. s. [from sut..] the qualities or practice of a
slut.
soory, to such neat excellence oppos'd, -
should make desire vomit emptiness. shakesp. cym.!eline.
these make our girls their sluttery rue,
by pinching them both black and blue;
and put a penny in their shoe,
milton;
pope's odsey.
bound,
ground. pope.
cadworth.
hudibrar.
-
t
sha's care.
the house for cleanly sweeping. drayton,
a man gave money for a black, upon an opinion that his
swarthy colour was rather sluttery than nature, and the fault of
his master that kept him no cleaner. l'e/irange.
slu'tt is h. adj. [from slat.] -
1. nasty; not nice; not cleanly; dirty; indecently negligent
of cleanliness. -
all preparations both for food and lodging such as would
make one detest niggardnets, it is so fluttish a vice. sidney.
albeit the mariners do covet store of cabbins, yet indeed
they are but slottish dens that breed sickness in peace, serving
to cover stealths, and in fight are dangerous to tear men with
their spointers, raleigh's essays.
the nastiness of that nation, and sattish course of life, hath
much promoted the opinion, occasioned by their servile condi-
tion at fift, and inferior ways of parsimony ever since. brown.
slothful disorder fil!'d his stable,
and outtish plenty deck'd her table. prior.
2. it is used sometimes for meretricious.
she got a leg cy by sittish tricks. holiday.
slu't t is h l y. a v. [from slottish.j. in a sluttish manner;
nastly ; dirtily. - - - -
slus 1 + is hn ess. n. s. sfrom sluttish j the qualitics or prac-
tice of a slut ; haitiness; distiness.
that
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 83</div><p class="text">s m a
s m . a
-
-
|
that is only suitable in laying a foul complexion upon a
filthy favour, setting forth both in suttishness. sidney.
i look on the instinct of this noisome and troublesome crea-
ture, the louse, of searching out foul and nasty clothes to har-
bour and breed in, as an effect of divine providence, designed
to deter men and women from suttishnes; and sordidness, and to
rovoke them to cleanliness and neatness. ray on the creation.
sly. adj. [rlo, saxon, flippery and metaphorically deceitful;
flagur, islandick.] meanly artful; secretly infidious ; cun-
in qs.
il *for my sly wiles and subtile craftiness,
the title of the kingdom i possess. hubberd's tale.
and for i doubt the greekish monarch sy,
will use with him some of his wonted craft.
his proud step he scornful turn'd,
and with sly circumspection. milton's paradise loft.
envy is a cursed plant: some fibres of it are rooted almost
in every man's nature, and it works in a sly and imperceptible
manner. j/atts.
it is odious in a man to look soy and leering at a wo—
man, - clarift.
sly’ly. adv. [from sly..] with secret artifice; insidiously.
to sm ack. v. n. [rmaeckan, saxon; smaecken, dutch..]
1. to have a taste ; to be tinetured with any particular taste. .
2. to have a tincture or quality infused.
- . all sects, all ages, smack of this vice, and he -
to die for it ! shakesp. measure for measure.
he is but a bastard to the time,
that doth not smack of observation. shakesp. king john.
3. to make a noise by separation of the lips strongly pressed
together, as after a taste.
she kiss'd with smacking lip the snoring lout;
for such a kiss demands a pair of gloves. gay.
4. to kiss with a close compression of the lips, so as to be heard
when they separate. -
he gives a smacking buss.
to sm ack. v. a. -
i. to kiss.
so careless flowers, strow'd on the waters face,
the curled whirlpools suck, smack, and embrace,
yet drown them. .
2. to make to emit any quick smart noise. -
more than one steed must delia's empire feel,
who sits triumphant o'er the flying wheel;
and as she guides it through th’ admiring throng,
with what an air she snacks the filken thong :
smack. n.s. ismaeck, dutch ; from the verb.]
1. taste; savour.
2. tineture; quality from something mixed.
the child, that sucketh the milk of the nurse, learns his
first speech of her; the which, being the first inured to his
tongue, is ever after most pleasing unto him; insomuch, that
though he afterwards be taught english, yet the smack of the
first will always abide with him. spenser.
your lordship, though not clean past your youth, hath yet
forme snack of age in you, some relish of the saltness of time,
and have a care of your health. shakesp. henry iv.
it caused the neighbours to rue, that a petty smack only of
popery opened a gap to the oppression of the whole.
as the pythagorean soul
runs through all beasts, and fish and fowl,
and has a smack of ev'ry one,
so love does, and has ever done.
2. a pleasing taste.
** - stack pease upon hovel;
to cover it quickly let owner regard,
lest dove and the cadow there finding a snack,
with ill stormy weather do perish thy stack.
4. a small quantity ; a taste.
trembling to approach
the little barrel, which he fears to broach,
h’ essays the wimble, often draws it back,
and deals to thirsty servants but a snack. dryden's pers.
5. the aet of parting the lips audibly, as after a pleasing taste.
6. a loud kiss.
he took o
the bride about the neck, and kiss'd her lips
with such a clamorous smack, that at the parting
all the church echo'd. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
i saw the lecherous citizen turn back
his head, and on his wife's lip steal a smack.
7. [snacca, saxon; sheckra, islandick. j a small ship. -
small. adj. [rmall, saxon; smal, dutch; smaar, islandick.]
i. little in quantity; not great.
for a small moment have i forsaken thee, but with great
mercies will i gather thce. isa. liv. 7.
death only this mysterious truth unfolds,
the mighty soul how snail a body holds. dryden's juven.
all numeration is but still the adding of one unit more, and
giving to the whole together a distinct name, whereby to
distinguish it from every smaller or greater multitude of
units. - locee.
fairfax,
pope.
donne.
2%ung,
carew.
tiffar.
jdonne,
*
płudibras.
the ordinary smallest measure we have is looked on as an
unit in number. - locke.
the danger is less when the quantity of the fluids is too
small, than when it is too great; for a smaller quantity will
pass where a larger cannot, but not contrariwise. arbuthnot,
good cooks cannot abide fiddling work: such is the dress.
ing of small birds, requiring a world of cookery. swift.
2. slender; exile; minute.
after the earthquake a fire, and after the fire a still small
voice. - - 1 kings, xix. 12.
your fin and calf i burnt, and ground it very small, 'tilli:
was as small as duft. deut. ix. 21.
those wav'd their limber fans
for wings, and smallest lineaments exaet. milton.
small-grained sand is esteemed the best for the tenant, and
the large for the landlord and land. mortimer's hussandy.
3. little in degree.
there arose no small stir about that way.
4. little in importance; petty; minute.
is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband? gon,
narrow man being fill'd with little shares,
courts, city, church, are all shops of small wares;
all having blown to sparks their noble fire, -
and drawn their sound gold ingot into wire. donne.
some mens behaviour is like a verse, wherein every syllable
is measured: how can a man comprehend great matters that
breaketh his mind too much to small observations f
knowing, by fame, small poets, small musicians,
small painters, and still smaller politicians. harte.
small is the subject, but not so the praise. pope.
5. little in the principal quality: as small beer; not strong;
weak.
go down to the cellar to draw ale or small beer. swift.
small. m. s. [from the adjective.] the small or narrow part
of any thing. it is particularly applied to the part of the leg
below the calf.
her garment was cut after such a fashion, that though the
length of it reached to the ancles, yet in her going one might
sometimes discern the small of her leg. sidney.
into her legs i’d have love's issues fall,
and all her calfs into a gouty small. sutkling.
his excellency, having mounted on the srall of my leg,
advanced forwards. gulliver's travels.
smallage. m. s. [from small age, because it soon withers.
skinner. ekoselinon, lat..] a plant. it is a species of parsley,
and a common weed by the sides of ditches and brooks. millor.
smallage is raised by slips or seed, which is reddish, and
pretty big, of a roundish oval figure; a little more full and
rising on one side than the other, and streaked from one end
to the other. amortimer’s husbandry.
smai. lcoal. m. s. [small and coal.] little wood coals used
to light fires,
a smallegal man, by waking one of these distressed gentle-
men, saved him from ten years imprisonment. spediator.
when smallocal murmurs in the hoarser throat,
from smutty dangers guard thy threaten’d coat. gay.
smallck a.f.t. n.s.. [small and craft.] a little vessel below
the denomination of ship.
shall he before me sign, whom t'other day }
aeis, xix. 2 3•
bacon.
a smallcraft vessel hither did convey;
where stain'd with prunes, and rotten figs, he lay. dryd.
smallpox. m. s. [small and pox.] an eruptive distemper of
great malignity; variolac.
he fell sick of the smallpox. //?seman.
sma'lly. adv. [from small j in a little quantity; with mi-
nuteness; in a little or low degree. -
a child that is still, and somewhat hard of wit, is never
chosen by the father to be made a scholar, or else, when he
cometh to the school, is smally regarded. aftham.
smalness. n. s. [from small.]
1. littleness; not greatness.
the parts in glass are evenly spread, but are not so close as
in gold; as we see by the easy admission of light, and by the
smalness of the weight. bacon's natural history.
2. littleness; want of bulk; minuteness; exility.
whatsoever is invisible, in respect of the fineness of the
body, or the smalness of the parts, or subtilty of the motion,
is little enquired. bacon's natural history.
the smalness of the rays of light may contribute very much
to the power of the agent by which they are refracted.
newton's opticks.
3. want of strength ; weakness.
smalt. n. s. a beautiful blue substance, produced from two
parts of zaffre being fused with three parts common salt, and
one part potash. his on fossils.
to make a light purple, mingle ceruse with logwood
water ; and moreover turnsoil with lac iningled with smalt of
bice. - peacham.
smaragdinf. adj. [smaragdorus, latin.j made of emerald,
resembling emerald.
smart. n.s. frtneorea, saxon somert, dutch ; smarta, swedish.]
1. quick, pungent, lively pain. -
then
*
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 84</div><p class="text">s m a
then her mind, though too late, by the smart, was brought
to think of the disease. sidney.
pain, corporal or intelle&amp;tual.
* "mishops are master'd by advice discreet,
and counsel mitigates the greatest smart. fairy queen.
it increased the smart of his present sufferings, to compare
them with his former happiness. atterbury.
t, smart. v. o. irmeonean, saxon; somerten, dutch.] -
1. to feel quick lively pain.
when a man's wounds cease to smart, only because he has
lost his feeling, they are nevertheless mortal. south.
human blood, when first let, is mild, and will not make
the eye or a fresh wound smart. arbuthnot.
2. to feel pain of body or mind.
he that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it. prov.
no creature smarts so little as a fool.
let peals of laughter, codrus' round thee break,
thou unconcern'd can'st hear the mighty crack. pope.
smart. adj. [from the noun.]
1. pungent; sharp 5, causing smart.
how solart a lash that speech doth give my conscience?
shakspeare.
to the fair he fain would quarter show,
his tender heart recoils at every blow ;
if unawares he gives too smart a stroke,
he means but to correct, and not provoke. granville.
1. quick ; vigorous; active.
that day was spent in snart skirmishes, in which many
fell, clarendon.
this sound proceeded from the nimble and smart percussions
of the ambient air, made by the swift and irregular motions
of the particles of the liquors. boyle.
3. producing any effect with force and vigour.
after show’rs,
the stars shine smarter, and the moon adorns,
as with unborrow'd beans, her sharpen'd horns. dryden.
4. acute; witty.
it was a smart reply that augustus made to one that mini-
fired this comfort of the fatality of things: this was so far
from giving any ease to his mind, that it was the very thing
that troubled him. tilson.
5. brisk; vivacious ; lively.
you may see a snart rhetorician turning his hat in his hands,
during the whole course of his harangue. a deaf man would
think he was cheapcning a beaver. - addison.
who, for the poor renown of being smart,
would leave a fling within a brother's heart? 1%ung.
smart. n.s. a fellow affecting briskness and vivacity. a
cant word.
smart ly, adv. [from smart..] after a smart manner; sharp-
ly; briskly; vigorously; wittily.
the art, order, and gravity of those proceedings, where
short, severe, constant rules were set, and snartly pursued,
made them less taken notice of. clarendon.
smar in ess. m. s. [from sna, t. j
1. the quality of being smart ; quickness; vigour.
what interest such a soariness in striking the air hath in
the production of sound, may in some measure appear by the
motion of a bullet, and that of a switch or other wand, which
produce no found, if they do but slowly pass through the air;
whereas if the one do smartly strike the air, and the other be
shot out of a gun, the celerity of their percussions on the air
puts it into an undulating motion, which, reaching the ear,
produces an audible noise. boyle.
1. liveliness; briskness; wittiness.
i defy all the clubs to invent a new phrase, equal in wit,
humour, smartnoy; or politeness, to my set. swift.
smatch. n.s.. [corruptcd from sma.k.]
1. taste; tincture; twang.
thou art a fellow of a good respect;
thy life hath had some south of honour in't. shakespeare.
some nations have a peculiar guttural or nasal snatch in
their language. holder's elements of speech.
these salts have somewhat of a nitrous taste, but mixt with
a snatch of a vitriolick. grew.
2 (carulo, lat.] a bird.
to smatter. v. n. [it is supposed to be corrupted from snack
0. affe. -
1. to have a flight taste; to have a flight, superficial, and im-
perfect knowledge.
such a practice gives a slight smastering of several sciences,
without any solid knowledge. // atti.
since, by a lotle song in learning, and great conceit
of himself, he has iot his religion, may he find it again by
harder study and an humo'er mind. bentley.
2. to talk superficially or ignorantly.
in proper terms, such as men soater, -
when they throw out and miss the matcr. hudibrar.
- of state affairs you cannot snatter; -
are aukward when you try to flatter. swift.
too. n. s. [from the ve: b.] superficial or slight know-
to re.
vol. ii.
2. to soil; to contaminate.
all other sciences were extinguis - - -
- guished during this empire
s. o: yo. of judicial astrology. £ - #.
• *. j. l. from smatter. -
superficial knowledge. jmatter.] one who has a flight qr
these few who preserve any rudiments of learning, are,
except one or two smatterers, the clergy's friends swift
s - -
to soear, v. a...[rmenan, saxon; joneeren, dutch.
1. to overs
smear. pread with something viscous and adhesive; to be-
if any such be here, that love
wherein you see me smear'd,
# o think brave death outweighs bad life,
et him wave thus. hake - -
then from the mountain hewing do." ; othells.
began to build a vessel of huge bulk, &gt;
smear'd round with pitch.
smear'd as she was with black gorgonean blood,
the fury sprang above the stygian flood.
this painting,
milton.
dryden,
why had i not, with charitable hand,
took up a beggar's issue at my gates ?
who sneered thus, and mir'd with infamy,
i might have said no part of it is mine. shakespeare.
smear. m. s. [from the verb..] an ointment, any fatiiquor
or juice. -
smea'ry. adj. [from snear.] dawby; adhesive.
a snary foam works o'er my grinding jaws,
and utmost anguish shakes my lab’ring frame.
smeath. m. s. a sea fowl.
to smeeth, or smutch. v. a. [rmisbe, saxon.] to smoke;
to blacken with smoke. not in use.
sme gmat ick. adj. [awiyaz.] soapy; deterfive. do?.
to sm ell. v. a. preterite and part. smelt. [of this word the
etymology is very obscure. skinner, the most acute of all
etymologists, derives it from sincel, warm, dutch ; because
smells are encreased by heat.]
1. to perceive by the nose.
their neighbours hear the same musick, or smell the same
perfumes with themselves: for here is enough. collier.
2. to find out by mental sagacity.
the horse sincit him out, and presently a crochet came in
his head how to countermine him. l'e/irange.
to sm ell. v. n.
1. to strike the nostrils.
the king is but a man as i am : the violet smells to him as
it doth to me; all his senses have but human conditions.
shakspeare.
the daintiest smells of flowers are out of those plants whose
leaves sincil not. bacon's natural history.
2. to have any particular scent: with of. -
honey in spain smelleth apparently of the rosemary or orange,
from whence the bee gathereth it. bacon.
a work of this nature is not to be performed upon one leg,
and should smell of oil if duly handled. 1", 1077.
if you have a silver saucepan, and the butter smells of smoak,
lay the fault upon the coals. swift.
3. to have a particular tincture of smack of any quality.
my unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life,
will so your accusation overweigh,
that you shall stifle in your own report,
rowe.
and small of calumny. shakespeare.
a man so smelling of the people's lee,
the court receiv'd him first for charity. dryden.
4. to practise the act of smelling.
whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall
be cut off. exad. xxx. 38.
i had a mind to know, whether they would find out the
treasure, and whether smelling enabled them to know what is
good for their nourishment. - addison's speciator.
5. to exercise sagacity.
down with the nose, take the bridge quite away,
of him that his particular to forefeild,
smells from the general weal.
sme l l. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. power of smelling; the sense of which the nose is the organ.
next, in the nostri's she doth use the son, il,
as god the breath of life in them did give :
so makes he now this pow'r in them to dwell,
to judge all airs, whereby we breathe, and live. davis,
2. scent; power of affecting the nose. -
the sweetest smell in the air is the white double violet,
which comes twice a-year. - - bacon.
all sweet smell, have joined with them some earthy or crude
odours. - bacon.
pleasant smell; are not confined unto vegetables, but found
in divers animals. brown's pulgar errours.
there is a great variety of sno, though we have but a
few names for them : the small of a violet and of musk, both
sweet, are as distinct as arv two smells. locke.
sm follf r. n.s.. [from /mol...] he who somells.
sm solf east. n.s. [jmell and joyt.j a parasite; one who
wood tables.
haunts good tabl the
24 k
shałoszare -
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 85</div><p class="text">s m i
s m i
the ant lives upon her own, honestly gotten; whereas the
hy is an intruder, and a common smelfeast that spunges upon
other people's trenchers. - l'estrange.
smelor. the preterite and participle pass of smell.
a cudgel he had felt,
and far enough on this occasion smelt. king.
smelt. n. s. [rmelz, saxon.] a small sea fish.
of round fish there are brit, sprat, barn, smelts. carew.
t, smelt. v. a. [ smalta, islandick; smelten, dutch..] to
melt ore, so as to extract the metal. -
a sort of earth, of a dusky red colour, found chiefly in
iron mines. some of this earth contains as much iron as to
render it worth smelting. jwoodward.
sme'lter. n. s. [from smelt..] one who melts oar.
the smelters come up to the assayers. woodward on fossils.
to smerk. v. a. [rmercian, saxon.] to smile wantonly.
certain gentlemen of the gown, whose aukward, spruce,
prim, sneering, and smirking countenances have got good pre-
ferment by force of cringing. swift.
smerky, or smirk. adj. nice; smart ; jaunty.
secst, how bragg yon bullock bears,
so smirk, so smooth his pricked ears:
his horns been as brade as rainbow bent,
his dew-lap as lith as lass of kent. spensor.
sme’rlin. m. s. [cobitis aculata.] a fish. ainsworth.
sm1'cket. n.s. [diminutive of smock, smocket, snicket.] the
under garment of a woman. -
t, smight. for smite.
as when a griffon, seized of his prey,
a dragon fierce encountreth in his flight,
through widest air making his idle way,
that would his rightful ravin rend away :
with hideous horror both together snight,
and souce so fore that they the heavens affray.
- fairy queen.
t, smile. v. n. [shuylen, dutch.
1. to contract the face with pleasure; to express kindness,
love, or gladness, by the countenance: contrary to frown.
the goddess of the mountain smiled upon her votaries, and
cheared them in their passage to her palace. tatler.
the finiling infant in his hand shall take,
the crested basilisk and speckled snake. pope.
she smild to see the doughty hero slain,
but, at her smile, the beau reviv'd again. pope.
but when her anxious lord return'd,
rais'd is her head; her eyes are dry'd :
she smiles, as william ne'er had mourn'd,
she looks, as mary ne'er had dy'd.
to express slight contempt by the look.
our king replied, which some will smile at now, but ac-
- prior.
2 -
cording to the learning of that time. camden.
should some more sober critick come abroad,
if wrong, i snile ; if right, i kiss the rod. pope.
'twas what i said to crags and child,
who prais'd my modesty, and snil'd. pope.
3. to look gay or joyous.
let their heirs enrich their time
with smiling plenty and fair prosp'rous days. shakespeare.
for see the morn,
unconcern'd with our unrest, begins
her rosy progress smiling. milton.
all things smil'd,
birds on the branches warbling. milton.
the river of bliss, through midst of heaven
rolls o'er elysian flow'rs her amber stream;
with these that never fade the spirits eleet
pind their resplendent locks inwreath'd with beams,
now in loose garlands thick thrown off, the bright
pavement, that like a sea of jasper shone,
impurpled with celestial roses snil'd,
the desart smil'd,
and paradise was open'd in the wild.
4. to be favourable; to be propitious.
then let me not let pass
occasion which now smiles.
me all too mean for such a task i weet,
yet if the sov’reign lady deigns to smile,
i’ll follow horace with impetuous heat,
and cloath the verse in spenser's native style.
smile. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a slight contraction of the face; a look of pleasure, or kind-
ness : opposed to f own.
i frown upon him, yet he loves me still.—
—oh that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill.
shakespeare's midsummer night's dream.
no man marks the narrow space
*twixt a prison and a smile.
to these, that sober race of men, whose lives
religious titled them the sons of god,
shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
of these fair athcists.
milton.
pope.
milton.
prior.
wotton.
milton.
sweet intercourse
of looks and smiles: for smiles from reason flow,
to brute denied, and are of love the food.
2. gay or joyous appearance.
yet what avail her unexhausted stores,
her blooming mountains and her sunny shores,
with all the gifts that heav'n and earth impart,
the smiles of nature, and the charms of art. addison,
smi'llngly. adv. [from smiling.] with a look of pleasure.
- his flaw'd heart,
*twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
burst smilingly. shakespeare's king lear,
carneades stopping him smilingly, told him, we are not so
forward to lose good company.
to smilt. v. n. [corrupted from smelt, or melt.]
having too much water, many corns will smilt, or have
their pulp turned into a substance like thick cream. mortimer.
to smirch. v. a. [from murk or murcky.] to cloud; to dusk;
to soil.
i’ll put myself in poor and mean attire,
and with a kind of umber smirch my face. shakespeare.
like the shaven hercules in the smirch worm-eaten tapestry.
shakespeare.
t, smir k. v. a. to look affectedly soft or kind.
her grizzled locks assume a smirking grace,
and art has levell'd her deep-furrow'd face.
smit. the participle passive of smite.
fir’d with the views this glitt'ring scene displays,
and smit with passion for my country's praise,
my artless reed attempts this lofty theme,
where sacred isis rolls her ancient stream.
milon,
boyle.
2%ung.
tickel,
- to smite. v. a. preterite smote ; participle pass. snit, smitten,
[rmizan, saxon; smjten, dutch.]
i. to strike; to reach with a blow.
so sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
to those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
as thy eye beams, when their fresh rays have smote
the night of dew that on my cheeks down flows. shah.
the sword of satan with steep force to smite,
descending. milton,
2. to kill; to destroy.
the servants of david had snitten of benjamin's men, so
that three hundred and threescore died. 2 sam. ii. 31.
god smote him for his errour, and he died. 2 sam. vi.
3. to afflict; to chasten. a scriptural expression.
let us not mistake god’s goodness, nor imagine, because
he smites us, that we are forsaken by him. jwake.
4. to blast.
and the flax and the barley was smitten, but the wheat and
the rye not. exodus.
5. to affect with any passion.
i wander where the muses haunt,
clear spring, or shady grove, or sunny hill,
smit with the love of sacred song. milton,
tempt not the lord thy god, he said, and stood;
but satan smitten with amazement fell. milton,
see what the charms that smite the simple heart,
not touch'd by nature, and not reach'd by art. pope.”
smit with the love of sister arts we came,
and met congenial, mingling flame with flame. pope.
to smit.e. v. n. to strike; to collide.
the heart melteth, and the knees smite together. nahum.
smiter. n.s.. [from smite.] he who smites.
i gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that
pluck off the hair. isa. l. 6.
smith. n.s. [rmso, saxon; someth, german; smid, dutch ;
from rmitan, saxon, to beat.]
1. one who forges with his hammer; one who works in metals.
he doth nothing but talk of his horse, and can shoe him.
i am afraid his mother played false with a smith. shakespeare.
lawless man, the anvil dares profane,
and forge that steel by which a man is slain:
which earth at first for plough shares did afford;
nor yet the smith had learn'd to form a sword. tate,
the ordinary qualities observable in iron, or a diamond,
that make their true complex idea, a smith or a jeweller com-
monly knows better than a philosopher. locke.
2. he that makes or effects any thing.
the doves repented, though too late,
become the smiths of their own foolish fate. dryden.
smithcraf t. n.s. [rmfocnaept, sax.] the art of a smith.
inventors of pastorage, smithcraft, and musick. raleigh.
sm1't hery. n.s.. [from smith..] the shop of a smith.
smithing. m. s. [from smith..] smithing is an art manual, by
which an irregular hump, or several lumps of iron is wrought
into an intended shape. moxon's mechanical exercist.
smithy. m. s. [rms&amp;se, saxon.] the shop of a smith.
his blazing locks sent forth a crackling sound,
and hiss'd, like red hot iron, within the smithy drown'd.
drydon.
smitt. n.s. the finest of the clayey ore, made up into balls,
they use for marking of sheep, and call it smitt. jp'oadward.
sm1tten.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 86</div><p class="text">s m o
5u'rre n. the participle passive of suite. struck; killed;
affected with passion.
how agree the kettle and the earthen pot together for if
the one be smitten against the other, it shall be broken. ecclus.
we did esteem him stricken, smitten of god and afflicted.
isa. liii. 4.
by the advantages of a good person and a pleasing conver-
sation, he made such an impression in her heart as could not
beeffaced: and he was himself no less smitten with constantia.
addison.
smod k. n. s. [rmoc, saxon.]
... the under garment of a woman; a shift.
her body covered with a light taffeta garment, so cut, as
the wrought so came through it in many places.
how do'st thou look now oh ill-starr'd wench
pale as thy sing: ' when we shall meet at compt;
this look of thine will hurl my soul from heav'n. siałos.
their apparel was linnen breeches, and over that a snock
close girt unto them with a towel.
though artemisia talks by fits,
of councils, classicks, fathers, wits;
reads malbranche, boyle, and locke:
yet in some things, methinks, she fails,
'twere well, if the would pair her nails,
and wear a cleaner smock. swisł.
1. smock is used in a judicrous kind of composition for any thing
relating to women.
at snack-treason, matron, i believe you ;
and if i were your husband; but when i
trust to your cob-web bosoms any other,
let me there die a fly, and feast von spider.
plague on his smock loyalty
i hate to see a brave bold fellow sotted, -
made sour and senseless, turn'd to whey by love. try?en.
stocky ace d. ad;... [smock and face..] palefaced; maidenly.
old chiefs reflecting on their former deeds,
disdain to rust with batter'd invalids;
but actve in the foremost ranks appear,
and leave young smocłfac’d beaux to guard the rear. fonton.
smoke. m. s. sys-mwo, weish ; runec, ronoec, saxon, smoock,
dutch..] the visible effluvium, or sooty exhalation from
any thing burning. -
she might utter out some smoke of those flames where with
sidney.
sandy.
ben. johnson.
else she was not only burned, out mothered. sidney.
stand off, and let me take the air,
why should the smok. p.rsue the 'ar cleaveland.
he knew tears caused by more, but not by flame. cowley.
all involv'd with stench and smoke. 41ston.
as shake that rises from the kindling fires,
is seen this moment, and the next expires. prior.
smoke passing through flame cannot but grow red hot, and
red hot smoke can appear no other than flame. newton.
t, smok e. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to emit a dark exhalation by heat.
when the sun went down, a smoking furnace and a burn-
ing lamp passed between those pieces.
gen. xv. 17.
his brandish’d steel,
which snook'd with bloody execution. shakespeare.
to him no temple stood nor altar sinck'd. milton.
for venus, cytherea was invok'd,
altars for pallas to athena smok'd. granville.
2. to burn; to be kindled. a scriptural term.
the anger of the lord shall smoak against that man. deut.
3. to move with such swiftness as to kindle; to move very fast
so as to raise dust like smoke.
aventinus drives his chariot round ;
proud of his steeds he smoke, along the field;
is father's hydra fills the ample shield.
with hasty hand the ruling reins he drew,
he lash'd the coursers, and the coursers flew ;
beneath the bending yoke alike they held
dryden's aen.
their equal pace, and smoak'd along the field. pope,
4. to smell, or hunt out.
he hither came t'observe and snake
what courses othcr riskers took. hudibras.
i began to smoke that they were a parcel of mummers, and
wondered that none of the middlesex justices took care to lay
some of them by the heels. addison's freeholder.
5. to use tobacco.
t. to suffer; to be punished.
maugre all the world will i keep safe,
or some of you shall snake for it in rome.
to smoke. v. a.
1. to scent by smoke; to medicate by smoke, or dry in smoke.
frictions of the back-bone-with flannel, sinoaked with pene-
trating aromatical substances, have proved effectual. arbuthnot.
2. to smell out; to find out.
he was first sno'd by the old lord; when his disguise and
he is parted, what a sprat you shall find him : shakespeare.
tom tattle pass for an impertinent, and will. trippet
begins to be food, in case i continue this paper. addis. spee!.
3. to sace: ; to ridicule to the face.
skałespeare.
smoke the fellow there.
to smoko-dry. v. 4. [smoke and dry.] to dry by smoke.
smoke-dry the fruit, but not if you pl -
smo'ker. *s [from ho you plant them, martimer,
1. one that dries or perfumes by smoke,
2. one that uses tobacco.
smokeless. adj. [from smoke.]
tenants with fighs the smo
and turn th' unwillin
congreve;
having no smoke.
*eks tow’rs survey,
g steed another way. y?
smo ky. adj. [from smoke.] pope,
1. emitting smoke; fumid.
victorious to the top aspires,
involving all the wood in smoky fires.
2. having the appearance or nature of smoke, dryden,
london appears in a morning drowned in a
and all the day after smothered with smoky fo
quence whereof proves very offensive to the lun
if blast septentrional with brushing wings
sweep up the smoky mists, and vapours damp,
then woe to mortals.
black cloud,
g, the conse-
gs. harvey.
3. noisome with smoke. philipt.
o he's as tedious
as a tir’d horse, or as a railing wife,
worse than a smoky house. shakespeare:
courtesy
is sooner found in lowly sheds,
with snoy rafters, than in tap'stry halls -
and courts of princes. milton.
morpheus, the humble god, that dwells
in cottages and smoky cells,
hates golded roofs and beds of down;
and though he fears no prince's frown, ;
flics from the circle of a crown. denham.
smoot h. irmes, rinoes, saxon; mayth, welsh.]
1. even on the surface; not rough ; level; having no asperities.
behold esau my brother is a hairy man, and i am a smooth
man. ... gen. xxvii. 1 1,
missing thee, i walk unseen,
on the dry smooth-shaven green,
to behold the wandring moon, -
riding near her highest noon. milton.
the outlines must be smooth, imperceptible to the touch,
and even without eminences or cavities. dryden.
nor box nor limes, without their use,
smooth-grain'd, and proper for the turner's trade:
which curious hands may carve, and steel with ease invade.
dryden.
2. evenly spread; glossy.
he for the promis'd journey bids prepare
the smooth-hair’d horses, and the rapid car. pope.
3. equal in pace; without starts or obstruction.
by the hand he took me rais'd,
and over fields and waters, as in air,
smooth-sliding without step. milton.
the fair-hair’d queen of love
descends smooth-gliding from the courts above. pope.
4. gently flowing.
smooth adonis from his rock
ran purple to the sea. milton.
5. voluble; not harsh; soft.
when sage minerva rose, -
from her sweet lips smooth elocution flows: gay.
so, dick adept, tuck back thy hair;
and i will pour into thy ear
remarks, which none did e'er disclose,
in smooth-pac’d verse or hobling prose. prior.
6. bland; mild ; adulatory.
the subtle fiend,
though inly stung with anger and disdain,
dissembled, and this answer smooth return'd. milt. par. reg.
this smooth discourse and mild behaviour oft
conceal a traitor. addison.
he was smooth-tongued, gave good words, and seldom lost
his temper. arbuthnot's hist. of john bull.
the madding monarchs to compose -
the pylian prince, the smooth speech'd nestor, rose. tickel.
to smoot h. v. a. [from the adjective.]
i. to level; to make even on the surface.
the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that
smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil. isa. xli.
smiling she seem’d, and full of pleasing thought,
from ocean as she first began to rise,
and smooth'd the ruffled seas, and clear'd the skies. dryden.
now on the wings of winds our course we keep ;
the god hath smooth'd the waters of the deep. pope's odys.
2. to work into a soft uniform mass.
it brings up again into the mouth that which it had swal-
lowed, and chewing it, grinds and smooths it, and afterwards
swallows it into another stomach. ray on the creation.
3. to make easy; to rid from obstructions.
thou, abelard the last sad office pay,
and smooth my passage to the realms of day. pope.
4. te
2
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 87</div><p class="text">s m u.
- • . . . . . . . . ." - " -
4. to make flowing; to free from harshness. ... to
so smooths her charming tones. . . . . . . . . .” --
lull with amelia's liquid name the nine, . . . .
- pope.
5. to palliate; to soften, , , -
* ...".
in their motions harmony divine, …, a, , ... . .
* -k milton,
all your mus's softer art display, , , . . . . . .
let carolina smooth the tuneful lay; - --
and sweetly flow through all the royal line. “
had it been a stranger, not my child, . . . . -
to smooth his fault, i would have been more mild. shakes?.
6. to calm ; to mollify. . . . . - -
now breathe we, lords; good fortune bids us pause,
and smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks. shakes?.
each perturbation smooth'd with outward calm. milton.
7. to ease. *...*.*. o, -
restor'd it soon will be; the means prepar’d,
the difficulty smooth'd, the danger shar'd :
be but yourself.
8. to flatter 5 to soften with blandishments.
... because i cannot flatter and look fair,
smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and eog,
duck with french nods, and apish courtesy,
i must be held a rancorous enemy.
this man's a flatt’rer if one be,
so are they all; for every greeze of fortune
is smooth'd by that below. shakespeare.
to smo'oth e.n. v. a. [a bad word among mechanicks for
smooth.] to make even and smooth.
with edged grooving tools they cut down and smoothen the
extuberances ieft. moxon's mech. exer.
s.moor hf ace d. adj. [snooth and face.] mild looking; having
a soft air. -
o, shall i say i thank you, gentle wife 2
—not so, my lord; a twelve-month and a day,
i'll mark no words that smoothfac’d woers say. shakespeare.
let their heirs
enrich their time to come with smoothfac'd peace,
with smiling plenty, and fair prosp'rous days. shak. r. iii.
smo'ot hly. adv. [from smooth.] o
1. not roughly ; evenly. -
2. with even glide.
the musick of that murm'ring spring
is not so mournful as the strains you sing;
nor rivers winding through the vales below
so sweetly warble, or so smoothly flow.
3. without obstruction; easily; readily.
had joshua been mindful, the fraud of the gibeonites could
not so smoothly have past unespied, 'till there was no help. hook.
4. with soft and bland language.
smo'oth ness. n.s.. [from smooth.]
1. evenness on the surface; freedom from asperity.
a countryman feeding his flock by the seaside, it was so de-
licate a fine day, that the smoothness of the water tempted him
to set up for a merchant. l'estrange.
the nymph is all into a laurel gone,
dryden,
shakspeare.
pope.
the smoothness of her skin remains alone. dryden.
2. softness or mildness on the palate. - -
fallacious drink ye honest men beware,
nor trust its smoothnes; ; the third circling glass
suffices virtue. - philips.
3. sweetness and softness of numbers.
as french has more fineness and smoothnes; at this time, so
it had more compass, spirit, and force in montaigne's age.
temple.
virgil, though smooth, where smoothness is required, is so
far from affecting it, that he rather disdains it; frequently
using synalephas, and concluding his sense in the middle of his
verse. - dryden,
4. blandness and gentleness of speech.
she is too subtle for thee; and her smoothness,
her very silence, and her patience,
speak to the people, and they pity her. shakespeare.
smore. the preterite of smite. -
death with a trident snote. milton.
to smoor her. v. a. [rmonan, saxon.]
1. to suffocate with smoke, or by exclusion of the air.
she might give passage to her thoughts, and so as it were
utter out some smoke of those flames, wherewith else she was
, not only burned but snothered. *
we smother'd * * * *
the most replenished sweet work of nature,
that from the prime creation e'er she fram’d. shakspeare.
we are enow yet living in the field,
to smother up the english in our throngs. shakesp. hen. v.
the helpless traveller, with wild surprise, ;
--&gt;
sees the dry desart all around him rise,
- and snother'd in the dusty whirlwind dies. addison's cato.
2. to suppress.
lewd and wicked custom, beginning perhaps at the first
amongst few, afterwards spreading into greater multitudes,
and so continuing; from time may be of force, even in plain
things, to smother the light of natural understanding. hooker.
sidney. -
she was warmed with the graceful appearance of the hero:
she smothered those sparkles out of decency, but conversation
blew them up into a flame. dryden's on. dedication,
smo‘ther. m. s. [from the verb.] .
1. a state of suppression. not in use. -
this unfortunate prince, after a long smother of discontent,
and hatred of many of his nobility and people, breaking forth
at times into seditions, was at last distressed by them. ason,
a man were better relate himself to a statue, than suffer his
thoughts to pass in smother. - ---- ... bacon.
nothing makes a man suspect much, more than to know
little ; and therefore men should procure to know more, and
not to keep their suspicions in smother. bacon's essays,
2. smoke; thick dusk. . -
thus must i from the smoke into the snother, -
from tyrant duke into a tyrant brother. shakespeare,
where yon disorder'd heap of ruin lies, -
stones rent from stones, where clouds of dust arise,
amid’ that smother neptune holds his place. dryd. æn.
the greater part enter only like mutes to fill the stage, and
spend their taper in smoke and smother. collier on fame,
to smo‘ther. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to smoke without vent.
hay and straw have a very low degree of heat; but yet close
and southering, and which drieth not. bacon's nat. history.
2. to be suppressed or kept close. -
the advantage of conversation is such, that, for want of
company, a man had better talk to a post than let his thoughts
lie smoking and sm thering. collier of friendship.
smo'uldering. u [this word seems a participle; but i know
smo‘uldry. ; not whether the verb smoulder be in use:
rmozan, saxon, to smother; smoel, dutch, hot...] burning
and smoking without vent. -
none can breathe, nor see, nor hear at will,
through smouldry cloud of duskish stinking smoke, -
that th' only breath him daunts who hath escap'd the
stroke. fairy qutin.
in some close pent room it crept along, -
and, smould'ring as it went, in silence fed;
'till th’infant monster, with devouring strong,
walk'd boldly upright with exalted head. dryden.
smug. adj, [smuck, dress ; smucken, to dress, dutch..] nice;
spruce; dressed with affectation of niceness, but without ele.
gance.
there i have a bankrupt for a prodigal, who dares scarce
shew his head on the rialto; a beggar, that used to come sa
jmug upon the mart. shak. merchant of venice.
he who can make your visage less horrid, and your person
more smug, is worthy some good reception. sprelator.
to smug. v. a. to adorn; to spruce.
my men,
in cince's house, were all, in severall baine
studiously sweetn'd, smug'd with oile, and deckt
with in and outweeds. - chapman.
to smu'ggle. v. a. [smockelen, dutch..] to import or
export goods without paying the customs.
smuggler. m. s. [from smuggle.] a wretch, who, in defiance
of justice and the laws, imports or exports goods either con-
traband or without payment of the customs.
smu'gly...adv. [from smug.] . neatly; sprucely.
lilies and roses will quickly appear,
and her face will look wond’rous smugly.
smu'gness. m. s. [from snug.] spruceness; neatness.
smut. n.s...[rmreza, saxon; smette, dutch..]
1. a spot made with soot or coal.
2. must or blackness gathered on corn; mildew.
farmers have suffered by smutty wheat, when such wil
not sell for above five shillings a bushel ; whereas that which
is free from smut will sell for ten. 44artimer's husbandry.
3. obscenity.
to smut. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to stain; to mark with soot or coal.
he is far from being smitted with the soil of atheism. more.
. a fuller had invitation from a collier to live with him: he
gave him a thousand thanks; but, says he, as fast as i make
any thing clean, you’ll be snutting it again. l’estrange.
the inside is so snutted with dust and smoke, that neither
the marble, filver, nor brass works shew themselves. addison.
i am wonderfully pleased to see my tenants play their inno-
gay,
cent tricks, and snutting one another. addison.
2. to taint with mildew.
mildew falleth upon corn, and snutteth it. bacon.
to smut. v. n. to gather must.
white red-eared wheat is good for clays, and bears a very
good crop, and seldom smits. alzortimer.
to sm utch. v. a. [from smut.] to black with smoke.
have you seen but a bright lily grow,
before rude hands have touch'd it 3
ha’ you mark'd but the fall o' the snow,
before the soil hath smuth'd it
smu’t tily, adv. [from smarty.]
1. blackly; smokily,
*
ben. johnson’s underwood.
2. obscenely.
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 88</div><p class="text">s n a
s n a
2. obscenely.
mu't rises: n. s. [from snutty.]
soil from smoke. -
my vines and peaches, upon my best south walls, were apt
to a foot or snuttinos, upon their leaves and upon their fruits,
which were good for nothing. temple.
2. obscenenes.
suu'rty. 44); [from snut.]
black with smoke or coal.
1. the snutty grain,
with sudden blaze diffus'd; inflames the air. milton.
the smutty wainscot full of cracks. swift.
he was a smutty dog yesterday, and cost me near two hours
to wash the ink off his face. pope.
tainted with mildew.
'smutty corn will sell dearer at one time than the clean at
another. locke.
obscene; not modest.
the place is a censure of a profane and snutty passage in the
old batchelor. collier.
snack, n.s. [foomshatch..] a share ; a part taken by compact.
if the master gets the better on't, they come in for their
k. l'estrange.
sa. for four times talking, if one piece thou take, 3/trang
that must be cantled, and the judge go snack. dryden.
all my demurs but double his attacks;
at last he whispers, “do, and we go snacks.” pope.
snacot. n.s. saeus, lat.] a fish. ainsworth.
sna‘ffle. m. s. [snavel, dutch, the nose..] a bridle which
crosses the nose. .
the third o' th' world is your's, which with a snaffe
you may pace easy; but not such a wife. shakespeare.
sooth him with praise;
this, from his weaning, let him well be taught,
and then betimes in a soft snaffe wrought. dryden's georg.
1. sna‘ffle. v. a. [from the noun..] to bridle; to hold in a
bridle; to hold , to manage.
snag. n.s. [of this word i know not the etymology or ori-
ginal.]
i. a jag, or sharp protuberance.
the one her other leg had lame,
which with a staff, all full of little snags,
she did disport, and impotence her uanic.
the coat of arms,
now on a naked snag in triumph born,
was hung on high.
3.
fairy queen;
dryden's aen.
2. a tooth left by itself, or standing beyond the rest; a tooth, in
contempt.
in china none hold women sweet,
except their snags are black as jet:
king chihu put nine queens to death,
convict on statute, iv'ry teeth. prior.
sna‘gged. {"; [from snag.j. full of snags; full of sharp
snaggy. protuberances; shooting into sharp points.
his stalking steps are stay'd
upon a snaggy oak, which he had torn
out of his mother's bowels, and it made
his mortal mace, where with his foemen he dismay’d. spens.
naked men belabouring one another with snagged sticks, or
dully falling together by the ears at fifty-cuffs. more.
sna.il. n. s. [rnool, saxon; snogel, dutch.]
1. a slimy animal which creeps on plants, some with shells on
their backs; the emblem of flowness.
i can tell why a snail has a house.—why ?—why, to put's
head in; not to give it away to his daughters, and leave his
horns without a case. shakesp. king lear.
fearful commenting
is leaden servitor to dull delay ;
delay leads impotent and snail-pac'd beggary. shak. r. iii.
the patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder:
snail "ow in profit, but he sleeps by day
more than the wild cat. shakespeare.
seeing the snail, which every where doth roam,
carrying his own house still, still is at home,
follow, for he is easy-pac'd, this snail
be thine own palace, or the world's thy gaol. donne.
there may be as many ranks of beings in the invisible
world superior to us, as we ourselves are superior to all the
ranks of being beneath us in this visible world, even though
we descend below the snail and the oyster. hatti,
2. a name given to a drone from the slow motion of a snail.
why prat'st thou to thyself, and answer'st not :
dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot! shak.
ssatl-clay er, or snail-irofti, n. j. [trifolium, lat.] . an
herb. ainsworth.
snake.. n.s. [rnaca, saxon; soake, dutch..] a serpent of the
oviparous kind, distinguished from a viper. the snake's bite
is harmless. snake in poetry is a general name for a serpent.
glo'ster's shew beguiles him;
as the snake, roll'd in a flow'ry bank,
with shining checker'd slough, doth sting a child,
to: for the beauty thinks it excellent. shaos”. hon. vi.
ol. ii.
sna‘keroor. n.s.. [shai, and ,
sna‘ky, adj. [from snake.] -
1. serpentine; belonging to a snake; resembling a snake.
*** scotch'd the shał, not kill's it:
; *** *nd be hesis, whila or poor malice . .
#. in danger of her former teeth. shakesp. macbeth.
lidi p***ust have their outlines in waves, resembling the
3.s of a snake upon the ground: they must be smooth and
- • * -- - den's dufresnoy.
t nor chalk, nor crumbling stones, aft: ofzs. y
hat work in hollow earth their winding tracks. dryden,
- - - - oat.] a speci -
growing in virginia and c...] pecies of birthwort
sna‘keshead iris. n.s. [*dadolus, latin.] a plant.
th; characters are: it hath a lily-shapjoh
leaf, shaped exactly like an iris; §: o: d o:
divided into two or three dugs, like oblong bulbs." min.
sna'oeweed, or bishort. n.f shiftoria, las
sna'kewood. n.s. [from snake and wood.j in..] a plant.
what we call snakewood is properly the shaller branches of
the root of a tall strait tree rowing in the island of timor;
and other parts of the east. f has no remarkable smell; but
is of an intensely bitter taste. the indians are of opinion
that it is a certain remedy for the bite of the hooded serpent,
and from thence its name of lignum colubrinum, or snairo.
we very seldom use it. hill's mat. med.
venomous tongue, tipt with vile adder's sting,
of that self kind with which the furies fell
their shaky heads do comb. spensar.
the crooked arms meander bow’d with his foshalyaded,
resign'd for conduct the choice youth of all their mortal
brood. chapmans
the true lovers knot had its original from nodus hercula-
neus, or hercules's knot, resembling the shaky complication in
the caduceus, or rod of hermes. brown's vulgar errours.
so to the coast of jordan he directs -
his easy steps, girded with shaky wiles. milton's par. rog.
2. having serpents.
look, look unto this shaky rod,
and stop your ears against the charming god. ben. johnson.
in his hand
he took caduceus, his shaky wand. hubberd's tale,
what was that snaky-headed gorgon shield
that wise minerva wore, unconquer’d virgin,
wherewith she freez'd her foes to congeal’d stone? milton.
... his flying hat was fasten’d on his head;
wings on his heels were hung, and in his hand
he holds the virtue of the snaky wand. dryden.
to snap. v. a. [the same with inap.]
1. to break at once; to break short.
if the chain of necessity be no stronger, but that it may be
snapped so easily in sunder; if his will was no otherwise deter-
mined from without himself, but only by the fignification of
your desire, and my modest intreaty, then we may conclude,
human affairs are not always governed by absolute necessity.
! . bramb. against hobbes.
light is broken like a body, as when 'tis snapped in pieces
by a tougher body. digby.
dauntless as death, away he walks;
breaks the doors open, snaps the locks ;
searches the parlour, chamber, study,
nor stops 'till he has culprit's body. prior;
2. to strike with a knacking noise, or sharp sound.
the bowzy fire
first shook from out his pipe the seeds of fire,
then snapt his box. dunciad:
3. to bite. -
a gentleman passing by a coach, one of the horses snapt off
the end of his finger. wiseman's surgery.
all mungrel curs bawl, snarl, and snap, where the foe flies
before him. l’estrange.
a notion generally received, that a lion is dangerous to all
women who are not virgins, may have given occasion to a
foolish report, that my lion's jaws are so contrived as to snap
the hands of any of the female sex, who are not thus quali-
fied. addison's spectator.
he shaps deceitful air with empty jaws,
the subtle hare darts swift beneath his paws. gay.
4. to catch suddenly and unexpectedly.
sir richard graham tells the marquis he would snap one of
the kids, and make some shift to carry him close to their
lodgings. wotto
some with a noise and greasy light
are snapt, as men catch larks at night. .. butler.
you should have thought of this before you was taken; for
now you are in no danger to be snapt finging again. l’esir.
did i not see you, rascal, did i not
when you lay snug to snap young damon's goat? dryden.
belated seem on watch to lie, -
and snap some cully passing by. swift.
5. [snappen, dutch..] to treat with sharp language.
capoch'd your rabbins of the synod, -
and snapp'd their canons with a why not. audibras.
- 24 l a surly
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 89</div><p class="text">s n a
's na
a surly ill-bred lord
that chides and snaps her up at every word. * *
to snap. v. n. o es. a -
1. to break short; to fall asunder; to break without bend-
- . 1119, - to . . . . - - -
g .note the ship's sicknesses, the mast
shak’d with an ague, and the hold and waist
. . with a salt dropsy clogg’d; and our tacklings
-, snapping, like to too high stretch'd treble strings. donne.
- the backbone is divided into so many vertebres for com-
modious bending, and not one intire rigid bone, which, being
of that length, would have been often in danger of shapping in
sunder. . . . . . - -
if your steel be too hard, that is, too brittle, if it be a
spring, it will not bow ; but with the least bending it will
snap asunder. * *
* the makers of these needles should give them a due tem-
. . per; for if they are too soft, they will bend; and if they are
3. too brittle, they snap. - - * sharp's surgery.
2. to make an effort to bite with eagerness... . . .
. . . . if the young dace be a bait for the old pike, i see no reason
... but i may snap at him. . . . shakesp. henry iv.
*... we snap at the bait without ever dreaming of the hook
granville.
… "
4-
- *** *
that goes along with it. * i’estrange.
... . . . . 'towzer snaps. * * * &amp;
at people's heels with frothy chaps. swift.
snap. n.s.. [from the verb.] -- - -
.i. the act of breaking with a quick motion, “”
.2. a greedy fellow. . . . . . . .” - - - - - - - - -
... -. he had no sooner said out his say, but up rises a cunning
... snap, then at the board. l’estrange.
3. a quick eager bite. . . . . . . . . . . ."
with their bills, thwarted crosswise at the end, they would
… cut an apple in two at one snap. ' ' - - - - - - carew.
4. a catch ; a theft. . . . " , i.
sna‘pdragon, or calf's snout. m. s. -[antirrhinum, latin.]
1. a plant. - . . . .
2. a kind of play, in which brandy is set on fire, and raisins
... thrown into it, which those who are unused to the sport are
afraid to take out; but which may be safely snatched by a quick
... motion, and put blazing into the mouth, which being closed,
the fire is at once extinguished. . - -
sna/pper... n.s.. [from snap.] one who snaps.…
my father named me autolicus, being letter'd under mer-
cury; who, as i am, was likewise a snapper up of unconsi-
der'd trifles, - shakesp. //inter's tale.
snappish. adj. [from snap.] : “... ". . . .
1. eager to bite. - . . . " " — . . -
the snappish cur, the passenger's annoy, a
... . . close at my heel with yelping treble flies. swift.
-,2: they lived in the temple; but were such snappish curs, that
... they frighted away most of the votaries. o "spectator.
2. peewish; sharp in reply. -
sna‘ppis h ly. adv. [from snappish.] peevishly ; tartly.
sna‘ppis hnbss. n.s.. [from snappish..] peevishness; tartness.
sna‘ps ack, n.s.. [snappsack, swedish.]. a soldier's bag; more
- usually knapsack. . . . . .
snare. m. s. [shara, swedish and islandick; snare, danish;
::, ro
floor, dutch..] . . ... ." . . - - - - - - -
1. anything set to catch an animal; a gin ; a net; a noose.
...to opoor hapless nightingale, thought i, , oo i
how sweet thousing'st, how near the deadly share / milton.
2. anything by which one is intrapped or intangled.
this i speak for your own profit, not that i may cast a
snare upon you. o: , , , 1 cor. vii. 35.
a fool's mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the share
of his soul. ~ 3 - … . . . . . . . prov. xviii. 7.
. . . propound to thyself a constant rule of living, which, though
to it may not be fit to observe scrupulously, lest it become a share
... to thy conscience, or endanger thy health, yet let not thy rule
... be broken. . . . . . . . . . . . … taylor's rule of living holy.
... . . for thee ordain’d a help, became thy snare, ' , "milton.
:, ; 2 - beauty,’ wealth, and wit, ... . . , a. o. t
... and prowess, to the pow'r of love submit;
the spreading share for all mankind is laid,
and lovers all betray, or are betray'd. dryden.
to snare. v. a- [from the noun.j. to intrap; to intangle ;
to catch in a noose. - - - - - - 'i -
- - glooster’s shew-i.: ....."
* - -
* beguiles him, as the mournful crocodile v. -
.*. with sorrow snares relenting passengers. shakesp. h. vi.
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. ps, ix.
- warn all creatures from thee,
:: . . henceforth, left that too heav'nly form, pretended
. . to hellish falsehood, snare them. milton's paradise lost.
to snarl. v. m. [sharren, dutch..] - • *.
1. to growl as an angry animal; to gnarre.
what! were you sharling all before i came,
. . . ready to catch each other by the throat, . . . . . .
and turn you all your hatred, now on me?" . . . . .
* * 2... ... .…shakespeare's richard iii.
- - *
~~~ * * * * -
-o-o: * * * * * *
* . . - -
ray on the creation.
moxon's mech. exer. . . "
he is born with teeth - . . . -"
and so i was ; which plainly fignify'd : ". ; : -
that i should snarl, and bite, and play the dog. soo. h. vi.
now, for the bare-pick’d bone of majesty, * - - - -
doth dogged war bristle his angry crest,
and shalseth in the gentle eyes of peace. shakesp. 1. j.n.
the she's even of the savage herd are safe: -
all, when they snarl or bite, have no return
but courtship from the male. " " dryden's don seloftioh,
an angry cur -
snarls while he feeds." drydei and lee's oodioui.
2. to speak roughly ; to talk in rude terms. -
'tis malicious and unmanly to snarl at the little lapses of a
pen, from which virgil himself stands not exempted. dryan.
the honest farmer and his wife, - - - -
two years declin’d from prime of life, - -
- had struggled with the marriage-noose, . . .
as almost ev'ry couple does: . . . - - - -
“sometimes my plague sometimes my darling !
kiffing to-day, to-morrow snarling. - prior.
where hast thou been snarling odious truths, and entertain.
ing company with discourse of their diseases ** congreve.
to snarl. v. a. to intangle; to embarrass. i know not
that this sense is well authorised. . . . "
* , confused snarled consciences render it difficult to pull out
thread by thread. " . . . decay of piety.
sna‘rler. m. s... [from snarl.] one who snarls; a growling,
furly, quarrelsome, insulting fellow.'
... should stupid libels grieve your mind, '4
you soon a remedy may find;. - -
- lie down obscure, like other folks,
… below the lash of snarlers jokes.
sna‘ry. adj. [from share.] intangling; infidious.
spiders in the vault their snary webs have spread. drydon.
snast. n.s. the snuff of a candle. ,
- it first burned fair, 'till some part of the candle was com-
sumed, and the sawdust gathering about the snas ; but then it
made the shaft big and long, and burn duskishly, and the candle
wasted in half the time of the wax pure. bacon.
to snatch. v. a. s. snacken, dutch..] - - -
1. to seize any thing hastily. - - - - -
a virtuous mind should rather wish to depart this world
with a kind of treatable dissolution, than to be suddenly cut off
in a moment; rather to be taken than snatched away from the
face of the earth. to hozir,
death, milio
- f
to.
swift,
* - so snatch'd, will not exempt us from the pain.
life's stream hurries all too fast:
in vain sedate reflections we would make, -
when half our knowledge we must snatch, not take. pope,
she snatch'd a sheet of thule from her bed: - -
sudden she flies, and whelms it o'er the pyre; *
o' down sink the flames. -- pope's danciad.
they, sailing down the stream,
are snatch'd immediate by the quick-eye’d trout
or darting salmon. . . . . . thomson's sammer.
2. to transport or carry suddenly. -
"he had scarce performed any part of the office of a bishop
in the diocese of london, when he was snatched from thence,
and promoted to canterbury. clarendon.
oh nature - -
inrich me with the knowledge of thy works, -
snatch me to heaven. thomson's autumn.
to snatch. v. n. to bite, or catch eagerly at something.
… ', lords will not let me: if i had a monopoly of fool, they
would have part on't ; nay, the ladies too will be snatching.
- shakesp. king lear.
he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry. is. ix. 20.
lycus, swifter of his feet,
runs, doubles, winds and turns, amidst the war;
springs to the walls, and leaves his foes behind,
and snatches at the beam he first can find... dryden's an.
snatch. m. s. [from the verb.] to . . . .
1. a hasty catch.… . . . . . . .
2. a short fit of vigorous action. * * * *
after a shower to weeding a snatch ;
more easily weed with the root to dispatch.
3. a small part of any thing; a broken part.
- she chaunted sndtches of old tunes,
as one incapable of her own distress. shakes. hamlet.
. in this work attempts will exceed performances, it being
composed by snatches of time, as medical vacations would
... permit. " or of . brown's pulgar errouri,
4. a broken or interrupted aation; a short fit.
- the snatches in his voice,
and burst of speaking, were as his. shakesp. cymbeline.
they move by fits and snatches; so that it is not conceivable
how they conduce unto a motion, which, by reason of its per-
petuity, must be regular and equal. j2.714, ms's daeda'us.
we have often little snatches of sunshine and fair weather
in the most uncomfortable parts of the year. spolator.
• * * *
* * * * * *
tor.
5. a
i. s.
swf
* ,
l, ..
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 90</div><p class="text">: s n e
. a quip; a shuffling answer. - * -- * -
* "come, leave your snatches, yield me a direa answer. shai.
ssa’rch er. n: s (from snatch..] one that snatches, or takes
anything in hate: ** -
they of those marches
shall be a wall sufficient to defend
our inland from the pilfering borderers. * -
—we do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
but fear the main intendment of the scot. shosh. h. v.
sorchiscly adv. [from snatching..] hastily; with inter-
uption. -
no. v. n. irnican, saxon ; shige, danish.]
1. to creep slily; to come or go as if afraid to be seen.
once the eagle, england, being in prey,
to her unguarded nest the weazel, scot,
comes sneaking, and so sucks her princely eggs. shakespeare.
sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you
must have a word anon: lay hold on him. shakespeare.
discover'd, and defeated of your prey,
you skulk'd behind the fence, and sneas'd away. pryden.
i ought not to turn my back, and to sneak off in filence,
and leave the truth to lie baffled, bleeding, and slain. --j/atts.
- he sneas'd into the grave,
a monarch's half and half a harlot's slave.
are you all ready? here's your musick here:
author, sneak off; we'll tickie you, my dear. moore.
1. to behave with meanness and servility; to crouch ; to
truckle. -
i need salute no great man's threshold, sneak to none of his
fiends to speak a good word for me to my conscience. south.
nothing can support minds drooping and sneaking, and in-
wardly reproaching them, from a sense of their own guilt, but
to see others as bad. south's sermons.
when int'rest calls off all her sneaking train,
when all th’ oblig'd desert, and all the vain,
she waits, or to the scaffold, or the cell,
when the lastling ring friend has bid farewel. . . . pope.
torn struts a soldier, open, bold, and brave;
will sneaks a scriv'ner, an exceeding knave. . . .
sneaker. n.s. a small vessel of drink. ". . . . .
i have just left the right worshipful and his myrmidons about
* -- *
-
dunciad.
pope.
a sneaker of five gallons. - spectator.
sneaking. participial adj. [from sneak.
1. servile; mean ; low. -- . *
when the smart dialogue grows rich, -
with sneaking dog and ugly bitch. rowe,
2. covetous; niggardly; meanly parcimonious. .
sne. aki ngly. adu. [from sneaking.]
1. meanly; serviley. -
do all things like a man, not sneakingly:
think the king sees thee still.
while you sneakingy submit,
and beg our pardon at our feet,
discouragd by your guilty fears
to hope for quarter for your ears.
2. in a covetous manner.
sneaking n ess. m. s. [from sneaking.]
1. niggardliness. .
2. meanness; p tifulness. -
sne'akup. m. s. [from sneak.] a cowardly, creeping, insi-
dious scoundrel. obsolete. -- " -
the prince is a jack, a sneakup; and, if he were here, i
would cudgel him like a dog, if he would say so. shak. h. iv.
to sneap. v. a. [this word seems a corruption of snib, or of
sno, to reprimand. perhaps snap is in that sense from snib,
jhibit, danish. *
: , 'vi
i
hrist.
- -
- - -----
-
men shuide him sible bitterly. chaucer.]
1. to reprimand 3 to check. o . . . . .
2. to nip. - - -- . . .
what may • - -
breed upon our absence, may there blow
no sneasing winds at home. shakespeare.
sneap. m. s. (from the verb.] a reprimand ; a check. 2
my lord, i will not undergo this sheap without reply: you
call honourable boldness impudent sauciness: if a man will
court’sy and say nothing, he is virtuous. shakesp. henry iv.
t. sneb. v. a. [properly to snib. see sneap..] to check;
to chide; to reprimand. - - -- . .
which made this foolish briar wax so bold, , , ;
that on a time he cast him to scold, * * }
and snoble the good oak, for he was old. spensor.
sneer. v. n. [this word is apparently of the same family
with shore and fort.) - - : * ~ *
1. to show contempt by looks: mas suspendere adwica. ~ : - -
2. to infinuate contempt by covert expresions. -
the wolf was by, and the fox in a sneering way advised him
not to irritate a prince against his subjects. in l’estrange.
i could be content to be a little sneered at in a line, for the
s:ke of the pleasure i should have in reading the rest. pope.
if there has been any thing expressed with too much seve-
fity, it will fall upon those fneering or daring writers of the
****gainst religion, who have left reason and decency. joats.
*
s. n i
3. to utter with grimace. . .
i have not been sneering fu
at a little tawdry whore.”-
4. to show aukward mirth.
i had no power over one muscle in their faces th -
* -- re- - - - ir faces, though th
sheered at every word spoken by each other. : “ *}.
- isome lies, and nauseous flattery;
congreve.
sneer. n.f. [from the verb.]
1. a look of contemptuous ridicule. - -
“... did not the sneer of more impartial men - " ' ' '
at sense and virtue, balance all agen. pope
2. an expression of ludicrous scorn. pope.
... ."...on them.
- guite neither the wisdom of the one nor the
majesty of the other could secure them from a sneer. walt;.
so o: n, s [from shorl he that sneers or shows con-
empt. o. - - - - - -- - - -
to sneeze. v. m. snieran, saxon; nigson, dutch..] to emit
wind audibly by the nose. . - . . . . . . .
if one be about to sneeze, rubbing the eyes till tears run
will provent it; for that the humour descending to the nostrils
is diverted to the eyes. - bacon.
if the pain be more intense and deeper within amongst the
membranes, there will be an itching in the palate and nostrils,
with frequent sneezing. o -//seman's surgery.
to thee cupid sneez’d aloud;… • * : * * * *
and every lucky omen sent before; " - “..." l
to meet the landing on the spartan shore. - bod”.
if any thing oppress the head, it hath a power to free itself
by sneezing. - - - * ray on the creation.
: violent sneezing produceth convulsions in all the muscles of
respiration: so great an alteration can be produced only by
the tickling of a feather; and if the action of sheezing should
: be continued by some very acrid substance, it will produce
headach, universal convulsions, fever, and death. a bathhot.
an officer put the sharp end of his half-pike a good way up
into my nostril, which tickled my nose like a straw, and made
me sneeze violently. * * * * * * * *-*... • * - swift.
snerze. n.s. [from the verb.] emission of wind audibly by
the nose. - . . . . . . . * * * *
i heard the rack … ;- - * * . .
as earth and sky would mingle; but “ . . . * *
these flaws, though mortals fear them -
. as dangerous to the pillar'd frame of heav'n,
are to the main as wholesome as a sizeze, ------
"to man's loss universe, and soon are gone. mill. par. rog.
. . we read in godignus, that upon a shoze of the emperor of
. monomotapa, there pass'd acclamations successively through
the city. - brown’s pagar errours.
sne'szewort. n.s. sofarmica, latin.] a plant. ". . . .
sn et...m. s. [among hunters.] the fat of a deer. " ": dio.
sn fw. the old preterite of to snow. . . . dict.
to sn1b. v. a. [snible, danish. see sneap..] "to check; to
nip ; to reprimand.” . . . . . . . -
asked for their pass by every squib, " . *
that list at will them to revile or saib. hattord"; tale.
snick and snee. n.s. a combat with knives." - - -
... among the dunkirkers, where shick and shee was in fashion,
a boatswain with some of our men drinking together, became
quarrelsome : one of sur men beat him down; then kneeling
upon his breast, he drew out a knife, sticking in his sash, and
cut him from the ear towards the mouth. //seman's surgery.
to sni'eker, or snigger. v. n. to laugh flily, wantonly, or
contemptuously; to laugh in one’s sleeve. . diff.
to sniff. v. n. [sniffa, swedish..] to draw breath audibly up
the nose, " * * * --- --&gt; -- ---
so then you look'd scornful, and shift at the dean,
- . as, who should say; now am i skinny and leah? swift.
to sn1"go l.e., v. n. -". -" - --
snigging is this performed: in a warm day, when the wa-
... ter is lowest, take a strong small hook, tied to a string about a
- yard long and then into one of the holes, where an eel may
hide herself, with the help of a short stick put in your bait
: leisurely, and as far as you may conveniently: if within the
fight of it, the eel will bite instantly, and as certainly gorge
... it: pull him out by degrees: “ . . . . . j/alton's angler.
to snip. v. a. [shippen,” dutch..] to cut at once with
... scissars. - -
the finus should be laid open, which was snipt up about
* two inches with a pair of probe-scissars, and the incised lips
... dressed. . . . . . . . . . . . • * is is man's surgery,
... ... when tradesmen brought extravagant bills, fir roger used
to bargain to cut off a quarter of a yard: he wore a pair of
scissars for this purpose, and would ship it off nicely. arbuthnot.
putting one blade of the scissars up the gut, and the other up
the wound, ship the whole length of the fistula. sharp.
snip. n.s.. [from the verb.] - -
1. a single cut with scissars.
what i this a sleevc * -
here's ship and nip, and cut, and slish and slash,
like to a censor in a barber's shop. shakespeare.
the ulcer would not cure farther than it was laid oxen 3
therefore with one ship more i laid it open to the very end. ..";
2.
- -------
-- - - - --
:
* --
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 91</div><p class="text">s n o
s n u
2. a small shred. o
those we keep within compass by small ships of emplast,
hoping to defend the parts about; but, in spite of all, they
will spread farther. wiseman's surgery.
3. a share; a snack. a low word.
he found his friend upon the mending hand, which he was
glad to hear, because of the ship that he himself expected upon
the dividend. l’estrange.
snipe. n.s.. [shoppe, german; rarce, saxon; suit, welsh.]
1. a small fen fowl with a long bill.
the external evident causes of the atra bilis are a high fer-
menting diet; as old cheese, birds feeding in fens, as geese,
ducks, woodcocks, snipes, and swans. floyer.
2. a fool; a blockhead.
thus do i ever make my fool my purse ;
for i mine own gain'd knowledge should profane,
if i should time expend with such a snipe,
but for my sport and profit. shakesp. othello.
sni'pper. m. s. e:#: one that snips,
sni'ppet. n.s.. [from ship.] . a small part; a share.
witches simpling, and on gibbets
cutting from malefactors snippets ;
or from the pill'ry tips of ears. hudibrar.
sni'psnap. n.s. [a cant word formed by reduplication of snap.]
tart dialogue; with quick replies.
dennis and dissonance, and captious art,
and shipsnap short, and interruption smart. pope's dunciad.
snite. m. s. [rnica, saxon.] a snipe. this is perhaps the
true name; but snipe prevails.
of tame birds cornwall hath doves, geese, and ducks: of
wild, quail, rail, snite, and wood-dove. carew.
to snite. v. a. [rnyzan, saxon.] to blow the nose.
nor would any one be able to snite his nose, or to sneeze;
in both which the passage of the breath through the mouth,
being intercepted by the tongue, is forced to go through the
nose. - -- - grew's cosmol.
sni'vel. n.s. isnavel, shevel, german.] snot; the running
of the nose. ! -- - -
to sni'vel. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to run at the nose.
2. to cry as children.
funeral tears are hired out as mourning cloaks; and whe-
ther we go to our graves shiveling or singing, 'tis all mere
form. - l'estrange.
away goes he saiveling and yelping, that he had dropt his
axe into the water. - l’estrange.
sni've ller. n.s.. [from saivel.] a weeper; a weak lamenter.
* he'd more lament when i was dead,
than all the sniveller; round my bed. swift.
to snore. v. n. [sorcken, dutch..] to breathe hard through
the nose, as men in sleep.
i did unreverently blame the gods,
who wake for thee, though thousnare for thyself. b. johns.
whose railing heroes, and whose wounded gods,
makes some suspect he snares as well as nods. roscommon.
he may lie in his shades, and snare on to doomsday for me;
unless i see farther reason of disturbing his repose, stillingfleet.
is not yonder proteus' cave -
it is; and in it lies the god asleep;
and snoring by
we may descry - - -
the monsters of the deep. . . . . dryden’s albion,
the giant, gorg'd with flesh, and wine, and blood,
lay stretch'd at length, and snoring in his den,
belching raw.gobbets from his maw, o'ercharg’d
- with purple wine and cruddl’d gore confus’d. addison.
snore. m.s. [rnora, saxon, from the verb.] audible respira-
tion of sleepers through the nose.
the surfeited grooms
s
do mock their charge with snares: i've drugg’d their possets.
- - shakespeare's macbeth.
sno’rer, n.f. [from sure.] he that snores.
to snort. v. n. [smarcken, dutch..] to blow through the
nose as a high-mettled horse. . . -
the shorting of his horses was heard. jer. viii. 16.
the fiery war-horse paws the ground, *-
and shorts and trembles at the trumpet’s sound. addison.
from their full racks the gen’rous steeds retire,
dropping ambrosial foams and shorting fire. addison's ovid.
he with wide nostrils, shorting, skims the wave. thomson.
snot. n.s. [rnoze, saxon; snot, dutch..] the mucus of
the nose.
thus, when a greedy sloven once has thrown
his snot into the mess, 'tis all his own.
snotty. adj. [from snot..] full of snot.
this squire south my husband took in a dirty snotty-nosed
swift.
boy. arbuthnot.
snout. n.s.. [shuyt, dutch.]
1. the nose of a beast.
his nose in the air, his snout in the skies. tusser.
in shape a beagle's whelp throughout, -
with broader forehead, and a sharper snout, dryden.
2. the nose of a man, in contempt.
her subtle snout
did quickly wind his meaning out. hudibral
but when the date of nock was out, -
off dropt the sympathetick snout. audibral,
what æthiop lips he has,
how foul asnaut, and what a hanging face!. dryd, juvenal
charm'd with his eyes, and chin, and snout, -
her pocket-glass drew slily out;
and grew enamour'd with her phiz,
as just the counterpart of his.
3. the nosel or end of any hollow pipe.
snout ed. adj. [from snout..] having a snout.
their dogs snouted like foxes, but deprived of that prope
which the logicians call proprium quarto mode, for they toun
not bark. - beysn.
snouted and tailed like a boar, and footed like a goat. gy.
snow... n.s. [rnap, saxon; snee, dutch..] the small par-
ticles of water frozen before they unite into drops. locke.
drought and heat consume snow waters. job, xxiv. i9.
he gives the winter's snow her airy birth,
and bids her virgin fleeces clothe the earth. sahdi.
soft as the fleeces of descending snows. pope.
to snow. v. n. [rnapan, saxon; sneeuwen, dutch..] to have
snow fall.
the hills being high about them, it shows at the tops of
them oftener than it rains. brown's travel,
to snow. v. a. to scatter like snow.
if thou best born to see strange fights,
ride ten thousand days and nights, :
*till age snow white hairs on thee. donn,
snowball. n. s. [snow and ball.] a round lump of con.
gelated snow. -
they passed to the east-riding of yorkshire, their company
daily increasing, like a snowball in rolling. hayward.
his bulky folly gathers as it goes,
and, rolling o'er you, like a snowball grows. dryden.
a snowball having the power to produce in us the ideas of
white, cold, and round, the powers, as they are in the snow-
ball, i call qualities; and as they are sensations in our under-
standings, ideas. lock.
snow broth. n.s.. [snow and broth.] very cold liquor.
angelo, a man whose blo
is very snowbroth, one who never feels -
the wanton stings and motions of the sense. shałestart.
snow deep. n.s. [viola bulbosa, lat.] an herb.
snow drop. n.s.. [narcissoleucoium, latin.] an early flower.
when we tried the experiment with the leaves of those
purely white flowers that appear about the end of winter,
called snowdrops, the event was not much unlike that newly
mentioned. boyle on colouri,
the little shape, by magick pow'r,
grew less and less, contracted to a flow'r;
a flow'r, that first in this sweet garden smil’d,
to virgins sacred, and the snowdrop styl'd.
snow-white. adj. [snow and white.] white as snow.
a snow-white bull shall on your shore be slain;
his of er'd entrails cast into the main. dryden's aen.
snow y. adj. [from snow.]
1. white like snow.
so shews a snowy dove trooping with crows, -
. as yonder lady o'er her fellows shews. shakespeare.
- now i see thy jolly train:
snowy headed winter leads
, spring and summer next succeeds;
yellow autumn brings the rear;
thou art father of the year.
the blushing ruby on her snowy breaft,
render'd its panting whiteness more confest.
2. abounding with snow.
these first in crete
and ida known; thence on the snowy top
of cold olympus rul'd the middle air. milton's par. loft.
as when the tartar from his russian foe,
by astracan, over the snowy plains,
retires. milton's parads, loft.
$nue. m. s. [from shelle, dutch, a nose, or knubel, a joint of
the finger.] a jag a snag ; a knot in wood.
lifting up his dreadful club on high,
all arm'd with ragged snubs and knotty grafn,
him thought at first encounter to have slain. fairy queen,
72 snub. v. a. [rather toshib. see sneap, sneb, snis.]
1. to check; to reprimand.
2. to nip.
near the sea-shores the heads and boughs of trees run out
far to landward; but toward the sea are so saubbed by the
winds, as if their boughs had been pared or shaven off.
ray on the creation.
to snub. v. n. [snuffin, dutch, j. to sob with convul-
sion.
to snudge. v. n. [shiger, danish..] to lie idle, close, or
snug.
2 *
swift,
- *
tickel,
rowe.
prior,
now
o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 92</div><p class="text">s n u
s o
now he will fight it out, and to the wars;
now eat his bread in peace, - - - --
and snudge in quiet ; now he scorns increase;
now all day spares.
snuff. n.s.. [shift, dutch, snot..]
1. snot. in this sense it is not used. - -
o 2. the useless excrescence of a candle: whence moucher la chan-
de le.
-
k
herbert.
i.
my snuff and loathed part of nature should
burn itself out. shakespeare's king lear.
but dearest heart, and dearer image, stay !
alas ! true joys at best are dreams enough : -
though you stay here, you pass too fast away; .
o for even at first life's taper is a snuff. donne.
o if the liquor be of a close and glutinous consistency, it may
burn without any shuff, as we see in camphire, and some other
bituminous substances; and most of the ancient lamps were of
s this kind, because none have been found with such wicks. isilk.
3. a candle almost burnt out. -
lamentable !
to hide me from the radiant sun, and solace
l' th' dungeon by a snuff. shakespeare's cymbeline.
. the fired wick of a candie remaining after the flame.
a torch, sniff and all, goes out in a moment, when dipped
into the vapour. - addison on italy.
. resentment expressed by shifting ; perverse resentment. not
used unless in low language.
what hath been seen -
either in soft or packings of the duke's,
or the hard rein which both of then have borne
against the old ki:d king. shakesp. king lear.
jupiter took snuff at the contempt, and punished him: he
sent him home again. * l'e/irange.
6. powdered tobacco taken by the nose.
just where the breath of life his nostrils drew,
a charge of snuff the vily virgin threw ;
the gnomes direct to ev'ry aton just
the pungent grains of titillating dust. pope.
to snuff. v. a. [shift n, dutch..]
1. to draw in with the breath.
a heiser will put up her nose, and shiff in the air against
- rain. bacon.
- with delight he souff"d the smell
of mortal change on earth. aston's paradis. loft.
he sniff; the wind, his heels the sand excite ;
but when he stands colle&amp;ted in his might,
he roars and promises a more successful fight.
the youth,
who holds the nearest station to the light,
already seems to stuff the vital air,
and leans just forward on a shining spear. dryden's 42n.
my troops are mounted; their numidian steeds
snuff up the wind, and long to scour the desart. addison.
my nag's greatest fault was softng up the air about brack-
denstown, whereby he became such a lover of liberty, that i
could scarce hold him in. o swift.
2. to scent.
the cow looks up, and from afar can find ,
the change of heav'n, and snuff; it in the wind. dryden.
for thee the bul's rebellow through the groves,
and tempt the stream, and shuff their absent loves. dryden.
o'er all the blood-bound boasts superior skill,
to scent, to view, to turn, and boldly kill !
his fellows vain alarms rejects with scorn,
true to the master’s voice, and learned horn:
his nostrils oft, if ancient fame sing true,
trace the fly felon through the tainted dew:
once shuff"d, he follows with unalter'd aim,
nor odours lure him from the chosen game;
deep-mouth’d he thunders, and inflam'd he views,
springs on relentless, and to death pursues. tickel.
3. to crop the candle.
the late queen's centlewoman
- to be her mistress’ mistress
this candle burns not clear: 'tis i must snuff it,
and out it goes. shakespeare's henry viii.
.
dryden. ;
- or - against a communion-day our lamps should be drciled, our
--- lights snuff.d, and our religion more active. taylor.
you have got
an office for your talents fit,
*- to snuff the lights, and stir the fire,
[… and get a dinner for your hire. swift.
ox=} 7% snuff. v. m.
------ 1. to snort; to draw breath by the nose.
the fury fires the pack, they snuff, they vent,
* -- and feed their hungry nostrils with the feent. dryd. æn.
* o saj's flumpus, sir, my master bad me pray
your company to dine with him to-day :
i. o he/ox/3, then follows, up the stairs he goes;
* nescrpulls off his hat, nor cleans his shoes. aing.
2. v. shift in contempt.
23 o ol, ii.
ye said, what a weariness is it, and ye have snuff"d at it.
. . . . . . . . - - alal. ii. 13.
$nu'; f box. m. s. isoft and box.] the box in which snuff is
carried. o
if a gentleman leaves a snuffox on the table, and goeth
away, look it up as part of your wails. swift,
sir plume, of amber suffbox justly vain, . . . . .
and the nice conduct of a clouded cane. .s...... pope.
snu'e fer. m. s. [from snuff. he that snuffs. . . . . . . . .
sn uffers. m. s. [from snoff.] the instrument with which
the candle is clipped. . . . . . , s: ,
when you have snuffed the candle, leave the soft's open.
* = - - swift's directions to the rutler.
to snu‘ffle. v. m. sshoff-len, dutch..] i o speak through
the nose; to breath hard through the pose. . . . . . . . -&gt;
a water-spaniel came down the river, shewing that he
hunted for a duck ; and with a softing grace, diffraining that
his smelling force could not as weli prevail. through the water
as through the air, waited with his eye to see whether he could
espy the duck’s getting up again. … - . . . .” - sidney.
bagpipes of the loudest drones, . . . . . …. vo
with snuffling broken-winded tones, -
whose blasts of air in pockets shut,... o. o. ooo. . .
sound filthier than from the gut. ... - - 5 hudibras.
it came to the ape to deliver his opinion, who smelt and
* *
- -
--~ * or -
*
fifted, and considered on't. . . . - l'eorange.
- one clad in purple, . . * . . . . . .
eats and recites some lamentable rhymc; . . .
some senseless phillis in a broken note, . . …
snuffling at nose, and croaking in his throat. . . dryden.
snu ffler. m. s. [from sniffle.] he that speaks through the nose.
to snug. v. m. [shiger, dutch..] to lie close. . . . . .
there shugging well, he well appear'd content, …
so to have done amiss, so to be shent. -- " - sidney,
as the loving couple lay snugging together, venus, to try
if the cat had changed her manners with her shape, turned a
mouse loose into the chamber. . . . . l’asrange.
snug. adj. [from the verb.] for is
i. close ; free from any inconvenience, yet not splendid.
they spy’d a country farm, - - - - - - -
where all was snug, and clean, and warm ;-- or . . .
for woods before, and hills behind, . -
secur'd it both from rain and wild. . . .
2. close ; out of notice. -
at vvill's - * * *
lie snug, and hear what criticks say.
3. slily or insidiously close. . . . . . . . . . . . .
did i not see you, rascal, did i not l r s ::
when you lay snug to snap young daoon's goat dryden.
to snu'ggle. v. n. [from soug.j. to lic close ; to lie warm.
so, adv. irpa, saxon; so, dutch ; so, german.] .
1. in like manner. it answers to as either preceding or follow-
ing. noting comparison. ‘. . . . . . . . . . . to
as whom the fables feign of monstrous fize, or
titanian or earthborn that warr'd on jove, . . . . .
so stretch'd out huge in length the arch fiend lay. milton,
thick as autumnal leaves that strew the brooks, . .
or 's so
* * * * * * 2.7%
- . . to swift,
in valombrosa, where th’ etrurian shades . . .
high over-arch'd embow'r, so thick bestrewn - . . .
abject and lost lay these. ... - … milton,
tir'd at first sight with what the muse imparts, ovo
in fearless youth we tempt the heights of arts; a no
so pleas'd at first the tow'ring alps we try, , , , ;
mount o'er the vales, and seem to tread the sky. . . pope.
as into air the purer spirits flow, , , , , ... "
and sep'rate from their kindred dregs below, q &amp;
so flew her soul to its congenial place. . . . . . . . pope.
2. to such a degree. . . . . . . . . . . .
why is his chariot so long in coming . . . , judg. v. 28.
can nothing great, and at the height, so
remain so long, but its own weight
will ruin it or is't blind chance . . . . . . .
that still desires new states to advance ben.johns. catiline.
amoret, my lovely foe, . . . . . . . . . .
tell me where thy strength does lie; . . . . .
where the pow'r that charms us so, , … . . .
in thy soul, or in thy eye? . . . . . . . . . iłallor.
i viewed in my mind, so far as i was able, the beginning
and progress of a rising world. burmet's theory of the earth.
since then our arcite is with honour dead,
why should we mourn that he s soon is feed. dryden.
upon our first going into a company of strangers, our be-
nevolence or aversion rises towards several particular persons,
before we have heard them speak, or so much as know who
they are. aiaison's speciator.
we think our fathers fools, so wise we’re grown :
our wiser sons, no doubt, will think us so. pope.
3. in such a manner. -
there's no such thing, as that we beauty call,
it is meer cofenage all;
for though some long ago
24 m. - lik'd
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 93</div><p class="text">s o
s o a
i.ik'd certain colours mingl’d so and so,
that doth not tie me now from chufing new. suckling.
we may be certain that man is not a creature that hath
wings; because this only concerns the manner of his existence;
and we seeing what he is, may certainly know that he is not
so or so. locke.
i shall minutely tell him the steps by which i was brought
into this way, that he may judge whether i proceeded ratio-
nally, if so be any thing in my example is worth his o:
0&amp;a'e.
this gentleman is a person of good sense, and knows that
he is very much in fir roger's esteem, so that he lives in the
family rather as a relation than dependent. addison.
4. it is regularly answered by as or that, but they are sometimes
omitted.
so frown'd the mighty combatants, that hell
grew darker at their frown. milton.
there is something equivalent in france and scotland ; so
as 'tis a very hard calumny upon our soil to affirm that so ex-
cellent a fruit will not grow here. temple.
5. in the same manner. -
of such examples add me to the roll;
, me easily indeed mine may neglect,
but god's propos'd deliverance not so. milton.
to keep up the tutor’s authority, use him with great respect
yourself, and cause all your family to do so too. locke.
according to the multifariousness of this immutability, so
are the possibilities of being. norris.
6. thus ; in this manner.
not far from thence the mournful fields appear,
so call'd from lovers that inhabit there. dryden.
does this deserve to be rewarded so *
did you come here a stranger or a foe dryden.
it concerns every man, with the greatest seriousness, to en-
quire into those matters whether they be so or not. tillotson.
no nation ever complained they had too broad, too deep,
or too many rivers; they understand better than so, how to
value those inestimable gifts of nature. bentley.
so when the first bold vessel dar'd the seas,
high on the stern the thracian rais'd his strain. pope.
whether this be from an habitual motion of the animal spi-
rits, or from the alteration of the constitution, by some more
unaccountable way, this is certain that so it is. locke.
7. therefore; for this reason; in consequence of this.
the god, though loth, yet was constrain'd t'obey;
for longer time than that, no living wight,
below the earth, might suffer'd be to stay:
so back again him brought to living light. fairy queen.
trafficke, or rove ye, and like theeves oppresse
poore strange adventurers ; exposing so
your soules to danger, and your lives to wo chapman.
if he set industriously and sincerely to perform the com-
mands of christ, he can have no ground of doubting but it
shall prove successful to him, and so all that he hath to do is to
endeavour by prayer and use of the means, to qualify himself
for this blessed condition. hammond's fundamentals.
it leaves instruction, and so instructers, to the sobriety of
the settled articles and rule of the church. holyday.
some are fall'n, to disobedience fall’n ;
and so from heav'n to deepest hell. milton's paradise loft.
god makes him in his own image an intelle&amp;tual creature,
and so capable of dominion. locke.
8. on these terms; noting a conditional petition: answered by
45.
o goddess' tell what i would say,
thou know'st it, and i feel too much to pray,
so grant my suit, as i enforce my might,
in love to be thy champion. dryden's knight's tale.
here then exchange we mutually forgiveness:
so may the guilt of all my broken vows,
my perjuries to thee be all forgotten;
as here my soul acquits thee of my death,
as here i part without an angry thought.
so may kind rains their vital moisture yield,
and swell the future harvest of thy field.
9. provided that ; on condition that ; modo.
be not sad :
evil into the mind of god or man
may come and go, so unapprov’d, and leave
no spot or blame behind. milton's paradise lost.
so the doctrine be but wholsome and edifying, though there
should be a want of exactness in the manner of speaking or
reasoning, it may be overlooked. atterbury.
too much of love thy hapless friend has prov’d,
too many giddy foolish hours are gone;
may the remaining few know only friendship:
so thou, my dearest, truest, best alicia,
vouchsafe to lodge me in thy gentle heart,
a partner there ; i will give up mankind. rowe.
10. in like manner; noting concession of one proposition and
assumption of another, answering to as.
rowe.
pope.
as a war should be undertaken upon a just motive, so a
prince ought to consider the condition he is in when he esters
on 11. - swift.
11. so sometimes returns the sense of a word or sentence goi,
before, and is used to avoid repetition; as, the two broth.;
were valiant, but the elds? was more so ; that is, more valiant,
the french article le is often used in the same manner. this
mode of expression is not to be used but in familiar language
nor even in that to be commended. sts-&gt;
the fat with plenty fills my heart,
the lean with love makes me too so. cooky.
who thinks his wife is virtuous, though not so, w
is pleas'd and patient till the truth he know. denham.
not to admire is all the art i know
to make men happy, and to keep them so. creech's hora.
one may as well say, that the conflagration shall be only
national, as to say that the deluge was so. burnet.
however soft within themselves they are,
to you they will be valiant by despair;
for having once been guilty, well they know
to a revengeful prince they still are so. dryden,
he was great ere fortune made him so. djo.
i laugh at every one, said an old cynick, who laughs at
me. do you so * replied the philosopher; then you live the
merriest life of any man in athens. adison.
they are beautiful in themselves, and much more so in that
noble language peculiar to that great poet. addison.
common-place books have been long used by industrious
young divines, and still continue so. swift.
as to his using ludicrous expressions, my opinion is, that
they are not so. - pope.
the blest to-day is as completely so,
as who began a thousand years ago.
12. thus it is ; this is the state.
how sorrow shakes him |
so, now the tempest tears him up by th’ roots,
and on the ground extends the noble ruin.
i 3. at this point; at this time.
when
with wild wood leaves and weeds i ha' strew’d his grave,
and on it said a century of prayers,
such as i can, twice o'er, i’ll weep and figh;
and, leaving so his service, follow you.
14. it notes a kind of abrupt beginning. well.
o, so, and had you a council
of ladies too who was your speaker,
madam : ben. johnson's cition.
15. it sometimes is little more than an expletive, though it im-
plies some latent or surd comparison. in french, s.
an astringent is not quite so proper, where relaxing the
urinary passages is necessary. - arbuthnot.
16. a word of assumption; thus be it.
there is percy ; if your father will do me any honour, so;
if not, let him kill the next percy himself. shakespeare.
i will never bear a base mind: if it be my defliny, so if it
be not, so. no man is too good to serve his prince.
shak stare.
pope,
dyden.
shakes care,
17. a form of petition.
ready are th' appellant and defendant,
the armourer and his man, to enter the lists,
so please your highness to behold the fight. shakespeare.
18. so much as. however much. this is, i think, an irre-
gular expression.
so much as you admire the beauty of his verse, his prose is
full as good. - pope.
19. so so. an exclamation after some thing done or known.
corrupted, i think, from cessoz.
i would not have thee linger in thy pain:
so so. shakespeare's othello.
so so; it works: now mistress, fit you fast. dryden.
2o. is. [cost cosi, italian.] indifferently; not much amiss nor
weii,
he's not very tall; yet for his years he's tall;
his leg is but so so : and yet 'tis well. shakespeare.
deliver us from the nauseous repetition of as and so, which
some so so writers, i may call them so, are continually found-
ing in our ears. - felton on the clafficks.
21. so then. thus then it is that ; therefore.
so then the volscians stand but as at first
ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road
upon's again. shakespeare's corio'anus.
to a war are required a just quarrel, sufficient forces, and
a prudent choice of the designs: so then, i will first justify the
quarrel, balance the forces, and propound designs. bacon,
to soak. v. n. [roclan, saxon.]
i. to lie steeped in moisture.
for thy conceit in soaking will draw in
more than the common blocks. shakes eart.
2. to enter by degrees into pores.
lay a heap of earth in great frosts upon a hollow vess!,
putting a canvass between, and pour water upon it, so as to
sook
3
do
h
.#
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 94</div><p class="text">s o b
s o b
of through: it will make a harder ice in the vessel, and less
apt to dissolve than ordinarily. - - bacon.
rain soaking into the strata, which lie near the surface,
hears with it all such moveable matter as occurs. moodward.
, to drink gluttoosly and intemperately. this is a low term.
let a drunkard see that his health decays, his estate wastes,
yet the habitual thirst after his cups drives him to the tavern;
though he has, in his view the loss of health and plenty ; the
least of which he confesses is far greater than the tickling of
his palate with a goals of wine, cr the idle chat of a soaking
club. locke.
7, soak. v. 6: . -
1. to macerate, in any moisture; to steep 5 to keep wet till
moisture is imbibed; to drench.
many of our princes
lie drown'd and food in mercenary blood:
so do our vulgar drench their peasant himbs
in blood of princes. shakespeare's honry v.
their land shall be soaked with blood. lsa. xxxiv. 7.
there deep galesus sca's the yellow sands. dryden.
wormwood, put into the brine you soak your corn in, pre-
vents the birds eating it.
2. to draw in through the pores.
thou whose life's a dream of lazy pleasure:
'tis all thy bus ness, bus'ness how to shun
to bask thy naked body in the sun;
suppling thy stiffen'd joints with fragrant oil;
then in thy spacious garden walk a while,
to suck the moisture up and soak it in. dryden.
. to drain ; to exhaust. this seems to be a cant term, per-
haps used erroneously for sick.
pants that draw much nourishment from the earth, and soak
and exhaust it, hurt all things that grow by them. bacon.
a greater sparer than a saver; for though he had such
means to accumulate, yet his forts, and his garrisons, and his
feasings, wherein he was only sumptuous, could not but soak
his exchequer. js attan.
soak fr. m. s. [from soak..] -
1. he that macerates in any moisture.
2. a great drinker. in low language.
soap. m. s. [repe, saxon ; /*p, lat. j a substance used in
wathing, inade of a lixivium of vegetable alkaline ashes and
any unctuous substance.
sea is a mixture of a fixed alkaline salt and oil; its virtues
are cleansing, penetrating, attenuating, and resolving ; and
any mixture of any oily substance with salt may be called a
joap. arbuthnot on aliments.
he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers soap. a sala, hi.
a bubble blown with water, first made tenacious by dis-
solving a little soap in it, after a while will appear tinged with
a great variety of colours. newton's opticks.
soap-earth is found in great quantity on the land near the
banks of the river hermus, seven miles from smyrna. isoodw.
soap-ashes are much commended, after the soap-boilers have
done with them, for cold or four lands. a sortimer.
as rain-water diminishes their salt, so the moistening of
them with chamber-lee or soap-suds adds thereto. mortimer.
soapboile.t. m. s. [ soap and boil.j one whose trade is to
make soap.
a soapboiler conjoles with me on the duties on castle-soap.
addison's spectator.
is a species of campion.
a siller.
also timer.
soapwort. m. s. (japonaria, lat. j
t. s.5ar. v. n. [sarare, italian.]
1. to fly aloft; to tower; to mount; properly to fly without
any visible action of the wings. milton uses it actively.
'tis but a base ignoble mind
that mounts no higher than a bird can soar.
feather'd soon and fledg’d,
they summ'd their pens, and soaring th' air sublime,
r r -
shake?care.
with clang despis'd the ground. milton.
2. to mount intellectually ; to tower with the mind.
how high a pitch his resolution soars. shakespeare.
valour soars above
what the world calls misfortune and afflictions. alison.
3. to rise high.
who as ires must down as low -
as high he sar’d. milton.
flames rise and sink by firs; at last they soar
in one bright blaze, and then descend no more. dryden.
when swallows fleet soar high, and sport in air,
he told us that the welkin would be clear. gay.
soar. m. s. [from the verb...] towering flight.
within /or
of tow'ring eagles, to all the fowls he seems --
a phoenix. milton.
to sob. v. n. [reob, complaining, saxon. ... perhaps it is a
mere onematoria copied from the sound.) to heave audibly
with convulsive sorrow ; to fish with convulsion.
when toy was like father, like a child,
told the sad story of my father's death,
- - - - --- !, a 1. -
he twenty times inade pause to so and weep. shakespeare.
as if her life and death lay on his saying,
some tears she shed, with fighs and shing, mixt,
as if her hopes were dead through his delaying.
" _ " - firfax,
so. o d, she sobb'd, and furious with despair, s
******* garments, and she tore her hair. *** *
when children have y cr in a r dryden.
not the power to obtain their desire,
our and sobbing, maintain their title to
--- '''', at 23,
i sobb'd;—and with faint eyes locke on education:
look'd upwards, to the ruler of the skies.
sob. m. s. [from the verb.) a convo.
of respiration obstructed by sorrow.
break heart, or choak with solo my hoted breath ;
do thy own work, admit no foreign death. dr de
there oft are heard the notes of infant woc jaen.
the short thick so, loud scream, and ori."
a wond’rous bag with both her hands she b
there she collects the force of female lungs
- - to ox
sighs, jobs, and passions, and the war of tongues.
to sop. v. a. to soak. a cant word. -&gt;
the tree being sobbed and wet, swells.
sopo r. adj. s sobrius, lat. job, e, fr.]
1. temperate, particularly in liquors; not drunken.
live a sor, righteous, and godly life. common prayer.
the vines give wine to the drunkard as well as to the scher
in on. taylor’s s! 2: toy communicant.
no solor temperate person, whatsoever other sins he may
be guilty of, can look with complacency upon the drunken-
nes, and ottishness of his neighbour. south's sermons.
2. not overpowered by drink. -
a law there is among the grecians, whereof pittacus is au-
thor; that he which being overcome with drink did then strike
any man, should suffer punishment double, as much as if he
had done the same being sober. hooker.
3. not mad; right in the understanding.
another, who had a great genius for tragedy, following
the fury of his natural temper, made every man and woman
in his plays stark raging mad : there was not a sober person to
be had : all was tempestuous and bluffering. dryden.
n9/or man would put himself into danger, for the ap-
plause of escaping without breaking his neck. dryden.
4. regular ; calm ; free from inordinate passion.
this same young solor blooded boy a man cannot make him
laugh. shakes care.
cicca travelled all over peru, and is a grave and for wri-
ter. abbot's doscription of the i/orld.
young men likewise exhort to be sober minded. tit. ii. 6.
the governour of scotland being of great courage, and
joherjudgment, amply performed his duty both before the battle
and in the field. hayward.
these confusions disposed men of any sooer understanding
to wish for peace. clarendon.
among them some sober men confessed, that as his majesty's
affairs then stood, he could not grant it. -
to these, that sober race of men, whose lives
religious, titled them the sons of god,
shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame -
jgnobly to the trains and to the smiles -
of these fair atheists. - asilion.
be your designs ever so good, your intentions ever so sober,
they will, by their clam
it.
harte.
'sive figh; a convulsive as:
fouall. pope.
inds:
pope.
a sortimer.
clarendon.
and your sea; ches directed in the fear of god. //aterland.
5. scrious ; folcmn; grave.
petruchio
shall offer me, disguis’d in sober robes,
to old baptista as a schoolmaster. shakespeare.
come, civil night,
thou sober-suited matron, all in black. shakespeare.
twilight grey
iiad in her sober liv'ry all things clad. milton.
what parts gay france from sober spain,
a little rising rocky chain :
of men born south or north th' hill, -
those seldom move; these ne'er stand still. prior.
for swift and him despis'd the farce of state,
the sober follies of the wise and great. pope.
see her sober over a sampler, or gay over a jointed baby.
pope.
to so"ber. v. a. [from the adjective.] to make sober. p
a little learning is a dang'rous thing ;
drink deep, or taste not the pierian spring;
there shallow draughts intoxicate the brain,
and drinking largely sole's us again.
so p : rly. adv. [from so!er.]
1. without intemperance.
2. without madness.
3. temperately ; moderately.
let any prince think soberly of his forces, except his militia
of natives be valian: soldiers. bacon.
4. coo'y : cal:nly.
whenever children are chastised, let it be done without pas-
fion, and solely, laying on the blows slowly. locke.
so lers ess. n. j. [from sober.]
pope,
1. temperance
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 95</div><p class="text">s o c
s o c
1. temperance in drink. -
keep my body in temperance, salernos, and chastity.
common prayer.
2. calmness; freedom from enthusiasm ; coolness.
a person noted for his sołerns; and skill in spagyrical prepa-
rations, made helmont's experiment succeed very well. boyle.
the soverns of virgii might have shewn the difference:
dryden.
sop r1'et y. m. s. [from sobriete, fr. solrius, lat.]
1. temperance in drink; soberness.
drunkenness is more uncharitable to the soul, and in scrip-
ture is more declaimed against than gluttony; and sobriety hath
obtained to fignify temperance in drinking. taylor.
2. present freedom from the power of strong liquor.
3. general temperance.
in setting down the form of common prayer, there was no
need that the book should mention either the learning of a fit,
or the unfitness of an ignorant minister, more than that he
which describeth the manner how to pitch a field, should
speak of moderation and sobriety in diet. hooker.
4. freedom from inordinate passion.
the libertine could not prevail on men of virtue and so-
briety to give up their religion. rogers.
5. calinness; coolness.
enquire with all sobriety and severity, whether there be in
the footsteps of nature, any such transmission of immateriate
virtues and what the force of imagination is. bacon.
sobriety in our riper years is the effect of a well concocted
warmth; but where the principles are only phlegm, what can
be expected but an insipid manhood, and old infancy dryden.
if sometimes ovid appears too gay, there is a secret grace-
fulness of youth which accompanies his writings, though the
stayedness and sobriety of age be wanting. dryden.
6. seriousness; gravity.
a report without truth; and i had almost said, without any
fabriety, or modesty. jwaterland.
mirth makes them not mad;
nor sobriety sad. denham.
soccage. m. s. [sic, french, a ploughshare; soccagium, barba-
rous latin.] in law, is a tenure of lands for certain inferiour
or husbandly services to be performed to the lord of the fee.
all services due for land being knight's service, or soccage; so
that whatever is not knight's service, is so-cage. this soccage
is of three kinds; a so-cage of free tenure, where a man hold-
eth by free service of twelve pence a year for all manner of ser-
vices. soccase of ancient tenure is of land of ancient demesne,
where no writ original shall be sued, but the writ secundum
consistidinem manerii. sorcage of base tenure is where those
that hold it may have none other writ but the mon/lraverunt ;
and such sockmen hold not by certain service. cowel.
the lands are not holden at all of her majesty, or not
holden in chief, but by a mean tenure in soccage, or by knight's
service. - bacon.
socca ger. m. s. [from soccage.] a tenant by foccage.
sociable. adj. [ sociable, fr. sociabilis, lat.]
1. fit to be conjoined.
another law toucheth them as they are sociable parts united
into one body; a law which bindeth them each to serve unto
other's good, and all to prefer the good of the whole before
whatsoever their own particular. hooker.
2. ready to unite in a general interest.
to make man mild, and sociable to man;
to cultivate the wild licentious savage
with wisdom, discipline. -
3. friendly; familiar; conversible.
them thus employ'd, beheld
with pity heav'n's high king, and to him call’d
raphael, the sociable spirit, that deign'd
to travel with tobias.
4. inclin'd to company. -
in children much solitude and silence i like not, nor any
thing born before his time, as this must needs be in that sociable
addison's cato.
milton.
and exposed age. //otton.
so'cs ableness. n.s.. [from sociable.]
1. inclination to company and converse.
such as would call her friendship love, and feign
to sociablems; a name profane, donne.
the two main properties of man are contemplation and so-
cioleness, or love of converse. more.
2. freedom of conversation; good fellowship.
he always used courtesy and modesty, disliked of none;
sometimes sociablenos, and fellowship well lik'd by many. hayw.
socia b ly. adv. [from sociable.] conversibly ; as a compa-
in 1911.
yet not terrible,
that i should fear; nor socially mild,
as raphael, that i should much confide;
but solemn and sublime.
so'cial. adj. [ socialis, lat.]
1. relating to a general or publick interest ; relating to so-
cict v.
‘i o love cur neighbour as ourselves is such a fundamental
milton.
truth for regulating human society, that by that alone one
might determine all the cases in social morality. locke,
true self love and social are the fame. post.
2. easy to mix in friendly gaiety; companionable.
withers adieu yet not with thee remove
thy martial spirit or thy social love. pope,
3. consisting in union or converse with another.
thou in thy secrecy although alone,
best with thy self accompany'd, feck'st not
social communication. milton,
social n ess. m. s. (from social.] the quality of being social.
soci’et y. m. s. ssociete, fr. societas, lat.]
1. union of many in one general intercit. .
if the power of one society extend likewise to the making of
laws for another society, as if the church could make laws for
the state in temporals; or the state make laws binding the
church, relating to spirituals, then is that society entirely sub-
ject to the other. */ly.
2. numbers united in one interest; community.
as the practice of piety and virtue is agreeable to our rea-
son, so is it for the interest of private persons and publicks.
cieties. tillosin,
3. company; converse.
to make society
the sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
till supper-time alone. shakes are’s macleth.
whilst i was big in clamour, came there a man,
who having seen me in my worser state,
shunn'd my abhorr'd society. shakespeare’s k. lear.
solitude sometimes is best society,
and short retirement urges sweet return. mision.
4. partnership ; union on equal terms.
among unequals what society can fort? milton,
heav'n's greatness no society can bear ;
servants he made, and those thou want'st not here. dryden.
sock. m. s. (soccus, latin ; roce, saxon; socke, dutch j
1. something put between the foot and shoe.
ere i lead this life long, i’ll sow nether socks, and mend
them, and foot them too. shakespeare's henry iv.
a physician, that would be mystical, prescribeth for the
rheum to walk continually upon a camomile alley; meaning
he should put camomile within his socks. - bacon.
2. the shoe of the ancient comick actors, taken in poems for
comedy, and opposed to buskin or tragedy.
then to the well trod stage anon,
if johnson’s learned sock be on,
or sweetest shakespeare, fancy's child,
warble his native wood-notes wild.
great fletcher never treads in buskins here,
nor greater johnson dares in socks appear;
but gentle simkin just reception finds
amidst the monument of vanish'd minds. dryden,
on two figures of a&amp;tors in the villa mathei at rome, we
see the fashion of the old sock and larva. addison.
sock e.t. m. s. [souchette, fr.]
1. any hollow pipe; generally the hollow of a candlestick.
two goodly beacons set in watches stead,
therein gave light, and flam’d continually;
for they of living fire most subtilly
were made, and set in silver sockets bright.
she at your flames would soon take fire,
and like a candle in the socket
dissolve.
the nightly virgin sees
when sparkling lamps their sputt’ring light advance,
as 1.
milion,
fairy queen.
hadibras.
and in the sockets oily bubbles dance. dryden.
the stars amaz'd ran backward from the fight,
and, shrunk within their sockets, lost their light. dryden.
two dire comets
in their own plague, and fire have breath'd their last,
or dimly in their sinking sockets frown. dryden.
to nurse up the vital flame as long as the matter will last,
is not always good husbandry; it is much better to cover it
with an extinguisher of honour, than let it consume till it
burns blue, and iies agonizing within the socket, and at length
goes out in no persume. collier.
2. the receptacle of the eye.
his eye-balls in their hollow sockets sink;
berest of sleep he loths his meat and drink;
he withers at his heart, and looks as wan
as the pale spectre of a murder'd man. dryden.
3. any hollow that receives something inserted.
the sockets and supporters of flowers are figured ; as in the
five brethren of the rose, and sockets of gillyflowers. bacon.
gomphosis is the connection of a tooth to its /ocket. isis.
as the weight leans wholly upon the axis, the grating and
rubbing of these axes against the socket; wherein they are
placed, will cause some inaptitude and resistency to that rota-
tion of the cylinder which would otherwise ensue. //ilkins.
on either side the head produce an ear,
and sink a socket for the shining share. drydon,
socketchisel. n. s. a stronger sort of chisels.
carpenters
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 96</div><p class="text">s o f
carpenters, for their rougher work, use a stronger sort of
chisels, and distinguish them by the name ofz. ; their
hank made with a hollow socket a-top, to receive a strong
wooden sprig made to fit into the socket. moxon.
... m. s. [with archite&amp;ts.] a flat square member, under
*::::::sof pedestals of statues and vases: it serves a. a foot
stand. bailey.
so or soccager. n. j. . [rocarman, saxon.] a sort of
tenant that holds lands and “nements by soccage tenure, of
which there are three kinds. see soccace. cowel.
50'come. */. [in the old law, and in scotland.] a custom of
tenants ob iged to grind corn at their lord's mill.
sop. n. s. [sed, dutch..] a turf; a clod.
the sexton shall green sodi on thee bestow ;
alas! the sexton is thy banker now. swift.
here fame shall dress a sweeter sod,
than fancy's feet have ever trod. collins.
$op, the preterite of stethe.
never caldron sod
with so much fervour, fed with all the flore
that could enrage it.
jacob sod pottage. .. gen. xxv. 29.
$opolity. *s, [sodalitar, latin.] a fellowship; a frates.
*; new confraternity was instituted in spain, of the slaves
of the blessed virgin, and this sodality established with large
indulgencies. - - stillingfleet.
soppen. [the participle passive of stethe..] boiled; feetfied.
can siden water, their barley broth,
decoet their cold blood to such valiant heat shakespeare.
sidden business! there's a stew’d phrase indeed! shakesp.
thou sadden-witted lord; thou hast no more brain than i
bailey.
chapman.
have in my elbows. shakespeare's troilus and crossida.
try it with milk sodden, and with cream. bacon.
mix it with sodden wines and raisins. dryden.
t. so der. v. a. [souder, french ; fouderen, dutch. it is ge-
nerally written solder, from soldare, italian; solidare, latin.]
to cement with some metallick matter.
he that smootheth with the hammer, encourageth him that
smote the anvil, saying. it is ready for sodiring. isa. xli.
$6'der. n.s. metallick cement.
still the difficulty returns, how these hooks were made:
what is it that fastens this soder, and links these first principles
of bodies into a chain collier on pride.
soo, no so. [sae, scottish. a large wooden vessel with hoops,
for holding water; a cowl.
a pump grown dry will yield no water; but pouring a little
into it first, for one bason full you may fetch up as many soe-
fills. amore.
sor’ver, adv. [s, and ever j a word properly joined with a
pronoun or adverb, as whosoever; whatsoever; bzwsoever.
what great thing sever a man proposed to do in his life,
he should think of atchieving it by fifty. temple.
what love soever by an heir is shown,
or you could ne'er suspect my loyal love. dryden.
$of a. m. s. [i believe an eastern word..] a splendid seat co-
wered with carpets.
the king, leaped off from the sofa on which he sat, and
cried out, 'tis my abdallah guardian,
sorr, adj. [roft, saxon; soft, dutch.]
1. not hard. -
hard and soft are names we give things, only in relation to
the constitutions of our own bodies; that being called hard,
which will put us to pain sooner than change figure, by the
pressure of any part of our bodies; and that soft, which
changes the situation of its parts upon an easy touch. loot.
some bodies are hard, and some soft : the hardness is caused
by the jejuneness of the spirits, which if a greater degree,
make them not only hard, but fragil.
hot and cold were in one body fixt,
and soft with hard, and light with heavy mixt. dryden.
1. not rugged; not rough.
what went ye out for to see? a man clothed in soft raiment
behold, they that wear soft raiment are in kings houses. matth.
3. ductile; not unchangeable of form.
spirits can either sex assume; so soft
and uncompounded is their essence pure. milton.
4. facile; flexible; not resolute; yielding.
a few divines of so soft and servile tempers as disposed them
to so sudden aeling and compliance. k. charler.
one king is too soft and easy; another too fiery. l’estrange.
5. tender; timorous.
what he hath done famously, he did it to that end; tho'
soft conscienced men can be content to say, it was for his
acor.
country. shakspeare's coriolanus.
łowo, within themselves they are,
to you they will be valiant by despair. dryden.
curst be the verse, how well foe'er it flow,
that tends to make one worthy man my foe;
ive virtue scandal, innocence a fear,
9 from the soft-ey'd virgin steal a tear. pope.
6, mild; gentle ; kind; not severe. -
wol. ii.
would my heart were flint like edward'
or edward's soft and itiful like edward's; -- a
our off. pitiful like mine. shakespeare,
- *come as soft as now sever, milton.
yet soft his natuse, though &amp;: his lay, 077;
his anger moral, and his wisdom gay.
7. meek; civil; complais.
thou art their soldier, and bein bred in broils. •
hast not the //? way, which thou i. oil,
}. fit for thee to use, as they to claim
n asking their good loves, shak &gt; fas------
8. placid; still; easy. ja offeare's coriolanus:
on her soft axle while she paces even,
she bears thee soft with the footh air along. milton.
oo:: ...th to the murmuring sound -
the high porch, fles sleeps profo -
9. effeminate; joi, o ps profound popes
this sense is also mistress of an art
which to soft people sweet perfumes doth sell;
though this dear art doth little good impart,
since they smell best, that do of nothing smell. davies.
an idle and soft course of life is the source of criminal plea. .
sures. broome.
io. delicate; elegantly tender.
her form more oft and feminine. . milton.
less winning soft, less amiably mild. milton.
11. weak; simple.
the deceiver soon found this soft
nocency itself did not secure him.
12. gentle; not loud; not rough.
her voice was ever soft,
gole od low, an excellent thing in women. shakespeare.
the dorian mood of flutes and joft recorders. milton.
when some great and gracious monarch dies,
so? whispers first, and mournful murmurs rise
among the sad attendants; then the sound
soon gathers voice.
soft whispering thus to nestor's son,
his head reclin'd, young ithacus begun.
13. smooth; flowing; not vehement; not rapid.
the solemn nightingale tun'd her soft lays. milton.
soft were my numbers, who could take offence,
when smooth description held the place of sons.
place of adam's, and in-
glanville.
dryden.
popes
pope.
hark! the numbers soft and clear
gently steal upon the ear. pope:
14. not forcible; not violent.
sleep falls with soft slumb’rous weight. milton.
15. mild; not glaring.
the sun shining upon the upper part of the clouds, made
them appear like fine down or wool, and made the oftes?
sweetest lights imaginable. brown's travels.
soft, interj, hold; stop; not so fast.
but soft, i pray you; did king richard then
proclaim my brother shakespeare's hen. iv.
oh! come in, aemilia;
soft, by and by, let me the curtains draw.
shakespeare.
but soft, my muse, the world is wide,
and all at once was not descry’d. suckling.
to soften. v. a. [from soft.]
1. to make soft; to make less hard.
bodies, into which the water will enter, long seething will
rather soften than indurate. bacon's natural history.
their arrow's point they soften in the flame,
and sounding hammers break its barbed frame. gay.
2. to intenerate; to make less fierce or obstinate; to mollify.
i will soften stony hearts. milton.
our friends see not our faults, or conceal them, or soften
them by their representation. addison.
i would correct the harsh expressions of one party,’ by
softening and reconciling methods. jwatts.
3. to make easy; to compose; to make placid; to mitigate;
to palliate ; to alleviate.
call round her tomb each object of desire,
bid her be all that chears or softens life,
the tender sister, daughter, friend, and wife. pope.
musick the fiercest griefs can charm;
musick can soften pain to ease,
and make despair and madness please. pope.
4. to make less harsh; less vehement; less violent.
he bore his great commission in his look,
but sweetly temper'd awe, and soften’d all he spoke. dryd.
5. to make less glaring.
6. to make tender; to enervate,
to so’f ten. v. n.
1. to grow less hard.
many bodies, that will hardly melt, will soften; as iron in
the forge. bacon's natural history.
2. to grow less obdurate, cruel, or obstinate.
he may soften at the fight of the child;
the filence often of pure innocence
persuades, when speaking fails. shakespeare:
softly. adv. [from soft.]
1. without hardness.
24 n 2. not
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 97</div><p class="text">s o i
s o l
2. not violently; not forcibly.
solid bodies, if very softly percussed, give no sound ; as
when a man treadeth very softly upon boards. bacon.
3. not loudly.
ahab rent his clothes, and went softly. i kings, xxi. 27.
in this dark filerice softly leave the town,
and to the general's tent direct your steps.
4. gently; placidly.
death will dismiss me,
and lay me softly in my native dust,
• to pay the forfeit of ill-manag'd trust.
she with a wreath of myrtle crowns the head,
and softly lays him on a flow'ry bed. bryden's aeneid.
5. mildly; tenderly.
the king must die;
though pity softly plead within my soul,
yet he must die, that i may make you great.
so ftner. m. s. [from soft.]
1. that which makes soft.
2. one who palliates. -
those softners, and expedient-mongers, shake their heads
so strongly, that we can hear their pockets jingle. swift.
so'ftness. n.s.. [from soft.]
1. the quality of being soft; quality contrary to hardness.
* softnes; cometh by the greater quantity of spirits, which
ever induce yielding and cession; and by the more equal spread-
ing of the tangible parts, which thereby are more sliding and
following; as in gold. bacon's natural history.
2. mildness; kindness.
a wise man, when there is a necessity of expressing any evil
actions, should do it by a word that has a secondary idea of
kindness or softness; or a word that carries in it rebuke and
severity. jwatts's logick.
3. civility; gentleness.
they turn the softness of the tongue into the hardness of
the teeth. holyday.
improve these virtues, with a softns of manners, and a
sweetness of conversation. dryden.
4. effeminacy; vicious delicacy.
so long as idleness is quite shut out from our lives, all the
sins of wantonness, softness, and effeminacy, are prevented;
and there is but little room for temptation. taylor.
he was not delighted with the softnesses of the court. clarend.
5. timorousness; pusillanimity.
this virtue could not proceed out of fear or softness; for he
was valiant and active. bacon's henry vii.
dryden.
dryden.
dryden.
saving a man's self, or suffering, if with reason, is virtue:
if without it, is softness, or obstinacy. grew.
6. quality contrary to harshness.
softness of sounds is distinct from the exility of sounds.
- bacon.
7. facility; gentleness; candour; easiness to be affeded.
such was the ancient simplicity and softness of spirit, which
sometimes prevailed in the world, that they whose words were
even as oracles amongst men, seemed evermore loth to give
sentence against any thing publickly received in the church of
god. - hooker.
8. contrariety to energetick vehemence.
who but thyself the mind and ear can please,
with strength and softness, energy and ease ? płarte.
9. mildness; meekness.
- for contemplation he and valour form'd,
for softnes; she and sweet attractive grace. milton.
her stubborn look
this softness from thy finger took. wallor.
soho. interj. a form of calling from a distant place.
to soil. v. a. [rilian, saxon; selen, old german; souiller,
french.] -
1. to foul; to dirt; to pollute; to stain; to sully.
a silly man in simple weeds forlorn, -
and soiled with dust of the long dried way. fairy queen.
although some hereticks have abused this text, yet the sun
is not soiled in po i bacon's holy war.
. . if i sai
myself with fin, #. but vainly toil.
i would not soil these pure ambrosial weeds,
with the rank vapours of this sin-worm mould.
bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know,
which leaves us naked thus, of honour void,
of innocence, of faith, of purity,
our wonted ornaments now soil'd and stain'd.
one who cou’d n't for a taste o' th' flesh come in,
licks the soil'd earth,
while reeking with a mangled ombit's blood. tate.
if the eye-glass be tincted faintly with the smoke of a lamp
or torch, to obscure the light of the star, the fainter light
in the circumference of the star ceases to be visible, and the
star, if the glass be sufficiently sailed with smoke, appears
sandyr.
milton.
milton.
something more like a mathematical point. newton.
an absent hero's bed they sought to soil,
an absent hero's wealth they made their spoil. pope.
2. to dung; to manure.
men now present, just as they soil their ground, not that
they love the dirt, but that they expect a crop. south.
3. to soil a horse; to purge him by giving him grass in the
spitf it is in shakespeare to glut. [saouller, french.]
he soiled horse. shakespeare,
soil. n.s.. [from the verb.] -
1. dirt; spot; pollution; foulness.
by indireet ways
i met this crown; and i myself know well
how troublesome it sate upon my head:
to thee it shall descend with better quiet;
for all the soil of the atchievement goes -
with me into the earth. shakespeare's henry iv.
that would be a great soil in the new gloss of your mar.
riage. shakspeare.
vexed i am with passions, -
which give some soil perhaps to my behaviour. shakoshtar.
a lady's honour must be touch'd, -
which, nice as ermines, will not bear a soil. dryden.
2. [sol, french; salum, latin.] ground; earth, considered
with relation to its vegetative qualities.
judgment may be made of waters by the soil whereupon
they run. bacon's natural history.
her spots thou see'st
as clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce
fruits in her soften’d soil. amilton's paradis. loft.
the first cause of a kingdom's thriving is the fruitfulness
of the soil, to produce the necessaries and conveniencies of
life; not only for the inhabitants, but for exportation. swift.
3. land ; country.
dorset, that with fearful soul
leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
this fair alliance shall call home
to high promotions.
o unexpected stroke, worse than of death !
must i thus leave thee, paradise ! thus leave
thee, native sail! these happy walks and shades,
fit haunts of gods.
'4. dung; compost.
the haven has been stopped up by the great heaps of dit
that the sea has thrown into it; for all the soil on that fide:
of ravenna has been left there insensibly by the sea. addison.
improve land by dung, and other sort of soil. mortimer,
sol'liness. n.s.. [from soil.j stain; foulness.
make proof of the incorporation of silver and tin, whether,
shakstare.
milton.
it yield no sailines; more than silver. bacon.
sor'lure. m. s. [from soil.] ... stain; pollution.
he merits well to have her,
not making any scruple of her sailure. shakespeare.
toso'joup n. v. n. [sojourner, french; soggiornare, italian.i.
to dwell any where for a time; to live as not at home; to
inhabit as not in a settled habitation. almost out of use.
if, till the expiration of your month, -
you will return and sojourn with my sister,
dismissing half your train, come then to me. shałonare.
th' advantage of his absence took the king, .
and in the mean time sojourn’d at my father's. . shais).
how comes it he is to sojourn with you ? how creeps ac-
quaintance shakespeare's cymbeline.
here dwells he: though he sojourn every where
in progress, yet his standing house is here. bonne.
the sojourning of israel, who dwelt in egypt, was four hun-
dred and thirty years. . exod. xii. 40.
the soldiers first assembled at newcastle, and there sojourned
three days. hayward.
- - to sojourn in that land -: o
he comes invited. milton's paradise loft.
he who sojourns in a foreign country, refers what he sees
abroad to the state of things at home. , , , . . . atterbury.
so'journ. n.s.. [sojour, french; from the verb.] a temporary
residence; a casual and no settled habitation. this word was
anciently accented on the last syllable: milton accents it in-
differently. - -
the princes, france and burgundy,
long in our court have made their am’rous sojourn. shakso.
thee i revisit now, . -
escap'd the stygian pool, though long detain'd : *
in that obscure sojourn. milton's paradiso lo?.
scarce view'd the galilean towns, .
and once a-year jerusalem, few days -
short sojourn. - milton's paradise regained.
so journ ek. m. s. [from sojourn..] a temporary dweller. “
we are strangers and sojourners, as were all our fathers:
our days on earth are as a shadow. i coron. xxix. 16.
waves o'erthrew
busiris, and his memphian chivalry,
while with perfidious hatred they pursu'd -
the sojourners of goshen. 44ilton's paradis. loft.
not for a night, or quick revolving year, -
welcome an owner, not a sojourner. pryden.
to $o'l ace. v. a. [solacier, old french; solazzare, italian;
solatium, latin.j to comfort; to cheer; to amuse.
7 - - . . we
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 98</div><p class="text">s o l
s o i,
2. belonging to the sun.
we will with some strange pastime solate them. shakesp.
the birds with song
solar'd the woods. milton.
7, sol acf. 9. ". to take comfort; to be recreated. the
neutral sense is obsolete.
one poor and loving child,
but one thing to rejoice and solace in,
and cruel death hath catch'd it from my fight. shakespeare.
were they to be rul’d, and not to rule, ”
this sickly land might solace as before. shakesp. r. iii.
so'lace. m. s. [solatium, latin. comfort; pleasure; allevia-
tion; that which gives comfort or pleasure; recreation;
amusement.
therein sat a lady fresh and fair,
making sweet solace to herself alone;
sometimes she sung as loud as lark in air,
sometimes she laugh'd, that nigh her breath was gone.
- spenser's fairy 21sten.
it we have that which is meet and right, although they be
glad, we are not to envy them this their solace; we do not
think it a duty of ours to be in every such thing their tor-
mentofs. o hooker.
give me leave to go;
sorrow would solace, and my age would ease. shak. h. vi.
great joy"he promis'd to his thoughts, and new
solace in her return. a/ilton's paradise lo/?.
if i would delight my private hours
with musick or with poem, where so soon
as in our native language can i find
that solace p \ milton's paradse regain'd.
though fight be lost,
life yet hath many solaces; enjoy'd
wo-- coher f…so want not their delights,
at home in leisure and domestick ease,
exempt from many a care and chance, to which
eye-sight exposes daily men abroad. milton's 42nsler.
through waters and through flames i'll go,
suff'rer and solace of thy woe. prior.
sol ander. m. s. [souland es, fr.] a disease in horses. dic.
*::::. }a}. [solaire, french ; solaris, latin.]
1. being of the sun. -
the corpuscles that make up the beams of light be solary
effluviums, or minute particles of some ethereal substance,
thrusting on one another from the lucid body. boyle.
instead of golden fruits,
by genial show’rs and solar heat supply'd,
unsufferable winter hath defac’d
earth's blooming charms, and made a barren waste. blackm,
they denominate some herbs solar, and some lunar. bacon.
scripture hath becn punctual in other records, concerning
solary miracles. brown's sugar errours.
3. born under or in the predominant influence of the sun.
the cock was pleas'd to hear him speak so fair,
and proud beside, as solar people are.
4. measured by the sun.
the rule to find the moon's age, on any day of any solar
month, cannot shew precisely an exact account of the moon,
because of the inequality of the motions of the sun and moon,
and the number of days of the solar months. holder on i ine.
soln. the preterite and participle passive of sel.
sulb. m. s. [faller, old french. trevoux.] military pay 5
warlike entertainment.
but were your will her sold to entertain,
and number'd be amongst knights of maidenhead,
great guerdon, well i wot, should you remain,
and in her favour high be reckoned. fairy 34cen.
so'ldan. m. s. [for sultan.] the emperor of the turos; ,
they at the joidan's chair defy'd the best. assion.
so'ldanel. n.s.. [soldanella, latin j a plant. . miller:
t. solder. v. a. [souder, fr. soldare, ital, solidare, latin.]
see soder. -
1. to unite or fasten with any kind of metallick cement.
a concave sphere of gold, filled with water, and/oldered up,
has, upon pressing the sphere with great force, let the water
squeeze through it, and stand all over its outside in multitudes
of small drops like dew, without bursting or cracking the body
of the gold. newton's opt.
1. to mend; to unite any thing broken. .
it too!eth them not thus to for up a broken cause, where-
of their first and last discourses will fall asunder. hooker.
wars 'twixt you twain would be
as if the world should cleave, and that slain men
should solder up the rift. so, int. and cleopatra.
thou visible god,
that sould’re? close impossibilities,
and mak’st them kiss
learn'd he was in med'c'nal lore;
for by his side a pouch he wore,
keplete with strange hermetick powder,
that wounds nine miles point-bank would sold r. hudikrai.
dryden.
słakoff. tirion.
solber. n.s.. [from the verb
$93.p.e.r.e.r. n-s: [from solder.]
soldier. n.s.. [soldat, fr. from solidarius,
1. a fighting man; a warriour. originally
philanax.
sol e. m. s. [ solum, latin.]
1. the bottom of the foot.
3. [soloa, latin.) the bottom of the shoe.
the nak
ed cynick's jar ne'er flames: if broken.
------ . . ; - - m. . . . .
atoos. d, or a new bespon. dryd. jun. juv;
unite and . the presbyterians, and other sects, did at
jolder up their several schemes, to join against the
church. swift
s - 101st.
- - ..]. metallick c t. a
lick bod ..] : cement. metal-
j. that will melt with les, heat than the body to be
goldsmiths say, the coarses fluff
will serve for for well j i. swift
one that solders or mend."
low latin; of soli-
; soulde, french.j
one who served for
dur, a piece of money, the pay of a soldier
pay. - - -
your sister is the better soldier.
good siward,
an older and a better soldier none. &amp;ao. macbeth
a soldier, - * *******
full of strange oaths, and bearded like a pard,
jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel
seeking the bubble reputation *
ev’n in the cannon's mouth. .
a hateful service, that dissolv'd the knees
of many a soldier. -
i have not yet forgot i am a king:
if i have wrong'd thec, charge me face to face;
i have not yet forgot i am a soldier. dryd. d. sclassian.
$4%. king liar.
shałozear.
coman.
2. it is generally used of the common men, as distinct soft, the
commanders. +
it were meet that any one, before he came to be a captain;
should have been a soldier. spenser on ireland.
$oidisklike. adj. [soldier and like..] martial; waiike,
sool d1 erly.
military; becoming a soldier.
although at the first they had fought with beasily fury rather
than any soldierly discipline, practice had now made then com-
parable to the best. - - sidney:
i will maintain, the word with my sword to be a soldieriis,
wood, and a word of good command. , shakesp. henry iv.
they, according to a soldiery custom, in cases of extremity,
by interchange of a kiss by every of them upon the swords of
others, sealed a resolution to maintain the place. hayward.
enemics as well as friends confessed, that it was as soldierly
an action as had been performed on either side. clarendan.
sot die rship. n.s. [from soldier.] military charaster; mar-
tial qualities; behaviour becoming a soldier; martial skill.
thy father and myself in friendship
first tried our soldier/sip: he did look far
into the service of the time, and was - -
discipled of the brav'st. slak. 41', well that end, well.
by sea you throw away * * * -
the absolute soldiership you have by land,
distract your army, which doth most consist
of war-mark'd footmen. shakspears.
soldier y. m. s. [from soldier.] . . .
1. body of military men; soldiers collectively.
the memphian soldiery, a *
that swell'd the erythrean wave, when wall'd, . . .
the unfroze waters marvellously stood. -- philips,
i charge not the solicy with ignorance and contempt of
learning, without allowing c:ceptions. swift.
2. soldiership; military service.
offering him, if he would exercise his courage in soldiery,
he would commit some charge unto him under his lieutenant
- sidney.
i will only be bold with benediæ for his company; for
from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot he is all
mirth. shakesp. much ad about nothing.
tickling is most in the soles of the feet: the cause is the
rareness of being touched there. bacon's nat. history.
the soles of the feet have great affinity with the head and
the mouth of the stomach; as going wet-shod, to those that
use it not, affecteth both. bacon's natural history.
such resting found the sole of unblest feet. milton.
in the make of the camel's foot, the sole is flat and broad,
being very fleshy, and covered only with a thick, soft, and
somewhat callous skin, fit to travel in sandy places. ray,
2. the foot. -
to redeem thy woeful farent's head
from tyrant's rage and ever-dying dread,
hast wander'd through the world now long a day,
yet ceasest not thy weary soles to lead. - fairy queen.
nay, gentle romeo, we must have you dance.
—not i, believe me: you have dancing thoes, * * -
with nimble soles. shakespeare.
on fortune's cap we are not the very button—nor the soles
of her shoe. shakspeare's hans to
the caliga was a military shoe, with a verythick solo tied
above the inflep with leather thongs. . . 4 out” ” coins.
4. the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 99</div><p class="text">s o l
s o l
4. the part of any thing that touches the ground. -
the strike-block is a plane shorter than the jointer, having
its sole made exactly flat and straight, and is used for the shoot-
ing of a short joint. - moxon's mech. exer.
film is proper for mills, soles of wheels, and pipes. mortim.
5. a kind of sea-fish.
of flat fish, rays, thornbacks, soles, and flowks. carew.
to sole. v. a. [from the noun..] to furnish with soles: as,
to sole a pair of shoes.
his feet were soled with a treble tuft of a close short tawney,
down. grew's museum.
sole. adj. [sol, old french; solus, latin.]
1. single ; only. -
take not upon thee to be judge alone: there is no sole judge
but only one: say not to others, receive my sentence, when
their authority is above thine. płocker.
orpheus every where expressed the infinite and sole power of
one god, though he used the name of jupiter. raleigh.
to me shall be the glory sole among
th’infernal pow'rs. milton's paradise loft.
. a rattling tempest through the branches went,
that stripp'd them bare, and one sole way they rent. dryd.
he, sole in power, at the beginning said,
let sea and air, and earth and heav'n be made:
and it was so; and when he shall ordain
in other sort, has but to speak again,
. and they shall be no more.
2. [in law.] not married.
some others are such as a man cannot make his wife,
though he himself be sole and unmarried. ayliffe.
so lectsm. m. s. [toxoixiao;..] unfitness of one word to
another; impropriety in language. a barbarism may be in
one word, a solecism must be of more.
there is scarce a solecism in writing which the best author is
not guilty of, if we be at liberty to read him in the words of
some manuscript. addison.
solely. adv. [from sale.] singly; only.
you knew my father well, and in him me,
left solely heir to all his lands. shak. taming of the shrew.
this night's great business
shall to all our nights and days to come
give solely sovereign sway and masterdom. shakespeare-
that the intemperate heat of the clime solely occasions this
complexion, experience admits not. brown's vulgar errours.
this truth is pointed chiefly, if not solely, upon finners of
the first rate, who have cast off all regard for piety. atterbury.
they all chose rather to rest the cause solely on logical dis-
putation, than upon the testimonies of the ancients. waterland.
solemn. adj. [solemnel, french; solemnis, latin.]
1. anniversary; observed once a year with religious ceremo-
illes.
the worship of this image was advanced, and a solemn sup-
prior.
plication observed every year. stillingfleet.
2. religiously grave ; awful. -
his holy rites and solemn feasts profan'd. milton.
3. formal; ritual ; religiously regular. -
the necessary business of a man's calling, with some, will
not afford much time for set and solemn prayer. duty of man.
4. striking with seriousness; sober; serious.
then'gan he loudly through the house to call,
but no one care to answer to his cry;
there reigned a solemn silence over all. fairy queen.
to'swage with solemn touches troubled thoughts. milton.
nor then the solemn nightingale ceas'd warbling. milton.
5. grave; affectedly serious.
when steele refle&amp;ts upon the many solemn strong barriers
to our succession of laws and oaths, he thinks all fear vanish-
eth: so do i, provided the epithet solemn goes for nothing;
because though i have heard of a solemn day, and a solemn cox-
comb, yet i can conceive no idea of a solemn barrier. swift.
s. }n. f. [solemnite, french ; from solemn.] …
1. ceremony or rite annually performed. * -
were these annual solemnities only practised in the church 2
nelson.
though the days of solemnity, which are but few, must
quickly finish that outward exercise of devotion which apper-
tains to such times; yet they increase men's inward disposi-
tions to virtue for the present, and, by their frequent returns,
bring the same at length to perfection. nelson.
great was the cause; our old solemnities
from no blind zeal or fond tradition rise;
but, sav'd from death, our argives yearly pay
these grateful honours to the god of day. pope.
2. religious ceremony.
3. awful ceremony or procession.
the lady constance,
some speedy messenger bid repair
to our solemnity. shakesp. king john.
the moon, like to a silver bow,
new bent in heaven, shall behold the night
of our solemnities, shakespeare,
there may be greater danger in using such compositions in
churches, at arraignments, plays, and solemnities. bacon.
what fun'ral pomp shall floating tiber see,
when rifing from his bed he views the sad solemnity's dryd.
though the forms and solemnities of the last judgment may
bear some resemblance to those we are acquainted with here,
yet the rule of proceeding shall be very different. atterbury.
4. manner of acting awfully serious.
with much more skilful cruelty, and horrible folemnity, he
caused each thing to be prepared for his triumph of tyranny. sid.
5. gravity; steady seriousness.
the stateliness and gravity of the spaniards shews itself in
the solemnity of their language. addison's spectator.
6. awful grandeur; grave stateliness; sober dignity.
a diligent decency was in polycletus, above others; to whom
though the highest praise be attributed by the most, yet some
think he wanted solemness. wotton's architecture,
7. affected gravity. ,--
pr'ythee, virgilia, turn thy solemnos, out o' door,
and go along with us. shakesp. coriolanus,
be this truth eternal ne'er forgot, -
solemnity's a cover for a sot. 1%ung.
this speech ended with a solemnity of accent. fem. quixoi.
sol emniza tion... m. s. [from solemnize.] the aet of solem-
nizing; celebration. ."
soon followed the solemnization of the marriage between
charles and anne dutchess of bretagrue, with whom he re-
ceived the dutchy of bretagne. ". bacon's henry vii.
to solemnize. j. a. [solemniser, french; from salemn.]
1. to dignify by particular formalitigs; to celebrate.
dorilaus in a great battle was derived of life; his obse-
quies being no more solemnizea by the tears of his partaker-
than the blood of his enemies." sidney.
baptism to be administered in one place, and marriages.
lemnized in another.
hooker.
then 'gan they sprinkle all the parts with wine,
and made great feast to solemnize that day. fairy queen.
the multitude of the celestial host were heard to jolonia,
his miraculous birth. boyle's seraphick love.
their choice nobility and flower
met from all parts to solemnize this feast. milton's agonslit.
2. to perform religiously once a-year.
what commandment the jews had to celebrate their feast
of dedication, is never spoken of in the law, yet solemnized
even by our saviour himself. hooker.
so lemnly. adv. [from solemn.]
1. with annual religious ceremonies.
2. with formal gravity and stateliness; with affeded gravity.
there are, in points of wisdom and sufficiency, that do
nothing or little very solemnly. bacon's essays.
the ministers of state, who gave us law,
in corners, with selected friends, withdraw;
there in deaf murmurs solemnly are wise,
whisp'ring like winds, ere hurricanes arise. dryden:
3. with formal state.
- let him land, -
and solemnly see him set on to london. shakoff. h. w.
4. with religious seriousness.
to demonstrate how much men are blinded by their own
partiality, i do solemnly assure the reader, that he is the only
person from whom i ever heard that objection. swift.
to soli'cit. v. a. [solicito, latin.]
1. to importune; to intreat.
if you bethink yourself of any crime,
unreconcil'd as yet to heav'n and grace,
solicit for it straight.
we heartily solicit
your gracious self to take on you the charge
and kingly government of this your land.
- how he solicits heav'n
himself best knows ; but strangely visited people,
the mere despair of surgery, he cures. shakespeare.
did i request thee, makers from my clay,
. to mold me man * did i solicit thee
from darkness to promote me? milton's par. loft.
the guardian of my faith so false did prove,
as to solicit me with lawless love. dryden’s aurengzebe,
2. to call to action; to summon; to awake; to excite.
this supernatural soliciting
cannot be ill, cannot be good. shakesp. macbeth,
solicit henry with her wond’rous praise;
bethink thee on her virtues that surmount
her nat'ral graces, that extinguish art. shakesp. h. vi.
that fruit solicited her longing eye. - alfilton.
sounds and some tangible qualities solicit their proper senses,
and force an entrance to the mind. locke.
he is solicited by popular custom to indulge himself in for-
bidden liberties. a’ogers's sermons.
3. to implore; to ask.
with that she wept again, 'till he again soliciting the conclu-
sion of her story, then must you, said she, know the story of
amphialus 2
-
shakesp. othells.
shak. r. iii.
sidney.
3. 4. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 100</div><p class="text">s o l
-
l =
o
4. to attempt; to try to obtain.
i view my crime, but kindle at the view,
repent old pleasures, and solicit new. pope.
5. to disturb; to disquiet. a latinism.
solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid. milton.
i find your love, and would reward it too;
but anxious fears solicit my weak breast, dryd. span. fryar.
solicitation. m. s. [from solicit.]
1. importunity; act of importuning.
i can produce a man
of female seed, far abler to resist
all his solicitations, and at length
all his vast force, and drive him back to hell.
2. invitation; excitement.
children are surrounded with new things, which, by a
constant solicitation of their senses, draw the mind constantly
to them. locke.
solicitor. n.s.. [from solicit.]
1. one who petitions for another.
be merry, casio;
for thy solicitor shall rather die, - * -
than give thy cause away. shakespeare's othelh.
honest minds will consider poverty as a recommendation in
the person who applies himself to them, and make the justice
of his cause the most powerful solicitor in his behalf. addison.
2. one who does in chancery the business which is done by
attorneys in other courts. , -
for the king's attorney and solicitor general, their continual
use for the king's service requires men every way fit. bacon.
solicitous. adj. [solicitus, latin. j anxious ; careful;
concerned. it has commonly about before that which causes
anxiety; sometimes for or of for is proper before something
to be obtained.
our hearts are pure, when we are not solicitous of the opi-
nion and censures of men, but only that we do our duty. tayl.
enjoy the present, whatsoever it be, and be not solicitous for
the future. taylor's rule of living holy.
the colonel had been intent upon other things, and not
enough solicitous to finish the fortifications. clarendon.
in providing money for disbanding the armies, upon which
they were marvelously solicitous, there arose a question. clarend.
they who were in truth zealous for the preservation of the
laws, were solicitous to preserve the king's honour from any
indignity, and his regal power from violation. clarendon.
laud attended on his majesty, which he would have been
excused from, if that design had not been in view, to accom-
plish which he was solicitous for his advice. clarendon.
there kept their watch the legions, while the grand
in council sat, solicit.us what chance
might intercept their emperour sent.
without sign of boast, or sign of joy,
solicitous and blank, he thus began. amilton's parad. reg.
no man is solicitous about the event of that which he has in
his power to dispose of. - south.
you have not only been careful of my fortune, the effect
of your nobleness, but you have been solicitous of my reputa-
milton.
milton's par. loft.
tion, which is that of your kindness. dryden.
the tender dame, solicitous to know
whether her child should reach old age or no,
consults the sage tirefias. addison.
how lawful and praise-worthy is the care of a family and
yet how certainly are many people rendered incapable of all
virtue, by a worldly solicitous temper. law.
soli'citously. adv. [from solicitous.] anxiously; carefully.
the medical art being conversant about the health and life
of man, doctrinal errours in it are to be solicitously avoided. boyle.
he would surely have as solicitously promoted their learning,
as ever he obstructed it. decay of piety.
soli'citude. n.f. [solicitudo, lat.] anxiety; carefulness.
in this, by comparison, we behold the many cares and great
labours of worldly men, their solicitude and outward shews,
and publick ostentation, their pride, and vanities. raleigh.
if they would but provide for eternity with the some soli i-
tude, and real care, as they do for this life, they could not fail
of heaven. - ‘sion.
they are to be known by a wonderful solicitude for the re-
putation of their friends. tatler.
solicit ress. n.s. [feminine of solicitor.] a woman who
petitions for another.
i had the most earnest solicitress, as well as the fairest; and
nothing could be refused to my lady hyde. dryden.
solid. adj. [solidus, lat. solide, fr.]
1. not liquid; not fluid.
land that ever burn'd
with solid, as the lake with liquid fire.
2. not hollow ; full of matter; compact; dense.
thin airy things extend themselves in place,
things solid take up little space.
i hear his thund'ring voice resound,
and trampling feet that shake the solid ground.
3. having all the geometrical dimensions. a
vol. ii.
milton.
cowley.
dryden.
o
in asia foot are 1728/lainches, weighing 76 pound of
o *: *baton:t on coins.
4. strong; firm.
the duke's new palace is a noble pile built after this man-
ner, which makes it look very solid and majestick. addison.
5. sound; not weakly. -
if persons devote themselves to science, they should be well
assured of a solid and strong constitution of body, to bear the
fatigue. jwatts on the mind.
6. real; not empty; true; not sallacious. -
this might satisfy sober and wise men, not with soft and
specious words, but with pregnant and solid reasons k. charles.
either not define at all, or seek out other solider methods,
and more catholick grounds of defining. hammond.
the earth may of solid good contain . -
more plenty than the sun. s - milton.
7. not light; not superficial ; grave; profound.
these, wanting wit, affect gravity, and go by the name of
solid men; and a solid man is, in plain english, a solid solemn
fool. ipryden.
so lid. m. s. [in physick.] the part containing the fluids.
the first and most simple solids of our body are perhaps
merely terrestrial, and incapable of any change or disease. arb.
solidity. n.s.. [solidite, fr. soliditas, lat. from solid.]
1. fulness of matter; not hollowness.
2. firmness; hardness; compactness; density; not fluidity.
that which hinders the approach of two bodies, when
they are moving one towards another, i call solidity. locke.
the stone itself, whether naked or invested with earth, is
not by its solidity secured, but washed down. //codward.
3. truth; not fallaciousness; intellectual strength ; certainty.
the most known rules are placed in so beautiful a light,
that they have all the graces of novelty; and make the reader,
who was before acquainted with them, still more convinced
of their truth and salidity. addison's speciator.
his fellow-peers have attended to his eloquence, and have
been convinced by the solidity of his seasoning. prior.
this pretence his a great deal more of art, than of solidity
in it. - waterland.
so'lidly. adv. [from solid.]
1. firmly; densely ; compactly.
2. truly ; on good grounds.
a complete brave man ought to know solidly the main end
he is in the world for. digby.
* i look upon this as a sufficient ground for any rational man
to take up his religion upon, and which i defy the subtlest
atheist in the world solidly to answer; namely, that it is good
to be sure. south.
so'lidness. n. s. o solidity; firmness; density.
it beareth misseltoe: the cause may be the closeness and
folidness of the wood and pith of the oak. bacon.
it is built with that unusual solidness, that it seems he in-
tended to make a sacrifice to perpetuity, and to contest with
the iron teeth of time. howel's pocal forest.
solidu'ngulous. adj. [solidus and ungula, latin.] whole-
hoofed. -
it is set down by aristotle and pliny, that an horse and all
solidungulous or whole-hoofed animals have no gall, which we
find repugnant unto reason. brown's / ulgar errours.
solifi’dian. m. s. [solus and fides, lat.] one who supposes
only faith, not works, necessary to justification.
it may be justly feared, that the title of fundamentals, being
ordinarily confined to the doctrines of faith, hath occasioned
that great scandal in the church of god, at which so many
myriads of solifidians have stumbled, and fallen irreversibly, by
conceiving heaven a reward of true opinions. hammond.
sol i'loquy. n.s.. [soliloque, fr. solus and fouar, lat..] a dis-
course made by one in solitude to himself.
the whole poem is a solilo;wy - solomon is the person that
speaks: he is at once the hero and the author ; but he tells us
very often what others say to him. - prior.
he finds no respite from his anxious grief,
then seeks from his soliloquy relief. garth's dispensatory.
if i should own myself in love, you know lovers are always
allowed the comfort of soliloquy. speciator.
soo lipede. n. s. [solus and podes, lat.] an animal whose feet
are not cloven.
solipods, or firm footed animals, as horses, asses, and
mules, are in mighty number. brown's sugar errours.
solitatre. m. s [solitaire, fr.]
1. a recluse ; a hermit. . -
often have i been going to take possession of tranquillity,
when your conversation has spoiled me for a solitaire. pope.
2. an ornament for the neck. . -
solit arily. adv. [from solitary.] in solitude ; with lone-
liness; without company.
how should that subsist solitarily by itself, which hath no
substance, but individually the very same whereby others sub-
sist with it hooker,
feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage,
which dwell solitarily in the wood. 44ic. vii. 14.
24 o so'litariness.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 101</div><p class="text">s o l
s o m .
so lit ariness. n.s.. [from solitary.] solitude ; forbearance
of company; habitual retirement.
there is no cause to blame the prince for sometimes hearing
them : the blame-worthiness is, that to hear them he rather
goes to solitarines than makes them come to company, sidney.
you subject yourself to solitariness, the fly enemy that doth
most separate a man from well doing. sidney.
at home in wholsome solitariness,
my piteous soul began the wretchedness
of fuitors at the court to mourn. .
so'litary. adj. [solitaire, fr. solitarius, lat.]
1. living alone; not having company.
those rare and solitary, these in flocks. milton.
2. retired; remote from company; done or passed without
company.
in respect that it is solitary, i like it very well; but in respect
donne.
that it is private, it is a very vile life. shakespeare.
satan explores his solitary flight. amilton.
him fair lavinia
shall breed in groves to lead a solitary life. dryden's abn.
3. gloomy dismal. -
let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.
ob.
4. single. j
nor did a solitary vengeance serve: the cutting off one head
is not enough ; the eldest son must be involved. k. charles.
relations alternately relieve each other, their mutual con-
currences supporting their solitary instabilities. brown.
so lit ary. m. s. [from the adjective..] one that lives alone;
an hermit.
you describe so well your hermitical state of life, that none
of the ancient anchorites could go beyond you, for a cave,
with a spring, or any of the accommodations that befit a soli-
tary. pope's letters.
so litude. n.s.. [solitude, fr. solitudo, lat.]
1. lonely life; state of being alone.
it had been hard to have put more truth and untruth toge-
ther, in few words, than in that speech; whosoever is de-
hghted with solitude, is either a wild beast or a god. bacon.
what call's; thou solitude 2 is not the earth
with various living creatures, and the air,
replenish'd, and all these at thy command
to come, and play before thee ? milton's par. loft.
such only can enjoy the country who are capable of think-
ing when they are there: then they are prepared for solitude,
and in that solitude is prepared for them. dryden.
2. loneliness; remoteness from company.
the solitude of his little parish is become matter of great
comfort to him, because he hopes that god has placed him
and his flock there, to make it their way to heaven. law.
3. a lonely place; a desert.
- in these deep solitudes, and awful cells,
where heav'nly-pensive contemplation dwells.
so'll ar. n.s.. [solarium, low latin.] a garret.
some skilfully drieth their hops on a kel,
and some on a sollar, oft turning them wel. tosor.
so'lo. m. s. [italian.] a tune played by a single instrument.
so lomon’s loaf. m. s. a plant.
solomon's seal. n. j. [polygomatum, lat..] a plant.
solstice. m. s. [s/lice, fr. sol/litium, lat.]
1. the point beyond which the sun does not go; the tropical
point; the point at which the day is longest in summer, or
shortest in winter.
2. it is taken of itself commonly for the summer solstice.
the sun, ascending unto the northern signs, begetteth first
a temperate heat in the air, which by his approach unto the
sol/lice he intendeth, and by continuation increaseth the same
even upon declination. brown's vulgar errours.
let the plowmen's prayer
be for moist sol/lices, and winters fair.
solst1'tial. adj. [solsticial, fr. from sal/lice.]
1. belonging to the solstice.
observing the dog-days ten days before and after the equi-
noctial and solstitial points, by this observation alone, are ex-
empted a hundred days. brown's pulgar errours.
2. happening at the solstice, or at midsummer.
from the north to call
decrepit winter; from the south to bring
sol/litial summer's heat. milton's paradis. loft.
the fields labour'd with thirst ; aquarius had not shed
his wonted showers, and sirius parch'd with heat
sol/litial the green herbs. - -
solu ble. adj. [solubilis, lat.]
1. capable of dissolution or separation of parts.
sugar is a sal oleosum, being soluble in water and fusible in
fire. - arbuthnot.
2. producing laxity; relaxing.
solubi‘lity. n.s.. [from soluble.] susceptiveness of separation
of parts.
this cannot account for the indissolvable coherence of some
bodies, and the fragility and solubility of others. glanville.
pope.
may's wirgil.
philips.
to solve. v.a... [salvo, latin.] to clear; to explain; t
untie an intelle&amp;tual knot. 5 (q
he would solve high dispute
with conjugal caresses. milton.
the limiting of the regale only to christian princes, ji
rather involve and perplex the cause, than any way solve it.
do thou, my soul, the destin'd period wait, lofty.
when god shall solve the dark decrees of fate;
his now unequal dispensations clear,
and make all wise and beautiful appear. tickel
it is mere trifling to raise objections, merely for the so.
of answering and solving them. watt;
s9 ovency... m. s...[from solvent.] - ability to pay.
so'lvent. adj. [solvens, lat.]
i. having the power to cause dissolution.
when dissolved in water, it is not by the eye distinguish-
able from the solvent body, and appears as fluid. o,
2. able to pay debts contracted. o, “a
solvible. adj. [from solve..] possible to be cleared by reason
or inquiry.
intellective memory i call an act of the intelle&amp;ive faculty
because it is wrought by it, though i do not inquire how .
where, because it is not solville. ... hale's origin of manii.
* n.j. a fowl. i know not whether sound or
0/s2714.
a solund-goose is in bigness and feather very like a tame
goose, but his bill longer, and somewhat pointed; his wings
also much longer, being two yards over. grew.
a scot, when from the gallow-tree let loose,
drops into styx, and turns a soland-goos. cleaveland.
solution. m. s. [solution, fr. solutio, lat.]
1. disruption ; breach; disjunetion; separation.
in all bodies there is an appetite of union, and evitation of
solution of continuity. bacon's nat. hisloy.
2. matter dissolved; that which contains any thing dissolved,
aretaeus, to procure sleep, recommends a solution of opium
in water to foment the forehead. arbuthnot on coins.
when salt of tartar per deliquium, poured into the solution
of any metal, precipitates the metal, and makes it fall down
to the bottom of the liquor in the form of mud, does not this
argue that the acid particles are attracted more strongly by the
salt of tartar than by the metal, and by the stronger attraaion
go from the metal to the salt of tartar 2 mewton's opt,
3. resolution of a doubt; removal of an intelle&amp;tual difficulty.
something yet of doubt remains,
which only thy solution can resolve. milton's par. loft,
they give the reins to wand'ring thoughts, -
*till by their own perplexities involv’d
they ravel more, still less resolv’d,
but never find self-satisfying solution.
* - with hope and fear
the woman did the new solution hear;
the man diffides in his own augury,
and doubts. drydin.
this will instruct you to give a plainer solution of any dish-
cultics that may attend the theme, and refute objecions.
z - - jwatts.
songtive. adj. [from solvo, lat..] laxative; causing relax-
at 10n.
though it would not be so absterfive, opening, and solutive
as mead, yet it will be more lenitive in sharp diseases. bacon.
sology. m. s. sooo... and 2.eyo j. the doctrine of bo-
ics. -
some. a termination of many adjectives, which denote qua-
lity or property of any thing. it is generally joined with a
substantive : as gamesome. [saam, dutch.]
some. adj. [rom, rum, saxon; sums, gothick; sum, germ.
jon, danish; som, sommig, dutch.] -
1. more or less, noting an indeterminate quantity.
we landed some hundred men, where we found some fresh
water. raleigh.
2. more or fewer, noting an indeterminate number.
let me leave some of the folk that are with me. gen. xxxiii.
first go with me some few of you, and see the place and
how it may be made convenient for you; and then send for
your sick. bacon.
3. certain persons. some is often used absolutely for some people;
part. -
some to the shores do fly,
some to the woods, or whither fear advis'd
but running from, all to destruction hye. daniel,
not in the neighbouring moon as some have dream'd.
milton.
af.; - * *
milton's 4;onjois,
your edicts some reclaim from sins,
but most your life and blest example wins.
4. some is opposed to some, or to others.
it may be that the queen's treasure, in so great occasions of
disbursements, is not always so ready ; but being paid as it is,
now some, and then some, it is no great impoverishment to her
coffers. spenser on ireland.
dryden.
* *
5. it
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 102</div><p class="text">s o m
s o n
5. it is added to a number, to show that the number is uncertain
and conjectural.
being encountered with a strong storm some eight leagues
to the westward of scilly, i held it the office of a commander
to take a port. raleigh.
at the higher end of a creek milbrook lurketh between
two hills, a village of some eighty houses. carew.
old mens spirits visual, contrary to those of purblind
men, unite not, but when the object is at some good distance.
- bacon.
sir edward poinings, after he had continued at sluice some
good while, too, the king, then before buloigne.
bacon.
the number slain on the rebels part were some two thou-
sand. - bacon.
they have no black men amongst them, except some few
which dwell on the seacoast. heylin.
he bore away the prize to the admiration of some hundreds.
addison.
your good-natur'd gods, they say, -
descend some twice or thrice a day. prior,
paint, patches, jewels laid aside,
at night astronomers agree,
the evening has the day bely'd,
and phyllis is some forty-three. prior,
6. one ; any without determining which. -
the pilot of some small night-founder'd skiff. milton.
so'mebody. m. s. [some and body.]
1. one; not nobody; a person indiscriminate and undeter-
mined.
o that fir john were come, he would make this a bloody
day to somebody. shakespeare's henry iv.
jesus said somebody hath touched me; for 1 perceive that vir-
tuc is gone out of me. - luke, viii. 46.
if there be a tacit league. it is against somewhat or some-
body: who should they be is it against wild beasts no. it
is against such routs and shoals of people as have utterly dege-
nerated from the laws of nature. bacon.
if he had not done it when he did, somebody else might have
done it for him. heylin.
we must draw in somebody, that may stand
*twixt us and danger. denham's sophy.
the hopes that what he has must come to somebody, and
that he has no heirs, have that effect, that he has every day
three or four invitations. daison's spectator.
2. a person of coffideration.
theudas rose up, boasting himself to be somebody. aos.
so medeal. adv. irumbeal, saxon.] in some degree. ob-
solete.
siker now i see thou speak'st of spite,
all for thou lackest somedele their delight. spensor.
so mehow. adj. [some and how.] one way or other; i know
not how.
the vesicular cells may be for receiving the arterial and
nervous juices, that, by their action upon one another, they
may be swelled somehow, so as to shorten the length of every
fibril. cheyne.
so’mer's ault. r. m. s. [somerset is the corruption. sommer, a
so'mers et. } beam, and sault, french, a leap..] a leap
by which a jumper throws himself from a height, and turns
over his head.
so mething.. n.s. [rumcing, saxon.] -
1. a thing existing, though it appears not what ; a thing or
matter indeterminate.
- when fierce bavar
did from afar the british chief behold,
betwixt despair and rage, and hope and pain,
something within his warring bosom roll’d. prior.
the force of the air upon the pulmonary artery is but
small, in respect of that of the heart; but it is still something.
arbuthnot on aliments.
you'll say the whole world has something to do, something to
talk of, something to wish for, and something to be employed
about; but pray put all these somethings together, and what is
the sum total but just nothing. pope's letters.
here she beholds the chaos dark and deep,
where nameless somethings in their causes sleep.
2. more or less; not nothing.
something yet of doubt remains. -
years following years steal something ev'ry day,
pope.
milton.
at least they steal us from ourselves away. pope.
still from his little he could something spare,
to feed the hungry, and to cloathe the bare. harte.
3. a thing wanting a fixed denomination.
something between a cottage and a cell—
yet virtue here could sleep, and peace could dwell. harte.
4. part.
something of it arises from our infant state.
5. distance not great.
j.watts.
i will acquaint you with the perfeoł spy o' th' time; for’t
must be done to-night, and something from the palace. shak.
so m ething. adv. in some degree.
the pain went away upon it; but he was something dis.
couraged by a new pain falling some days after upon his elbow
on the other side. - temple.
so metime, adv. [some and time.]
1. once ; formerly. - - ... -
what art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
together with that fair and warlike form,
in which the majesty of buried denmark -* - *-*.
did sometime march : - shakosheare's haml.i.
good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for france.
- - shakespeare.
2. at one time or other hereafter.
so'metimes. adv. [some and times.]
1. not never ; now and then ; at one time or other.
it is good that we sometimes be contradicted, and that we
always bear it well; for perfect peace cannot be had in this
world. - - - taylor,
2. at one time: opposed to sometimes, or to another time.
the body passive is better wrought upon at sometimes than .
at others. bacon's natural history.
sometimes the one, and sometimes the other, may be glanced
upon in these scripture descriptions. burnet.
. he writes not always of a piece, but sometimes mixes trivial
things with those of greater moment: sometimes also, though
not often, he runs riot, and knows not when he has said
enough. dryden's fables, prosace.
so'mew hat. m. s. [some and what..] ... -
i. something; not nothing, though it be uncertain what.
upon the sea somewhat methought did rise
like blueish mists. dryden's indian emperor.
he that shuts his eyes against a small light, on purpose to
avoid the fight of somewhat that displeases him, would, for
the same reason, shut them against the sun. atterbury.
2. more or less.
concerning every of these, somewhat christ hath com-
manded, which must be kept 'till the world's end: on the con-
trary side, in every of them somewhat there may be added, as
the church judges it expedient. hooker;
these salts have somewhat of a nitrous taste, but mixt with
a smatch of vitriolick. grew.
3. part greater or less.
somewhat of his good sense will suffer in this transfusion,
and much of the beauty of his thoughts will be lost. dryden.
so'mew hat. adv. in some degree.
the flowre of armes, lycymnius, that somewhat aged grew.
chapman,
holding of the breath doth help somewhat to cease the hic-
cough. - bacon's natural history.
he is somewhat arrogant at his first entrance, and is too in-
quisitive through the whole; yet these imperfections hinder
not our compassion. - dryden.
so'me where. adv. [some and where.] in one place or other;
not nowhere. -
hopeless and forelorn -
they are return'd, and somewhere live obscurely. denham.
compressing two prisms hard together, that their sides;
which by chance were a very little convex, might somewhere
touch one another, i found the place in which they touched
to become absolutely transparent, as if they had there been one
continued piece of glass. newton's opt.
does something still, and somewhere yet remain,
reward or punishment : prior.
of the dead we must speak gently ; and therefore, as mr.
dryden says somewhere, peace be to its manes. pope.
soils. n.s.. [some and while.] once; for a time. out
of use. -
though under colour of the shepherds somewhile,
there crept in wolves full of fraud and guile,
that often devoured their own sheep,
and often the shepherd that did 'em keep. spensor's pas?.
somn1 fe rous. adj.. [somnisere, fr. somnifer, lat...] causing
sleep; procuring sleep ; soporiferous; dormitive.
i wish for some sominiferous potion, that might force me to
sleep away the intermitted time, as it does with men in sor-
l'ow. j/alton's angler.
somni'fick. adj. [somnus and facio, lat..] caufing sleep.
so'mnolency. m. s. [somnolentia, lat..] sleepiness; inclina-
tion to sleep. -
son. m. s. ssanus, gothick; runa, saxon; sohn, german;
fon, swedish; some, dutch; son, sclavonian.]
1. a male born of one or begotten by one; correlative to father
or mother. - -
she had a son for her cradle, ere she had a husband for her
bed. shakespeare's king lear.
- cast out this bond woman and her son. gen. xxi. io.
he compares the affection of the divine being to the indul-
gence of a wise father, who would have his sons exercised with
labour and pain, that they may gather strength. . addison.
2. descendant, however distant: as, the sons of adam.
i am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings. if xix.
3. compellation of an old to a young man, or of a confessor to
his penitent, -
be
6<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 103</div><p class="text">s o n
be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
riddling confession finds but riddling shrift. shakespeare.
4. native of a country.
britain then - -
sees arts her savage sons controul. pope.
5. the second person of the trinity.
if thou be the son of god, come down.
6. product of any thing.
our imperfections prompt our corruption, and loudly tell
us we are sons of earth. brown's vulgar errours.
earth's tall sons, the cedar, oak, and pine,
their parents undecaying strength declare. blackmore.
7. in scripture, sons of pride, and sons of light, denoting some
quality. 'tis a hebraism.
- this new fav’rite
of heav'n, this man of clay, son of despite.
son-in-law. m. s. one married to one's daughter.
if virtue no benighted beauty lack,
your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
shakespeare's othell.
a foreign son-in-law shall come from far,
whose race shall bear aloft the latian name. dryd. æn.
soonship. m. s. [from son.] filiation; the character of a son.
the apostle to the hebrews makes afflictions not only in-
cident but necessary to christianity, the badge and cognizance
of sonship. decay of piety.
sonata. m. s. [italian.] . a tune. -
he whistled a scotch tune, and an italian sonata. addison.
could pedro, think you, make no trial
of a sonata on his viol,
unless he had the total gut,
whence every string at first was cut.
song. m. s. [from rerungen, saxon.]
1. anything modulated in the utterance.
noise other than the sound of dance and song.
he first thinks fit no sonnetter advance
his censure farther than the song or dance.
2. a poem to be modulated by the voice; a ballad.
pardon, goddess of the night
those that slew thy virgin knight;
for the which, with songs of woe,
round about his tomb they go !
in her days ev'ry man shall sing
the merry songs of peace to all his neighbours.
shakespeare's henry viii.
mat. xxvii. 40.
milton.
prior.
milton.
dryden.
shakespeare.
3. a poem; lay ; strain.
the bard that first adorn'd our native tongue,
tun'd to his british lyre this ancient song.
there we a while will rest;
our next ensuing song to wond’rous things addrest.
drayton.
milton.
dryden.
4. poetry; poesy.
4. this subject for heroick song pleas'd me.
names memorable long,
if there be force in virtue, or in song. pope.
5. notes of birds.
the lark, the messenger of day,
saluted in her song the morning grey. dryden.
6. an old sonc. a trifle.
i do not intend to be thus put off with an old song. more.
a hopeful youth, newly advanced to great honour, was
forced by a cobler to resign all for an old sing. addison.
so"ng is h. adj. [from song..] containing songs; consisting of
songs. a low word.
the songish part must abound in the softness and variety of
numbers, its intention being to please the hearing. dryden.
so"ngst er. m. s. [from song.] a singer. used of human
fingers ; it is a word of flight contempt.
the pretty songsters of the spring with their various notes
did seem to welcome him as he passed. howel.
• some songsters can no more sing in any chamber but their
own, than some clerks read in any book but their own.
l’es’range.
either songster holding out their throats,
and folding up their wings, renew'd their notes.
so"ngst ress. n.s.. [from song..] a female singer.
through the soft silence of the listening night,
the sober-suited songsiress trills her lay. thomson's summer.
so'nnet. n. s. [sonnet, fr. sonnetto, italian.]
1. a short poem consisting of fourteen lines, of which the
rhymes are adjusted by a particular rule. it is not very suit-
able to the english language, and has not been used by any
man of eminence since milton, of whose sonnets this is a spe-
ciii.16:11. -
a book was writ of late call'd tetrachordon,
and woven close, both matter, form, and stile;
the subject new : it walk'd the town a-while,
numb'ring good intelle&amp;ts, now seldom por’d on:
cries the stall-reader, bless us, what a word on
a title-page is this 1 and some in file -
stand spelling false, while one might walk to mile-
end-green. why is it harder, firs, than gordon,
a
dryden.
colkitto, or macdonnel, or galasp?
those rugged names to our like mouths grow sleek,
that would have made quintilian stare and gasp.:
thy age like ours, soul of fir john cheek,
hated not learning worse than told or asp,
when thou taught'st cambridge and king elwald greek.
4milton.
2. a small poem.
let us into the city presently,
to sort some gentlemen well skill d in music 5
i have a sonnet that will serve the turn, shakespeare.
sonnette‘e.r. m. s. [sounctier, fr. from sonnet.] a smallpoet,
in contempt.
assist me, some extemporal god of rhime; for i am sure i
shall turn sonnetteer. shakep. love's labour' loft.
there are as many kinds of gardening as of poetry: your
makers of parterrcs and flower-gardens are epigrammatists and
/annetteers in this art. spelator.
what woful stuff this madrigal would be,
in some starv'd hackney sonnetteer or me
but let a lord once own the happy lines,
how the wit brightens ! how the style refines | pope.
soni'ferous, a j. [sonus and fero,
sound. -
this will appear, let the subject matter of sounds be what
it will ; either the atmosphere, or the etherial part thereof, or
joniferous particles of bodies. - - dorham,
sonorifick. adj. [ sonorus and facio, lat.] producing sound.
if he should ask me why a clock strikes, and points to the
hour; and i should say, it is by an indicating form and son:-
rifick quality, this would be unsatisfactory. watts's logick,
sono’rous. adj. [ sonore, fr. sonorus, lat.]
1. loud sounding ; giving loud or shrill sound. bodies are
distinguished as sonorous or unsonorous.
all the while
sonorous metal blowing martial founds;
at which the universal host up-sent
a shout that tore hell’s concave.
2. high sounding; magnificent of sound.
the italian opera, amidst all the meanness and familiarity
of the thoughts, has something beautiful and sonorous in the
expression. zdoson on italy.
the vowels are sonorous. dryden.
sono'rously. adv, [from sonorous.] with high sound; with
magnificence of sound.
sono rousness. n.s. [from sonorous.]
i. the quality of giving found.
enquiring of a maker of viols and lutes of what age he
thought lutes ought to be, to attain their full and best season-
ing for sonorousness, he replied, that in some twenty years
would be requisite, and in others forty. boyle.
2. magnificence of sound.
soqn. adv. [sons, gothick; rona, saxon; son, dutch.]
1. before long time be past; shortly after any time assigned or
supposed.
nor did they not perceive their evil plight,
yet to their gen'ral's voice they soon obey'd.
you must obey me, soon or late;
why should you vainly struggle with your fate? dryden,
2. early 5 before any time supposed: opposed to late.
o boy!, thy father gave thee life too soon,
and hath berest thee of thy life too late. shakes. hen. vi.
do this, that i may be restored to you the sooner. heb. xiii.
how is it that you are come so soon to-day ex. ii. 18.
the earlier stayeth for the later, and not that the later
cometh sooner. bacon's nat. history.
3. readily ; willingly.
i would as soon see a river winding through woods and mea-
dows, as when it is tossed up in so many whimsical figures at
versailles. addison's guardian.
4. it has in sidney the signification of an adjective, whether li-
centiously or according to the custom of his time.
he hath preserved argalus alive, under pretence of having
him publickly executed after these wars, of which they hope
for a soon and prosperous issue. sidney.
5. soon as. immediately; at the very time.
as soon as he came high unto the camp, he saw the calf and
the dance. ex. xxxii. 19.
nor was his virtue poison'd, soon as born,
with the too early thoughts of being king. drydin.
feasts, and business, and pleasures, and enjoyments, seem
great things to us, whilst we think of nothing else; but as
soon as we add death to them, they all sink into an equal lit-
tleness. latt.
soonly, adv. [from soon.] quickly; speedily. this words
remember in no other plate; but if soon be, as it seems once
to have been, an adjective, soonly is proper.
a mason meets with a stone that wants no cutting, and,
jonly approving of it, places it in his work. more.
$9.9pberry. n.s.. [sapindus, lat..] a plant. amiller.
$99t. n.s. [ro, saxon; soot, islandick; saet, dutch..] con-
densed or embodied smoke.
lat. j giving or bringing
milton’s par. loft.
milton.
so,
o's
me
t; ;
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 104</div><p class="text">s o o
set, though thin spread in a field, is a very good compost.
- - - bacon.
if the fire be not kept within the tunnel of the chimney,
and some appointed to sweep down the soot, the house will be
in danger of burning. howel.
of they assay’d,
hunger and thirst constraining; drugg’d as oft
with hatefullest disrelish, with'd their jaws,
with soot and cinders fill’d. milton's paradis, loft.
our houshold gods, that droop upon our hearths,
each from his venerable face shall brush
the macedonian foot, and shine again. dryd. cleomener.
soot ed. adj. [from soot.] smeared, manured, or covered with
t.
the land was sooted before. mortimer.
sooterkus. m. s. a kind of false birth fabled to be produced
by the dutch women fron sitting over their stoves.
when jove was, from his teeming head,
of wit’s fair goddess brought to-bed,
there follow'd at his lying-in,
for after-birth, a soterkin. swift.
s00th. n. s. [ros, saxon j truth ; reality. obsolete.
sir, understand you this of me in south,
th' youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
her father keeps from all access of suitors,
until the eldest sister first be wed. shakespeare.
he looks like sooth : he says he loves my daughter;
i think so too ; for never gaz'd the moon
upon the water, as he'll stand and read
my daughter's eyes. shakespeare's jpinter’s tale.
if i have any skill in soothsaving, as in footh i have none,
it doth prognosticate that i shall change caps. cam en's kem.
the very sooth of it is, that an ill habit has the force of an
ill fate. l'a/irange.
i did not mean to chide you ;
for, sooth to say, i hold it noble in you
to cherish the distress'd. rowe.
sooth. adj. [roe, saxon.) pleasing; delightful.
some other means i have,
which once of melibaeus old i learn'd,
the soothost shepherd that e'er pip'd on plains. milton.
sooth. n.s. sweetness; kindness.
meaning here. *
that eler this tongue of mine,
that laid the sentence of dread banishment
on yond proud man, should take it off again
with words of socih. shakesp. richard ii.
to soo tii. v. a. [æro sian, saxon.]
1. to flatter; to please with blandishments.
in soothing them, we tour sh gainst our senate
this seems to be the
the cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition. shakespeare,
can i sooth tyranny * *
seem pleas'd to see my royal master murder'd,
his crown usurp'd, a distaff in the throne * dryden.
by his fair daughter is the chief confin'd,
who sooths to deat delight his anxious mind;
successless all her soft caresses prove,
to banish from his breast his country's love. pope's ods.
thinks he that memnon, soldier as he is,
thoughtless and dull, will listen to his soothing * rowe.
i've try'd the force of every reason on him,
sooth'd and caress'd, been angry, sooth'd again ;
laid safety, life, and interest in his fight ,
but all are vain, he scorns them all for cato.
2. to calm; to soften ; to mollify.
the beldame
sooth; her with blandishments, and frights with threats. dry.
3. to gratify ; to please.
this calm’d his cares; sooth'd with his future fame,
and pleas'd to hear his propagated name. dryden.
sooth er. m. s. [from sooth j a flatterer; one who gains by
blandishments.
i cannot flatter: i defy
the tongues of sothers. shakoshcare's henry iv.
t. soothsay. v. n. isoth and say..] to predict; to foretell.
a damsel, posselled with a spirit of divination, met us,
addis. cato.
which brought her masters much gain by soot saying. acts, xvi. .
soothsa'yer. n.s. (from josay j a forcte cr; a predictor;
a prognosticator. - - -
scarce was musidorus made partaker of this oft blinding
light, when there were found numbers of soothsayers who at-
firmed strange and incredible things should be performed by
that child. sidney.
asoothsayer bids you beware the ides of march. shakespeare:
twis animated to expect the papacy by the prediction of
a soothsayer, that one should succeed pope leo, whose name
should be adrian, an aged man of mean birth, and of great.
learning and wisdom. bacon's henry vii.
soo'tiness. n.s.. [from sooty.] the quality of being sooty;
fuliginousness. -
$ogrx, adj. [from sat.j
. . wol, il s s:
1. breeding soot.
by fire of sooty coal th’ alchymist turns
metals to gold milton.
- - f07;
2. consisting of foot, fuliginous. tlfo,
'th o o: o chymical way so to defecate this oil,
2 all not spend into a so aoa.
3. black; dark; . footy matter. jwilkins.
all the grisly legions that troop
under the sooty flag of acheron;
harpies and hydras and all monstrous forms,
swift on his sooty pinions flits the gnome
and in a vapour reach'd the gloomy dome.
to soory. [from scot.] to make black with foot.
then (for his own weeds) shirt and coat all rent
o and all sootid with noisome smoke, 2 -
he put him on ; and over all a cloke.
sop. n. / [rop, saxon; sopa, spanish; soppe, p.s.o.
1. anything steeped in liquor; commonly to be eaten.
the bounded waters
would lift their bosoms higher than the shores,
and make a sop of all this solid globe. shakespeare.
draw, you rogue; for though it be night, yet the moon
shines: i’ll nake a sap o'th’ moonshine of you.' shakespear.
sops in wine, quantity for quantity, inebriate more than
wine of itself. bacon's natural history.
2. any thing given to pacify, from the sop given to cerberus.
the prudent sibyl had before prepard
#/. in honey stop d, to charm the guard,
nich mix'd with powerful drugs, she cast before
his greedy grinning jaws, jus' op'd to roar. dryden.
ill nature is not ure wish a sop; quarrelsome men, as
well as quarrelsome curs, are worse for fair usage. l'e/irange.
l'o cerb rus they give a sop,
his tripple barking mouth to itop. . swift.
to scp. v. a. so steep in liquor. -
sop e. m. s. [see soap.)
soph. n.s [from sophisła, lat.] a young man who has been
two years at the university.
three cambridge sophs, and three pert templars came,
the time their talents, and their tastes the same;
each prompt to query, answer and debate,
and smit with love of poesy and prate. pope's dunciad.
soro h1. n.f. [persian.] the emperor of persia.
by thi, scimitar
- milton.
pope.
that slew the sophi and a persian prince. shakespeare.
a fig for the sultan and sophi. congreve.
so ph is m. m. s. [sophisma, lat.] a fallacious argument; an
unsound subtilty; a fallacy.
when a false argument puts on the appearance of a true
one, then it is properly called a sophism or fallacy. watts.
- i, who as yet was never known to show,
false pity to premeditated woe,
will graciously explain great nature's laws,
and hearthy sophisms in so plain a cause. harte.
sophist. m. s. sophisła, lat.] a professor of philosophy.
the court of croesus is said to have been much resorted by
the sophis's of greece in the happy beginning of his reign.
- temple.
sophist er. m. s. [sophis?, fr. sophisła, lat.]
1. a disputant fallaciously subtle ; an artful but insidious logi-
c13 il-
a subtle traitor needs no sophisler. shakesp. hen. vi.
if a heathen philosopher brings arguments from reason,
which none of our atheistical soph/?ers can confute, for the
immortality of the soul, i hope they will so weigh the conse-
quences, as neither to talk, nor live, as if there was no such
thing. denham.
not all the subtle objections of sophifters and rabbies, against
the gospel, so much prejudiced the reception of it, as the re-
proach of those crimes with which they aspersed the assemblies
of christians. rogers.
2. a professor of philosophy; a sophist. this sense is antiquated.
alcidimus the sophifter hath arguments to prove, that vo-
luntary and extemporal far excelleth premeditated speech. hog.
sop h1's fic al. adj. [sophistique, fr. from sophis?..] fallaciously
subtle; logically deceitful.
neither know i whether i should prefer for madness, and
sophistical couzenage, that the same body of christ should be
in a thousand places at once of this sublunary world. hall.
when the state of the controversy is well understood, the
difficulty will not be great in giving answers to all his sophis-
tical cavils. stillingfleet.
that may seem a demonstration for the present, which to
postelity will appear a mere sophistical knot. more.
sop h1's tically. adv. [from sophistical.] with fallacious sub-
tilty.
hino argues most splistically. *f;
t, sophi's t1cate. v. a. [sophistiquer, fr. from sophis?..] to
adulterate; to corrupt with something spurious. - *--
if the passions of the mind be strong, they easily sophisticate
the understanding, they make it apt to believe upon.every
- 24 p slender
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 105</div><p class="text">s o r
slender warrant, and to imagine infallible truth, where scaree
..any probable shew appeareth. hooker.
here's three of us are sophisticated. - . . shakespeare.
- divers experiments succeeded not, because they were at
'one time tried with genuine materials, and at another time
t with sophislicated ones. - boyle.
the only persons amongst the heathens, who sophisticated.
nature and philosophy, were the stoicks; who affirmed a fa-
tal, unchangeable concatenation of causes, reaching even to
the elicite ads of man's will. south's sermons.
yet the rich cullies may their boasting spare ;
they purchase but sophisiicated ware:
'tis prodigality that buys deceit,
where both the giver and the taker cheat. dryden.
the eye hath its coats and humours transparent and colour-
less, lest it should tinge and sophisłicate the light that it lets in
by a natural jaundice, ** bentley.
sophi'sticate. part. adj. [from the verb.] adulterate ; not
a genuine. … -- - - * *
o wine sparkles brighter far than she,
s 'tis pure and right, without deceit,
and that no woman e'er will be ;
no, they are all sophisłicate. * cowley.
since then a great part of our scientifical treasure is most
likely to be adulterate, though all bears the image and super-
scription of truth; the only way to know what is sophifficate
and what is not so, is to bring all to the examen of the touch-
stone. . . . . - - glanville.
so truth, when only one supply'd the state,
grew scarce and dear, and yet sophislicate. dryden.
sophistication, n. j. [sophisłication, fr. from sophislicate.]
adulteration; not genuineness. -
sophiftication is the act of counterfeiting or adulterating any
thing with what is not so good, for the sake of unlawful gain.
- - $2uincy.
the drugs and simples sold in shops, generally are adulte-
rated by the fraudulent avarice of the sellers, especially if the
preciousness may make their sophistication very beneficial. boyle.
- besides easy submission to sophisłications of sense, we have
n inability to prevent the miscarriages of our junior reasons.
* - - - glanville.
sophisticator. n.s...[from sophilicate.] . adulterator ; one
that makes things not genuine. -
so'phistry. m. s. [from sophisł.]
1. fallacious ratiocination. . . -
- his sophisiry prevailed; his father believed.
sidney.
these men have obscured and confounded the natures of
things, by their false principles and wretched sophistry; tho’
an act be never so sinful, they will strip it of its guilt. south.
2. logical exercise. • *-*
the more youthful exercises of sophisłry, themes and de-
clamations. - felton.
to sopor air e. v. m. isoporo, lat..] to lay asleep. dict.
sopor1'ferous. adj. isopar and fero.] productive of sleep;
causing sleep; narcotick; opiate; dormitive , somniferous;
anodyne; sleepy. . . . . . -
the particular ingredients of those magical ointments are
opiate and sporiferous ;.. for anointing of the forehead, neck,
feet, and back-bone, procures dead sleeps. bacon.
while the whole operation was performing, i lay in a pro-
found sleep, by the force of that soporiferous medicine infused
into my liquor. - swift.
*
sororousness. n. s. [from sporiferous.] the quality of .
causing sleep. o. 1. . . .
sopo rio fick. adj. [sopor and facio..] causing sleep; opiate ;
narcotick.
the colour and taste of opium are, as well as its sporifick
or anodyne virtues, mere powers depending on its primary
. . qualities. - - locke.
so' pper, n. f.
sor b. m. s. [sorbum, lat.] the berry of the sorb or service-
tree, -
so'rbile. adj. [from sorbeo, lat..] that may be drunk or
sipped. - i . . . . . -
sorbi’tion. n.f. [sorbitio, lat.] the aet of drinking or sp-
- ing. -
soisse. n..f. [sorcier, fr. sortiarius, low latin.] a con-
jurer; an enchanter; a magician. - * * -
they say this town is full of cozenage, ...
as nimble jugglers that deceive the eye, , ~
drug-working forcerers that change the mind,
soul killing witches that deform the body, , -
and many such like libertines of fin. shakespeare.
. the weakness of the power of witches upon kings and ma-
gistrates may be ascribed to the weakness of imagination; for
… it is hard for a witch or a sorcerer to put on a belief that they
o, can hurt such. ..." bacon's natural history.
- * he saw a sable sarcerer arise, **
all sudden gorgon's hiss, and dragon's glare,
- - and ten horn'd fiends. pope.
. . . . the egyptian sorcerers contended with moses; but the
- craft; charms.
(from sp.) one that fleeps any thing in liquor.
sore. adj. [from the noun )
wonders which moses wrought did so far transcend the power
of magicians, as made them confess it was the finger of god.
r" o watts's logico,
so'rceross. n.s. [female of sorcerer.] a female magician;
an enchantress.
bring forth that sorcer's condemn'd to burn. shalo.
divers witches and sorceresses have fed upon man's flesh, to
aid their imagination with high and foul vapours. bacon,
the snaky sorceres; that sat -
just by hell-gate, and kept the fatal key, -
ris'n, and with hideous outcry rush'd between. milton,
how cunningly the sorceres, displays
her own transgressions, to upbraid me, mine. milton,
so'rce rous. adj. containing enchantments. a word not
used. -
- - th’ art ent'ring circe's house,'
where by her med'cines, black and sorcerous,
thy souldiers all are shut in well arm'd sties,
and turn'd to swine. chapman,
so'rcery. m. s. magick; enchantment; conjuration; witch.
- this witch sycorax,
for mischiefs manifold, and sorceries terrible,
was banish'd. shakespeare.
adders wisdom i have learn'd
to fence my ears against thy sorceries. milton.
a&amp;t:eon has long tracts of rich soil; but had the misfortune
in his youth to fall under the power of sorcery. tatler.
sord. m. s. [corrupted from sward..] turf; grassy ground.
. this is the prettiest low-born lass that ever ran on the green
jord. shakespeare's winter's tal.
an altar of grassy sard. amilton.
so’rdes. m. s. [latin.) foulness; dregs.
the sea washes off the soil and sordes wherein mineral mos.
ses were involved and concealed, and thereby renders them
more conspicuous. j/oodward.
so'rd et. ; n. s. [sourdine, fr. sordina, italian.] a small
so'rdin e. pipe put into the mouth of a trumpet to make it
sound lower or shriller. baily.
so'rdid. adj. [sordidus, lat.]
1. foul ; gross ; filthy; dirty.
- - there charon stands
a sordid god, down from his hoary chin
a length of beard descends, uncomb'd, unclean. dryden.
2. [sordide, fr.] intelle&amp;tually dirty ; mean; vile; base.
- thou can'st not those exceptions make,
which vulgar sordid mortals take. cowley.
it is strange since the priests office heretofore was always
splendid, that it is now looked upon as a piece of religion, to
make it low and sordid. south's sermoni.
3. [sordide, fr.] covetous ; niggardly.
he may be old, - - -
and yet not sordid, who refuses gold. denham.
h one should cease to be generous and charitable, because
another is sordid and ungrateful, it would be much in the
power of vice to extinguish christian virtues. l’estrange.
so rdidly. adv. [from sordid.] meanly; poorly; covetously.
so'rp1d ness. n.s. (from sordid.]
1. meanness; baseness.
i omit the madnesses of caligula's delights, and the exe-
crable sord:dness of those of tiberius. cowley.
2. nastiness; not neatness.
providence deters people from sluttishness and soraidness, and
provokes them to cleanliness. ray.
sore. m. s. [ran, saxon; saur, danish.] a place tender and
painful; a place excoriated ; an ulcer. it is not used of a
wound, but of a breach of continuity, either long continued
or from internal cause: to be a fore, there must be an exco-
riation ; a tumour or bruise is not called a sore before some
disruption happen. -
let us hence provide
a salve for any sore that may betide. shakespeare's hen. vi,
receipts abound; but searching all thy store,
the best is still at hand to launce the sore,
and cut the head; for till the core be found .
the secret vice is fed and gathers ground. dryden.
by these all festring sore her councils heal,
which time or has disclos'd, or shall reveal- dryden.
lice and flies, which have a most wonderful instinet to find
out convenient places for the hatching and nourishment of
their young, lay their eggs upon fores. bently,
1. tender to the touch. it has sometimes of before the causal
il quisl. - -
we can ne'er be sure,
whether we pain or not endure;
and just so far are sore and griev'd,
as by the fancy is believ'd. fiudibras.
while sore of battle, while our wounds are green,
why should we tempt the doubtful dye again.
it was a right answer of the physician to his patient, that
dryder.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 106</div><p class="text">s o. r.
so r
|
had sore eyes, if you have more pleasure in the taste of wine
than in the use of your fight, wine is good; but if the plea-
fire of seeing be greater to you than that of drinking, wine is
ht. - locke.
". in the mind; easily vexed. 0-are
malice and hatred are wery fretting and vexatious, and apt
to make our mind.so and uneasy; but he that can moderate
these affections will find ease in his mind. tillotson.
laugh at your friends, and if your friends are sore,
so much the better, you may laugh the more. pope.
violent with pain; afflictively vehement. see sore. adverb.
3. threescore and ten i can remember well,
within the volume of which time i've seen
hours dreadful, and things strange; but this fore night
hath trifled former knowings. shafoore.
i will persevere in my course of loyalty, though the conflict
*::: between that and my blood. shakespeare's k. lear.
y loins are filled with a sore disease; and there is no
whole part in my body. common prayer.
sore hath been their fight,
as likeliest was, when two such foes met arm'd.
--
milton.
gentle lady, may thy grave
peace and quiet cwer have;
after this day's travel sore, -
sweet rest scize thee evermore. milton.
they are determin'd to live up to the holy rule, though
for evils and great temporal inconveniencies should attend the
discharge of their duty. atterbury.
4. criminal. out of use.
to lapse in fulness
ls serer than to lie for need; and falsehood
is worse in kings than beggars. shakespeare's cymbeline.
sore. n.f. [from saur, french.]
the buck is called the first year a fawn; the second, a
pricket; the third, a forel; and the fourth year, a sore. shak.
sore. adv. [this the etymologists derive from seer, dutch; but
for means only an intenseness of any thing; fore almost al-
ways includes pain.] with painful or dangerous vehemence;
a very painful degree; with afflictive violence or pertinacity.
it is now little used.
thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me
common prayer.
fort.
the knight, then lightly leaping to the prey,
with mortal steel him mote again so sire,
that headless his unwieldy body lay.
- - - fairy queen.
he this and that, and each man's blow
doth eye, defend, and shift, being laid to sore. daniel.
though iron new and mangle sore, -
would wounds and bruises honour more. hudibrar.
distrust shook sore their minds. 41.ton.
so that if palanon were wounded sore,
arcite was hurt as much. dryden's knight's tale.
sore sich'd the knight, who this long sermon heard:
at length, considering all, his heart he chear'd. dryden.
how, didius, shall a roman fore repuls'd
greet your arrival to this distant isle :
how bid you welcome to thete shatter'd legions 2 a. philips.
so're hon. un, s. [irish and scottish.) a kind of arbitrary
sor n. exaction or servile tenure, formerly in scotland,
as likewise in ireland. whenever a chieftain had a mind to
revel, he came down among the tenants with his followers,
by way of contempt called in the lowlands giliwitsitts, and liv-
ed on free quarters; so that ever since, when a person obtrudes
himself us on another, stays at his house, and hangs upon him
for bed and board, he is said to sorn, or be a sorner. a1acbean.
they exact upon them all kind of services; yea, and the
very wild exactions, coignie, livery, and sorehan ; by which
they poll and utterly undo the poor tenants and freeholders
under them. spensor'; ireland.
so'rel. n.s. [diminutive of sore.]
the buck is called the first year a fawn; the second, a
pricket; the third, a sorel. shakspeare.
so'rely. adv. [from sore.]
1. with a great degree of pain or distress.
here's the smell of the blood still ; all the perfumes of ara-
bia will not sweeten this little hand. oh! oh! oh!—what
a figh is there? the heart is sorry overcharged. shakespeare.
of the warrior train,
though most were sortly wounded, none were slain. dryden.
2. with vehe:ncase dangerous or afictive.
i have done ill,
of which i do accuse myself so sorry,
that i will enjoy no more. shakespeare.
so're ness. n.s. from ser:..] tenderness of a hurt. -
he that, whilst the soronts of his late pangs of conscience
remains, finds himself a little indisposed for sin, presently con-
cludes repeatance hath had its perfect work. desay of piety.
my foot began to swell, and the pain asswaged, though it
left such a screness, that i could hardly suffer the clothes of
my bed. temple.
sox (tes. n.s. saw:iirr;..] properly an heap. an argument
where one proposition is accumulated on another.
chrysippus the stock inv
- ented a kind of -
sisting of more than three a kind of argument, con
propositions, which is called sorites,
or a heap. dryden-
sorites is when several middle terms are chosen to connect
onc another successively in several propositions, till the last
proposition connects its predicate with the first subject. thus,
all men of revenge have their souls often uneasy; uneasy souls
are a plague to themselves
- ; now to be one's own plague is
folly in the extreme. - o i
- -- j/atts’ ick.
soro ricide. [ soror and **do.] the murder of a s: logt.
so rr age. n. s. the blades of green wheator barley. dio.
so'rrance. n.s. [in farriery.] any disease or sore in horses.
- - - - ixic7.
sool, "...s. [rune, saxon; sorel, french; exall, latin.]
this plant agrees with the dock in all its characters and onl
differs in having an acid taste. &gt; o
of all roots of herbs the root of jarrel goeth the farthest into
the earth. it is a cold and acid herb that loveth the earth, and
is not much drawn by the sun. bacon.
acid austere vegetables contract and strengthen the fibres
as all kinds of sorrel, the virtues of which lie in acid stringen:
salt, a sovereign antidote against the putrescent bilious alkali.
- arbuthnot on aliments.
so raily. adv. [from sorry..] meanly; poorly; despicably ,
wretchedly ; pitiably.
thy pipe, 9 pan, shall help though i fing serrily. sidney.
soo riskss. n.s. (from sorry..] meanness; wretchedness; pi-
tiableness; despicableness. -
sor row: n. j. [song, danish.) grief; pain for something
past; sadness i mourning. sorrow is not commonly under-
stood as the effect of present evil, but of lost good.
sorrow is uneasiness in the mind, upon the thought of a
good lost, which might have been enjoyed longer; or the
sense of a present evil. t
locke.
sorrow on thce, and all the pack of you;
that triumph thus upon my misery shakespeare.
a world of woe and sorrow. milton.
s
some other hour i will to tears allow ;
but having you, can show no sorrow now. dryden.
to so r row. v. n. [saargan, gothick; ropaian, sax.] to
grieve ; to be sad ; to be dejected.
the miserable change, now at my end,
lament, nor sorrow at. shakesp. anthony and cleopatra.
where-ever sorrow is, relief would be, -
if you do sorrow at my grief in love,
by giving love, your sorrow and my grief
were both extermin'd. shakespeare.
now i rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye
for owed to repentance. 2 cor. vii. 9-
i neither fear to die nor desire to live; and having mastered
all grief in myself, i desire no man to sorrow for me. hayw.
send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace. milton.
sad the prince explores -
the neighb'ring main, and sorrowing treads the shores. pope.
so'r sow to. adj. [from sorrow.] accompanied with sorrow.
out of use.
now the publick body, which doth seldom
play the recanter, feeling in itself
a lack of timon's aid, hath sense withal
of its own fall, restraining aid to timon ;
and sends forth us to make their sorrowed tender. shakesp.
so'rrowful. adj. [sorrow and full.]
1. sad for something past; mournful; grieving. -
besied are they which have been sorrowful for all thy
scourges; for they shall rejoice for thee, when they have seen
all thy glory. tob. xiii. 14.
2. deeply serious. not in use.
hannah said, no, my lord, i am a woman of a sorrowful
spirit: i have poured out my soul before the lord.
3. expressing grief; accompanied with gricf.
the things that my soul refused to touch are as my sorrow-
ful meat. job, vi. 7- -
so rry. adj. [rano, saxon.)
1. grieved for something past. it is generally used of flight or
casual miscarriages or vexations, but sometimes of greater
things. it does not imply any long continuance of grief.
o, forget
what we are sorry for ourselves in thee. timon of athens.
the king was sorry: nevertheless for the oath's sake he
commanded the baptist's head to be given her. matth. xiv. 9.
i'm sorry for thee, friend; 'tis the duke's pleasure. shak.
we are sorry for the satire interspersed in some of these
pieces, upon a few people, from whom the highest provoca-
tions have been received. swift.
2. [from saur, filth, islandick.] vile; worthless; vexatious.
how now, why do you keep alone
of sorriest fancies your companions making, -
using those thoughts, which should, indeed, have died
with them they think on. shakespeare's macbeth.
if the union of the parts consist only in rest, it would seem
that a bag of dust would be of as firm a consistence as that of
maible; and bajazet's cage had been but a sorry prison, 9 ano.
2. coarse
1 sam.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 107</div><p class="text">* * o *
s o r
so t.
*
- coarse complexions,
and cheeks of sorry grain, will serve to ply -
the sampler, and to teize the housewife's wool. milton.
how vain were all the ensigns of his power, that could not
support him against one slighting look of a sorry slave!
l'e/lrange.
if this innocent had any relation to his thebais, the poet
might have found some sorry excuse for detaining the reader.
. . w dryden.
if such a slight and sorry business as that could produce one
organical body, one might reasonably expect, that now and
then a dead lump of dough might be leavened into an animal.
- . bentley's sormons.
sorr. m. s. [sorte, french..] .
1. a kind ; a species. -
disfigur'd more than spirit of happy sort. milton.
a substantial and unaffected piety not only gives a man a
* credit among the sober and virtuous, but even among the vi-
cious sort of men. tillotson.
these three sorts of poems should differ in their numbers,
designs, and every thought. . . walsh.
endeavouring to make the signification of specificknames
clear, they make their specifick ideas of the sorts of substances
of a few of those simple ideas found in them. locke.
2. a manner; a form of being or acting.
* flowers in such fort worn, can neither be smelt nor seen
well by those that wear them. hooker.
‘i hat i may laugh at her in equal sort
as she doth laugh at me, and makes my pain her sport.
- spenser's sonnet.
to adam in what sort shall i appear 2
3. a degree of any quality. -
i have written the more boldly unto you, in some sort, as
putting you in mind. . rom. xv. 15.
i shall not be wholly without praise, if in some sort i have
copied his stile. - dryden.
4. a class, or order of persons.
the one being a thing that belongeth generally unto all;
the other, such as none but the wiser and more judicious sort
can perform. . - hooker.
i have bought
golden opinions from all sorts of people. shakespeare.
the first sort by their own suggestion fell. amilton.
hospitality to the better sort, and charity to the poor, two
virtues that are never exercised so well as when they accom-
pany each other. afterbury's sermons.
5. a company; a knot of people.
mine eyes are full of tears: i cannot see;
and yet salt water blinds them not so much,
but they can see % of traitors here.
a sort of lusty shepherds strive.
6. rank; condition above the vulgar.
- is signior montanto returned from the wars 2–i know none
of that name, lady; there was none such in the army of any
fort. shakespeare.
7. [sort, fr. sorter, lat.] a lot. out of use.
make a lott'ry,
and by decree, let blockish ajax
draw the sort to fight with hector.
8. a pair; a set.
to sort. v. a. [sortiri, lat. affortire, italian.]
1. to separate into distinet and proper classes.
i come to thee for charitable licence,
to sort our nobles from our common men. shakespeare.
a piece of cloth made of white and black threads, though
the whole appear neither white nor black, but grey; yet each
remains what it was before, if the threads were pulled asunder,
and sorted each colour by itself. boyle.
shell-fish have been, by some of the ancients, compared
and sorted with the insects. bacon's natural history.
with this desire, she hath a native might
to find out ev'ry truth, if she had time;
th’ innumerable effects to sort aright,
and by degrees from cause to cause to climb. davies.
the number of simple ideas, that make the nominal essence
shakespeare.
waller.
- shakespeare.
of the lowest species, or first sorting of individuals, depends
on the mind of man. locke.
the rays which differ in refrangibility may be parted and
sorted from one another, and that either by refration, or by
- reflexion. - newton's opticks.
but grant that actions best discover man,
take the most strong, and sort them as you can :
the few that glare, each character must mark:
you balance not the many in the dark.
2. to reduce to order from a state of confusion.
these they sorted into their several times and places; some
to begin the service of god with, and some to end; some to
be interlac'd between the divine readings of the law and pro-
phets. hooker.
pope.
let me not be light;
for a light wife doth make a heavy husband;
*
and never be basanio so from me',
but god sort all ! shakespeare's march. of wenice,
4. -
milton. . .
3. to conjoin ; to put together in distribution. -
for, when she sorts things present with things past,
and thereby things to come doth oft foresee;
when she doth doubt at first, and chuse at first,
these acts her own, without her body be. davies,
the swain perceiving by her words ill sorted,
that she was wholly from herself transported. brown.
4. to cull; to chuse; to select.
send his mother to his father's house, . .
. that he may sort her out a worthy spouse. chapman,
to son t. v. n. - -
1. to be joined with others of the same species.
nor do metals only sort and herd with metals in the earth
and minerals with minerals; but both in common togethe.
woodward.
2. to consort; to join. !
the illiberality of parents towards their children, makes
them base, and sort with any company. baun.
3. to suit; to fit. -
a man cannot speak to a son but as a father; whereas a
friend, may speak as the case requires, and not as it sorti,
with the person. bacon.
they are happy whose natures sort with their vocations. bar,
among unequals, what society
can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
which must be nutual, in proportion due,
giv'n, and receiv'd. 44tlton's paradis, loft.
the creator calling forth by name -
his mighty angels, gave them several charge,
as sorted belt with prese things. milton's paradis, loft.
for diff'rent stiles with diff rent subjects sort, -
as several garbs with country, town, and court. pope,
4. [sortir, to issue, french.] to terminate; to issue.
it sorted not to any fight, but to a retreat. baton.
princes cannot gather this fruit, except they raise some per-
sons to be companions; which many times sorteth to incon-
venience. bacon.
5. to have success; to terminate in the effect desired.
the slips of their vines have been brought into spain, but
they have not sorted to the same purpose as in their native
country. abbot's description of the horld.
it was tried in a blown bladder, whereunto flesh and a
flower were put, and it sorted not ; for dry bladders will not
blow, and new bladders further putrefaction. bacon.
6. to fall out. [from sort, a lot, french.]
and so far am i glad it did so sort, -
as this their jangling i esteem a sport. shakespeare.
so'rtal. adj. a word formed by locke, but not yet received.
as things are ranked under names, into sorts or species only
as they agree to certain abstract ideas, the essence of each sort
comes to be nothing but that idea which the sortal, if i may
so call it from sort, as i do general from genus, name stands
for. locke.
so'rtance. n.s.. [from sort.j suitableness; agreement.
here doth he wish his person, with such power
as might hold sortance with his quality,
the which he could not levy. shakespeare's henry iv.
sortilege. n.s.. [sortilege, fr. sortilgium, latin.] the aet
or practice of drawing lots. -
so'rtment. m. s. [from sort.]
1. the aet of sorting; distribution.
2. a parcel sorted or distributed.
to soss. v. n. [a cant word.] to fit lazily on a chair; to fall
at once into a chair.
the winter sky began to frown,
poor stella must pack off to town;
from wholesome exercise and air,
to fossing in an easy chair.
sot. n.j. [roz, saxon; sot, french; fat, dutch..]
i. a blockhead; a dull ignorant stupid fellow; a dolt.
of the loyal service of his son,
when i inform'd him, then he call'd me fat;
and told me i had turn'd the wrong side out.
either our braggs
were crackt of kitchen trulls, or his description
prov'd us unspeaking sets. shakespeare.
soul-blinded sets, that creep
in dirt, and never saw the wonders of the deep. drayton.
tell him that no history or antiquity can match his con-
duct ; and presently the sot, because he knows neither history
nor antiquity, shall begin to measure himself by himself, which
is the only sure way for him not to fall short. south.
2. a wretch stupified by drinking.
every sign
that calls the staring sets to nasty wine.
a surly ill-bred lord,
that chides and snaps her up at every word:
a brutal set ; who while she holds his head,
with drunken filth bedaubs the nuptial bed.
to sor. v. a. to stupify; to besot. .
i hate to see a brave bold fellow sitted,
made four and senseless, turn'd to whey by love;
a driveling hero, fit for a romance. dryden’s span. friar.
- - the
swift,
shakespeare.
roscommon.
granville,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 108</div><p class="text">s o v
so u
the potion
turns his brain and stupifies his mind;
the setted moon-calf gapes.
t, sot. v. 7. to tipple to stupidity.
sottish. adj. [from soi...] -
1. dull; stupid ; senseless; infatuate; doltish.
all's but naught:
patience is sottish, and impatience does
become a dog that's mad. shakso. ant, and contra.
upon the report of his approach, more than half fell away
and dispersed; the residue, being more desperate or more sottish,
dryden.
did abide in the field, of whom many were slain. hayward.
he gain’d a king
ahaz his sottish conqueror. milton.
'tissottish to other at things that cannot be brought about.
- - 'eorange.
the inhabitants of soldania in africk are so sottish and
grossly ignorant, that they differ very little from brutes. if ilk.
how ignorant are sottish pretenders to astrology swift.
2. dull with intenperance.
spottishly. adv. [from souis...]
lessly.
northumberland, sottishly mad with over great fortune, pro-
cured the king, by his letters-patent under the great seal, to
appoint the lady jane to succeed him in the inheritance of the
crown. hayward.
atheism is impudent in pretending to philosophy, and su-
perstition sottishly ignorant in fancying that the knowledge of
nature tends to irreligion. - glanville.
so sottishy to lose the purest pleasures and comforts of this
world, and forego the expectation of immortality in another;
and so desperately to run the risk of dwelling with everlasting
burnings, plainly discovers itself to be the most pernicious
folly and deplorable madness in the world. bentley.
sottish ness. n.s.. [from sottish.)
1. dullness; tupidity; insensibility.
sometimes phlegm putrities into sottishnes, stones into
an ignorance or neglect of all religion. holydoy.
few confider what a degree of sottishnes, and confirmed ig-
norance men may fin themselves into. sotto.
the first part of the text, the folly and sottison's of atheism,
will come home to their case ; since they make such a noisy
pretence to wit and sagacity.
stupidly; dully; sense-
bentley.
2. drunken stupidity.
no sober temperate person can look with any complacency
upon the drunkenness and sottisons of his neighbour. scath.
souce. n.s. see souse.
sover fic n. adj. [souverain, french ; sovrano, spanish.]
1. supreme in power ; having no superiour.
as teaching brinoeth us to know that god is our supreme
truth; so prayer testifieth that we acknowledge him our sove-
reign good. hooker.
you, my sovereign lady,
causeless have laid disgraces on my head. shakesp. hen. iv.
none of us who now thy grace implore,
but held the rank of sovereign queen before,
till giddy chance, whose malice never bears
that mortal bliss should last for length of years,
cast us down headlong from our high estate. dryden.
whether esau, then, were a vassal to jacob, and jacob his
sovereign prince by birthright, i leave the reader to judge. locke.
2. supremely effic acious; predominant over diseases.
a memorial of fidelity and zeal, a sovereign preservative of
god's people from the venomous infection of heresy. hooker.
the most sovereign prescription in galen is but empirick;
and to this preservative of no better report than a horse drench.
shakspeare's coriolanus.
love-wounded protheus,
my bosom, as a bed,
shall lodge thee, till thy wound be throughly heal’d,
and thus i search it with a sov’reign kiss. • shakespeare.
a water we call water of paradise, by that we do to it, is
made very sovereign for health. bacon.
like the scum starv'd men did draw
from parboil'd shoes and boots, and all the rest
which were with any sovereign fatness blest. donne.
be cool, my friend, and hear my muse dispense
some soversion comforts drawn from common sense. dryden.
sover eign. m. s. supreme lord.
q, let my sovereign turn away his face,
and bid his ears a little while be deaf. shakespeare.
by my sovereign, and his fate, i swear,
renown'd for faith in peace, for force in war,
oft our alliance other lands desir’d. dryden.
sover figsly. a v. [from sovereign.] supremely; in the
highest degree.
he was sovereigns, lovely in himself. boyle.
sovereignty. n.), [souverainete, french.) supremacy; high-
eft place; supreme power; highest degree of excellence.
give me pardon,
that i, your vassal, have employed and pain'd
your unknown sovereignty.
vol. ii.
shakosheare.
sought. the preterite and participle pass. of seek.
ro *::: england, would this virtuous on: c
e ~~.".--&gt; - " - - -
to o * grace the sov’reignty thereof. - sy ooza: , ,
ficers 3. o "to a people, to institute majorates o ol.
c con - sl- . * .. -
the so! } m; to punish and pardon malefactors ; to have
he so:c authority of making war and peaco, are the true
marks of so, *-gnty. - o-, -, - ---
a mighty hunter thence he shall be flood
before the lord ; as in despite of heav'n
or from heav'n, -
claiming seco - -
nothing does so gratify a nd sov’reignty.
ax grotify a haughty humour,
usurped sovereignty over our brethren. go", i. o o
that holds th ove's own tree, - ngue.
hat holds the woods in awful sov’re;. -
requires a depth of lodging in s: . -
high as his topmost boughs to heav'n as end
so low his roots to hell's dominion tend. 2
i well foresce, whene'er thy suit i grant
that i my much-lov’d sov’reignty shaft want,
and her new beauty may thy heart invade. dryden
let us above all things posiess our souls win aws.sos.
hensions of the maj sty and sovereignty of god. a.
alexander's grecian colonies in the indies were ano.
terminated by sandrocottus; seleucus recovered the sovereignty
in some degree, but was forced to abandon to him the coun.
try along the indus. arbuthnot on coins.
j) to ic: -
a so-or.
dryden.
souto. m. s. (from sous, french.] a subterraneous drain.
... yet sould not such mines, without great pains and choices
if at all, be wrought; the delfs would be so flown with wa.
ters, it being impossible to make any addits or soughs to drain
them, that no gins or machines could suffice to lay and keep
them dry. - - ray on the creation.
another was sound in sinking a sough-pit. j/3cavard.
i am /aught of them that asked not for me: i am found of
them that sought me not. isa. lxv. 1
sout... m. s. [raje!, sax. joel, dan. sual, islandick ; so, dutch.]
. the inmaterial and immortal spirit of man.
when death was overcome, he opened heaven as well to
the believing gentiles as jews: heaven till then was no recep-
tacle to the souls of either. hooker.
perraps, for want of food, the soul may pine;
put that were trange, since all things bad and good;
since all god's creatures, mortal and divine;
since god himself is her eternal food. davies.
he remembered them of the promises, seals and oaths, which
by publick authority had passed for concluding this marriage,
that these being religious bonds betwixt god and their joli,
could not by any politick act of state be dissolved. hayward.
so natural is the knowledge of the soul's immortality, and
of some ubi for the future reception of it, that we find some
tract or other of it in most barbarous nations. hey!}n.
2. intellectual principle. -
eloquence the soul, song charms the sense. milton.
the eyes of our souls only then begin to see, when our -
bodily eyes are closing. law.
3. vital principle.
thou almost mak’s me waver in my faith,
to hold opinion with pythagoras,
that scal of animals infuse themselves
into the trunks of men. shakesp. march, of penice.
thou sun, of this great world both eye and soul. milton.
join voices, all ye living soul, 1 ye birds,
that singing up to heav'n-gate ascend,
bear on your wings, and in your notes his praise. milton.
in common discourse and writing, we leave out the words
vegetative, sensitive, and rational; and make the word soul
serve for all these principles. j/attr.
4. spirit; essence; quintessence; principal part.
he has the very soul of bounty. shakespeare.
charity the soul of all the rest. alton.
5. interiour power.
there is some soul of goodness in things evil,
would men observingly distil it out. shakespeare.
6. a familiar appellation exprefiing the qualities of the mind.
three wenches where i stood, cry’d, -
“ alas, good soul!” shakespeare's julius cosar.
this is a poor mad soul; and she says up and down the
town, that her eldest son is like you. shakesp. hen. iv.
the poor soul sat finging by a sycamore tree,
sing all a green willow : -
her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee. shakoff.
keep the poor soul no longer in suspense,
your change is such as does not need defence. dryden.
unenlarged souls are disgusted with the wonders of the mi-
croscope, discovering animals which equal not a peppercorn.
j/atts,
7. human being.
the moral is the case of every soul of us. l’estrange.
it is a republick; there are in it a hundred bourgeois, and
about a thousand souls. addison's italy.
my state of health none care to learn; -
my life is here no soul's concern. swift.
24 q- 8. aetive
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 109</div><p class="text">s o u
s o u
8. a&amp;ive power.
earth, air and seas, through empty space would rowl,
and heav'n would fly before the driving soul. dryden:
9. spirit; fire; grandeur of mind.
that he wants caution, he must needs confess;
but not a soul, to give our arms success. 1%ung.
io. intelligent being in general.
every soul in heav'n shall bend the knee. milton.
sou’ldier. see sol dier.
sou’led. adj. [from soul..] furnished with mind.
griping, and still tenacious of thy hold,
wou'd'st thou the grecian chiefs, though largely soul’d,
shou'd give the prizes they had gain’d before. dryden.
sou’lless. adj. [from soul..] mean; low; spiritless.
slave, soulles, villain, dog, o rarely base shakespeare.
sou’lshot. n. j. [soul and shot..] something paid for a soul's
requiem among the romanists.
in the saxon times there was a funeral duty to be paid,
called pecunia sepulchralis &amp; symbolum anima, and in saxon
soulshot. ayliffe's parergon.
sound. adj. [runo, saxon.]
1. healthy; hearty; not morbid; not diseased; not hurt.
i am fall'n out with my more headier will,
to take the indispos'd and sickly fit
for the sound man. shakespeare's king lear.
he hath a heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue is the
clapper; for what his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.
shakespeare.
he hath received him safe and sound. luke, xv. 27.
we can preserve
unhurt our minds, and understanding sound.
the king visits all around,
comforts the sick, congratulates the sound;
honours the princely chiefs. - dryden.
but capys, and the rest of sounder mind,
the fatal present to the flames design'd,
or to the deep. dryden.
when a word, which originally signifies any particular ob-
jec, is attributed to several other objects, on account of some
evident reference or relation to the original idea, this is pe-
culiarly called an analogical word; so a sound or healthy pulse,
a sound digestion, sound sleep, are all so called, with reference
to a sound and healthy constitution; but if you speak of sound
doctrine, or sound speech, this is by way of resemblance to
health, and the words are metaphorical. watts's logick.
2. right; not erroneous; orthodox.
whom although to know be life, and joy to make mention
of his name; yet our soundest knowledge is to know that we
know him not as indeed he is, neither can know him : and
milton.
our safest eloquence concerning him is filence. hooker.
let my heart be sound in thy statutes. psal. cxix. 80.
sound, and yet not trivial, catechetick institution. felton.
the rules are sound and useful, and may serve your devo-
tion. - wake.
3. stout; strong; lusty.
the men are very strong and able of body; and therefore
either give sound strokes with their clubs wherewith they
fight, or else shoot strong shots with their bows. abbot.
4. valid; not failing.
they reserved their titles, tenures, and signiories whole
and sound to themselves. spenser's ireland.
5. fast; hearty. it is applied to sleep.
new wak'd from soundes' sleep,
soft on the flow'ry herb i found me laid
in balmy sweat. milton's paradise loft.
sound. adv. soundly; heartily; completely fast.
the messenger approaching to him spake,
but his waste words return'd to him in vain;
so sound he slept that nought might him awake. fa. queen.
soun d. m. s. [sode, french..] a shallow sea, such as may be
sounded.
the sound of denmark, where ships pay toll.
wake,
behold i come, sent from the stygian sound,
as a dire vapour that had cleft the ground,
to ingender with the night, and blast the day. ben. johnson.
him young thoosa bore, the bright increase
of phorcys, dreaded in the sounds and seas. pope.
soun d. m. s. [..sonde, fr.] a probe, an instrument used by
chirurgeons to feel what is out of reach of the fingers.
the patient being laid on a table, pass the sound till it meet
with some resistance. sharp's surgery.
to sou nd. v. a.
1. to search with a plummet; to try depth.
in this secret there is a gulf, which while we live we shall
never sound. hooker.
you are, hastings, much too shallow
to sound the bottom of the after-times.
2. to try; to examine.
has he never before sounded you in this business? shakespeare.
invites these lords, and those he meant to sound, daniel.
camden.
shakesp. hen. iv.
i was in jest,
and by that offer meant to sound your breast.
i’ve sounded my numidians, man by man,
and find 'em ripe for a revolt.
to sound. v. n. to try with the sounding-line.
the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some coun-
try, and sounded and found it near twenty fathoms. acis, xxvii.
beyond this we have no more a positive distinet notion of
infinite space than a mariner has of the depth of the sea, where
having let down a large portion of his sounding-line, he reaches
no bottom. locłe.
soun d. m. s. [spia, lat.] the cuttle-fish. ainsworth.
sou n'd. m. s. [ son, french ; somus, latin.]
1. any thing audible; a noise; that which is perceived by the
car.
dryden,
addison's cato,
heaps of huge words uphoarded hideously
with horrid sound, though having little sense,
and thereby wanting due intelligence,
have marred the face of goodly poesy,
and made a monster of their fantasy.
come, fisters, cheer we up his sprights,
and shew the best of our delights;
i’ll charm the air to give a sound,
while you perform your antick round. shakesp. macbeth.
dash a stone against a stone in the bottom of the water, and
it maketh a sound: so a long pole struck upon gravel in the
bottom of the water maketh a sound. bacon's nat. hist,
the warlike sound of trumpets loud. amilton.
whene'er he spoke, his voice was heard around,
loud as a trumpet with a silver sound. dryden.
that which is conveyed into the brain by the ear is called
sound; though, till it affect the perceptive part, it be nothing
but motion. loir.
2. mere empty noise opposed to meaning.
he contented himself with doubtful and general terms,
which might make no ill sound in men's ears. lotke.
let us confider this proposition as to its meaning; for it is
spensor.
the sense and not sound that must be the principle. locke.
o lavish land 1 for sound at such expence 2
but then, she saves it in her bills for sense. toung.
to sou n d. v. n.
1. to make a noise; to emit a noise.
trumpet once more to sound at general doom. milton.
that with one blast through the whole house does bound,
and first taught speaking-trumpets how to sound. dryden.
thither the filver sounding lyres
shall call the smiling loves and young desires.
2. to exhibit by sound, or likeness of sound.
why do you start, and seem to fear
things that do sound so fair
they being told there was small hope of ease
to be expe&amp;ted to their evils from hence,
were willing at the first to give an ear
to any thing that sounded liberty. ben. johnson's catiline.
this relation sounds rather like a chymical dream than a
philosophical truth. wilkins's math. magick.
3. to be conveyed in sound.
from you sounded out the word of the lord.
to sound. v. a.
1. to cause to make a noise; to play on.
and many nymphs about them flocking round,
and many tritons, which their horns did sound.
michael bid sound
th’ archangel trumpet.
misenus lay; none so renown'd
the warrior trumpet in the field to sound;
with breathing brass to kindle fierce alarms,
and rouze to dare their fate in honourable arms.
2. to betoken or direct by a sound.
once jove from ida did both hosts survey,
and, when he pleas'd to thunder, part the fray;
here heav'n in vain that kind retreat should sound,
pope.
shakespeare.
1 thes, i. 8.
spe'sor-
milt on.
dryden.
the louder cannon had the thunder drown'd. iwaller,
3. to celebrate by sound.
sun, sound his praise. milton.
so'undboard. m. s. [sound and board.] board which propa-
gates the sound in organs.
try it without any soundboard along, only harpwise at one
end of the string. bacon's natural history.
as in an organ, from one blast of wind,
to many a row of pipes the soundboard breathes. milton.
so unding. adj. [from sound..] sonorous; having a magnifi-
cent sound.
obsolete words may then be revived, when more sounding
or more significant than those in practice. dryden.
soun dly. adv. [from sound.]
1. healthily; heartily.
2. lustily ; stoutly; strongly.
when duncan is asleep,
whereto the rather shall this hard day's journey
soundly invite him. shakesp. machoth.
they
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 110</div><p class="text">s o u
s o u ,
they did ply
my feet and hands with cords, and to the mast
with other halsers made me soundly fast. chapman's odyssey.
who had so often in your aid
so many ways been soundly paid.
hudibras.
have no concern,
provided punch, for there's the jest,
be soundly maul’d, and plague the rest. swift.
their nobility and gentry are one half ruined, banished, or
converted: they all soundy feel the smart of the last irish war.
3. truly; joy.
* the wisest are always the readiest to acknowledge, that
soundly to judge of a law is the weightiest thing which any man
can take upon him. ho:{, r.
the doctrine of the church of england, expressed in the
thirty-nine articles, is so soundly and orthodoxly settled, as
cannot be questioned without extreme danger to our religion.
bacon.
4. fast; closely: it is used of sleeping.
now when that idle dream was to him brought,
unto that elsen knight he bad him fly,
where he slept soundy, void of evil thought. fairy queen.
when the succession of ideas ceases, our perception of du-
ration ceases with it, which every one experiments whilst he
sleeps foundy. locke.
sounds ess. n.s. (from sand.]
1. health; heartingss.
1 would i had that corporal soundn's now,
as when thy father and myself in friendship
first tried our soldiership. shakspeare.
2. truth; reetitude; incorrupt state.
in the end, very few excepted, all became subject to the
sway of time: other odds there was none amongst them, saving
only that some fell sooner away, and some later from the sound-
nos: of belief. 17:24, r.
lesly is misled in his politicks; but he hath given proof of
his sound is in religion. swift.
as the health and strength, or weakness of our bodies, is
very much owing to their methods of treating us when we
were young ; so the soundness or folly of our minds are not less
owing to those first tempers and ways of thinking, which we
eagerly received from the love, tenderness, authority, and
constant conversation of our mothers. law.
3- strength; solidity.
this presupposed, it may stand then very well with strength
and soundn's of reason, even thus to answer. hooker.
soup. m. / [sotope, fr. j strong decoction of flesh for the
table.
spongy morells in strong ragousts are found,
and in the soup the slimy snail is drown'd. gay's trizia.
let the cook daub the back of the footman's new livery, or,
when he is going up with a dish of soup, let her follow him
fostly with a ladie-full. swift.
sour. adj. [run, runs;, saxon ; fur, welsh.]
1. acid ; austere; pungent on the palate with astringency, as
vinegar, or unripe fruit.
all sour things, as vinegar, provoke appetite.
their drink is sour.
butlet the bounds of licences he fix’d,
not things of disagreeing natures mix’d,
not sweet with sour, nor birds with serpents join'd. drydor.
both ways deceitful is the wine of pow'r,
when new, 'tis beady, and when old, 'tis sawr.
2. harsh of temper; crabbed ; peevish ; morose; severe.
he was a scholar,
lofty and sour to them that lov’d him not. shafts. h. viii.
a man of pleasant and popular conversation, rather free than
for and reserved. isotton's life of buckingham.
tiberius, otherwise a very sour man, would punctually per-
form this rite unto others, and expect the same. brown.
3. afflictive; painful. -
let me embrace these sour adversities;
for wise men say it is the wisest course.
4. expressing discontent.
bacon.
hos. iv. 18.
ha te.
shakoff. h. vi.
he said a sour thing to laura the other day. tati.r.
sullen and sour, with discontented mien
jocasta frown'd. pope.
the lord treasurer often looked on me with a sour counte-
nance. swift.
souk, n.s.. [from the adjective..] acid substance.
a thousand saurs to temper with one sweet,
to make it seem more dear and dainty.
t. sou r. v. a.
1. to make acid.
his angelick nature had none of that carnal leven which
ferments to the souring of ours. decay of piety.
thus kneaded up with milk, the new made man
his kingdom o'er his kindred world began ;
'till knowledge misapply'd, misunderstood,
and pride of empire, sour’d his balmy blood.
sfessor.
drydon.
one passion, with a different turn, **
makes wit inflame or anger burn :
so the sun's heat, with diff'rent pow'rs,
ripens the grape, the liquor sours.
2. to make harsh, or unkindly.
tufts of grass soar land.
3. to make uneasy; to make less
hail, great king
- c
to sour your happiness
the queen is dead. - soakespeare's cymbeline.
he brought envy, malice, and a -
- - mbition into paradise
which soured to him the sweetness of the paradife,
swift. -
martimer’s husbandos
pleasing.
, i must report
4. to make discontented. place. dryden.
not my own disgrace
hath ever made me sour my patient cheek,
or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face. shakes care.
three crabbed mouths had sour'd themselves to death
- -
ere i could make tice open thy whitehood. soaospeare
in me, as yet, anbition had no part, j
pride had not sawr'd, nor wrath debas'd my heart. hurts.
to soup. v. n.
1. to become acid.
asses milk, when it sour; in the stomach, and who
four, will purge strongly. .
2. to grow peevish or crabbed.
they keep out melancholy from the virtuous, and hinder
the hatred of vice from souring into severity. aloison.
if i turn my eyes from them, or seem displeased, they four
upon it. - speciator.
source. m. s. [ source, fr.] opecator
1. spring; fountain ; head.
kings that rule
behind the hidden sources of the nile.
2. original; first course.
this second source of men, while yet but few,
with some regard to what is just and right, -
shall lead their lives. azion's prais. loo.
this is the true source and original of this mischief.
whey, turned
arbuthnot on diet.
allison's cato.
- south.
of himself is none;
but that cternal infinite, and one,
who never did begin, who ne'er can end,
on him all beings, as their source, depend. dryden.
3. first producer.
famous greece,
that source of art and cultivated thought, -
which they to rome, and romans hither brought. i?’,”.
sour det. m. s. [from sourd, fr j. the little pipe of a trumpet.
sourisii. adj. [from sour.] somewhat sour.
by distilation we obtain a sourish spirit, which will dissolve
coral. boyle.
sour ly. adv. [from sour.]
1. with acidity.
2. with acrimony.
the stern athenian prince
then sour &amp; smil’d.
sous n ess. n.s.. [from sour.]
1. acidity; austereness of taste.
sourness consisteth in some grossness of the body, and incor-
poration doth make the mixture of the body more equal,
which induceth a milder tastc. bacon's natural history.
i' th' spring, like youth, it yields an acid taste;
but summer doth, like age, the surness waste.
ile knew
for fruit the grassed pear-tree to dispose,
and tame to plumbs the surns of the sloes. pryd. pirzil.
of acid or four one has a notion from taste, surnes, being
one of those simple ideas which one cannot describe. arbuthn.
has life no surnes, drawn so near its cnd pope.
2. asperity; harshness of temper.
pelagius carped at the curious neatness of mens apparel in
those days, and, through the sourness of his disposition, spoke
somewhat too hardly thereof. hooker.
he was never thought to be of that superstitious surness,
which some men pretend to in religion. king charles.
her religion is equally free from the weakness of supersti-
tion and the sourns of enthusiasm: it is not of an uncom-
fortable melancholy nature. addison's freeholder.
take care that no sournes, and moroseness mingle with our
serious frame of mind. nelson.
sour sop. m. s. [guanabanus, lat.] custard-apple.
it grows in several parts of the spanish west-indies, where
it is cultivated for its fruits. asiller.
sous. n.s. [ sol, fr.] a small denomination of money.
souse. m. s. [soute, salt, dutch...]
1. pickle made of salt.
2. anything kept parboiled in salt-pickle.
and he that can rear up a pig in his house,
dryden's knight'; 7&amp;se,
d.noaon.
hath cheaper his bacon, and sweeter his soft. tuftr.
all-saints, do lay for pork and scoso,
for sprats and spurlings for your house. tosor,
to scuse. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 111</div><p class="text">s o u
s o w
1. to parboil; or steep in pickle.
oil, though it stink, they drop by drop impart;
but souse the cabbage with a bounteous heart.
2. to throw into water. a ludicrous sense.
they soused me into the thames with as little remorse as
they drown blind puppies. shakespeare.
who those were that run away, .
and yet gave out th’ had won the day;
although the rabble sous’d them for't,
o'er head and ears in mud and dirt. butler.
they soused me over head and ears in water when a boy,
so that i am now one of the most case-hardened of the iron-
sides. addison's guardian.
to souse. v. n. [of this word i know not the original : it
must come from sous, or dissous, down, fr.] to fall as a
bird on its prey. -
thus on some silver swan, or tim’rous hare,
jove's bird comes sousing down from upper air;
her crooked tallons truss the fearful prey,
then out of fight she soars. dryden's acn.
jove's bird will souse upon the tim’rous hare,
and tender kids with his sharp talons tear. dryden, jun.
to souse. v. a. to strike with sudden violence, as a bird
strikes his prey.
the gallant monarch is in arms;
and like an eagle o'er his airy tow’rs,
to souse annoyance that comes near his nest.
sous e. adv. with sudden violence. a low word.
such make a private study of the street,
and looking full at ev'ry man they meet,
run souse against his chaps, who stands amaz'd,
to find they did not see, but only gaz'd. 1%ung.
so'uterrain. m. s. ssauterrain, fr.] a grotto or cavern in
the ground. not english.
defences against extremities of heat, as shade, grottoes, or
souterrains, are necessary preservatives of health. arbuthnot.
south. m. s. [ruo, saxon ; suyd, dutch ; sud, fr.]
1. the part where the sun is to us at noon : opposed to north.
east and west have no certain points of heaven, but north
and south are fixed; and seldom the far southern people have
pope.
shakespeare.
invaded the northern, but contrariwise. bacon.
2. the southern regions of the globe. -
the queen of the south. bible.
from the north to call
decrepit winter, from the south to bring
solstitial summer's heat. - milton.
3. the wind that blows from the south.
- all the contagion of the south light on you,
you shames of rome, you ! shakesp. coriolanus.
south. adj. [from the noun..] southern ; meridional.
• one inch of delay more is a south sea. shakespeare.
how thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by
the south wind. job, xxxvii. 17.
meanwhile the south wind rose, and with black wings
wide hovering, all the clouds together drove. 44ilton.
south. adv.
1. towards the south.
his regiment lies half a mile
south from the mighty power of the king.
shakespeare's richard iii.
2. from the south.
such fruits as you appoint for long keeping, gather in a fair
and dry day, and when the wind bloweth not south. bacon.
southing. adj. [from the noun.] going towards the south.
i will conduct thee on thy way,
when next the southing sun inflames the day. dryden.
south ing.. n.s. tendency to the south.
not far from hence, if i observ'd aright
the southing of the stars and polar light,
sicilia lies. dryden's an.
south ea’s t. m. s. [south and east.] the point between the
east and south; the point of winter sunrise.
the planting of trees warm upon a wall against the south,
or southeast sun, doth hasten their ripening. bacon.
the three seas of italy, the inferiour towards the southeast,
the sonian towards the south, and the adriatick on the north-
east side, were commanded by three different nations. arbuth.
so'utherly. adj. [from south.] - -
1. belonging to any of the points denominated from the south ;
not absolutely southern. *
2. lying towards the south.
unto such as live under the pole that is only north which
is above them, that is only southerly which is below them.
- brown.
two other country bills give us a view of the most easterly,
westerly, and southerly parts of england. graunt.
3. coming from about the south.
i am but mad north, northwest: when the wind is southerly,
i know a hawk from a handsaw. shakespeare's hamlet,
southern. adj. [ruzenne, saxon; from south.]
1. belonging to the south ; meridional. -
frowning auster seeks the southern sphere,
and rots with endless rain th' unwholsome year.
2. lying towards the south.
why mourn i not for thee,
and with the southern clouds contend in tears : shak. h. vi.
3. coming from the south.
mens bodies are heavier when southern winds blow than
when northern. bacon's natural hisloy.
sour hern wood, n.s. [rusennpubu, saxon; abratanum, la.)
this plant agrees in most parts with the wormwood, from
which it is not easy to separate it. miller,
so'uth most. adj. [from south.] furthest toward the south,
next chemos, th’ obscene dread of moab's sons,
from aroar to nebo, and the wild
of southmose abarim.
so uthsay. m. s. [properly soothsay..] prediction.
all those were idle thoughts and fantasies,
devices, dreams, opinions unsound,
shews, visions, southsays, and prophecies,
and all that feigned is, as leasings, tales, and lies. f. &amp;,
to so uthsay. v. n. [see soothsay..] to predict.
young men, hovering between hope and fear, might easily
be carried into the superstition of southsaying by names. camden.
southsayer. n.s. [properly soothsayer. see soothsayer.]
a predicter.
southward. m. s. the southern regions.
countries are more fruitful to the southward than in the
northern parts. raleigh's history of the iworld,
so uthwa r d. adv. [from south.] towards the south.
a prisoner in a room twenty foot square, is at liberty to
walk twenty foot southward, but not northward. lucie.
every life, from the dreary months,
flies conscious southward. thomson's winter.
southwe’s t. m. s. [south and woff.] point between the south
and west; winter sun-set. -
phenice is an haven of crete, and lieth toward the south-
wesł. aes, xxvii. 12.
the planting of trees warm upon a wall against the south,
or southeast sun, doth hasten their coming on and ripening;
and the southeast is found to be better than the southwos, tho’
the southwool be the hotter coast. . . bacon's national hisory.
sou/enance. m. s. [french..] remembrance; memory.
a french word which with many more is now happily disused.
if thou wilt renounce thy miscreance,
life will i grant thee for thy valiance,
and all thy wrongs will wipe out of my souvenance. spensr.
gave wond’rous great countenance to the knight,
that of his way he had no souvenance,
nor care of vow’d revenge.
sow. n. / [ruzn, saxon ; sog, souwe, dutch.]
i. a female pig; the female of a boar.
boars have great fangs, sows much less. bacon's nat. hist.
a sow beneath an oak shall lye along,
d ryden -
aillon,
stensor.
' and white herself, and white her thirty young. dryden.
for which they scorn and hate them worse
than dogs and cats do sow gelders. hudibras.
the sow gelder's horn has something musical in it, but this
is seldom heard. adaison's speciator.
2. perhaps from sow might come sowen, swen, swine, ypina,
saxon.
and was’t thou fain
to hovel thee with swine, and rogues forlorn,
in short and musty straw shakespeare's king lear.
3. an oblong mass of lead. ainsworth.
4. [44illepeda, lat..] an inse&amp;t ; a millepede. ainsworth.
sow bread. m. s. [cyclamen, lat..] a plant.
to sow. v. n. [saian, gothick; rapan, saxon;
dutch..] to scatter seed in order to a harvest.
the one belongeth unto them that seek, the other unto
them that have found happiness: they that pray do but yet
sow, they that give thanks declare they have reaped. hooker.
they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. ps. cxxvi. 5.
he that soweth to his flesh, shall reap corruption; but he
that soweth to the spirit, shall reap life everlasting. gal. vi. 8.
sow to yourselves in righteousness, and reap in mercy. hos.
to sow. v. a. part, pass sown.
1. to scatter in the ground in order to growth 5 to propagate
by seed.
like was not to be found,
save in that soil where all good things did grow,
and freely sprung out of the fruitful ground
as incorrupted nature did them sow. fairy queen.
from ireland come i with my strength,
and reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd. shakspears.
i saw my law in you, and it shall bring fruit in you. 2 esdr.
many plants which grow in the hotter countrics, being set
in the colder, will, being sown of seeds late in the spring,
jayen,
come up and abide most part of the summer. bacon.
when to turn
the fruitful soil, and when to saw the corn,
i sing, mecacnas. jdryden's georg.
2
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 112</div><p class="text">s p a -
s p a
the proud mother views her precious brood,
and happier branches, which she never sow'd. dryden.
4. to spread ; to propagate.
frowardness is in his heart: he deviseth mischief continually,
he sowth discord. .. - prov. vi. 14.
to sow a jangling noise of words unknown.
ilton.
since then they stand secur'd by being join'd: l
it were worthy a king's head, to saw division,
and seeds of jealousy, to loose those bonds. rowe.
born to ashiet my marcia's family,
and saw dissention in the hearts of brothers. addison's cato.
to impregnate or stock with seed.
3. he shall give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt saw the
round withal. is xxx. 23.
the intellectual faculty is a goodly field, capable of great
improvement; and it is the worst husbandry in the world to
ow it with trifles or impertinencies. hale's origin of mankind.
4. to besprinkle.
he sow'd with stars the heav'n thick as a field.
morn new sow'd the earth with orient pearl.
1, sow. v. a. for sew. to join by needlework.
some tree, whose broad smooth leaves together sow'd,
milton.
milton.
and girded on, may cover round. amilton.
s, sowce. v., a. to throw into the water. see souse.
he sword me up to the middle in the pond. l'estrange.
sower. n.s...[from sow.j
1. he that sprinkles the seed.
a sewer went forth to sow.
it is thrown round, as grain by a skilful swer.
2. a scatterer.
terming paul and his doorine a sower of words, a very bab-
bler or trifler. hakewill on providence.
3. a breeder ; a promoter.
they are sowers of suits, which make the court swell, and
the country pine. bacon.
so'wins n.s. flummery, made of oatmeal somewhat sour’d.
these so wins, that is, fluminery being blended together,
produce good yeast. //ort, mer's huoandry.
see where norah with the swins comes. swift.
t. sowl. v. a. silon saw, as ho's are pulled by dogs, skinner;
from sole, a strap, a rein, kennet.] to pool by the ears.
he'll go and sowl the porter of roine-gates by th’ cars.
shakespeare.
it is used barbarously by swist
mat. xiii. 3.
derham.
sown. the participle of sow.
for sewed.
a goodly country, naturally beautified with */.
with pease. heylyn.
an hundred and fifty of their beds, sown together, made up
the breadth and length. gulliver.
sowt:11stle. m. s. [ sonchius, lat.] a weed.
sowthistles though coneys eat, yet sheep and cattle will not
touch ; the milk of which rubbed on warts weareth them
away, which shewcth it is corrosive.
spaad. m. s. [/feila terrar, lat. j a kind of mineral.
english talc, of which the coarser sort is called plaister;
the fincr; shaad, carth-flax, or salamander's hair. woodward.
space. n. s. [spatum. lat.]
1. room ; local extension.
space is the relation of distance between any two bodies or
points. locke.
oh, undistinguish’d space of woman's wit! shakespeare.
this which yields or fills all space. milton.
pures; ace is capable neither of resistance nor motion. locke.
space and motion can never be actually infinite: they have
a power only and a capacity of being increased without end ;
so that no space can be assigned so vast, but still a larger may
be imagined; no motion so swift or languid, but a greater ve-
locity or slowness may still be conceived. bentley.
1. any quantity of place.
i would not be the villain that thou think'st
for the whole pace that's in the tyrant's grasp,
and the rich east to boot. shakespeare's macbeth.
there was but two ways to escape; the one through the
woods about ten miles space to walpo. knolles.
in such a great ruin, where the fragments are great and
hard, it is not possible they should be to adjusted in their fall,
but that they would lie hollow, and many unfilled spaces would
bacon.
be intercepted amongst them. burnet.
measuring first with carcful eyes
the space his spear could reach, aloud he cries. dryden.
3. quantity of time.
there is a competent time allowed every man, and as it is
certain death is the conclusion of it, 'tis poliible some space
before death. hammond.
nine times the soice that measures day and night
to mortal men, he with his horrid crew
lay vanquish'd, rolling in the fiery gulph,
confounded, though immortal. milton.
in a lever the motion can be continued only for so short a
fact, as may be answerable to that little distance betwixt the
fulciment and the weight. i/ilkins's math. mag.
so may o his judgments for a time, and give a people
'ol. ii.
2 longer space of repentance: he may stay 'till the iniquities of
a nation be full; but sooner or later they have reason to expect
his vengeance
- - tillotson
the lives of great men cannot be writ with any †:
degree of elegance or exactness, within a short /pace after their
decease. * * : * &gt;
4. a small time; a while. addison's freeholder.
sith for me ye fight, to me this grace
both yield, to stay your deadly strif -
compassion quell’d y strife a space. fairy queen.
his best of man, and gave him up to tears
a space, 'till firmer thoughts restrain'd excess. milton.
spa’cious. adj. [spacieux, fr. spatiosus, lat.] wide; ex-
tensive ; roomy; not narrow.
the former buildings, which were but mean, contented
them not : spacious and ample churches they erected through-
out every city.
- - hooker.
convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty;
and yet seem cold. shakespeare
merab with spacious beauty fills the fight, -
but too much awe chastis'd the bold delight. cowley.
like an english gen'ral will i die,
and all the ocean make my spacious grave:
women and cowards on the land may sie:
the sea's a tomb that's proper for the brave. dryden.
spa"ciously. adv. [from spacious.] extensively.
spa"cious n ess. m. s. [from spacious.] roominess; wide ex-
tension.
spaddle. t. s. [diminutive of shade.] a little spade.
others destroy moles with a spaddle, waiting in the morn-
ings and evenings for them. a sortimer's husbandry.
spaße. n.f. [rpas, saxon; spade, islandick and dutch.]
1. the instrument of digging.
take the air of the earth new turned up, by digging with
the spade, or standing by him that diggeth. bacon.
many learned in-n affirm, that some isthmes have been eat
through bv. the sea, and others cut by the spade. brown.
his next advance was to the soldier's trade,
where if he did not nimbly ply the spade,
his surly officer ne'er tail'd to crack -
his knotty cudgel on his tougher back. dryden.
herc nature never diff'rence made
between the sceptre and the spade. swift.
2. a deer three years old. ainsworth.
3. a suit of cards.
spa dezone. n.s.. [named from the form.] the shoulder-
blade.
by th’ shoulder of a ram from off the right side par'd,
which usually they boil, the spade-bone being bar'd.
drayton.
spad;"ceous. adj. [spadiceus, lat.]
of those five scaliger beheld, though one was shadiceous, or
of a light red, and two inclining to red, yet was there not
any of this complexion among them. brown's wulgar errouri.
spadi li.e. m. s. [ padille, or espadille, fr.] the ace of pades
at ombre.
spagy'rick. a #. [spagyricus, lat. a word coined by para-
celsus from spaher, a searcher, teutonick..] chymical.
spa"gy risr. n. s. a chymist. -
this change is so unexampled, that though among the more
curious spagyrist; it be very well known, yet many naturalists
cannot easily believe it. boyle.
spake. the old preterite of speak.
so shake the archangel michael, then paus'd. milton.
spall. n.s. (espaule, fr. sooulder. out of use.
their mighty strokes their haberions dismay’d,
and naked made each others many shalles. fairfax.
spalt, or spe’t. n. s. a white, scaly, shining storie, frequently
used to promote the fusion of metals. bailey.
span. n.s. [rpan, rponne, saxon; spanna, ital. shan, dutch.
perhaps originally the expanson of the hand.]
1. the space from the end of the thumb to the end of the little
finger extended; nine inches.
a foot, the length of it, is a sixth part of the fathom ; a
span, one cight; a palm, or hand's breadth, one twenty-fourth ;
a thumb's breadth, or inch, one seventy-second ; and a fore-
finger's breadth one ninety-sixth, holder on time.
will you with counters sum
the vast proportion of his infinite :
and buckle in a waste most fathomless,
with span; and inches so diminutive
as fears and reasons? shakso. troilus and crossida.
sum how brief the life of man
runs his erring pilgrimage,
that the stretching of a span
buckles in his sum of age. * shakespeare.
when i removed the one, although but at the distance of
a span, the other would stand like hercules's pillar. brown.
2. any short duration.
you have scarce time
to steal from spiritual leisure a brief span,
to keep your earthly audit. shakespeare's henry viii.
24 r. the
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 113</div><p class="text">s p a
s-p a
the virgin's part, the mother and the wife,
so well she acted in this span of life. j/aller.
then conscience, unrestrain'd by fears, began -
to stretch her limits, and extend the span. dryden.
life's but a span, i'll ev'ry inch enjoy. farquhar.
to span. v. a.
1. to measure by the hand extended.
oft on the well-known spot i fix my eyes,
and span the distance that between us lies. tickel.
2. to measure.
my surveyor is false; the o'er great cardinal
hath shew'd him gold; my life is spann'd already.
- shakspeare.
this soul doth span the world, and hang content
from either pole unto the centre;
where in each room of the well-furnish'd tent
he lies warm, and without adventure. herbert.
harry, whose tuneful and well-measur’d song
first taught our english musick how to span
words with just note and accent, not to scan
with midas' ears, counting short and long. milton.
span. the preterite of spin. see spin.
together furiously they ran,
that to the ground came horse and man;
the blood out of their helmets span,
so sharp were their encounters. drayton's nymphid.
spa"ncount er. r. n.s.. [from span, counter, and farthing.) a
§...} play at which money is thrown within a
span or mark.
tell the king, that for his father's sake, henry v. in whose
time boys went to spancounter for french crowns, i am con-
tent he shall reign. shakespeare's henry vi.
boys shall not play
at sancounter or blowpoint, but shall pay
toll to some courtier. donne.
his chief solace is to steal down, and play at shanfarthing
with the page. - swift.
to spane. v. a. to wean a child.
spang. m. s. [spange, dutch..] this word seems to have sig-
nified a cluster of shining bodies.
the colours that shew best by candlelight are white, carna-
tion, and a kind of sea-water green; and ouches or spangs,
as they are of no great cost, so they are of most glory. bacon.
spangle. m. s. [spange, german, a buckle, a locket: whence
cher spangen, ear-rings.] - -
1. a small plate or boss of shining metal.
2. anything sparkling and shining.
as hoary frost with spangles doth attire
. the mossy branches of an oak half dead. fairy queen.
thus in a starry night fond children cry
for the rich spangles that adorn the sky. jwaller.
the twinklingspangles, the ornaments of the upper world,
lose their beauty and magnificence: vulgar spectators see them
but as a confused huddle of petty illuminants. glanville.
that now the dew with spangles deck'd the ground,
a sweeter spot of earth was never found. dryden.
to spangle. v. a. [from the noun..] to besprinkle with
spangles or shining bodies. - -
they never meet in grove or green, -
by fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen. shakespeare.
what stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
as those two eyes become that heavenly face. shakespeare.
unpin that spangled breastplate which you wear,
that th' eyes of busy fools may be stopt there.
four faces each
had, like a double janus; all their shape
spangled with eyes, more numerous than those
of argus. milton's par. loft.
then appear'd
spangling the hemisphere, then first adorn'd
with the bright luminaries, that set and rose.
he cuts out a silk mantle from the skies,
where the most sprightly azure pleas'd the eyes;
this he with starry vapours spangles all,
took in their prime, ere they grow, rise, and fall. cowley.
the spacious firmament on high,
with all the blue etherial sky,
and spang!'d heav'ns, a shining frame, . -
their great original proclaim. addison's spediator.
spaniel. m. s. [hispaniolis, lat. espagnetil, fr.]
i. a dog used for sports in the field, remarkable for sagacity and
obedience. - -
divers days i followed his steps 'till i found him, having
newly met with an excellent spaniel belonging to his dead
companion. sidney.
... there are arts to reclaim the wildest men, as there are to
make spaniel, fetch and carry: chide 'em often, and feed 'em
feldom. dryden's spanish fryar.
2. a low, mean, sneaking fellow ; a courtier; a dedicator ; a
pensioner; a dependant; a placeman.
i mean sweet words,
, low crooked curtesies, and base spaniel fawning. shakesp.
donne.
milton.
i am your spaniel; and, demetrius,
the more you beat me i will fawn on you. shakespeare.
to spa stel. v. n. (from the noun...] to fawn; to play the
spaniel.
span is h broom, n. s. [genisła juncea, lat.] a plant so called,
as being a native of spain. miller.
span is h. py. m. s. [cantharis, lat.] a venomous fly that shines
like gold, and breeds in the tops of ashes, olives, &amp;c. it is
used to raise blisters.
span1sh nut, n.s.. [ssyrinthium, lat..] a plant. miller,
spa'n ker, n.s. a small coin.
your cure too costs you but a spanker. . denham.
spa'nn.e.r. m. s. the lock of a fusic or carabine. bailey.
my prince's court is now full of nothing but buff-coats,
spanners, and musket-rests. howel.
spar. m. s.
1. marcasite.
spar is a mixed body, consisting of crystal incorporated
sometimes with lac lunae, and sometimes with other mineral,
stony, earthy, or metallick matter. //oodward. .
some stones, as spar of lead, dissolved in proper menstru-
ums, become salts. newton's opticks.
2. [sparre, dutch...] a small beam; the bar of a gate.
to spar. v. n. to fight with prelusive strokes.
7% spar. v. a. [rpannan, saxon; sperren, german.] to shut;
to close ; to bar.
and if he chance come when i am abroad,
sparre the yate fast for fear of fraud ;
ne for all his worst, nor for his best,
w
open the door at his request. spensor's pasłrals.
six gates i' th' city with massy staples,
and corresponsive and fulfilling bolts,
spar up the sons of troy. shakespeare.
yet for she yode thereat half agast,
and kiddie the door sparred after her fast. spensor.
sparable. m. s. [rpannan, saxon, to fasten..] small nails.
spa radrap. m. s. [in pharmacy..] a cerecloth.
with application of the common sparadrap for issues, this
ulcer was by a fontanel kept open. j/isman's surgery.
one. v. a. [rpanan, saxon; soaeren, dutch; spargne,
t. -
1. to use frugally; not to waste; not to consume.
thou thy father's thunder didst not spare. milton. .
2. to have unemployed; to save from any particular use.
all the time he could spare from the necessary cares of his
weighty charge he bestowed on prayer, and serving of god:
he oftentimes spent the night alone in church praying, his
head-piece, gorget, and gauntlets lying by him. knolls.
he had no bread to spare. l’estrange.
only the foolish virgins entertained this foolish conceit, that
there might be an overplus of grace sufficient to supply their
want; but the wise knew not of any that they had to spare,
but supposed all that they had little enough. tillotson.
let a pamphlet come in a proper juncture, and every one
who can share a shilling shall be a subscriber. swift.
3. to do without ; to lose willingly.
i could have better spar'd a better man.
for his mind, i do not care,
that's a toy that i could spare;
let his title be but great,
his clothes rich, and band sit neat.
sense of pleasure we may well
spare out of life perhaps, and not repine;
shak, hen. iv.
ben. johnson.
but pain is perfect misery. milton.
now she might spare the ocean, and oppose
your conduct to the fiercest of her foes. jvaller.
the fair blessing we vouchsafe to send;
nor can we spare you long, tho’ often we may lend. dryd.
4. to omit 5 to forbear. -
we might have jpardour coming. milton.
be pleas'd your politicks to spare;
i'm old enough, and can myself take care. dryden.
5. to use tenderly; to forbear ; to treat with pity; not to
afflict; not to destroy ; to use with mercy.
spare us, good lord. common prayer.
who will set the discipline of wisdom over mine heart,
that they spare me not for my ignorances : ecclus. xxiii. 2.
doth not each look a flash of lightning feel !
which spares the body's sheath, but melts the steel.
cleaviland.
dim sadness did not spare
celestial visages. * - milton.
less pleasure take brave minds in battles won
than in restoring such as are undone:
- tygers have courage, and the rugged bear;
but man alone can whom he conquers spare. iwaller,
6. to grant ; to allow ; to indulge.
- set me in the remotest place,
that neptune's frozen arms embrace;
where angry jove did never spare
one breath of kind and temperate air. roscommon.
7. to forbear to inflict or impose.
o spare
zoosate
# *
go; not
*ja'
o cu
voghi
o, -
low:
§o
tomo
to yogo
two
, spoffo
if this
h; 04's (
# is of
oppo
assing
:le, b:
lead a
in my
on now
c; wal
lot m
| my
ofot
soon a
his wis
*::ins
: , ,
* n
$nt
'oto
ot
. . . .
... it<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 114</div><p class="text">s p a
s p a
spare my remembrance; 'twas a guilty day; -
and still the blush hangs here. dryd. all for love,
o spare this great, this good, this aged king,
and spare your soul the crime ! dryden's spanish fryar.
spare my fight the pain -
of seeing what a world of tears it costs you.
t, spare. v. n.
1. to live frugally; to be parcimonious ; to be not liberal.
h’ has where withal : in him
sporing would show a worse fin than ill doctrine. shakes).
those wants, which they rather feared than felt, would
well enough be overcome by sparing and patience. knolles.
in these relations, although he be more sparing, his prede-
cessors were very numerous. brown's wulgar errours.
our labours late and early every morning,
midst winter frosts, then clad and fed with sparing,
rise to our toils. otway.
god has not been so sparing to men to make them barely
two-legged creatures, and left it to aristotle to make them
rational. o locke.
when they discover the passionate desire of fame in the am-
bitious man, they become sparing and saving in their commen-
dations; they envy him the satisfaction of an applause. addis.
now a reservoir to keep and spare,
dryden.
the next a fountain spouting through his heir. pope.
no statute in his favour says
how free or frugal i shall pass my days;
who at sometimes spend, at others spare,
divided between carelessness and care. pope.
2. to for bear; to be scrupulous. .
his soldiers spared not to say that they should be unkindly
dealt with, if they were defrauded of the spoil. knolles.
to pluck and eat my fill i spar'd not. . milton.
3. to use mercy; to forgive ; to be tender. o
their king, out of a princely feeling, was soaring and
compassionate towards his subjects, bacon.
spare. adj. 4 -
1. scanty ; not abundant; parcinonious; frugal.
he was spare, but discreet of speech; better conceiving than
delivering ; equally stout and kind. carew's surv. of cornwal.
men ought to beware, that they use not exercise and a spare
diet both. bacon's natural history.
join with thee calm peace and quiet;
spare fast, that oft with gods doth diet. milton.
the masters of the world were bred up with spare diet; and
the young gentlemen of rome felt no want of strength, be-
cause they ate but once a day. locke.
2. superfluous; unwanted. o . . .
if that no spare cloths he had to give, -
his own coat he would cut, and it distribute glad. spenser.
as any of our sick waxed well, he might be removed; for
which purpose there were set forth ten spare chambers. bacon.
learning seems more adapted to the female world than to
the male, because they have more spare time upon their hands,
and lead a more sedentary life.
in my stare hours you’ve had your part; - - -
ev’n now my servile band your sovereign will obeys. norr.
3. lean ; wanting flesh ; macilent. . * : * : - ... "
o give me your spare men, and spare me the great ones. shak.
if my name were liable to fear, -
... i do not know the man i should avoid
. so soon as that spare cassius.
his visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare, . . .
his arms clung to his ribs. - milton's paradis? loft.
spare. m. s. [from the verb.j parcimony; frugal use ; hus-
bandry. not in use. " ' " " ' " " ' " ' " ..
since uncheck’t, they may, ' ' ' " e
they therefore will make still his goods their prey,
without all spare or end. chapman.
our victuals failed us, though we had made good spare of
them. do/7,
spa’rer. m. s. [from share.] one who avoids expence.
by nature far from profusion, and yet a greater sparer than
a saver; for though he had such means to accumulate, yet his
forts, garrisons, and his feastings, wherein he was only sump-
tuous, could not but soak his exchequer. . j/otton.
spa’rerib. m. s. [spare and rib.] some part cut off from the
rib : as, a sparerib of pork.
spar gef action. n.s.. [spargo, lat..] the aet of sprinkling.
spa rin g. adj. [from spare.] - . . .
1. scarce; little. - - o - -
of this there is with you sparing memory or none; but we
have large knowledge thereof. - - - bacon.
2. scanty ; not plentiful. . . . . . .
if much exercise, then use a plentiful diet; and if sharing
diet, then little exercise. - bacon.
good air, solitary groves, and soaring diet, sufficient to
make you fancy yourself one of the fathers of the desert. pope.
3. parcimonious; not liberal. -
virgil being so very paring of his words, and leaving so
much to be imagined by the reader, can never be translated as
he ought in any modern tongue. dryden.
addison's speciator. .
* . .
- a --
- -
shałoff. julius cæsar,
though soaring of his grace, to mischief bent,
he seldom does a good with good intent.
sparingly, adv. [from sparing.]
1. not abundantly.
give us leave freely to render what we have in charge ;
qr shall we sparingly shew you far off
the dauphin's meaning shakespeare's henry v.
the borders whereon you plant fruit-trees should be large,
and set with fine flowers; but thin and sharingly, left they des:
ceive the trees. bacon's essays:
2. frugally; parcimoniously; not lavishly.
high titles of honour were in the king's minority sharingly
granted, because dignity then waited on desert. haywara.
commend but sparingly whom thou do's love;
but less condemn whom thou do'st not approve. denham.
3. with abstinence.
christians are obliged to taste even the innocent pleasures of
life but sparingly. atterbury.
4. not with great frequency.
the morality of a grave sentence, affected by lucan, is
more sparingly used by virgil. dryden.
qur sacraments, which had been frequented with so much
zeal, were approached more sparingly. atterbury.
5. cautiously ; tenderly. -
speech of touch towards others should be sharingy used;
for discourse ought to be as a field, without coming home to
any man. bacon's essays.
spark. m. s. [rpeanca, saxon; sharke, dutch.]
i. a small particle of fire, or kindled matter.
if any marvel how a thing, in itself so weak, could import
any great danger, they must consider not so much how small
the soark is that flieth up, as how apt things about it are to o
dryden,
take fire. - hooker.
i am about to weep; but thinking that
we are a queen, my drops of tears i'll turn
to sparks of fire. . . shakespeare.
i was not forgetful of the sparks which some mens distem-
pers formerly studied to kindle in parliaments. k. charles.
in this deep quiet, from what source unknown,
those seeds of fire that fatal birth disclose:
and first, few scatt'ring sparks about were blown,
big with the flames that to our ruin rose. dryden.
oh, may some spark of your celestial fire
the last, the meanest of your sons inspire. pope.
2. anything shining. -
we haye, here and there, a little clear light, some sharks
of bright knowledge. locke.
3. anything vivid or active.
if any spark of life be yet remaining,
down, down to hell, and say, i sent thee thither. -
- - - shakes care.
4. a lively, showy, splendid, gay man. it is commonly used
in contempt. - -
"how many huffing sparks have we seen, that in the same
day have been both the idols and the scorn of the same slaves :
- - * * l'estrange.
a shark like thee, of the mankilling trade
fell sick. dryden.
... as for the disputes of sharpers, we don't read of any pro-
visions made for the honours of such sparks. collier.
the finest sparks, and cleanest beaux
drip from the shoulders to the toes.
... i who have been the poet's spark to-day,
will now become the champion of his psay. granville.
unlucky as fungoso in the play, - -,
these sparks with aukward vanity display -
what the fine gentlemen wore yesterday. pope.
5. a lover. -
to spark. v. 4. [from the noun..] to emit particles of fire;
to sparkle. not in use. - -
- fair is my love,
when the rose in her cheek appears,
or in her eyes the fire of love doth spark. spenser.
sovo. adj. [spark and full.] lively; brisk; airy. not
usegl. - -
hitherto will our sparkful youth laugh at their great grand-
father's english, who had more care to do well than to speak
minion-like. camden's remains.
spa'rkis h. adj. [from spark.] -
1. airy; gay. a low word.
rather than women.
is anything more sparkish and better humour'd than venus's
accosting her son in the defarts of libya jwalsh.
2. showy; well dressed; fine.
a daw, to be sparkish, trick'd himself up with all the gay
feathers he could muster. ' l’estrange,
spa"rkle. n.s.. [from spark.]
1. a spark; a small particle of fire.
- he with repeated strokes
of clashing flints, their hidden fires provokes;
short flame succeeds, a bed of wither'd leaves
the dying sparkles in their fall receives:
prior.
it is commonly applied to men,
caught<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 115</div><p class="text">s p a
caught into life, in fiery fumes they rise,
and, fed with stronger food, invade the skies.
2. any luminous particle.
dryden.
to detract from the dignity thereof, were to injure ev'n,
god himself, who being that light which none can approach
unto, hath sent out these lights whereof we are capable, even
as so many sparkles resembling the bright fountain from which
they rise. hooker.
when reason's lamp, which, like the sun in sky,
throughout man's little world her beams did spread,
is now become a sparkle, which doth lie
under the ashes, half extinet and dead.
ah then thy once lov'd eloisa see
it will be then no crime to gaze on me.
see from my cheek the transient roses die,
see the last sparkle languish in my eye.
to spa/rk le. v. m. [from the noun..]
1. to emit sparks.
2. to issue in sparks.
the bold design
pleas'd highly those infernal states, and joy
sparkled in all their eyes.
3. to shine; to glitter. -
a hair seen in a microscope loses its former colour, and is
in a great measure pellucid, with a mixture of some bright
fparkling colours, such as appear from the refraction of dia-
monds. locke.
politulus is a fine young gentleman, who sparkles in all the
fhining things of dress and equipage. watts.
4. to rise up, as wine when poured into a glass. r
spa'rklingly. adv. [from sparkling.] with vivid and twink-
ling lustre.
diamonds sometimes would look more sparklingly than they
were wont, and sometimes far more dull than ordinary. boyle.
spa’rkling ness. n.s.. [from sparkling.] vivid and twinkling
lusire. - -
i have observed a manifestly greater clearness and sparkling-
mes; at some times than at others, though i could not refer it
to the superficial clearness or foulness of the stone. boyle.
sparrow. n.s. frpeanya, saxon; passer, lat.] a small bird.
dismay’d not this
macbeth and banquo: yes,
as sparrows, eagles; or the hare, the lion. shakespeare.
there is great probability that a thousand sparrows will fly
away at the fight of a hawk among them. watts.
sparrowhawk, or sparhawk. n.s. [rpearparoc, saxon.]
davies.
pope.
milton.
the female of the musket hawk. hanmer.
spa rrowg r ass. n.s. [corrupted from asparagus.]
your infant pease to sparrowgrass prefer,
which to the supper you may best defer. king.
spa(rry. adj. [from spar...] consisting of spar, -
in which manner spar is usually found herein, and other
minerals; or such as are of some observable figure ; of which
sort are the sparry striae, or icicles called stalactitae. woodw.
spas m. n.s.. [spasme, fr. orgago..] convulsion ; violent and
involuntary contraclion of any part.
all the maladies
of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
of heart sick agony.
wounds are subject to pain, inflammation, spasm.
- wiseman's surgery.
carminative things dilute and relax; because wind occa-
fions a spasm or convulsion in some part. - a buthnot.
spa's modick. adj. [spasmodique, fr. from spasm.]. convul-
sive. - - -
spat. the preterite of spit. . . .
and when he had spat on the ground, he anointed his eyes.
gospel.
milton.
spat. n.s. the young shell-fish. . .
a reticulated film found upon sea-shells, and usually sup-
posed to be the remains of the vesicles of the spat of some fort
of shell. fish. jwoodward on fossils.
to spa(t1at e. v. n. [spation, lat.] to rove ; to range; to
ramble at large. a word not used.
wonder causeth astonishment, or an immoveable posture of
the body, caused by the fixing of the mind upon one cogita-
tion, whereby it doth not spatiate and transcur. bacon.
confined to a narrow chamber, he could spatiate at large
through the whole universe. bentley.
t, spa(tter. v. a. [rpaz, spit, saxon.]
1. to sprinkle with dirt, or any thing offensive.
the pavement swam in blood, the walls around
were spatter'd o'er with brains. addison.
2. to throw out any thing offensive.
his forward voice now is to speak well of his friend; his
backward voice is to spatter foul speeches, and to detract.
. -- * * shakespeare.
3. to asperse; to defame. -
#% spatter. v. n. to spit; to sputter as at any thing nau-
seous taken into the mouth.
they fondly thinking to allay
their appetite with gust, instead of fruit
chew'd bitter ashes, which th' offended taste
with spattering noise rejected. milton,
spatterbashes. n.s.. [spatter and dosh.] coverings for so
legs by which the wet is kept off.
spattling, poppy, n.s. spapaver spumeum.] white behem. a
plant which is a species of campion. miller
spa"tula. n.s.. [spatha, spathula, lat..] a spattle or slice."
spatula is an instrument used by apothecaries and surgeons
in spreading plaisters or stirring medicines together. oil,
in raising up the hairy scalp smooth with my spatula, scousi
discover no fault in the bone. joseman's surgery.
spa win... n.s. [ospavent, fr., spavano, italian.] this dias.
in horses is a bony excrescence or crust as hard as a bone
that grows on the inside of the hough, not far from the elbow.
and is generated of the same matter by which the bones or i.
gaments are nourished : it is at first like a tender gristle, but
by degrees comes to hardness. farrier's didi.
they've all new legs and lame ones; one would take it,
that never saw them pace before, the spavin,
and springhalt reign'd among them. shakespeare.
if it had been a /pavin, and the ass had petitioned for an.
other farrier, it might have been reasonable. i'e/irange.
spaw. m. s. [from spaw in germany.] a place famous for
mineral waters; any mineral water.
to spawl. v. n. [rpoeclian, to spit, saxon.] to throw moi-
sture out of the mouth. . . . "
he who does on iv'ry tables dine, - * {
his marble floors with drunken spawlings shine. dryden,
what mischief can the dean have done him,
that traulus calls for vengeance on him :
why must he sputter, spawl, and slaver it,
in vain against the people's fav'rite. swift.
spawl. n.s. [rparl, saxon.] spittle; moisture ejected from
the mouth.
of spittle she lustration makes;
then in the spawl her middle finger dips,
anoints the temple, forehead, and the lips.
spawn. m. s. [spene, spenne, dutch.]
1. the eggs of fish, or of frogs.
masters of the people,
your multiplying spawn how can he flatter -
that's thousand to one good one shakesp. coriolanus,
god said, let the waters generate
reptile, with spawn abundant, living soul milton.
these ponds, in spawning time abounded with frogs, and
a great deal of spawn. ray on the creation.
2. any product or offspring. in contempt.
'i was not the spawn of such as these
that dy'd with punick blood the conquer'd seas,
and quasht the stern hacides. - roscommon.
this atheistical humour was the spawn of the gross supersti-
dryden.
&amp;
tions of the romish church and court. tillotson.
to spaw n. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to produce as fishes do eggs.
some report a sea-maid spawn'd him. shakespeare.
2. to generate; to bring forth. in contempt.
what practices such principles as these may spawn, when
they are laid out to the sun, you may determine. swift.
to sp aw n. v. n. -
1. to produce eggs as fish.
- the fish having spawned before, the fry that goes down
hath had about three months growth under ground, when
they are brought up again. brown's travels.
2. to issue; to proceed. in contempt.
it is so ill a quality, and the mother of so many ill ones that
fpawn from it, that a child should be brought up in the greatest
abhorrence of it. . . o locke.
spa'wnex. n. s. [from spawn..] the female fish.
the barbel, for the preservation of their seed, both the
fpawner and the melter cover their spawn with sand. jp'alton.
to spay. v. a. [shado, lat..] to castrate female animals.
be dumb you beggars of the rythming trade,
... geld your loose wits, and let your muse be spay’d. cleavil.
the males must be gelt, and the sows spay’d the spay’d
they esteem as the most profitable, because of the great quan-
tity of fat upon the inwards. mortimer’s husbandry.
to speak. v. n. [preterite, spake or spoke; participle passive,
fpoken ; rpecan, saxon ; spreken, dutch.]
1. to utter articulate sounds; to express thoughts by words.
speaking is nothing else than a sensible expression of the no-
tions of the mind, by several discriminations of utterance of
voice, used as signs, having by consent several determinate
significancies. - holder.
hannah spake in her heart, only her lips moved, but her
voice was not heard. 1 sam. i. 13.
2. to haraogue; to make a speech.
many of the nobility made themselves popular by speaking
in parliament, against those things which were most grateful
to his majesty, and which still passed notwithstanding their
contradiction. . clarenden.
thersites, though the most presumptuous greek,
yet durst not for achilles' armour speak. dryden.
3. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 116</div><p class="text">s p e
-
s p e
to talk for or against; to dispute.
3. a knave should have some countenance at his friend's re-
quest. an honest man, sir, is able to speak for himself when
a knave is not. - - shakesp. henry iv.
the general and his wife are talking of it;
and she speaks for you stoutly. shakesp. othello.
so. he had no power, esp t
he was your enemy still spake against
your liberties and charters.
to discourse; to make mention.
4. were such things here as we do speak about
or have we eaten of the insane root,
that takes the reason prisoner shakesp. king lear.
lot went out and sate unto his sons in law. "gen. xix. 14.
the fire you speak of,
if any flames of it approach my fortunes,
i'll quench it not with water, but with ruin. ben. johnson.
the scripture speaks only of those to whom it speaks. ham.
they could never be lost, but by an universal deluge, which
has been spoken to already. tillotson.
lucan speaks of a part of caesar's army that came to him,
from the leman-lake, in the beginning of the civil war. addis.
had luther spoke up to this accusation, yet chrysostom's
example would have been his defence. atterbury.
5. to go sound.
§. all your trumpets speak, give them all breath,
those clam'rous harbingers of blood and death. shakesp.
6. to speak with. to address; to converse with.
thou can'st not fear us, pompey, with thy sails,
we'll speak with thee at sea. , shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
1 spake with one that came from thence,
that freely render'd me these news for true. shakespeare.
nicholas was by a herald sent for to come into the great
bassa; solyman disdaining to speak with him himself. knolles.
t. speak. v. a.
1. to utter with the mouth; to pronounce. -
mordecai had spoken good. e?h. vii. 6.
consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds. judges.
they sat down with him upon the ground, and none spake
a word. job, ii. 13.
when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil
of that way before the multitude, he departed. aois, xix. 9.
you, from my youth,
have known and try’d me, speak i more than truth? sandys.
what you keep by you, you may change and mend,
shakesp. coriolanus.
but words once spoke can never be recalid. j/allor.
under the tropick is our language spoke,
and part of flanders hath receiv'd our yoke. 17aller.
he no where speaks it out, or in direct terms calls them
substances. locke.
colours speak all languages, but words are understood only
by such a people or nation. speciator,
1. to proclaim ; to celebrate.
it is my father's musick
to speak your deeds, not little of his care
to have them recompensed. shakespeare's j/inter's tale.
. to address; to accost.
if he have need of thee, he will deceive thee, smile upon
thee, put thee in hope, speak thce fair, and say, what wantest
thou? ecclus. xiii. 6.
4. to exhibit; to make known.
let heav'n's wide circuit speak
' the maker's high magnificence.
spea'kable. adj. [from speak.]
1. possible to be spoken.
1. having the power of speech.
- say,
how cam'st thou speakable of mute 7
speaker. n. s. [from speak.]
1. one that speaks.
these fames grew so general, as the authors were lost in
the generality of speakers. bacon's henry vii.
in conversation or reading, find out the true sense, idea
which the speaker or writer affixes to his words. watts's logo.
common speakers have only one set of ideas, and one set
of words to clothe them in ; and these are always ready at the
mouth. swift.
1. one that speaks in any particular manner.
horace's phrase is tarret jerur ;
and happy was that curious speaker. .
3. one that celebrates, proclaims, or mentions.
after my death, i wish no other herald,
no other speaker of my living actions,
to keep mine honour from corruption.
4. the prolocutor of the commons.
ihave disabled myself like an elected speaker of the house. dry.
spra'king trumpet. n.s. a stentorophonick instrument; a
. by which the voice may be propagated to a great
ance.
that with one blast through the whole house does bound,
and first taught speaking trumpet how to sound. pryden.
vol. ii.
milton.
milton.
prior.
shakespeare.
spear, n. s. sysper, welsh; saxon : yat-h.
joao, old french; sarum, so axon; spere, datch;
i. a long weapon with a sharp point, used in thrusting or throw-
ing ; a lance. o
those brandishers of speares,
from many cities drawn, are they that are our hinderers.
- - - of)/nant.
th egyptian, like a hill, himself did rear, chapma
like some tall tree; upon it seem'd a spear. &gt; cowley.
nor wanted in his grasp ey.
what seem'd both shield and spor. milton
the flying spear -
sung innocent, and spent its force in air. pope.
the lous’d-up lion, resolute and slow, fo -
advances full on the protended spear. thomson.
2. a lance generally with prongs, to kill fish.
the borderers watching, until they be past up into some nar-
row creek, below them, cast a strong corded net athwart the
stream, with which, and their loud shouting, they stop them
from retiring, until the ebb have abandoned them to the hunt.
er's mercy, who, by an old custom, share them with such in--
differency, as if a woman with child be present, the babe in
her womb is gratified with a portion: a point also observed
by the spear-hunters in taking of salmons. carew.
*...* v. a. (from the noun..] to kill or pierce with a
pear. .
to spear. v. n. to shoot or sprout. this is commonly
witten spire.
let them not lie left they should spear, and the air dry and
spoil the shoot. mortimer’s husandy.
speargrass. n. s. [spear and gros; ) long stiff grass.
tickle our noses with speargrass to make them bleed; and
then beflubber our garments with it. shakespeare's henry iv.
so man. m. s. [spear and man.] one who uses a lance in
fig it.
the spea, man's arm by thee, great god, directed,
sends forth a certain wound. prior.
spearmint. m. s. [onentha romana, lat..] a plant; a spe-
cies of mint.
spear wort, n.s. [ranunculus flammeus, lat..] an herb. ajos.
special. adj. [special, fr. specialis, latin.]
1. noting a sort or species.
a special idea is called by the schools a species.
2. particular ; peculiar.
miost commonly with a certain special grace of her own,
wagging her lips, and grinning instead of similing. sidney.
the several books of scripture having had each some feve-
ral occasion and particular purpose which caused them to be
written, the contents thereof are according to the exigence of
jwatts.
that special end whereunto they are intended. h.oker.
of all men alive
i never yet beheld that special face,
which i could fancy more than any other. shakespeare.
nought so vile that on the earth doth live,
but to the earth some special good doth give. shakespeare.
the fourth commandment, in respect of any one definite
and special day of every week, was not simply and perpetually
moral. is'hite.
our saviour is represented every where in scripture, as the
special patron of the poor and the afflicted, and as laying their
interests to heart more nearly than those of any other of his
members. atterbury.
3. appropriate; designed for a particular purpose.
o neal, upon his marriage with a daughter of kildare,
was made denizen by a special act of parliament. davies.
such things are evident by natural light, which men of a
mature age, in the ordinary use of their faculties, with the
common help of mutual society, may know and be suffi-
ciently assured of, without the help of any special revela-
tion. jwilkins.
4. extraordinary; uncommon. -
that which necessity of some special time doth cause to be
enjoined, bindeth no longer than during that time, but doth
afterward become free. hooker.
the other scheme takes special care to attribute all the
work of conversion to grace. hammond.
though our charity should be universal, yet as it cannot
be actually exercised, but on particular times, so it should be
chiefly on special opportunities. spratt's sormans.
he bore
a paunch of the same bulk before ;
which still he had a special care
to keep well cramm'd with thrifty fare.
5. chief in excellence. -
the king hath drawn
the special head of all the land together,
specially, adv. [from special.]
1. particularly above others.
special, she day that thou floodest before the lord.
a brother beloved, specially to me.
2. not in a common way; peculiarly.
hudibrat,
shai. how iv.
24 s - if
deuf,
phil. xvi.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 117</div><p class="text">s p e
s p e
if there be matter of law that carries any difficulty, the
jury may, to deliver themselves from an attaint, find it spe-
cially. - ale.
spe'cialty. }" s. [specialite, french; from special.] par-
specia‘lity. § ticularity.
on these two general heads all other specialties are depen-
dent. hooker.
the packet is not come,
where that and other specialties are bound. shakespeare.
speciality of rule hath been negle&amp;ted. shakespeare.
when men were sure, that in case they rested upon a bare
contract without speciality, the other party might wage his law,
they would not rest upon such contracts without reducing the
debt into a speciality which accorded many suits. ahale.
species. n.s.. [species, latin.]
1. a sort; a subdivision of a general term.
a special idea is called by the schools a species ; it is one
common nature that agrees to several fingular individual be-
ings: so horse is a special idea or species as it agrees to buce-
phalus, trot, and snowball. watts.
2. class of nature; single order of beings.
he intendeth the care of species or common natures, but let-
teth loose the guard of individuals or single existencies. brown.
the phenix pindar is a whole species alone. cowley.
for we are animals no less,
although of different species. hudibras.
thou nam'st a race which must proceed from me,
yet my whole species in myself i see. dryden.
a mind of superior or meaner capacities than human would
constitute a different species, though united to a human body
in the same laws of connexion: and a mind of human capa-
cities would make ancther species, if united to a different body
in different laws of connexion. pentley's sermons.
3. appearance to the senses; any visible or sensible representa-
tion. -
an apparent diversity between the species visible and audible
is, that the visible doth not mingle in the medium, but the
audible doth. bacon.
it is a most certain rule, how much any body hath of co-
lour, so much hath it of opacity, and by so much the more
unfit it is to transmit the species. ray on the creation.
the species of the letters illuminated with blue were nearer
to the lens than those illuminated with deep red by about three
inches, or three and a quarter; but the species of the letters
illuminated with indigo and violet appeared so confused and
indistinet, that i could not read them. newton's opticks.
4. representation to the mind.
wit in the poet, or wit-writing, is no other than the facul-
ty of imagination in the writer, which searches over all the
memory for the species or ideas of those things which it designs
to represent. dryden.
5. show; visible exhibition. not in use ; and perhaps, in the
following quotation, misprinted for spectacles.
shews and species serve best with the people. bacon.
6. circulating money.
as there was in the splendour of the roman empire a less
quantity of current species in europe than there is now, rome
possessed a much greater proportion of the circulating species
of its time than any european city. arbuthnot.
7. simples that have place in a compound medicine.
§:::::::::: } adj. [specifique, french; shecies and facio.]
1. that which makes a thing of the species of which it is.
that thou to truth the perfect way may’st know,
to thee all her specifick forms i'll show. denham.
the understanding, as to the exercise of this power, is
subject to the command of the will, though, as to the specifick
nature of its acts, it is determined by the object. south.
by whose direction is the nutriment so regularly distributed
into the respective parts, and how are they kept to their speci-
fick uniformities : glanville.
these principles i confider not as occult qualities, supposed
to result from the specifick forms of things, but as general laws
of nature by which the things themselves are formed; their
truth appearing to us by phaenomena, though their causes be
not yet discovered. newton's opticks.
as all things were formed according to these specifical plat-
forms, so their truth must be measured from their conformity
to them. norris.
specifick gravity is the appropriate and peculiar gravity or
weight which any species of natural bodies have, and by
which they are plainly distinguishable from all other bodies of
different kinds. quincy.
the specifick qualities of plants reside in their native spirit,
oil and essential salt: for the water, fixt salt and earth appear
to be the same in all plants. arbuthnot.
specifick difference is that primary attribute which distin-
guishes each species from one another, while they stand rank-
ed under the same general nature or genus. though wine
differs from other liquids, in that it is the juice of a certain
fruit, yet this is but a general or generick difference; for it
does not distinguish wine from cyder or perry: the joecifth
difference of wine therefore is its pressure from the grape; as
cyder is pressed from apples, and perry from pears. watts,
2. [in medicine.] appropriated to the cure of some particular
distemper. . it is usually applied to the arcana, or medicines
that work by occult qualities. - -
the operation of purging medicines have been referred to
a hidden propriety, a specifical virtue, and the like shifts of
ignorance. baron’s natural hylor).
if she would drink a good deco&amp;tion of sarsa, with the us of
specificks, she might enjoy a good health. wiftman,
speci'fically. adv. [from specifick.] in such a manner as to
constitute a species; according to the nature of the species.
his faith must be not only living, but lively too; it must
be put into a posture by a particular exercise of those several
virtues that are specifically requisite to a due performance of
this duty. - - south's sermons.
human reason doth not only gradually, but specifical, dif.
fer from the fantastick reason of brutes, which have no con-
ceit of truth, as an aggregate of divers simple conceits, nor of
* universal. grew,
e must allow that bodies were endowed with the same af.
fe&amp;tions then as ever since; and that, if an axe head be sup-
posed to float upon water which is specifically lighter, it had
been supernatural. . . - * * ley.
to specificate. v. a. [from species and facio..] to mark by
notation of distinguishing particularities. - - - -
man, by the instituted law of his creation, and the common
influence of the divine goodness, is enabled to act as a reason-
able creature, without any particular, specificating, concurrent,
new imperate act of the divine special providence. hall.
specification, n.s.. [from specifick; specification, fr.] -
1. distinet notation; determination by a peculiar mark. .
this specification or limitation of the question hinders the
disputers from wandering away from the precise point of en-
quiry. .. - watts.
2. particular mention.
the constitution here speaks generally without the soft-
cation of any place. ayliff's pirirgon.
to spe'cify. v. a. [from species; specifier, fr.] to thention;
to show by some particular marks of distinetion.
as the change of such laws as have been specified is neces-
sary, so the evidence that they are such must be great. hooker.
st. peter doth not specify what these waters were. burnet.
he has there given us an exact geography of greece, where
the countries, and the uses of their soils, are specified. pope.
specimen. m. s. [specimen, latin.j. a sample; a part of any
thing exhibited, that the rest may be known.
several persons have exhibited specimens of this art before
multitudes of beholders. addison's spediator.
spe'cious. adj. [specieux, fr. speciosus, latin.]
1. showy; pleasing to the view. -
the rest, far greater part,
will deem in outward rites and specious forms,
religion satisfy'd. milton,
- - she next i took to wife,
o that i never had 1 fond wish too late |
was in the vale of sorec, dalila,
that specious monster, my accomplish’d share. milton.
2. plausible; superficially, not solidly right; striking at first
view.
bad men boast
their specious deeds on earth which glory excites,
or close ambition warnish’d o'er with zeal. milton,
somewhat of specious they must have to recommend them-
selves to princes; for folly will not easily go down in its na-
tural form. - dryden.
temptation is of greater danger, because it is covered with
the specious names of good nature and good manners. rogers.
this is the only specious objection which our romish ad-
versaries urge against the doctrine of this church in the point
of celibacy. atterbury.
spe'ciously, adv. [from specious.] with fair appearance.
piety is opposed to hypocrisy and infincerity; especially to
that personated devotion under which any kind of impiety is
wont to be disguised, and put off more speciously. hammond.
speck. n.s. [rpecec, saxon.] a small discoloration; a spot.
every speck does not blind a man. govern, of the tongue.
then are they happy, when
no speck is left of their habitual stains;
but the pure aether of the soul remains. dryden's znaid.
to speck. v. a. to spot; to stain in drops.
flow’r
carnation, purple, azure, or speck'd with gold. milton, ,
speckle. n.s.. [from speck.] small speck; little spot.
to speckle. v. a. [from the noun..] to mark with small
spots.
*s, dreadfully he towards him did pass,
forelifting up aloft his speckled breast,
and often bounding on the bruised grass,
as for great joy of his new comen guest. fairy quin.
- specki’d
#:
bu
t;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 118</div><p class="text">- * - • *-
specki'd vanity
will sicken soon and die,
and leprous fin will melt from earthly mould.
saw'st thou not late a speckl"d serpent rear
his gilded spires to climb on yon fair tree ?
before this happy minute i was he.
the smiling infant in his hand shall take
the crested basilisk and speckled snake;
pleas'd the green lustre of the scales survey,
and with their forky tongue and pointless sting shall play.
pope's moffah.
dryden.
the tortoise here and elephant unite,
transform'd to combs, the spectra and the white. pope.
sreckt, or speight... n.s. a woodpecker. ainsworth.
spectacle. ". s: [speciacle, fr. spectaculum, latin.]
1. a show; a gazing stock; any thing exhibited to the view as
eminently remarkable.
in open place produc’d they me,
to be a publick spectacle to all. shakesp. henry vi.
we are made a spectacle unto angels, and men. 1 cor. iv. 9.
2. any thing perceived by the fight.
forth riding underneath the castle wall,
a dunghill of dead carcases he spy'd, - -
the dreadful spectacle of that sad house of pride. fa. queen.
when pronouncing sentence, seem not glad,
such spectacles, though they are just, are sad. denham.
3. [in the plural.] galles to affist the fight.
the sixth age shifts
into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
with spectacles on nose and pouch on side. shakespeare.
we have helps for fight above speciacles and glasses. bacon.
shakespeare was naturally learned: he needed not the spec-
tales of books to read nature; he looked inwards and found
her there. dryden on dramatick poesy.
the first speciacle-maker did not think that he was leading
the way to the discovery of new planets. grew.
this is the reason of the decay of fight in old men, and
shews why their fight is mended by spectacles. newton.
this day, then let us not be told,
that you are sick and i grown old 5
nor think on our approaching ills,
and talk of speciacies and pills. swift.
spectacled. aff. [from the noun..] furnished with spec-
tacles.
all tongues sneak of him, and the bleared fights
are soaried to see him. shakespeare's coriolanuf.
spectation. n.s. [spotatio, latin.] regard ; respect.
this simple speciation of the lungs is differenced from that
which concomitates a pleurisy. harvey.
spectator. n.s.. [speciateur, fr. spectator, latin.] a looker-
on ; a beholder. -
more
than history can pattern, though devis'd
and play'd, to take spectators. shakespeare.
if it proves a good repast to the spectators, the dish pays the
shot. shakespeare's cymbeline.
an old gentleman mounting on horseback, got up heavily;
but desired the spectators that they would count fourscore and
eight before they judged him. dryden.
he mourns his former vigour lost so far,
to make him now spe:#ator of a war. dryden.
what pleasure hath the owner more than the speciator? seed.
spectatorship, n.s.. [from spectator.] act of beholding.
thou stand'st i' th' state of hanging, or of some death more
long in sectatorship, and crueller in suffering. shakespeare.
speci re. m. s. [saoire, fr. spe: run, latin.] apparition;
appearance of persons dead.
the chosts of traitors from the bridge descend,
with bold fanatick spectres to rejoice. dryden.
the very poetical use of the word for a spoire doth imply
an exact resemblance to some real being it represents. stilling.
these are nothing but specires the understanding raises to
itself to flatter its own laziness. locke.
spectrum. n.s. [latin.] an image; a visible form.
this prism had some veins running along within the glass,
from the one end to the other, which scattered some of the
sun's light irregularly, but had no sensible effect in increasing
the length of the coloured spectrum. newton's opticki.
spe'cular, adj. [specularis, latin.] -
1. having the qualities of a mirrour or looking-glass.
it were but madness now to impart
the skill of soccular stone. donne.
quicksilver may, by the fire alone, in glass vessels, be turn-
td into a red body; and from this red body may be obtained
a mercury, bright and specular as before. boyle.
a specium of metas without glass, made some years since
for optical uses, and very well wrought, produced none of
those rings; and thence i understood that these ring: as 11e
not from the specular surface alone, but depend upon the two
surfaces of the plate of glass whereof the speculum was made,
and upon the thicknes, of the glass between them. not".
2: assisting fight. in proper.
milton.
s p e
* - the hidden way
qf nature would'st thou know, how first she frames
all things in miniature? thy specular orb
so o kernels; lo!
in each observe the slende
of first-beginning trees. r threads -
to specular e. v. n. [specular, fr. specular, lat.]
ditats; to contemplate; to take a v
mind.
confider the quantity, and not /peculate upon an intrinse-
cal relation. - digby on bodies,
as news-writers record fasts which afford great matter of
speculation, their readers speculate accordingly, and, by their
variety of conjectures, become consummate statesmen. addis.
73 spe'culate: v. a. to consider attentively; to look through
with the mind.
man was not meant to gape, or look upward, but to have
his thoughts sublime; and not only behold, but speculate their
nature with the eye of the understanding. brown.
speculation. n.f. [speculation, fr. from speculate.]
1. examination by the eye; view. -
2. examiner; spy. this word is found no where else, and
probably is here misprinted for speculator.
to, who have, as who have not, whom their great
ars
throne and set high servants
which are to france the spits and speculations,
intelligent of our state. shakespeare's king lear.
3. mental view; intellectual examination; contemplation.
in all these things being fully persuaded, that what they did,
it was obedience to the will of god, and that all men should
do the like ; there remained after speculation, practice where-
philipi.
to me-
iew of any thing with the
unto the whole world might be framed. hooker.
thenceforth to speculations high or deep,
i turn'd my thoughts; and with capacious mind
consider'd all things visible. milton.
news-writers afford matter of speculation. addison.
4. a train of thoughts formed by meditation.
from him socrates derived the principles of morality,
most part of his natural speculations.
5. mental scheme not reduced to practice.
this terrestrial globe, which before was only round in she-
culation, has since been surrounded by the fortune and boldness
of many navigators. temple.
this is a consideration not to be negle&amp;led, or thought an
and
temple.
indifferent matter of mere speculation. lofty.
6. power of sight. not in use.
thy bones are marrowless; thy blood is cold;
thou hast no speculation in those eyes
thou star'st with.
shakespeare,
speculative. adj. [speculatif, fr. from speculate.]
1. given to speculation; contemplative. -
if all other uses were utterly taken away, yet the mind of
man being by nature speculative, and delighted with contem-
plation in itself, they were to be known even for mere know-
ledge sake. hooker.
it encourages speculative persons who have no turn of mind
to increase their fortunes. addison.
2. theoretical; notional; ideal; not pracical.
some take it for a speculative platform, that reason and na-
ture would that the best should govern, but no wise to create
a right. bacon's holy war.
these are not speculative flights, or imaginary notions, but
are plain and undeniable laws, that are founded in the nature
of rational beings. law.
speculatively. adv. [from speculative.]
1. contemplatively; with meditation.
2. ideally; notionally; theoretically ; not praslically.
speculator. m. s. [from speculate.]
1. one who forms theories.
he is dextrous in puzzling others, if they be not through-
paced speculators in those great theories. more.
2. [speculateur, french..] an observer; a contemplator.
although lapidaries and questuary enquirers affirm it, yet
the writers of minerals, and natural speculators, conceive the
stones which bear this name to be a mineral concretion. brown.
3. a spy; a watcher. - -
ali the boats had one speculator, to give notice when the
fish approached. broome on q.'ssy.
speculatory. adj. [from speculate.] exercising speculation.
speculum. m. s. [latin.) a mirrour; a looking-glass i
that in which representations are formed by reflection.
a rough and coloured object may serve for a speculum, to
reflect the artificial rainbow. boyle on colouri.
sped. the preterite and part, passive of seed. .
his horse full of windgalls, sped with tie spavins, and rayed
with the yellows. shakespeare.
barbarosła, sped of that he desired, staid not long at con-
stantinople, but shaped his course towards italy. anolls.
with all his harness soon the god was sped;
his flying hat, his wings upon his heels. drydin.
... n.s. ss #.
sps sch, n. j. [ on to j 1. the
3
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 119</div><p class="text">s p e
1. the power of articulate utterance; the power of expressing
thoughts by vocal words. o
there is none comparable to the variety of instrustive ex-
pressions by speech, wherewith man alone is endowed, for the
communication of his thoughts. holder on speech.
though our ideas are first acquired by various sensations
and refle&amp;tions, yet we convey them to each other by the
means of certain sounds, or written marks, which we call
words; and a great part of our knowledge is both obtained and
communicated by these means, which are called speech. watts.
2. language; words considered as expresfing thoughts. .
in speech be eight parts. - accidence.
the aets of god to human ears * *
cannot without process of speech be told.
3. particular language as distinet from others.
there is neither speech nor language, but their voices are
heard among them. ps, common prayer.
4. anything spoken. -
a plague upon your epileptick visage 1
smile you my speeches as i were a fool.
5. talk; mention.
the duke did of me demand
what was the speech among the londoners,
concerning the french journey.
speech of a man's self ought to be seldom.
6. oration; harangue.
the constant design of these orators, in all their speeches,
milton.
swift. k. lar.
- shakespeare.
bacon's essays.
was to drive some one particular point. swift.
7. declaration of thoughts. - -
i, with leave of speech implor’d, reply'd. milton.
spe echless. adj. [from speech.]
1. deprived of the power of speaking; made mute or dumb.
he fell down, foam'd at mouth, and was speechless. shakesp.
the great god pan hath broken his pipes, and apollo's
priests are become speechless. raleigh.
a single vision transports them : it finds them in the eager-
ness and height of their devotion; they are speechless for the
time that it continues, and prostrate when it departs. dryden.
speechless with wonder, and half dead with fear. addison.
2. mute; dumb.
i kneel'd before him ;
'twas very faintly he said rise: dismiss'd me
thus, with his speechless hand. shakesp. coriolanus.
from her eyes
i did receive fair speechless messages. shakespeare.
he that never hears a word spoken, it is no wonder he re-
main speechless; as any one must do, who from an infant should
be bred up among mutes. holder on speech.
to speed. v. n. pret. and part, pass sped and speeded. [speeden,
. dutch.]
1. to make haste; to move with celerity.
so well they sped that they be come at length
unto the place whereas the paynim lay,
devoid of outward sense and native strength,
covered with charmed cloud from view of day. fa. queen.
do you think me a swallow, an arrow, or a bullet have
i, in my poor and cold motion, the expedition of thought 2
i speeded hither with the very extremest inch of possibility. shak.
if pray'rs -
could alter high decrees, i to that place
would speed before thee, and be louder heard. milton.
- see where idwall speeds 1 a trusty soldier. a. philips.
2. [spebian, to grow rich, saxon.] to have good success.
timon is shrunk, indeed;
and he, that's once deny'd, will hardly speed. shakesp.
now if this suit lay in bianca's pow'r,
how quickly should you speed. shakespeare.
when first this tempter cross'd the gulph from hell,
i told you then he should prevail, and speed
in his bad errand.
3. to succeed well or ill.
make me not fighted like the basilisk:
i’ve look'd on thousands, who have sped the better
by my regard, but kill'd none so. shakesp. winter's tale.
mo. shewed them what an offence it was rashly to de-
part out of the city, which might be unto them dangerous,
although they should speed never so well. knolles.
these were violators of the first temple, and those that pro-
faned and abused the second, sped no better. south.
4. to have any condition good or bad.
ships heretofore in seas like fishes sped,
the mightiest still upon the smallest fed.
to speed. v. a.
1. to dispatch in haste; to send away quickly.
the tyrant's self, a thing unused, began
to feel his heart relent with meer compassion;
but not dispos'd to ruth or mercy then,
he sped him thence home to his habitation.
2. to hasten; to put into quick motion.
she,
hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
led hither by pure love. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
milton.
waller.
fairfax.
satan, tow'rd the coast of earth beneath,
down from th’ ecliptick sped with hop'd success,
throws his steep fight in many an airy wheel.
the priest reply'd no more,
but shed his steps along the hoarse resounding shore. dryden.
3: to furnish in baste.
4. to dispatch; to destroy ; to kill; to mischief; to ruin.
with a speeding thrust his heart he found;
the lukewarm blood came rushing thro’ the wound. dryd.
a dire dilemma | either way i’m sped;
if foes, they write; if friends, they read me dead. pop.,
5. to execute; to dispatch. -
judicial acts are all those writings and matters which relate
to judicial proceedings, and are sped in open court at the in-
stance of one or both of the parties. ayliffe's parergon.
6. to assist ; to help forward.
lucina
reach'd her midwife hands to speed the throws.
propitious neptune steer'd their course by night
milton.
dryden.
with rising gales, that sped their happy flight. drydon.
speed the soft intercourse from soul to soul, --
and waft a figh from indus to the pole. pope.
7. to make prosperous; to make to succeed.
if any bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your
house, neither bid him god spred. st. paul.
he was chosen, though he stood low upon the roll, by a
very unusual concurrence of providential events, happened to
be sped. fell.
speed. n. s. [sooed, dutch.] -
1. quickness; celerity.
earth receives
as tribute, such a sumless journey brought
of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light; *
steed / to describe whose swiftness number fails. mohaw,
we observe the horse's patient service at the plough, his
speed upon the highway, his docibleness, and desire of glory.
otes
2. haste; hurry; dispatch.
when they strain to their utmost speed, there is still the
wonted distance between them and their aims: all their eager
torsuits bring them no acquests. decay of piety.
3. , ne course or pace of a horse.
he that rides at high speed, and with a pistol, kills a sparrow
flying. shakesp. henry iv.
4. success; event of any action or incident.
the prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
of the queen's speed, is gone. shałespear.
o lord, i pray thee send me good speed. gen. xxiv. 12.
spe'edily. adv. [from speedy..] with haste; quickly.
post speedily to your husband, -
shew him this letter. shakespeare's king lear.
send speedily to bertran; charge him strictly
not to proceed. ' ' ' dryden's spanish friar.
speed in ess. n.s.. [from speedy.j. the quality of being speedy.
speedw ell. n.s. [veranica, latin.] fluellin. a plant.
in a scarcity in silesia a rumour was spread of its raining
millet-seed; but ’twas found to be only the seeds of the ivy- -
leaved speedwell, or small henbit. derham's physico-theology.
speedy. adj. [from speed.] quick; swift; nimble ; quick of
dispatch.
how near's the other army
—near, and on speedy foot: the main descry
stands on the hourly thought. shakesp. king lear.
back with speedios sail
zophiel, of cherubim the swiftest wing, -
. came flying. milton's paradis? loft.
let it be enough what thou hast done,
when spotted deaths ran arm'd through ev'ry street,
with poison'd darts, which not the good could shun,
the speedy could outfly, or valiant meet. dryden.
speight. m. s spicus martius, lat.] a bird.
spell. m. s. [rpel, saxon, a word.]
1. a charm consisting of some words of occult power.
horace uses words :
sunt verba &amp; voces quibus hunc lenire dolorem
posis.
start not ; her actions shall be holy:
you bear my spell is lawful : do not shun her,
until you see her die again; for then -
you kill her double. shakespeare's winter’s tale.
some have delivered the polity of spirits, that they stand in
awe of charms, spells, and conjurations, letters, characters,
notes, and dashes. brown's vulgar errowri.
thou durst not thus disparage glorious arms,
had not spells
and black enchantments, some magician's art,
arm'd thee or charm'd thee strong. milton's agonister.
begin, begin, the mystick spell prepare. amilton.
yourself you so excel,
when you vouchsafe to breathe my thought,
that like a spirit with this spell
of my own teaching, i am caught.
thus
paller.
so
t.
mild
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 120</div><p class="text">s p e
s p e .
a-
mild lucina
then reach'd her midwife hands to speed the throes,
and spoke the pow'rful spells that babes to birth disclose. dry.
2. a turn of work; a vicisłitude of labour. a low word.
their toil is so extreme as they cannot endure it above four
hours in a day, but are succeeded by spell: ; the residue of the
time they wear out at coytes and kayles. - carew.
t, spell. v. a. pret. and part, pass spelled or sock. [solin, duf.]
1. to write with the proper letters.
in the criticism of spelling, the word fatire ought to be with
i, and not with y ; and if this be so, then it is false spelled
throughout. dryden's javenal, dedication.
2. to read by naming letters singly.
i never yet saw man,
how wife, how noble, young, how rarely featur'd,
but she would spell him backward; if fair fac'd,
she'd swear the gentleman should be her sister. shakesp.
3. to charm.
i have you fast:
unchain your spirits now with spelling charms,
and try if they can gain your liberty. shakesp. henry vi.
this gather'd in the planetary hour, -
with noxious weeds, and shell'd with words of pow'r,
dire stepdames in the magick bowl infuse. dryden.
t, spell. v. n.
1. to form words of letters. -
what small knowledge was, in them did dwell ;
and he a god, who could but read or spel. dryden.
by pasting on the vowels and consonants on the sides of
four dice, he has made this a play for his children, whereby
his eldest son in coats, has played himself into spelling. lock.
the latin, being written of the same character with the
mother-tongue, by the assistance of a spelling book, it is le-
gible. - - spe:lator.
another cause, which hath maimed our language, is a fool-
ish opinion that we ought to spell exactly as we speak. swift.
2. to read. - --
if i read aught in heav'n, - -
or heav'n write aught of fate, by what the stars,
voluminous or single characters, -
in their conjunction met, give me to shell,
sorrows and labours, opposition, hate, -
attends thee. , moon's parados lo?.
when gowns, not arms, repell’d -
the fierce epirote, and the african bold, l
whether to settle peace, or to unfold
the drift of hollow states, hard to be sell’d, milton.
and may at last my weary age - - -
find out the peaceful hermitage,
where i may fit and rightly spell “" “ . . oil
of every star that heav'n doth shew, - -
and every herb that sips the dew. milton.
3. to read unskilfully. -
as to his understanding, they bring him in void of all no-
tion, a rude unwritten blank; sent into the world only to read
and spell out a god in the works of creation. south.
to spe lt. v. n. to split; to break. a bad word. - - -
feed geese with oats, spelled beans, barley-meal, or ground
malt mixed with beer. mortimer's hoshaidy.
spe'lt er. m. s. a kind of semi-metal. . - w **
metals in fusion do not flame for want of a copious fume,
except speller, which fumes copiously and thereby flames. newt.
t, spen id. v. a. s.rpenban, saxon onto, italian.] * * * *
1. to consume ; to exhaust ; to waste. -
our cannons malice vainly shall be sent
against th’ invulnerable clouds. - shakespeare.
i will very gladly spond and be sent for you. 2 cor. xii. 15.
there is oil in the dwelling of the wise, but a foolish man
fpendeth it up. . . . . • ‘ prov, xxi. 20.
we must exasperate ~.
the almighty victor to send all his rage. . . milton.
money is brought into england by nothing but spending
"here less of foreign commodities than what we carry to market
can pay for. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - - locke.
2. to bestow as expence; to expend, as cost. -
wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread?
isa. lv. 2.
- - - -
3. to bestow for any purpose: often with upon. .
when we can intreat an hour to serve, t :
would spend it in some words upon that business, ''
if you would grant the time. * shaks). macbeth.
eleutherius, perceiving that he was unwilling to spend any
more time upon the debate, thought not fit to make any men-
tion to him of the proposed opinion. boyle.
4. to effuse. - - - - - -
- coward dogs - -
most spend their mouths, when what they seem to threaten
runs far before them. shakesp. henry v.
5. to squander; to lavish. * *
the whole of our refle&amp;ions terminate in this, what course
we are to take to pass our time; some to get, and others to
jpend their estates, jake.
vol. ii.
father nor mother.
* .
6. to pass; to suffer to pass away. . -
in those pooral pattimes a great many days were sent, to
follow their flying predecessors. sidney.
the song their days in wealth, and in a moment go down
to the grave. - - - - - - job, xxi. 13.
he spends his life with his wife, and rememboresh no her
- - - , i 4/or. iv. 2 i •
say, for you saw us, ye immortal ligh's, -
how off unwearied have v. e spent the nights,
till the ledaean stars so farm'd for love, * *
wonder'd at us from abo, e. - cow'y.
when he was of riper years, for his farther accompleth-
ment, he soon a considerable part of his time in tray long.
- foe.
7. to waste ; to wear out; to exhaust of force.
the waves ascended and descended, 'til their violence bjor
- spent by degrees, they settled at las!. bornel's so. 9 * * to.
they bend their bows, they worl their iings around ; -
heaps of sent arrows fall, and strew the ground. doyd, i.
the winds are rais'd, the storm blows o 3.
be it your care, my friends, to keep it up
in its full fury, and di: ct it right,
'till it has soot itself on cato's head.
8. to fatigue; to harass. - - - - -
noteing but only the hope of spoil did relieve them, basing
force cloth’s to cover their nakedness, and their bodie, ot
with long labour and thirst. knolles's hilvy of the 1 a ki.
or come your shipping in our ports to lay, " ... -
stent and disabled in so long a way dryden's aon.
our walls are thinly mann'd, our best men is in ;
the rest, an heartless number, spent with watching. o
and hairass'd out with duty. - - , , dryden.
some spent with toil, some with despair oppress'd,
leap'd headlong from the heights, the fiancs consum'd the
rest. * * ~ * o dryden's zn.
thou oft has seen me . . . . . . . . . .
wrestling with vice and faction ; now thou see'st me
... , spent, overpower", despairing of success. madison's cato.
to spend. v. n. - - - -
1. to make 'expence. : .
henceforth your tongue must send at lessor rate,
than in its flames to wrap a nation's fate. . dryd m.
he sponds as a person who knows that he must come to a
reckoning.'" - - saith.
2. to prove in the use. - - - - -
buttes soon! as if it came from the richer soil. .
i. for .5. 1, 1 ' ' ' ' ' '.' - * - - - - - -
3. to be lost of wated. " ". -
the found sendoth and is dissipated in the open air; but in
such concaves it is cosiserved and contracej. bacon.
on mountains, it may be, many dews fall, that spend before
they come to the valleys, -- - . . . . . . bacon.
4. to be employed to any use.
- - *
a - 2-
zon's coto.
* ...;
, tomok.
there have been cuis and an image of jupiter made of
wild vines; for the vines that they use for wine are so often
cut, that their sap soon sell into the grapes. . . . . bacon.
spender:'n. j. [from send.j - -
1. -one who spends. -- t--- a : -, * * * **
let not you recreations be lavish sendors of your time;
but healthful, short, and apt to refre you. . i o) lor.
2. a prodigal; a lavisher. . . . . . . . .
bishop morton told the commissioners, who were to levy
the benevolence, if they inct with any that were sparing, to test
them that they must needs have, because they laid up; and if
they were sendors, they must needs have, because it was seen
in their port and manper of living. bacon's henry vii.
soor. ”. j.. [spend and thrift.]. a prodigai ; a la-
v111.1er. “, * . . . . . . . . . . . .
bitter cold weather fived both the bird and the song.
thrift. * . l'a/trange.
* -
some fawning usurer does feed . . . . . -
with present sums th' unwary spendthrift's need. dryden.
most men, like sensitio is heirs, judge a little in hand bet-
ter than a great deal to come. , , , , , , , , , locke.
the son, bred in sloth, becomes a spendthrift, a profligate,
and goes out of the world a beggar. . . . . . . . swift.
spe’rable, adj. isoerabilis, latin.j. such as may be hoped.
not in use, - - *
we may cast it away, if it be found but a bladder, and
discharge it of so much as is vain and not fperable. bacon.
sperm. m. s. [sperme, fr. sperma, lat.j. sced; that by which
the species is continued. . . . . . . . . - -
some creatures bring forth many young ones at a burthen,
and some but one: this may be caused by the quantity of
serm required, or by the partitions of the womb which may
sever the sperm. bacon.
there is required to the preparation of the sperm of animals
a great apparatus of vessels, many secretions, concoctions, re-
flections, and circulations. -" " roy.
spermace ii. m. s. [lat..] corruptedly pronounced far-
wastly. . . . . . . – . . . . . -
a particular sort of whale affords the oil whence this is
made; and that is very improperly called sperma, because it is
24. t only<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 121</div><p class="text">s p h -
s p 1
enly the oil which comes from the head of which it can be
made. it is changed from what it is naturally, the oil itself
being very brown and rank. the peculiar property of it
is to shoot into flakes, not much unlike the chrystalliza-
tion of salts; but in this state ’tis yellow, and has a certain
rankness, from which it is freed by squeezing it between
warm metalline plates: at length it becomes perfeotly pure,
inodorous, flaky, smooth, white, and in some measure tran-
sparent. quincy,
::::::::::::: } adj. [spermatique, fr. from sperm.]
1. seminal ; consisting of seed.
the primordials of the world are not mechanical, but sper-
matical or vital. more's divine dialogues.
metals and sundry meteors rude shapes have no need of
any particular principle of life, or spermatical form, distinet
from the rest or motion of the particles of the matter. more.
2. belonging to the sperm ; containing sperm.
the moisture of the body, which did before irrigate the
parts, is drawn down to the spermatical vessels. bacon.
two different sexes must concur to their generation: there
is in both a great apparatus of spermatick vessels, wherein the
more spirituous part of the blood is by many digestions and
circulations exalted into sperm. ray on the creation.
to spe'rm arize. v. n. [from sperm.] to yield seed.
aristotle affirming that women do not spermatize, and con-
fer a receptacle rather than essential principles of generation,
deductively includes both sexes in mankind. brown.
spermatoce'le. n.f. [arieux and znan.] a rupture caused
by the contraction of the seminal vessels, and the semen falling
into the scrotum. bailey.
speamo'logist. n.s.. [artwoxcyg’.] one who gathers or
treats of seeds. idic7.
to sperse. v. a. [spersus, lat.] to disperse; to scatter. a
word not now in use.
the wrathful wind,
which blows cold storms, burst out of scythian mew
that spers, those clouds, and in so short as thought
this dreadful shape was vanished to nought. spenser.
he making speedy way through spersed air,
and through the world of waters wide and deep,
to morpheus' house doth hastily repair. fairy queen.
to spet. v. a. to bring or pour abundantly. [spet in scot-
land is a superabundance of water: as, that tide or fresh was
a high spet.
gh spet.] mysterious dame,
that ne'er art call’d, but when the dragon womb
of stygian darkness spets her thickest gloom,
and makes one blot of all the air,
stop thy cloudy ebon chair.
to spew. v. a. [rpepan, saxon; speuwen, dutch.]
1. to vomit; to eject from the stomach.
a swordfish small him from the rest did sunder,
that in his throat him pricking softly under
his wide abyss, him forced forth to spew,
that all the sea did roar like heaven's thunder,
and all the waves were stain'd with filthy hue.
2. to eject; to cast forth. .
when earth with slime and mud is cover'd o'er,
or hollow places spew their wat'ry store. dryden's georg.
when yellow sands are fifted from below,
the glitt'ring billows give a golden show;
and when the fouler bottom spews the black,
the stygian dye the tainted waters take.
3. to eject with loathing.
keep my statutes, and commit not any of these abomina-
tions, that the land spew not you out. lev. xviii. 28.
contentious suits ought to be spewed out, as the surfeit of
courts. - bacon's essays.
to spew. v. n. to vomit; to ease the stomach.
he could have haul’d in
the drunkards, and the noises of the inn;
but better ’twas that they should sleep or spew,
than in the scene to offend or him or you. ben. johnson.
spe'wy. adj. [from spew.] wet; foggy. a provincial word.
the lower vallies in wet winters are so spewy, that they
know not how to feed them. mortimer's husbandry.
to spha(ce late. v. a. [from sphacelus, medical latin.] to
affect with a gangrene.
the long retention of matter sphacelates the brain. sharp.
to spha’ce la te. v. n. to mortify; to suffer the gangrene.
the skin, by the great distension, having been rendered
very thin, will, if not taken away, sphacelate, and the rest
degenerate into a cancerous ulcer. sharp's surgery.
spha’celus. m. s. [rpoxiag'; sphacele, fr.] a gangrene; a
mortification.
it is the ground of inflammation, gangrene, sphacelus.
- wiseman.
sphere. m.s.. [sphere, fr. sphera, lat.]
1. a globe; an orbicular body; a body of which the center is
at the same distance from every point of the circumference.
4.
milt0??s
spenser.
dryden.
first the sun, a mighty sphere, he fram'd.
2. any . of the mundane system. -
what if within the moon's fair shining sphere,
what if in every other star unseen, -
**
4sillon,
of other worlds he happily should hear? - fairy &amp;n
and then mortal ears" o
had heard the musick of the spheres," dryden
3. a globe representing the earth or sky.
two figures on the sides emboss'd appear;
conon, and what's his name who made the sphere,
and shew'd the seasons of the sliding year dryden
4. orb ; circuit of motion. -
half unsung, but narrower bound -
within the visible diurnal sphere. milton
5. province ; compass of knowledge or action ; employmen.
[from the sphere of activity ascribed to the power eminati.
from bodies.] §
to be call'd into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move
in’t. shakespeare's antony and cleopatra
of enemies he could not but contract good store, whil.
moving in so high a sphere, and with so vigorous a lustre,
- - king charlo,
every man, versed in any particular business, finds flui,
with these authors, so far as they treat of matters within hi.
sphere. addison's freeholder,
ye know the spheres and various tasks affign'd
by laws eternal to the aethereal kind.
the hermit's pray’r permitted, not approv'd;
soon in an higher sphere eulogius mov’d.
to sphere. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to place in a sphere.
- the glorious planet sol, r
in noble eminence enthron’d and spher'd
amidst the rest, whose med'cinable eye
corrects the ill aspects of planets evil.
2. to form into roundness.
light from her native east
to journey through the airy gloom began,
spher'd in a radiant cloud; for yet the sun
s was not. milton's paradis, lý.
‘r - - -
::::::::: } adj. [spherique, fr. from sphere.]
1. round; orbicular; globular.
what descent of waters could there be in a spherical and
round body, wherein there is nor high nor low. raleigh.
though sounds spread round, so that there is an orb or
fpherical area of the sound, yet they go farthest in the forelines
from the first local impulsion of the air. . bacon.
by discernment of the moisture drawn up in vapours, we
must know the reason of the spherical figures of the drops.
- glanville.
a fluid mass necessarily falls into a spherical surface. keil,
where the central nodule was globular, the inner surface of
the first crust would be spherick; and if the crust was in all
parts of the same thickness, that whole crust would be sphe-
rical. woodward on fossils,
2. planetary; relating to orbs of the planets. o
we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and
stars, as if we were villains by spherical predominance.
shakespeare.
sphe'rically. adv. [from spherical.] in form of a sphere.
sphe ricalness. r. n.s.. [from sphere.] roundness; rotun-
spheri'city. } dity. -
such bodies receive their figure and limits from such lets as
hinder them from attaining to that sphericalnes; they aim3.
- - - f by.
water consists of small, smooth, spherical particles: §:
frnoothness makes 'em slip easily upon one another; the sphe-
ricity keeps 'em from touching one another in more points than
one. cheyne's phil. princ.
sphe’roid. m. s. [rspatz and #3g&gt;; spheroide, fr.) abody
oblong or oblate, approaching to the form of a sphere.
they are not solid particles, by the necessity they are under
to change their figures into oblong spheroids, in the capillary
vessels. cheyne's phil. princ.
sphero1'pical. adj. [from spheroid.] having the form of a
spheroid.
if these corpuscles be spheroidical, or oval, their shortest di-
ameters must not be much greater than those of light. cheyne.
sphe rule. n.s.. [sphaerula, lat.] a little globe.
mercury is a collection of exceeding small, vastly heavy
spberules. cheyne's phil. princ.
sphinx. n.s. [orpty;..] - *
the sphinx was a famous monster in egypt, that remained
by conjoined nilus, having the face of a virgin, and the body
of a lion. - peacham on drawing.
sr. n. s. [ospial, fr.] a spy; a scout; a watcher. ob-
olete.
his ears be as spials, alarum to crie. tuscr's husbandry,
he privy spials plac'd in all his way,
to weet what course he takes, and how he fares. *:
* . qi
pope.
*hart,
shahjart,
o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 122</div><p class="text">s p i
for he by faithful spial was assured
that egypt's king was forward on his way. fairfax.
their trust towards them hath rather been as to good pials
and good whisperers, than good magistrates and officers. bac.
spice. m. s. [espices, fr.]
1. a vegetable production, fragrant to the smell and pungent to
the palate; an aromatick substance used in sauces,
dang'rous rocks,
which, touching but my gentle vessel's side,
would scatter all the spices on the stream. shakespeare.
is not manhood, learning, gentleness, and virtue, the size
and salt that seasons a man * shako/p. 7 roilus and crossida.
garlick, the northern spice, is in mighty request among
the indians. - - temple.
high sauces and rich spices are fetched from the indies.
baker.
1. a small quantity, as of spice to the thing seasoned.
think what they have done,
and then run stark mad; for all
thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it. shakespeare.
it containeth singular relations, not without some pice or
sprinkling of all learning. brown's wulgar errours.
so in the wicked there's no vice,
of which the saints have not a spice.
f, spice. v. a. [from the noun.]
mix with aromatick bodies.
his mother was a votress of my order,
and in ... air by night
full often she hath gossip'd by my side.
with a festivall
she'll first receive thee; but will spite thy bread
with flowrie poysons.
these hymns may work on future wits, and so
may great-grand-children of thy praises grow;
and so, though not revive, embalm and spice
hudibras.
to season with spice; to
shakespeare.
chapman.
the world, which else would putrify with vice. donne.
what though some lave a fraught
of cloves and nutmeg, and in cinnamon sail,
if thou hast where withal to spice a draught,
when grief prevail? pierbert.
sprocer. n.s.. [from spice..] one who deals in spice.
names have been derived from occupations, as salter and
spicer. camden.
spice ry. n.s. [ soiceries, fr. from spice.]
1. the commodity of spices.
their camels were loaden with spicery, and balm and myrrh.
raleigh's history of the //orld.
she in whose body
the western treasure, eastern spicery,
europe and africk, and the unknown rest,
were easily found.
1. a repository of spices.
the spicery, the cellar and its furniture, are too well known
to be here insisted upon. addison on italy.
spick and span. [this word i should not have expe&amp;ted to
have found authorised by a polite writer. span-new is used by
chaucer, and is supposed to come from rpannan, to stretch,
sax. expandere, lat. whence span. span-new is therefore ori-
ginally used of cloth new extended or dressed at the clothiers,
and spick and span is newly extended on the spikes or tenters:
it is however a low word. quite new ; now first used.
while the honour thou hast got,
is spick and span new, piping hot,
strike her up bravely. butler.
they would have these reduced to nothing, and then others
donne.
created spick and span new cot of nothing. burnet.
i keep no antiquated stuff;
but spick and soon i have enough. swift.
spocknel. n.s. (meum, lat..] the herb maldmony or bear-
wort. dic7.
spicy. adj. [from spire.]
1. producing spice; abounding with aromaticks.
- off at sea north-east winds blow
sabaean odour, from the spicy shore
of araby the blesł, with such delay
well pleas'd they lack their course, and many a league,
chear'd with the grateful smell old ocean smiles. zmilton.
for them the idumaean balm did sweat,
and in hot ceilon spicy forests grew. dryden.
2. aromatick; having the qualities of spice.
the regimen in this disease ought to be of soy and cepha-
lick vegetables, to dispel the viscosity. arbuthnot on diet.
under southern skies exalt their sails,
led by new stars, and borne by spicy gales' pope.
spicosity. n.s.. [spica, lat.] the quality of being spiked
like ears of corn; fulness of ears. dicf.
spider. n.s. [skinner thinks this word softened from sinder,
or spinner, from spin: junius, with his usual felicity, dreams
that it comes from arov, to extend; for the spider extends
his web. perhaps it comes from shieden, dutch; joyden,
danish, to spy, to lye upon the catch. don, bona, saxon,
is a bettle, or properly an bumble bee, or singles bee. may not
spider be spy dor, the insea that watches the dor?] . theant.
mal that spins a web for flies.
more direful hap betide that hated wretch,
than i can wish to adders, spiders, toads.
: -o- - shakespeare
the spider * web to watch we'll stand, espeare,
and when it takes the bee, -
we'll help out of the tyrant's hand
the innocent to free. drayton,
infidious, restless, watchful sold
fear no officious damsel's too er,
extend thy artful fabrick wider,
and spread thy banners round my room:
while i thy curious fabrick flare at:
and think on hapless poet's fate,
like thee confin'd to noisome garret,
and rudely banish’d rooms of state.
the spider's touch how exquisitely fine !
feels at each thread, and lives along the line.
sp1 percatcher. n.s. [from spider and catcher; picus
rius, lat.] a bird. - * -
spi dekwort. n.s. sphalangium, lat.] a plant with a lily-
flower, composed of six petals. miller,
spi's nel. n.s.. [meum, lat.] a plant. see spicknel.
spi got. m. s. [spijcker, dutch..] a pin or peg put into the
faucet to keep in the liquor.
base hungarian wight, wilt thou the spigot wield. shakesp.
take out the spigot, and clap the point in your mouth. sw.
spike. n.s.. [spira, lat.]
1. an ear of corn.
drawn up in ranks and files, the bearded spikes
guard it from birds as with a stand of pikes.
suffering not the yellow beards to rear, -
he tramples down the spikes, and intercepts the year. dryd,
the gleaners,
spike after spike, their sparing harvest pick. thomson.
2. a long nail of iron or wood; a long rod of iron sharpened:
so called from its fimilitude to an ear.
for the body of the ships, no nation equals england for the
oaken timber ; and we need not borrow of any other iron for
spikes, or nails to fasten them. bacon.
the head of your medal would be seen to more advantage,
if it were placed on a spike of the tower. dryden.
he wears on his head the corona radiata, another type of
his divinity: the spikes that shoot out represent the rays of the
sun. addison.
spike. n.s. the name of a plant. this is a smaller species
of lavender. -
the oil of spike is much used by our artificers in their var-
nishes; but it is generally adulterated. hill's mat. med.
to spike. v. a. [from the noun.]
r. to fasten with long nails.
lay long planks upon them, pinned or spiked down to the
pieces of oak on which they lie. amoxon's mech. exer.
lay long planks upon them, spiking or pinning them down
fast. martimer's husbandry.
2. to set with spikes.
a youth, leaping over the spiked pales, was suddenly frighted
down, and in his falling he was catched by those spikes.
wiseman.
dr. littleton,
pope.
mura-
denham.
. to make sharp at the end.
so. m.s.. [spica nardi, lat.] a plant, and the oil
or balsam produced from the plant.
it grows plentifully in java. it has been known to the
medical writers of all ages. hill's mat. med.
a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard,
brake and poured it on his head. ..., asar. xiv. 3.
he cast into the pile bundles of myrrh, and sheaves of spike-
nard, enriching it with every spicy shrub. spectator.
spill. n. s. [spijlen, dutch..]
1. a small shiver of wood, or thin bar of iron.
the oysters, besides gathering by hand, have a peculiar
dredge, which is a thick strong net, fastened to three still of
iron, and drawn at the boat's stern. carew.
have near the bunghole a little venthole, stopped with a
joill. martimer.
2. a small quantity of money. i know not whence derived.
the bishops, who consecrated this ground, were wont to
have a spill or sportule from the credulous laity: ayliffe.
to spill. v. a. [rpillan, saxon; spillen, dutch ; spilla,
islandick.]
1. to shed; to lose by shedding.
be satisfied, dear god, with our true blood,
which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.
friend or brother,
he forfeits his own blood that spills another.
themselves exact their cruelty,
and i constrained am this blood to spill. daniel's civil war.
they having spill'd much blood, and done much waste,
subduing nations; and atchiev'd thereby
fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey,
'. shall change their course to pleasure, case, and sloth.
milton.
medea,
shak. timon.
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 123</div><p class="text">s p i
medea must not draw her murth'ring knife,
and spill her childrens blood upon the stage.
orbellan did disgrace
with treach'rous deeds our mighty mother's race ;
and to revenge his blood, so juilly spilt,
rostommon.
what is it less than to partake his guilt dryden.
nor the centaurs tale -
be here repeated; how, with lust and wine
inflam’d, they fought and spilt their drunken souls
at feasting hour. . philips.
2. to destroy ; to mischief. - -
thus is our thought with pain of thistle tilled,
thus be our noblest parts dried up with sorrow ;
thus is our mind with too much minding spilled. sidney.
why are you so fierce and cruel ? -
is it because your eyes have power to killf
then know that mercy is the mighty's jewel,’
and greater glory think to save than spill.
thou all-shaking thunder, -
crack nature's mould, all germins still at once ...
that make ingrateful man. shakespeare's king lear.
be not angry with these fires; * *
for then their threats will kill me: . . .
nor jook too kind on my desires;
for then my hopes will soil/me.
all bodies are with other bodies fi!!’d;
but she receives both heav'n and earth together:
nor are their forms by rash encounters soil"d;
for there they stand, and neither toucheth either." davies.
3. to throw away. - -
this fight shall damp the raging rushan's breast,
the poison spil, and half drawn sword as rest. . tickel.
to spill. v. n. - - -
i. to waste; to be lavish.
thy father bids thee spare, and chides for spilling.
2. to be shed; to be lost by being shed.
he was so topfull of himself, that he let it spill on all the
company : he spoke well indeed, but he spoke too long.
- o //atts.
spi'll er. m.s. [i know not whence derived.] a kind of fish-
ing line. - ---
in hirbour they are taken by soil rs made of a cord, to
which divers shorter are tied at a little diliance, and to each
of these a hook is fastened with a bat: this s iller they sink in
the sea where those fishes have their accustomed haunt. carew.
spilth. n.s.. [from soil.) anything poured out or wasted.
our vaults have wept with drunken filth of wine. shakesp.
to spin. v. a. preter, sun or span ; part. spun. irpinnan, sax.
fpinnen, dutch..] - -
1. to draw out into threads. * * -
the women spun goats hair. ex. xxxv.26.
2. to form threads by drawing out and twisting any filamentous
matter. - • * *
you would be another penelope; yet all the yarn she spun,
in ulysses's absence, did but fill ithaca full of moths. .
shaksheare.
spessor.
ben. johnson.
- - - . . -
the fates but only shin the coarser clue;
the finest of the wool is left for you.
3. to protract; to draw out. . . . . * . . . . . .
by one delay after another they son out their whole lives,
'till there's no more future left before 'em. l'e/?range.
why should rome fall a moment ere her time :
no, let us draw her term of freedom out
in its full length, and spin it to the last.
4. to form by degrees; to draw out tediously. o -
i passed lightly over many particulars, on which learned and
witty men might spin out large volumes. digby.
if his cure lies among the jawyers let nothing be said against
intangling property, spinning out causes, and squeezing clients.
- * * * * - collier.
men of large thoughts and quick apprehensions are not to
expect any thing here, but what, being spun out of my own
- doyon.
addison's cato.
coarse thoughts, is fitted to men of my own size. locke.
the line's are weak, another's pleas'd to say;
lord fanny spins a thousand such a day. pope.
5. to put into a turning motion, as a boy's top,
yo spin. v. n. -
1. to exercise the art of spinning, or drawing threads. . .
we can fling our legs and arms upwards and downwards,
backwards, forwards, and round, as they that spin. more.
ten thousand stalks their various blossoms spread;
peaceful and lowly in their native soil,
they neither know to sin, nor care to toil.
for this alcides learn'd to spin; - -
his club laid down, and lion’s skin. prior.
2. [spingare, italian.] to stream out in a thread or small
current.
together furiously they ran,
that to the ground came horse and man;
the blood out of their helmets span,
so sharp were their encounters.
3. to move round as a spindle.
prior.
drayton's nymphid.
- sidney.
whether the sun, predominant in heav'n,
rise on the earth, or earth rise on the fun,
he from the east his flaming road begin, , ,
or she from west her filent course advance
with inoffensive pace, that spinning sleeps
on her soft axle, ". she fo . p -
and bears thee soft with the smooth air along, -
solicit not thy thoughts. ' asilton's paradis: loft.
as when a shipwright stands his workmen o'er,
who ply the wimble some huge beam to bore;
urg’d on all hands it nimbly spins about,
the grain decp piercing 'till it scoops it out.
so ! on so {sonathia, lat.] a plant.
it hath an apetalous flower, confifting of many stamina in-
cluded in the flower-cup, which are produced in spikes upon
the male plants which are barren ; but the embryoes are pro-
‘duced from the wings of the leaves on the female points,
which afterward become roundish or angular sceds, which, in
some sorts, have thorns adhering to them. milor.
soinage is an excellent herb crude, or boiled. mortifier.
spinal. adj. [spina, lat..] belonging to the back bone.
all spinal, or such as have no rios, but only a back bone,
are somewhat analogous thereto. brown's pagar e-roars.
those solids are entirely nervous, and proceed from the
brain, and "onal marrow, which by their bulk appear suffici-
ent to furnish all the stamina or threads of the solid parts.
4. buthnot.
pope,
descending careless from his couch, the fill
lux’d his joint neck and spinal marrow bruis’d.
sp1’s d le. m. s. [rpinol, spintel, saxon.]
i. the pin by which the thread is formed, and on which it is
conglomerated. - -
bodies fibrous by moisture incorporate with other thread,
especially if there be a little wreathing; as appeareth by the
twisting of thread, and twirling about of spinals. bacon.
sing to those that hold the vital sheers,
and turn the adamantine spindle round
on which the fate of gods and men is wound. milion.
upon a true repentance, god is not so fatally tied to the
findle of absolute reprobation as not to keep his promise, and
philips.
seal merciful pardons. joser alaint.
so pallas from the dusty field withdrew, -
and when imperial jove appear'd in view, - ;
resum’d her female arts, the sindle and the clew; -
forgot the scepter she so well had sway’d,
and with that mildness, she had rul’d, obey'd. stepney.
do you take me for a roman matron, , -, *
bred tamely to the spindle and the loom? . a. philips.
2. a long slender stalk. .
the spindles must be tied up, and, as they grow in height,
rods set by them, left by their bending they should break.
- - - airliner.
3. any thing slender. in contempt. . . - -
repose yourself, if those spindie legs of yours will carry you
to the next chair. dryden's spanish pryor.
. . the marriage of one of our heiresses with an eminent cour-
tier gave us spindle shanks and cramps. tati.r.
to spin pi. e. v. n. [from the noun..] to shoot into a long
small staik. - - -
another ill accident in drought is the spindling of the corn,
which with us is rare, but in hotter countries common ; inso-
much as the word calamity was first derived from calamus,
when the corn could not get out of the stalk. , bacon.
when the flowers begin to spindle, all but one cr two of
the biggest, at each root, should be nipped off. a sortimer.
spoken. aj. [spindle and flank.] having small
egs. … ". ** -
her lawyer is a little rivelled, sindl sanked gentleman.
- - addison.
spi'ndletree. m. s. [enonymus, lat.j prickwood. a plant.
spin.e. n.s.. [spina, lat..] the back bone.
he rapier entered his right side, reaching within a finger's
breadth of the spine. ... -- jojo man's sargery.
there are who think the marrow of a man,
which in the spine, while he was living ran 5
when dead, the pith corrupted, will become
a snake, and hiss within the hollow tomb. drydon.
sp1’nel. m. s. a fort of mineral. spizel ruby is of a tight
rosy red; it is softer than the rock or balass ruby. joozaward.
spi'net. m. s. [ospinette, fr.] a small harpsichord, an initru-
ment with keys.
when miss delights in her signet, *
a fiddler may his fortune get. swift,
spin1 ferous. adj. [spina and siro, lat.] bearing thorns.
spink. n s. a finch ; a bird. -
- want sharpens poesy, and grief adorns,
the sink chaunts sweetest in a hedge of thorns.
spi'nner. m.s.. [from spin.]
1. one skilled in spinning.
a practised sinner shall spin a pound of wool worth two
shillings for sixpence. graurf.
i - 2. a
fiartz.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 123</div><p class="text">s i i
!
, difficult and spiny an affair as so nice a subject.
spiracle. [spiraculum, lat.]
2. a garden spider with long jointed legs.
weaving spiders como no here:
hence you long leg'd spirer, he ilce. shakes?care.
spi'nn ing wheel. n.s. [from spot i the wheel by which, since
the disuse of the rook, tie thread is drawn.
my sotnong wheel and rake,
let susan keep for net dear litter's sake. gay.
sr.'nn.y. adi i suppose small, soder. a barbarous word.
they plow it early in the year, and then there will come
some spinny gross that will keep it from calding. 'mortimer.
spinosity. "...j. [spin/ws, lat.j crabbedness; thorny or
brary perplexity. -
philosophy onsisted of nought but dry spinosities, lean no-
tions, and engless altercations about things of nothing. glan.
sri nous, adj. [sinosa, lat.) thorny; full of thorns.
spi'nster. n. j. [from soil...]
1. a woman that spins.
the spinsters and the knitters in the sun,
and the free maids that weave their thread with hones,
do use to chant it. shakespeare's twelfth night.
one michael caffio, sp s •
that never set a squadron in the field,
nor the division of a battle knows
more than a spin/?er shakespeare's othello.
2. [in law.]. the general term for a girl or maiden woman.
if a gentlewoman be termed spinster, she may abate the writ.
lord coke.
i desire that a yearly annuity of twenty pounds shall be
paid to rebecca dingley of the city of dublin, spinster, du-
ring her life. swift.
spi'nstry, n.s. (from spin/her.] the work of spinning.
sri n.y. adj. [spina, lat.] thorny; briary; perplexed; dif-
ficult; troublesome.
the first attempts are always imperfeot; much more in so
dighy.
a breathing hole ; a vent; a
small aperture,
most of these spiracles perpetually send forth fire, more or
less. - //oodward.
spi'ral, a j. [spirale, fr. from shira, lat..] curve; wind-
ing; circularly involved, like a screw.
the process of the fibres in the ventricles, running in so-
ral lines from the tip to the base of the heart, shews that the
systole of the heart is a muscular construction, as a purse is
shut by drawing the strings contrary ways. ray.
why earth or sun diurnal stages keep *
in spiral tracts why through the zodiack creep blackmore.
the intestinal tube affects a straight, instead of a spiral cy-
linder. arbuthnot on aliments.
sp1 rally. adv. [from spiral.] in a spiral form.
the sides are composed of two orders of fibres running cir-
cularly or spirally from base to tip. ray on the creation.
spiraotion. n.s.. [spiratio, lat.) breathing. -
spi're. m. s. [spira, lat. spira, italian ; spira, swedish. j
1. a curve line; any thi, , wreathed or contorted, every wreath
being in a different plane; a curl; a twist; a wreath.
is head
crested aloft, and car uncle his eyes;
with burnish'd neck of verdant gold, erect
amidst his circling spires, that on the grass
floated redundant, milton,
a dragon's fiery form belied the god,
sublime on radiant spires he rode. dryden.
air seems to consist of spires contorted into small spheres,
through the interstices of which the particles of light may freely
pass; it is light, the solid substance of the spires being very
small in proportion to the spaces they take up. cheyne.
2. any thing growing up taper; a round pyramid, so called
perhaps because a line drawn round and round in less and less
circles, would be a spire; a steeple.
with glist'ring spires and pinnacles adorn'd. milton.
he cannot make one spire of grass more or less than he hath
made. hale's origin of mankind.
these pointed spires that wound the ambient sky,
inglorious change shall in destruction lie. prior.
3. the top or uppermost point.
'twere no less than a traducement to silence, that
which to the spire and top of praises vouch'd,
vou'd seem but modest.
to spire. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to shoot up pyramidically.
it is not so apt to spire up as the other sorts, being more
inclined to branch into arms. martimer.
2. [spiro, lat.] to breathe. not in use. speoser.
spirit. n.s.. [spiritus, lat.]
1. breath; wind.
all purges have in them a raw spirit or wind, which is the
principal cause of tension in the stomach. bacon.
all bodies have spirits and pneumatical parts within them ;
but the main difference between animate and inanimate are,
that the spirits of things animate are all continued within
themselves, and branched in veins as blood is; and the spirits
vol. ii.
shakspeare.
...[esprit, fr.]
3. the soul of man.
. an apparition.
have also certain seats where the
unto the rest do resort;
shut in and cut of
principal do reside, and where:
- but the sirit, in things inanimate are
by the tangible parts, as air in snow.
bacon's natural history.
the balmy spirit of the western breeze. anon.
being. an immaterial substance; an intelledual
spirit is a substance wherein thi
and a power of moving do subsist.
she is a spirit; yet not like air, or wind; - - -
nor like the spirits about the heart, or brin • - c
nor like those spirits which alchymists do find
when they in ev'rything seek gold in vain. -
for she all natures unior h. von doth pass
being like those spirit, which god's oight fice do see
or like himself whose image once she was &gt;
though now, alas! she scarce his shadow b. -
for of all forms she holds the first degree, -
that are to gross material bodies knit;
yet she herself is bodyless and free;
and though confin'd is almost infinite. pavier.
i shall depend upon your constant friendship; like the trust
we have in benevolent /pirits, who, though we never see or
hear them; we think are constantly praying for us. pope.
if we seclude space, there will remain in the world but
matter and mind, or body and spirit. watts's logi, k.
you are all of you pure spirits. i don't mean that you have
not bodies that want meat and drink, and sleep and cloth-
ing ; but that all that deserves to be called you, is nothing
else but stir it. c-
nking, knowing, *;
locke.
law.
the spirit shall return unto god that gave it. bible.
look, who comes here ! a grave unto a soul,
holding th' eternal spirit 'gainst her will -
in the vile prison of afflicted breath. shakespeare's k. john.
everything that you call yours, besides this spirit, is but
like your cloathing: sometimes that is only to be used for
a while, and then to end, and die, and wear away. law.
. they were terrified, and supposed that they had seen a spi-
rif. - luke, xxiv. 37.
perhaps you might see the image, and not the glass; the
former appearing like a spirit in the air. bacon.
whilst young, preserve his tender mind from all impres-
sions of spirits and goblins in the dark. locke.
. temper; habitual disposition of mind.
he fits
upon their tongues a various spirit, to rase
quite out their native language. mkon.
that peculiar law of christianity which forbids revenge, no
man can think it "rievous who considers the restless torment
of a malicious and revengeful spirit. tillotson.
nor once disturb their heav'nly spirit;
with scapin's cheats, or caesar's merits.” prior.
let them consider how far they are from that spirit, which
prays for its most unjust enemies, if they have not kindness
enough to pray for those, by whose labours and service they
live in ease themselves. daw.
he is the devout man, who lives no longer on his own will,
or the way and spirit of the world, but to the sole will of god.
laws
6. ardour; courage; elevation; vehemence of mind.
'tis well blown, lads;
this morning, like the spirit of a youth - -
that means to be of note, begins betimes. shakespeare,
farewel the big war, -
the spirit stirring drum, th' ear piercing fife. shakespeare.
the king's party, called the cavaliers, began to recover
their spirits. swift.
7. genius; vigour of mind.
more ample spirit than hitherto was wont,
here needs me, whiles the famous ancestors
of my most dreaded sovereign i recount,
by which all earthly princes she doth far surmount. fa. q.
to a mighty work thou goest, o king,
that equal spirits and equal pow'rs shall bring. daniel.
a wild tartar, when he spies
a man that's handsome, valiant, wise,
if he can kill him, thinks t' inherit -
his wit, his beauty, and his spirit. butler.
the noblest spirit or genius cannot deserve enough of man-
kind, to pretend to the esteem of heroick virtue. temple.
8. turn of mind; power of mind moral or intellectual.
you were us'd
to say extremity was the trier of spirits,
that common chances common men could bear.
i ask but half thy mighty spirit for me.
a perfect judge will read each work of wit,
with the same spirit that its author writ:
survey the whole, nor seek flight fault to find,
where nature moves, and rapture warms the mind. pope,
shakesp.
cowley.
9, intellectual powers distinet from the body.
24 u thess
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 123</div><p class="text">s p i
- s p i
16. anything eminently pure and refined. *
these discourses made so deep impression upon the mind
and spirit of the prince, whose nature was inclined to adven-
tures, that he was transported with the thought of it. clarendon.
in spirit perhaps he also saw
rich mexico, the seat of montezume: milton.
10. sentiment; perception. * -- "
you are too great to be by me gainsaid: - -
your spirit is too true, your fears too certain. shakespeare.
11. eagerness ; desire. • .
god has changed mens tempers with the times, and made
a spirit of building succeed a spirit of pulling down. south.
12. man of a&amp;tivity; man of life, fire and enterprise.
the watry kingdom is no bar - -
to stop the foreign spirits, but they come. shakespeare.
13. persons distinguished by qualities of the mind. a french
word, happily growing obsolete. -
romish adversaries, from the rising up of some schismatical
jpirits amongst us, conclude, that the main body of our church
is schismatical, because some branches, or members thereof
were such. - - - white.
oft pitying god did well-form'd spirits raise,
fit for the toilsome bus'ness of their days,
to free the groaning nation, and to give
peace first, and then the rules in peace to live. cowley.
such spirits as he desired to please, such would ichuse for
my judges. , , dryden.
14. that which gives vigour or cheerfulness to the mind; the
purest part of the body bordering, says sydenham, on immate-
riality. in this meaning it is commonly written with the plu-
ral termination.
o though thou didst but jest:
with my vex'd spirits i cannot take a truce,
but they will quake. shakespeare's king john.
when i sit and tell .
the warlike feats i’ve done, his spirits fly out
into my story. shakespeare's cymbeline.
alas! when all our lamps are burn'd,
our bodies wasted, and our spirits spent,
when we have all the learned volumes turn'd,
which yield men's wits both help and ornament;
what can we know, or what can we discern ? davies.
it was the time when gentle night began,
to endrain with sleep the busy spirits of man. cowley.
to sing thy praise, wou'd heav'n my breath prolong,
- infusing spirits worthy such a song,
not thracian orpheus should transcend my lays. dryden.
all men by experience find the necessity and aid of the spi-
rits in the business of conco&amp;tion. - blackmore.
. . by means of the curious inosculation of the auditory nerves,
the orgasms of the firits should be allayed. derham.
in some fair body thus the secret soul . . ---
with spirits feeds, with vigour fills the whole; - -
each motion guides, and ev’ry nerve sustains, -
itself unseen, but in the effects remains. . o pope.
he is always forced to drink a hearty glass, to drive thoughts
of business out of his head, and make his spirits drowsy enough
for sleep. . . . . - - - law.
15. characteristical likeness; essential qualities. . . .
italian pieces will appear best in a room where the windows
are high, because they are commonly made to a descending
light, which of all other doth set off mens faces in their truest
fpirit. ... wotton.
nor doth the eye itself, .. to . . . .
that most pure(i. of sense, behold itself. shakespeare.
17. that which hath power or energy. . .
there is in wine a mighty spirit, that will not be con-
gealed. - - - - - - - - - * * , , , , , south.
18. an inflammable liquor raised by distillation; as brandy,
rum. is . . . . . . -
what the chymists call spirit, they apply the name to so
many differing things, that they seem to have no settled notion
of the thing. in general, they give the name of spirit to any
distilled volatile liquor. , , , , - - - - boyle.
all spirits, by frequent use, destroy, and at last extinguish
the natural heat of the stomach. . . . . . temple.
in distillations, what trickles down the sides of the receiver,
if it will not mix with water, is oil; if it will, it is spirit.
arbuthnot on aliments.
19. it may be observed, that in the poets spirit was a monosyl-
h; and therefore was often written sprite, or, less properly,
fpright. - --- - -
- the charge thereof unto a courteous spright -
commanded was. - - spenser.
to spi'rit. v. a. - -
1. to animate or actuate as a spirit. -
so talk'd the spirited sly snake.
2. to excite; to animate; to encourage. -- -
he will be faint in any execution of such a counsel, unless
milton's par. loft.
spirited by the unanimous decrees of a general diet. temple.
civil diffensions never fail of introducing and/piriting the
ambition of private men. - swift.
many officers and private men spirit up and affist those ch
stinate people to continue in their rebellion. saj.
3. to draw ; to entice. -
in the southern coast of america, the southern point of the
needle varieth toward the land, as being disposed and spirited
that way, by the meridional and proper hemisphere. brown
the ministry had him spirited away, and carried abroad s
a dangerous person. arbuthnot and pope
spiritally. adv. [from spiritus, lat.] by means of u.
breath.
conceive one of each pronounced spiritally, the other wo-
cally. holder's elements of spetch,
spi'rite.p. adj. [from spirit...] lively; vivacious ; full offi.
dryden's translation of virgil is noble and spirited. po.
so. m. s. [from spirited.] disposition or make";
ining.
he showed the narrow spiritedness, pride, and ignorance of
pedants. addison.
spiritfulness. n.s. [from spirit and fall.] sprightines.
liveliness. &gt;
a cock's crowing is, a tone that corresponds to singing
attesting his mirth and spiritsuines. h.
spiritless, adj. [from spirit.] dejected; low; deprived;
vigour; wanting courage; depressed.
a man so faint, so spiritles,
so dull, so dead in look, so woe begone,
drew priam's curtain. shafo. henry iv
of their wonted vigour left them drain'd, " . g
exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fall'n. milton's par, loft.
nor did all rome, grown spiritles, supply
a man that for bold truth durst bravely die. dryden.
art thou so base, so spiritles; a slave?
not so he bore the fate to which you doom'd him. smith.
spi'r1tous. adj. [from spirit.]
1. refined ; defecated; advanced near to spirit.
more refin'd, more spiritous and pure,
as nearer to him plac'd, or nearer tending. milton.
2. fine; ardent; active.
spi'ritousness. n.s.. [from spiritous.] fineness and aeivity
of parts.
they, notwithstanding the great thinness and spiritusus,
of the liquor, did lift up the upper surface, and for a moment
form a thin film like a small hemisphere. boyle.
sp1 ritual. adj. [spirituel, fr. from spirit.]
1. distinet from matter; immaterial; incorporeal.
echo is a great argument of the spiritual effence of sounds;
for if it were corporeal, the repercussion should be created by
like instruments with the original sound. bacon.
... bothyisibles and audibles in their working emit no corpo-
real substance into their mediums, but only carry certain/hi-
ritual species. - bacon.
. . all, creatures, as well spiritual as corporeal, declare their
absolute dependence upon the first author of all beings, the
only self-existent god. bently.
2. mental; intelle&amp;tual. ' - -
spiritual armour, able to refift
satan's assaults. milton.
the same disaster has invaded his spirituals; the passions
rebel; and there are so many governours, that there can be
no government. south.
3. not gross; refined from external things; relative only to
the mind. w
... some who pretend to be of a more spiritual and refined re-
ligion, spend their time in contemplation, and talk much of
communion with god. . . calamy's sermons.
4. not temporal; relating to the things of heaven; ecclesiastical.
place man in some publick society, civil or spiritual. hook.
- . . . thou art reverend,
touching thy spiritual function, not thy life. shakespeare.
i have made an offer to his majesty,
upon our spiritual convocation,
as touching france, to give a greater sum
than ever at one time the clergy did. shakespeare.
those servants, who have believing masters, are forbid to
withdraw any, thing of their worldly respect, as presuming
upon their spiritual kindred; or to honour them less, because
they are become their brethren in being believers. kettleworth.
the clergy's business lies among the laity; nor is there a
more effectual way to forward the salvation of mens souls,
than for spiritual persons to make themselves as agreeable as
they can in the conversations of the world. - swift.
, she loves them as her spiritual children, and they reverence
her as their spiritual mother, with an affection far above that
ef the fondest friends. law.
spiritua’lity. n.s. (from spiritual.]
1. incorporeity; immateriality; essence distinet from matter.
if this light be not spiritual, yet it approacheth nearest unto
spirituality; and if it have any corporality, then of all other
the most subtile and pure. faleigh.
2. intellectual mature. …
a pleasure made for the soul, suitable to its spirituality, and
equal to all its capacities. south.
3. [spiritualie,
:
's
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 123</div><p class="text">s p i
[spiritualita fr.] a&amp;s independent of the body; pure a&amp;s
3. f the soul; mental refinemen -
o many secret indispositions and aversions to duty will fleal
upon the soul, and it will require both time and close applica-
on of mind to recover, it to such a frame, as shall dispose it
for the spiritualities of religion. south.
that which belongs to any one as an ecclesiastick.
of common right, the dean and chapter are guardians of
the spiritualities, during the vacancy of a bishoprick. ayliffe.
soualty. m. s. [from soiritual.] ecclesiastical body.
not in use.
we of the fpiritually -
will raise your highness such a mighty sum,
as never did the clergy at one time. shakespeare.
$nstrualization. n. j. [from spiritualize.] . the act of
spiritualizing: s. . . . . . . . ]: -
orraituairo. v. 4. [spiritualifor, fr. from spirit.] to re-
fine the intellect; to purity from the feculencies of the world.
this would take it much out of the care of the soul, to
situalso and replenish it with good works. hammond.
we begin our survey from the lowest dregs of sense, and
so ascend to our more spiritualized selves. glanville.
as to the future glory in which the body is to partake, that
load of earth which now engages to corruption, must be
calcined and spiritualized, and thus be clothed upon with
lory. - decay of piety.
lfman will att rationally, he cannot admit any competition
between a momentary satisfaction, and an everlasting happi-
ness, as great as god can give, and our spiritualized capacities
receive. - rogers.
spiritually. adv. s from soiritual. ) without corporeal
tossness; with attention to things purely intelle&amp;tual.
in the same degree that virgins live more spiritually than
other persons, in the same degree is their virginity a more ex-
cellent state. taylor's kule of living holy.
spirituous. adj. [spiritueux, fr. from spirit.]
1. having the quality of spirit, tenuity and activity of parts.
more refin'd, more sirituau, and pure,
as to him nearer tending. milton.
the most spirituous and most fragrant part of the plant
exhales by the action of the sun. arbuthnot.
1. lively; gay; vivid ; airy.
it may appear airy and spirituous, and fit for the welcome of
chearful guciis. jp'otton's architecture.
spirituo's 1ty. }"is [from spirituous.] the quality of
spirituou's ness. 9 being spirituous; tenuity and activity.
7, spirit. v. n. [sortlyten, dutch, to shoot up, skinner; sprit-
ta, swedish, to fly out, lye, j to spring out in a sudden
stream; to stream out by intervals.
bottling of bcor, while new and full of spirit, so that it
sorteth when the stopple is taken forth, maketh the drink
more quick and windy. bacon's natural hyory.
thus the small jett, which hasly hands unlock,
spirts in the gard’ner's eyes who turns the cock. pope.
t. spirr. v. a. to throw out in a jet.
when weary proteus
retir'd for shelter to his wonted caves,
his finny flocks about their shepherd play,
and rowling round him, shirt the bitter sea. dryden.
v, hen rains the passage hide,
oft the loose stones spirt up a muddy tide
beneath thy careless foot. gay,
spot. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. sudden ejection.
1. sudden effort.
t, spi'rtle. v. a. [a corruption of spirt.] to shoot scat-
teringly. *
the brains and mingled blood were shirtled on the wall.
drayton.
the terraqueous globe would, by the centrifugal force of
that motion, be soon dissipated and sirtled into the circum-
ambient space, was it not kept tog: ther by this noble con-
trivance of the creator. derham's physicz-theology.
spi'ry. adj. [from spire.]
1. pyramidal.
waste sandy valleys, once perplex'd with thorn,
the sory fir, and shapely box adorn. pope's mosiah.
in these lon, walls, their days eternal bound,
these moss-grown domes with so iry turrets crown'd,
where awful arches make a noon-day night,
and the dim windows shed a solemn light ,
thy eyes diffus’d a reconciling ray,
and gleams of glory brighten’d all the day. pope.
2. wreathed; curled.
hid in the spiry volumes of the snake, -
ilurk'd within the covert of a brake. dryden.
soiss. adj. [spisis, lat.) close ; firm; thick. not in use.
from his modest and humble charity, virtues which rarely
cohabit with the swelling windiness of much knowledge, issued
this sis; and dense, yet polished; this copious, yet conciso
treatise of the variety of languages. brerewood.
spi situde. n.s. [from sists, latin. j grossness; thickness.
drawing wine or beer from the lees, called racking, it will
clarify the sooner; for though the lees keep the drink in heart,
and make it lasting, yet they cast up some spi/itude. bacon.
oisode is subdued by aerid thing, and crimony by in
spissating. - arbuthnot on aliment.
spit. m. s. [rprean, saxon; joit, dutch; spedo, italian.]
i. ors p'9"g on which meat is driven to be turned before the
- a goodly city is this anthim ;
tio i that made thy widows: then know me not;
left that thy wives with spits, and boys with stones, "
in puny battle slay me. shakespeare's coriolanus.
they may be contrived to the moving of sails in a chimney
corner, the motion of which may be applied to the turning
- - 5.
of a spit. *ilkins's mathematical maric.
with peggy dixon thoughtful fit, 2ematical magick.
contriving for the pot and spit. swift.
2. such a depth of earth as is pierced by one aaion of the -
where the earth is washed ...'. quick, face so
t. o: first spit o dug out of the ditch. mortimer.
• spit. v. a. preterite spat; participle pass soft itted.
[from the noun.] j. p ple pass spit, or spitted
1. to put upon a spit.
i see my cousin's ghost
seeking out romeo, that did spit his body
upon a rapier's point. shakespeare,
2. to thrust through. so -
i spitted frogs, i crush'd a heap of emmets. dryden.
to spit. v. a. srportan, saxon; sytter, danish..] to eject
from the mouth. - -
a large mouth, indeed,
that spits forth death, and mountains. shakespears. -
commissions which compel from each
the fixth part of his substance, makes bold mouths,
tongues sit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
allegiance in them. shakos, aro.
the sea thrusts up her waves,
one after other, thicke and high, upon the groaning shores;
first in herself loud, but oppos'd with banks and rocks, she
iores, -
and all her backe in bristles set, sits every way her some.
chapman.
7% spit. v. n. to throw out spittle or moisture of the mouth.
very good orators, when they are here, will spit. shakesp.
i dare meet surrey,
and spit upon him whilst i say he lies. shakes. rich. ii.
the wat'ry kingdom, whose ambitious head
spits in the face of heaven, is no bar
to stop the foreign spirits; but they come. shakes care.
he soat on the ground, made clay of the spittle, and anointed
the eyes of the blind man. - john, ix. 6.
a maid came from her father's house to one of the tribu-
nals of the gentiles, and declaring herself a christian, soft in
the judge's face. south.
a drunkard men abhor, and would even soit at him, were
it not for fear he should something more than spit at them. south.
spit on your finger and thumb, and pinch the snuff till
the candle goes out. swift's rules for servants.
sp1’tt al. n. s. [corrupted from hospital.] a charitable foun-
dation. . in use only in the phrases, a shittal sermon, and rob
not the spittal.
to sp1’tchcock. v. a. to cut an eel in pieces and roast him.
of this word i find no good etymology.
no man lards salt pork with orange peel,
or garnishes his lamb with spitchcockt eel. king,
spite. n.s.. [spijt, dutch; despit, french.j
1. malice ; rancour; hate; malignity; malevolence.
this breeding rather spite than shame in her, or, if it were
a shame, a shame not of the fault, but of the repulse, she did
thirst for a revenge. . . sidney.
bewray they did their inward boiling site,
each stirring others to revenge their cause. daniel.
done all to spite - -
the great creator; but their site still serves
his glory to augment. milton's parads: loft.
be gone, ye criticks, and restrain your site,
codrus writes on, and will for ever write. - pope.
2. spite of, or in spite of. notwithstanding; in defiance of,
it is often used without any malignity of meaning.
i'll guard thee frce,
and save thee in her spite. chapman.
blessed be such a preacher, whom god made use of to speak
a word in season, and saved me in spite of the world, the devil,
and myself. south,
in spite of me i love, and sce too late
my mother's pride must find my mother's fate. dryden,
for thy lov'd sake, spite of my boding fears,
i'll meet the danger which ambition brings. rz:ve.
my father's fate,
in spite of all the fortitude that shines
before
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 123</div><p class="text">s p l
s p l
before my face in cato's great example,
subdues my soul, and fills my eyes with tears. addison.
in spite of all applications, the patient grew worse every
day. arbuthnot.
to spite. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to mischief; to treat maliciously; to vex; to thwart ma-
lignantly-
beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spighted, slain,
most detestable death, by thee. shakespeare.
i'll sacrifice the lamb that i do love,
to sight a raven's heart within a dove. shakespeare.
2. to fill with spite; to offend. -
so with play did he a good while fight against the fight of
zelmane, who, more spited with that courtesy, that one that
did nothing should be able to resist her, burned away with
choler any motions which might grow out of her own sweet
disposition. - sidney.
darius, spited at the magi, endeavoured to abolish not
only their learning but their language. temple.
spi'teful. adj. [spite and fulll malicious; malignant.
the jews were the deadliest and spitefullest enemies of
christianity that were in the world, and in this respect their
orders to be shunned. - hooker.
- all you have done
hath been but for a wayward son, - -
spightful and wrathful. shakesp. macbeth.
our public form of divine service and worship is in ever
part thereof religious and holy, maugre the malice of spitefol
wretches, who have depraved it. jwhite.
contempt is a thing made up of an undervaluing of a man,
upon a belief of his utter uselessness, and a spiteful endeavour
to engage the rest of the world in the same slight esteem of
him. south.
the spiteful stars have shed their venom down,
and now the peaceful planets take their turn. dryden.
sp1’tefully. adv. [from siteful..] maliciously; malignantly.
twice false evadne, spitefully forsworn
that fatal beast like this i would have torn. jwaller.
vanessa sat,
scarce list'ning to their idle chat,
further than sometimes by a frown,
when they grew pert, to pull them down;
at last she spitefully was bent
to try their wisdom's full extent. swift.
sp1 reful nfss, n, s. . [from spiteful..] malice ; malignity;
defire of vexing. -
it looks more like spitefulness and ill-nature, than a diligent
search after truth. keil against burnet.
sp1’tted. adj. [from spit.] shot out into length.
whether the head of a deer, that by age is more shitted,
a may be brought again to be more branched. bacon.
sp1’tter. m. s. [from spit.} -
1. one who puts meat on a spit.
2. one who spits with his mouth.
... a young deer, ains.
p17ttle. n.s. [corrupted from hospital, and therefore better
written spital, or spittal.] hospital. it is still retained in
scotland. - -
to the spittle go,
and from the powd'ring-tub of infamy
fetch forth the lazar kite of cressid's kind. shakesp. h. v.
this is it
that makes the waned widow wed again;
she whom the spittle house, and ulcerous fores,
would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices
to th’april-day again. shakesp. timon.
cure the spittle world of maladies. cleaveland.
spi(ttle. n. s. [rpoechan, saxon.] moisture of the mouth.
the saliva or spittle is an humour of eminent use. ray.
maenas and atys in the mouth were bred,
and never hatch'd within the lab'ring head;
no blood from bitten nails those poems drew,
but churn'd like spittle from the lips they flew. dryden.
the spittle is an active liquor, immediately derived from the
arterial blood: it is saponaceous. arbuthnot.
... a genius for all stations fit, ,
whose meanest talent is his wit:
his heart too great, though fortune little,
to lick a rascal statesman's spittle. swift.
sp1’rve nom. n.s.. [spit and venom.] poison ejected from the
mouth. -
the spitvenom of their poisoned hearts breaketh out to the
annoyance of others. hooker.
splanch no logy.. n.f. [splanchnologie, french; ruracyxyz and
aaygp.] a treatise or description of the bowels. pic?.
to splash. v. a. splaska, swedish. they have both an af-
finity with plash..] to daub with dirt in great quantities.
spla'shy. adj. [from splash.] full of dirty water; apt to
daub.
to splay. v. a. to dislocate or break a horse's shoulder-
bone.
- 2
spla/yfoot, adj. [splay or display, and foot j "having the foot
turned inward. * -
though still some traces of our rustick vein,
and splayfoot verse remain'd, and will remain. p
spla'ymouth. n.s.. [splay and mouth.) mouth widened
design. -
all authors to their own defects are blind :
hadst thou but janus-like a face behind,
to see the people when splaymouths they make,
to mark their fingers pointed at thy back,
their tongues loll'd out a foot. - drydon
spleen. m. s. [splin, latin.] -
1. the milt; one of the viscera, of which the use is scard
known. it is supposed the seat of anger, melancholy, and
mirth. ,
if the wound be on the left hypochondrium, under the
short ribs, you may conclude the spleen wounded. hisman
2. anger; spite ; ill-humour. - -
his solemne queen, whose spleene he was dispos'd
to tempt yet further, knowing well what anger it inclood
and how wives angers should be us’d. com.
if she must teem, - -
create her child of spleen, that it may live
and be a thwart dismatur'd torment to her. shakestart,
kind pity checks my spleen; brave scorn forbids
those tears to issue, which swell my eye-lids.
all envy'd; but the theftyan brethren show'd
the least respect; and thus they vent their spoon aloud:
0'e.
by
donne,
lay down those honour’d spoils. dryden,
in noble minds some dregs remain,
not yet purg'd off, of spleen and sour disdain. , pop,
3. a fit of anger.
, charge not in your spleen a noble person,
and spoil your nobler soul. - shalosure.
4. a sudden motion; a fit.
brief as the light'ning in the collied night,
that, in a spleen, unfolds both heav'n and earth;
and, ere a man hath power to say, behold ! -
the jaws of darkness do devour it up. shai-sheart,
5. melancholy; hypochondriacal vapours.'
the spleen with sullen vapours clouds the brain,
and binds the spirits in its heavy chain,
howe'er the cause fantastick may appear,
th’ effect is real, and the pain sincere. blackmore,
spleen, vapours, and small-pox above them all. pot.
bodies chang'd to recent forms by spleen. pope,
6. immoderate merriment.
they that desire the spleen, and would die with laughing.
shakhtar.
sple'ened, adj. [from spleen.] deprived of the spleen.
animals spleened grow salacious. arbuthnot.
spleen ful. adj. [spleen and full.] "angry; peewish; fretful;
melancholy. -
the commons, like an angry hive of bees
that want their leader, scatter up and down;
myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny. shak, h. vi.
the chearful soldiers, with new stores supply'd,
now long to execute their spleenful will. dryden.
if you drink tea upon a promontory that overhangs the sea,
the whistling of the wind is better musick to contented minds
than the opera to off's pope.
sple'enless. adj. [from spleen.] kind ; gentle; mild. ob-
solete. -
mean time flew our ships, and streight we fetcht
the syren's isle; a spleenless wind so stretcht
her wings to waft us, and so urg'd our keel. chapman.
sple'en wort, n. s. [spleen and wort; asplenion, lat.] milt-
waste. a plant.
the leaves and fruit are like those of the fern; but the
pinnulae are eared at their basis. miller.
safe pass'd the gnome through this fantastick band,
a branch of healing spleenwort in his hand, pot.
sple'eny, adj. [from spleen.] angry; peewish; humorous.
what though i know her virtuous,
and well deserving; yet i know her for
a spleeny lutheran, and not wholesome to
our cause. shakesp. henry viii.
splendent, adj. [splendens, lat.] shining; glossy; having
lustre.
they assigned them names from some remarkable qualities,
that is very observable in their red and splendent planets.
- brown's pulgar errours.
metallick substances may, by reason of their great density,
reflect all the light incident upon them, and so be as opake and
splendent as it is possible for any body to be. newton.
sple'ndid. adj. [splendide, fr. splendidas, latin.] showy;
magnificent; sumptuous; pompous.
unacceptable, though in heav'n, our state.
of splendid vassalage. milton.
eep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
and slept beneath the pompous colonade: fast
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 123</div><p class="text">s. p. l
s p o
fast by his side pisistratus lay spread,
in age his equal, on a splendid bed. pope's odyssey.
srte'ndidly. * [from splendid.] magnificently; sumptu-
ously; pompously. -
their condition, though it look splendidly, yet when you
handle it on all sides, it will prick your fingers. taylor.
you will not admit you live splendidly, yet it cannot be
denied but that you live neatly and elegantly. amore.
how he lives and eats, s
how largely gives, how splendidly he treats. dryden.
he, of the royal store
splendidly frugal, sits whole nights devoid
of sweet repole. philips.
5rle'ndour. n.j. [splendeur, french ; splendor, latin.]
1. lustre; power of shining.
splendour hath a degree of whiteness, especially if there be
a little repercussion; for a looking-glass, with the steel behind,
looketh whiter than glass simple. bacon's natural history.
the dignity of gold above silver is not much ; the splen-
dour is alike, and more pleasing to some eyes, as in cloth of
silver. bacon's phys. remains.
the first symptoms are a chilness, a certain splendour or
shining in the eyes, with a little moisture.
2. magnificence; pomp.
romulus, being to give laws to his new romans, found
no better way to procure an esteen and reverence to them,
than by first procuring it to himself by splendour of habit and
arbuthnot.
retinue. - south.
'tis use alone that sanetifies expence, -
and splendour borrows all her rays from sense. pope.
splene tick. adj. [splenetique, french.j
spleen; fretful; peevish.
horace purged himself from these splenetick refle&amp;tions in
odes and epodes, before he undertook his satyrs. dryden.
this daughter silently lowers, t'other steals a kind look at
you, a third is exactly well behaved, and a fourth a solone-
tik, tatler.
you humour me when i am sick;
why not when i am splenetico o pope.
sple nick. ed. [splenique, french ; solen, latin.] belonging
to the spleen.
suppose the spleen obstrusted in its lower parts and splenick
branch, a potent heat causeth the orgasmus to boil. harvey.
the solenick vein hath divers cells opening into it near its
extremities in human bodies; but in quadrupeds the cells open
into the trunks of the splenick veins, ray on the creation.
sple'nish. adj. [fron spleen j fretful; peevish.
yourselves you must engage,
somewhat to cool your splenish rage,
your grievous thirst, and to asswage,
that first you drink this liquor. drayton.
sple's itive. adj. [from spleen. j hot ; fiery; passionate. not
in use.
troubled with the
take thy fingers from my throat;
for though i am not splenitive and rash,
yet i have in me something dangerous. shakosh. hamlet.
splent. m. s. (or perhaps splint ; spinella, italian. j
splent, is a callous hard substance, or an insensible swelling,
which breeds on or adheres to the shank-bone of a horse; and
when it grows big, spoils the shape of the leg. when there
is but one, it is called a single splent; but when there is an-
other opposite to it on the outside of the shank-bone, it is
called a pegged or pinned splent. farrier’s dio.
t. splic. v. a. [spion, dutch ; plico, latin.] to join the
two ends of a rope without a knot. ,
splin t. n. s. [splinter, dutch.]
1. a fragment of wood in general.
1. a thin piece of wood or other matter used by chirurgeons to
hold the bone newly set in its place.
the ancients, after the seventh day, used splints, which
not only kept the members steady, but straight; and of these
some are made of tin, others of scabbard and wood, sowed up
in linen cloths. joseman's surgery.
to splint.
to spli'nter.
1. to secure by splints.
this broken joint intreat her to splinter, and this crack of
your love shall grow stronger than it was before. shak. othello.
2. to shiver; to break into fragments.
spll’nter. n.s.. [spinter, dutch..]
1. a fragment of any thing broken with violence.
he was slain usion a course at tilt, one of the splinters of
{v. a. [from the noun.]
montgomery's staff going in at his bever. bacon.
amidst whole heaps of spices lights a ball.
and now their odours arm'd against them flie;
some preciously by shatter'd porcelain fall,
and some by aromatick splinters die. dryden.
2. a thin piece of wood.
a plain indian fan, used by the meaner sort, made of the
small stringy parts of roots, spread out in a round flat form,
and so bound together with a splinter hoop, and strengthened
with small bars on both sides. grew's musaeum.
vol. ii.
+
to srir'ster, v. n. [fro - -
- v - ro - m the noun..] to be broken i
fragments; to be shivered. j il 1nto
7o split. v. a. pret. and part pass split. [spletten, splitten,
dutch.]
1. to leave; to live , to divide longitudinally in two.
bo t; o thou hast the one half of my heart;
ot not, thou split/? thine own. shak. winter”
that self-hand ak. winter's tale,
hath, with the courage whi
splitted the heart. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
wer thou serv'd up two in one dish, the rather
to split thy fire into a double fitnes; cleaveland
\ cold winter split the rocks in twain. id *.
. a skull so hard, that it is almost as easy to split a hio of
iron as to make a fracture in it. ray on the creation
this effort is in some earthquakes so vehement that ift,
and tears the earth, making cracks or cham, in it some
miles. 2-
2. to divide; to part. woodward.
their logick has appeared the mere art of w
their metaphysick, the skill of splitting an hair, of distinguish-
ing without a difference. //atts on the mind
...one and the same ray is by refraction disturbed, shattered,
dilated, and split, and spread into many diverging rays. newt.
he instances luther's sensuality and disobedience; two
crimes which he has dealt with, and to make the more solemn
shew, he split 'em into twenty.
oh! would it please the gods to split
thy beauty, size, and years, and wit,
no age could furnish out a pair
of nymphs so graceful, wise, and fair;
with half the lustre of your eyes,
with half your wit, your years, and size.
3. to dash and break on a rock.
god's desertion, as a full and violent wind, drives him in
an instant, not to the harbour, but on the rock where he will
be irrecoverably split. decay of piety.
those who live by shores, with joy behold
some wealthy vessel split or stranded nigh;
and from the rocks leap down for shipwreck'd gold,
and seek the tempot's which the others fly. dryden.
4. to divide; to break into discord.
in states notoriously irreligious, a secret and irresistible
power splits their counsels, and snites their most refined poli-
cies with frustration and a curse. south.
to split. v. n.
1. to burst in sunder; to crack; to suffer disruption.
a huge vessel of exceeding hard marble split asunder by con-
gealed water. boyle.
what is't to me,
who never sail on her unfaithful sea,
if storms arise and clouds grow black,
if the mast split, and threaten wrack *
the road that to the lungs this store transmits,
into unnumber'd narrow channels splits. blackmore.
2. to burst with laughter.
each had a gravity would make you split,
and shook his head at m-y as a wit.
3. to be broken against rocks.
after our ship did split,
when you, and the poor number sav'd with you,
hung on our driving boat. shakespeare.
these are the rocks on which the sanguine tribe of lovers
daily split, and on which the politician, the alchymist, and
projector, are cast away. addison's spectator.
the seamen spied a rock, and the wind was so strong that
we were driven directly upon it, and immediately split. swift.
splitt f.r. m. s. [from split.) one who splits.
how should we rejoice, if, like judas the first,
those splitters of parsons in sunder should burst
splu’rt e.r. m. s. bustle; tumult. a low word.
to spoil. v. a. [sposio, latin; spolier, french.]
1. to seize by robbery; to take away by force.
ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in
yourselves that ye have in heaven an enduring substance. heb.
this mount
with all his verdure spoil'd, and trees adrift. milton.
2. to plunder; to strip of goods: with of before the thing
taken.
yielding themselves upon the turks faith, for the safeguard
of their liberty and goods, they were most o /poil d
of all that they had. knalls's history of the turks.
thou shift not gain what i deny to yield,
nor reap the harvest, though thou spoilst the field. prior.
my sons their old unhappy fire despise,
spoil'd of his kingdom, and depriv'd of eyes.
. to corrupt; to mar; to make useless.
spill, rpillan, saxon.] - -
beware lest any man spoil you, through philosophy and vain
deceit. col. ii. 8.
spiritual pride spoil; many graces. taylor.
women are not only spoiled by this education, but we spoil
24 x that
ch the heart did lend it,
rangling, and
atterbury.
swift.
dryden.
pope.
swift.
pope.
[this is properly
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 123</div><p class="text">s p o
o s p o
that part of the world which would otherwise furnish most in-
{tances of an eminent and exalted piety. . law.
to spoil. v. n.
1. to p, actise robbery or plunder.
england was intested with robbers and outlaws, which,
lurking in woods, used to break forth to rob and soil. spens.
they which hate us spoil for themselves. ps, xliv, 14.
2. to grow useless; to be corrupted.
he that gathered a hundred bushels of acorns, or apples,
had thereby a property in them: he was only to look that he
used them before they spoiled, else he robbed others. locke.
spoil. n. s. [spolium, latin.]
1. that which is taken by violence; that which is taken from
an enemy; plunder ; pillage ; booty.
the cry of talbot serves me for a sword;
for i have loaden me with many spoils,
using no other weapon but his name.
2. that which is gained by strength or effort.
but grant our heroes hopes long toil
and comprehensive genius crown,
each science and each art his spoil,
yet what reward, or what renown :
3. that which is taken from another.
gentle gales,
fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense
native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
these balny spoils.
4. the act of robbery; robbery; waste.
the man that hath not musick in himself,
nor is not mov'd with concord of sweet sounds,
ls fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils. shakespeare.
too late, alas ! we find
the softness of thy sword, con in 1ed through thy soil,
c
shakesp. hen. vi.
bentley.
milan.
to be the only cause of unrecover'd spoil. drayton.
*
go and speed
havock, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain. milton.
5. corruption; cause of corruption.
company, villainous company, hath been the spoil of
nc. shakespeare.
6. the slough ; the cast-off skin of a serpent.
snakes, the rather for the casting of their spoil, live till they
be old. bacon.
spo’, l.e.r. n.s.. [from spoil.]
1. a robber ; a plunderer; a pillager.
such ruin of her manners rome
doth suffer now, as she's become
both her own spailer and own prey. ben. johns. catiline.
providence, where it loves a nation, concerns itself to own
and assert the interest of religion, by blasting the spoilers of
religious persons and places. south.
came you then here, thus far, thro' waves, to conquer,
to waste, to plunder, out of mere compassion?
is it humanity that prompts you on 2
happy for us, and happy for you spoilers,
had your humanity ne'er reach'd our world !
2. one who mars or corrupts any thing.
spoil ful. adj. [spoil and full.] wasteful; rapacious.
having oft in battle vanquished
those spoilful picts, and swarming easterlings,
long time in peace his realm established. fairy queen.
spoke. m. s. [rpaca, saxon; speiche, german.] the bar of
a wheel that passes from the nave to the felly.
all you gods,
in general synod take away her power;
break all the spokes and fellies of her wheel,
and bowl the round nave down the hill of heav'n. shakes.
no heir e'er drove so fine a coach;
the spokes, we are by ovid told,
a. philips.
were silver, and the axle gold. swift.
spoke. the prete rite of speak.
they spoke best in the glory of their conquest. spratt.
spok en, participle passive of speak,
wouldst thou be spoken for to the king ; 2 kings, iv.13.
the original of these signs for communication is found in
vita vote, in spoken language. holder on speech.
spook esm an. m. s. [spoke and man.] one who speaks for
another. - - - - * *
'tis you that have the reason,
—to do what? - .
—to be a spokesman from madam silvia. . . shakespeare.
he shall be thy spokesman unto the people. exod. iv. 16.
to spo'lia'i (s. v. a. [spolio, lat..] to rob; to plunder. dici.
spotiation, n. s. [soliution, french ; spotiato, latin.j. the
act of robbery or privation. . -
an ecclesiastical benefice is sometimes void de jure &amp; fadio,
and sometimes de faolo, and not de jure; as when a man suf-
- fers a spoliation by his own act. : ayliffe's parergon.
spo'ndee. m. s. [spondee, french; spondews, latin.] a foot of
two long syllables.
we see in the choice of the words the weight of the stone,
and the striving to heave it up the mountain: homer clogs.
the verse with sponders, and leaves the vowels open. bradme,
spo'ndyle, n. s. [rrowowa gp; spondile, fr. spondylus, latin.]
a vertebra; a joint of the spine.
it hath for the spine or back-bone a cartilaginous substance
without any spondyles, processes, or protuberances. brow.
sponge. m. s. [spongia, latin.] a soft porous substance, sup-
posed by some the nidus of animals. it is remarkable for
sucking up water. it is too often written spunge. see
spunge.
sponges are gathered from thesides of rocks, being as a large
but tough moss. bacon.
they opened and washed part of their sponges. sandji.
great officers are like sponges: they suck till they are full,
and, when they come once to be squeezed, their very heart's
blood come away. l'estrange.
to spong e. v. a. [from the noun..] to blot; to wipe away
as with a sponge.
except between the words of translation and the mind of
scripture itself there be contradiction, very little difference
should not seem an intolerable blemish necessarily to beftunga
oll's, - hooker.
to sponge. v. n. to suck in as a sponge; to gain by mean
as [s,
the ant lives upon her own honesty; whereas the fly is an
intruder, and a common smell-feast, that spunges upon other
people's trenchers. y
here wont the dean, when he's to seek,
to spunge a breakfast once a week. swift.
spo'nger. m. s. [from sponge.] one who hangs for a main-
tenance on others.
a generous rich man, that kept a splendid and open table,
would try which were friends, and which only trencher-flies
and soungers. l’estrange.
sposnginess. n. s. [from spongy.] softness and fulness of ca-
vities like a sponge.
the lungs are exposed to receive all the droppings from the
brain: a very fit cistern, because of their sponginess. harvy.
spo'ngious. adj. [spongieux, french ; from sponge.] full of
small cavities like a sponge.
all thick bones are hollow or spongeous, and contain an
oleaginous substance in little vesicles, which by the heat of the
body is exhaled through these bones to supply their fibres. cho.
spo'ngy. adj. [from sponge.]
1. soft and full of small interstitial holes.
the lungs are the most spongy part of the body, and there-
fore ablest to contract and dilate itself. bacon's nat. history.
a spongy excrescence groweth upon the roots of the laser-
tree, and upon cedar, very white, light, and friable, ealled
agarick. bacon's natural history.
the body of the tree being very spongy within, though hard
ostrange.
without, they easily contrive into canoes. amore.
into earth's spungy veins the ocean sinks,
those rivers to replenish which he drinks. denham.
return, unhappy swain'
the spungy clouds are fill'd with gath'ring rain. dryden.
her bones are all very spongy, and more remarkably those of
a wild bird, which flies much, and long together. grew.
2. wet ; drenched; soaked; full like a sponge.
when their drench'd natures lie as in a death,
what cannot you and i perform upon
th'unguarded duncan: what not put upon
his spungy officers, who shall bear the guilt. shakesp.
sponk, n. s. a word in edinburgh which denotes a match,
or any thing dipt in sulphur that takes fire: as, any spunk;
will ye buy 3 touchwood.
spo'nsal. adj. [sponsalis, latin.] relating to marriage.
spo'nsion. m. s. [sponso, latin.] the act of becoming surety
for another. --
sponsor. m. s. [latin.] a surety; one who makes a pro-
mise or gives security for another.
in the baptism of a male there ought to be two males and
one woman, and in the baptism of a female child two women
and one man; and these are called sponsors or sureties for their
education in the true christian faith. ayliffe’s parergon.
the sponsor ought to be of the same station with the person
to whom he becomes surety. brcane.
the rash hermit, who with impious pray’r
had been the sponsor of another's care. harte.
spont a'neity, n.s.. [spontaneitas, school lat. spontaneite, fr.
from spontaneous.] voluntariness; willingness; accord un-
compelled. . 2.f
necessity and joantaneity may sometimes meet together, so:
may spontaneity and liberty; but real necessity and true liberty
can never.
strict necessity they simple call; it, " ". . .
it so binds the will, that things foreknown -
by spontaneity not choice are done. * dryden.
sponta(neous. adj. [spontanee, french ; from spente, lat.)
voluntary ; not compelled; acting without compulsion or re-
straint; acting of itself; acting of its own accord. 3
many analogal motions in animals, though i cannot call
them voluntary, yet i see them spontaneous : i have reason to
conclude, that these are not simply uechanical. płals.
they
bramh, agains. hobbs, .
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 8</div><p class="text">s p o
s p o
they now came forth
spontaneous; for within them spirit mov’d
attendant on their lord.
while john for nine-pins does declare,
and roger loves to pitch the bar,
both legs and arms spontaneous move,
which was the thing i meant to prove.
begin with sense, of ev'ry art the soul,
parts answering parts shall slide into a whole ;
spontaneous beauties all around advance,
start ev'n from difficulty, strike from chance,
nature shall join you, time shall make it grow. pope.
spontaneously. adv. [from joontaneous.] voluntarily; of
its own accord.
this would be as impossible as that the lead of an edifice
should naturally and spontaneously mount up to the roof, while
lighter materials employ themselves beneath it. bentley.
whey turns spontaneously acid, and the curd into cheese as
hard as a stone. , arbuthnot on aliments.
sront a neous ness. m. s. [from spontaneous.] voluntariness;
freedom of will; accord unforced.
the sagacities and instincts of brutes, the soontaneousness of
many of their animal motions, are not explicable without
supposing some active determinate power connexed to and in-
herent in their spirits, of a higher extraction than the bare
natural modification of matter. hale's origin of mankind.
spool. n.s. sspool, gorman ; /?sh!, dutch j a small piece
of came or reed, with a knot at each end ; or a piece of wood
turned in that form to wind yarn upon; a quill.
i, sroom. v. n. . [probably from spume, or foam, as a ship
driven with violence spumes, or raises a foam.] to go on
swiftly. a sea term.
when virtue spoons before a prosperous gale,
my heaving withes help to fill the fail. dryden.
spoon. n.s. [spaen, dutch ; soone, danish; spoonn, islandick.]
a concave vesicl with a handle, used in eating liquids.
would'st thou drown thyself,
put but a little water in a spoon,
and it shall be as all the ocean,
enough to stifle such a villain up. shakesp. king john.
this is a devil, and no monster: i will leave him; i have
no long spoon. shakespeare's tempst.
or o'er cold coffee trifle with the spoon,
count the slow clock, and dine exact at noon.
spoonbill. n.s.. [spoon and bill; platea, lat.] a bird.
the shoveller, or spoonbill; the former name the more pro-
per, the end of the bill being broad like a shovel; but not
concave like a spoon, but perfeotly flat. grew's loosa um.
ducks and geese have such long broad bills to quafer in
water and mud; to which we may reckon the bill of the
/poonbill. derham's physico-theology.
spoonful. n.s.. [spoon and full.]
1. as much as is generally taken at once in a spoon.
cal spoonful is half an ounce.
prescribe him, before he do use the receipt, that he take
such a pill, or a spoonful of liquor. bacon.
1. any small quantity of liquid.
surely the choice and measure of the materials of which
the whole body is composed, and what we take daily by
pounds, is at least of as much importance as of what we take
seldom, and only by grains and spoonfuls. arbuthnot.
spoon m.e.a.t. m. s. [spoon and meat.] liquid food; nourish-
ment taken with a spoon.
we prescribed a slender diet, allowing only spoonmeats.
//seman.
milton.
prior.
o
pope.
a medi-
vvietched
are mortal, born to sleep their lives away!
go back to what thy infancy began,
eat pap and spoon meat; for thy gugaws cry,
be sullen, and refuse the lullaby. dryden's pers.
diet most upon spo.nmeats, as veal, or cock-broths. harv.
spo'oxwort. n. j. scurvygrass.
spoonwart was there, scorbutics to supply, -
and centaury to clear the jaundic'd eye. harte.
t. spoos. v. n. in sea language, is when a ship being under
sail in a storm cannot bear it, but is obliged to put ight be-
fore the wind. - bailey.
spoka'pical. adj. [troezozo; ; starodigue, fr.] . . -
asparadical disease is an endenial discase, what in a parti-
cular season affects but few people. arbuthnot.
sport. n. s. [spott, a make-game, islandick, -
1. play; diversion; game; frolick and tumultuous merriment.
her sports were such as carried riches of knowledge upon
the stream of delight. - sidney.
as flies to wanton boys, are we to th’ gods: ...
they kill us for their sport. shakespeare's king lear.
when their hearts were merry, they said, call for samson,
that he may make us sport; and they called for him, and he
made them sport. judg. xvi. 25.
as a madman who casteth fire brands, arrows and death ;
so is the man that deceiveth his nighbour, and saith, am not
i in sport prov, xxvi. 19.
the discourse of fools is irksome, and their sport is in the
wantonness of sin. ecclus. xxvii. 1
2: mock; contemptuous mirth. • 13-
if i suspect without cause why th -
let me be your jest. , why then make short o
they had his messengers in derifion and made a sport of his
prophets. 1 estir. i
- - - - - i. s. i.
to make sport with his word, and to o *::
it ridiculous, by turning that | - * . - -
rect affront to god. " at holy book into raillery, is a di-
*t//, /.
3. that with which one plays. tillason.
each on his rock transfix'd, the
- - rf
of wrecking whirlwinds. , the sport and prey milton
commit not thy prophetick mind -
to flitting leaves, the sport of every wind,
lest they disperse in air. dryden
some grave their wrongs on marble, he more just
stoop'd down serene, and wrote them on the dust
trod under foot, the sport of ev'ry wind &gt;
swept from the earth, and blotted from his mind
there secret in the grave he bade them lie, &gt;
and griev'd they could not 'scape th’ almighty's eye.
- dr. madden on bp. bouler.
4. play; idle gingle.
an author who should introduce such a sport of words upon
our stage, would meet with small applause. broome.
5. diversion of the field, as of fowling, hunting, fishing.
now for our mountain sport, up to yon hill,
your legs are young. shakespeare's cymbeline.
the king, who was excessively affected to hunting, and the
forts of the field, had a great desire to make a great park for
red as well as fallow deer, between richmond and hampton
court. clarendon.
to sport. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to divert ; to make merry. it is used only with the recipro-
cal pronoun.
the poor man wept and bled, cried and prayed, while they
/ported themselves in his pain, and delighted in his prayers as
the argument of their victory. sidney.
away with him, and let her sport herself
with that he's big with. shak speare's winter's tale.
against whom do ye sport yourselves * against whom make
ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? isa. lvii. 4.
what pretty stories these are for a man of his seriousness to
/port himself with all atterbury.
let such writers go on at their dearest peril, and sport them-
solves in their own deceivings. jwatts.
2. to represent by any kind of play.
now sporting on thy lyre the love of youth,
now virtuous age and venerable truth;
expressing justly sappho's wanton art
of odes, and pindar's more majestick part.
to sport. v. n.
1. to play; to frolick; to game ; to wanton.
they sporting with quick glance,
shew to the fun their wav'd coats dropt with gold. milton.
larissa, as she sported at this play, was drowned in the river
peneus. broome on the odyssey.
2. to trifle.
if any man turn religion into raillery, by bold jests, he
renders himself ridiculous, because he sports with his own life.
dryden.
tillotson.
sport ful. adj. [sport and full.]
1. merry; frolick; wanton ; acting in jest.
how with a sportful malice it was follow'd,
may rather pluck on laughter than revenge. shakes care.
down he alights among the sportful herd
of those four-footed kinds. milton.
2. ludicrous, done in jest.
his highness, even in such a slight and sportful damage, had
a noble sense of just dealing. //otton.
behold your own ascanius, while he said,
he drew his glitt'ring helmet from his head, {
in which the youth to sportful arms he led. dryden.
they are no sportful productions of the soil, but did once
belong to real and living fishes; seeing each of them doth ex-
actly resemble some other shell on the sea-shore. bentley.
a catalogue of this may be had in albericus gentilis; which,
because it is too sportful, i forbear to mention. baker.
sport fully. adv. [from sportful.j wantonly ; merrily.
spo'rt full ness. n. s. [from sportful..] wantonness ; play :
merriment; frolick.
the otter got out of the river, and inweeded himself so, as
the ladies lost the further marking of his sportfulness. sidney.
sportive. adj. [from sport.] gay ; merry; frolick 3 wan-
ton; playful; ludicrous.
i am not in a sportive humour now ;
tell me, and daily not, * is the money? shakespeare.
is it
that drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
was't shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
of smoky' muskets : shakesp. all's well that o*:
lie
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 9</div><p class="text">s p o
s p o
while thus the constant pair alternate said,
joyful above them and around them play'd
angels and sportive loves, a numerous crowd,
smiling they clapt their wings, and low they bow'd. prior.
we must not hope wholly to change their original tempers,
nor make the gay, pensive and grave; nor the melancholy,
fportive, without spoiling them. locke.
no wonder savages or subjects slain,
were equal crimes in a despotick reign;
both doom'd alike for sportive tyrants bled,
but subjects starv'd while savages were fed. pope.
sportiye ness. n. s. [fron sportive..] gaiety; play; wan-
tonness. -
shall i conclude her to be fimple, that has her time to be-
gin, or refuse sportiveness as freely as i have walton's angier.
spo'rts man. m. s. [sport and man.] one who pursues the
recreations of the field.
manilius lets us know the pagan hunters had meleager for
their patron, as the christians have their st. hubert : he speaks
of the constellation which makes a good sportsman. addison.
spo'rtule. n. s. [sportule, fr. sportula, lat.] an alms ; a
dole.
the bishops, who consecrated the ground, had a spill or
sportule from the credulous laity. ayliff's parergon.
spo t. n.s. [spette, danish; spotte, flemish.j
1. a blot; a mark made by discoloration.
this three years day, these eyes, though clear . . .
to outward view of blemish or of spot, -
berest of fight, their seeing have forgot. milton.
a long series of ancestors shews the native lustre with ad-
vantage ; but if he any way degenerate from his line, the least
shot is visible on ermine. dryden.
2. a taint; a disgrace; a reproach; a fault.
yet chloe sure was form'd without a spot,
'tis true, but something in her was forgot. pope.
3. i know not well the meaning of spot in this place, unless it
be a scandalous woman, a disgrace to her sex.
let him take thee,
and hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians;
follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
of all thy sex. shakespeare's antony and cleopatra.
4. a small extent of place.
that spot to which i point is paradise,
adam's abode, those lofty shades his bow'r, milton.
he, who, with plato, shall place beatitude in the knowledge
of god, will have his thoughts raised to other contemplations
than those who looked not beyond this spot of earth, and those
perishing things in it. - locke.
about one of these breathing passages is a spot of myrtles,
that flourish within the steam of these vapours. addison.
abdallah converted the whole mountain into a kind of gar-
den, and covered every part of it with plantations or spots of
flowers. - the guardian.
he that could make two ears of corn grow upon a spot of
ground where only one grew before, would deserve better of
mankind than the whole race of politicians. swift.
5. any particular place.
i would be busy in the world, and learn,
not like a coarse and useless dunghill weed,
fix'd to one spot, and rot just as i grow.
as in this grove i took my last farewel,
as on this very spot of earth i fell,
so she my prey becomes ev’n here.
here adrian fell: upon that fatal sp.t
our brother died. granville.
the dutch landscapes are, i think, always a representation
of an individual spot, and each in its kind a very faithful, but
very confined portrait. reynolds.
6. upon the spot. immediately; without changing place.
[sur le champ.]
the lion did not chop him up immediately upon the spot ;
and yet he was resolved he should not escape. l’estrange.
it was determined upon the spot, according as the oratory on
oay .
dryden.
either side prevailed. swift.
7% spot. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to mark with discolorations; to maculate.
they are polluted off'rings, more abhorr'd
, than spotted livers in the sacrifice. shakespeare.
have you not seen a handkerchief,
spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand? shakespeare.
but serpents now more amity maintain;
from spotted skins the leopard does refrain:
. . no weaker lion's by a stronger slain. tate's juvenal.
2. to patch by way of ornament.
i counted the patches on both sides, and found the tory
patches to be about twenty stronger than the whig ; but next
morning the whole puppet-show was filled with faces spotted
after the whiggish manner. adaison's spectator.
3. to corrupt; to disgrace; to taint.
this vow receive, this vow of god maintain,
my virgin life, no spotted thoughts shall stain. sidney.
... the people of armenia have retained the christian faiths
-
from the time of the apostles; but at this day it is spotted with
many absurdities. abbot's descript. of the wari,
spotless. adj. [from spot.] -
1. free from spots.
2. free from reproach or impurity; immaculate; pure; un-
tainted.
so much fairer
and spotles, shall mine innocence arise,
when the king knows my truth. shakstart.
i dare my life lay down, that the queen is spotles,
in th’ eyes of heaven. shakespeare's winter, t.,
you grac'd the sev'ral parts of life,
a spotles; virgin, and a faultless wife. walr.
e sometimes wish that it had been our lot to live and con-
verse with christ, to hear his divine discourses, and to ob-
serve his spotles; behaviour; and we please ourselves perhaps
with thinking, how ready a reception we should have given
to him and his doctrine. alterbury.
eternal sunshine of the spotles, mind,
each pray’r accepted, and each wish resign'd. pop.,
srđo. n. s. [from spot..] one that spots; one that matu.
atcs.
spotty. adj. [from spot.] full of spots; maculated.
the moon whose orb
through optick glass the tuscan artist views
in valombrosa to descry new lands,
rivers or mountains on her spotty globe. milion.
spou's al, adj. [from spouse.] nuptial ; matrimonial; conju-
gal; connubial; bridal.
there shall we consummate our spousaltites. shatshear.
t. hope's chaste kiss wrongs no more joy's maidenhead,
than spousal rites prejudice the marriage bed. crashaw.
this other in her prime of love,
spousal embraces vitiated with gold. amilton.
sleep's thou, careless of the nuptial day ?
thy spousal ornament neglected lies; -
arise, prepare the bridal train, arise. pope's 0}sy.
spou's a*. m. s. [espousailles, fr. sponsalia, lat.] mariage
nuptials.
as man and wife, being two, are one in love,
so be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a spousal,
that never may ill office, or fell jealousy
thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms,
to make divorce of their incorporate league. shałoftware.
the amorous bird of night -
sung spousal, and bid haste the ev'ning star,
on his hill top to light the bridal lamp. milton,
the spousals of hippolita the queen,
what tilts and tourneys at the feast were seen. dryden.
ætherial musick did her death prepare, -
like joyful sounds of spousal; in the air: *
a radiant light did her crown'd temples gild. dryden.
spouse, n.s. ssponsa, sponsus, lat. espouse, fr.] one joined
in marriage; a husband or wife.
- she is of good esteem;
beside so qualified as may beseem -
the spouse of any noble gentleman. shakesheart.
at once farewel, o faithful spouse ! they said;
at once th' encroaching rhinds their closing lips invade.
dryden.
spou'sed. adj. [from the noun.j wedded; espoused; joined
together as in matrimony.
they led the vine
to wed her elm ; she spous’d about him twines
her marriageable arms. - milton,
spou'seless. adj. [from spouse..] wanting a husband or wife.
to tempt the spouseless queen with am’rous wiles,
resort the nobles from the neighb'ring isles.
spout. n.s.. [from spuyt, dutch.j
1. a pipe, or mouth of a pipe or vessel out of which any thing
is poured. -
she gasping to begin some speech, her eyes -
became two spouts. shakespeare's winter's tale.
in whales that breathe, lest the water should get unto the
lungs, an ejection thereof is contrived by a fistula or spout at
the head. brown's pulgar erreurs.
if you chance it to lack,
be it claret or sack,
i'll make this snout
to deal it about,
or this to run out, -
as it were from a spout. ben. johnson.
as waters did in storms, now pitch runs out,
as lead, when a fir’d church becomes one spout. donne.
in gaza they couch vessels of earth in their walls to gather
the wind from the top, and to pass it down in spouts into
… rooms. bacon.
let the water be fed by some higher than the pool, and de-
livered into it by fair spouts, and then discharged by some
equality of bores that it stay little. bacon.
in this single cathedral the very spouts are loaded with orna-
• inents. addison on italy.
from
pope.
*
sps
spr
ts
nfr,
's
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          page 10</div><p class="text">s p r
from silver spout; the grateful liquors glide,
and china's earth receives the smoking tide. pope.
2, water falling in a body; a cataract, such as is seen in the
hot climates when clouds sometimes discharge all their water
al on cc.
not the dreadful sout,
which shipmen do the hurricano call,
constring'd in mass by the almighty sun,
shall dizzy with more clamour neptune's car
in his descent, than shall my prompted sword
, fatling on diomede. */8. troilus and croffda.
the force of these motions pressing more in some places
than in others, there would fall not showers, but great spouts
or cascades of water. furnet's theory of the earth.
5, spout. * * [from the noun..] to pour with violence, or
in a collected body as from a spout.
we will bear home that lusty blood again,
which here we came to spout against your town. shakesp.
i intend two fountains, the one that sprinklet, or spouteth
water, the other a fair receipt of water. bacon.
she swims in blood, and blood does shooting throw
to heav'n, that heav'n mens cruelties might know. it aller.
next on his belly floats the mighty while;
he twists his back, and rears his threatning tail:
he spouts the tide.
t. spout. v. n. to issue as from a spout.
they laid them down hard by the murmuring musick of
certain waters, which spouted out of the side of the fills. sidney.
. no hands cou’d force it thence, so fixt it stood,
till out it rush'd, expell'd by streams of souting'blood.
creech.
drydon.
it sout; up out of deep wells, and flics forth at the tops of
them, upon the face of the ground. j/oadward.
all the glittering hill
is bright with spouting rills. 7%amson's autumn.
sprag. adj. , vigorous; spritely. a provincial word.
a good sprog memory. shakoff. mry iowa, of sponds.
t, sprain. v. a. [corrupted from strain..] to strctoh the li-
aments of a joint without dislocation of the bone.
should the big last extend the shoe too wide,
the sudden turn may stretch the swelling vein,
thy cracking joint unhinge, or ancies rain. gay.
sprain., n. s. [from the verb.] extension of ligaments with-
out dislocation of the joint.
i was in pain, and thought it was with some sprain at tennis.
temple.
spraints. n.s. the dung of an otter. dics.
sprang. the preterite of spring.
mankind sprang from one common original; whence this
tradition would be universally diffused. tillotson.
sprat. m. s. [sprot, dutch ; sarda, lat..] a small sea fish.
so oft in feasts with costly changes clad,
to crammed maws a sprat new stomach brings. sidney.
all-saints do lay for porke and sowse,
for sprats and spurlings for their house. tulsor.
of round fish there are brit, sprat, barn, smelts. carew.
t, sprawl. v. n. [spradle, danish; spartelen, dutch..]
1. to struggle as in the convulsions of death.
hang the child, that he may see it sprawl;
a sight to vex the father’s soul. shakosheare.
some lie sprawling on the ground,
with many a gash and bloody wound. hudibrar,
2. to tumble or creep with much agitation and contortion of the
limbs.
the birds were not fledged ; but upon sprawling and strug-
going to get clear of the flame, down they tumbled. l'e/ir.
tclamon hap'd to meet
a rising root that held his fasten’d feet;
so down he fell, whom sprawling on the ground,
his brother from the wooden gyves unbound. dryden.
hence, long before the child can crawl, -
he learns to kick, and wince, and sprawl. prior.
did the stars do this feat once only, which gave beginning
to human race who were there then in the world, to observe
the births of those first men, and calculate their nativities, as
they sprawled out of ditches 2 - bently.
he ran, he leapt into a flood,
there sprawl"d a while, and scarce got out, -
all cover'd o'er with slime. swift.
spray. n.s. (of the same race with sort and sorout.] ".
1. the extremity of a branch. - -
at fight whereof each bird that fits on spray,"
- and every beast that to his den was fled,
come forth afresh out of their late dismay, -
and to the light lift up their drooping head. hollard's tale.
* thus droops this lofty pine, and hangs his sprays;
thus eleanor's pride dies in her younger days. shakespeare.
the wind that whistles through the sprays,
maintains the consort of the song;
and hidden birds with native lays,
the golden sleep prolong. dryden.
2. the foam of the sea, commonly written sory.
vol. ii.
s p r
winds rai - -
t2 so"..."; of the salt with the spray. arbuthnot,
- * irpreban, saxons spreyden, d
1. t tend ; . . . &gt; yden, dutch..]
too. **pand; to make to coves of fill a larger space
he bought a field where he had
rizpah spread sackcloth for ...i his tent. gen. xxxiii.
"pon the rock. 2 sam. xx;
aire attendants then, -
the sheets and bedding of the
within a cabin of the ho
sored and made soft. cl
make the trees more tall, more spread, and iilore jo.
they use to be... . bacon's natural history
silver spread into plates is brought from tarshish jer 3.
shall funeral eloquence her joir, soread • a to - x •
and scatter roses on the wealthy j}'''“
2. to cover by extension.
her checks their freshness lose and wonted
and an unusual paleness spread; her face. "go,
3. to cover over. st -
the workman melteth a graven image and th -
sorcadeth it over with gold. g 3c, e goldsmith
4. to stretch ; to extend. isa. xi. 19.
spread o'er the filver waves thy golden hair. shakespeare.
he arose from kneeling, with his hands spread up to heaven
and he blessed the congregation. 1 kings, viii so
the stately trees fast spread their branches. "“”
man of men,
llow keele,
2%urg.
- - amilton.
peep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
fast by his side pisstratus lay spread,
in age his equal, on a splenda bed. pope.
5. to publish ; to divulge ; to disseminate.
they, when departed, spread abroad his fame in all that
country.
6. to emit as effiuvia or emanations ; to diffuse.
their course thro' thickest constellations held,
they spread their bane.
to spread. v. n. to extend or expand itself.
can any understand the jpreadings of the clouds, or the
noise of his tabernacle? job, xxxvi. 29.
the princes of germany had but a dull for of the great-
ness of spain, upon a general apprehension only of their spread-
ing and ambitious defions. -
plants, if they spread much, are seldom tall.
great pan, who wont to chase the fair,
and lov'd the spreading oak, was there. addison's cato.
the valley opened at the farther end joreading forth into an
immense ocean.
addison.
spread. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. extent; compass.
i have got a fine spread of improveable lands, and am al-
ready ploughing up some, fencing others.
2. expansion of parts.
no flower hath that spread of the woodbind.
spreader. m. s. [from spread.]
i. one that spreads.
by conforming ourselves we should be soreaders of a worse
insection than any we are likely to draw from papists by our
conformity with them in ceremonies. hooker.
2. publisher; divulger; disseminator.
if it be a mistake, i desire i may not be accused for a spreader
of false news. - swift.
spr est, port. [from sprone, to sprinkle, rmenian, j"psittinail,
saxon ; sprengen, dutch..] sprinkled. obsolete.
q lips, that kiss'd that hand, with my tears sprent.
sidney.
sprig. m. s. sysłrig, welsh, so davie: ; but it is probably of
the same race with spring..] a small branch; a spray.
the substance is true ivy, after it is taken down, the friends
of the family are desirous to have some sprig to keep. bacon.
our chilling climate hardly bears
a shrig of bays in fifty years;
while ev'ry fool his claim alledges,
as if it grew in common hedges. swift.
sprig chryslal. n. s.
in perpendicular fissures, chrystal is found in form of an
hexangular column, adhering at one end to the stone, and
near the other lessening gradually, till it terminates in a point:
this is called by lapidaries sprig or rock chrystal. . it codward.
spri'go y. adj. [from sprig..] full of small branches.
spright. n.s. [contraction of spirit, spiritus, latin; it was
anciently written sprete or spryte; and spirit, as now written,
was long confidered in verse as a monosyllable: this word
should therefore be spelled sprite, and its derivatives spritely,
spritesul; but custom has determined otherwise.]
1. spirit; shade ; soul; incorporeal agent.
he doth display
the gate with pearls and rubics richly dight,
through which her words so wise do make their way,
to bear the message of her spright. . spensor.
o forth he called out of deep darkness dread,
legions of sprights, the which like little flies,
flutt'ring about his ever damned head, -
await whereto their service he applies. fairy queen.
24 y while
4/atth. ix. 31.
milton.
bacon.
bacon.
addison.
bacon.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s p r
s p r
while with heav'nly charity she spoke,
a streaming blaze the silent shadows broke;
the birds obscene to forests wing'd their flight,
and gaping graves received the guilty spright. dryden.
of these am i who thy protection claim,
a watchful sprite, and ariel is my name. pope.
2. walking spirit; apparition.
the ideas of goblins and sprights have no more to do with
darkness than light; yet let but a foolish maid inculcate these
often on the mind of a child, possibly he shall never be able to
separate them again. locke.
3. power which gives cheerfulness or courage.
o chastity, the chief of heav'nly lights,
which mak’st us most immortal shape to wear,
hold thou my heart, establish thou my sprights :
to only thee my constant course i bear,
till spotless soul unto thy bosom fly,
such life to lead, such death i vow to die.
4. an arrow. not in use.
we had in use for sea fight short arrows called sprights,
without any other heads save wood sharpened ; which were
discharged out of muskets, and would pierce through the sides
of ships where a bullet would not. bacon's natural history.
to spright. v. a. to haunt as a spright. a ludicrous use.
i am sprighted with a fool. shakespeare's cymbeline.
spri'ght ful. adj. [spright and full.] lively; brisk; gay ?
vigorous.
the spirit of the time shall teach me speed.—
—spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman. shakespeare.
steeds sprightful as the light. cowley.
happy my eyes when they behold thy face:
my heavy heart will leave its doleful beating,
at fight of thee, and bound with sprightful joys. otway.
spri'ch's fully, adv. [from sprightful..] briskly; vigorously.
norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
shakespeare.
spri'ght less, adj. [from spright.] dull; enervated; sluggish.
are you grown
benumb'd with fear, or virtue's sprightles, cold : cowley.
spri'ght liness. n. s. [from sprightly..] liveliness ; briskness ;
vigour; gaiety; vivacity. -
the soul is clogged when she acts in conjunetion with a
companion so heavy ; but in dreams, observe with what a
fprightlines; and alacrity does she exert herself. addison.
spri'ghtly. adj. [from spright.] gay; brisk; lively; vigo-
rous; airy; vivacious.
produce the wine that makes us bold,
sidney.
and sprightly wit and love inspires. dryden.
when now the sprightly trumpet, from afar,
had giv'n the signal of approaching war. dryden:
each morn they wak'd me with a sprightly lay :
of opening heav'n they sung, and gladsome day. prior.
the sprightly sylvia trips along the green;
she runs, but hopes she does not run unseen. pope.
to spring. v. n. preterite sprung or sprang, anciently sprong.
[rpringan, sax. springen, dutch..]
1. to arise out of the ground and grow by vegetative power.
all blest secrets,
all you unpublish’d virtues of the earth,
spring with my tears; be aidant and remediate
in the good man's distress.
to his musick, plants and flowers
ever sprung, as sun and showers
there had made a lasting spring. shakespeare's henry viii.
to satisfy the desolate ground, and cause the bud of the
tender herb to spring forth. job, xxxviii. 27.
other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang
up and encreased. mark, iv. 8.
tell me, in what happy fields
the thistle springs, to which the lily yields :
2. to begin to grow.
that the nipples should be made with such perforations as
to admit passage to the milk, when drawn, otherwise to retain
it; and the teeth of the young not sprung, are effects of pro-
vidence. ray.
3. to proceed as from seed.
ye shall eat this year such things as grow of themselves;
and in the second year that which springeth of the same. 2 kings.
much more good of sin shall spring. milton.
4. to come into existence; to issue forth.
had'st thou sway’d as kings should do,
giving no ground unto the house of york,
they never then had sprung like summer flies. shakespeare.
ev’n thought meets thought, ere from the lips it part,
and each waim wish springs mutual from the heart. pope.
5. to arise ; to appear; to begin to appear or to exist.
when the day began to spring, they let her go. judges.
to them which sat in the region and shadow of death, light
is sprung up. - matth. iv. 16.
fly, fly, prophane fogs far hence fly away,
taint not the pure streams of the springing day
shakespeare.
pope.
with your dull influence: it is for you
to sit and scoule upon night's heavy brow. crashaw,
do not blast my springing hopes
which thy kind hand has planted in my soul. rowe.
6. to issue with effect or force.
swift fly the years, and rise th' expe&amp;ted morn;
oh spring to light: auspicious babe be born.
7. to proceed as from ancestors, or a country.
how youngly he began to serve his country,
how long continued ; and what stock he springs of;
the noble house of marcius. shakespeare's coriolanus,
our lord sprang out of judea. th. vii. 14.
all these
shall, like the brethren sprung of dragon's teeth,
ruin each other, and he fall amongst 'em. ben. johnson,
heroes of old, by rapine, and by spoil,
in search of fame did all the world embroil;
thus to their gods, each then ally'd his name,
this sprang from jove, and that from titan came. gramv,
8. to proceed as from a ground, cause, or reason.
they found new hope to spring
out of despair. milton.
some have been deceived into an opinion, that the inherit-
ance of rule over men, and property in things, sprang from
the same original, and descend by the same rules. locke.
9. to grow ; to thrive.
what makes all this but jupiter the king,
at whose command we perish and we spring:
then 'tis our best, since thus ordain'd to die,
to make a virtue of necessity. dryden's knight's tak,
10. to bound; to leap; to jump; to rush hastily; to appear
suddenly.
pope,
some strange commotion
is in his brain; he bites his lip, and starts;
stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
then lays his finger on his temple; strait
springs out into fast gait, then stops again.
shakespeare's henry viii.
i sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a man
child, than now in first seeing he had proved himself a man.
shakespeare.
he called for a light, and sprang in and fell before paul. ads.
when heav'n was nam’d, they loos'd their hold again;
then sprung she forth, they follow'd her amain. dryden.
afraid to sleep;
her blood all fever'd, with a furious leap
she sprung from bed. dryden.
springs up to life, and fresh to second pain,
ls sav'd to-day, to-morrow to be slain. dryden.
see, aw’d by heaven, the blooming hebrew flies
her artful tongue, and more persuasive eyes;
and springing from her disappointed arms,
prefers a dungeon to forbidden charms.
the mountain stag, that springs
from height to height, and bounds along the plains,
nor has a master to restrain his course;
that mountain stag would vanoe rather be,
than be a slave. - philips' briton.
11. to fly with elastick power; to start.
a link of horsehair, that will easily slip, fasten to the end of
the stick that springs. mortimer's husbandry.
12. to rise from a covert.
my doors are hateful to my eyes,
fill'd and damm'd up with gaping creditors,
watchful as fowlers when their game will spring. otway.
a covey of partridges springing in our front, put our in-
fantry in disorder. addison.
13. to issue from a fountain.
israel's servants digged in the valley, and found a well of
fpringing water. gen. xxvi. 19.
let the wide world his praises fing,
where tagus and euphrates spring;
and from the danube's frosty banks to those
where from an unknown head great nilus flows. roscomm.
14. to proceed as from a source.
'tis true from force the noblest title springs,
i therefore hold from that which first made kings.
15. to shoot; to issue with speed and violence.
then shook the sacred shrine, and sudden light
sprung thro’ the vaulted roof, and made the temple bright:
the pow'r, behold ! the pow'r in glory shone,
nor lies she long; but as her fates ordain, ;
blackmore,
dryden.
by her bent bow and her keen arrows known. dryden.
the friendly gods a springing gale enlarg’d,
the fleet swift tilting o'er the surges flew,
till grecian cliffs appear'd. pope.
to spring. v. a.
1. to start; to rouse game. -
thus i reclaim'd my buzzard love to fly
at what, and when, and how, and where i chose :
now negligent of sport i lie;
and now, as other fawkners use,
i soring
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s p r s p r
ispring a mistress, swear, write, figh, and dye, which is weakened, wh
and j. o: or lost, go talk or lie. donne. the body. en she operates more in *:::::
that sprung the game you were to set, in adult - - - - yon.
before you had time to draw the net. hudibras. they must to: cannot any "; }.
a large cock-pheasant he sprung in one of the neighbouring 4. any active power ; any cause b o h ti ... not.
woods. --- addison's spectator. produced or propagated. y which motion or action is
here i use a great deal of diligence before i can spring any my heart finks in me while i hear hims k
thing; whereas in town, whilst i am following one character, and every slacken'd fibre drops its .." peak,
i am crossed by another, that they puzzle the chace. addison. like nature letting down the springs of lif
see how the well-taught pointer leads the way ! so much the name of father awes #. i. c; dryden.
the scent grows warm ; he stops, he springs the prey. gay. nature is the same, and man is the same has th ryden.
2. to produce quickly or unexpectedly. affections and passions, ; has the same
the nurse, surpriz'd with fright, and the same springs that give them
starts and leaves her bed, and /prings a light. dryden.
thus man by his own strength to heav'n would soat,
and would not be oblig'd to god for more:
vain, wretched creature, how art thou misled,
to think thy wit these godlike notions bred
these truths are not the product of thy mind,
motion.
our author shuns by vulgar spring to move.
5. a leap ; a bound; a jump; a violent effort ; a sudden stru
the prisoner with a soring from prison broke:
then stretch'd his feather'd fans with all his might
and to the neighb'ring maple wing’d his flight. c 'dryan.
with what a spring his furious soul broke loose, -
rymer.
pope.
ggle.
but dropt from heaven, and of a nobler kind : and left the limbs still quiveri r -
reveal’d religion first inform'd thy fight, 6. a leak; a start of o vering on the ground ! add. cato,
and reason saw not, 'till faith sprung the light. dryden. each petty hand
he that has such a burning zeal, and spring, such mighty can steer a ship becalm'd , but he that will
discoveries, must needs be an admirable patriot. collier. govern, and carry her to her ends, must know
. to make by starting, applied to a ship. his tides, his currents; how to shift his sails, -
people discharge themselves of burdensome refle&amp;tions, as of where her springs are, her leaks, and how to stop 'em.
the cargo of a ship that has sprung a leak. l’estrange. ben. johnson's catiline.
no more accuse thy pen; but charge the crime 7. a fountain ; an issue of water from the earth.
on native sloth, and negligence of time: now stop thy spring: ; my sea shall suck them dry,
beware the publick laughter of the town, and swell so much the higher by their ebb. shak. henry vi.
thou spring's a leak already in thy crown. dryden. springs on the tops of hills pass through a great deal of pure
whether she sprung a leak, i cannot find, carth, with less mixture of other waters. bacon's nat. hist.
or whether she was overset with wind, when in th’ effects she doth the causes know,
but down at once with all her crew she went. dryden. and seeing the stream, thinks where the spring doth rise;
4. to discharge, applied to a mine. and seeing the branch, conceives the root below:
our miners discovered several of the enemies mines, who these things she views without the body's eyes. davies.
have sprung divers others which did little execution. tater. he adds the running s, rings and standing lakes,
i sprung a mine, whereby the whole nest was overthrown. and bounding banks for winding rivers makes. dryden.
a dison's speciator. nile hears him knocking at nis seventold gates,
5. to contrive on a sudden; to produce hastily; to offer un- and seeks his hidden spring, and fears his nephews fites.
expectedly. dryden.
the friends to the cause sprang a new project, and it was he bathed himself in cold spring water in the midst of
advertised that the crisis could not appear till the ladies had vv inter. locke.
shewn their zeal against the pretender. swift. the water that falls down from the clouds, sinking into
6. to pass by leaping. a barbarous use. beds of rock or clay, breaks out in springs, commonly at the
u.be secnning skill bottom of hilly ground. locke.
to spring the fence, to rein the prancing fleed. thomson. 8. a source; that by which anything is supplied.
7. of the verb spring the primary sense is to grow out f the to that great pring, which do hogreat kingdoms move,
ground, so plants spring, thence spring the season ; so water the sacred soring, whence right and honour streams;
springs, thence spring a fountain. plants rise unexpectedly, distilling virtue, shedding peace and love
and waters break out violently; thence any thing done sud- in every place, as cynthia sheds her beams. davier.
denly, or coming hastily, is said to spring ; thence spring means i move, i fee, i speak, discourse, and know,
an elastick body. thus the active significations all import though now i am, i was not always so:
suddenness or force. then that from which i was, must be before,
spring. m. s. [from the verb.] whom, as my spring of being, i adore. dryden.
1. the season in which plants rise and vegetate; the vernal rolling down through so many barbarous ages, from the
season. spring of virgil, it bears along with it the filth of the goths
orpheus with his lute made trees, and vandals. dryden.
and the mountain-tops, that freeze, he has a secret spring of spiritual joy, and the continual
bow them:-lves when he did sing: feast of a good conscience within, that forbids him to be mi-
to his musick, plants and flowers serable. bentley,
ever sprung, as sun and showers 9. rise ; beginning.
there had made a lasting spring. shakesh. hen. viii. about the spring of the day samuel called saul to the top of
the spring visiteth not these quarters so timely as the the house. i sa. ix. 26.
eastern parts. carew. io. cause; original. - - - -
come, gentle spring, ethereal mildness come, the reason of the quicker or flower termination of this
and from the boom of yon dropping cloud disemper, arises from these three springs. blackmore.
upon our pains descend. thomson's spring. the first springs of great events, like those of great rivers,
2. an elastick body; a body which when distorted has the power s are often mean and little. swift.
of restoring itself to its former state. pr ing
this may be performed by the strength of some such spring spring al. { n. s. a youth. oo::
as is used in watches: this spring may be applicq to one wheel, before the bull she pictur'd winged love,
which shall rive an equal motion to both the win s. soilkins. with his young brother sport, light fluttering
the pong must be made of good steel, well tempered ; and upon the waves, as each had been a dove;
the wide, the two enes of the spring stand afunder, the milder the one his bow and shafts, the other spring
it throws the chape of the vice open. amoxon's mech. exer. a "...# tead about his head did move,
he that was sharp. footed enough to see the configuration as in their fire's new love both triumphing. . . spensor.
of the minute particles of the spring of a clock, and upon what spring e. "...s. [from spring j. a gin ; a noose which fastened
pecular in use its eastick motion depends, would no doubt to any elastick body catches by a spring or jerk.
discover something very admirable. locke. - as 2 woodcock to my own springe, osrick, a.
3. elastick force. i'm justly kill'd with mine own treachery. shakespeare.
heav'n's, what a pring was in his arm, to throw l let goats for food their loaded udders lend ;
how high he held his shield, and rose at ev'ry blow' but neither springes, nets, no; snares employ. dryden.
-&gt; dryden. with hairy springe, we the birds betray,
bodies which are absolutely hard, or so soft as to be void of slight lines of hair surprize the finny prey. pope.
- - - - - - w - horouses game.
east civ, will not rebound from one another: impen trability sprise er. m.s. [from spring.] one who g
makes them only stop. if two equal bodies meet directly in spri'ngin ess. n.). [from springy.) elasticity; power of re-
vacao, they wiłł by the laws of motion stop where they meet, storing itself. - -
lose their motion, and remain in rest, unles they be elastick, where there is a continued endeavour of the parts o: 2 o
and receive new motion from their spring. newton. to put themselves into another state, the progress may be o
the soul is gathered within herself, and recovers that spring more slow, fince it was a great while before the texture of the
2 corpuscles
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s p r
s p r
torpuscles of the steel were so altered as to make them lose
their former springines. boyle.
the air is a thin fluid body; endowed with elasticity and
springiness, capable of condensation and rarefaction. bentley.
spor’no, h.alt. n.s.. [spring and halt..] a lameness by which
the horse twitches up his legs.
they've all new legs, and lame ones; one would take it,
that never saw them pace before, the spavin "
and springhalt reign'd among them. shakesp. henry viii.
spri'ngle. n.s.. [from spring.] a springe ; an elastick noose.
woodcocks arrive first on the north coast, where every
plash-shoot serveth for springles to take them. carew.
to spri'n gle. v. n. misprinted, i suppose, for sprinkle.
this is timon's last,
who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,
washes it off, and springles in your faces
your reeking villany. shakesp. timon of athens.
spri'notide. n.s.. [spring and tide.] tide at the new and
full moon; high tide.
love, like springtides, full and high,
swells in every youthful vein;
but each tide does less supply,
*till they quite shrink in again:
if a flow in age appear, -
'tis but rain, and runs not clear. dryd. tyrannick love.
most people die when the moon chiefly reigns; that is, in
the night, or upon or near a springtide. grew's cosmol.
spri'ngy. adj. [from springe.]
1. elastick; having the power of restoring itself.
had not the maker wrought the springy frame,
such as it is to fan the vital flame,
the blood, defrauded of its nitrous food,
had cool'd and languish’d in th’ arterial road;
while the tir'd heart had strove, with fruitless pain,
to push the lazy tide along the vein. blackm. creation.
this vast contraction and expansion seems unintelligible,
by feigning the particles of air to be springy and ramous, or
rolled up like hoops, or by any other means than a repulsive
power. newton.
though the bundle of fibres which constitute the muscles
may be small, the fibres may be strong and springy. arbuthnot.
if our air had not been a springy body, no animal could have
exercised the very funetion of respiration; and yet the ends of
respiration are not served by that springiness, but by some
other unknown quality. - bentley's sermons.
2. [from spring.] full of springs or fountains. not used.
where the sandy or gravelly lands are springy or wet, rather
marl them for grass than corn. - mortioner's husbandry.
to sprinkle. v. a. [sprinkelen, dutch.]
1. to scatter; to disperse in small masles. .
take handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let moses sprinkle
it towards the heaven. ex. ix. 8.
2. to scatter in drops.
sprinkle water of purifying upon them. num. viii. 7.
3. to besprinkle; to wash, wet, or dust by sprinkling.
let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. heb.
wings he wore
of many a colour'd plume sprinkled with gold. milton.
the prince, with living water sprinkl"d o'er
his limbs and body; then approach'd the door,
possess'd the porch. dryden's aen.
to spr1'nkle. v. n. to perform the aet of scattering in small
drops.
#. priest shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger. lev. xiv.
baptism may well enough be performed by sprinkling, or ef-
fusion of water. ayliffe's parergon.
when dext’rous damsels twirl the sprinkling mop,
and cleanse the spatter'd sash, and scrub the stairs,
know saturday appears. gay's trivia.
spr 1’s kle r. n.s. [from sprinkle..] one that sprinkles.
to sprit. v. a. [rpnyczan, saxon; spruyten, dutch..] to
throw out; to eject with force. commonly spirt.
toads sometimes exclude or sprit out a dark and liquid
matter behind, and a venomous condition there may be per-
haps therein; but it cannot be called their urine. brown.
7, sprit. v. n. [rpnyczan, saxon; spruyten, dutch..] . to
shoot; to germinate; to sprout. used of barley wetted for
malt. - " .. - - - - -
sprit. n.s.. [from the verb.]-shoot; sprout."
the barley, after it has been couched four days, will sweat
a little, and shew the chit or sprit at the root-end of the corn.
- ---- - - - - - - mortimer's husbandry.
spri’rs a11... n.s.. [sprit and sail.] the sail which belongs to
the boltsprit mast. . . . . . . - - dic7.
our men quitted themselves of the fireship, by cutting the
sorisail tackle off with their short hatchets. jwiseman.
sfr it e. m. s. [contracted from spirit..] a spirit; an incorpo-
real agent. -
the sprites of fiery termagants in flame
mount up, and take a salamander's name.
pope.
spritefully. adv. [see sprightfully.]
with life and ardour.
the grecians spritefully drew from the darts the corse,
and hearst it, bearing it to fleet. chapman's iliad.
spritely. adv. [from sprite.] gayly.
you have not seene young heiffers, hihly kept;
fill'd full of daisies at the field, and driven
home to their hovels; all so spritely given,
that no roome can containe them.
spr on g. the preterite of spring. obsolete.
not mistrusting, 'till these new curiosities sprong up, that
ever any man would think our labour herein mispent, or the
time wastefully consumed. hooker.
to sprout. v. n. [rpnyczan, saxon ; spruyten, dutch. sprout,
sprit, and by a very frequent transposition spirt or spurt, are
all the same word.]
1. to shoot by vegetation; to germinate.
the sprouting leaves that saw you here,
and call'd their fellows to the fight. cowley.
try whether, these things in the sprouting do increase
weight, by weighing them before they are hanged up; and
afterwards again, when they are sprouted. bacon.
that leaf faded, but the young buds sprouted on, which af.
terwards opened into fair leaves. bacon's natural history.
we find no security to prevent germination, having made
trial of grains, whose ends, cut off, have notwithstanding
sprouted. brown's vulgar errouri.
old baucis is by old philemon seen
sprouting with sudden leaves of sprightly green. dryden,
hence sprouting plants enrich the plain and wood:
for physick some, and some design'd for food. blackmore,
envy'd britannia, sturdy as the oak
which on her mountain top she proudly bears,
eludes the ax, and sprouts against the stroke,
strong from her wounds, and greater by her wars. prior:
rub malt between your hands to get the come or sprouting
vigorously ;
chapman,
clean away. mortimer's husbandry.
2. to shoot into ramifications,
vitriol is apt to sprout with moisture. bacon:
3. to grow. -
th’ enliv'ning dust its head begins to rear,
and on the ashes sprouting plumes appear. tickel.
sprout. n.s.. [from the verb.] a shoot of a vegetable.
stumps of trees, lying out of the ground, will put forth
sprouts for a time. . . bacon.
early ere the odorous breath of morn
awakes the slumbering leaves, or tassel’d horn
shakes the high thicket, haste i all about,
number my ranks, and visit every sprout. milton.
to this kid, taken out of the womb, were brought in the
tender sprouts of shrubs; and, after it had tasted, began to eat
of such as are the usual food of goats. ray on the creation.
spr outs. m. s. pl. [from sprout..] young coleworts.
spruce. adj. [skinner derives this word from preux, french;
but he proposes it with hesitation: junius thinks it comes from
fprout; casaubon trifles yet more contemptibly. i know not
whence to deduce it, except from pruce. in ancient books
we find furniture of pruce a thing costly and elegant, and
thence probably came spruce.] nice; trim; neat without
elegance. it was anciently used of things with a serious
meaning: it is now used only of persons, and with levity.
the tree
that wraps that crystal in a wooden tomb,
shall be took up spruce, fill'd with diamond.
thou wilt not leave me in the middle street,
tho' some more spruce companion thou do'st meet.
along the crisped shades and bow’rs
revels the spruce and jocund spring ;
the graces, and the rosy-bosom'd hours,
thither all their bounties bring. milton.
i must not slip into too spruce a style for serious matters; and
yet i approve not that dull insipid way of writing practised by
donne.
donne,
many chymists. boyle.
he put his band and beard in order,
the sprucer to accost and board her. płudibras,
he is so spruce, that he can never be genteel. tatler.
this tim makes a strange figure with that ragged coat un-
der his livery: can't he go spruce and clean arbuthnot.
to spr uce. v. n. [from the noun..] to dress with affected
neatness.
spruce, n.s. a species of fir.
spru'cebeer. n.s.. [from spruce, a kind of fir.] beer tinc-
tured with branches of fir.
in ulcers of the kidneys sprucebeer is a good balsamick.
- arbuthnot.
spru'celeather... n.s. [corrupted for prussian leather.]
ainsworth.
the leather was of pruce. dryden's fatles.
spru'cely. adv. [from spruce j in a nice manner.
spru'ceness. n.s.. [from struce..] . neatness without elegance.
sprung. the preterite and participle passive of spring.
7
tall
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">[. *
s p u
tall norway fir, their masts in battle spent,
and english oaks, sprung leaks, and planks, restore. dryl.
now from beneath maleas' airy height,
alast she sprung, and steer'd to thebes her flight. pope.
who sprung from kin's shall know less joy than i. pope.
spsust. n.s. any thing that is short, and will not easily bend.
spud, n. j. a short knife; any short thick thing, in con-
tempt. - -
my love to sheelah is more firmly fixt,
than strongest weeds t at grow these stones betwixt:
my spud these nettles from the stones can part,
no knife so keen to weed thee from my heart. swift.
sru'll ers of porn. "... s. [perhaps properly spoolers.] are such
as are employed to ice that it be well spun, and fit for the
!oom. dici.
spum.e. n.s. s sound, latin.] foam ; froth.
materials dark and crude,
of spirituous and fiery stume, till touch'd
with heaven's ray, and temper'd, they shoot forth
so beauteous, op'ning to the ambient light. milton.
waters frozen in pans, alter their dissolution, leave a froth
and spume upon them, which are caused by the airy parts dif-
fused by the congea'able mixture. brown's vulgar erroars.
t, spum. f. v. n [/own’, latin j. to foam; to froth.
spu mous. ; adj. [spurneus, latin; from the noun.] frothy :
sfu, m y. foamy.
the cause is the putrefaction of the body by unnatural heat:
the putrifying parts suffer a turgescence, and becoming airy
and soumous, ascend into the surface of the water. brown.
not with more madness, rolling from afar,
the spuny waves proclaim the wat'ry war;
and mounting upwards with a mighty roar,
march onwards, and insult the rocky shore. dryden.
the spumous and florid state of the blood, in passing through
the lungs, arises from its own elasticity, and its violent mo-
tion, the aerial particles expanding themselves. arbuthnot.
spun. the preterite and part, pass of spin.
the nymph nor spun, nor dress'd with artful pride;
her vest was gather'd up, her hair was ty'd. addison.
spunge. m. s. [songia, latin. j a sporge. see sposo f.
when he needs what you have glean'd, it is but squeezing
you, and, spunge, you shall be dry again. shakesp. hamlet.
considering the motion that was impressed by the painter's
hand upon the spunge, compounded with the specifick gravity
of the spunge and the resistance of the air, the shunge did ine-
chanically and unavoidably move in that particular line of
motion. bentley's sermons.
to spungs. v. n. [rather to sponge.] to hang on others for
maintenan cc.
this will maintain you, with the perquisite of soing
while you are young. swift to gay.
spu'ng in ghouse. m. s. [spunge and house.) a house to which
debtors are taken before commitment to prison, where the
bailiffs sponge upon them, or riot at their cost.
a bailiff kept you the whole evening in a spunginghouse. swift.
spu'ngy. adj. from spunge.]
1. full of small holes, and soft like a sponge.
some english wool, vex'd in a belgian loom,
and into cloth of spungy softness made,
did into france or colder denmark roam,
to ruin with worse air our staple trade. dryden.
2. wet; moist ; watery.
i saw jove's bird, the roman eagle, wing'd
from the spungy south to this part of the welt,
there vanish'd in the sun-beams. soakesp. cymbeline.
3. having the quality of imbibing.
there is no lady of more softer bowels,
more spungy to suck in the sense of fear. shakespeare.
spunk. n.s. rotten wood; touchwood. see spos k.
to make white powder, the best way is by the powder of
rotten willows: spunk, or touchwood prepared, might perhaps
make it ruslet. b. aux's sugar erroars.
spur. n.s. [rpuna, sax. spore, danish, islandick, and dutch;
esperon, french.)
1. a sharp point fixed in the rider's heel, with which he pricks
his horse to drive him forward.
he borrowing that homely armour for want of a better,
had come upon the spur to redecin philoclea's picture. sony.
whether the body politick be
a horse whereon the governour doth ride,
who, newly in the seat, that it may know
he can command it, lets it traight feel the sour. s'ao so.
he presently set spurs to his horse, and departed with to “
rest of the company. knoi...,’s 11:/ory of the tur/i.
was i for this entitled, sir,
and girt with rusty sword and spur,
for fame and honour to wage battle ho! -a;.
2. incitement; instigation. it is used with to before the effect.
dryden has used it with of ; but, if he speaks properly, he
means to make the following word personal.
seeing then that nothing can move, unless there be some
end, the desire whereof provok-th unto motion, how sh ou'd
vol. ii.
o power of the soul, that spirit of our mind, ever stor
ltic w. action, unless it have also the like spur; hooker.
t *** *ed we any spur, but our own couse,
hi. prick us to redress? shakesh. julius cæsar,
1s laws are deep, and not vulgar; not made upon the spur
of a particular occasion, but out of providence of the future
to o: his people more and more happy. bacon.
reward is the /or of virtue in all good arts, all laudable
... and emulation, which is th: other spur, will never
‘....". when particular rewards are proposed. dryden.
, the chief, if not only spur to human industry and action
is uneasiness. lo.
. the former may be a sour to the latter, tillage makji.
in love with the study, without any childish baits cheyne.
3. a stimulus; a prick ; any thing that galls and teazes.
grief and patience, rooted in him bon.
mingle their spurs together. shakesp. cymbeline.
4. the sharp points on the legs of a cock with whith he fights.
of birds the bill is of like matter with the teeth :
- - - - --- as for
their sour; it is but a nail. bacon.
animals have natural weapons to defend and offend; some
talons, some claws, some spurs and beaks. ray.
5. anything standing out; a snag.
the strong-bas'd promontory
have i made shake, and pluckt up by the spurs
the pine and cedar.
to spur. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to prick with the spur; to drive with the spur.
my friend, who always takes care to cure his horse of start-
ing fits, spurred him up to the very side of the coach. adson.
your father, when he mounted, -
rein’d 'em in strongly, and he spurr'd them hard. dryden.
who would be at the trouble of learning, when he finds his
ignorance is caressed ? but when you brow-beat and maul
them, you make them men; for though they have no natu-
ral mettle, yet, if they are spurred and kicked, they will
mend their pace. collier on pride.
2. to instigate; to incite; to urge forward.
lovers break not hours,
unless it be to come before their time:
so much they spur their expedition. shakes eare.
let the awe he has got upon their minds be so tempered with
the marks of good will, that affection may spur them to their
duty. locke.
3. to drive by force.
love will not be spurr'd to what it loaths. shakspeare.
to spur. v. n.
1. to travel with great expedition.
with backward bows the parthians shall be there,
and, spurring from the fight, confess their fear:
a double wreath shall crown our caesar's brows. drydon.
2. to press forward.
ascanius took th' alarm, while yet he led,
and, spurring on, his equals soon o'erpass'd. dryd. æn.
some bold men, though they begin with infinite ignorance
and errour, yet, by spurring on, refine themselves. grew.
spu'ro all ed. adj. [spur and gall.] hurt with the spur.
i was not made a horse,
and yet i bear a burthen like an ass,
sourgall'd and tir’d, by jaunting bolingbroke. shakspeare.
what! shall each spurgall'd hackney of the day,
or each new pension'd sycophant, pretend
to break my windows, if i treat a friend ? pope.
spur ge. m. s. [esourge, french ; surgie, dutch, from purgo,
latin.) a plant violently purgative. spurge is a general
name in english for all milky purgative plants. skinner.
every part of the plant abounds with a milky juice. there
are seventy-one species of this plant, of which wartwort is
one. broad leaved spurge is a biennial plant, and used in
medicine under the name of cataputia minor. the milky
juice in these plants is used by some to destroy warts; but
particular care should be taken in the application, because it
is a strong caustick. a4iller.
that the leaves of cataputia, or sourge, being plucked up-
wards or downwards, perform their operations by purge or
vomit, is a strange conceit, ascribing unto plants positional
operations. brown's pulgar errours.
spurg s f.x. n.s.. [thymelaea, lat. j a plant.
spurge laurel, or 44-zeroon. n. j. [chamadaphne, lat.] a
lant.
so olive. n.s.. [chamarka, lat..] a shrub.
spoi's ce sort. n.s [xiphion, lat.) a plant.
spur ou.s. adj. [spurius, latin. j
1. not genuine; counterfeit ; adulterine.
reformed churches reject not all traditions, but soch as are
sourious, superstitious, and not consonant to the prime role of
faith. j%ite.
the coin that shows the first is generally rej cted as spu-
rious, nor is the other esteemed inose authentick by the pre-
sent roman medalists. addison on italy.
if anything else has been printed, in which we really had
any hand, it is loaded with spurious additions. swift.
24 z 2. not
shakespeare.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s p u
s q_u
2. not legitimate; bastard.
your scipios, caesars, pompeys, and your catos,
these gods on earth, are all the spurious brood
of violated maids. addison's cato.
spu'rious ness. n.s. [from spurious.] adulterateness; state of
being counterfeit.
you proceed to hippolytus, and speak of his spuriousness
with as much confidence as if you were able to prove it.
- //aterland.
spu'rling. m. s. [esperlan, french..] a small sea-fish.
all-saints, do lay for porke and sowse,
for sprats and spurlings for your house.
to spurn. v. a. [rponnan, saxon.]
i. to kick; to strike or drive with the foot.
they suppos'd i could rend bars of steel,
and spurn in pieces posts of adamant. shakesp. henry vi.
say my request's unjust,
and spurn me back; but if it be not so,
thou art not honest. shakespeare's coriolanus.
you that did void your rheum upon my beard,
and foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
over your threshold. shakesp. merchant of venice.
he in the surging smoke
tuffer.
uplifted spurn'd the ground. milton.
so was i forc’d -
to do a sovereign justice to myself,
and spurn thee from my presence. dryden's don stbaffian.
then will i draw up my legs, and spurn her from me with
my foot. addison's spectator.
a milk-white bull shall at your altars stand,
that threats a fight, and spurn; the rising sand. pope.
when athens sinks by fates unjust,
when wild barbarians spurn her dust. pope.
now they, who reach parnassus’ lofty crown,
employ their pains to sturn some others down. pope.
2. to reject; to scorn; to put away with contempt; to disdain.
in wisdom i should ask your name;
but since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
what safe and nicely i might well delay,
by rule of knighthood, i disdain and spurn.
. to treat with contempt.
domesticks will pay a more chearful service, when they find
themselves not spurned, because fortune has laid them at their
masters feet. locke.
to spurn. v. n.
1. to make contemptuous opposition; to make insolent re-
sistance.
shakespeare.
a son to blunt the sword
that guards the peace and safety of your person;
nay more, to spurn at your most royal image.
l, pandulph, do religiously demand
why thou against the church, our holy mother,
so wilfully dost spurn ? shakesp. king john.
instruct me why
vanoc should spurn against our rule, and stir
the tributary provinces to war. philips's briton.
2. to toss up the heels; to kick or struggle.
the drunken chairman in the kennel spurns,
the glasses shatters, and his charge o’erturns. gay.
spurn. n.s.. [from the verb..] kick; insolent and contemptu-
ous treatment.
the insolence of office, and the spurns
that patient merit of th' unworthy takes. shakesp. hamlet.
spu'rney. m. s. a plant.
spu'rrer. m. s. [from sour.] one who uses spurs.
spu'rrier. m. s. [from spur.] one who makes spurs.
spu'rry. m. s. [spergula, latin.] a plant.
to spurt. v. n. [see 70 spirt.] to fly out with a quick
stream. -
if from a puneture of a lancet, the manner of the spurting
out of the blood will shew it. jwiseman's surgery.
spu'rw ay. m. s. [spur and way.] a horse-way; a bridle-
road; distinet from a road for carriages.
sputation. m. s. [sputum, latin j the aet of spitting.
a moist consumption receives its nomenclature from a moist
sputation, or expectoration: a dry one is known by its dry
cough. harvey on consumptions.
to sputter. v. n. [sout”, latin.]
1. to emit moisture in small flying drops.
if a manly drop or two fall down,
it scalds along my checks, like the green wood,
that, sputt'ring in the flame, works outwards into tears.
dryden.
shakesp.
z
z
2. to fly out in small particles with some noise.
the nightly virgin, while her wheel she plies,
foresees the storms impending in the skies, -
when sparkling lamps their spott'ring light advance,
and in the sockets oily bubbles dance. dryden.
3. to speak hastily and obscurely, as with the mouth full ; to
throw out the spittle by hasty speech.
a pinking owl sat spottering at the sun, and asked him what
he meant to stand staring her in the eyes. l'eslrange.
they could neither of them speak their rage; and so fell a
jputtering at one another, like two roasting apples. congr.
though he sputter through a session, -
it never makes the least impression;
whate'er he speaks for madness goes. swift.
to sputter. v. a. to throw out with noise and hesitation.
thou dost with lies the throne invade,
obtending heav'n for whate'er ills befall;
and sputt'ring under specious names thy gall. dryden
in the midst of carefles, and without the least pretended in:
citement, to sputter out the basest accusations ! swift,
sputter. m. s. moisture thrown out in small drops.
sputte rer. m. s...[from sputter.]. one that sputters.
spy. n.s.. [spio, welsh; espion, french; spie, dutch; jocula-
ter, latin.] it is observed by a german, that soy has been in
all ages a word by which the eye, or office of the eye, has been
expressed : thus the arimospians of old, fabled to have but on:
eye, were so called from ari, which, among the nations of
caucasus, still signifies one, and spi, which has been received
from the old asiatick languages for an eye, sight, or one that
sees.) one sent to watch the conduct or motions of others.
one sent to gain intelligence in an enemy's camp or coin.
try.
we'll hear poor rogues
talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too,
and take upon's the mystery of things,
as if we were god’s spies.
spies of the volscians
held me in chace, that i was forc'd to wheel
three or four miles about. shakesp. coriolanus,
every corner was possessed by diligent spies upon their
master and mistress. clarendon,
i come no spy,
with purpose to explore, or to disturb,
the secrets of your realm. milton's paradis, loft.
such command we had,
to see that none thence issu'd forth a spy,
or enemy, while god was in his work.
nothing lies hid from radiant eyes;
all they subdue become their spies:
secrets, as chosen jewels, are
presented to oblige the fair.
over my men i'll set my careful spies,
to watch rebellion in their very eyes.
these wretched spies of wit must then confess,
they take more pains to please themselves the less. dryden.
those who attend on their state, are so many spies placed
upon them by the publick to observe them nearly. atterbury.
to spy. v. a. [see spy. m. s.]
1. to discover by the eye at a distance, or in a state of conceal-
ment; to espy.
light hath no tongue, but is all eye;
if it could speak as well as spy,
this were the worst that it could say,
that being well i fain would stay. donne.
as tyger spy'd two gentle fawns. milton.
a countryman spied a snake under a hedge, half frozen to
shakesp. king lear,
milton.
waller.
dryden.
death. l'estrange.
my brother guyomar, methinks, i spy :
haste in his steps, and wonder in his eye. dryden.
one in reading skip'd over all sentences where he spy'd a
note of admiration. swift.
2. to discover by close examination.
pot a lawyer tell he has spy'd some defect in an entail, how
solicitous are they to repair that errour decay of piety.
3. to search or discover by artifice.
moses sent to spy out jaazer, and took the villages. numb,
to spy. v. n. to search narrowly.
it is my nature's plague
to/fy into abuse; and oft my jealousy
shapes faults that are not. shakespeare's othells.
spyboa.t. m. s. [spy and boat.] a boat sent out for intelli.
gence.
giving the colour of the sea to their soyboats, to keep them
from being discovered, came from the veneti. arbuthnot.
squab. adj. [i know not whence derived.]
i. unfeathered; newly hatched.
why must old pigeons, and they stale, be drest,
when there's so many squab ones in the nest
2. fat; thick and stout; aukwardly bulky.
the nappy ale goes round,
nor the sual daughter nor the wife were nice,
each health the youths began, sim pledg'd it twice. betters.
sq9a.b. m. s. a kind of sofa or couch; a stuffed cushion.
on her large squab you find her spread,
like a fat corpse upon a bed.
squab. adv.
low word.
the eagle took the tortoise up into the air, and dropt him
down, squab, upon a rock, that dashed him to pieces. l'esir.
so bpie. m. s. [sauab and pie.] a pie made of many ingre-
lents.
king.
- - swift.
with a heavy sudden fall; plump and flat. a
cornwal
s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s q_u
cornwal sual pie, and devon whitepot brings,
and leister beans and bacon, food of kings. -&gt; king.
t. squad. v. ". to fall down plump or flat; to squelsh or
uash.
soon. adj. [from squab.] ...thick; heavy; fleshy.
diet renders them of a squabbish or lardy habit of body.
- harvey.
to squa’bble. v. n. [aiabla, swedish.j to quarrel; to
debate peevishly ; to wrangle; to fight. a low word.
drunk? and speak parrot and suabble * swagger ? oh,
thou invincible spirit of wine! shakespeare's othello.
i thought it not improper, in a suabbling and contentious
age, to detect the vanity of confiding ignorance. glanville.
if there must be disputes, is not squabbling less inconvenient
than murder? collier on duelling.
the sense of these propositions is very plain, though logi-
cians might squabble a whole day, whether they should rank
them under negative or affirmative. j/atts's logick.
so m. s. [from the verb.] a low brawl; a petty
uarscs.
q in popular factions, pragmatick fools commonly begin the
suabble, and crafty knaves reap the benefit. l'e/frange.
a man whose personal courage is suspected, is not to drive
squadrons before him ; but may be allowed the merit of some
juabble, or throwing a bottle at his neighbour's head. arbuth.
s&amp;a'bbler. m. s. [from squabble.] a quarrelsome fellow ; a
brawler.
squadron. . m. s. [osadron, fr. suadrone, italian, from
quad a us, latin j
1. a body of men drawn up square.
those half-rounding guards
just met, and closing stood in squadron join'd. milton.
2. a part of an army; a troop.
eurimidon then rein'd his horse, that trotted neighing by;
the king a foot-man, and so scowres the squadrons orderly.
chapman.
nothing the moors were more afraid of, than in a set battle
to fight with stadrons coming orderly on. knolles.
then beauteous atys, with lulus bred,
of equal age, the second squadron led. dryden.
3. part of a fleet; a certain number of ships.
rome could not maintain its dominion over so many pro-
vinces, without suadrons ready equipt. arbuthnot.
soga dr on ed. adj. [from suadron.j. formed into squadrons.
they gladly thither haste; and by a choir -
of suadron'd angels hear his carol sung. milton.
squa'lid. adj. [sualidus, latin j foul; nasty; filthy.
a doleful case desires a doleful song,
without vain art or curious compliments,
and suasid fortune into baseness flowing,
doth scorn the pride of wonted ornaments. sponsor.
uncomb'd his locks, and squalid his attire,
unlike the trim of love and gay desire. dryden's knight's tale.
all these cocytus bounds with squalid reeds,
with muddy ditches and with deadly weeds. dryden.
t. squall. v. m. [squala, swedish.) to scream out as a
child or woman frighted.
in my neighbourhood, a very pretty prattling shoulder of
veals walls out at the fight of a knife. speciator.
i put five into my coat-pocket; and as to the sixth, i made
a countenance as if i would eat him alive. the poor man
soalled terribly. swift.
cornelius sunk back on a chair; the guests stood astonished;
the infant squawl’d. arbuthnot and pope.
soy all. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. loud scream.
there oft are heard the notes of infant woe,
the short thick sob, loud scream, and shriller squall. pope.
2. sudden gust of wind. a sailor's word.
squasiles. n.s. [from stall.] screamer; one that screams.
snla lor. m. s. [latin.] "coarseness; nastiness; want of
cleanliness and neatness.
take heed that their new flowers and sweetness do not as
much corrupt as the others dryness and squalor. ben, fos”.
what can filthy poverty give clfe, but boggary, folsome
nastiness, squalor, ugliness, hunger, and thirit; burto
sogally. 3.}. [from), wall.] windy; gusly. a sailor's word.
s&amp;a'mous. adj. [jiamens, latin. j scaly; covered with
scales.
the sea was replenished with fish, of the cartilaginous and
squamos, as of the testaceous and crustaceous kinds. if oadw.
those galls and balls are produced, in the gems of oak, which
may be called soom.au, oak cones. 19e ham's physico-theology.
t. squander. v. a. [cershwendon, teutonick.] -
1. to scatter lavishly, to spend profusely; to throw away in
idle prodigality.
we stander away some part of our fortune at play. atter".
they often squarder's, but they never gave. savage.
never take a favourite waiting-maid, to insinuate how great
a fortune you brought, and how little you are allowed to
juander. swift.
ro, in plain prose, were made two sorts of mon,
##". some, and some to hide agen. pope.
* friends would rather see such thoughts as they com-
municate only to one an
other *** * * *** *****
to all the world. , than what they stander about
how uncertain it i pope.
t is, whether the v r
selves shall be indulge &gt; years we propose to our-
!"god to us, uncertain whether we shall have
.." *** **nation to improve them better than thos.
- - squander away. rz
2. "o. to dissipate gery.
. he hath an argosie bound to tripolis an -
dies, and other ventures he o'o.
the troops we squander'd first, again appear
from sev'rai quarters, and enclose the rear.
he is a successful warrior,
and has the soldiers hearts: upon the skirts
s of arragon %. troops he rallies. dryden
qua nde rer. m. s. from souander. is . ".
gal; a waster; mills." j a spendthrift; a prodi-
plenty in their own keeping teaches them from the begin-
ning to be squanderers and waters. loft.
square. as. [y/gwar, welsh; quadratus, latin.]
i. cornered ; having right angles.
^!!!he doors and posts were square, with the windows. kinz.
water and air the varied form confound; ce
the straightlooks crooked, and thesquare grows round. prior.
2. forming a right angle. -
this instrument is for striking lines souare to other lines or
streight sides, and try the squareness of their work. moxon.
3. cornered; having angles of whatever content; as three
square, five square.
catching up in haste his three souare shield,
and shining helmet, soon him buckled to the field. sensor.
the clavicle is a crooked bone, in the figure of an s. one
end of which being thicker and almost three soare, is inserted
into the first bone of the sternon. joseman's surgery.
4. parallcl; exactly suitable.
she's a most triumphant lady, if report be sure to her. shaft.
5. strong; stout; well set: as, a square man.
6. equal ; exact; honest; fair: as, square dealing.
all have not offended;
for those that were, it is not square to take
on those that are, revenge; crimes, like to lands,
are not inherited. shakespeare'; tim n of athens.
7. [in geometry.] square root of any number is that which,
multiplied by itself, produces the souare, as 4 is the sou're root
of 16 ; because 4x4=16; and likewise 0 the square root of
36, as 6x6=36.
square. m. s. squadra, latin.]
1. a figure with right angles and equal sides.
then did a sharped spire of diamond bright,
ten feet each way in square appear to me,
justly proportion'd up into his height,
so far as archer might his level see. spensor.
rais'd of grassy turf their table was ;
and on her ample square from side to side
all autumn pil’d. miłon.
2. an area of four sides, with houses on each side.
the statue of alexander vii. stands in the large souare of
the town. addison on italy.
3. content of an angle.
in rectangle triangles the souare which is made of the fide
that subtendeth the right angle, is equal to the squares which
are made of the sides, containing the right angle. brown.
4. a rule or instrument by which workmen measure or form
their angles.
5. rule; regularity; exact proportion; justness of workman-
ship or conduct. not now much used.
in st. paul's time the integrity of rome was famous : co-
rinth many ways reproved : thcy of galatia much more out
of square. hooker.
the whole ordinance of that government was at first evil
plotted, and through other oversights came more out of square,
to that disorder which it is now come unto. spenser's ireland.
i have not kept my souare, but that to come
shall all be done by th' rule. shao. anthony and cleopatra.
nothing so much setteth this art of influence out of square
and rule as education. raleigh.
6. squadron; troops formed square. not now in use.
he alone
dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
; to disperse.
dryden.
in the brave squares of war. shakspeare.
our superfluous lacqueys and our peasants,
who in unnecessary action swarm
about our squares of battle, were enow
to purge this field of such a hilding foe. shakspeare.
7. a square number is when another called its root can be exactly
found, which multiplied by itself produces the square. the
following example is not accurate.
advance thy golden mountains to the skies,
on the broad base of fifty thousand rise;
7 add
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s o u
$ q_u
add one round hundred, and, if that's not fair;
add fifty more, and bring it to a square. pope.
8. quaternion ; number four. though perhaps in the follow-
ing lines, souare may mean only capacity.
i profess
myself an enemy to all other joys
which the most precious square of sense possesses,
and find i am alone felicitate
in your dear love. *
9. level; equality.
men should sort themselves with their equals; for a rich
man that converses upon the square with a poor man, shall
certainly undoe him. l’estrange.
- we live not on the square with such as these,
such are our betters who can better please. dryden.
1o., quartile; the astrological situation of planets, distant ninety
degrees from each other.
- - - - to th’ other five
their planetary motions, and aspects,
in sextile, square, and trine and opposite -
of noxious efficacy. . . milton's paradise lost.
i 1. rule; conformity. a proverbial use.
i shall break no squares whether it be so or not. l’estrange.
12. soy ares go. the game proceeds. chessboards being full
of squares. - -
one frog looked about him to see how squares went with
their new king. l’estrange.
to squar e. v. a. squadro, lat. from the noun.]
1. to form with right angles.
2. to reduce to a square.
circles to souare, and cubes to double,
wou'd give a man excessive trouble.
3. to measure; to reduce to a measure.
stubborn criticks, apt, without a theme
for depravation, to square all the sex
by cressid's rule.
4. to adjust 3 to regulate; to mould; to shape.
dreams are toys;
yet for this once, yea superstitiously,
i will be souar’d by this.
shakespeare.
prior.
shakespeare. *
shakesp. winter's tale.
how frantickly i square my talk shakespeare.
thou'rt said to have a stubborn soul,
that apprehends no further than this world,
and squar’s thy life accordingly. shakespeare.
he employs not on us the hammer and the chizzel, with an
intent to wound or mangle us, but only to souare and fashion
our hard and stubborn hearts. boyle's seraphick love.
god has designed us a measure of our undertakings ; his
word and law, by the proportions whereof we are to souare
our actions. decay of piety.
the oracle was inforced to proclaim socrates to be the
wisest man in the world, because he applied his studies to the
moral part, the squaring men's lives. hammond.
his preaching much, but more his practice wrought ;
a living sermon of the truths he taught;
for this by rules severe his life he squar’d,
that all might see the doctrine which they heard. dryden.
this must convince all such who have, upon a wrong in-
terpretation, presumed to square opinions by theirs, and have
in loud exclamations shewn their abhorrence of university
education. - swift.
5. to accommodate; to fit.
eye me, blest providence, and square my trial
to my proportion'd strength. milton.
some professions can equally square themselves to, and thrive
under all revolutions of government. south.
6. to respect in quartile.
o'er libra's sign a crowd of foes prevails,
the icy goat and crab that square the scales.
to square. v. n.
1. to suit with ; to fit with.
i set them by the rule, and, as they square,
or deviate from undoubted doctrine, fare. dryden.
his description squares exactly to lime. iwoodward.
these marine bodies do not square with those opinions, but
exhibit phaenomena that thwart them. woodward.
2. to quarrel; to go to opposite sides.
are you such fools
to square for this would it offend you then
that both should speed f shakesp. titus andronicus.
but they do square, that all their elves for fear
creep into acorn cups, and hide them there. shakespeare.
squa'reness. n.s. [from souare.] the state of being square.
this instrument is for striking lines square to other lines or
straight lines, and try the squareness of their work. amoxon.
motion, squareness, or any particular shape, are the acci-
dents of body. j/atts's logick.
squash. n.s.. [from quash.j
1. anything soft and easily crushed.
not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a
boy, as a squash is before it is a peascod, or a coddling, when
it is almost an apple. shakespeare's twelfth night.
creech.
obsolete.
*
2. [melopepo.] a plant. miller.
squash is an indian kind of pumpion that grows apace.
- boyle.
3. any thing unripe; any thing soft. in contempt.
how like i then was to this kernel,
this squash, this gentleman. shakespeare's winter's tal,
4. a sudden fall.
since they will overload my shoulders, i shall throw down
the burden with a squash among them. arbuthnot.
5. a shock of soft bodies.
my fall was stopped by a terrible squash that sounded louder
than the cataract of niagara. - swift,
to squash. v. a. to crush into pulp. s
to sqg at. v. n. [quattare, italian.] to fit cowering; to fit
close to the ground.
squat. adj. [from the verb.]
1. cowering; close to the ground.
him there they found,
squat like a toad, close at the ear of eve. asilion,
her dearest com’rades never caught her
squat on her hams. swift.
2. short and thick ; having one part close to another, as those
of an animal contracted and cowering.
the squill-insect is so called from some similitude to the
squill-fish: the head is broad and squat,
... alma in verse, in prose, the mind,
throughout the body squat or tall,
is bond fide, all in all.
squat. m. s.
1. the posture of cowering or lying close.
a stitch-fall'n cheek that hangs below the jaw;
such wrinkles as a skilful hand would draw
for an old grandam ape, when with a grace
she sits at squat, and scrubs her leathern face.
2. a sudden fall.
bruises, suats and falls, which often kill others, can bring
little hurt to those that are temperate. hiror.
squat. n.s. a sort of mineral. . -
the squat consists of tin ore and spar incorporated. woodw.
to sq9 eak. v. n. [sqwaka, swedish.]
1. to set up a sudden dolorous cry; to cry out with pain.
2. to cry with a shrill acute tone.
the sheeted dead
did squeak and gibber in the roman streets.
cartwheels squeak not when they are liquored.
i see the new arion sail, -
the lute still trembling underneath thy nail:
at thy well sharpen'd thumb from shore to shore,
the ...so for fear, the bases roar. dryden.
blunderbusses planted in every loop hole, go off at the
squeaking of a fiddle and the thrumming of a guitar. dryden.
who can endure to hear one of the rough old romans
squeaking through the mouth of an eunuch addison.
how like brutes organs are to ours;
they grant, if higher pow'rs think fit,
a bear might soon be made a wit ;
and that for any thing in nature,
pigs might squeak love-odes, dogs bark satyr.
in florid impotence he speaks,
and as the prompter breath, s, the puppet squeaks. pope.
zoilus calls the companions of ulysses the squeaking pigs of
homer. pope's odyssey.
3. to break filence or secrecy for fear or pain.
if he be obstinate, put a civil question to him upon the rack,
and he squeaks, i warrant him. dryden's don sehaslian.
squeak. m. s. [from the verb.] a shrill quick cry; a cry of
pain.
ran cow and calf, and family of hogs,
in panick horrour of pursuing dogs : -
with many a deadly grunt and doleful squeak,
poor swine! as if their pretty hearts wou'd break. drydon.
grow.
*
prior.
dryden,
shakespears.
bacon.
prior.
to sque al. v. n. [sawala, swedish.j. to cry with a shrill
sharp voice; to cry with pain.
cry, and squeal a cry continued.
squea'mish. adj. [for quawmish or qualmish, from qualm )
nice; fastidious; easily disgusted ; having the stomach easily
turned ; being apt to take offence without much reason. it is
used always in dislike either real or ironical.
yet, for countenance sake, he seemed very squeamish in re-
spect of the charge he had of the princess pamela. sidney.
quoth he, that honour's very sueamish, -
that takes a basting for a blemish;
for what's more honourable than scars, -
or skin to tatters rent in wars 2
his musick is rustick, and perhaps too plain,
the men of soueamish taste to entertain. southero.
it is rare to see a man at once squeamish and voracious.
south.
there is no occasion to oppose the ancients and the mo-
derns, or to be squeamish on either fide. he that wisely con-
ducts his mind in the pursuit of knowledge, will gather what
sights he can from either. ezke,
8 sque a/mishly.
squeak seems a short sudden
hudibra.
§
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s q u
sogea'mishly. a-v. [from squamish.j in a fastidious man.
nes.
squea'mish: ess. n: s [from squamish.] niceness;
iastidiousness.
the thorough-pac'd politician must laugh at the squeamish-
nos, of his conscience, and read it another le&amp;ture. south.
upon their principles they may revive the worship of the
host of heaven; it is but conquering a little squeamishness of
flomach. - - - - stillingfleet.
to administer this dose, fifty thousand operators, consider-
ing the squeamishn's of some stomachs, and the peewishness of
oung children, is but reasonable. swift.
t,'squeeze. v. a. [cpiran, saxon; y-gwassu, welsh.]
1. to press; to crush between two bodies.
it is applied to the squeezing or pressing of things downwards,
as in the presses for printing. jwilkins.
the sinking of the earth would make a convulsion of the
air, and that crack must so shake or squeeze the atmosphere, as
to bring down all the remaining vapours. burnet.
he reap'd the product of his labour'd ground,
and squeez'd the combs with golden liquor crown'd. dryden.
none acted mournings forc’u to show,
o or squeeze his eyes to make the torrent flow. dryden.
when florio speaks, what virgin could withstand,
if gentle damon did not soueeze her hand 2.
2. to oppress ; to crush ; to harass by extortion.
in a civil war people must expect to be crushed and sourezed
toward the burden. l'erage.
. to force between close bodies. -
7, squeeze. v. n.
1. to act or pass, in consequence of compression.
a concave sphere of gold fill'd with water and solder'd up,
upon pressing the sphere with great force, let the water sou-eze
through it, and thand all over its outside in multitudes of small
drops, like dow, without bursting or cracking the body of the
gold. newton's opticks.
what crowds of these, impenitently bold,
in sounds and jingling syllables grown old,
still run on poets, in a raging vein,
ev’n to the dregs and squeezing; of the brain.
2. to force way through close bodies.
many a publick minister comes empty in ; but when he has
crammed his guts, he is aim to squeeze hard before he can get
off. l'etrange.
squeeze. n. s. [from the verb.] compression; pressure,
a subtile artist stands with wond rous bag,
that bears imprison'd winds, of gentler sort
than those that erst laertes' son enclos'd :
peaceful they sleep; but let the tuneful squeeze
of lab'ring elbow route them, out they fly
delicacy;
pope.
pope.
. melodious, and with spritely accents charin. philips.
- squelch. m. s. heavy tall. a low ludicrous word.
he tore the earth which he had sav'd
from squelch of knight, and storm'd and rav'd. hudibrar.
so soon as the poor devil had recovered the squelch, away he
scampers, bawling like mad. l’estrange.
squib. n. s. [ schieven, german, to push forward. this etymo-
logy, though the best that i have found, is not very probable.]
1. a small pipe of paper filled with wildfire. used in sport.
the armada at calais, fir walter kaleigh was wont prettily
to say, were suddeniy driven away with squibs; for it was no
more than a stratagem of fire-boats manless, and sent upon
them. bacon's i/ar with spain.
the forest of the south, compareth the french valour to a
sui, or fire of flax, which burns and crackies for a time,
but suddenly extinguishes. how i's vocal forest.
lampoons, like south, may make a present blaze;
but time, and thunder, pay respect to bays. //aller.
furious he or gins ho march,
drives ratting o'er a brazen arch ;
with sqash; and crackers arm'd to throw
among the tremblin , c' owd below.
criticks on verse, as ulbs on triumphs wait,
proclaim the glo y, and augment the state.
1. any pet, y fellow. not to use.
asked for their pass by every sinib,
that list at will them to revile or snib. ... spensor.
the squib, in the cominon phrase, are called libeliefs.
tatler.
... s.
swift.
1%ung.
scyllt. n j. [squila, stilla, lat. silisk, fr.]
1. a plant.
it hath a large acrid bulbous root like an onion; the leaves
are broad; the flowers are like those of ornithogalum, or the
itarry hyacinth : they grow in a long spike, and come out be-
fore the leaves. a1iller.
seed or keroc's of apples and pears put into a suill, which
is like a great on-on, will come up earlier than in the earth
itself. bacon's natural history.
'twill down like oxymel of suills. roscommon.
the self-same atoms
can, in the truffle, furnish out a feast;
and nauseate, in the scay, fail, tie taste. garth.
vol. ii.
2. a fish.
3. an inse&amp;t.
}: *inot is so called from some fimilitude to the
jouill-fish, in *ving a long body covered with a crust, com-
s posed of o o the head broad and squat. grew.
&amp; “” "j. isouinance, souinancie, fr. sailinami -
an inflammation in the oft- italian.]
used for suinancies and inflammations of
seemeth to have a mollif the throat; it
- ying and lenifying virtue.
in a (uinancy there is o: of .." mo:
squint. adj. [sauinte, dutch, oblique, transverse.] floor.
ing obliquely ; looking not dire&amp;ly ; looking suspicious
where an equal poise of hope and fear y.
does arbitrate the event, my nature is
that i incline to hope rather than fear,
and gladly banish squint suspicion. milton.
to squint. v. n.
line of vision.
some can squint when they will; and children set upon a
table with a candle behind them, both eyes will move out-
wards, to see the light, and so induce squinting. bacon.
not a period of this epistle but squints towards another over
against it. pope.
to squin r. v. a.
1. to form the eye to oblique vision.
this is the soul filbertigibbet ; he gives the web and the
pin, so into the eye, and makes the hairlip. shakespeare.
2. to turn the eye obliquely.
perkin began already to sount one eye upon the crown, and
another upon the sanctuary. bacon's henry vii.
squint eye d. adj. squint and cye.]
1. having the sight directed obliqu-.
he was so squintoed, that he seemed spitefully to look upon
• them whom he beheld. knoles's history of the turks.
2. indirect ; oblique; malignant.
this is such a false and squinteyed praise, -
which seemi g to look upwards on his glories,
to look obliquely; to look not in a direct
looks down upon my fears. denham.
sq91ntif esco, adj. squinting. a cant word.
the timbrel and the ouint fogo maid
of ifis awe thee; left the gods for sin,
should, with a swelling diopsy stuff thy skin. dryden.
to sog 1 ny. v. n. to lock asquint. a cant word.
i remember thine eyes well enough: -
dost thou sluiny at me ! shakespeare's king lear.
sqjim e. m. s. [contraction of squire; escuyer, french. see
esquire.]
1. a gentleman next in rank to a knight.
he will maintain you like a gentlewoman.—ay, that i will,
come cut and long tail under one degree of a squire. shakesp.
the rest are princes, barons, knights, squires,
and gentlemen of blood. shakespeare's henry v.
2. an attendant on a noole warriour.
old butes’ form he took, anchises' squire
now left to rule ascantus. dryden's aeneid.
knights, squires, and steeds must enter on the stage. pope.
3. an attendant at court.
return with her—
i could as well be brought
to knee his throne, and squire-like pension beg,
to keep base life a-foot. shakespeare's king lear.
sqi'i'rrel. m. s. [escuruzil, fr. sciurus, i at..] a small ani-
mal that lives in woods, rema.kable ior leaping from tree to
to cc.
one chanc'd to find a nut,
in the end of which a hole was cuts
which lay upon a hazel-root,
there scatter'd by a squirrel:
which out the kernel gotten had ;
when quoth this fay, dear queen be glad,
let oberon be ne'er so mad, -
i'll set you safe from peril. drayton.
to squirt. v. a. to throw out in a quick stream. of un-
certain etymology.
sir roger she mortally hated, and used to hire fellows to
squit kennel water upon him as he passed along. arbuthnot.
to squirt. v. n. to prate; to let fly. low cant.
you are so given to squirting up and down, and chattering,
that the world would say, i had chosen a jack-pudding for a
prime minister. l'estrange.
sq91rt. n.s. [from the verb.] -
1. an instrument by which a quick stream is ejected.
he with his suirt-fire cou’d disperse -
whole troops. hudibrar.
his weapons are a pin to scratch, and a squirt to bespatter.
pope.
2. a small quick stream.
water those with squirts of an infusion of the medicine in
dunged water. bacon's natural history.
sq91's ter. n.s. [from squirt.1. one that plies a squirt. . .
the squirtirs were at it with their kennel water, for they
were mad for the loss of their bubble. arbuthnot.
25 a to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a *
% stab. v. a. [slaven, old dutch.]
1. to pierce with a pointed weapon. * .
- hear the lamentations of poor anne, -
wife to thy edward, to thy slaughter'd son; . . . . .
stabb’d by the self-same hand that made these wounds. shak.
porcius, think, thou seest thy dying brother
stabb’d at his heart, and all befnear'd with blood, -
storming at thee! addison's cato.
2. to wound mortally or mischievously. -
what tears will then be shed
then, to compleat her woes, will i espouse
hermione:—'twill slab her to the heart!
to stab. v. m.
1. to give a wound with a pointed weapon.
none shall dare
with shorten’d sword to slab in closer war; -
but in fair combat fight. dryden's knight's tas.
killing a man with a sword or a hatchet, are looked on as
no distinet species of action; but if the point of the sword first
enter the body, it passes for a distinet species where it has a
distinet name; as in england, where it is alka/*.
ac{4.
a. philips.
2. to offer a stab.
thou hid'st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts,
which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart,
to slab at my frail life. shakespeare's henry iv.
3. to give a mortal wound.
he speaks poinards, and every word slabs.
stab. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. a wound with a sharp pointed weapon.
the elements
of whom your swords are temper'd, may as well
wound the loud winds, or with bemockt at slabs
kill the still closing waters. shakespeare.
cleander,
unworthy was thy fate, thou first of warriours,
to fall beneath a base assassin's slab.
2. a dark injury; a sly mischief.
3. a stroke; a blow. -
he had a scripture ready to repell them all ; every pertinent
text urged home being a dire&amp;t/lab to a temptation. , south.
sta'bber. m. s. [from slab.] one who stabs ; a privy mur-
derer.
stabitliment. n.s.. [from stabilis, lat..] support; firm-
ness; act of making firm.
they serve for sabiliment, propagation and shade. derham.
stabi'lity. n.s.. [stabilite, fr. from stabilitas, lat.]
1. stableness; steadiness; strength to stand.
by the same degrees that either of these happen, the stability
of the figure is by the same lessened. emple.
these mighty girders which the fabrick bind,
these ribs robust and vast in order join'd,
such strength and such slability impart,
that storms above, and earthquakes under ground
break not the pillars. blackmore.
- he began to try
this and that hanging stone's stability.
2. fixedness; not fluidity.
since fluidness and slability are contrary qualities, we may
conceive that the firmness or stability of a body consists in this,
that the particles which compose it do so rest, or are intangled,
that there is among them a mutual cohesion. boyle.
3. firmness of resolution.
st a'ble. adj. [stable, fr. jiabilis, lat.]
1. fixed ; able to stand.
2. steady ; constant; fixed in resolution or conduct.
if man would be unvariable,
he must be like a rock or stone, or tree;
for ev'n the perfect angels were not stable,
but had a fall more desperate than we.
he perfeoł, stable; but imperfeot we, -
subject to change. dryden's knight's tale.
3. strong ; fixed in state or condition; durable.
this region of chance and vanity, where nothing is stable,
nothing equal; nothing could be offered to-day but what to-
morrow might deprive us of . kogers.
statble. n.s.. [slabulum, lat.] a house for beasts.
i will make rabbah affable for camels. ezra, xxv. 5.
slothful disorder fill'd his slable, -
and sluttish plenty deck'd her table. prior.
to st a'ble. v. n. [stabulo, latin.] to kennel; to dwell as
beasts. -- . . . . . . * -.
in their palaces, -
where luxury late reign'd, sea monsters whelp'd
and stabled. . . . . . . * * - milton.
to st a'ble. v. a. [stabula, lat.] to put into a stable.
sta’ble box. r. m. s. [stable and boy, or man.] one who at-
§:::::::::: tends in the stable.
as soon as you alight at the inn, deliver your horses to the
flableboy. * . . . . . . swift.
• if the gentleman hath lain a night, get the flablemen and the
scullion to stand in his way. - swift's directions to the butler.
shakespears.
rowe.
cotton.
davies.
• i would with jockeys from newmarket dine,
and to rough riders give my choicest wine;
would caress some stableman of note,
and imitate his language and his coat.
sta'bleness. n. s. [from stable.]
1. power to stand, -
2. steadiness; constancy; stability. . .
* ... the king becoming graces
as justice, verity, temp'rance, stablenes, *
bounty, persev'rance, i have no relish of them. shaftan
st a'blest and. m. s. [in law.] is one of the four evideo *
presumptions, whereby a man is convinced to intend the
stealing of the king's deer in the forest: and this is when *
man is found at his standing in the forest with a cross boo,
bent, ready to shoot at any deer ; or with a long bow, or jo,
standing close by a tree with greyhounds in a leash ready to
brania.
• -- * * * - c
i'll keep my stablesland where i lodge my wife, i'll .
couples with her. - - shakoftaro.
to sta'blish. v. a. softablir, fr. jhabilio, lat.] to establish,
to fix; to settle.
then she began a treaty to procure, -
and stablish terms betwixt both their requests. $or.
stop effusion of our christian blood,
and stablish quietness on ev'ry fide. shafift. hon. vi.
comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good work.
- - - - 2 this ii. 17.
, poor hereticks in love there be, -
which think to aablish dangerous constancy;
but i have told them, fince you will be true,
you shall be true to them who're false to you. donal.
- his covenant sworn
to david, stablish'd as the days of heav'n. milton,
stack. m. s. [/lacca, italian.]
1. a large quantity of hay, corn, or wood, heaped up regilarly
together.
against every pillar was a stack of billets above a man's
height, which the watermen that bring wood down the seine
laid there. bacon's natural history.
while the marquis and his servant on foot were chasing the
kid about the sack, the prince from horseback killed him with
a pistol. wotton’s buckingham.
while the cock
to the slack or the barn-door,
stoutly struts, his dame before, miltor.
stacks of moist corn grow hot by fermentation. nowton,
an inundation, says the fable,
o'erflow'd a farmer's barn and stable;
whole ricks of hay and sacks of corn
were down the sudden current born. swift.
2. a number of chimneys or funnels standing together.
a mason making a slack of chimneys, the foundation of the
house sunk. wiseman's surgery.
7%. srack. v. a. [from the noun..] to pile up regularly in
ricks.
so likewise a hovel will serve for a room,
to slack on the pease. tussor:
the prices of slacking up of wood i shall give you. mort.
st act e. m. s. an aromatick; the gum that distills from the
tree which produces myrrh.
take sweet spices, slacie, and galbanum.
sta'dle. n. s. [rcabel, saxon, a foundation.]
1. anything which serves for support to another.
2. a staff; a crutch. obsolete.
he cometh on, his weak steps governing
and aged limbs on cypress stadle stout,
and with an ivy twine his waist is girt about. spenser.
3. a tree suffered to grow for coarse and common uses, as posts
or rails. of this meaning i am doubtful.
leave growing for saddles the likeliest and best,
though feller and buyer dispatched the rest. tuffer.
coppice-woods, if you leave in them saddles too thick,
will run to bushes and briars, and have little clean under-
wood. bacan.
to statle. v. a. [from the noun..] to furnish with stadles.
first see it well fenced, ere hewers begin;
tussor.
ex. xxx. 34.
then see it well saddled without and within.
sra dtholder... n.s.. [stadt and houden, dutch..] the chief
magistrate of the united provinces.
so; f/ plur, slaves. [rzaep, saxon; staff, danish; slas,
utch.
1. a stick with which a man supports himself in walking.
- it much would please him,
that of his fortunes you would make a saff
to lean upon. shakespeare's antony and cleopatra.
grant me and my people the benefit of thy chastisements,
that thy rod as well as thy/laff may comfort us. a. charles.
is it probable that he, who had met whole armies in battle,
should now throw away his staff, out of fear of a dog. bront.
2. a prop ; a support.
hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that,
and manage it against despairing thoughts. shaky?:are.
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a *
* * s t a
the boy was the very/taff of my age, my very prop. . .
- - - - - - - - shakespeare.
if a subseet be a son, then ought he to be a staff unto his
father, wherewith not to strike, but to sustain him. holyday.
3. a stick used as a weapon; a club; the handle of an edged
or pointed weapon. a club properly includes the notion of
weight, and the staff of length. . .
i cannot strike at wretched kernes, whose arms. . .
are hir'd to bear their slaves. shakespeare's macbeth.
he that bought the flin ran greater risque than t’other that
sold it, and had the worse end of the staff: d'estrange.
with forks and slaves the felon they pursue. dryin,
4. any long piece of wood,
he forthwith from the glitt'ring staff unfurl’d
th’ imperial ensign. - milton.
to his single eye, that in his forehead glar'd
like a ful moon, or a broad burnish'd shield,
a forky /?off we dext'rously apply'd,
which, in the spacious socket turning round, - *
scoopt out the big round gelly from its orb. addison.
, round or step of a ladder.
descending and ascending by ladders, i ascended at one of
fix hundred and thirty-nine slaves, or eighty-nine fathoms.
brown's travels.
6. an ensign of an office; a badge of authority.
methought this staff, mine office-badge in court, -
was broke in twain. shakespeare's henry vi.
all his officers brake their slaves; but at their return new
saves were delivered unto them. hayward on edward vi.
7. [stef, islandick.] a stanza; a series of verses regularly dis-
posed, so as that, when the series concluded, the same order
begins again.
cowley found out that no kind of staff is proper for an he-
roick poem, as being all too lyrical; yet though he wrote in
couplets, where rhyme is freer from constraint, he affects half
verses. dryden.
when crito once a panegyric show'd,
he beat him with a staff of his own ode. harte.
sta'ffish. adj. [from staff.] stiff; harsh. obsolete.
a wit in youth not over dull, heavy, knotty, and lumpish,
but hard, tough, and though somewhat staffish, both for learn-
ing and whole course of living, proveth alway. best. ascham,
statftree. m. s. a sort of ever green privet.
stag. ": [of this word i find no derivation.] the male red
decr; the male of the hind.
to the place a poor sequestred slag,
that from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
did come to languish. shakesp. a you like it.
the swift slag from under ground
bore up his branching head. milton.
th’ inhabitants of seas and skies shall change,
and fish on shore, and /lags in air shall range. dryden.
the stag
hears his own feet, and thinks they sound like more,
and fears his hind legs will o'ertake his fore.
stage. m. s. [oslage, fr.]
1. a floor raised to view on which any show is exhibited; a
raised floor of temporary use.
2. the theatre; the place of scenick critertainments.
and much good do.'t you then,
brave plush and velvet men:
can feed on ort; and, safe in your stage clothes,
dare quit, upon your oaths,
the stagers and the stage wrights too. ben. johnson.
those two mytilene brethren, basely born, crept out of a
small galliot unto the majesty of great kings. herein admire
the wonderful changes and chances of these worldly things,
now up, now down, as if the life of man were not of much
more certainty than a stage play. kncle's history.
i maintain, against the enemies of the stage, that patterns
of piety, decently represented, may second the precepts.
dryden.
one livius andronicus was the first stage player in rome.
dryden's fiveral, dedication.
knights, squires, and fleeds must enter on the stage. pope.
3. any place where any thing is publickly transacted or per-
formed.
when we are born, we cry that we are come ...
to this great /iage of fools. shakso. king lear.
4. a place in which rest is taken on a journey as much of a
journey as is performed without intermission. (statio, latin.]
i shall put you in mind where it was you promised to set
out, or begin your first stage; and beseech you to go before
me my guide harmond's prao. catech.
our ext/lage trought us to the mouth of the tibet...
addison.
pope.
from thence compell'd by craft and age, -
she makes the head her latest stoge. prizr.
we must not expect that our journey through the several
f : ; of t is life should be all smooth and even. atterbury.
ity opening a passage from muscovy to china, and mark-
is he several stages, it was a journey of so many days. baker.
men drop so fast, ere life's mid stage we tread,
few know so many friends alive, as dead.
5. a single step of gradual process.
. the changes and vicifitude in wars are many; but chiefly
in the seats or stages of the war, the weapons, and the man-
ner of the conduct. bacon's essays.
thio by so called the first stage of a consumption, but
i had rather call it an ill habit preparatory to that distemper.
blackmore.
to prepare the soul to be a fit inhabitant of that holy place
to which we aspire, is to be brought to perfection by gradual
advances through several hard and laborious flages of disci-
pline. rogers.
the first stage of healing, or the discharge of matter, is by
surgeons called digestion. sharp's surgery.
t2 jo". v. a. [from the noun..] to exhibit publickly. out
of u1c.
1%ung.
- i love the people;
but do not like to stage me to their eyes:
#. it do well, i do not relish well
their loud applause, shakesp. measure for measure.
- the quick comedians
extemp'rally will stage us, and present
our alexandrian revels. shakesp. ant, and cleopatra.
sta'gecoach. n.s. [/tage and coach..] a coach that keeps its
stages; a coach that passes and repasses on certain days for the
accommodation of passengers.
the story was told me by a priest, as we travelled in a
stagecoach. addison.
when late their miry fides stagecoaches show,
and their stiff horses through the town move slow,
then let the prudent walker shoes provide. gay,
sta"geplay. n.s.. [stage and play.] theatrical entertainment.
this rough-cast unhewn poetry was instead of stageplays for
one hundred and twenty years. dryden's juv. dedication.
sta'geplayer. m. s. one who publickly represents actions
on the stage.
among slaves, who exercised polite arts, none sold so dear
as stageplayers or actors. arbuthnet on coins.
sta'ger. m. s. [from stage.]
1. a player.
you safe in your stage clothes,
dare quit, upon your oaths,
the slagers and the stage wrights too. ben. johnson,
2. one who has long acted on the stage of life; a practitioner;
a person of cunning.
i've heard old cunning/lagers
say, fools for argument use wagers. hudibrar.
one experienced stager, that had baffled twenty traps and
tricks before, discovered the plot. l'estrange.
some stagers of the wiser sort
made all these idle wonderments their sport:
but he, who heard what ev'ry fool could say, -
would never fix his thought, but trim his time away. dry.
one cries out, these slagers
come in good time to make more work for wagers. dryd.
be by a parson cheated
had you been cunning/lagers,
you might yourselves be treated
by captains and by majors. swift.
st a'gevil. n. s. a disease in horses. ijic7.
st a'ccard. n.s.. [from stag.] a four year old stag. ainsw.
to sta(gger. v. n. [slaggeren, dutch.]
1. to reel ; not to stand or walk steadily.
he began to appear sick and giddy, and to stagger; after
which he fell down as dead. boyle.
he struck with all his might
full on the helmet of th' unwary knight:
deep was the wound; he slagger'd with the blow. dryden.
them revelling the tentyrites invade,
by giddy heads and staggering legs betray'd. tate.
the immediate forerunners of an apoplexy are a vertigo,
staggering, and loss of memory. arbuthnot.
2. to faint; to begin to give way.
the enemy staggers: if you follow your blow, he falls at
your feet; but if you allow him respite, he will recover his
strength. addison.
3. to hesitate; to fall into doubt; to become less confident of
determined.
a man may, if he were fearful, stagger in this attempt.
shakespeare.
he saggered not at the promise of god through unbelief;
but was strong in faith. rom. iv. 29.
three means to fortify belief are experience, reason, and
authority: of these the most potent is authority ; for belief
upon reason, or experience, will slagger. bacon.
no hereticks desire to spread
their light opinions, like these epicures ;
for so their slagg'ring thoughts are comforted, -
and other mens assent their doubt assures. davies.
if thou confidently depend on the truth of this, without any
doubting or slaggering, this will be accepted by god. *:
ut
8
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a
but let it inward sink and drown my mind:
falshood shall want its triumph: i begin
to fagger ; but i’ll prep myself within.
to st agg e.r. v. a.
1. to make to stagger; to make to reel.
that hand shall burn in never-quenching fire,
that staggers thus my person. shakesp. richard ii,
2. to shock; to alarm; to make less steady or confident.
the question did at first so slagger me,
bearing a state of mighty moment in't. shak. henry viii.
whosoever will read the story of this war, will find him-
self much staggered, and put to a kind of riddle.
when a prince fails in honour and justice, ’tis enough to
jagger his people in their allegiance. l’estrange.
the shells being lodged with the belemnites, selenites, and
other like natural fossils, it was enough to slagger a spectator,
and make him ready to entertain a belief that these were so
too. woodward,
sta’o gers. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a kind of horse apoplexy. - -
his horse past cure of the fives, stark spoil'd with the stag-
gers. shakespeare.
2. madness; wild conduct; irregular behaviour. out of use.
i will throw thee from my care for ever
into the staggers, and the careless lapse
of youth and ignorance. shakespeare.
sta'gn an cy. m. s. [from slagnant..] the state of being with-
out motion or ventilation.
sta'gnant. adj. islagnans, lat.j motionless; still 3 not
agitated; not flowing ; not running.
what does the flood from putrefaction keep
should it be /*agnant in its ample seat,
the sun would through it spread destructive heat. blackm.
'twas owing to this hurry and action of the water that the
sand now was cast into layers, and not to a regular settlement,
from a water quiet and /fagnant. //oodward.
immur'd and busied in perpetual sloth, ".
that gloomy slumber of the stagnant soul. irene.
7% sta(gnate. v. n. [/?agnum, lat.] to lye motionless;
to have no course or stream. -
the water which now arises must have all stagnated at the
surface, and could never possibly have been refunded forth
upon the earth, had not the strata been thus raised up. woodw.
the aliment moving through the capillary tubes stagnates,
and unites itself to the vessel through which it flows. arbuthn.
where creeping waters ooze, ... "
where marshes stagnate. thomson:
st agnat, on. m. s. (from stagnate.] stop of course; cessa-
tion of motion. it is often applied figuratively to moral or
civil images. ..
as the alps surround geneva on all sides, they form a vast
bason, where there would be a constant stagnation of vapours,
did not the north wind scatter them from time to time. addis.
to what great ends subservient is the wind
b.o.old, where e'er this active vapour flies,
it drives the clouds, and agitates the skies:
this fromyiagnation and corruption saves
th’ aerial ocean's ever-rolling waves. blackmore.
staid. participial adjective. [from slay.] sober; grave; re-
gular; composed; not wild; not volatile.
put thyself
jnto a 'haviour of less fear, ere wildness
vanquish my slaider senses. shakespeare's cymbeline.
this seems to our weaker view, - - -
o'erlaid with black said wisdom's hue." milton.
h should not be a persuader to them of studying much in the
spring, after three years that they have well laid their grounds;
but to ride out, with prudent and slaid guides, to all the quar-
ters of the land. milton on education.
i am the more at ease in fir roger's family, because it con-
fists of sober and slaid persons. addison.
statdn ess. m. s. [from said.] sobriety; gravity; regularity;
confrariety to wildness.
the boiling blood of youth, fiercely agitating the fluid air,
hinders that serenity and fixed slaidness which is necessary to
so severe an intentness. glanv. sceps.
if sometimes he appears too gay, yet a secret gracefulness
of youth accompanies his writings, though the saidness and
sobriety of age be wanting. dryd. preface to ovid.
to stain. v. a. sylaenio, welsh, from ys and taenu.
rhag gwyar or gnawd, -
afar y/iaenawd. taliesyn, an old british poet.]
1. to blot; to spot; to maculate.
- lend me a looking-glass ;
if that her breath will mist or slain the stone,
why then she lives. shakspeare's king lear.
from the gash a stream -
his armours in'd, ere while so bright.
, embrace again, my sons: be foes no more,
o/i. your country with your children's gore. dryden.
2. to die.
3. to disgrace; to spot with guilt or infamy,
dryden.
milton.
howel.
of honour void, of innocence, of faith, of purity,
our wonted ornaments now soil'd and slain'd. milton
stain. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. blot; spot; discoloration.
nor death itself can wholly wash their slains;
but long contracted filth ev’n in the soul remains:
the reliques of inveterate vice they wear, -
and spots of sin. dryden's an.
we no where meet with a more pleasing show than what
appears in the heavens at the rising and setting of the sun,
which is wholly made up of those different slains of light that
shew themselves in clouds of a different situation. addison,
swift trouts diversify'd with crimson slains,
and pikes, the tyrants of the wat'ry plains. pope.
2. taint of guilt or infamy.
to solemn actions of royalty and justice their suitable orna-
ments are a beauty: are they only in religion a stain * hooter.
our opinion, concerning the force and virtue which such
places have, is, i trust, without any blemish or slain of he-
resy. . - - hooker.
then heav'n and earth renew’d, shall be made pure
to sanetity, that shall receive noslain. milton,
ulysses bids his friends to cast lots; for if he had made the
choice himself, they whom he had rejected might have judged
it a slain upon them for want of merit. broome.
3. cause of reproach ; shame.
hereby i will lead her that is the praise, and yet the /lain
of all womankind. sidney.
8ta iner. m. s. [from slain..] one who stains; one who
blots; one that dies; a dier,
st ainless, adj. [from slain.]
1. free from blots or spots. not in use.
the phenix wings are not so rare
for faultless length and slainles; hue.
2. free from sin or reproach.
i cannot love him;
yet i suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
of great estate, of fresh and stainles; youth. shakofftare.
stair... n. s. [rzezen, saxon; sieghe, dutch..] steps by which
we rise an ascent from the lower part of a building to the
upper. stair was anciently used for the whole order of steps;
but slair now, if it be used at all, signifies, as in milton, only
one flight of steps.
a good builder to a high tower will not make his fair up.
right, but winding almost the full compass about, that the
sidney.
steepness be the more insensible. sidney.
how many cowards, whose hearts are all as false
as stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
the beards of hercules and frowning mars shakosheart.
slaver with lips as common as the fairs
that mount the capitol. shakespeare.
i would have one only goodly room above stairs, of some
forty foot high. bacon's essays.
sir james tirrel repairing to the tower by night, attended
by two servants, stood at the stair-foot, and sent these two
villains to execute the murder. bacon.
the stairs were such as whereon jacob saw
angels ascending and descending. milton's par. loft.
satan now on the lower stair,
that scal’d by steps of gold to heav'n gate,
looks down with wonder at the sudden view
of all this world. milton's par. loft.
trembling he springs,
as terror had increas'd his feet with wings;
nor staid for stairs; but down the depth he threw
his body: on his back the door he drew. dryden.
statr case. n.s. [/air and case.] the part of a fabrick that
contains the stairs.
to make a complete staircase is a curious piece of archi-
tecture. watten.
i cannot forbear mentioning a staircase, where the easiness
of the ascent, the disposition of the lights, and the convenient
landing, are admirably contrived. addison on italy.
stake. n.s. [rcaca, saxon; sacca, dutch ; estaca, spanish.)
1. a post or strong stick fixed in the ground.
the more i shaked the sake, which he had planted in the
ground of my heart, the deeper still it sunk into it. sidney.
his credit in the world might stand the poor town in great
stead, as hitherto their ministers foreign estimation hath been
the best stake in their hedge. hooker.
he wanted pikes to set before his archers;
instead whereof sharp slakes, pluckt out of hedges,
they pitched in the ground. shakesp. henry vi.
in france the grapes that make the wine grow upon low
vines bound to small stakes, and the raised vines in arbors make
but verjuice. bacon's natural history.
or sharpen stakes, or head the forks, or twine
the sallow twigs to tie the straggling vine. dryden.
2. a piece of long rough wood.
while he whirl’d in fiery circles round
the brand, a sharpen'd stake strong dryas found }
and in the shoulder's joint inflicts the wound. dryden.
3. any
.
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
3. anything placed is a polisade or fence.
that hollow i should know : what are you, speak
come not too near, you fall on iron stakes else. " milton.
st to which a beast is tied to be baited.
... the poro.słake, d
and bay'd about with many enemies. shah, %, jul. casar.
have you not set mine honour at the state, -
and baited it with all th’ unmuzzled thoughts
that tyrannous heart can think? shak, twelfth night.
k. anything pledged 9r wagered. i know not well whence it
has this meaning: i suppose it is so named from being at
ałe, that is in a state of hazard like an animal baited, and in
hazard from which it cannot be withdrawn.
'tis time short pleasure now to take, -
of little life the best to make,
and manage wisely the last /lake. cowley. }
o then, what interest shall i make
to save my last important stake,
when the most just have cause to quake roscommon.
he ventures little for so great a stake. more.
th' increasing sound is borne to either shore,
and for their stakes the throwing nations fear. dryden.
the game was so contrived, that one particular cast took
up the wholesake; and when some others came up, you laid
down. arbuthnot.
6. the state of being hazarded, pledged, or wagered.
when he heard that the lady margaret was declared for it,
he saw plainly that his kingdom must again be put to the state,
and that he must fight for it. bacon's henry vii.
are not our liberties, our lives,
the laws, religion, and our wives,
enough at once to lie at /lake,
for cov'nant and the cause's sake * hudibras.
the honor of the nation being in a manner at stake to make
good several deficiencies. davenant.
of my crown thou too much care do'st take;
that which i value more, my love's at slake. dryden.
hath any of you a great interest at slake in a distant part of
the world? hath he ventured a good share of his fortune 2
alterbury.
every moment cato's life's at slake. aadison.
7. the stake is a small anvil, which stands upon a small iron
foot on the work-bench, to remove as occasion offers; or else
it hath a strong iron spike at the bottom let into some place of
the work-bench, not to be removed. its office is to set small
cold work straight upon, or to cut or punch upon with the
cold chislel or cold punch. moxon's mech. exer.
7; srake. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fasten, support, or defend with posts set upright.
stake and bind up your weakest plants and flowers against
the winds, before they in a moment prostrate a whole year's
labour. evelyn's kalendar.
2. to wager; to hazard; to put to hazard.
is a man betrayed in his nearest concerns? the cause is, he
relied upon the services of a pack of villains, who designed
nothing but their own game, and to stake him while they play'd
for themselves. south.
persons, after their prisons have been flung open, have
chosen rather to languish in their dungeons than stake their
miserable lives on the success of a revolution. addison.
they durst not stake their present and future happiness on
their own chimerical imaginations. addison.
i'll stake yon' lamb that near the fountain plays,
and from the brink his dancing shade surveys. pope.
stalactites. m. s. [from roazo2.]
stalactites is only spar in the shape of an icicle, accidentally
formed in the perpendicular fissures of the stone. woodward.
stala’ctical. adj. resembling an icicle.
a cave was lined with those slalaclical stones on the top and
sides. derham's physico-theology.
stalacmi’res. n.s. spar formed into the shape of drops.
//oodward's meth. foss.
stale. adj. [selle, dutch.]
1. old; long kept ; altered by time. stale is not used of per-
sons otherwise than in contempt, except when it is applied to
beer; it commonly means worse for age.
this, richard, is a curious case :
suppose your eyes sent equal rays
upon two distant pots of ale,
not knowing which was mild or sale ;
in this sad state your doubtful choice
would never have the casting voice. prior.
a sale virgin sets up a shop in a place where she is not
known. speciator.
2. used 'till it is of no use or esteem; worn out of regard or no-
tice.
the duke regarded not the muttering multitude, knowing
that rumours grow sale and vanish with time. hayward.
about her neck a pacquet mail,
fraught with advice, some fresh, some sale. . . botler.
many things beget opinion; so doth novelty; wit it is, if
falo, is less taking. grew's cysoio/.
vol. ii.
pompey was a persea favouri -
+ ourite of the people; * - - - - -
...” .." solo for want of a timely o pre-
ucing them upon the stage. y or intro-
they reason and conside b - swift.
v. recedent
st and ownstale nonsense which #. o invent
tale. n.s. [from realan, saxon, to steal.] -
1. something exhibited or offered as an allurement to d hers
to any place or purpose. raw others
his heart being wholly deli - - -
- 'lly delighted in de
never be warned ; but rather .. bird go; . could
to bring in more. , served for a sale
still as he went he crafty sales did la sidney.
with cunning trains him to entrap *.
t: !. spials plac'd in all his way, ;
oweet what course he takes, and -
the trumpery in my to... fares. spensor.
for sale to catch these thieves. 'swift t.
had he none else to make a /tale but me? - empoff.
i was the chief that rais'd him to
and i'll be chief to bring him do
. a pretence of kindness is the uni
jects: by this men are robbed of their fortunes, and women
of their honour. government of the tongue.
. it may be a vizor for the hypocrite, and a stale for the am-
bitious.
this easy fool must be my sale, set up decay of piety.
o o the people's eyes: he's tame and merciful ;
1sh i can manage. d o -
2. in shakespeare it o, to signify a o: * don sebastian.
i stand dishonour'd, that have gone about
to link my dear friend to a common sale.
3. [from sale, adj.] urine; old urine.
4. old beer ; beer somewhat acidulated.
5. [stele, dutch, a slick.] a handle.
boog th’ arrowes sale without, and that the head
ld goe
pope.
the crown,
wn again, shakes h. vi.
versal sale to all base pro-
shakespears.
no further then it might be seene, he call'd his spirits again.
- chapman.
it hath a long sale or handle, with a button at the efid for
one's hand. mortimer's husbandry.
to stale. v. a [from the adjective.] to wear out ; to make
old. not in use.
age cannot wither her, nor custom sale
hof infinite variety. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
were i a common laugher, or did use
to sale with ordinary oaths my love
to every new protestor. shakesh. julius cæsar.
a barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
on abject orts and imitations;
which, out of use, and slal"d by other men,
begin his fashion. shakesp. fulius caesar.
to st ale. v. n. [from the noun..] to make water.
having ty'd his beast t'a pale,
and taken time for both to slale.
sta'lely, adv. [from sale.] of old; long time.
all your promis'd mountains
and seas i am so slalely acquainted with. ben. johnson.
sta'leness. m. s. [from sale.j. oldness; state of being long
kept; state of being corrupted by time.
the beer and wine, as well within water as above, have
not been palled ; but somewhat better than bottles of the same
drinks and slaleness, kept in a cellar. bacon's nat. history.
provided our landlord's principles were sound, we did not
take any notice of the stalenes of his provisions. addison.
to stalk. v. n. [rzealcan, saxon.)
1. to walk with high and superb steps. it is used commonly
in a sense of dislike.
his monstrous enemy
with sturdy steps came slasting in his fight. spensor.
shall your city call us lord,
in that behalf which we challeng'd it
or shall we give the signal to our rage,
and stalk in blood to our possession ?
unfold th’ eternal door :
you see before the gate what stalking ghost
commands the guard, what sentries keep the post. dryden.
with manly mien he slalk'd along the ground;
nor wanted voice bely'd, nor vaunting found. dryden.
then stalking through the deep
he fords the ocean, while the topmost wave
scarce reaches up his middle side. addison.
vexatious thought still found my flying mind,
nor bound by limits, nor to place confin'd ;
haunted my nights, and terrify'd my days;
stalk'd through my gardens, and pursu'd my ways,
nor shut from artful bow'r, nor lost in winding maze. prior:
scornful turning from the shore
my haughty step, isiak'd the valley o’er. pope's oosoy.
2. it is often used with some insinuation of contemptor abhorrence.
bertran
stalks close behind her, like a witch's fiend .
presling to be employ'd. dryden's spanish fryar.
25 b they
hudibras.
shakesp. k. john.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a
|
they pass their precious hours in plays and sports,
*till death behind came slalking on unseen, dryden.
'tis not to stalk about, and draw fresh air -
from time to time. addison's cato.
3. to walk behind a stalking horse or cover.
the king asked how far it was to a certain town: they said
six miles. half an hour after he asked again: one said six
miles and a half. the king alighted out of his coach, and
crept under the shoulder of his led horse: and when some asked
his majesty what he meant, i must sialk, said he for yonder
town is shy, and flies me. bacon's apophthegms.
st alk. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. high, proud, wide, and stately step.
behind it forth there leapt
an ugly fiend, more foul than dismal day;
the which with monstrous slalk behind him stept,
and ever as he went due watch upon him kept. spenser.
great milton next, with high and haughty stalks,
unfetter'd in majestick numbers walks. addison.
2. [stele, dutch..] the stem on which flowers or fruits grow.
a stock-gillyflower, gently tied on a stick, put into a steep
glass full of quicksilver, so that the quicksilver cover it; after
five days you will find the flower fresh, and the slalk harder
and less flexible than it was. - bacon.
small store will serve, where store,
all seasons, ripe for use hangs on the slalk. milton.
that amber attracts not basil, is wholly repugnant unto
truth; for if the leaves thereof, or dried/talks, be stripped unto
small straws, they arise unto amber, wax, and other eleetricks,
no otherways than those of wheat and rye. brown.
roses unbid, and ev'ry fragrant flow'r,
flew from their stalks to strew thy nuptial bow'r. dryden.
3. the stem of a quill.
viewed with a glass, they appear made up of little bladders,
like those in the plume or /talk of a quill. grew.
sta'lkinghorse. n. / [/talking and horse.] a horse either
real or fictitious, by which a fowler shelters himself from the
sight of the game; a mask; a pretence.
let the counsellor give counsel not for faction but for con-
science, forbearing to make the good of the state the slalking-
horse of his private ends. hakewill on providence.
hypocrisy is the devil's stalkinghorse, under an affectation of
simplicity and religion. - l'e/irange.
sta(lky. adj. [from stalk..] hard like a stalk.
it grows upon a round stalk, and at the top bears a great
slalky head. - amortimer.
stall. m. s. [rzeal, saxon; slal, dutch ; slalla, italian.]
1. a crib in which an ox is fed, or a horse is kept in the
stable.
a herd of oxen then he carv'd, with high rais'd heads,
forg’d all
of gold and tin, for colour mixt, and bellowing from their
jiall,
rusht to their pastures. chapman's iliad.
duncan's horses,
beauteous and swift, the minions of the race,
turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
contending 'gainst obedience. shakesp. macbeth.
solomon had forty thousand slalls of horses. i kings iv.
his fellow sought what lodging he could find;
at last he found a stall where oxen stood.
2. a bench or form where any thing is set to sale.
stalls, bulks, windows,
* are smother'd up, leads fill’d, and ridges hors'd
with variable complections; all agreeing .
in earnestness to see him. shakesp. coriolanus.
they are nature's coarser wares that lie on the slall, exposed
to the transient view of every common eye.
bess hoy first found it troublesome to bawl,
and therefore plac'd her cherries on a sall. king.
how pedlars stalls with glitt'ring toys are laid,
the various fairings of the country maid. gay.
harley, the nation's great support,
returning home one day from court,
observ'd a parson near whitehall,
cheap'ning old authors on a stall. swift.
3. [stall, swedish ; stal, armorick.] a small house or shed in
which certain trades are practised.
all these together in one heap were thrown,
like carcases of beasts in butcher's stall;
and in another corner wide were strown
the antique ruins of the roman’s fall. spenser.
4. the seat of a dignified clergyman in the choir.
the pope creates a canon beyond the number limited, and
commands the chapter to assign unto such canon as all in the
choir and place in the chapter. ayliffe's parergon.
the dignified clergy, out of mere humility, have called their
thrones by the names of slalls. warburton.
to st all. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to keep in a stall or stable. -
-: for such encheason, if you go nie,
few chimneys recking you will espy;
dryden.
glanville. r
the fat ox, that wont ligg in the stall; . . . .
is now fast slalled in his crumenal. spenser’s pasorah,
for my part, he keeps me rustically at home; or, to speak
more properly, sties me here at home unkept: for call you
that keeping, for a gentleman of my birth, that differs not
from the stalling of an ox : shakespear.
nisus the forest pass'd,
and alban plains, from alba's name so call’d,
where king latinus then his oxenstall’d. dryden.
2. [for insiall.] to invest.
long may’st thou live to wail thy children's loss;
and see another as i see thee now,
deck'd in thy rights, as thou art still'd in mine. shaloft.
to stall. v. n.
1. to inhabit; to dwell.
we could not slall together in the world. shakespeare,
2. to kennel.
sta ll age. m. s. [from stall.]
1. rent paid for a stall.
2. [in old books.] laystall; dung; compost.
sta(llfe d. adj. [stall and fed..] fed not with grass, but dry
feed.
every one must every day sustaine
the load of one beast, the most fat, and best
of all the stallsed, to the woer's feast. chapman.
stalfed oxen, and crammed fowls, are often diseased in
their livers. arbuthnot on aliments.
sta’llworn. adj. [stall and worn.] long kept in the stable.
but it is probably a mistake for stalworth, [reapelpen's, saxon,
stout...]
his stallworn steed the champion stout bestrode. shakes.
sta'llion. m. s... [ysdalwyn, an old welsh word: the one is
derived from the other; but which from which i cannot cer-
tainly tell. wotton. estallion, french ; stallone, italian; slal-
heng/?, dutch... junius thinks it derived from realan, to
leap..] a horse kept for mares.
the present defects are breeding without choice of slalions
in shape or size. temple.
if fleet dragon's progeny at last
prove jaded, and in frequent matches cast,
no favour for the stallion we retain, -
and no respect for the degen'rate strain. dryden,
sta mina. n.s. [latin.]
1. the first principles of any thing.
2. the solids of a human body. -
3. [in botany.] those little fine threads or capillaments which
grow up within the flowers of plants, encompassing round the
style, and on which the apices grow at their extremities.
4. a slight sort of stuff.
stam1'neous. adj. islamineus, latin.]
1. consisting of threads.
2. stamineous flowers are so far imperfeot as to want those co-
loured leaves which are called petala, and consist only of the
- stylus and the stamina; and such plants as do bear these slami-
neous flowers ray makes to constitute a large genus of plants:
these he divides into such as, first, have their fruit or seed to-
tally divided from the flower; and these are such plants as are
said to be of different sexes: the reason of which is, that from
the said seed some plant shall arise with flowers and no fruit,
and others with fruit and no flowers; as hops, hemp, stinging
nettles. 2. such as have their fruit only a little disjointed
from their flowers; as the ricinus, and the heliotropium tri-
conon. 3. such as have their fruit immediately contiguous,
or adhering to their flower. 4. such whose flowers adhere to
the top or uppermost of the seed; as the beta, asarum, and
alchimilla.
sta'mmel. m. s. a species of red colour.
reedhood, the first that doth appear
in slammel; scarlet is too dear. ben. johnson.
to statmmer. v. n. [reamen, a stammerer, saxon; same-
len, stameren, to stammer, dutch..] to speak with unnatu-
ral hesitation; to utter words with difficulty. **,
sometimes to her news of myself to tell,
i go about; but then is all my best
wry words, and slamm'ring, or else doltish dumb:
say then, can this but of enchantment come * sidney.
i would thou could'st slammer, that thou might'st pour out
of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow-mouth’d bottle,
either too much at once, or none at all. shakespeare.
she stammers; oh what grace in lisping lies 1
if she says nothing, to be sure she's wife. dryden.
lagean juice,
which stammering tongues and stagg'ring feet produce. dry.
cornelius hoped he would come to slammer like de-
mosthenes. arbuthn. mart. scrib.
your hearers would rather you should be less correct, than
perpetually slammering, which is one of the worst solecisms
in rhetorick. swift.
sta'mmerer. m. s. [from slammer.] one who speaks with
hesitation. -
a /?ammerer cannot with moderation hope for the gift of
tongues, or a peasant to become learned as origen. taylor.
ts
72
ji.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a
7, stamp., v. 2, s/ampen, dutch; /lamper, danish.1
1. to strike by pressing the foot hastily downwards.
if arcite thus deplore
his suff'rings, palamon yet suffers more:
he frets, he fumes, he stares, he stamps the ground;
the hollow tow'r with clamours rings around. dryden.
2. to pound; to beat as in a mortar.
i took the calf you had made, burnt it with fire, and stamped
and ground it very small. deut. ix. 21.
some apothecaries, upon stamping of coloquintida, have
been put into a great scouring by the vapour only. bacon.
3. [e/iamper, french ; stampare, italian; o/lampar, spanish.]
to impress with some mark or figure.
height of place is intended only to stamp the endowments
of a private condition with lustre and authority. south.
here swells the shelf with ogilby the great;
there, aao's with arms, newcastle shines complete. pope,
4. to fix a mark by impresfing it.
out of mere ambition, you have made
your holy hat be /?ampt on the king's coin. shakespeare.
these prodigious conceits in nature spring out of framing
abstracted conceptions, instead of those easy and primary no-
tions which nature stamps in all men of common sense. digby.
there needs no positive law or sanction of god to /?amp an
obliquity upon such a disobedience. south.
no constant reason of this can be given, but from the na-
ture of man's mind, which hath this notion of a deity born
with it, and /lamped upon it; or is of such a frame, that in
the free use of itself it will find out god. tillotson.
though god has given us no innate ideas of himself,
though he has stampt no original characters on out minds,
wherein we may read his being; yet having furnished us with
those faculties our minds are endowed with, he hath not left
himself without witness. locke.
what titles had they had, if nature had not
strove hard to thrust the worst deserving first,
and /lamp'd the noble mark of eldership
upon their baser metal : rowe's ambitious stepmother.
what an unspeakable happiness would it be to a man en-
- gaged in the pursuit of knowledge, if he had but a power of
stampong his best sentinents upon his memory in indelible
characters ? j/atts.
5. to make by impressing a mark.
if two pennyweight of filver, marked with a certain im-
pretion, shall here in england be equivalent to three penny-
- weight marked with another impression, they will not fail to
jamp pieces of that fashion, and quickly carry away your
silver. locłe.
6. to mint; to form ; to coin.
we are bastards all ;
and that most venerable man, which i
did call my father, was i know not where
when i was stampt. shakesp. cymbeline.
7, stamp. v. n. to strike the foot suddenly downward.
what a fool art thou,
a ramping fool, to brag, to slam”, and swear,
upon my party thou cold-blooded slave,
haft thou not spoke like thunder on my side shakoffeare.
the men shall howl at the noise of the stamping of the hoofs
of his strong horses. jer. xlvii. 3.
there is such an echo among the old ruins and vaults, that,
if you stamp but a little louder than ordinary, you hear the
sound repeated. addison.
he cannot bear th'astonishing delight,
but starts, exclaims, and stamps, and raves and dies. dennis.
they got to the top, which was flat and even, and/lamping
upon it, they found it was hollow. swift.
stamp. n.s.. [stampe, french; /lampa, italian.]
1. any instrument by which a hollow impression is made.
some other nymphs, with colours faint
and pencil slow, may cupid paint,
and a weak heart in time destroy:
she has a stamp, and prints the boy. j/aller.
'tis gold so pure,
it cannot bear the stamp without allay. dryden.
1. a mark set on anything; impression.
but to the pure refined ore,
the stamp of kings imparts no more
worth, than the metal held before. carew.
that sacred name gives ornament and grace,
and, like his stamp, makes basest metals pass:
twere folly now a stately pile to raise,
to build a playhouse, while you throw down plays. dryd.
ideas are imprinted on the memory; some by an object af-
fecting the senses only; others, that have more than once
offered themselves, have yet been little taken notice of ; the
mind, intent only on one thing, not settling the siamp deep
into itself. locke.
3. a thing marked or stamped.
the mere despair of surgery he cures;
hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
put on with holy prayers. shakso. macbeth.
4. a piaure cut in wood or metal
o: w. a plate.
at venice they put out very curious stamps of the several
. which are most famous for off...; and magni-
aï. s ... a 1- " - . addison on italy,
5. a mark set upon things that poy customs to the government.
... indeed the paper stamp o
did very much his genius cramp;
and since he could not spend his fire;
he now intended to retire. 2
6. o character of reputation, good or bad, fixed o:
thing.
the persons here refleaed upon are of such - - -
of impiety, that they seem formed into ..". "...so
; a piclure made by impres:
- *- - - - abolical
society for the finding out new experiments in vice. south.
where reason or scripture is expressed for any opinion, we
may receive it as of divine authority; but it is not the strength
of our own persuasions which can give it that stamp. locke.
7. authority; currency; value derived from any suffrage or
attestation.
of the same stamp is that which is obtruded upon us, that
an adamant suspends the attraction of the loadstone.
- brown's pulgar errours.
the common people do not judge of vice or virtue by mo-
rality, o the o so much as by the slamp that is set
upon it men of figure. l'estrange.
8. make; .. o 3/?range
if speaking truth
in this fine age were not thought flatt'ry,
such attribution should this douglas have,
as not a soldier of this season's slamp
should go so general current through the world. shakoff.
when one man of an exemplary improbity charges another
of the same /lamp in a court of justice, he lies unior to dis.
advantage of a strong suspicion. l'estrange.
let a friend to the government relate to him a mater of
fact, he gives him the lye in every look; but if one of his
own /*p should tell him that the king of sweden would be
suddenly at perth, he hugs himself at the good news. addison.
a king of heav'n's own stamp, not vulgar make;
blesied in giving, and averse to take. harte.
stamper. m. s. [from stamp.] an instrument of pounding.
from the stamping-mill it passeth through the crazing-mill;
but of late times they mostly use wet/ impers. carew.
stan, amongst our forefathers, was the termination of the
superiative degree: so æthelstan, most noble; bet/?an, the best;
legs/lan, the dearest; hostan, the wisest; dunstan, the
highest gibson's camden.
to s i anch. v. a. s.siancher, french; /*gnare, italian.] to
stop blood; to hinder from running.
iron or a stone, laid to the neck, doth stanch the bleeding
of the nose. bacon's natural history.
of veins of earth medicinal are terra lemnia, terra sigillata,
communis, and bolus a menus ; whereof terra lemnia is the
chief; the virtues of them are for curing of wounds, so inch-
ing of blood, and stopping of fluxes and rheums. bacon.
leeches, inwardly taken, fasten upon the veins, and occa-
sion an effusion of blood, which cannot be easily stanched.
brown's vulgar. errours:
he fought to hinder fighting, and assay’d
to /lanch blood by breathing of the vein. dryden.
to stanch. v. n. to stop.
a woman touched the hem of his garment, and imme-
diately her issue stanched. luke viii. 44.
stanch. adj. [this seems to come from the verb.]
1. sound; such as will not run out.
what we endeavoured in vain may be performed by some
virtuoso, that shall have stancher vessels, and more funny
days. boyle.
2. firm; sound of principle; trusty; hearty; determined.
the standing absurdity, without the belief of which no
man is reckoned a slanch churchman, is that there is a calf's-
head club. addison,
in politicks, i hear, you're stanch, --
directly bent against the french. prior,
they mean to convince, not the groveling herd, or gidd
populace, but the grave and /lanch men, men of sobriety and
firmness. * //aterland.
each slaunch polemick stubborn as a rock, -
each fierce logician still expelling locke,
came whip and spur. pope.
3. in this sense is used a stanch hound. a dog that follows the
scent without errour or remisiness.
4. strong; not to be broken.
if i knew
what hoop would hold us/launch from edge to edge
o' th' world, i would pursue it. shak. ant, and cleopatra,
you will lose their love: this is to be kept /lanch, and
carefully watched. locke.
st a'nch er. m. s. [from stanch.) one that stops blood.
sta'nch son. m. s. [ostancon, french.) a prop ; a support.
stanch less. adj. ifrom sianch..] not to be stopped. th
ere
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
there grows,
in my most ill-compos'd affection, such -
asianchless avarice, that, were i king,
i should out off the nobles for their lands. shakesp. macbeth.
she unto scythia sent, for hunger him to gnaw,
and thrust her down his throat, into his slaunchless maw.
drayton.
t, stand. v. m. preterite i stood, i have stood... [rtanban,
gothick and saxon; slaen, dutch ; share, italian ; oftar,
spanish; share, latin.]
1. to be upon the feet; not to fit, kneel, or lie down.
the absolution to be pronounced by the priest alone stand-
ing, the people still kneeling. common prayer.
2. to be not demolished or overthrown.
what will they then f what but unbuild
a living temple, built by faith to stand?
3. to be placed as an edifice. -
this poet's tomb stood on the other fide of naples, which
looks towards vesuvio. addison on italy.
4. to remain erect; not to fall.
to stand or fall,
free in thine own arbitrement it lies.
chariot and charioteer lay overturn'd,
and fiery foaming steeds: what stood, recoil'd
o'erweary'd, through the faint satanick host
defensive scarce, or with pale fear surpris'd
fled ignominious. milton's paradise loft.
5. to become erect.
mute, and amaz'd, my hair with horror stood;
milton.
milton.
fear shrunk my senses, and congeal’d my blood. dryden.
her hair stood up; convulsive rage possess'd
her trembling limbs. dryden's afneid.
6. to stop; to halt; not to go forward.
the leaders, having charge from you to stand,
will not go off until they hear you speak. shakesp. h. vi.
sun in gideon stand,
and thou moon in the vale of ajalon.
mortal, who this forbidden path
in arms presum'st to trade, i charge thee stand,
and tell thy name. dryden's an.
7. to be at a stationary point without progress or regression.
this nation of spain runs a race still of empire, when all
milton.
other states of christendom stand at a stay. bacon.
immense the pow'r, immense were the demand;
say, at what part of nature will they stand? pope.
8. to be in a state of firmness, not vacillation.
commonwealths by virtue ever stood. davies.
my mind on its own centre stands unmov’d,
and stable as the fabrick of the world,
propt on itself. dryden.
9. to be in any posture of resistance or defence.
seeing how lothly opposite i stood
to his unnat'ral purpose, in fell motion
with his prepared sword he charges home
my unprovided body. shakesp. king lear.
from enemies heav'n keep your majesty;
and when they stand against you, may they fall.
io. to be in a state of hostility; to keep the ground.
if he would presently yield, barbarossa promised to let him
go free; but if he should sland upon his defence, he threatened
to make him repent his foolish hardiness. knolles.
the king granted the jews to gather themselves together,
and stand for their life. efth. viii. 1 1.
e are often constrained to stand alone against the strength
of opinion. brown's preface to vulgar errours.
it was by the sword they should die, if they stood upon de-
fence; and by the halter, if they should yield. hayward.
11. not to yield; not to fly; not to give way:
who before him stood so to it? for the lord brought his
enemies unto him. - ecclus. xlvi. 3.
put on the whole armour of god, that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the devil. eph. vi. 11.
their lives and fortunes were put in safety, whether they
stood to it or ran away. bacon's henry vii.
12. to stay; not to fly.
then the light'ning-loving deity cast
a foule flight on my soldiers: nor stood fast
one man of all. chapman.
at the soldierly word stand, the flyers halted a little. clarend.
13. to be placed with regard to rank or order.
amongst liquids endued with this quality of relaxing, warm
water stands first. arbuthnot on aliments.
theology would truly enlarge the mind, were it studied
with that freedom and that sacred charity which it teaches: let
this therefore stand always chief. watts.
14. to remain in the present state.
if meat make my brother offend, i will eat no flesh while
the world slandeth. i cor. viii. 13.
that sots and knaves should be so vain
to wish their vile resemblance may remain;
and sland recorded, at their own request,
to future days a libel or a jest.
shakesp.
dryden.
f;. [estar, spanish.j. to be in any particular state; to be:
emphatically expressed.
the sea,
aw'd by the rod of moses so to stand
divided. -. milton,
accomplish what your signs foreshow:
i stand resign'd, and am prepar'd to go. dryden's an,
he struck the snakes, and stood again
new sex'd, and strait recover'd into man. addison,
they expect to be favoured, who stand not possessed of any
one of those qualifications that belonged to him. atterbur.
some middle prices shew us in what proportion the value of
their lands stood, in regard to those of our own country. arbus,
god, who sees all things intuitively, does not want these
helps: he neither slands in need of logick, nor uses it. baier,
persians and greeks like turns of nature found,
and the world's victor stood subdu'd by sound. pope.
narrow capacities, imagining the great capable of being dis.
concerted by little occasions, frame their malignant fables ac-
cordingly, and stand detected by it, as by an evident markof
ignorance. pope's essay on homer.
16. not to become void; to remain in force.
god was not ignorant that the judges, whose sentence in
matters of controversy he ordained should stand, oftentimes
would be deceived.
- hooker,
a thing within my bosom tells me,
that no conditions of our peace can sland. shak. h. iv.
i will punish you, that ye may know that my words shall
surely sland against you for evil. jer. xliv. 29.
my mercy will i keep for him, and my covenant shall sland
fast with him. ps. lxxxix. 28.
17. to consist; to have its being or essence.
that could not make him that did the service perfeo, as
pertaining to the conscience, which stood only in meats and
drinks. heb. ix, 10.
18. to be with respect to terms of a contract.
the hirelings stand at a certain wages.
19. to have a place.
if it stand
within the eye of honour, be assured
my purse, my person, my extremest means,
lie all unlock'd to your occasions. shak. march. of wenia,
my very enemy's dog,
though he had bit me, should have stood that night
against my fire. shakesp. king lear.
this excellent man, who stood not upon the advantage-
carow,
ground before, provoked men of all qualities. clarendon,
chariots wing'd
from th’ armoury of god, where sland of old
myriads. milton,
20. to be in any state at the time present.
opprest nature sleeps: -
this rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
which stand in hard cure. shakesp. king lear.
so it stands; and this i fear at last,
hume's knavery will be the duchess' wreck. shał. h. vi.
all which grace
i now will amplify, and tell what case
thy houshold stands in. chapman.
our company assembled, i said, my dear friends, let us
know ourselves, and how it standeth with us. bacon,
gardiner was made king's solicitor, and the patent, formerly
granted to saint-john, stood revoked. clarendon,
why stand we longer shivering under fears milton.
as things now stand with us, we have no power to do good
after that illustrious manner our saviour did. calamy's serm,
21. to be in a permanent state.
the broil doubtful longstood,
as two spent swimmers that do cling together,
and choke their art, shakoshtar,
i in thy persevering shall rejoice,
and all the blest sland fast. milton.
22. to be with regard to condition or fortune.
island in need of one whose glories may
redeem my crimes, ally me to his fame. dryden.
23. to have any particular respect.
here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
mumbling of wicked charms, conj'ring the moon
to stand’s auspicious mistress. shakesp. king lear.
an utter unsuitableness disobedience has to the relation
which man necessarily stands in towards his maker. south,
24. to be without action.
a philosopher disputed with adrian the emperor, and did it
but weakly: one of his friends, that stood by, said, methinks
you were not like yourself last day in argument with the em-
peror; i could have answered better myself. why, said the
philosopher, would you have me contend with him that com-
mands thirty legions : bacon,
25. to depend ; to rest; to be supported.
this reply standeth all by conjectures. whitgift.
the presbyterians of the kirk, less forward to declare their
opinion in the former point, stand upon the latter only, sandes.
he
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
he that will know, must by the connexion of the proofs
see the truth and the ground it stands on. locke.
16. to be with regard to state of mind.
stand in awe and sin not: commune with your own heart
upon your bed, and be still. psal. iv. 4.
i desire to be present, and change my voice, for island in
doubt of you.
17. to succeed; to be acquitted; to be safe.
readers, by whose judgment i would sland or fall, would
not be such as are acquainted only with the french and ita-
lian criticks. addison's spectator.
18. to be with respect to any particular.
caesar entreats,
not to consider in what case thou sland"
further than he is caesar. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
to heav'n i do appeal,
i have lov'd my king and common-weal;
as for my wife, i know not how it sland. shak. henry vi.
19. to be resolutely of a party.
the cause must be presumed as good on our part as on theirs,
till it be decided who have stood for the truth, and who for
tiros. hooker.
gal. iv. 20.
shall we sound him *
i think, he will stand very strong with us.
lt remains,
to gratify his noble service, that
hath thus sized for his country. shakespeare's coriolanur.
, to be in the place ; to be representative.
chilon said, that kings friends and favourites were like
casting counters; that sometimes /?ood for one, sometimes for
ten. bacon.
i will not trouble myself, whether these names sland for
the same thing, or really include one another. locke.
their language being scanty, had no words in it to stand
for a thousand. locke.
1. to remain ; to be fixed.
watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be
strong. i cor. xvi. 13.
how soon hath thy predistion, seer blest
measur'd this transicnt world, the race of time,
till time stand fix’d.
32. to hold a course at sea.
behold on latian shores a foreign prince'
from the same parts of heav'n his navy sound,
to the same parts on earth his army lands.
full for the port the ithacensians stand,
and furl their sails, and issue on the land.
33. to have direction towards any local point.
the wand did not really sound to the metals, when placed
under it, or the metalline veins. boyle.
34. to offer as a candidate.
he stood to be elected one of the proetors for the univer-
fity. sanderson's life.
35. to place himself; to be placed.
the fool hath planted in his memory
an army of good words; and i do know
a many fools that stand in better place,
garnish'd like him, that for a tricksy word
defy the matter. shakes eare's merch. of penice.
he was commanded by the duke to stand aside and expect
his answer. knoles's h/?ory of the turks.
1stood between the lord and you, to shew you the lord's
shakespeare.
milton.
dryden.
pope's oosy.
word. deut. v. 5.
stand by when he is going. swift.
36. to stagnate; not to flow.
where ufens glides along the lowly lands,
or the black water of pomptina stands. dryden.
37. to be with respect to chance.
yourself, renowned prince, then stood as fair
as any comer i have look'd on,
for my affection. sha&amp;#-are's merchant of venice.
each thinks he sland; fairest for the great lot, and that he
is possified of the golden number. addison's speciator.
he was a gentleman of consi !erable practice at the bar, and
s!od fair for the first vacancy on the bench. rowe.
38. to remain satisfied.
though page be a secure fool, and so ind so firmly on his
wife's frailty, yet i cannot put off my opinion so casily. soak.
39. to be without motion.
i'll tell you who time ambles withal, who time gallops
withal.-w. hom sand, it soil withal –with lawyers in the
vacation; for they sleep between term and term, and then
they perceive not how time moves. shakespeare.
4c. to make delay.
they will susped they shall make but small progress, if,
in the books they read, they must stand to examine and un-
ravel every argument. locke.
41. to insist; to dwell with many words, or much pertinacity.
to said us on every point, and be curious in particulars,
belongeth to the first author of the story. 2 maccab. ii. 30.
it is so plain that it needeth not to be stood upon. bacon.
42. to be exposed.
vol. ii.
have i lived to stand in the taunt of one that makes fritters
of english shak &gt; zoo, -
43. to joist ; to peover." •speare's merry wives of windsor.
never stand in a lie when
th -
and make amends. ou art accused, but ask pardon
- taylor's rule of living holy.
the emperor standing upon the advantage he to: §, #:
seizure of their fleet, obliged them to delive. cajo.
hath the prince a full commission,
to hear, and absolutely to determine
of what conditions we shall stand upon?
solar.
44. to persist in a claim, akespeare's henry iv.
45. to adhere; to abide.
to. would sland to the sword,
o try what friends would do, -
46. to lo. or fate afford. daniel.
his faithful people, whatsoever they rightly ask, the same
shall they receive, so far as may stand with the glory of god
and their own everlasting good; unto either of which it is no
virtuous man's purpose to seek any thing prejudicial. hooker.
some instances of fortune cannot stand with some others;
but if you desire this, you must lose that. taylor.
it stood with reason that they should be rewarded liberally
out of their own labours, since they received pay. davies.
sprightly youth and close application will hardly sland to-
gether. - felton,
47. to be put aside with disregard.
we make all our addresses to the promises, hug and caress
them, and in the interim let the commands sland by ne-
glected. decay of piety.
48. to stand by. to support; to defend; not to desert.
the ass hoped the dog would sland by him, if set upon by
the wolf. l’estrange.
if he meet with a repulse, we must throw off the fox's skin,
and put on the lion's : come, gentlemen, you'll sland by me.
dryden's spanish friar.
our good works will attend and stand by us at the hour of
death. calamy.
49. to stand by. to be present without being an ador.
margaret's curse is fail’n upon our heads,
for standing by when richard kill'd her son.
50. to stand by. to repose on ; to rest in.
t he world is inclined to sound by the arundelian marble.
pope's effoy on homer.
51. to st and for. to propose one's self a candidate.
how many stand for consulships ?–three: but 'tis thought
of every one coriolanus will carry it. shakespeare.
if they were jealous that coriolanus had a design on their
liberties when he sized for the consulship, it was but just that
they should give him a repulse. 19ennis.
52. to stand for. to maintain; to profess to support.
those which slood for the presbytery thought their cause had
more sympathy with the discipline of scotland, than the hie-
shakespeare.
rarchy of england. bacon.
freedom we all sound for. ben. johnson.
53. to stand off. to keep at a distance.
stand off, and let me take my fill of death. dryden.
54. to stand off. not to comply.
stand no more off,
but give thyself unto my sick desires. shakspeare.
55. to stand off. to forbear friendship or intimacy.
our bloods pour’d altogether
would quite confound distinetion; yet stand off
in differences so mighty. shakespeare.
such behaviour frights away friendship, and makes it stand
off in dislike and aversion. collier of friendship.
though nothing can be more honourable than an acquaint-
ance with god, we stand off from it, and will not be tempted
to embrace it. atterbury.
50. to stand off. to have relief; to appear protuberant or
prominent.
picture is best when it slandoth off, as if it were carved;
and sculpture is best when it appeareth so tender as if it were
painted; when there is such a softness in the limbs, as if not
a chiffel had hewed them out of stone, but a pencil had drawn
and stroaked then in oil. wattan’s architecture.
57. to srasp out. to hold resolution ; to hold a post ; not to
yield a point.
king john hath reconcil'd
himself to rome; his spirit is come in,
that so stood out against the holy church.
pomtinius knows not you,
while you sland cut upon these traiterous terms.
ben. johnson.
let not men flatter themselves, that though they find it
difficult at present to combat and sand out against an ill prac-
tice; yet that old age would do that for them, which they
in their youth could never find in their hearts to do for them-
selves. south.
scarce can a good-natured man refuse a compliance with
the solicitations of his company, and stand out against the rail-
lery of his familiars. fogers.
25 c 58. to
shakespeare.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
58.
to stand out. not to comply ; to secede.
... thou shalt see me at tullus’ face :
what, art thou stiff sland's out * shakespeare.
if the ladies will sland out, let them remember that the jury
is not all agreed. dryden.
6o.
61.
to st and out. to be prominent or protuberant.
their eyes stand out with fatness. ps. lxxiii. 7.
to stand to. to ply; to persevere.
palinurus, cry’d aloud,
what gusts of weather from that gath'ring cloud
my thoughts presage ; ere that the tempest roars,
stand to your tackles, mates, and stretch your oars. dryd.
to stand to. to remain fixed in a purpose.
he that will pass his land, *
as i have mine, may set his hand
and heart unto this deed, when he hath read ;
and make the purchase spread -
to both our goods if he to it will stand. herbert.
i still sland to it, that this is his sense, as will appear from
the design of his words. stillingfleet.
62.
to stand to. to abide by a contract or assertion.
as i have no reason to sland to the award of my enemies;
so neither dare i trust the partiality of my friends. dryden.
63.
to stand under. to undergo; to sustain.
if you unite in your complaints,
and force them with a constancy, the cardinal
cannot stand under them. shakesp. henry viii.
64. to st and up. to erect one's self; to rise from fitting.
65.
to stand up. to arise in order to gain notice.
when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation of
such things as i supposed. aeïs, xxv. 18.
66. to stand tip. to make a party.
when we flood up about the corn, he himself stuck not to
... call us the many-headed monster. shakespeare's coriolanus.
67.
to stand upon. to concern; to interest. an impersonal
sense.
does it not sland me now upon? - shakespeare's hamlet.
the king knowing well that it stood him upon : by how
much the more he had hitherto protracted the time, by so
much the sooner to dispatch with the rebels. bacon.
it sands me much upon
to enervate this objeclion. hudibras.
does it not s'and them upon, to examine upon what grounds
they presume it to be a revelation from god. locke.
68.
to stand upon. to value; to take pride.
men sland very much upon the reputation of their under-
flandings, and of all things hate to be accounted fools: the
best way to avoid this imputation is to be religious. tillotson.
we highly esteem and sland much upon our birth, though
we derive nothing from our ancestors but our bodies; and it
is useful to improve this advantage, to imitate their good ex-
amples. ray on the creation.
69. to stand upon. to insist.
a rascally, yea—forsooth, knave, to bear a gentleman in
hand, and then stand upon security. shakespears.
to st and. v. a.
1. to endure; to resist without flying or yielding.
none durst sand him;
here, there, and every where, enrag'd he flew. shakespeare.
love stood the fiege, and wou’d not yield his breast. dryd.
- oh! had bounteous heav'n
bestow'd hippolitus on phaedra's arms, .
so had i stood the shock of angry fate. smith.
that not for fame, but virtue’s better end,
he stood the furious foe, the timid friend,
the damning critick. pope.
2. to await; to abide ; to suffer.
bid him disband the legions,
submit his actions to the publick censure,
and sand the judgment of a roman senate. addison's cato.
3. to keep i to maintain with ground.
turning at the length, he stood his ground,
and miss'd his friend. dryden.
stand. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a station; a place where one waits standing.
i have found you out a sland most fit,
where you may have such 'vantage on the duke,
he shall not pass you. shakesp. measure for measure.
in this covert will we make a sland,
culling the principal of all the deer. shakespeare.
then from his lofty sland on that high tree,
down he alights among the sportful herds. milton.
- the princely hierarch
in their bright sland there left his pow'rs, to seize
possession of the garden. milton's paradis, loft.
the male bird, whilst the hen is covering her eggs, gene-
rally takes his sland upon a neighbouring bough, and diverts
her with his songs during her fitting. adaison's speciator.
fi
i took my stand upon an eminence which was appointed for
general rendezvous of these female carriers, to look into their
several ladings. addison's speciator.
three persons entered into a conspiracy to assassinate timo-
leon, as he was offering up his devotions in a certain temple:
in order to it they took their several sands in the most conve.
nient places, 4ddison.
when just as by her sand arsaces past,
the window by design or chance fell down,
and to his view expos'd her blushing beauties. . . . rout.
the urchin from his private stand . . . .
took aim, and shot with all his strength. swift.
2. rank; post; station. not used.
father, since your fortune did attain
so high a sland; i mean not to descend. * daniel.
3. a stop ; a halt.
a race of youthful and unhandled colts
fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing;
if any air of musick touch their ears,
you shall perceive them make a mutual sland;
their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze. shakespeare.
the earl of northampton followed the horse so closely,
that they made a sland, when he furiously charged and routed
them. clarindin."
once more the fleeting soul came back,
t' inspire the mortal frame,
and in the body took a doubtful stand,
hov'ring like expiring flame,
that mounts and falls by turns. dryden.
at every turn she made a little sland,
and thrust among the thorns her lily hand
to draw the rose. - . . . dryden.
4. stop; interruption.
the greatest part of trade is driven by young merchants,
upon borrowing at interest; so as, if the usurer either call in,
or keep back his money, there will ensue presently a great
jiand of trade. - bacon.
should this circulation cease, the formation of bodies would
be at an end, and nature at a perfeoł stand. woodward.
5. the act of opposing.
we are come off
like romans ; neither foolish in our stands,
nor cowardly in retire. shakespeare.
6. highest mark; stationary point; point from which the next
motion is regressive.
our sons but the same things can wish and do,
voice is at sland and at the highest flow:
then, satire, spread thy sails; take all the winds can blow.
dryden.
in the beginning of summer the days are at a sland, with
little variation of length or shortness; because the diurnal va-
riation of the sun partakes more of a right line than of a spiral,
dryden.
the sea, since the memory of all ages, hath continued at
a stand, without considerable variation. bently.
7. a point beyond which one cannot proceed.
every part of what we would,
must make a sland at what your highness will. shakespeare.
when fam'd varelst this little wonder drew,
flora vouchsav'd the growing work to view ;
finding the painter's science at a sland,
the goddess snatch'd the pencil from his hand:
and finishing the piece, she smiling said,
behold one work of mine that ne'er shall fade. prizr.
8. difficulty; perplexity; embarrassment; hesitation.
a fool may so far imitate the mein of a wise man, as at
first to put a body to a sland what to make of him.
l’estrange.
the well-shap'd changeling is a man, has a rational soul,
tho' it appear not : this is past doubt. make the ears a little
longer, then you begin to boggle: make the face yet nar-
rower, and then you are at a stand. locks,
9. a frame or table on which vessels are placed.
such squires are only fit for country towns,
to stink of ale, and dust a sland with clowns;
who, to be chosen for the land's protectors,
tope and get drunk before the wise electors. dryden.
after supper a sland was brought in, with a brass vessel full
of wine, of which he that pleas'd might drink; but no liquor
was forced. dryden's life of cleomenes.
statndard. n.s.. [effendart, fr.]
- 1. an ensign in war, particularly the ensign of the horse.
his armies, in the following day, -
on those fair plains their standards proud display. fairfax.
erect the sandard there of ancient night,
yours be the advantage all, mine the revenge. milton.
behold camillus loaded home,
with standards well redeem'd and foreign foes q'ercome.
- - dryder.
to their common standard they repair;
the nimble horsemen scour the fields of air. dryden.
2. [from sland.]. that which is of undoubted authority; that
which is the test of other things of the same kind.
the dogmatist gives the lie to all dissenting apprehenders,
and proclaims his judgment the fittest intellectual afandard.
- - glanville,
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a
the heavenly motions are more stated than the terrestrial
models, and are both originals and standards. holder.
our measures of length, i cannot call standards; for stand-
and measures must be certain and fixed. holder.
when people have brought right and wrong to a false
andard, there follows an envious malevolence. l'estrange.
the romans made those times the standard of their wit,
when they subdued the world. spratt.
from these ancient/landard; i descend to our own histori-
2ns. felton.
when i shall propose the /?andard whereby i give judg-
ment, any may easily inform himself of the quantity and inca-
sure of it. - pwoodward.
the court which used to be the standard of propriety, and
correctness of speech, ever since continued the worst school in
england for that accomplishment. swift.
first follow nature, and your judgment frame,
by her just standard, which is still the same.
3. that which has been tried by the proper test.
the english tongue, if refined to a certain standard, per-
haps might be fixed for ever. swift.
in comely rank call ev'ry merit forth ;
imprint on ev'ry act its standard-worth. prior.
. a settled rate.
that precise weight and fineness, by law appropriated to
the pieces of each denomination, is called the standard. locke.
the device of king henry vii. was profound in making
farms of a standard, that is, maintained with such a proportion
of lands as may breed a subject to live in plenty. 3acon.
a standard might be made, under which no horse should be
used for draught: this would enlarge the breed of horses.
7 emple.
by the present standard of the coinage, sixty two shillings
is coincid out of one pound weight of filver. arbuthnot.
5. a standing sten or tree.
a standard of a damask rose with the root on, was set up-
right in an earthen pan, full of fair water, half a foot under
the water, the standard being more than two foot above it.
bacon's natural history.
plant fruit of all sorts and standard, mural, or shrubs which
lose their leaf. evelyn's kalendar.
in france part of their gardens is laid out for flowers,
others for fruits; some soondard, some against walls. temple.
standar d bear e.r. n.s. (soundard and bear.] one who bears
a standard or ensign.
they shall be as when a standardhearer fainteth. isa. x. 18.
these are the standardbearers in our contending armies, the
dwarfs and squires who carry the impresses of the giants or
knights. spectator.
standcrop. m. s. [vermicularis, lat.) an herb. ainsworth.
sta's de l. m. s. [from *and.) a tree of long standing.
the druinians were nettled to see the princely standel of
their royal oak return with a branch of willows. howel.
sta(nder. m. s. [from stand.]
1. one who stands.
2. a tree that has stood long.
the young spring was pitifully nipt and over-trodden by
very beasts; and also the fairest standers of all were rooted up
and cast into the fire. ascham's schoolmaster.
3. sta’nder by. one present; a mere spectator.
pope.
explain some statute of the land to the standers by. hooker.
l would not be a slander by to hear
my sovereign mistress clouded so, without
my present vengeance taken. shakosheare.
when a gentleman is disposed to swear, it is not for any
fanders by to curtail his oaths. shakespeare's cymbeline.
the standers by see clearly this event,
all parties say, they're sure, yet all dissent. denham.
the slanders by suspected her to be a duchess. addison.
standergr ass. m. s. [ satyrion, lat..] an herb. ainsw.
standing, fart. a 'j. [from sland.
1. settled; established ; not temporary.
standing armics have the place of subjects, and the go-
vernment depends upon the contented and discontented hu-
mours of thc soldiers. temple.
laugh’d all the pow'rs who favour tyranny,
and all the slanding army of the sky. dryden.
money being looked upon as the slanding measure of other
commoditics, men consider it as a slanding measure, though
when it has varied its quantity, it is not so. locke.
thus doth he advise them to cred among themselves stand-
ing courts by consent. - kettleworth.
such a one, by pretending to distinguish himself from the
herd, becomes a songing object of raillery. addison.
the common sanding rules of the gospel are a more power-
ful means of conviction than any miracie. alterbury.
great slanding miracle that heav'n assign'd
'tis only thinking gives this turn of mind. pote.
2. lasting ; not transitory.
the landlord had swelled his body to a prodigious size, and
worked up his complexion to a standing crimson. addison.
3. stagnant; not running.
he turned the wilderness into a standing water. psal. cvil.
this made their flowing shrink
from slanding lake to tripping ebb. amilton.
4. fixed; not moveable.
- - there's his chamber
his standing bed and truckle boo." shakespeare.
standing. m. s. [from sland.]
1. continuance ; long possession of an office
place. »
nothing had been more easy than to command a patron of
a long standing. dryden.
although the ancients were of opinion that egypt :...
merly sea; yet this tract of land is as old, and of as long a
standing as any upon the continent of africa. woodward.
i wish your fortune had enabled you to have continued
longer in the university, till you were of ten years standing.
2. station; place to stand in. swift.
such ordnance as he brought with him, because it was fitter
for service in field than for battery, did only beat down the
battlements, and such little standings. knolles's history.
his coming is in state, i will provide you a good standing
to see his entry.
3. power to stand.
i sink in deep mire, where there is no slanding. ps. lxix.
4. rank; condition.
sta's pisii. n s. [ sland and dish.] a case for pen and ink.
a grubstreet patriot does not write to secure, but get some-
thing: should the government be overturned he has nothing
to lose but an old slandish. addison.
i bequeath to dean swift esq; my large filver standish, con-
fitting of a large silver plate, an ink-pot, and a sand-box.
swift.
stang. m. s. [rzaeno, saxon.] a perch.
these fields were intermingled with woods of half a sang,
and the tallest tree appeared to be seven feet high. swift.
stank. adj. weak; worn out.
diggon, i am so stiff and so stank,
that unneth i may stand any more,
and how the western wind bloweth sore,
beating the withered leaf from the tree. spenser.
stank. i he preterite of slink.
the fish in the river died, and the river sank. exod. vii.
stann a r y. adj. [from slannum, lat..] relating to the tin-
works.
a steward keepeth his court once every three weeks: the
are termed /?annary courts of the latin slannum, and hold plea
of a&amp;tion of debt or trespass about white or black tin. carew.
sta nz a. m. s. [/fanza, ital. stance, fr.] a number of lines
regularly adjutted to each other ; so much of a poem as con-
tains every variation of measure or relation of rhyme. stanza
is originally a room of a house, and came to signify a subdi-
vision of a poem ; a staff.
so bold as yet no verse of mine has been,
to wear that gem on any line,
nortill the happy nuptial house be seen,
shall any /fanza with it shine. cowley.
horace confines himself strictly to one sort of verse or stanza
in every ode. dryden.
in quatrains, the last line of the stanza is to be considered
in the composition of the first. dryden,
before his sacred name flies ev'ry fault,
and each exalted stanza teems with thought. pope.
st a'ple. m. s. [estape, fr. shapel, dutch.]
1. a settled mart ; an established emporium.
a staple of romance and lies,
false tears, and real perjuries. prior,
the customs of alexandria were very great, it having been
the staple of the indian trade. arbuthnot on coins.
tyre, alexander the great sacked, and establishing the
staple at alexandria, made the greatest revolution in trade that
ever was known. arbuthnot.
2. i know not the meaning in the following passage.
henry ii. granted liberty of coining to certain abbies,
allowing them one slaple, and two puncheons at a rate.
camden.
character, or
2:0?. -
3. the original material of a manufaaure.
at lenster, for her wool whose staple doth excel,
and seems to overmatch the golden phrygian fell. drayton.
sta(ple. adj. [from the noun.]
1. settled; established in commerce.
some english wool, vex'd in a belgian loom,
and into cloth of spungy softness made :
did into france or colder denmark roam,
to ruin with worse ware our staple trade.
2. according to the laws of commerce.
what needy writer would not solicit to work under such
masters, who will take off their ware at their own rates, and
trouble not themselves to examine whether it be/taple or no?
swift.
stat’le.
dryden.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a
st a'ple. m. s. [rzapul, saxon, a prop.] a loop of iron; a
barbent and driven in at both ends.
i have seen/taples of doors and nails born. peacham.
the filver ring she pull'd, the door reclos'd :
the bolt, obedient to the silken cord,
to the strong staple's inmost depth restor'd,
secur'd the valves. pope's odyssey.
star. m. s. [rteonna, saxon; serre, dutch.]
1. one of the luminous bodies that appear in the nocturnal sky.
when an astronomer uses the word star in its strict sense,
it is applied only to the fixt stars; but in a large sense it in-
cludes the planets. watts.
then let the pebbles on the hungry beech
fillop the /lars;
murdering impossibility, to make
what cannot be, flight work.
hither the syracusan’s art translates
heaven's form, the course of things and human fates;
th’ included spirit serving thesiar deck'd signs,
shakesp. coriolanus.
the living work in constant motions winds. hakewill.
as from a cloud his fulgent head,
and shape star bright, appear'd. milton.
2. the pole-star.
well, if you be not turn'd turk, there is no more sailing
by the /far. shakesp. much ado about nothing.
3. configuration of the planets supposed to influence fortune.
from forth the fatal loins of these two foes
a pair of star crost lovers take their life. shakespeare.
we are apt to do amiss, and lay the blame upon our stars
or fortune. l’estrange.
4. a mark of reference ; an asterisk. -
remarks worthy of riper observation, note with a marginal
jolar. jwatts.
star of bethlehem. n. s. [ornithogalum, lat..] a flower. miller.
sta'rapple. m. s. a globular or olive-shaped soft fleshy fruit,
inclosing a stone of the same shape. this plant grows in the
warmest parts of america, where the fruit is eaten by way of
desert. it grows to the height of thirty or forty feet. miller.
star board. m. s. [rteonbono, saxon.] is the right-hand
side of the ship, as larboard is the left. harris.
on shipboard the mariners will not leave their starboard and
larboard, because some one accounts it gibrish. bramh.
starch. n.s.. [from soare, teutonick, stiff.] a kind of
viscous matter made of flower or potatoes, with which linen
is stiffened, and was formerly coloured.
has he
dislik'd your yellow starch, or said your doublet
was not exactly frenchised. fletcher's queen of corinth.
with starch thin laid on, and the skin well stretched, pre-
pare your ground. peacham on drawing.
to starch. v. a. [from the noun..] to stiffen with starch.
her goodly countenance l’ve seen
set off with kerchief starch'd and pinners clean. gay.
sta'rchamber. m. s. [camera sellata, lat..] a kind of cri-
minal court of equity. now abolished.
i'll make a starchamber matter of it: if he were twenty fir
john falstaffs, he shall not abuse robert shallow, esq.
shakespeare.
sta'rched. adj. [from starch.]
1. stiffened with starch.
2. stiff; precise; formal.
does the gospel any where prescribe a starched squeezed
ccuntenance, a stiff formal gait, or a singularity of manners.
- swift.
sta'rcher, n.s. [from sarch..] one whose trade is to starch.
sta'rchly. adv. [from starch..] stiffly ; precisely.
st a'roh n ess. m.s. (from starth.] stiffness; preciseness.
to stare. v. n. [rcanian, saxon; serren, dutch..]
1. to look with fixed eyes; to look with wonder, impudence,
confidence, stupidity, or horrour.
her modest eyes, abashed to behold
so many gazers, as on her do soare,
upon the lowly ground affixed are. spenser.
their staring eyes, sparkling with servent fire,
and ugly shapes, did nigh the man dismay, -
that, were it not for shame, he would retire. spensor.
look not big, nor/lare nor fret :
i will be master of what is mine own. shakespeare.
they were never satisfied with slaring upon their masts,
sails, cables, ropes, and tacklings. abbot.
i hear
the tread of manv feet steering this way;
perhaps my enemies, who come to share
at my affliction, and perhaps t” insult. milton's agonister.
a satyr that comes sharing from the woods,
must not at first speak like an orator. waller.
and while he shares around with stupid eyes,
his brows with berries and his temples dies. dryden.
what do'st thou make a shipboard
art thou of bethlem's noble college free ?
stark/faring mad, that thou should'st tempt the seat dryd.
struggling, and wildly soaring on the skies
with scarce recover'd fight. - dryden's an
trembling the miscreant stood; -
he star'd and roll'd his haggard eyes around. dryden,
break out in crackling flames to shun thy snare,
or hiss a dragon, or a tyger soare. dryden's wire;
why do'st thou not irgil,
try the virtue of that gorgon face,
to share me into statue dryden
i was unluckily prevented by the presence of a bear, which
as i approached with my present, threw his eyes in my wa &gt;
and/fared me out of my resolution. addison's go.
the wit at his elbow gave him a touch upon the shouj
and soared him in the face with so bewitching a grin, that th:
whistler relaxed his fibres. addi
she paid a tradesman once, to make him soare. #:
gods' shall the ravisher display your hair, -
while the fops envy, and the ladies stare. pope.
through nature and through art she rang'd,
and gracefully her subject chang'd :
in vain; her hearers had no share
in all she spoke, except to/lare. swift
2. to stare in the face. to be undeniably evident. -
is it possible for people, without scruple to offend against
the law, which they carry about them in indelible characters
and that jiares them in the face, whilst they are breaking it ;
3. to stand out. locke.
take off all the soaring straws and jaggs in the hive, and
make them smooth. amortimer’s husbandy.
stare. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. fixed look.
the balls of his broad eyes roll'd in his head,
and glar'd betwixt a yellow and a red:
he look’d a lion with a gloomy slare,
and o'er his eyebrows hung his matted hair.
2. s.sturnus, lat..] starling. a bird.
starer. m. s. [from slare..] one who looks with fixed eyes.
one self approving hour whole years outweighs
of stupid soarers, and of loud huzza's. pope.
sta rfish. m. s. [/lar and fish.] a fish branching out it,
several points.
this has a ray of one species of english starfish. woodw.
stargazer. m. s. [/far and gaze.] an astronomer, or afiro.
loger. in contempt.
let the astrologers, the sargazers, and the monthly prog-
nosticators, stand up and save thee. is xlvii. 13.
a sargazer, in the height of his celestial observation,
stumbled into a ditch. l'erange.
sta'rhawk, n.s. [ostur, lat..] a sort of hawk. ainsw.
stark, adj. [rrenc, renac, saxon; serci, dutch.]
1. stiff; strong; rugged.
his heavy head devoid of careful cark,
whose senses all were straight benummed and stark. spenser.
many a nobleman lies shark and stiff
under the hoofs of vaunting enemies. shakesp. h. iv.
the north is not so stark and cold. ben. johnson.
so soon as this spring is become shark enough, it breaks the
case in two, and slings the seed. derham's physico-theology.
2. deep; full; still.
confider the slark security
the commonwealth is in now ; the whole senate
sleepy, and dreaming no such violent blow. ben. johnson.
3. mere ; simple; plain ; gross.
to turn stark fools, and subjects fit
for sport of boys, and rabble wit. hudibras.
he pronounces the citation stark nonsense. collier.
stark, adv. is used to intend or augment the signification of
a word : as stark mad, mad in the highest degree. it is now
little used but in low language.
then are the best but stark naught; for open suspeaing
dryden.
others, comes of secret condemning themselves. sidney.
the fruitful-headed beast, amaz'd -
at flashing beams of that sun-shiny shield,
became stark blind, and all his senses doz'd,
that down he tumbled. stensor.
men and women goslark naked. abbot.
they both dance much ; and for more nimbleness, some-
times shark naked. heylyn.
he is stark mad, who ever says
that he hath been in love an hour. donne.
those seditious, that seemed moderate before, became
desperate, and those who were desperate seemed siark mad;
whence tumults, confused hollowings and howsings.
hayward.
who, by the most cogent arguments, will disrobe himsel
at once of all his old opinions, and turn himself out sark
naked in quest of new notions locke.
in came squire south, all dressed up in feathers and ribbons,
fare staring mad, brandishing his sword. arbuthnot,
starkly, adv. [from stark.j. stiffly , strongly.
l,
st,
*
(
2
as
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">as fast lock'd up in fleep as guiltless labour,
when it lies star}} in the traveller's bones. shakspeare.
starless, adj. [from star.] having no light of stars. "
a boundless continent,
dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of ni ht,
starless expos'd. milton's parads: loft.
cato might give them furlo's for another world;
but we, like sentries, are oblig'd to stand
in starlos, nights, and wait th' appointed hour. dryden.
starlight. m. s. [ star and light.] luttre of the stars.
now they never meet in grove or green,
by fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen. shakes eare.
nor walk by moon,
or glittering starlight, without thee is sweet. milton.
they danc'd by starlight and the friendly moon. dryden.
starlight. adi. lighted by the stars.
owls, that mark the setting sun, declare
a starlight evening and a morning fair.
sra'riike, adj. [star and like.)
1. stellated ; having various points resembling a star in lustre.
nightshade tree rises with a wooden item, green-leaved,
and has starlike flowers. as reimer's husbandry.
2. bright; illustrious.
the having turned many to righteousness shall confer a star-
ike and immortal brightness. boyle's seraphick love.
these reasons mov’d her starlike husband's heart;
but still he held his purpose to depart. dryden.
sta's lisc. m.s. irrarlins, saxon ; sturnus. a small singing
bird.
i will have a starling taught to speak
nothing but mortimer, and give it him,
to keep his anger still in motion. shakesp. henry iv.
starpave d. adj. [star and pave..] studd d with stars.
in progress through the road of heav'n starpav'd. milton.
starpr ov. off. [sia and proof..] impervious to stall.ht.
under the shady roof
of branchong elm start roof. a sistin.
sta'r read. m. s. [/tar and read.) dostrine of the stars;
astronomy. speoser.
sta’rr f d. adj. [from star.]
1. influenced by the stars with respect to fortune.
my third comfort,
starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast
hal'd out to murder. shakespeare's jpinter's tale.
2. decorated with stars.
that starr'd ethiop queen, that strove
to set her beauty's praise above
the sea-nymphs.
he furious hurl’d against the ground
his sceptre starr'd with golden studs around.
starry. adj. [from star.]
1. decorated with stars; abounding with stars.
daphne wond'ring mounts on high,
above the clouds, a ove the starry sky
2. consisting of stars; stellar.
such is his will, that paints
the earth with colours fresh,
the darkest skies with store
of starry lights.
heav'n and carth's compacted frame,
and flowing waters, and the starry flame,
and both the radiant lights, one common soul
inspires and feeds, and animates the whole.
3. reson bling stars.
tears had dimm'd the lustre of her starry eyes. sh. illust.
sta'rr in g. adj. [stellons, latin ; from star.] shining with
stellar light; blazing with loarkling light.
such his fell glances as the fatal light
of starring comets that look kingdoms dead. crashaw.
star shoot. n.s. [sar and shoot.) an emission from a star.
i have seen a good quantity of that jelly, by the vulgar
called a starshoot, as if it remained upon the extinction of a
falling star. boyle.
t. start. v. n. [startzen, german.]
1. to feel a sudden and involuntary twitch or motion of the
animal frame, on the apprehension of danger. -
starting is an apprehension of the thing ferred, and in that
kind it is a motion of shrinking ; and likewise an inquisition,
in the beginning, what the matter should be, and in that kind
it is a motion of erection, and therefore, when a man would
listen suddenly to any thing, he start, th; for the starting is an
erection of the spirits to attend. bacon's natural listory.
a shape appear'd
bending to look on me: i started back ; r
it started back. shoshcare.
an open enemy to flattery, especially from a fricad, fron
whom he started to meet the lightest appearance of that sery;
kindness. fell.
i start as from some dreadful dream, -
and often ask myself if yet awake. dryden's span. fryar.
as his doubts decline,
he dreads just vengeance, and he starts at sin.
vol. ii.
dryden's pīrg.
molton.
pope.
pope.
spensor.
dryden.
dryden.
he start, at every new appearance,
and solicitous for fear of a sur, rize.
2. to sise suddenly: commonly with up.
there started up, in quoen elizabeth's reign, a new pres-
byterian sect, which tendered". form of discipline to the
ques, and to the state. // hite.
co. d by these strings, trees farting from the ground
have follow'd with delight in. powerful sound. roscommon.
they starting up beheid the heavy sigh'. dryden.
the mind, often works in search ...i some hidden idea
though sometimes they /* up in our minds of their own
accord. ilocke
might dryden bless once more our eyes, -
new blackmores and n w milbourns most arise :
nay, should great homer lift his awful head. '
zoilus again would start up from the dead.”
3. to move with sudden quickness.
the flowers, call'd out of their beds,
start and raise up their drowsy heads.
a spirit fit to start into an empire,
and look the world to law. dryden's clemenes.
she at the summons roll'd her eyes around,
and snatch'd the sa, ting serpents from the ground.
4. to shrink; to winch.
what trick, what starting hole, can's thou find out to hide
thce from this open shame : sospeare's henry iv.
with tryal fire touch me his finger cond ;
if he be chase, the flime will back descend,
and turn him to no pain; but if he start,
it is the flesh of a cor, upted heart. shakspeare.
5. to deviate
the lords and gentlemen take all the meanes sort upon
themselves; for they are best able to bring them in, whenso-
ever any of them starteth out. sp nser on ireland.
1.h' old drudgi g sun from his long-bcaten way,
shall at thy voice start and misguide the d *y ;
the jocund orbs shall break their measuru pace,
and stub orn poles change their allotted place.
i rank him with the prodigies of fame,
with things which start from nature's common rules,
with bearded infants, and with teeming mules. cretch.
keep your foul to the work when ready to start aside, un-
loss you will be a slave to every wild imagination. //atts.
6. to set out from the barrier at a race.
it seems to be rather a terminus a quo than a true principle,
as the starting post is none of the horse's legs. boyle.
should some god tell me, that i should be born
and cry again, his offer i should scorn;
ashain'd, when i have ended well my race,
to be led back to my first stating place.
when from the goal iney/i.rt,
the youthful chariotects with heaving heart
rush to the race. dryden's wrg.
the clangor of the trumpet gives the sign;
at once they start, advancing in a line.
7. to set out on any pursuit.
fair course of passion, where two lovers sart,
and run together, heart still yokt with heart. j’aller.
people, when they have made themselves weary, set up
their rest upon the very spot where they started. l’e/trango.
when two start into the world together, he that is thrown
behind, unless his mind proves generous, will be displeased
with the other.
and is always woking
colli.r on lovetousness.
pope.
cleaveland.
popc.
cowley.
denham.
dryden.
collier.
to start. v. a.
1. to alarm ; to disturb suddenly; to startle.
direness, familiar to my slaught rous thoughts,
cannot once start me. shałosofare.
being full of suppor and distemp'ring draughts,
upon malicious bravery do'st thou come
to start my quiet. shakespeare's o:le!”.
the very print of a fox-foot would have sta, to ye. l’e//r.
2. to make to start or fly hastily from a hiding place; to rouse
by a sudden disturbance.
the blood more stirs
to rouze a lion than to start a hare.
i started from its vernal bow'r
the rising game, and chac'd from flow'r to flow'r. pope.
3. to bring into motion ; to produce to view or notice; to pro-
duce unexpectedly.
conjure with 'em "
brutus will start a spirit as soon as caesar. shakes care.
what exception can posibly be started against this stating 2
11ammond.
it was unadvisedly done, when i was enforcing a weightier
design, to start and follow another of less moment. spratt.
the present occasion bus started the dispute amongst us.
1 sky.
insignificant cavils may be storted against every thing that
is not capable of mathematical demonstration. aadison.
i was engaged in conversation upon a objeo which the
people love to start in discourse. - zd yoa. foe: b.lier.
4. to discover; to bring within pursuit.
25 d - the
shakoshcare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a
the sensual men agree in pursuit of every pleasure they can
ta} t. temple.
5. to put suddenly out of place. • * *
one, by a fall in wrestling, started the end of the clavicle
from the sternon. - //iseman's surgery.
start. n. s. [from the verb.j
1. a motion of terrour ; a sudden twitch or contraction of the
frame from fear or alarm.
these fiaws and starts would well become
a woman's story at a winter's fire,
authoriz'd by her grandam. shakespeare.
the fright awaken'd arcite with a start ;
against his bosom bounc'd his heaving heart. dryden.
2. a sudden rousing to action ; excitement.
how much had i to do to calm his rage
now fear i this will give it start again. shakesp. hamlet.
3. sally ; vehement eruption; sudden effusion.
thou art like enough, through vassal fear,
base inclination, and the start of spleen,
to fight awainst me under percy's pay. shakespeare.
several star's of sancy off-hand, look well enough ; but
bring them to the test, and there is nothing in 'em. l'estr.
are they not only to disguise our passions,
to set our looks at variance with our thoughts,
to check the starts and fallies of the soul ? addison's cato.
we were well enough pleased with this start of thought.
addison.
4. sudden fit ; intermitted ation.
methought her eyes had crost her tongue;
for she did speak in starts distractedly. shakespeare.
thy forms are studied arts,
thy subtile ways be narrow straits ;
thy curtesy but sudden starts :
and what thou call'st thy gifts are baits. ben. johnson.
nature does nothing by sarts and leaps, or in a hurry; but
all her notions are gradual. l’e/?range.
an ambiguous expression, a little chagrin, or a start of
passion, is not cnough to take leave upon. collier.
5. a quick spring or motion; a shoot; a push.
in strings, the more they are wound up and strained, and
thereby give a more quick shart back, the more treble is the
sound; and the slacker they are, or less wound up, the baser
is the sound. bacon's natural history.
both cause the string to give a quicker /art. bacon.
how could water make those visible /?arts upon freezing,
but by some subtile freezing principle which as suddenly shoots
into it. grew's cosmol. sac.
6. first emission from the barrier; act of setting out.
you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
straining upon the shart. shakespeare's henry v.
all leapt to chariot,
and every man then for the start cast in his proper lot.
chapman.
if a man deal with another upon conditions, the shart of
first performance is all. bacon.
7. to get the start. to begin before another; to obtain ad-
vantage over another.
get the shart of the majestick world. shakes jul. crs.
all pretorian courts, if any of the parties be laid asleep,
under pretence of arbitrement, and the other party, during
that time, doth cautelously get the start and advantage at com-
mon law, yet the pretorian court will set back all things in
/latu quo frias. bacon's war with spain.
doubtless some other heart.
will get to start;
and, stepping in before,
will take possession of the sacred store
of hidden sweets.
ere the knight could do his part,
the squire had got so much the slart,
h’ had to the lady done his errand,
and told her all his tricks aforehand. hudibras.
she might have forsaken him, if he had not got the start of
her. dryden’s don. dedication.
the reason why the mathematicks and mechanick arts have
so much got the start in growth of other sciences, may be re-
solved into this, that their progress hath not been retarded by
that reverential awe of former discoverers. glanville.
the french year has got the start of ours more in the works
crashaw.
of nature than in the new stile. addison.
st a(rter. m. s. [from /;art.]
1. one that shrinks from his purpose.
stand to it boldly, and take quarter,
to let thee see i am no starter. hudibras.
2. one who suddenly moves a question or objection.
3. a dog that rouses the game.
if sheridan was not the staunchest hound in the pack, he
was at least the best starter. delany.
st a'rtingly. adv. [from starting.] by sudden fits; with
frequent intermission.
why do you speak so startingly and rash :
shakespeare's othello.
sta'rtingpost. m. s. [start and post.] barrier from which
the race begins.
to sta rtle, v. n. [from start...] to shrink; to move on
feeling a sudden impression of alarm or terrour.
the starting steed was seiz'd with sudden fright,
and bounding o'er the pommel cast the knight.
why shrinks the soul
* back on herself, and startles at destruction ?
my frighted thoughts run back,
and /fartle into madness at the sound.
to st a rtl e. v. a.
1. to fright; to shock; to impress with sudden terrour, sur-
prise, or alarm.
such whispring wak'd her, but with startled eye
drydon.
addis. cats.
zddison's cats,
on adam. milton,
to hear the lark begin his flight,
and singing startle the dull night
from his watch-tower in the skies,
*till the dappled dawn doth rise. milton,
the supposition that angels assume bodies needs not sort.
us, since some of the most ancient and most learned fathers
seemed to believe that they had bodies. lake,
incest oh name it not
the very mention shakes my inmost soul:
the gods are /?artled in their peaceful mansions,
and nature sickens at the shocking sound. smith,
his books had been solemnly burnt at rome as heretical :
some people, he found, were started at it; so he was forced
boldly to make repsisals, to buoy up their courage. atterbury.
now the leaf
incessant rustles, from the mournful grove
oft /?arting such as studious walk below,
and slowly circles through the waving air.
2. to deter; to make to deviate.
they would find occasions enough, upon the account of
his known affections to the king's service, from which it was
not possible to remove or /iarte him. clarendon.
wilmot had more scruples from religion to startle him, and
would not have attained his end by any gross act of wicked-
ness. clarendon.
stat&amp;t le. m. s. [from the verb.] sudden alarm; shock; sud-
den impression of terrour.
after having recovered from my first startle, i was very well
pleased at the accident. speciator.
sta'rtup. m. s. [start and up..] one that comes suddenly into
in oti cc.
that young startup hath all the glory of my overthrow.
shaftspeare.
7% starve. v. n. [rceanpan, saxon; serven, dutch, to
die.]
1. to perish; to be destroyed. obsolete.
to her came message of the murderment,
wherein her guiltless friends should hopeless starve. fairf.
2. to perish with hunger. it has with or for before the cause;
of less properly.
were the pains of honest industry, and of starving with
hunger and cold, set before us, no body would doubt which
to chuse. locke.
an animal that soarves of hunger, dies feverish and delirious.
arbuthnot.
3. to be killed with cold. it has with or for before the cause.
have i seen the naked /larve for cold,
thomson.
while avarice my charity controll'd : sandys.
4. to suffer extreme poverty.
sometimes virtue sharves while vice is fed:
what then is the reward of virtue bread pope.
5. to be destroyed with cold.
had the seeds of the pepper-plant been borne from java to
these northern countries, they must have starved for want of
sun. //codward's natural history.
to star ve. v. a. -
1. to kill with hunger.
i cannot blame his cousin king,
that wish’d him on the barren mountains sharv'd. shai:#.
hunger and thirst, or guns and swords,
give the same death in different words:
to push this argument no further,
to starve a man in law is murther. prior.
if they had died through fasting, when meat was at hand,
they would have been guilty of siarving themselves. pope.
2. to subdue by famine.
thy desires
are wolfish, bloody, starv'd, and ravenous. shakes care.
he would have worn her out by slow degrees,
as men by fasting starve th' untam'd disease. dryden.
attalus endeavoured to starve italy, by stopping their con-
voy of provisions from africa. arbuthnot on coins.
3. to kill with cold.
from beds of raging fire to starve in ice
their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine
immoveable, infix’d, and frozen round. milton.
4. to deprive of force or vigour.
the
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a
the powers of their minds are /arved by disuse, and have
lost that reach and strength which nature fitted them to re-
ceive. - locke.
srvoveling. " so, (from surve.j. an animal thin and weak
for want f nourishment.
if i hang, i'll make a fat pair of gallows; for old fir john
hangs with ine, and he's go/orolog. shakespeare.
now thy alms is giv'n, the letter's read;
donne. {
the body risen again, the which was dead;
and thy poor sharveling bountifully fed.
the fat ones would be making sport with the lean, and
calling them /ia ve ings. l'e/irange.
sra'ry, l no. 49. hungry; loan; pining.
- the thronging clusters thin
by kind avulsion; else the /lorv'ling brood,
void of sufficient sustenance, will yield
a fload or autumn. philips.
poor starveling bird, how small thy gains !
how unproportion'd to thy pains ! swift.
sr*'s worr. m. / [or, lat.) a plant. 41 lier.
sr*., ary. a. stron so, lt j. fixed; sittled.
the st and statory times of pairing of nails, and cutting of
hair, is but the continuation of ancient superstition. brown.
state. m. s. [slatus, lat.)
1. condition; circumstances of nature or fortune.
i do not
infer as if i thought my sister's fate
secure. milton.
i found the whole city highly concerned for the ha-
zardous state of candia, which was lost soon after. domi-
nico cantatini, the present duke, was sedulous in that affair.
drown's i ravels.
their sins have the aggravation of being fins against grace,
and forsaking and do porting from god, which refect makes
the site of apostates as the unexcusable, so the most desperately
dangerous state. hammond.
thus have his prayers for others, altered and amended the
jit of his own heart. law.
relate what latium was,
declare the past and present /late of things.
like the pop its is your poet's sate,
dryden's on.
poor and disarm'd. pope.
2. modification of anything.
keep the state of the question in your eye. boyle.
3. stationary point; crisis ; height; point from which the next
movement is regression.
the deer that endureth the womb but eight months, and is
comple at at six years, cannot live much more than thirty, as
having passed two general motions; that is, its beginning and
increase; and having but two more to run through, that is,
its oute and declination. brown's sugar errours.
t unours have their several degrees and times; as begin-
nigg, augment, state, and declination. j/yeman.
4. [//tat, fr. j. estate ; signiory; polics.ion.
strong was their liot,
their slates far of, and they of wary wit. daniel.
5. mode of government.
no state can be named wher' in any part of the body of those
imperial laws hath the just force of a law, otherwise than as
custom hath particularly induced it. selden.
6. the community; the publick ; the commonwealth.
if any thing more than yor sport
idid move your greatoes, and this noble state,
to call on him, he ho; es it is no other
but for your health sake. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
a state's anger
should not take knowledge either of fools or women. b. j.
i hear her talk of slate matters and the senate. ben. johns.
what he got by fortune,
it was the state that now must make his right. daniel.
the state ha h given you licence to stay on land for the
space of six weeks. bacon.
it is better the kingdom should be in good estate, with par-
ticular loss to many of the people, than that all the people
should be well, and the state of the kingdom altogether lost.
hayward.
it is a bad exchange to wound a man's own conscience,
thereby to saves to tores. king charles.
for you wo it, y'd, as did the grecian sate
'till alexander came. js aller.
since they all live by begging, it were better for the state
to keep them. graant.
these are the realms of unrelenting fate ;
ard awful rhadamanthus rules the state:
he hears and judges. dryden's zn.
7. hence singles, it in shoes rare for individuality. ...
my thouot, who e murther yet is but fantastical,
shakes to my sing. state of man, that function
ls (mother's a uraic. slawspeare's macbeth.
8. ( wil power, not ecclesiastical.
the same criminal may be absolved by the church, and
condemned by the sate; absolved or pardoned by the state, yet
censured by the church. lesley.
government not monarchical.
9. a republick; a
g from a state so narrow in compass of
they feared nothin
land, and so weak, that the strength of their armies has ever
been made
up of foreign troops. temple.
io. rank 5. condition ; quality.
fair dame, i ain not to you known,
though in your state of honour ion perse&amp;t. shakespeare.
high state the bed is where misfortine lies. fairfax.
11. solemn pomp ; appearance of greatness.
when in triumphant state the british mus.
true to herself, shall bab’rous ad refue. 2 roscommon
there kings receiv'd the marks of sov rein pow'r : -
in state the monarchs march'd, the lictors bore
the awful axes and the rods before. dryden's aen
let my attendants wait: i’ll be alone, -
where least of state, where most of love is shown. dryden.
to appear in their robes would be a troublesome
f ale.
piece of
callier.
at home surrounded by a servile crowd,
prompt to abuse, and in detraction loud;
abroad begirt with men, and swords, and spears,
his very state acknowledging his fears. prior.
if god has delivered me up to evil spirits, to be dragged by
them to places of torments, could it be any comfort to me,
that they found me upon a bed of state?
12. dignity; grandeur. -
she intructed him how he should keep state, and yet with
a modest sense of his misfortunes. bacon's henry vii.
law.
the swan rows her state with oary feet. milton.
he was said, and in his gait
preserv'd a grave majestick state. - butler.
such cheerful modesty, such humble state,
moves certain love. jvaller.
can this imperious lord forget to reign,
quit all hoat', descend, and serve again. pope's statius.
he will cosider, not what arts, or methods, or application
will soonest make him richer and greater than his brethren, or
remove him from a shop to a life of state and pleasure; but
will consider what arts, what methods, what application can
make worldly business most acceptable to god, and make a
life of trade a life of holiness, devotion and piety.
13. a seat of dignity.
this chair shall be my state, this dagger my sceptre, and
this cushion my crown. shakes eare's henry iv.
as she affected not the grandeur of a state with a canopy,
she thought there was no offence in an elbow-chair. arbuthn.
the brain was her study, the heart her state room. arbuth.
14. a canopy; a covering of dignity.
over the chair is a state made round of ivy, somewhat
whiter than ours; and the state is curiously wrought with fil-
ver and silk. bacon,
his high throne, under state
of richest texture spread, at th' upper end
was plac'd. auton's paradise loss.
15. a person of high rank.
law.
obsolete.
she is a dutchess, a grea, state. latymer.
16. the principal persons in the government.
the bold design
pleas'd highly those internal states. milton.
17. joined with another word it signifies publick.
i am no courtier, nor versed in state-affairs : my life hath
rather been contemplative than active. bacon.
council ' what's that a pack of bearded slaves,
the scavengers that sweep state nusances,
and are themselves the greatest. dry len’s cleomenes.
i am accused of refle&amp;ting upon great states-folks. swift.
to state. v. a. [constater, fr.]
1. to settle; to regulate.
this is so stated a rule, that all casuists press it in all cases
of damage. decay of piety.
this is to state accounts, and looks more like merchandize
than friendship. colier of friendship.
he is capable of corruption who receives more than what
is the stated and unquestioned fee of his office. addison.
2. to represent in all the circumstances of modification.
many other inconveniences are consequent to this stating
of this question; and particularly that, by those which thus
/tote it, there hath never yet been affilined any definite num-
ber of fundamentals. hammond on fundame ta's.
its present state stateth it to be what it now is. 1|ale.
were our case stated to any sover heathen, he wou'd never
guess why they who acknowledge the necessity of prayer, and
confess the same god, may not ask in the same form.
decay of piey.
to state it fairly, imitation is the most advantageous way
for a tianslator to shew himself, but the greatest wrong which
can be done to the memory of the dead. dryden.
i pretended not fully to state, much less demonstrate, the
truth contained in the text. art, roury.
the ugh
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
s t a
though i don't pretend to state the exact degree of mis-
chief that is done by it, yet its plain and natural tendency to
do harm is sufficient to justify the most absolute condemnation
of it. law,
state liness. n.s. s from stately.]
1. grandeur; majestick appearance; august manner; dignity.
we may colle&amp;t the excellency of the understanding then by
the glorious remainders of it now, and guess at the stateliness
of the building by the magnificence of its ruins. south.
for stateliness and majesty what is comparable to a horse :
more's antidote again/? atheism.
2. appearance of pride; affeded dignity.
agenor glad such punctual ready bliss
did on his own design itself obtrude,
swell'd his vast looks to bigger stateliness. beaumont's psyche.
she hated statelines; ; but wisely knew
what just regard was to her title due.
st ately. adj. [from state.]
1. august; grand ; lofty; elevated; majestick; magnificent.
a satelier pyramid to her i’ll rear,
than rhodope's or memphis' ever was. shak. hen. vi.
these regions have abundance of high cedars, and other
stately trees casting a shade. raleigh's history.
truth, like a stately dome, will not shew herself at the first
betterton.
visit. south.
he many a walk travers'd
of stateliest covert, cedar, pine, or palm. milton.
2. elevated in mien or sentiment.
ye that stately tread or lowly creep. milton.
he maintains majesty in the midst of plainness, and is stately
without ambition, which is the vice of lucan. dryden.
sta’s eroom. n.s.. [from state and room.] a magnificent room
in a palace or great house.
states. m. s. pl. [from state.] nobility.
states man. m. s. [state and man.]
1. a politician; one versed in the arts of government.
it looks grave enough
to seem a statesman. ben. johnson.
the corruption of a poet is the generation of a states-
man. pope.
2. one employed in publick affairs.
if such actions may have passage free,
bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be. shak. othello.
it is a weakness which attends high and low ; the statesman
who holds the helm, as well as the peasant who holds the
plough. south.
absolute power is not a plant that will grow in this soil;
and statesmen, who have attempted to cultivate it here, have
pulled on their own and their master's ruin. 19avenant.
a british minister must expect to see many friends fall off,
whom he cannot gratify, since, to use the phrase of a late souts-
man, the pasture is not large enough. addison.
here britain's statesmen oft the fall foredoom
of foreign tyrants, and of nymphs at home. pope.
state swom an. m. s. [ state and woman.] a woman who
meddles with publick affairs: in contempt.
how she was in debt, and where she meant
to raise fresh sums: she's a great/lateswoman / b. johnson.
several objects may innocently be ridiculed, as the passions
of our stateswomen. addison.
statical. uadj. [from the noun..] relating to the science
statick. { of weighing.
a man weigheth some pounds less in the height of winter,
according to experience, and the statick aphorisms of saneto-
rius. brown's vulgar erreurs.
if one by a statical engine could regulate his insensible per-
spiration, he might often, by restoring of that, foresee, pre-
vent, or shorten a fit of the gout. arbuthnot on diet.
stat1cks. n.s. [sa],x* ; /latique, fr.] the science which
considers the weight of bodies.
this is a catholick rule of staticks, that if any body be bulk
for bulk heavier than a fluid, it will sink to the bottom ; and if
lighter, it will float upon it, having part extant, and part im-
mersed, as that so much of the fluid as is equal in bulk to the
immersed part be equal in gravity to the whole. bentley.
station. m. s. [/iation, french; statio, latin.]
1. the aet of standing.
their manner was to stand at prayer, whereupon their
meetings unto that purpose on those days had the names of
siations given them. hooker.
in station like the herald, mercury,
new-lighted on a heav'n-kissing hill.
2. a state of rest.
all progression is performed by drawing on or impelling
forward some part which was before in station or at quiet,
where there are no joints. brown's wulgar errours.
. a place where any one is placed.
the seditious remained within their station, which, by rea-
son of the nastiness of the beastly multitude, might more firly
be termed a kennel than a camp. hayward.
the planets in their station list'ning stood. a4ilton.
shakoff. timon.
4. post assigned; office.
michael in either hand leads them out of paradise, the fier;
serpent waving behind them, and the cherubims taking their
stations to guard the place. milton.
5. situation ; position.
to fingle stations now what years belong,
with planets join'd, they claim another song.
the fig and date, why love they to remain
in middle station and an even plain;
while in the lower marsh the gourd is found,
and while the hill with olive-shade is crown'd?
6. employment; office.
no member of a political body so mean, but it may be
used in some station or other. l'estrange.
by spending this day in religious exercises, we acquire
new strength and resolution to perform god’s will in our
several stations the week following. nelson.
they believe that the common size of human understand-
ing is fitted to some station or other. swift.
whether those who are leaders of a party arrive at that
station more by a sort of instinet, or influence of the stars, than
by the possession of any great abilities, may be a point of much
cretch,
prior,
dispute. swift.
7. character; state.
far the greater part have kept their station. milton.
8. rank; condition of life.
i can be contented with an humbler station in the temple of
virtue, than to be set on the pinnacle. dryden.
to station. v. a. [from the noun..] to place in a certain
post, rank, or place.
stationary. adj. [from station.]
1. fixed; not progressive. -
between the descent and ascent, where the image seemed
stationary, i stopped the prism, and fixed it in that posture, that
it should be moved no more. newton's opt.
2. respecting place.
the same harmony and stationary constitution, as it hap-
pened in many species, so doth it fall out in individuals. brown.
3. belonging to a stationer.
station.e.r. m. s. [from station.]
i. a bookseller.
some modern tragedies are beautiful on the stage, and yet
tryphon the stationer complains they are seldom asked for in
his shop. dryden.
with authors, stationers obey'd the call;
glory and gain th’ industrious tribe provoke,
and gentle dulness ever loves a joke. pope's dunciad.
2. a feller of paper.
stat1st. n. s. [from state.] a statesman; a politician; one
skilled in government.
i do believe,
statist though i am none, nor like to be,
that this shall prove a war. shakesp. cymbeline.
their orators thou then extoll'st, as those
the top of eloquence, statists indeed,
and lovers of their country. milton's paradiso rog:
statuary. m. s. [slatuaire, french; from statua, latin.]
1. the art of carving images or representations of life.
the northern nations, that overwhelmed it by their num-
bers, were too barbarous to preserve the remains of learning more
carefully than they did those of archite&amp;ture and statuary. temple.
2. one that practises or professes the art of making statues,
on other occasions the statuaries took their subjects from
the poets. addison.
how shall any man, who hath a genius for history, under-
take such a work with spirit and chearfulness, when he consi-
ders that he will be read with pleasure but a very few years
this is like employing an excellent statuary to work upon
mouldering stone. swift.
statue. n.s. [statue, fr. statua, latin.] an image; a solid
representation of any living being.
the princess heard of her mother's statue, a piece many
years in doing, and now newly perform'd by that rare italian
master. shakesp. if inter's tale.
they spake not a word;
but like dumb statues, or unbreathing stones,
star'd each on other. shaks). richard iii.
archite&amp;ts propounded unto alexander to cut the mountain
athos into the form of a statue, which in his right hand should
hold a town capable of containing ten thousand men, and in
his left a vessel to receive all the water that flowed from the
mountain. //ilkins’s math. magick.
a statue of polycletus, called the rule, deserves that name
for having so perfeoł an agreement in all its parts, that it is
not possible to find a fault in it. dryden's dufresnoy.
to statue. v. a. [from the noun..] to place as a statue.
thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, lov’d and ador'd;
and were there sense in his idolatry,
my substance should be statued in thy stead. shakes?care.
stature. m. s. [stature, fr. statura, latin.] the height of
any animal.
i,
6
what
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t a
what stature we attain at seven years we sometimes double,
most times come short of at one and twenty. brown.
a creature who might erect
his stature, and upright with front serene
govern the rest. milton.
foreign men of mighty stature came. dryden.
thyself but dust, thy stature but a span;
a moment thy duration, foolish man prior.
we have certain demonstration from egyptian mummies,
and roman urns and rings, and measures and edifices, and
many other antiquities, that human stature has not diminished
for above two thousand years. bentley's sermons.
statutable, adj. [from statute.] according to statute.
i met with one who was three inches above five feet, the
tatutable measure of that club. addison's guaraian.
sia rurably adv. [from statutable.] in a manner agreeable
to law.
statute. m. s. [statut, french; statutun, latin.] a law ;
an edict of the legislature.
not only the common law, but also the statutes and ads of
parliament, were specially intended for its benefit. sperfer.
blood hath been shed,
ere human statute purg'd the gen'ral weal. shakespeare.
there was a statute against vagabonds; wherein note the
dislike the parliament had of goaling them as chargeable and
sterous. bacon.
know the statutes of heaven and laws of eternity, those
immutable rules of justice. hillson.
o queen indulg’d by favour of the gods,
to build a town, with statutes to restrain
the wild inhabitant beneath thy reign. dryden's encil.
7, stave. v. a. in the plural stoves. [from staff.
1. to break in picces: used originally of barrels made of small
parts or staves.
it irreverent expression, or a thought too wanton, are crept
into my verses, let them be /fav'd or forfeited like contra-
banded goods. - dryden.
2. to push away as with a staff: with off.
how can they escape the contagion of the writings, whom
the virulency of the calumnies have not saved off from read-
ing. ben. johnson.
the condition of a servant staves him off to a distance; but
the gospel speaks nothing but allurement, attraction, and in-
vitation. south.
3. to pour out by breaking the cask.
the feared disorders that might ensue thereof have been an
occasion that divers times all the wine in the city hath been
staved. sarty,’s travels.
4. to furnish with rundles or staves.
this was the shameful end of aloysus grittus, solyman's
deputy in hungary , who climbing too fast up the evil staved
ladder of ambition, suddenly sell, and never rose more. knolles.
to stav e. v. n. to fight with staves.
equal shame and envy stirr'd
i' th' enemy, that one shou'd beard
so many warriours, and so stout,
as he had done, and stav'd it out.
1, st ave and tail. v. a.
and by pulling the tail.
the conquering foe they soon assail'd,
hudibras.
to part dogs by interposing a staff,
first trulla stav'a, and cerdon tail'd, hudibras.
staves. m. s. the plural of staff.
all in strange manner arm’d,
some rustick knives, some staves in fire warmed. sponsor.
they tie teasils up in bundles or staves. mortimer.
st a v esacre. m. s. [herba peaicularis, lat.] larkspur. a plant.
t. stay. v. n. [siaen, dutch..]
1. to continue in a place; to forbear departure.
if she do bid me pack, i'll give her thanks,
as though she bid me stay by her a week. shakespeare.
not after resurrection shall he stay -
longer on earth than certain times t'appear. milton.
he did ordain, that as many might depart as would ; but as
many as would stay should have very good means to live from
the state. bacon.
they flocked in such multitudes, that they not only stayed
for their resort, but discharged divers. hayward.
th’ injur'd sea, which from her wonted place,
to gain some acres, avarice did force,
if the new banks neglected once decay, - -
no longer will from her old channel stay. jwaller.
stay, i command you, stay and hear me first. , dryden.
nor must he stay at home, because he must be back again
by one and twenty. - locke.
every plant has its atmosphere, which hath various effects
on those who stay near them. arbuthnot on aliments.
servants sent on messages stay out longer than the message
requires. swift.
2. to continue in a state.
the flames augment, and stay
at their full height, then languish to decay. dryden.
vol. ii.
3. to wait; to attend; to forbear to ad.
i'll tell ti -
when i a nee my whole device
r "in my coach, which says for us. shakespear.
would ye tarry for them till they were grown ... ye
stay for them from having husbands? ruth i. 13.
we for his royal presence l
to end the . p only stay
- drydon.
|joy for turnus, whose devoted head y
is owing to the living and the dead;
my son and i expect it from his hand. dryden.
the father cannot stay any lon
mother for a new set of babies
4. to w. to stand still.
hen she list pour out her larger sprigh
she would command the hasty ni o
or backward turn his course. &gt; spensor
perkin warbeck, finding that when matters once gro down
the hill, they stay not without a new force, to
- resolved
some exploit upon england. q1w c #.
satan •
throws his steep flight in many an airy wheel,
ger for the fortune, nor the
to play with. locke.
nor stay'd, till on niphates' top he lights. milton.
5. to dwell; to belong.
nor will i stay
9n amphix, or what deaths he dealt that day. dryden.
. i must stay a little on one action, which preferred the re-
lief of others to the consideration of yourself. dryden.
6. to rest confidently: with upon. -
b. cause ye trust in oppression, and ftay thereon, this shall
be as a breach ready to fail. isa. xxx. 12.
they call themselves of the holy city, and slay themselves
upon god. isa. xlviii. 2.
to st.ay. v. a.
1. to stop; to withhold; to repress.
all that may stay their minds from thinking that true which
they hearily with were false, but cannot think it so without
some scruple. hooker.
the syrens sang to allure them into danger; but orpheus
sang so well that he said them. ralegh's history of the world.
he took nothing but a bit of bread to stay his stoiach. lockt.
to stay these sudden gests of pinion
that hurry you from reason, rest afur'd
the secret of your love lives with me only. rowe.
stay her stomach with these half hundred plays, till i can
procure her a romance big enough to satisfy her great soul with
adventures. pope.
why cease we then the wrath of heaven to stay?
be humbled all. pope.
2
. to delay; to obstruct; to hinder from progression.
the joyous time will not be say’d
unless she do him by the forelock take. spensor.
your ships are staid at venice. shakespeare.
unto the shore, with tears, with sighs, with moan,
they him conduct; cursing the bounds that stay
their willing fleet, that would have further gone. daniel.
i will bring thee where no shadow says
thy coming, and thy soft embraces. milton.
i was willing to stay my reader on an argument that appears
to ne new. locke.
3. to keep from departure.
if as a prisoner i were here, you might
have then insisted on a conqueror's right,
and so y’d me here. dryden.
4. [estayer, french..] to prop ; to support; to hold up.
on this determination we might stay ourselves without fur-
ther proceeding herein. hooker.
aaron and hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side
and the other on the other. exod. xvii. 12.
sallows and reeds for vineyards useful found,
to stay thy vines.
stay. m. s. sesaye, french.]
1. continuance in a place; forbearance of departure.
determine,
or for her stay or going; the affair cries haste. shakespeare.
should judges make a longer stay in a place than usually they
dryden.
do, a day in a county would be a very good addition. bacon.
her long with ardent look his eye pursu'd,
delighted but desired more her stay. milton.
the thracian youth invades
orpheus returning from th' elysian shades,
embrace the hero, and his stay implore. j/aller.
so long a stay will make
the jealous king suspect we have been plotting. denham.
what pleasure hop'it thou in my stay,
when i'm constrain’d and wish myself away : dryden.
when the wine sparkles,
make haste, and leave thy business and thy care,
no mortal int’rest can be worth thy stay. dryden.
2. stand; ceslation of progression.
bones, after full growth, continue at a stay; teeth stand at
a stay, except their wearing. - bacon.
jay, p 25 e. - affairs
|
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s.t. e.
s t e
affairs of state seemed rather to stand at a say, than to ad-
vance or decline. - - - | hayward.
made of sphere-metal, never to decay, -
until his revolution was is. . . . . . milton.
almighty crowd thou shorten'st all dispute;
nor faith nor reason make thee at a stay, -- * -
thou leap'st o'er all. . . . . . dryden's medal.
3. a stop; an obstruction; a hindrance from progress.
his fell heart thought long that little way,
griev'd with each step, tormente with each stay. fairfax.
4. restraint; prudence; caution; discreet steadiness; sobriety
bf judgment. - - - - - - , - -
for her son, - * * -
in her own hand the crown she kept in store,
till riper years he raught, and stronger stay. spenser.
many just and temperate provisos, well shewed and fore-
tokened the wisdom, stay and moderation of the king. bacon.
with prudent stay he long deferr'd
the rough contention. " " philips.
5. a fixed state.
who have before, or shall write after thee,
their works though toughly laboured will be
like infancy or age to man's firm stay,
or early and late twilights to mid-day.
alas ! ... is there in human flate |
and who can shun inevitable fate
6. a prop; a support.
obedience of creatures unto the law of nature is the stay
of the whole world. hooker.
what surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
what this was once a king, and now is clay. shakespeare.
my only strength, and stay / forlorn of thee,
whither shall i betake me?—where subsist milton.
trees serve as so many stays for their vines, which hang like
garlands from tree to tree. addison on italy.
7. tackling. .
- with stays and cordage last he rigg’d a ship,
donne.
dryden.
and roll'd on leavers, launch'd her in the deep. pope.
8. [in the plural.j." boddice.
- no stubborn stays her yielding shape embrace. gay.
9. steadiness of conduct.
sta'yep, part, adj. [from stay.] fixed; settled; serious; not
volatile. -
whatsoever is above these proceedeth of shortness of me-
mory, or of want of a stayed and equal attention. bacon.
he was well stayed, and in his gate
preserv'd a grave majestick state. hudibras.
a stayed man and wife are seldom so indolent as not to find
consolation in each other. pope.
stayedly. adv. [from stayed.] composedly; gravely; pru-
dently; soberly; calmly; judiciously.
sta’yedness. m. s. [from stayed.]
i. solidity; weight. -
when substantialness combineth with delightfulness, and
currantness with stayedness, how can the language sound other
than most full of sweetness? camden's remains.
2. composure; prudence; gravity; judiciousness.
sta’yer. m. s. [from stay.] one who stops, holds or sup-
orts.
por may jove, the guardian of the capitol,
he, the great stayer of our troops in rout,
fulfil your hopes, and animate the cohorts. a. philips.
sta’ylace. n.s.. [stay and late.] a lace with which women
fasten their boddice. -
a staylace from england should become a topick for censure
at visits. swift.
stay s. m. s. without singular.
1. boddice; a kind of stiff waistcoat made of whalebone, worn
by ladies.
2. k. in a ship to keep the mast from falling aft. all masts,
topmasts, and flagstaves, have stays, except the spritsail top-
mast: the mainmast, foremast, with the masts belonging to
them, have also back stays, which help to keep the mast from
pitching forward or overboard. harris.
3. [scabe, saxon.] station; fixed anchorage.
they were come upon the stays, when one of the sailors
descried a galley. sidney.
our ships lay anchor'd close: nor needed we
feare harme on any staies. chapman.
4. any support; any thing that keeps another extended.
__weavers stretch your stays upon the west. dryden,
stead. % [rzeb, saxon.] -
1. place. obsolete. . . . . . - *.
fly therefore, fly this fearful stead anon,
left thy fool hardize work thy sad confusion, spenser.
... they righ approached to the stead
where as those maremaids dwelt. spensor's fairy queen.
* ... " ' "the term of life is limited,
ne may a man prolong nor shorten it;
... the §. may not move from watchful stead,
- o nor leave his stand until his captain bed,
- - - - - 7 - -
- * * *
immoveable.
sponsor•
3. room; place which another had or might have. it is
scarcely used but with the preposition in.
if we had taken them clean away, or else removed
so as to place in their stead others, we had done worse.
there fell down many slain,
until the captivity,
nor do the bold'st attempts bring forth
events still equal to their worth;
but sometimes fail, and in their stead
them,
- - hooker.
and they dwelt in their flead,
1 chron. v. 22.
fortune and cowardice succeed. butler
- jealousy then fir’d his soul, -
and his face kindled like a burning coal;
now cold despair succeeding in her stead,
o livid paleness turns the glowing red. dryden.
3. use; help. to stand in stead; to be of great use; to help;
to advantage. -
a compleat man hath some parts, whereof the want could
not deprive him of his essence; yet to have them standio;
in fingular stead, in respect of special uses. hookers
he makes his understanding the warehouse of lumber i.
ther than a repository of truth, which will stand him in stead
when he has occasion for it. lotke.
the smallest act of charity shall stand us in greatsai.
atterbury'
4. the frame of a bed. ry's sermons,
the genial bed,
sallow the feet, the borders and the sed. dryden
stead, sied, being in the name of a place that is distant from
any river, comes from the saxon reeb, rzyb, a place; but if
it be upon a river or harbour, it is to be derived from rza’se
a shore or station for ships. . gibson's camio.
to st ead. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to help; to advantage; to support; to affist. a word some-
what obsolete.
we are neither in skill, nor ability of power greatly to
stead you. sidney.
shake cart.
and necessaries, so
shakespeare's tampo.
it nothing steads us
to chide him from our eyes.
rich garments, linens, stuffs,
which since have steaded much.
can you so stead me
as bring me to the fight of isabella shakespeare.
your friendly aid and counsel much may stead me. 'ou.
2. to fill the place of another. obsolete.
we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your ap-
pointment, and go in your place. shakespeare.
stea"pf ast. adj. [stead and fast.] -
1. fast in place; firm; fixed.
such was this giant's fall, that seem'd to shake
this sledsost globe of earth, as it for fear did quake. spensor.
laws ought to be like stony tables, plain, /teadfast, and
- spenser's state of ireland,
how rev'rend is the face of this tall pile, -
whose massy pillars rear their aged heads
to bear aloft its arch'd and pond’rous roof, -
by its own weight made steadsoft and immoveable,
looking tranquillity; it strikes an awe
and terrour on my aking sight. congreve.
2. constant; resolute.
i hope her stubborn heart to bend,
and that it then more stedsoft will endure. spenser.
be faithful to thy neighbour in his poverty; abide hooft
unto him in the time of his trouble. '... :*
him resist stedfast in the faith. i pet. v. 9.
3. not turned aside by fear.
what form of death could him affright,
wh9 unconcern'd, with stedfast fight,
cou'd view the surges mounting steep,
and monsters rolling in the deep? dryden.
stroopfastly: adv. [from steadfast.j. firmly; constantly.
god's omniscience steadfasty grasps the greatest and most
slippery uncertainties, south’s sermons.
in general, stedfastly believe, that whatever god hath re-
vealed is infallibly true. hake's preparation for death.
stea'dfastness. n. s. [from steadfast.]
1. immutability; fixedness.
so hard these heavenly beauties beenfir’d,
as things divine, least passions do impress,
the more of steadfast minds to be admir’d,
the more they stayed be on stedfasinos.
2. firmness; constancy; resolution.
steadily, adv. [from steady.]
1. without tottering; without shaking.
sin has a tendency to bring men under evils, unless hin-
dered by some accident, which no man can steadily build
upon. south's sermons.
2. without variation or irregularity.
so steadily does fickle fortune steer
th’obedient orb that it should never err.
steadiness. n.s.. [from sleady.]
1. state of being not tottering nor easily shaken.
2. firmness;
spenser,
blackmore.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t e *
2. firmness; constancy. - - *
john got the better of his cholerick temper, and wrought
himself up to a great steadines of mind, to pursue his interest
through all impediments, arbuthnot.
consistent unvaried conduct.
steadiness is a point of prudence as well as of courage. l'es.
a friend is useful to form an undertaking, and secure steadi-
nts; of conduct. collier of friendship.
srody, adj., [rebo, saxon.]
. firm; fixed; not tottering.
their feet steady, their hands diligent, their eyes watchful,
and their hearts resolute.
1. regular; constant; undeviating; unremitted.
he sails 'tween worlds and worlds with steady wing. milt.
steer the bounding bark with steady toil,
when the storm thickens and the billows boil. pope.
not wavering; not fickle; not changeable with regard to
resolution or attention.
now clear i understand,
what oft my steadios; thoughts have search'd in vain. milton.
steady to my principles, and not dispirited with my af-
fliaions, i have, by the blesfing of god, overcome all diffi-
culties. dryden's aeneid.
a clear fight keeps the understanding steady. locke.
sreak. n.s. (syck, islandick and erse, a piece; sheka, swedish,
to boil.] a slice of flesh broiled or fried; a collop.
the surgeon protested he had cured him very well, and of-
fered to eat the first stake of him. tatler.
fair ladies who contrive
to feast on ale and steaks. swift.
t, steal. v. a. preterite i./?ole, part. pass stolen. clan
saxon; selen, dutch.] jłole, j; [rcelan,
1. to take by theft; to take clandestinely; to take without
right. to stal generally implies secrecy; to rob, either se-
crecy or violence.
thou ran'st a tilt in honour of my love,
and stol's away the ladies hearts of france. shakespeare.
there are some shrewd contents in yon same paper,
that steal the colour from bassanio's cheek;
some dear friend dead. soakesp. merch. of venice.
how should we steal silver or gold gen. xliv, 8.
a schoolboy finding a bird's nest, shews it his companion,
and he stral; it. shakespeare.
2. to withdraw or convey without notice.
the law of england never was properly applied to the irish,
by a purposed plot of government, but as they could insinuate
and skal themselves under the same by their humble carriage
and submission. spenser.
let us shift away, there's warrant in that theft
which steals itself when there's no mercy left. shakespeare.
3. to gain or effect by private and gradual means.
young lorenzo
stole her soul with many vows of faith,
and ne'er a true one.
were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
doth watch bianca's steps so narrowly,
*twere good to stal our marriage. shakespeare.
they hate being alone, for fear some affrighting apprehen-
sons should steal or force their way in. calamy.
variety of objects has a tendency to steal away the mind
from its steady pursuit of any subject. //atts.
t. st e a l. v. n.
1. to withdraw privily; to pass silently.
fixt of mind to avoid further entreaty, and to fly all com-
pany, one night she stole away.
my lord of amiens and myself
did steal behind him as he lay along
l]nder an oak. shakespeare.
i cannot think it,
that he would steal away so guilty like,
seeing you coming. shakesheare's othell.
the most peaceable way, if you take a thief, is to let him
shew what he is, and steal out of your company., shakespeare.
at time that lover's flights doth still conceal,
through athens' gate have we devis’d to skal. shakesp.
in my conduct shall your ladies come,
from whom you now must steal and take no leave. shak:
others weary of the long journey, lingering behind, were
folen away; and they which were left, moiled with dirt and
mire. knoller.
a bride
should vanish from her cloaths into her bed,
as souls from bodies steal and are not spy'd. donne.
the vapour of charcoal hath killed many; and it is the
more dangerous, because it cometh without any ill smell, and
sealeth on by little and little. bacon's natural history.
a soft and solemn breathing sound,
rose like a steam of rich distill'd perfumes,
and sole upon the air, that even silence - - - -
was took ere she was ware. milton.
as wise artists mix their colours so,
that by degrees they from each other gos
3
shakespeare.
sidney.
*/kal, unheeded from the neighboin, wh;
$o on us sole our blessed chao o: ghb'ring white, dryden:
^so he had no steward, he stol, away. soft.
n o: o fierce eyes with sparkling fury glow,
t ... */foal out, and tears begin to flow. pope.
* * ******; to play the thief; to take anything thievish.
yo o habit of thieving. y thing
fealth.g. i - - - -
kno: o ... on another what is his, wo .
the good humour is to seal at a minute's th-co.
the wise it call ; steal? a fico for the phrase ! softlar.
stea"ler. m. s. [from steal.] one who steals a thief -
ar the transgression is in or. 2. softwar,
stea lingly. adv. [from seasing.] slily; by in o.
*. by ...
- ey were diverse motions, they did - -
into another, as the latter pot ". ever ‘....'...'.
eye could discern the former was ended. sid
stealth. n.s.. [from sical j ney.
1. the act of stealing; theft.
. the owner proveth the sealth
him by such an outlaw, and to have been found in the posses-
fion of the prisoner s &gt;
- penser's state of ireland.
the stealth of mutual entertainment s 'f irelan
with character too gross is written on juliet. shakespeare:
in the secret dark that none reproves, -
their pretty stealth, shall work, and snares shall spread.
to have been committed upon
s -
the gods persuaded mercury, penser
their good observer, to this sicalth. chapman's ili
2. the thing stolen. z jtea opman s iliad.
on his back a heavy load he bare
of nightly stealths, and pillage several. fai
- ry queen.
store of cabbins are but sluttish dens, that breed fickness in
peace, serving to cover stealths, and in fight are dangerous to
tear men with splinters. raleigh.
3. secret act; clandestine praelice. by sealth means secretly;
clandestinely; with desire of concealment: but, like steal, is
often used in a good sense.
the wisdom of the same spirit borrowed from melody that
pleasure, which, mingled with heavenly mysteries, causeth the
smoothness and softness of that which toucheth the car, to
convey as it were by stealth the treasure of good things into
man's mind. hooker.
i feel this youth's perfeołions,
with an invisible and subtile sealth,
to creep in at mine eyes. shakespeare's twelfth night.
the monarch blinded with desire of wealth,
with steel invades his brother's life by siealth
before the sacred altar. dryden.
let humble allen, with an aukward shame,
do good by stealth, and blush to find it fame. pope.
ste at thy. adj. [from shealth..] done clandestinely ; per-
formed by stealth.
now wither'd murder with his sea'thy pace,
moves like a ghost. shakespeare's macbeth.
steam. n. s. [rteme, saxon.] the smoke or vapour of any
thing moist and hot.
sweet odours are, in such a company as there is steam and
heat, things of great refreshment.
his offering soon propitious fire from heaven
consum'd with nimble glance and grateful stam. milton.
while the temple smoak'd with hallow'd /team,
they wash the virgin. - dryden.
such the figure of a feast
which, were it not for plenty and for steam,
might be resembled to a sick man's dream. king.
some it bears in steams up into the air, in such a quantity as
to be manifest to the smell, especially the sulphur. woodw.
to steam. v. n. [rzeman, saxon.]
1. to smoke or vapour with moist heat.
let the crude humours dance
bacon.
in heated brass, steaming with fire intense. philips.
2. to send up vapours.
ye mists that rise from steaming lake. milton.
see, see, my brother's ghost hangs hovering there,
o'er his warm blood, that steams into the air. dryden.
o wretched we ' why were we hurry'd down
this lubrick and adult'rate age;
nay, added fat pollutions of our own,
to increase the steaming ordures of the stage 2 dryden.
3. to pass in vapouts.
scarcely had phoebus in the gloomy east
got harnessed his fiery-footed team, -
ne rear'd above the earth his flaming crest
when the last deadly smoke aloft did steam. spenser.
the dissolved amber plainly swam like a thin film upon the
liquor, whence it steamed away into the air, boyle.
these minerals not only issue out at these larger exits, but
soam forth through the pores, of the earth, occasioning sul-
phureous and other offensive stenches. woodward.
stean for stone. sponsor.
steato'ma.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t e.
s. t. e.
steato"m.a. m. s. [rtztwo 2.]
if the matter in a wen resembles milk-curds, the tumour is
called atheroma; if like honey, meliceris; and if composed of
fat, sleatoma. sharp's surgery.
steed. m. s. [rzeba, saxon.] a horse for state or war.
my noble steed i give him,
with all his trim belonging. shakespeare's macbeth.
impresses quaint, caparisons and steeds. amilton.
stout are our men, and warlike are our steeds. waller.
she thought herself the trembling dame who fled,
and him the grisly ghost that spurr'd th' infernal steed.
dryden.
who, like our active african, instructs
the fiery steed, and trains him to his hand addison's cato.
see the bold youth strain up the threat’ning steep; .
hang o'er their coursers heads with eager speed,
and earth rolls back beneath the flying steed. pope.
some nymphs affeot a more heroic breed,
and vault from hunters to the manag'd steed. 1%ung.
steel. m. s. [real, saxon ; stael, dutch.] -
1. steel is a kind of iron, refined and purified by the fire with
other ingredients, which renders it white, and its grain closer
and finer than common iron. steel, of all other metals, is
that susceptible of the greatest degree of hardness, when well
tempered ; whence its great use in the making of tools and
instruments of all kinds. chambers.
steel is made from the purest and softest iron, by keeping it
red-hot, stratified with coal-dust and wood-ashes, or other
substances that abound in the phlogiston, for several hours in
a close furnace. - hill's mat, med.
at her back a bow and quiver gay,
stuff'd with steel-headed darts wherewith she quell'd
the savage beasis in her victorious play. spensor.
with mighty bars of long enduring brass
the steel-bound doors and iron gates he ties. fairfax.
they are not charm'd against your points, of steel nor iron
framed. - chapman.
a looking-glass, with the steel behind, looketh whiter than
glass simple, bacon's natural history.
diamonds, though hard bodies, will not ready strike fire
with steel, much less with one another ; nor a flint easily with
a steel, if they both be wet ; the sparks being then quenched
in their eruption. brown's wulgar errours.
both were of shining steel, and wrought so pure
as might the strokes of two such arms endure. dryden.
2. it is often used metonymically for weapons or armour.
brave macbeth with his brandish'd steel
which smok’d with bloody execution,
carv'd out his passage till he had fac'd the slave. shakespeare.
polish'd steel from far severely shines. lryden.
he sudden as the word,
in proud plexippus' bosom plunged the sword;
toxeus amaz'd, and with amazement slow,
stood doubting; and while doubting thus he stood,
receiv'd the steel bath'd in his brother's blood.
3. chalybeate medicines.
after relaxing, steel strengthens the solids, and is likewise
an antiacid. arbuthnot.
4. it is used proverbially for hardness: as heads of steel.
steel. adj. made of steel.
a lance then took he, with a keene steele head,
to be his keepe off, both 'gainst men and dogges. chapm.
to steel. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to point or edge with steel.
add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers,
and with thy blessings steel my lance's point. shak. r. ii.
2. to make hard or firm. it is used, if it be applied to the
mind, very often in a bad sense.
lies well steel'd with weighty arguments.
so service shall with steeled fingers toil,
and labour shall refresh itself with hope.
shakspeare's henry v.
from his metal was his party steel'd;
which once in him rebated, all the rest
turn'd on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.
o god of battles | sleel my soldiers hearts,
possess them not with fear. shakesp. henry v.
why will you fight against so sweet a passion,
and sleel your heart to such a world of charms ?
man, foolish man
scarce know'st thou how thyself began;
yet sleel'd with study’d boldness, thou dar'st try
to send thy doubted reason's dazed eye
through the mysterious gulph of vast immensity.
let the sleel'd turk be deaf to matrons cries,
see virgins ravish'd with relentless eyes.
so perish all whose breasts the furies seel'd,
and curs'd with hearts unknowing how to yield.
st fe'ly. adj. [from steel.]
1. made of steel.
thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
broach'd with the sley point of clifford's lance. shafe?,
dryden.
shakespeare.
shakesp.
addison.
prior.
tickel.
pope.
here smokes his forge, he bares his finewy arm,
and early strokes the sounding anvil warm ;
around his shop the sleely sparkles flew,
as for the steed he shap'd the bending shoe.
2. hard ; firm.
that she would unarm her noble heart of that steely resist-
ance against the sweet blows of love. sidney.
stee'lyard. m. s. [ steel and yard.] a kind of balance, in
which the weight is moved along an iron rod, and grows hea:
vier as it is removed farther from the fulcrum.
steen, or stean. n.s. a vessel of clay or stone. ainsworth.
steep. adj. [rzeap, saxon.] rising or descending with great
inclination; precipitous. -
the mountains shall be thrown down, and the sleep places
shall fall. ezek,
he now had conquer’d anxur's sleep ascent. addison.
steep. m. s. precipice ; ascent or descent approaching to per-
pendicularity. -
as that theban monster that propos'd
her riddle, and him, who solv’d it not, devour’d ;
that once found out and solv'd, for grief and spight
gay.
cast herself headlong from the ismenian sleep. amilton.
as high turrets for their airy sleep
require foundations, in proportion deep;
and lofty cedars as far upwards shoot,
* as to the neather heavens they drive the root;
so low did her secure foundation lie,
she was not humble, but humility. dryden.
instructs the beast to know his native force,
to take the bit between his teeth, and fly
to the next headlong sleep of anarchy. dryden.
we had on each fide naked rocks and mountains, broken
into a thousand irregular sleeps and precipices. addison.
leaning o'er the rails, he musing stood,
and view'd below the black canal of mud,
where common shores a lulling murmur keep,
whose torrents rush from holborn's fatal sleep. gay.
to steep. v. a. [/lippen, dutch..] to soak ; to macerate;
to imbue; to dip.
. when his brother saw the red blood trail
adown so fast, and all his armour sleep,
for very fellness loud he 'gan to weep. spensor.
he, like an adder, lurking in the weeds,
his wand'ring thought in deep desire does sleep;
and his frail eye with spoil of beauty feeds. spensor.
a napkin sleeped in the harmless blood
of sweet young rutland. ... shakes. henry vi.
the conquering wie hath steep'd our sense
in soft and delicate lethe. . -
many dream not to find, neither deserve,
and yet are sleep'd in favours. shakspeare's cymbeline.
four days will quickly sleep themselves in night:
four nights will quickly dream away the time. shakespeare.
most of the sleepings are cheap things, and the goodness of
shakespeare.
the crop is a great matter of gain. bacon.
whole droves of minds are by the driving god
compell'd to drink the deep lethean flood:
in large forgetful draughts to sleep the cares -
of their past labours and their irksome years. dryden.
wheat sleeped in brine twelve hours prevents the smuttiness.
mortimer’s husbandry.
stee’rle. m. s. [rteopel, rzypel, saxon.] a turret of a
church generally furnished with bells. a spire.
blow, winds, and crack your cheeks; rage, blow !
you cataracts and hurricanoes spout
till you have drench'd our sleeples, drown'd the cocks.
- - shakespeare.
what was found in many places, and preached for wheat
fallen on the ground from the clouds, was but the seed of ivy-
berries, and though found in steeples or high places, might be
conveyed thither or muted by birds. brown's pulgar errours.
a raven i saw sleeple-high, just over your house. l'ejir.
they, far from seeples and their sacred sound,
in fields their sullen conventicles found. dryden.
stee ply. adv. [from sleep.] with precipitous declivity.
stee pn ess. n.s.. [from skep.] precipitous declivity.
the craggedness or sleepness of that mountain maketh many
parts of it inaccessible. brerewood on language.
lord lovel swam over trent on horseback, but could not :
recover the farther side, by reason of the steepness of the bank,
and so was drowned. bacon's henry vii.
vineyards, meadows, and cornfields lie on the borders
and run up all the sides of the alps, where the barrenness of
the rocks, or the sleepness of the ascent will suffer them.
addison.
stee'py. adj. [from sleep.] having a precipitous declivity. a
poetical word for sleep. -
who hath dispos'd, but thou, the winding way,
where springs down from the sleepy craggs do beat 2 jwattan.
a prophet some, and some a poet cry,
from /jeepy othrys’ top to pylus drove
his herd ; and for his sains enjoy'd his love. dryden.
- no
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t e
no more, my goats, shall i behold you climb
the sleepy cliffs, or crop the flow'ry thyme. dryden.
steer. n.s... [rone, reeon, retone, saxon; slier, dutch.]
a young bullock. -
they think themselves half exempted from law and obedi-
ence; and having once tasted freedom, do, like a sleer that
hath been long out of his yoke, grudge and repine ever after
to come under rule again. spenser's ireland.
lacaon, neptune's priest,
with solemn pomp then sacrific’d a sleer.
nor has the steer,
at whose strong chest the deadly tiger hangs,
e'er plow'd for him. thomson.
t, steer. v. a. [rteenan, rtyrian, sax. shieren, dutch..] to
direct; to guide in a passage: originally used of a ship, but
applied to other things.
a comely palmer, clad in black attire,
of ripest years, and hairs all hoary gray,
that with a staff his feeble steps did sizer,
left his long way his aged limbs should tire. spensor.
if a pilot cannot see the pole star it can be no fault in him
to steer his course by such stars as do best appear to him.
king charles.
dryden.
t, steer. v. n.
1. to direct a course at sea.
as when a ship by skilful steersman wrought,
nigh river's mouth, or foreland, where the wind
weers oft, as oft so sleers, and shifts her sail. milton.
in a creature, whose thoughts are more than the sands, and
wider than the ocean, fancy and passion must needs run him
into strange courses, if reason, which is his only star and com-
pass be not that he steers by. locke.
2. to conduct himself.
stee’rag e. n. / [from /*er.]
1. the act or prastice of steering.
having got his vessel launched and set afloat, he committed
the steerage of it to such as he thought capable of conducting
it. spectator.
2. dire&amp;ion; regulation of a course.
he that hath the steerage of my course,
direct my suit. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
3. that by which any course is guided.
his costly frame
inscrib'd to phoebus, here he hung on high,
the steerage of his wings, and cut the sky. drydon.
4. regulation, or management of any thing.
you raise the honour of the peerage,
proud to attend you at the steerage. swift.
5. the stern or hinder part of the ship.
stee'rsmat e. q n.s. [/]eer and man, or mate.] a pilot; one
steer's man. { who steers a ship.
what pilot so expert but needs must wreck,
embark'd with such a steersonate at the helm ? milton.
in a storm, though the vessel be pressed never so hard, a
skilful sheer/man will yet bear up against it. l'estrange.
through it the joyful steersman clears his way,
and comes to anchor in his inmost bay. dryden.
stega no'or aph1st. n.s. (riyawos and y:z:22.] e who
practises the art of secret writing. bailey.
stegaso'graphy, n. s. [reyzvo, and 7.62o2.] the art of secret
writing by characters or cyphers, inteligible only to the per-
sons who correspond one with another. bailey.
st egnost ick. adj. [rsy…"….] binding; rendering costive.
baily.
stf'le. m. s. [rzela, sax. sole, dutch..] a stalk; a handle.
stellar. adj. [from sella j astral; relating to the stars.
in part shed down
their stellar virtue, on all kinds that grow
on earth; made hereby apter to receive
perfection from the sun's more potent ray. milton.
salt dissolved, upon fixation, returns to its affected cubes,
and regular figures of minerals, as the hexagonal of chrystal,
and sellar figure of the stone atteria. glanville.
stellate. adj. [/islatus, lat..] pointed in the manner of a
painted star. -
one making a reculus of antimony, without iron, found
his regulus adorned with a more conspicuous star than i have
seen in several/toslate regulus's of antimony and mars. boyle.
stellation. n.s.. [from stella.] emission of light as from a
star.
stelled. adj. starry. --
and quench'd the selled fires. shaks eare's king l'ar.
stelli'ferjus. adj. [sicla and fero.] having stars. dic.
stellion. n.s. [/fessiz, lat.) a newt. ainsworth:
stf'llion at e. n. s. s.siellionat, fr. stellionatus, lat l a kind
of crime which is conmitted [in law] by a deceitful selling of
a thing otherwise than it really is: as, if a man should sell
that for his own estate which is actually another man's.
it discerneth of crimes of stellionate, and the inchoations to-
wards crimes capital, not actually committed. bacon.
stem. n.s. [stemma, lat.)
1. the stalk; the twig.
vol. ii.
s t e
two lovely berries molded on one stem,
so with two seeming bodies, but one heart.
after they are first shot u
a very large top,
j'em.
- shakespeare.
- p thirty foot in length, they spread
having no bough nor twig in the trunk or
- raleigh's history.
set them aslope a reasonable depth, and then o, will o:
forth moy roots, and so carry more shots upon a stem. bac.
this, ere it was in th’ earth,
god made, and ev'r herb, before i
on the green stem. y , before it grew
the stem thus threaten’d and the sap in thee milton. .
drops all the branches of that noble toe. &gt; jwaller.
farewell, you flow’rs, whose buds with early care
i watch'd, and to the chearful fundi
who now shall bind your slems 2 or,
with fountain streams your fainting s
d rear :
when you fall,
ouls recall -
the low'ring spring with lavish rain d dryden
beats down the slender slem and bearded grain. dryden.
2. family; race; generation. pedigrees are drawn in the form
of a branching tree.
i will assay her worth to celebrate,
and so attend ye toward her glittering state;
where ye may all, that are of noble slem,
approach. milton,
whosoever will undertake the imperial diadem, must have
of his own wherewith to support it which is one of the rea-
sons that it hath continued these two ages and more in that
jiem, now so much spoken of. howel's local forest.
do'st thou in hounds aspire to deathless fame
learn well their lineage and their ancient/tem.
3. progeny; branch of a family.
this is a slem
of that victorious stock, and let us fear
his native mightiness. shakespeare's henry v.
4. [stammen, swedish.] the prow or forepart of a ship.
orante's barque, ev’n in the hero's view,
from /*em to stern, by waves was overborn. dryden.
to stem. v. a. s.siamma, islandick.] to oppose a current;
to pass cross or forward notwithstanding the stream.
they on the trading flood,
through the wide ethiopian to the cape
tickel.
ply, stemming nightly tow'rd the pole. milton.
above the deep they raise their scaly crests,
and stem the flood with their erected breasts. denham.
in shipping such as this, the irish kern
and untaught indian, on the stream did glide,
ere sharp-keel'd boats to stem the flood did learn,
or fin-like oars did spread from either side. dryden.
at length erasmus, that great injur'd name,
stemm'd the wild torrent of a barb'rous age,
and drove those holy vandals off the stage. pope,
stench. n.s. (from reencan, saxon.]
1. a stink; a bad smell.
death, death; oh amiable and lovely death!
thou odoriferous slench, sound rottenness,
arise forth from thy couch of lasting night. shak. k.
so bees with smoke, and doves with noisome slench,
are from their hives, and houses, driv'n away. shakespeare.
physicians, by the slench of feathers, cure the rising of the
mother. bacon's nat. hi/lory,
the ministery will be found the salt of the earth, the thing
that keeps societies of men from slench and corruption. south.
the hoary nar,
corrupted with the slench of sulphur flows,
and into tiber's streams th’ infected current throws. add.
2. i find it used once for a good smell.
black bulls and bearded goats on altars lie,
and clouds of sav'ry stench involve the sky.
to st enc h. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to make to stink. not proper, or in use.
the foulness of the ponds only slencheth the water.
martimer.
2. [for slaunch, corruptly..] to stop; to hinder to flow.
they had better skill to let blood than stench it. k. charles.
restringents to slench and incrasiatives to thicken the blood.
harvey on consumptions.
ste no'o raphy. m. s. [revo; and y:zoo.] short-hand.
o the accurst stenog, a hy of sia. !
the princely eagle shrunk into a bat. cleaveland.
sten roropho'nick. adj. [from stentor, the homerical herald,
whose voice was as loud as that of fifty men, and own, a
voice..] loudly speaking or sounding. -
of this sentorophonick horn of alexander there is a figure
preserved in the vatican. derham's physico-theology.
t., step. v. n. [rzoeppan, saxon; soappen, dutch.]
1. to move by a single change of the place of the foot.
one of our nation hath proceeded so far, that he was able,
by the help of wings, in a running pace, to flop constantly ten
yards at a time. isilkins's math. mag.
2. to advance by a sudden progression. -
whosoever # after the troubling the water stopped in, was
made whole. jo. v. 4.
ventidius
john,
dryden.
25 f
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t e
s t e
ventidius lately - -
bury'd his father, by whose death he's sopp'd
into a great estate. shakesp. timon.
3. to move mentally. -
when a person is hearing a sermon, he may give his
thoughts leave to step back so far as to recollect the several
heads. jwatts.
they are shopping almost three thousand years back into the
remotest antiquity, the only true mirrour of that ancient
world. pope's preface to the iliad.
4. to go; to walk.
i am in blood
stept in so far, that should i wade no more,
returning were as tedious as go o’er. shakesp. macbeth.
. to come as it were by chance.
the old poets slop in to the assistance of the medalist.
addison.
6. to take a short walk. -
see where he comes : so please you, step aside;
i'll know his grievance. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
my brothers, when they saw me wearied out,
stopp'd, as they said, to the next thicket-side
to bring me berries. milton.
when your master wants a servant who happens to be
abroad, answer, that be had but that minute slept out. swist.
7. to walk gravely, slowly, or resolutely.
pyrrhus, the most ancient of all the bashaws, sept forth,
and, appealing unto his mercies, earnestly requested him to
spare i.is life. knoles's hislory of the turks.
when you sopp'd forth, how did the monster rage,
in scorn of your soft looks and tender age cowley.
home the swain retreats,
his flock before him //epping to the fold. thomson's summer.
step. m. s. [it ep, saxon ; /lap, dutch.j
1. progression by one removal of the foot.
thou sound and firm-set earth,
hear not my shops, which way they walk. shakesp. macleth.
ling’ring perdition, worse than any death
can be at once, shall step by step attend
you and your ways. shakespeare's temps?.
who was the first to explore th' untrodden path,
when life was hazarded in every slep 2 addison's cato.
2. one remove in climbing; hold for the foot ; a stair.
while solyman lay at buda, seven bloody heads of bishops,
slain in battle, were set in order upon a wooden slop. knolies.
the breadth of every single siep or stair should be never less
than one foot, nor more than eighteen inches. //otton.
those heights where william's virtue might have staid,
and on the subject world look’d safely down,
by marlbro’ pass'd, the props and sips were made
sublimer yet to raise his queen's renown. prior.
it was a saying among the ancients, truth lies in a well ;
and, to carry on this metaphor, we may justly say, that logick
does supply us with steps, whereby we may go down to reach
the water. jwatts.
3. quantity of space passed or measured by one removal of the
foot.
the gradus, a roman measure, may be translated a step, or
the half of a pastus or pace, arbuthnot on coins.
4. a small length ; a small space.
there is but a shop between me and death.
5. walk; passage; (in the plural.)
o may thy pow'r, propitious still to me,
conduct my steps to find the fatal tree
in this deep forest.
6. gradation; degree.
the same fin for substance hath fundry steps and degrees, in
respect whereof one man becometh a more heinous offender
than and ther. perkins.
7. progression; act of advancing.
to derive two or three general principles of motion from
phaenomena, and afterwards to tell us how the properties and
actions of all corporeal things follow from those manifest prin-
ciples, would be a very great step in philosophy, though the
causes of those principles were not yet discovered. newton.
one injury is best defended by a second, and this by a third:
by these steps the old masters of the palace in france became
masters of the kingdom ; and by these steps a general, during
pleasure, might have grown into a general for life, and a ge-
neral for life into a king. swift.
the querist must not proceed too swiftly towards the deter-
mination of his point, that he may with more ease draw the
learner to those principles slep by slip, from whence the final
conclusion will arise. watts.
8. footstep ; print of the foot.
from hence astrea took her flight, and here
the prints of her departing steps appear. dryden's virgil.
9. gait; manner of walking.
sudden from the golden throne
with a submisfive slep i hasted down;
the glowing garland from my hair i took,
love in my heart, obcdience in my look.
i sa. xx. 3.
dryden's aon.
prizr.
io. a&amp;tion ; instance of conduct.
the reputation of a man depends upon the first slo, ht
makes in the world. pope
step, in composition, signifies one who is related only by m.
riage. [sceop, saxon, from reepan, to deprive or make ano.
phan : for the saxons not only said a step-mother, but a step-
daughter, or step-son ; to which it indeed, according to this
etymology, more properly belongs: but as it is now sold.
applied but to the mother, it seems to mean, in the mind of
those who use it, a woman who has slopped into the vacan.
place of the true mother.]
how should their minds chuse but misdoubt, lest this disi.
pline, which always you match with divine doctrine as her
natural and true sister, be found unto all kinds of knowle
a step-mother. o
his wanton step-dame loved him the more; -
but when she saw her offered sweets refuse,
her love she turn'd to hate. spe's r,
you shall not find me, daughter,
after the slander of most slep-mothers,
ill-ey'd unto you. shakes. cymbalho,
a father cruel, and a step-dame false. shakspeare.
cato the elder, being aged, buried his wife, and married
a young woman: his son came to him, and said, sir, what
have i offended, that you have brought a step-mother into your
house : the old man answered, nay, quite the contiary,
son ; thou pleasest me so well, as i would be glad to have
more such.
the name of step-dame, your practis'd art,
by which you have estrang'd my father's heart,
all you have done against me, or design, -
shows your aversion, but begets not mine. dryd, aurengz.
a step-dame too i have, a cursed she,
who rules my hen-peck'd fire, and orders me. dryden,
any body would have guessed miss to have been bred up
under the influence of a cruel step-dame, and john to be the
fondling of a tender mother. a buthn. hisł. of john bull.
ste ppingstone. m. s. [/lep and soone..] stone laid to catch
the foot, and save it from wet or dirt.
like stopping/lones to save a stride,
in streets where kennels are too wide. swift.
stercora'ceous. adj. [/tercoraceus, lat..] belonging to dung;
partaking of the nature of dung.
green juicy vegetables, in a heap together, acquire a heat
equal to that of a human body; then a putrid stercoraceous
taste and odour, in taste resembling putrid flesh, and in smell
human faeces. arbuthnot on aliments.
ster cor ation. m. s. [from stercora, lat.] the act of dung-
ing ; the aet of manuring with dung.
the first help is /lercoration: the sheeps dung is one of the
best, and the next dung of kine, and that of horses. bacon.
stercoration is seasonable. evelyn's kalendar.
the exteriour pulp of the fruit serves not only for the secu-
rity of the seed, whilst it hangs upon the plant, but, after it
is fallen upon the earth, for the stercoration of the soil, and
promotion of the growth, though not the first germination of
the seminal plant. ray on the creation,
stereo'graphy. m. s. [sitt's and %22%; /tereographie, fr.]
the art of drawing the forms of solids upon a plane. harris.
stereo'metry. m. s. soft so; and were:w ; /iereometrie, fr.]
the art of measuring all sorts of solid bodies. harris.
steril. adj. [/serie, fr. sterilis, lat..] barren; unfruit-
ful; not productive; wanting fecundity.
our elders say,
the barren, touched in this holy chase,
shake off their/ieri/ curse. shakesp. julius casar.
thy sea marge /leril, and rocky hard.
shakespeare's tem; oft.
in very seril years corn sown will grow to another kind.
bacon's natural history.
to separate seeds, put them in water: such as are corrupted
and steril swim. brown's pulgar erreurs.
she is grown seril and barren, and her births of animals
are now very inconsiderable. more against atheism.
when the vegetative stratum was once washed off by rains,
the hills would have become barren, the strata below yielding
only mere serile and mineral matter, such as was inept for the
formation of vegetables. jp&amp;cdward.
ster1 lity.. n. s. [/ierilite, fr. serilitar, from serilis, lat.]
barrenness ; want of fecundity ; unfruitfulness.
spain is thin sown of people, by reason of the serility of the
soil, and because their natives are exhausted by so many em-
ployments in such vast territories. bacon's par with spain.
an eternal sterility must have possessed the world, where all
things had been fastened everlastingly with the adamantine
chains of specifick gravity, if the almighty had not said, let
the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the
fruit-tree yielding fruit. bentley's seroon.
he had more frequent occasion for repetition than any poet;
yet one cannot ascribe this to any serility of expression, but to
the genius of his times, which delighted in these reiterati
verses. " - pope's effy on lio.o.
bacon.
i?
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t e
s t e
f, sre'rit'ize. o.o. [from seril.] to make barren; to de-
rive of fecundity, or the power of production.
may we not as well suppose the sterilizing the earth was
suspended. for some time, ’till the deluge became the execu-
tioner of it? ... . woodward's natural h/lory.
go! /?ori'ize the fertile with thy rage. savage.
- - - - - s
sre'rling. adj. [of this word many derivations have been
offered; the molt probable of which is that offered by cam sea,
who derives it from the eyserungs, who were employed as
coiners] - -
1. an epithet by which genuine english money is discriminated.
the king's treasure that he let at his death, amounted
unto eighteen hundred thousand poun is sterling. bacon.
several of them would rather chuse to count out a sum in
sefierces than in pounds sterling. addison.
2. genuine; having past the test.
there is not one single witty phrase in this collestion,
which hath not received the stamp an i approbation of one
hundred years: he may therefore be secure to find them all
genuine, /*.*, and a thensick. swift's polite conversation.
ste'rling. t. j. [/te, singum, low lat. from the adjective.]
i. english coln money.
this visionary various projects tries,
and knows that to be rich is to be wise:
by useful observation he can tell
the sacred charms that in true 'cring dwell;
how gold makes a patrician of a slave,
a dwarf an atlas, a therites brave. garth.
great name, which in our rolls recorded slands,
leads honours, and protects the learned bands,
accept this offering to thy bounty due,
and roman wealth in english sterling view. c. arbuthnot.
2. standard rate.
stern. adj. [rona, saxon.]
1. severe of counted once ; truculent of aspest.
why look you it is so joern and tragical ? shakes. h. vi.
i would outliare the series? cyes that look,
outbrave the heart most during on the earth,
puck the yout, suck ng cubs from the she-bear,
yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey,
to win thee, lady. shos. ..! serchant of penice.
it shall not be a miss here to present the stern but lively
countenance of this so famous a man.
i…'. history of the turks.
gods and men
fear'd her stern frown, and she was queen o' th' woods.
alsoston.
the judge supreme soon cost a fleds.st eye,
stern, yet attemper'd with benignity. harte.
2. severe of manners ; has sh; unrekinting ; cruel.
women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
thou /orn, obdurate, flinty, rough, remo: seless. shakesp.
the common executioner,
whose heart th' accustom'd fight of death makes hard,
falls not the ax upon the humbled neck,
but first begs pardon : will you /?rner be
than he that deals and lives by bloody drops ? shakespeare.
did this in caesar seem ambitious
when that the poor have cry'd, caesar hath wept ;
ambition should be made of sternor stuff. shak. jul. cos.
then shall the war, and stern debate and strife
immortal, be the bus'ness of my life;
and in thy faine the dusty spoi's among,
high on the burnish'd roof, my banner shall be hung.
dryden.
how s?ern as tutors, and as uncles hard,
we lash the pupil and defraud the ward.
3. hard ; affictive.
if wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,
thou shouldst have said, go, porter, turn the key,
all cruels else subscrib'd. shakesp. king lear.
mischiefe stood,
and with his/hern steele, drew in streames the blood.
chapman.
stern. n.s. [rzon, saxon. of the same original with steer.]
1. the hind part of the shop where the rudder is placed.
let a barbarous indian, who had never seen a ship, view
the separate and disjointed parts, as the prow and /tern, the
ribs, masts, ropes, and shrouds, he would form but a very
lame idea of it. //atts on the mind.
they turn their heads to sea, their sterns to land. dryden.
2. post of management ; direction.
the king from eltam i intend to send,
and fit at chiefest stern of publick weal.
3. the hinder part of anythin .
she all at once her beastly body raised,
with doubled forces high above the ground,
though wropping up her wreathed stern around. spensor.
stern age. n.s. (from jera.] the steerage or stern. not
used.
grapple your minds to sermage of this navy,
and leave your england as dead midnight still. shakespeare.
dryden's pers.
shafts. h. vi.
ste'rnly. adj. [from stern..] in a fiern manner; severely ;
truculently.
no mountaine lion tore
two lambs so slenly.
sternly he pronounc'd
the rigid interdiction. milton's par. loft
yet sure thou art not, northv face the some -2.
northy limbs moulded in so soft afia... ." '
thou look'st more sternly, do's more strongly move,
and more of awe thou bear'sh, and les,
ste’rnness. m. s. [from /tern.] 2 ess of love. dryden.
1. severity of look.
of stature huge, and eke of courage bold,
that sons of men amaz'd their sternn's to behold spenser
how would he look to see his work so noble - -
wildly bound up! or how
should i, in these my borrow'd flaunts, belo'd
the /lernness of his presence
2. severity or harshness of manners.
i have siernness in my soul enough
to hear of soldiers work.
sternon. m. s. sovoy.] the breast-bone,
a soldier was shot in the breast through the sfernon. isosom.
sternutatios. m. s. [/ternutatio, lat.] the act of sneez.
ing.
sternutation is a convulsive shaking of the nerves and mus-
cles, occasioned by an irritation of those in the nostrils. &amp;#in.
concerning sternutation, or sneezing, and the custom of
saluting upon that motion, it is generally believed to derive
its original from a disease whereinsternutation proved mortal,
and such as sneezed died. brown's pulgar errours.
sternu't ative, adj. [/lermutatis, fr. from slernuta, lat.]
having the quality of sneezing.
ster su'rator y. m. s. [sternutatoire, fr. from /*ernuta, lat.]
medicine that provokes to sneeze.
physicians, in persons near death, use sternutatories, or such
medicines as provoke unto sneezing ; when, if the faculty
arise, and sternutation cnsueth, they conceive hopes of life.
brown.
ste’v en. m. s. [rteren, saxon.] a cry, or loud clamour.
ne sooner was out, but swifter than thought,
fast by the hide, the wolf lowder caught;
and had not rossy renne to the seven,
lowder had been slain thiske same even. spenser.
to st ew. v. a. [e/luver, fr. stoven, dutch..] to seeth any
thing in a slow moist heat, with little water.
ere i was risen from the place, that show'd
my duty kneeling, came a reeking post,
stew’d in his haste, half breathless. shakesp. king lear.
i bruised my skin with playing at sword and dagger with a
master of fence, three veneys for a dish of slew'd prunes. shak.
to st ew. v. m. to be seethed in a slow moist heat.
stew. n.s. souve, fr. sofa, italian ; estufa, spanish.]
1. a bagnio ; a hot-house.
as burning ætna from his boiling slew
doth belch out flames, and rocks in pieces broke,
and ragged ribs of mountains molten new,
fnwrapt in coal-black clouds and filthy smoke. spensor.
the lydians were inhibited by cyrus to use any armour,
and give themselves to baths and siews. abbot.
2. a brothel; a house of prostitution. [this signification is by
some imputed to this, that there were licensed brothels near
the slews or fishponds in southwark; but probably stew, like
bagnio, took a bad signification from bad use. it may be
doubted whether it has any singular. south uses it in a plural
termination with a singular sense. shakespeare makes it sin-
ular.
£ #!. be that hate harlots, and never were at the siews;
that abhor falshood, and never brake promise. asham.
i have seen corruption boil and bubble,
*till it o'er-run the stew. shakespeare.
with them there are no slows, no dissolute houses, no cur-
tesans. bacon's new atlantis.
her, though seven years she in the stews had laid,
a nunnery durst receive and think a maid,
and though in childbirth's labour she did lie,
midwives would swear 'twere but a tympany. donne.
what mod’rate top would rake the park or slews,
who among troops of faultless nymphs can chuse? rossom.
making his own house a shows, a bordel, and a school of
lewdness, to instill the rudiments of vice into the unwary
flexible years of his poor children. south.
3. [stowen, dutch, to store.] a storepond; a small pond where
fish are kept for the table.
ste ward. n.s. [rziparo, saxon.]
1. one who manages the affairs of another.
there satyclad in red,
down to the ground, a comely personage,
that in his hand a white rod managed ;
he steward was, high diet, ripe of age,
and in demeanour sober, and in council sage. sponsor,
whilst i have gold, i'll be his steward still, shał. "...
ake
chapman.
shakespeare.
dryden's cleomenes.
-
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t i
s t i
*
take on you the charge
and kingly government of this your land;
not as protector, seward, substitute,
or lowly factor for another's gain. shakesh. richard iii.
how is it that i hear this of thee : give an account of thy
stewardship ; for thou mayeft be no longer sleward, lu. xvi.
improve all those talents the providence of god hath in-
trusted us with, because we are but stewards, and must give
an account of them. nelson.
when a sleward defrauds his lord, he must connive at the
rest of the servants while they are following the same practice.
- - swift.
what can be a greater honour than to be chosen one of the
so ward, and dispensers of god's bounty to mankind what
can give a generous spirit more complacency than to consider,
that great numbers owe to him, under god, their subsistence,
and the good conduct of their lives swift.
just sleward of the bounty he receiv'd,
and dying poorer than the poor reliev'd. harte.
2. an officer of state.
the duke of suffolk is the first, and claims
to be high steward. shakespeare.
ste’w ard ship. m. s. [from steward.] the office of a steward.
the earl of worcester
hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship. shakes. r. ii.
shew us the hand of god
that hath dismiss'd us from our stewardship. shakespeare.
if they are not employed to such purposes, we are false to
our trust, and the stewardship committed to us, and shall be
one day severely accountable to god for it. calamy’s sermons.
st ew pan. m. s. [from slew and pan.] a pan used for stewing.
sti'b1a l. adj. [from stibium, lat. j antimonial.
the former depend upon a corrupt incinerated melancholy,
and the latter upon an adutt stibial or eruginous sulphur, harv.
sti bia'rian. m. s. [from slitium.] a violent man; from the
violent operation of antimony. obsolete.
this slihiarian presseth audaciously upon the royal throne,
and after some sacrification, tendereth a bitter pill of sacri-
lege and cruelty; but when the same was rejected because it
was violent, then he presents his antimonian potion. jwhite.
st i'cados. m. s. [sicadis, lat.] an herb. ainsworth.
stick. n.s. [rzicca, saxon; secco, italian; seck, dutch.]
1. a piece of wood small and long.
onions as they hang will shoot forth, and so will the herb
orpin, with which in the country they trim their houses, bind-
ing it to a lath or sick set against a wall. bacon's nat. history.
some strike from clashing flints their fiery seed,
some gather slick; the kindled flames to seed.
2. many instruments long and slender are called/?icks.
to stick. v. a. preterite stuck; participle pası. stuck. [rcican,
saxon.] to fasten on so as that it may adhere.
two troops in fair array one moment show'd;
the next, a field with fallen bodies strow'd :
the points of spears are stuck within the shield,
the steeds without their riders scour the field,
the knights unhors'd. dryden.
would our ladies, instead of sticking on a patch against
their country, sacrifice their necklaces against the common
enemy, what decrees ought not to be made in their favour
dryden.
- addison.
oh for some pedant reign,
some gentie james to bless the land again;
to sick the doctor's chair unto the throne,
give law to words, or war with words alone. pope.
to stick. v. n. -
1. to adhere; to unite itself by its tenacity or penetrating
power.
i will cause the fish of thy rivers to sick unto thy scales. ez.
the green caterpillar breedeth in the inward parts of roses
not blown, where the dew slicketh. bacon.
though the sword be put into the sheath, we must not suf-
fer it there to rust, or stick so fast as that we shall not be able
to draw it readily, when need requires. raleigh.
if on your fame our sex a blot has thrown,
'twill ever stick, thro’ malice of your own. 1%ung.
2. to be inseparable; to be united with anything. generally
in an ill sense.
now does he feel
his secret murthers sticking on his hands. shakesp. macbeth.
he is often stigmatized with it, as a note of infamy, to stick
by him whilst the world lasteth. sanderson.
in their quarrels they proceed to calling names, ’till they
light upon one that is sure to stick. swift.
3. to rest upon the memory painfully.
the going away of that which had staid so long, doth yet
stick with me. bacon's natural history.
4. to stop 5 to lose motion.
none of those who stick at this impediment, have any ene-
mies so bitter and implacable, as they found theirs. kettlewell.
i shudder at the name !
my blood runs backward, and my fault’ring tongue
sticks at the sound. smith's phaedra and hippolitus.
5. to resist emission.
wherefore could i not pronounce amen
i had most need of blesfing, and amen
stuck in my throat. shakesp. macbeth,
6. to be constant to ; to adhere with firmness: sometimes with
to, and sometimes with by.
the knave will slick by thee, i can assure thee that : he will
not out, he is true bred. shakespeare's henry iv.
the first contains a slicking fast to christ, when the chris-
tian profession is persecuted; and the second a rising from fin,
as he rose, to a new christian life. hammond.
some slick to you, and some to t'other side. dryden.
they could not but conclude, that to be their interest, and
being so convinced, pursue it and slick to it. tilletson.
we are your only friends, slick by us and we will slic ty
you. autnant.
the advantage will be on our side, if we slick to its essen-
tials. addison's freeholder.
7. to be troublesome by adhering ; with by or to.
i am satisfied to trifle away my time, rather than let it sick
by me. a'ope's letters.
8. to remain; not to be lost.
proverbial sentences are formed into a verse, whereby they
stick upon the memory. watts.
9. to dwell upon ; not to forsake.
if the matter be knotty, the mind must stop and buckle to
it, and sick upon it with labour and thought, and not leave
it ’till it has mastered the difficulty. locke.
every man, besides occasional affections, has beloved stu-
dies which the mind will more closely sick to. locke.
io. to cause difficulties or scruple.
this is the difficulty that slicks with the most reasonable of
those who, from conscience, refuse to join with the revolu-
tion. swift.
11. to scruple; to hesitate.
it is a good point of cunning for a man to shape the answer
he would have in his own words and propositions; for it makes
the other party slick the less. bacon.
the church of rome, under pretext of exposition of scrip-
ture, doth not stick to add and alter. bacon.
rather than impute our miscarriages to our own corruption,
we do not slick to arraign providence itself. l'estrange.
every one without hesitation supposes eternity, and sits
not to ascribe infinity to duration. locke.
that two bodies cannot be in the same place is a truth
that no body any more slicks at, than at this maxim, that it is
impossible for the same thing to be, and not to be. locke.
to slick at nothing for the publick interest is represented as
the refined part of the venetian wisdom. addison on italy.
some slick not to say, that the parson and attorney forged a
will. arbuthnot.
12. to be stopped ; to be unable to proceed.
if we should fail.
but screw your courage to the slicking place,
and we'll not fail. shakespeare's macbeth.
they never doubted the commons; but heard all /luck in
the lords house, and desired the names of those who hindered
the agreement between the lords and commons. clarendon.
he threw: the trembling weapon pass'd
through nine bull-hides, each under other plac'd }
qn his broad shield, and stuck within the last. dryden.
13. to be embarrassed; to be puzzled.
where they slick, they are not to be farther puzzled by
putting them upon finding it out themselves. locke.
they will slick long at part of a demonstration, for want of
perceiving the connexion of two ideas, that, to one more ex-
ercised, is as visible as any thing. locke.
souls a little more capacious can take in the connexion of
a few propositions; but if the chain be prolix, here they slick
and are confounded. jwatts on the mind.
14. to stick out. to be prominent with deformity.
his flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen, and his
bones that were not seen slick out. job xxxiii. 21.
i5. to stick out. to refuse compliance.
to stick v. a. [rzician, saxon; sicken, dutch.]
1. to stab ; to pierce with a pointed instrument.
the heruli, when their old kindred fell sick, stuck them
with a dagger. grew.
2. to fix upon a pointed body; as, he stuck the fruit upon his
knife.
3. to fasten by transfixion.
her death ! -
i'll stand betwixt: it first shall pierce my heart:
we will be /luck together on his dart.
dryden's tyrannick lovt.
4. to set with something pointed.
a lofty pile they rear;
the fabrick's front with cypress twigs they strew,
and/lick the fides with boughs of baleful yew. dryden.
stock in ess. n.s.. [from slicky.] adhesive quality; viscosity;
glutinousness; tenacity.
t;
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t f
s t i
1, stickle. v.a. [from the pracice of prizefighters, who
laced seconds with staves or sticks to interpose occasionally.]
1. to take part with one side or other.
fortune, as she's wont, turn'd fickle,
and for the foe began to slickle. hudibras.
2. to contest; to altercate; to contend rather with obstinacy
than vehemence.
let them go to't, and slickle,
whether a conclave, or a conventicle, cleaveland.
heralds slickle, who got who,
so many hundred years ago. hudibras.
3. to trim; to play fast and loose; to agt a part between oppo-
sites.
when he sees half of the christians killed, and the rest in
a fair way of being routed, he sticksos betwixt the remainder of
god's host and the race of fiends. dryden.
sri'cklebag. m. s. [properly sickleback, from sick, to prick;
pungitius, lat.] the smallest of fresh-water fish.
a little fish called a slicklebag, without scales, hath his body
fenced with several prickles. j/alton's angler.
stickle r. m. s. [from stickle.]
1. a sidesman to fencers; a second to a duellist; one who stands
to judge a combat.
basilius came to part them, the slickler's authority being un-
able to persuade cholerick hearers; and part them he did. sidn.
basilius, the judge, appointed slickiers and trumpcts, whom
the others should obey. sidney.
our former chiefs, like slicklers of the war,
first fought t' inflame the parties, then to poise:
the quarrel lov'd, but did the cause abhor;
and did not strike to hurt, but made a noise. dryden.
2. an obstinate contender about any thing.
quercetanus, though the grand slickler for the tria prima,
has this concession of the irresolubleness of diamonds. boyle.
the inferior tribe of common women have, in most reigns,
been the professed sicklers for such as have acted against the
true interest of the nation. addison's freeholder.
the tory or high church clergy were the greatest sicklers
against the exorbitant proceedings of king james ii. swift.
all place themselves in the list of the national church,
though they are great stickler for liberty of conscience. swift.
sri'cky. adj. [from stick. j. viscous ; adhesive; glutinous.
herbs which last longest are those of strong smell, and with
a slicky stalk. bacon's natural history.
stiff. adj. [relp, saxon; stiff, danish; sy, swedish; sifur,
islandick; stiff, dutch..]
1. rigid ; inflexible; resisting flexure; not flaccid; not lim-
ber; not easily flexible; not pliant.
they rising on soft pinions, tower
the mid aerial sky. milton.
the glittering robe
hung floating loose, or stiff with mazy gold. thomson.
2. not soft ; not giving way; not fluid ; not easily yielding to
the touch.
still less and less my boiling spirits flow;
and i grow stiff as cooling metals do. dryd. indian emp.
minging with that oily liquor, they were wholly incorpo-
rate, and so grew more /l/ and firm, making but one sub-
stance. burnet's theory.
3. strong; not easily resisted.
on a stiff gale
the theban swan extends his wings. denham.
4. hardy; stubborn ; not easily subdued.
how st f is my vile sense,
that i stand up, and have ingenious feeling
of my huge sorrows ' better i were distract! shakoffeare.
5. obstinate; pertinacious.
we neither allow unmeet nor purpose the soff defence of
any unnecessary custon heretofore received. hooker.
yield to others when there is cause; but it is a shame to
stand stiff in a foolish argument. taylor.
a war ensues, the cretans own their cause,
stiff to defend their hospitable laws. dryden.
6. harsh; not written with ease; constrained.
7. formal; rigorous in certain ceremonics; not disengaged in
behaviour; starched; affected.
the french are open, familiar, and talkative ; the italians
fift, ceremonious, and reserved. . addison on italy.
stf forms are bad, but let not worse intrude,
nor conquer art and nature to be rude. joung.
8. in shakesp. are it seems to mean strongly maintained, or as-
serted with good evidence.
this is stiff news. shakspeare.
to sti'ffen. v. a. [rzirian, saxon.]
1. to make stiff; to make inflexible; to make unp'iant.
when the blast of war blows in our ears,
stiffon the finews, summon up the blood,
disguise fair nature with hard-favour’d rage. shaky?. h. v.
he stiffned his neck, and hardened his heart from turning
unto the lord. 2 chron. xxxvi. 13.
the poor, by them disrobed, naked lie,
weil'd with no other covering but the sky;
vol. il.
; to affining frosts, and drenching showers, ". .
hich thicken'd air from her black bosom pours. sandyr.
her - - -
2. to own 4, and with sulphur burn. dryden.
her/liff'ning grief - -
who saw her children flighterd all at once,
was dull to mine. - - -
to sti'ffen. v. n. dryden and lee.
1. to grow stiff; to grow rigid
aghast, astonish'd
i stood; like bristles
; to become unpliant.
• and struck dumb with fear,
- - - - rose my stiff'ning hair. -
fix'd in astonishment i zo. dryden.
like one just blasted by a stroke from heaven
}. o and/offens yet alo - -
n dreadful looks, a monument of wrath. - * -
2. to #. hard ; to be hardened. wrath. addison's cato.
he tender soil, then stiffening by degree
shut from the bounded #. to. *...
3. to grow less susceptive of impression; to grow obsti
some souls, we see, ..
grow hard and shiffon with adversity. dryden.
stiff hea's ted, adj. [/liff and heart.]’ obstinate; stubborn;
cointumacious. -
- they are impudent children, and stiffhearted. - ezek. ii.
stiofly, adv. [from stiff.] rigidly; inflexibly ; stubbornly.
in matters divine, it is still maintained stiffly, that they have
no stiffnecked force. - hooker.
i commended them that stood so sifty for the lord. 2 esdr.
the indian fig of itself multiplieth from root to root, the
plenty of the sap and the softness of the stalk making the bough,
being overloaden and not softy upheld, to weigh down. boon.
sri ff secked. adj. [/liff and neck.j. stubborn; obstinate,
cointumacious.
an infinite charge to her majesty, to send over such an
army as should tread down all that standeth before them on
foot, and lay on the ground all the stiffnecked. spensor.
this stiffneck'd pride, nor art nor force can bend,
nor high-flown hopes to reason's lure descend. denham.
stioff ness. n.s.. [from stiff.]
1. rigidity; inflexibility ; hardness; ineptitude to bend.
the stiffnes, and dryness of iron to melt, must be hopen by
moistening or opening it. bacon.
the willow bows and recovers, the oak is stubborn and in-
flexible; and the punishment of that stiffness is one branch of
the allegory. l'estrange,
2. ineptitude to motion; torpidness.
the pillars of this frame grow weak,
my finews slacken, and an icy stiffness
benumbs my blood. - denham.
3. tension; not laxity.
to try new shrouds, one mounts into the wind,
and one below, their ease or stiffness notes. dryden.
4. obstinacy; stubbornness; contumaciousness.
the vices of old age have the stiffness of it too; and as it is
the unfittest time to learn in, so the unfitness of it to unlearn
will be found much greater.
firmness or sis/ness of the mind is not from adherence to
dryden.
plate.
truth, but submission to prejudice. locke.
these hold their opinions with the greatest stiffnof; ; being
generally the most fierce and firm in their tenets. locłe.
5. unpleasing formality; constraint.
all this religion sat easily upon him, without any of that
soffness and constraint, any of those forbidding appearances
which disparage the actions of the sincerely pious. atterbury.
6. rigorousness; harshness.
there fill yourself with those most joyous fights;
but speak no word to her of these sad plights,
which her too constant stiffnes, doth constrain. spenser.
7. manner of writing, not easy but harsh and constrained.
! rules and critical observations improve a good genius,
where nature leadeth the way, provided he is not too scrupu-
lous; for that will introduce a stiffnes; and affectation, which
are utterly abhorrent from all good writing. felton.
to sti’fl e. v. a. [effouser, french.]
1. to oppress or kill by closeness of air; to suffocate.
where have you been broiling?
among the crowd i' th' abbey, where a finger
cou'd not be wedg’d in more; i am shifted
with the mere rankness of their joy. shakespeare.
pray’r against his absolute decree
no more avails than breath against the wind;
blown sifting back on him that breathes it forth. milton.
that part of the air that we drew out, left the more room
for the softng steams of the coals to be received into it. boyle.
stifted with kisses, a sweet death he dies. dryden.
at one time they keep their patients so close and warm, as
almost to sift them with care; and all on a sudden, the cold
regimen is in vogue. baker.
i took my leave, being half softed with the closeness of the
room. swift's account of partridge's death.
2. to keep in ; to hinder from emission.
whilst bodies become coloured by reflecting or transmitting
25 g this .
south's sermons.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t i
s t f
this or that sort of rays more copiously than the rest, they stop
and stifle in themselves the rays which they do not reflect or
transmit. newton's opticks.
3. to extinguish by hindering communication.
4. to extinguish by artful or gentle means.
every reasonable man will pay a tax with chearfulness for
fifting a civil war in its birth. addison's freeholder.
5. to suppress; to conceal.
if't prove thy fortune, polydore, to conquer,
trust me, and let me know thy love's success,
that i may ever after stifle mine. otway's orphan.
6. to suppress artfully or fraudulently.
these conclusions have been acknowledged by the disputers
themselves, till with labour and study they had stified their first
convictions, rogers.
on these two pillars will our faith for ever stand, firm and
unmoveable, against all attempts; whether of vain philosophy,
to better the doctrine, or of vainer criticism, to corrupt or
stifle the evidence, waterland.
you excel in the art of sifting and concealing your resent-
ment. swift.
sti’gma, n. s. [stigma, latin.]
1. a brand ; a mark with a hot iron.
2. a mark of infamy.
stig matical. uadj. [from stigma.] branded or marked with
sti'gmatick. } some token of infamy.
thou'rt like a foul mishapen sligmatick,
mark'd by the destinies to be avoided. shakespeare.
he is deformed, crooked, old and ere,
vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind,
stigmatical in making, worse in mind. shakespeare.
to st1 gmat1ze. v. a. [stigmatiser, french, from sigma.]
to mark with a brand ; to disgrace with a note of re-
proach.
men of learning who take to business, discharge it with
greater honesty than men of the world; because the former in
reading have been used to find virtue extolled and vice slig-
matized, while the latter have seen vice triumphant and virtue
discountenanced. addison.
sour enthusiasts affect to sigmatize the finest and most ele-
gant authors both ancient and modern, as dangerous to reli-
gion. addison's freeholder.
the privileges of juries should be ascertained, and whoever
violates them sligmatized by publick censure. swift.
sti la r, adj. [from stile.] belonging to the stile of a dial.
- at fifty-one and a half degrees, which is london's latitude,
make a mark, and laying a ruler to the center of the plane and
to this mark, draw a line for the soilar line. moxon.
stile. m. s. [rzigele, from stigan, sax. to climb.]
1. a set of steps to pass from one enclosure to another.
there comes my master and another gentleman from frog-
mare over the stile this way. shakespeare.
if they draw several ways, they be ready to hang themselves
upon every gate or stile they come at. l'estrange.
the little strutting pile,
you see just by the church-yard stile. swift.
2. [stile, fr.] a pin to cast the shadow in a sun-dial. this
should rather be style.
ere&amp;t the stile perpendicularly over the substilar line, so as
to make an angle with the dial-plane equal to the elevation of
the pole of your place. moxon's mech. exercises.
stiletto. m. s. [italian; stilet, fr.] a small dagger, of which
the blade is not edged but round, with a sharp point.
when a senator should be torn in pieces, he hired one,
who entering into the senate-house, should assault him as an
enemy to the state; and stabbing him with stilettoes, leave him
to be torn by others. hakewill on providence.
to still. v. a. [rzillan, sax. stillen, dutch...]
1. to silence; to make silent.
is this the scourge of france
is this the talbot so much fear'd abroad,
that with his name the mothers still their babes?
the third fair morn now blaz’d upon the main,
then glassy smooth lay all the liquid plain,
the winds were hush'd, the billows scarcely curl’d,
and a dead filence still'd the wat'ry world.
2. to quiet; to appease.
in all refrainings of anger, it is the best remedy to make a
man's self believe, that the opportunity of revenge is not yet
come; but that he foresces a time for it, and so to still him-
self in the mean time, and reserve it. - bacon.
3. to make motionless.
he having a full sway over the water, had power to still
and compose it, as well as to move and disturb it. woodward.
still. adj. [stil, dutch.]
1. silent; uttering no noise. it is well observed by junius, that
st is the sound commanding filence.
we do not act, that often jest and laugh:
'tis old but true, still swine eat all the draugh.
your wife octavia, with her modest eyes,
and still conclusion, shall acquire no honour,
demuring upon me. shakesp. anthony and cleopatra.
shakesp.
pope.
shakesp.
the storm was said, the winds retir’d,
obedient to thy will;
the sea that roar'd at thy command,
at thy command was still.
2. quiet; calm. ,
atin when he spied
thus in still waves of deep delight to wade,
fiercely approaching to him, loudly cry’d.
from hence my lines and i depart,
i to my soft still walks, they to my heart;
i to the nurse, they to the child of art. donne.
religious pleasure moves gently, and therefore constantly.
it does not affect by rapture, but is like the pleasure of health,
which is still and sober. south.
hope quickens all the still parts of life, and keeps the mind
awake in her most remiss and indolent hours. addison.
silius italicus has represented it as a very gentle and still
river, in the beautiful description he has given of it. adasan.
how all things listen, while thy muse complains;
such silence waits on philomela's strains,
in some still ev'ning, when the whisp'ring breeze
addi h,
spensor.
pants on the leaves, and dies upon the trees. pope.
3. motionless.
gyrecia fit still, but with no still pensiveness. sidney.
though the body really moves, yet not changing perceive-
able distance with other bodies, as fast as the ideas of our minds
follow in train, the thing seems to stand /lill, as we find in
the hands of clocks. locke.
that, in this state of ignorance, we short-fighted creatures
might not mistake true felicity, we are endowed with a power
to suspend any particular desire. this is standing sill where
we are not sufficiently assured. locke.
this stone, o sysiphus, stands still ;
ixion rests upon his wheel.
still. n.s. calm; filence.
herne the hunter,
sometime a keeper here in windsor forest,
doth all the winter time, at still of midnight,
walk round about an oak with ragged horns. shak.
he had never any jealousy with his father, which might give
occasion of altering court or council upon the change; but all
things passed in a still. bacon', henry vii.
still, cdv. [rtille, saxon.]
1. to this time; till now.
it hath been anciently reported, and is still received, that
extreme applauses of great multitudes have so tarified the air,
pope,
that birds flying over have fallen down. bacon.
thou, o matron
here dying to the shore hast left thy name:
cajeta still the place is call’d from thee,
the nurse of great æneas' infancy. dryden's aneid.
2. nevertheless; notwithstanding.
the desire of fame betrays the ambitious man into inde-
cencies that lessen his reputation; he is still afraid lest any of
his actions should be thrown away in private. addison.
3. in an encreasing degree.
as god sometimes addresses himself in this manner to the
hearts of men; so, if the heart will receive such motions by a
ready compliance, they will return more frequently, and fill
more and more powerfully. south.
the moral perfections of the deity, the more attentively
we confider, the more perfeotly still shall we know them. ali.
4. always; ever; continually.
unless god from heaven did by vision still shew them what
to do; they might do nothing. haaker.
my brain i’ll prove the female to my soul;
my soul, the father; and these two beget
a generation of sill breeding thoughts. shakespeare.
whom the disease of talking still once possesseth, he can ne-
wer hold his peace. ben. johnson.
he told them, that if their king were still absent from them,
they would at length crown apes. davies on ireland.
chymists would be rich, if they could still do in great quan-
tities, what they have sometimes done in little. boyle.
trade begets trade, and people go much where ". .
are already gone: so men run fill to a crowd in the streets,
though only to see. temple.
the fewer still you name, you wound the more,
bond is but one; but harpax is a score. pope.
5. after that.
in the primitive church, such as by fear being compelled to
sacrifice to strange gods, after repented, and kept still the of.
fice of preaching the gospel. //bigfit.
6. in continuance.
i with my hand at midnight held your head;
and, like the watchful minutes to the hour,
still and anon chear'd up the heavy time,
saying, what want you ? shakesp. king john,
still, n. j. [from distill a vessel for distillation; an alem-
bick. -
nature's confestioner, the bee,
whose suckets are moist alchimy
the
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t i
s t i
the still of his refining mold,
minting the garden into gold. cleaveland.
in distilling hot spirits, if the head of the shill be taken off,
the vapour which ascends out of the still will take fire at the
flame of a candle, and the flame will run along the vapour
from the candle to the still. newton's opticks.
this fragrant spirit is obtained from all plants in the least
aromatick, by a cold still, with a heat not exceeding that of
summer. - - - arbuthnot on mliments.
i, srill. v.4, [from distil..] to distil; to extract or operate
upon by distillation. - -
j, stili. v. n. [stillo, latin.] to drop; to fall in drops.
out of use.
his sceptre 'gainst the ground he threw,
and tears/?ill'd from him which mov’d all the crew. chapm.
short thick sobs, whose thund'ring volleys float,
and roul themselves over her lubric throat
in panting murmurs, /lill'd out of her breast,
that ever bubbling spring. crashaw.
srillatitious: adj. [/lillatitius, latin.] falling in drops;
drawn by a still.
sri'llatory, n.s.. [from stil or diffil.]
1. an alembick ; a veilel in which distislation is performed.
in all stillatories the vapour is turned back upon itself, by
the encounter of the sides of the stillatory.
1. the room in which stols are placed ; laboratory.
all offices that require heat, as kitchens, stillatories, stoves,
should be meridional. j/otton's architecture.
these are nature's stillatories, in whose caverns the ascend-
ing vapours are congealed to that universal aquavitae, that good
fresh water. more again/? atheism.
stillbox n. adj. [/?ill and born.] born lifeless ; dead in the
birth.
grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth,
should be stillborn ; and that we now possest
the utmost man of expectation; we are
a body strong enough to equal with the king. shałoszaro.
many casualties were but matter of sense, as whether a child
were abortive or /?illborn. graunt's bills of mortality.
the pale assistants on each other star'd,
with gaping mouths for issuing words prepar’d:
the soil born sounds upon the palate hung,
and dy'd imperfect on the falt'ring tongue, dryden.
i know a trick to make you thrive;
o, 'tis a quaint device '
your stilbarn poems shall revive,
and scorn to wrap up spice. swift.
sti'llicide. m. s. [/liticidium, latin.] a succession of
drops.
†: ali, of water, if there be water enough to follow,
will draw themselves into a small thread; because they will
not discontinue. bacon's natural history.
stillici dious. adj. [from silicide.] falling in drops.
crystal is found sometimes in rocks, and in some places not
unlike the stirious or stillicidious dependencies of ice. brown.
still i ng. m. s. [from still.j
1. the act of stilling.
2. a stand for casks.
sti'll ness. n.s.. [from still.]
1. calm; quiet; silence ; freedom from noise.
how sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank'
here will we fit, and let the sounds of musick
creep in our ears; soft stillnes, and the night
become the touches of sweet harmony. shakespeare.
when black clouds draw down the lab’ ing skies,
and horrid stillness first invades the ear;
and in that filence we the tempest fear. dryden.
virgil, to heighten the horrour of æneas' passing by this
coast, has prepared the reader by cajeta's funeral and the still-
dion.
ness of the night. dryden.
if a house be on fire, those at next door may escape, by the
fillness of the weather. swift.
2. habitual filence; taciturnity.
the gravity and stillness of your youth
the world hash noted. shakespeare's othello.
stills ran d n, s. [/iii! and sland.) absence of motion.
the tide swell d up unto his height,
then makes a still land, running neither way. shakes are.
sti'lly. a.sv. [from still.]
i. silently ; not loudly. -
from camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
the hum of cither army stily sounds. shakesp. henry v.
2. calmly ; not tumultuously.
stilts. n.s. [si, tor, swedish; solten, dutch; recelcan.] sup-
ports on which boys raise themselves when they walk.
some could not be content to walk upon the battlements,
but they must put themselves upon stilts. howel's eng. tears.
the heron and such like fowl live of fishes, walk on long
fills like the people in the marshes. more again? ah im.
men must not walk upon shots. i.'e/irange.
to stimulate. v. a. [simula, latin.]
1. to prick.
2. to prick forward :
i to excite by some pungent motive.
3. [in physick.] to excite a quick sensation, with a deriva-
tion towards the part.
extreme cold stimulates
a glowing heat; those thi
degree excite pain.
• producing first a rigour, and then
ngs which stimulate in the extreme
s •.ii r , , , --&gt; - arbuthnot on diet.
.**ines lubricate, and others both subsic. and
simulate.
o, - - sharp.
sri mulation. m. s. [simulati, latin.] excitement; o:
gency. 2.
some persons, from the secret simulation of vani
- - - nit -
o a valuable book, and throw contempt upon ...:
alc.
- // atts on the mind.
*...*.*.*.*.*...so
3. 67. *"cin or ; 4xoil stung - -
islandick.] o sanx ; stungen, fore pricked,
i. to pierce or wound with a point darted out, as tha
or scorpions.
the snake, rolled in a flow'ry bank,
with shining checker'd slough, doth /ting a child
that for the beauty thinks it excellent. shakespeare.
that snakes and vipers sting and transmit their mis, hiefly
t of wasps
the tail, is not easily to be justified, the poison lying about the
teeth, and communicated by the bite.
2. to pain acutely.
his unkindness
that stript her from his benediclion, turn'd her
to foreign casualties, gave her dear right,
to his doghearted daughters: these things sting him
so venomously, that burning shame detains him
from his cordelia.
brown.
shake feare:
no more i wave
to prove the hero.--sander stings the brave. pope.
the singing lash apply. pope.
sting. n.s. [from the verb...]
1. a sharp point with which some animals are armed, and which
is commonly venomous.
serpents have venomous teeth, which are mistaken for their
sting. bacon's natural history.
his rapier was a hornet's sing,
it was a very dangerous thing:
for if he chanc'd to hurt the king,
it would be long in healing,
2. anything that gives pain.
the jews receiving this book originally with such sing in
it, shews that the authority was high. forbes.
3. the point in the last verse.
it is not the jerk or sting of an epigram, nor the seeming
contradiction of a poor antithesis. drydon.
4. remorse of conscience.
sti'ngily. adv. [from singy.] covetously.
sri ngin ess. n.s.. [from stingy.] avarice; covetousness; nig-
gardliness.
sri ngless. adj. [from sing.] having no fling.
he hugs this viper when he thinks it stingles. decay of potr.
sri'n go. n. s. (from the sharpness of the taste j osd beer.
a cant word.
sti'ng y. adj. [a low cant word. in this word, with its de-
rivatives, the g is pronounced as in gem.] covetous ; nig-
gardly; avaricious.
a stingy narrow-hearted fellow that had a deal of choice
fruit, had not the heart to touch it till it began to be rotten.
l’estrange.
he relates it only by parcels, and wont give us the whole,
which forces me to bespeak his friends to engage him to lay
aside that stingy humour, and gratify the publick at once.
a buthnot's history of john bull.
to stink. v. n. preterite i sunk or stank. [rzinian, saxon;
stincken, dutch..] to emit an offensive smell, commonly a
smell of putrefaction.
johm, it will be sinking law for his breath. shakespeare.
when the children of ammon saw that they stank before
david, they sent and hired syrians. 2 sam. x. 6.
what a fool art thou, to leave thy mother for a nasty stink-
ing goat l'e/irange.
most of smells want names; sweet and stinking serve our
turn for these ideas, which is little more than to call them
pleasing and displeafing. locke.
chloris, this costly way to sink give o'er,
'tis throwing sweet into a common shore;
not all arabia would sufficient be,
thou smell'st not of thy sweets, they stink of thee. granv.
srink. n.s. (from the verb...] offensive smell.
those stinks which the nostrils straight abhor are not most
pernicious, but such airs as have some similitude with man's
body, and so betray the spirits. bacon's natural history.
they share a sin; and such proportions fall,
drayton,
that, like a stink, 'tis nothing to them all. dryden.
by what criterion do ye eat, d'ye think?
if this is priz'd for sweetness, that for stine, pope.
st1'nkak d. n. s. [from sink. j a mean flinking paltry fel-
low.
sti's ker.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t i
st i .
st1'nker. n.s.. [from stink.] something intended to offend by
the smell. * -
the air may be purified by burning of stinkpots or slinkers
in contagious lanes. harvey.
st1'nkingly. adv. [from sinking.] with a stink.
can'st thou believe thy living is a life,
so stinkingly depending 2 shakespeare.
st1'nkpot. n. s. [stink and pot.] an artificial composition
offensive to the smell. -
the air may be purified by fires of pitch-barrels, especially
in close places, by burning of stinkpots. harvey.
to st int. v. a. [stynta, swed. stunta, islandick.] to bound ;
to limit; to confine; to restrain; to stop.
the reason hereof is the end which he hath proposed, and
the law whereby his wisdom bath stinted the effects of his
power in such sort, that it doth not work infinitely, but cor-
respondently unto that end for which it worketh. hooker.
then hopeless, heartless, 'gan the cunning thief,
persuade us die, to stint all further strife. spenser.
nature wisely stints our appetite, -
and craves no more than undisturb’d delight. dryden.
i shall not go about to extenuate the latitude of the curse
upon the earth, or stint it only to the production of weeds, but
give it its full scope in an universal diminution of the fruitful-
ness of the earth. woodward.
a supposed heathen deity might be so poor in his attributes,
so stinted in his knowledge, that a pagan might hope to con-
ceal his perjury from his notice. addison.
few countries, which, if well cultivated, would not sup-
port double their inhabitants, and yet fewer where one third
are not extremely stinted in necessaries. swift.
she stints them in their meals, and is very scrupulous of
what they eat and drink, and tells them how many fine shapes
she has seen spoiled in her time for want of such care. law.
stint. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. limit; bound; restraint.
we must come at the length to some pause: for if every
thing were to be desired for some other without any stint,
there could be no certain end proposed unto our actions, we
should go on we know not whither. hooker.
the exteriors of mourning, a decent funeral, and black
habits, are the usual stints of common husbands. dryden.
2. a proportion; a quantity assigned.
touching the stint or measure thereof, rites and ceremonies,
and other external things of the like nature, being hurtful unto
the church, either in respect of their quality, or in regard of
their number; in the former there could be no doubt or dif-
ficulty what would be done; their deliberation in the latter
was more difficult. hooker.
our stint of woe
is common; every day, a sailor's wife,
the masters of some merchant, and the merchant
have just our theme of woe. shakespeare.
he that gave the hint,
this letter for to print,
must also pay the stint. denham.
how much wine drink you in a day ? my stint in company
is a pint at noon. swift.
sti'pend. m.s.. [slipendium, latin.] wages; settled pay.
all the earth,
her kings and tetrarchs are their tributaries;
people and nations pay them hourly stipends. ben. johnson.
st. paul's zeal was expressed in preaching without o of-
ferings or stipend. aylor.
stipe'ndiary. adj. [stipendiarius, latin.] receiving salaries;
performing any service for a stated price.
his great stipendiary prelates came with troops of evil ap-
pointed horsemen not half full. knolles's history.
place rectories in the remaining churches, which are now
served only by stipendiary curates. swift.
stipe'ndiary. m. s. [stipendiaire, fr. stipendiarius, latin.]
one who performs any service for a settled payment.
this whole country is called the kingdom of tunis; the
king whereof is a kind of stipendiary unto the turk. abbot.
if thou art become
a tyrant's vile slipendiary, with grief
that valour thus triumphant i behold,
which after all its danger and brave toil,
deserves no honour from the gods or men. glover.
st1'p tick. r adj. [sualizes.] having the power to staunch
s.; blood; asiringent. this by analogy should be
written slyptick. -
there is a sour sliptick salt diffused through the earth, which
passing a conco&amp;tion in plants, becometh milder. brown.
from spirit of salt, carefully dephlegmed and removed into
lower glasses, having gently abstracted the whole, there re-
mained in the botton, and the neck of the retort, a great
quantity of a certain dry and stiptical substance, mostly of a
yellowish colour. - boyle.
in an effusion of blood, having dossils ready dipt in the royal
joptico, we applied them. wiseman's surgery,
to stitulate. v. n. [slipular, latin; slipuler, fr.] to
contract ; to bargain; to settle terms.
the romans very much neglected their maritime affairs;
for they stipulated with the carthaginians to furnish them
with ships for transport and war. arbuthnot.
stipula’s ion. n.s. s stipulation, fr. from stipulate.] bar.
als).
we promise obediently to keep all god’s commandments ;
the hopes given by the gospel depend on our performance of
that stipulation. rogers.
stipulator. n.s. one who contracts or bargains.
to stir. v. a. [reintan, saxon; //ocren, dutch..]
i. to move ; to remove from its place.
my foot i had never yet in five days been able to soir but
as it was lifted. temple.
other spirits
shoot through their tracts, and distant muscles fill:
this sov’reign, by his arbitrary nod,
restrains or sends his ministers abroad,
swift and obedient to his high command,
they stir a finger, or they lift a hand.
2. to agitate ; to bring into debate.
preserve the right of thy place, but stir not questions of
jurisdiction, and rather assume thy right in filence than voice
it with claims. bacon.
one judgment in parliament, that cases of that nature ought
to be determined according to the common law, is of greater
weight than many cases to the contrary, wherein the question
was not stirred; yea, even though it should be stirred, and the
blackmore,
contrary affirmed. hale.
3. to incite ; to instigate; to animate. -
with him is come the mother queen; +
an ate stirring him to blood and strife. shakspeare.
if you stir these daughters hearts
against their father, fool me not so much
to bear it tamely. shakesp. king liar.
nestor next beheld
the subtle pylian orator range up and downe the field,
embattelling his men at armes, and stirring all to blowes.
chapman.
4. to raise; to excite.
the soldiers love her brother's memory;
and for her sake some mutiny will stir. dryden.
5. to stir up. to incite ; to animate; to instigate by in.
flaming the passions.
this would seem a dangerous commission, and ready to sir
up all the irish in rebellion. speoser's ireland.
the greedy thirst of royal crown, -
that knows no kindred, no regards, no right,
stirred porrex up to put his brother down. spensor.
the words of judas were very good, and able to stir them
up to valour. 2 maccab. xiv. 17.
having overcome and thrust him out of his kingdom, he
stirred up the christians and numidians against him. knolls.
the vigorous spirit of montrose stirred him up to make
some attempt, whether he had any help or no. clarendon.
the improving of his own parts and happiness stir him up
to so notable a design. more against atheism.
thou with rebel insolence did'st dare
to own and to protect that hoary ruffian,
to stir the factious rabble up to arms. rowe.
6. to stir up. to put in action; to excite; to quicken.
hell is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming; it stir-
reth up the dead for thee. isa. xiv. 9.
such mirth the jocund flute or gamesome pipe
stirs up among the loose unletter'd hinds. milton.
to stir up vigour in him, employ him in some constant
bodily labour. locke.
the use of the passions is to stir up the mind, and put it
upon aetion, to awake the understanding and to enforce the
will. addison.
to st ir. v. n.
1. to move one's self; to go out of the place; to change place.
no power he had to stir, nor will to rise. spenser.
they had the semblance of great bodies behind on the other
side of the hill, the falsehood of which would have been ma-
nifest as soon as they should move from the place where they
were, and from whence they were not to stir. clarendon.
we acknowledge a man to be mad or melancholy, who
fancies himself to be glass, and so is afraid of stirring; or
taking himself to be wax, dares not let the sun shine upon
him. law.
2. to be in motion; not to be still ; to pass from inadivity to
in otton.
the great judge of all knows every different degree of hu-
man improvement, from these weak stirrings and tendencies
of the will, which have not yet formed themselves into regu-
lar purposes, to the last entire consummation of a good ha-
bit. addison’s speciator.
3. to become the object of notice.
if they happen to have any superior character, they fancy
7 they
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t i
s t o
they have a right to talk freely upon every thing that stirs or
ars. . - - - - watts.
4. to rise in the morning. this is a colloquial and familiar
use.
if the gentlewoman that attends the general's wife be stir-
ring, tell her, there's one caffio entreats of her a little favour
of speech. - shakespeare's othello.
stir. n.s. [slur, runick, a battle; y/?wrf, noise, welsh.]
... tumult; bulle,
what halloing and what stir is this to-day
these are my mates, that make their wills their law,
have some unhappy passenger in chace. shakespeare.
tumultuous stirs upon this strife ensue. drayton.
he hath spun a fair thread, to make all this soir for such a
necessity as no man ever denied. bp. bramhall.
tell, said the soldier, miserable sir,
why all these words, this clamour and this sir,
why do disputes in wrangling spend the day denham.
the great stirs of the disputing world are but the conflicts
f the humours. glanville.
after all this stir about them they are good for nothing.
tillotson.
consider, after so much stir about genus and species, how
few words we have yet settled definitions of. locke.
silence is usually worse than the fiercest and loudest accusa-
tions; fince it proceeds from a kind of numbness or stupidity
of conscience, and an absolute dominion obtained by sin over
the soul, so that it shall not so much as dare to complain or
make a sir. south's sermons.
2. commotion ; publick disturbance; tumultuous disorder; se-
ditious uproar.
whensoever the earl shall die, all those lands are to come
unto her majesty; he is like to make a soul/?ir there, though
of himself of no power, yet through supportance of some
others who lie in the wind. spenser's ireland.
he did make these stirs, grieving that the name of christ
was at all brought into those parts. albot.
being advertised of some stirs raised by his unnatural sons in
england, he departed out of ireland without a blow. davies.
raphael, thou hear'st what stir on earth,
satan from hell'scap'd through the dark some gulf
hath rais'd in paradise, and how disturb’d
this night the human pair.
3. agitation of thoughts; conflicting passion.
he did keep
the deck, with glove or hat, or handkerchief,
still waving, as the stirs and fits of 's mind
could best express how slow his soul sail'd on,
how swift his ship. shakespeare's cymbeline.
sti'rious. adj. [from soiria, lat..] resembling icicles.
chrystal is found sometimes in rocks, and in some places
not much unlike the stirious or stillicidious dependencies of
ice. brown's jougar errours.
stirp. m. s. [stirps, lat.] race ; family; generation. not
used.
sundry nations got footing in that land, of the which there
yet remain divers great families and stirps. spenser.
democracies are less subject to sedition than when there
are stirps of nobles. bacon.
all nations of might and fame resorted hither; of whom
we have some stirps and little tribes with us at this day. bacon.
sti'rrer. m. s. [from soir.]
1. one who is in motion ; one who puts in motion.
2. a riser in the morning.
come on ; give me your hand, sir; an early stirrer. shak.
3. an inciter; an instigator.
... stirrer up. an inciter; an instigator. -
a perpetual spring, not found elsewhere but in the indies
only, by reason of the sun's neighbourhood, the life and stirrer
up of nature in a perpetual activity. raleigh.
will it not reflect on thy character, nic, to turn barreter
in thy old days ; a stirrer up of quarrels betwixt thy neigh-
bours? arbuthnot.
srrorup. n.s. [rzigerap, reinap, from rosan, saxon, to
climb, and nap, a cord.] an iron hoop suspended by a strap,
in which the horseman sets his foot when he mounts or rides.
neither is his manner of mounting unseemly, though he
lack stirrups; for in his getsing up, his horse is still going:
whereby he gaincth way: and therefore the stir up was called
so in scorn, as it were a stay to get up, being derived of the
old english word sly; which is to get up, or mount. sposer.
hast thou not kiss'd my hand, and held my stirrup *
shakespeare.
his horse hipped with an old mothy saddle, the slirrups of
no kindred. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
my friend, judge not me,
thou fees; i judge not thee.
between the stirrup and the ground,
mercy i ask'd, mercy i found.
at this the knight began to chear up,
and raising up himself on yi rup,
cry'd out victoria.
vol. ii.
milt 2/7.
cam isn's remains.
hudibras.
to stitch. v. a. [slicke,
i. to sew, to work with a needle on any thing.
2. i o join 3 to unite, genera lly with some degree of clumsine s
-
or inaccuracy. i
having stitched together these
chite&amp;ture and their ornaments.
3. to stitch up. to mend what was rent.
it is in your hand as we - p - - or wag
|l to itch 1. h - -
i - j/ is life again, 2s ney
i with a needle and thread slit.}a up the artery and the
wound -
- wiseman's suroe
to practise needlework. iseman's surgery.
danish; slicken, dutch.]
animadversions touching ar-
j%tton.
to stitch. v. n.
stitch... n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. a pass of the needle and thread through anything.
2. [from reician, saxon.] a sharp lancinating pain.
if you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself into stitches
o: me; yond gull malvolio is turned heathen, a very o
negado. shakespeare's to 'ich
a simple bloody sputation of the : is #:::::::::
a pleurisy, which is ever painful, and attended with a stitch.
harvey on c. otions.
3. a link of yarn in knitting. y nsumptions
there fell twenty stitches in his stocking.
4. in chapman it seems to mean furrows or ridges.
mo men at plow he made, and drawe carth here and
there,
and turn'd up stitches orderly. chapman's iliads.
5. in the following line allusion is made to a knit stock.
a/fitch-fall'n cheek, that hangs below the jaw,
such wrinkles as a skilful hand would draw,
for an old grandam ape. dryden.
stitchery. n.s. [from aitch..] needlework. in contempt.
come lay aside your slitchery; play the idle housewife with
me this afternoon. shakespeare's othello.
sti"rchwort. n. s. [anthemis.] camomile. ainsworth.
stith y. m. s. [/fedie, islandick; reis, hard, saxon.] an
anvil; the iron body on which the smith forges his work.
my imaginations are as foul
as vulcan’s /?ithy. shakespeare's hamlet.
to srive. v. a. [supposed of the same original with slow.)
1. to stuff up close.
you would admire, if you saw them /?ive it in their ships.
sandys's journey.
motteux.
2. to make hot or sultry.
his chamber was commonly slived with friends or suitors of
one kind or other. j/otton.
sti'v er. m. s. [dutch..] a dutch coin about the value of a
halfpenny.
stoa t. m. s. a small stinking animal.
sto'cah. n. s. [irish ; /lochk, erse.] an attendant; a wallet-
boy; one who runs at a horseman's foot; a horseboy. not
in use.
he holdeth himself a gentleman, and scorneth to work,
which he saith is the life of a peasant ; but thenceforth be-
cometh an horseboy, or a slocah to some kern, inuring him-
self to his sword, and the gentlemanly trade of stealing.
spensor.
stocc a. do. m. s. [/?occato, from slocco, a rapier, italian.] a
thrust with the rapier.
you stand on distance, your passes, soccado's, and i know
not what. shakspeare's merry //ives of i/indsor.
stock. m. s. [rzoc, saxon; stock, dutch ; /?…, fr.]
1. the trunk ; the body of a plant. -
that furious bcast
his precious horn, sought of his enemies,
strikes in the stock, ne thence can be releas'd. spenser.
there is hope of a tree, if cut down, that it will spi out
again, though the root wax old in the carth, and the /?:ck die
in the ground. job xiv. 8.
2. the trunk into which a graft is inserted.
the cion over-ruleth the stock quite; and the /?ook is passive
only, and giveth aliment but no motion to the graft.
as fruits, ungrateful to the planter's care,
on savage slocks inserted, learn to beer;
the surest virtues thus from passions shoot,
wild nature's vigour working at the root.
3. a log; a post.
that they kept thy truth so pure of old,
when all our fathers worshipp'd /rocks and stones,
forget not.
why all this fury! what's the matter,
that oaks must come from thrace to dance 2
must stupid stocks be taught to flatter
and is there no such wood in france
4. a man proverbially stupid.
what tyranny is this, my heart to thrall,
and eke my tongue with proud restraint to tie,
that neither 1 may speak nor think at all,
but like a stupid slack in silence die :
while we admire
this virtue and this moral discipline,
let's be no stoicks, nor nost-:4. shakespeare.
25 h 5. the
bacon.
pope.
milton.
j’rior.
perser.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t o
s t o
3. the handle of any thing. -
6. a support of a ship while it is building.
fresh supplies of ships,
and such as fitted since the fight had been, , -
or new from stocks were fall’n into the road. dryden.
7. [stacco, a rapier, italian.] a thrust; a stoccado.
to see thee here, to see thee there; to see thee pass thy
pundo, thy soft, thy reverse. shakespeare.
8. something made of lineri; a cravat; a close neckcloth. an-
ciently a cover for the legs.
his lackey with a linen stock on one leg, and a kersey boot-
hose on the other. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
9. a race ; a lineage; a family.
say what stock he springs of:-
—the noble house of marcius. shakesp. coriolanus.
his early virtues to that ancient stock
gave as much honour as from thence he took. /waller.
- the like shall sing
all prophesy, that of the royal stock
of david, so i name this king, shall rise
a son, the woman's seed. milton.
thou hast seen one world begin, and end,
and man, as from a second stock, proceed. milton.
to no human /lock
we owe this fierce unkindness; but the rock, -
that cloven rock produc’d thee. jwaller.
thy mother was no goddess, northy stock
from dardanus; but in some horrid rock,
perfidious wretch, rough caucasus thee bred. denham.
10. the principal; capital store ; fund already provided.
- prodigal men
feel not their own stock wasting. ben. johns. catiline.
let the exportation of home commodities be more in value
than the importation of foreign; so the stock of the kingdom
fhall yearly increase; for then the balance of trade must be
returned in money or bullion. bacon’s advice to williers.
a king, against a storm, must foresee to a convenient stock
of treasure. bacon.
'tis the place where god promises and delights to dispense
larger proportions of his favour, that he may fix a mark of
honour on his sanetuary, and recommend it to the sons of
men, upon the stock of their own interest as well as his own
glory. south.
some honour of your own acquire;
add to that stock, which justly we bestow,
of those blest shades to whom you all things owe. dryden.
yet was she not profuse; but fear'd to waste,
and wisely manag'd that the stock might last ;
that all might be supply'd, and she not grieve,
when crouds appear'd, she had not to relieve;
which to prevent, she still increas'd her store;
laid up, and spar'd, that she might give the more. dryden.
beneath one law bees live,
and with one common stock their traffick drive:
all is the state's, the state provides for all. dryden's georg.
nor do those ills on single bodies prey;
but oftner bring the nation to decay, }
and sweep the present stock and future hope away. dryd.
if parents die without actually transferring their right to .
another, why does it not return to the common stock of man-
kind - locke.
when we brought it out it took such a quantity of air into
its lungs, that it swelled almost twice as big as before; and it
was perhaps on this flock of air that it lived a minute longer
the second time. addison on italy.
be ready to give, and glad to distribute, by setting apart
something out of thy stock for the use of some charities.
atterbury.
of those stars, which our imperfeot eye
has doom'd and fix’d to one eternal sky,
each by a native stock of honour great,
may dart strong influence, and diffuse kind heat. prior.
they had law-suits ; but, though they spent their income,
they never mortgaged the stock. arbuthnot.
she has divided part of her estate amongst them, that every
one may be charitable out of their own /?ock, and each of them
take it in their turns to provide for the poor and sick of the
parish. .' ', law.
* . . quantity; store; body. -
he proposes to himself no small fock of fame in future ages,
in being the first who has undertaken this design. arbuthnot.
12. a fund established by the government, of which the value
rises and falls by artifice or chance.
an artificial wealth of funds and flocks was in the hands of
those who had been plundering the publick. swift.
statesman and patriot ply alike the socks,
peeress and butler share alike the box. pope.
to stock. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to store; to fill sufficiently.
if a man will commit such rules to his memory, and sock
his mind with portions of scripture answerable to all the heads
of duty, his conscience can never be at a loss. south.
i, who before with shepherds in the groves,
sung to my oaten pipe their rural loves, -
• manur'd the glebe, and socł'd the fruitful plain. dryder.
the world begun to be siecked with people, and human in:
dustry drained those uninhabitable places. " burnet
springs and rivers are by large supplies continually so
with water. - - woodward.
2. to lay up in store; as, he socks what he cannot use, .
3. to put in the stocks. see stocks.
call not your stocks for me: i serve the king, -
on whose employment i was sent to you :
you shall do small respect, shew too bold malice
against the grace and person of my master,
stocking his messenger. shakesp. king lor
4. to stock up. to extirpate. -
- the wild boar not only spoils her branches, but slowl,
her roots. - - decoy of piety.
stock dow e. m. s. spalumbes.j ringdove.
- stockooves and turtles tell their am’rous pain,
and, from the lofty elms, of love complain. dryden.
stock f is h. m. s. [/lockevych, dutch..] dried cod, so colo
from its hardness.
stockgi'lly flow er. n.s. sleuccium, lat.]. a plant. millr.
sro'cking, n.s. [the original word seems to be flock, whence
/?ocks, a prison for the legs. stock, in the old language
made the plural socken, which was used for a pair of soft, .
covers for the legs. stocken was in time taken for a singular
and pronounced socking. the like corruption has happene:
to chico, chicken, chickens.] the covering of the leg.
in his first approach before my lady, he will come to her
in yellow stockings, and 'tis a colour she abhors. shakespeare.
by the loyalty of that town he procured shoes, sloting,
and money for his soldiers. clarendon.
unless we should expect that nature should make jerkins
and stockings grow out of the grouad, what could she do better
than afford us so fit materials for cloathing as the wool of
sheep * - 44ore against atheism.
he spent half a day to look for his odd stocking, when he
had them both upon a leg. l'eirage.
at am’rous flavio is the stocking thrown,
that very night he longs to lie alone. pope.
the families of farmers live in filth and nastiness, without
a shoe or stocking to their feet. swift.
to stocking; v. a. [from the noun..] ...to dress in stockings.
stocking'd with loads of fat town-dirt, he goes. dryden.
stock jo bber... n.s. [stook and job.] . a low wretch who gets
money by buying and selling shares in the funds.
the so-c'sober thus from 'change-alley goes down,
and tips you the freeman a wink;
let me have but your vote to serve for the town,
and here is a guinea to drink. swift,
stock is h. adj. [from stock.] hard; blockish.
- the poet
did feign that orpheus drew trees, stones; and floods;
since nought so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
but musick for the time doth change his nature. shais.
stock lock. m. s. [/lock and lock.] lock fixed in wood.
there are locks for several purposes; as street-door-locks,
called stocklocks; chamber-door-locks, called spring-locks, and
cupboard-locks. a422 an’s meth. exer.
sorocks. m. s. [commonly without singular. see stocking.]
1. prison for the legs.
fetch forth the stocks :
as i have life and honour, there shall he sit ’till noon.
shakespeare.
tom is whipt from tything to tything, sock-punish'd, and
imprisoned. shakespeare's king lear.
matrimony is expressed by a young man standing, his legs
being fast in a pair of /locks. , peacham.
the sizess hinder his legs from obeying the determination
of his mind, if it would transfer his body to another place.
lacko.
2. wooden work upon which ships are built.
stocks.ti’l l. adj. [stock and still.] motionless as logs.
our preachers stand stockstill in the pulpit, and will not so
much as move a finger to set off the best sermon. dison.
stok e, stoak, seem to come from the saxon reocce, fignifying
the stock or body of a tree. gilson's camden.
srol e. m. s. [ stola, lat.) a long vest.
ver all a black stole she did throw,
as one that inly mourned. - speoser,
the solemn feast of ceres now was near,
when long white linen stoles the matrons wear. dryden,
stole. the preterite of steal.
w
a factor sole a gen, away. pope.
stolen. participle passive of steal.
siolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is plea-
sant. - przv. ix. 17.
sto li'd ity.. n.s.. [solidus, lat, stolidite, fr. j stupidity;
want of sense.
these are the fools in the text, indocile untractable fools,
whose stolidity can b-file all arguments. bently,
sto'mach,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t o
so
sto'mach. n.s. [ostomach, fr. stomachus, lat.]
1. the ventricle in which food is digested.
if you're fick at sea,
or somach qualm'd at land, a dram of this
will ... distemper. shakesp. cymbeline,
this filthy simile, this beastly line,
quite turns my stomach.
a. appetite; desire of food.
tell me, what is't that takes from thee -
thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep shakespeare.
will fortune never come with both hands full
but write her fair words still in fou'est letters :
she either gives a stomach, and no food,
such are the poor in health ; or elsea feast,
and takes away the stomach; such the rich,
that have abundance and enjoy it not. shakes. hon. iv.
as appetite or stomach to meat is a sign of health in the
body, so is this hunger in the soul a vital quality, an evidence
of some life of grace in the heart; whereas decay of appetite,
and the no manner of stomach, is a most desperate progno-
stick. - - - hammond.
3. inclination; liking.
he which hath no stomach to this fight,
let him depart. shakespeare's henry v.
the unusual distance of time made it subject to every man's
note, that it was an act against his stomach, and put upon him
by necessity of state. bacon's henry vii.
the very trade went against his stomach. l'estrange.
4. [stenacho, lat.]. anger; violence of temper. -
disdain he called was, and did disdain
to be so call’d, and who so did him call:
stern was his look, and full of stomach vain,
his portance terrible, and stature tall.
is’t near dinner time * i would it were,
that you might kill your stomach on your meat,
and not upon your maid. shak. two gent. of perona.
instead of trumpet and of drum,
that makes the warrior's stomach come.
5. sullenness; resentment; stubbornness.
some of the chiefest laity professed with greater somach
their judgments, that such a discipline was little better than
popish tyranny disguised under a new form. hooker.
they plainly saw, that when stomach doth strive with wit,
pope.
spenser.
butler.
the match is not equal. h.ker.
whereby the ape in wond’rous stomach wox,
strongly encouraged by the crafty fox. spenser.
that nobles should such stomachs bear !
i myself fight not once in forty year. shoes. henry vi.
it stuck in the camel's stomach, that bulls should be armed
with horns, and that a creature of his size should be left de-
fenceless. l'e/lrange.
not courage but somach that makes people break rather
than they will bend. l'estrange.
this sort of crying proceeding from pride, obstinacy, and
stomach, the will, where the fault lies, must be bent. locke.
6. pride; haughtiness.
arius, a subtile witted and a marvellous fair-spoken man,
was discontented that one should be placed before him in ho-
nour, whose superior he thought himself in desert, because
through envy and stomach prone unto contradiction. hooker.
he was a man
of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
himself with princes. shakoffeare's henry viii.
to sro’m ach. v. a. [somachor, lat..] to resent; to remem-
ber with anger and malignity.
believe not all ; or, if you must believe,
stomach not all. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
jonathan loved david, and the people applauded him ; only
saulstomached him, and therefore hated him. hall's contempl.
the lion began to shew his teeth, and to stomach the affront.
l'estrange.
t. sto'm ach. v. n. to be angry.
let a man, though never so justly, oppose himself unto
those that are disordered in their ways, and what one amongst
them commonly doth not stomach at such contradiction, storm
at reproof, and hate such as would reform them hooker.
sto'mached, adj. [from stomach..] filled with passions of re-
sentment.
high somach'd are they both, and full of ire ;
in rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire. shaftspeare.
sto's acher. n. s. [from stomach..] an ornamental covering
worn by women on the breast.
golden quoifs and stomachers,
for my lads to give their dears.
shakes. iłznter's tale.
instead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth. is. iii. 24.
thou marry'st every year
the lyrick lark and the grave whispering dove,
the sparrow that neglects his life for love,
the houshold bird with the red slamacher. donne.
sto'machful. adj. [/lomach sus, lat. jiana.h and full.] sul-
len; stubborn ; perverse.
, asiomachful boy put to school, the whole world could not
fog to pronounce the first letter. l’estrange.
o or/amachful crying should not be permitted, be-
§ause it, is another way of encouraging those passions which
tis our business to subdue. locke
sto'machfulness. n.s. ff - - ---
sullenness; *...* [from somalful..] stubbornness;
s"; adj. isiomachique, fr.] relating to the sto-
stom a^chick. .*ch ; pertaining to the stomach.
a” hypochondriack consumption is an exotion, occa-
- fioned by an infaretion and obstruction of the stomachick vessels
through melancholy humours. harv
by a catarrh the stomachical ferment is vitiated. flo o:
souck. n.s. [from /lomach..] a medicine for the #.
in a cin.
sto'machless. adj. [from slomach and los...] being without
appetite. ©
sto machous. adj. [from slomach. stout : r" . -
obstinate. oo:: s' j t; angry; sullen ;
that stranger knight in presence came,
and goodly salved them; but nought again
him answered, as courtesy became ;
but with stern looks, and /lomachaus disdain,
gave signs of grudge and discontentment vain. speoser.
ston d. m. s. [for sland.] 4.
1. post; station. obsolete.
on th' other side, th' assieged castle's ward
their stedfast sonds did mightily maintain. spenser.
2. stop ; indisposition to proceed.
there be not /lond, nor restiveness in a man's nature; but
the wheels of his mind keep way with the wheels of his for-
tune. bacon's essays.
stone. m. s. [/lains, gothick; rean, saxon; sleen, dutch.]
1. stones are bodies insipid, hard, not ductile or malleable, nor
soluble in water. //oodward's meth. foss.
stones are, the foster and the harder. of the foster/lane,
are, 1. the foliaceous or flaky, as talk. 2. the fibrose, as
the asbestus. 3. the granulated, as the gypsum. of the
harder stones are, i. the opake stones, as limestone. 2. the
semi-pellucid, as agate. 3. the pellucid, as crystal and the
gems. hill's 41at. 41ed.
five sharp smooth soones from the next brook he chose,
and fits them to his sling. cowley.
relenties time destroying power,
whom stone and brass obey. parnel.
2. piece of stone cut for building.
should i go to church, and see the holy edifice of stone,
and not bethink me strait of dang'rous rocks | sospeare.
the english used the //znes to reinforce the pier. hayward.
3. gem; precious stone.
i thought i saw
wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of peal,
inestimable stones, unvalu'd jewels. shakesp. rich. iii.
4. anything made of stone.
lend me a looking glass;
if that her breath will mist or stain the sons,
why then she lives. shakespeare.
5. calculous concretion in the kidneys or bladder; the discale
arising from a calculus.
a specifick remedy for preventing of the stone i take to be
the constant use of alehoof-ale. i emple.
a gentleman supposed his difficulty in urining proceeded
from the stone. ///eman's surgery.
6. the case which in some fruits contains the seed, and is itself
contained in the fruit.
to make fruits without core or sline is a curiosity. bacon.
7. testicle.
8. a weight containing fourteen pounds. a stone of meat is
eight pounds.
does wood think that we will sell him a stone of wool for
his counters ? - swift.
9. a funeral monument. -
should some relenting eye
glance on the stone where our cold reliques lie. pope.
io. it is taken for a state of torpidness and insensibility.
i have not yet forgot myself to slane. pope.
11. st on e is used by way of exaggeration.
what need you be so boist'rous rough
i will not struggle, i will stand stone stili. shake?. k. john.
and there lies whacum by my side,
stone dead, and in his own blood dy’d. hudibras.
the fellow held his breath, and lay stone still, as if he was
dead. l’estrange.
she had got a trick of holding her breath, and lying at her
length for stone dead. l’estrange.
the cottages having taken a country-dance toge, her, had
becm all out, and stood stone still with amazement. pope.
12. to leave no stone unturn.d. to do every thing that can
be done for the production or promotion of any effect.
women, that left no stone unturn'd
in which the cause inigot be concern'd,
brought
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t o
s t o
brought in their children's spoons and whistles,
to purchase swords, carbines, and pistols. hudibras.
he crimes invented, left unturn’d no some -
to make my guilt appear, and hide his own. dryden.
stone. adj. made of stone.
present her at the leet,
because she bought stone jugs, and no seal’d quarts. shak.
to st on e. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to pelt or beat or kill with stones.
these people be almost ready to stone me. ex. xvii. 4.
crucifixion was a punishment unknown to the jewish laws,
among whom the stoning to death was the punishment for
blasphemy. stephens's sermons.
2. to harden.
oh perjur'd woman! thou do's stone my heart;
and mak’st me call what i intend to do,
a murder, which i thought a sacrifice. shakesp. othello.
sto'nebreak. m. s. [ saxifraga anglicana.j. an herb., ainsw.
sro'nechatter... n.s. [rubetra, lat.] a bird. ainsworth.
sro'necray, n.s. . a diffemper in hawks. ,
sto'n ecrop. m. s. a sort of tree. --
stonecrop tree is a beautiful tree, but not common. mortim.
sto'necutter. n.s.. [from stone and cutter.] one whose trade
is to hew stones.
a /?onecutter's man had the vesiculae of his lungs so stuffed
with dust, that, in cutting, the knife went as if through a
heap of sand. derham's physico-theology.
my prosecutor provided me a monument at the stonecutter's,
and would have erected it in the parish-church. swift.
sto'nefern. m. s. a plant. ainsworth.
sto"nefly. n.s. an inse&amp;t. ainsworth.
sro’nefruit. n.s. [/lone and fruit.] . fruit of which the seed
is covered with a hard shell enveloped in the pulp.
we gathered ripe apricocks and ripe plums upon one tree,
from which we expect some other sorts of stonefruit. boyle.
sto'nehawk. m. s. [lithofalco, lat..] a kind of hawk. ainsw.
sto'nehorse. n. s. [stone and horse..] a horse not castrated.
where there is most arable land, stonehorses or geldings are
more necessary. mortimer's husbandry.
sto'nep1t. m. s. [stone and pit.] a quarry; a pit where
ftones are dug.
there's one found in a stonepit. woodward.
sro'nep1tch. n.s.. [from stone and pitch..] hard inspissated
itch.
p the egyptian mummies are reported to be as hard as slone-
pitch. bacon's nat. history.
sto'neplover. m.s. [pluvialis cinerea.] a bird. ainsworth.
sto'nes mickle. n.s.. [massinata.] a bird. ainsworth.
sto'nework. m. s. [some and work.] building of stone.
they make two walls with flat stones, and fill the space
with earth, and so they continue the stonework. mortimer.
sto'niness. m. s. [from stony.]
1. the quality of having many stones.
the name hexton owes its original to the sonines of the
place. hearne.
small gravel or stoniness is found therein. mortimer.
2. hardness of mind.
he hath some stonynes, at the bottom. hammond.
sto'ny. adj. [from stone.]
1. made of stone. - -
nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
can be retentive to the strength of spirit. shak. jul. cas.
with love's light wings did i o'erperch these walls;
for stony limits cannot hold love out. shak, rom, andjul.
nor slept the winds
within their stony caves, but rush'd abroad
from the four hinges of the world, and fell
on the vext wilderness, whose tallest pines,
though rooted deep as high and sturdiest oaks,
bow'd their stiff necks, loaden with stormy blasts,
or torn up sheer. milton's paradise regain'd.
here the marshy grounds approach your fields,
and there the soil a stony harvest yields. dryden's virgil.
as in spires he stood, he turn'd to stone;
the stony snake retain'd the figure still his own. dryden.
they suppose these bodies to be only water petrified, or
converted into these sparry or stony icicles. woodward.
2. abounding with stones.
from the stony maenalus
bring your flocks, and live with us. milton.
3. petrifick.
now let the stony dart of senseless cold
pierce to my heart, and pass through every side. spenser.
4. hard; inflexible; unrelenting.
the stony hardness of too many patrons hearts, not touched
with any feeling in this case. mooker.
thou art come to answer
astony adversary, an inhuman wretch
uncapable of pity. shakes. merchant of venice.
eight yards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles a-
foot with me, and the stony hearted villains know it. shakesp.
at this sight -
my heart is turn'd to stone; and while 'tis mine,
it shall be stony. shakspeare's henry vi.
i will clear their senses dark,
what may suffice, and soften stony hearts
to pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
indiff'rence, clad in wisdom's guise,
all fortitude of mind supplies;
for how can stony bowels melt,
in those who never pity felt
stood. the preterite of to stand.
adam, at the news,
heart-struck with chilling gripe of sorrow stood. milton.
stool. m. s. [stols, gothick; reol, saxon; /toel, dutch.]
1. a seat without a back, so distinguished from a chair.
if a chair be defined a seat for a single person, with a back
belonging to it, then a stool is a seat for a single person with-
out a back. jwatts's logick.
milton.
swift,
thou fearful fool,
why takest not of the same fruit of gold
ne fittest down on that same filver stool,
to rest thy weary person in the shadow cold spensor.
now which were wise, and which were fools :
poor alma fits between two stools:
the more she reads, the more perplext. prior.
2. evacuation by purgative medicines.
there be medicines that move stools, and not urine; some
other urine, and not stools; those that purge by stool, are such
as enter not all, or little, into the mesentery veins; but either
at the first are not digestible by the stomach, and therefore
move immediately downwards to the guts; or else are after-
wards rejected by the mesentery veins, and so turn likewise
downwards to the guts. bacon's natural history.
the peristaltick motion, or repeated changes of contraaion
and dilatation, is not in the lower guts, else one would have
a continual needing of going to stool. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. stool of repentance, or culty stool, in the kirks of scotland, is
somewhat analogous to the pillory. it is elevated above the
congregation. in some places there may be a seat in it; but
it is generally without, and the person stands therein who has
been guilty of fornication, for three sundays, in the fore-
noon; and after sermon is called upon by name and surname,
the beadle or kirk officer bringing the offender, if refraaory,
forwards to his post; and then the preacher proceeds to admo.
nition. here too are set to publick view adulterers; only
these are habited in a coarse canvas, analogous to a hairy or
monastick vest, with a hood to it, which they call the sack
or sackcloth, and that every sunday throughout a year, or
longer.
unequal and unreasonable judgment of things brings many
c
a great man to the stool of repentance. l’estrange.
stg'9lball. m. s. [stool and ball.] a play where balls are
driven from stool to stool.
while betty dances on the green,
and susan is at stoolball seen.
to stoop., v. n. [reuplan, saxon; soyoon, dutch.]
1. to bend down; to bend forward."
like unto the boughs of this tree he bended downward,
and stooped toward the earth. raleigh.
2. tolean forward standing or walking.
when pelopidas and ismenias were sent to artaxerxes,
pelopidas did nothing unworthy; but ismenias let fall his
ring to the ground, and, stooping for that, was thought to
prior.
make his adoration. stillingfeet.
he sizeping open'd my left side, and took
from thence a rib. milton.
3. to yield; to bend; to submit.
i am the son of henry the fifth,
who made the dauphin and the french to sloop.
... mighty in her ships stood carthage long,
and swept the riches of the world from far;
yet sloop'd to rome, less wealthy, but more strong. dryd.
4. to descend from rank or dignity.
where men of great wealth sloop to husbandry, it multi-
plieth riches exceedingly. bacon.
he that condescended so far, and sloped so low, to invite
and to bring us to heaven, will not refuse us a gracious recep-
tion there. boyle's seraphi. a love.
5. to yield; to be inferiour.
death his death-wound shall then receive,
s hakesp.
*
and so-op inglorious. milton.
these are arts, my prince, -
in which your zama does not sloop to rome. addison.
6. to sink from resolution or superiority; to condescend.
they, whose authority is required unto the satisfying of
your demand, do think it both dangerous to admit such con-
course of divided minds, and unmeet that their laws, which,
being once solemnly established, are to exact obedience of all
men and to constrain thereunto, should so far /?oop as to hold
themselves in suspence from taking any effect upon you, 'till
some disputer can persuade you to be obedient. ah22&amp;er.
6
7. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t o
to come down on prev as a falcon.
7. the bird of jove/foot'd from his airv tour,
two birds of gayett plume before him drove. milton.
8. to alight from the wong.
satan ready now
to sloop with wearied wings and willing feet,
on the bare outside of this world. milton.
twelve swans tehold in beauteous order move,
and sloop with closing pinions from above. dryden.
to sink to a lower place.
9. cow'ring low
with bland, thment, each bird slop'd on his wing. milton.
sroof. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. act of stooping ; inclination downward.
2. descent from dignity or superiority.
can any loyal subject see
with patience soch a sloop from sovereignty
an ocean pour'd upon a narrow brook? dryden.
3. fall of a bird upon his prey.
now will i wander through the air,
mount, make a stood at ev'ry fair. j/aller.
an eagle made a sloop at him in the middle of his exalta-
tion, and carried him away. l'estrange.
4. [8&lt;oppa, saxon; ope, 5*. a vessel of liquor.
come, lieutenant, i have a sloop of wine; and here with-
out are a brace of gallants, that would sain have a measure to
the health of othelio. shakespeare.
there's nothing more in me, fir, but may be squeez'd out
without rocking, only a sloop or two of wine. denham.
a cald on of sat beef, and stop of ale,
on the huzzaing mob shall more prevail,
than if you give them, with the nicest art,
ragousts of peacocks brains, or filbert tart. king.
stoop in gly. adv. [from slooping.] with inclination down-
wards.
nani was noted to to it , to walk/loopingly, and raise
himself from benches with lab rious gesture. !, as form.
to stop. v. a. solauser, fr. /ioppare, ital. stoppen, dutch..]
1. to hinder from progressive motion.
from the oracle
they will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had
shall/?op or spur me. shakes care.
2. to hinder from successive operation.
can any dresses find a way
to stop th' approaches of decay,
and mend a ruin’d face dorset.
3- to hinder from any change of state, whether to better or
worse.
4. to hinder from a stion or practice.
friend, 'tis the duke's pleasure,
whose disposition, all the world well knows,
will not be rubb'd nor slopp'd. shakesp. king lear.
as the truth of christ is in me, no man shall /?op me of
this boosting. 2 cor. xi. to.
5. to put an end to the motion or action of any thing ; to in-
tercept.
almon falls, pierc'd with an arrow from the distant war:
fix'd in his throat the flying weapon stood,
and stopp'd his breath, and drank his vital blood. drydon.
6. to repress ; to suspend.
every bold sinner, when about to engage in the commission
of any known fin, should arrest his confidence, and stop the
execution of his purpose with this question : do i believe that
god has denounced death to such a practice, or do i not
- south.
7. to suppress.
he, on occasion of footing my play, did me a good office
at court, by representing it as long ago designed. dryden.
8. to regulate musical strings with the fingers.
in instruments of strings, if you stop a string high, where-
by it hath le’s scope to tremble, the found is more treble, but
yet more dead. bacon's natural hisłory.
9. to close any aperture.
smite every fenced city, stop all wells of water, and mar
land with stones. 2 kings iii. 19.
they pulled away the shoulder, and sopped their ears, that
they should not hear. zech. vii. 1 1.
a hawk's bell, the ho!cs stopped up, hang by a thread within
a bottle glass, and so the glass close with wax. bacon.
his majesty stopia a leak that did much harm. bacon.
stoopings and suffocations are dangerous in the body. bacon.
they first raised an army with this design, to stop my mouth
or force my consent. king charles.
celsus gives a precept about bleeding, that when the blood
is good, which is to be judged by the colour, that immediately
the vein should be sloped. arbuthnot.
10. to obstruct; to encumber.
mountains of ice that slop th’ imagin'd way. a.ilton.
to stop. v. n.
i. to cease to go forward.
some strange commotion
... is in his brain: he bites his lip, and starts;
, vol. ii.
stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
then lays his finger on his temple, strait
o out o gait, then soft again. shak. h. viii.
ton pursue their thoughts of space, they so
confines of body, as if space were there ; an o }.
if the rude throng pour on with furious pace -
and hap to break the from a friend's embrace 2.
stop short, nor strugsle through. &gt;
2. to cease from any course cf action.
o i. made by degrees from one step to an-
other ; and the best time to so, ** her . . . . . . . . of -os-
stop. m. s. [from the verb.] slo is at the beginning. lesley.
1. coslation of progressive motion.
thought's the slave of time, and life time's fool;
and time, that takes survey of all th
must have a /i.p. y e world,
gay.
--- - shakespeare.
the marigold, whose courtier's face a
ecchoes the sun, and doth unlace
her at his rise, at his full slop
packs and shuts up her gawdy shop. cleaveland.
a lion, ranging for his prey, made a set on a sudden at a
hideous yelling noise, which it.: led him. l’estrange
2. hindrance of progress; obstruction ; act of stopping. ge.
in weak and tender minds we little know what misery this
strict opinion would breed, besides the stops it would make in
the whole course of all mens lives and aotions. hooker.
these gates are not sufficient for the communication bel
tween the walled city and its suburbs, as daily appears by the
joops and embarrasses of coaches near both these gates. graunt.
my praise the fabii claim,
and thou great hero, greatest of thy name,
ordain'd in war to save the sinking state,
and, by delays, to put a sop to fate. dryden's aon.
qccult qualities put a stop to the improvement of natural
philosophy, and therefore have been rejected. newton', opt.
brokers hinder trade, by making the circuit which the mo-
ney goes larger, and in that circuit more // ps, so that the re-
turns must necessarily be slower and scantier. locke.
female zeal, though proceeding from so good a principle,
if we may believe the french historians, often put a so p to the
proceedings of their kings, which might have ended in a re-
for at on. addison.
3. represion; hindrance of operation.
'i is a great step towards the mastery of our desires to give
this slop to them, and shut them up in silence. locke.
4. cellation of action.
look you to the guard to-night:
let's teach ourselves that honourable slop,
not to outsport discretion.
5. interruption.
thou art full of love and honesly,
and weigh'st thy words before thou giv'st them breath ;
therefore these so of thine fright me the more. shako.
6. prohibition of sale.
if they should open a war, they foresce the consumption
france must fall into by the so p of their wine and salts, wholly
taken off by our two nations. temple.
7. that which obstructs; obstacle; impediment.
the proud duesla, full of wrathful spight
and fierce disdain to be affronted so,
inforc'd her purple beast with all her might,
shakoshcare.
that stop out of the way to overthrow. spensor.
on indeed they went : but o ! not far; -
a fatal stop travers'd their headlong course. daniel.
blessed be that god who cast rubs, stops, and hindrances in
my way, when i was attempting the commission of such a sin.
south.
so melancholy a prospe&amp;t should inspire us with zeal to op-
pose some slop to the rising torrent, and check this overflowing
of ungodliness. rogers.
8. instrument by which the sounds of wind musick are regu-
lated. :
you would play upon me, you would seem to know my
flops; you would pluck out the heart of my mystery.
shakespeare.
blest are those,
whose blood and judgment are so well commingl’d,
that they are not a pipe for fortune's finger,
to sound what stop she please. shakesp. hamlet.
the harp
had work, and rested not ; the solemn pipe,
and dulcimer, all organs of sweet shop.
the sound
of instruments, that made melodious chime,
was heard of harp and organ ; and who mov’d
their stops, and chords, was seen; his volant touch
instinct through all proportions, low and high,
fled, and pursu'd transverse the resonant fugue. milton.
a variety of strings may be observed on their harps, and of
slops on their tibiae; which shews the little foundation that
such writers have gone upon, who, from a short passage in a
classick author, have determined the precise shape of the an-
25 i clent
milton.
!
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s. t. o
s t o
cient musical instruments, with the exact number of their pipes,
{{rings, and /lops. addison on italy.
9. regulation of musical chords by the fingers.
the further a string is strained, the less superstraining goeth
to a note; for it requireth good winding of a string before it
will make any note at all : and in the stops of lutes, the higher
they go, the less distance is between the frets. bacon.
10. the act of applying the stops in musick.
th' organ-sound a time survives the slop,
before it doth the dying note give up, daniel's civil war.
11. a point in writing, by which sentences are distinguished.
even the iron-pointed pen,
that notes the tragick dooms of men,
wet with tears still'd from the eyes
of the flinty destinies,
would have learn’d a softer style,
and have been asham'd to spoil
his life's sweet story by the haste
of a cruel slop ill-plac'd. crashaw.
soro pcock. m. s. [/lop and cock.] a pipe made to let out li-
quor, stopped by a turning cock.
no man could spit from him without it, but would drivel
like some paralytick or fool ; the tongue being as a slopcock to
the air, till upon its removal the spittle is driven away.
- grew's cosnol.
sto'pgap. n.s.. [from stop and gap.] something substituted;
a temporary expedient.
sto ppage. m. s. [from stop.] the aet of stopping; the state
of being stopped.
- the effects are a stoppage of circulation by too great a
weight upon the heart, and suffocation. arbuthnot.
the stoppage of a cough, or spitting, increases phlegm in
the stomach. floyer on the humours.
stopple, or stopper. n.s.. [from stop.] that by which any
hole or the mouth of any vessel is filled up.
bottles swinged, or carried in a wheel-barrow upon rough
ground, fill not full, but leave some air ; for if the liquor
come close to the stopple, it cannot flower. bacon.
there were no shuts or stopples made for the ears, that any
loud or sharp noise might awaken it, as also a soft and gentle
murmur provoke it to sleep. ray on the creation.
sto'r axtr.e.e. n.s.. [styrax, latin.]
1. a plant.
2. a resinous and odoriferous gum.
i yielded a pleasant odour like the best myrrh, as galbanum,
and sweet storax. ecclus. xxiv. 15.
store. n.s.. [stor, in old swedish and runick, is much, and
is prefixed to other words to intend their signification; stor,
danish; stoor, islandick, is great. the teutonick dialects
nearer to english seem not to have retained this word.]
1. large number ; large quantity; plenty.
the ships are fraught with store of victuals, and good quan-
*
miller.
tity of treasure. bacon.
none yet, but store hereafter from the earth
up hither like acrial vapours flew,
, of all things transitory and vain, when sin -
with vanity had fill'd the works of men. milton.
jove, grant me length of life, and years good store
heap on my bended back. dryden's juvenal.
2. a stock accumulated; a supply hoarded.
... we liv'd -
supine amidst our flowing store,
we slept securely, and we dreamt of more.
divine cecilia came,
inventress of the vocal frame:
the sweet enthusiast from her sacred store
enlarg’d the former narrow bounds,
and added length to solemn sounds.
thee, goddess, thee, britannia's isle adores:
how has she oft exhausted all her stores,
how oft in fields of death thy presence sought
nor thinks the mighty prize too dearly bought. addison.
their minds are richly fraught
with philosophick stores. thomson.
3. the state of being accumulated; hoard.
is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among
my treasures 2 deut. xxxii. 34.
4. storehouse; magazine.
sulphurous and nitrous foam,
conco&amp;ted and adusted, they reduc’d
to blackest grain, and into store convey'd.
store. adj. hoarded; laid up; accumulated.
what floods of treasure have flowed into europe by that
action, so that the cause of christendom is raised since twenty
times told: of this treasure the gold was accumulate and store
treasure; but the silver is still growing. bacon's holy war.
to store. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to furnish; to replenish.
wise plato said the world with men was sor'd,
that succour each to other might afford.
her face with thousand beauties blest ;
her mind with thousand virtues stor'd ;
dryden.
dryden.
milton.
denham.
her pow'r with boundless joy confest,
her person only not ador'd.
2. to stock against a future time. - - -
some were of opinion that it were best to stay where th
were, until more aid and store of victuals were come; but
others said the enemy were but barely stored with victuals, and
therefore could not long hold out. anzlles's history.
one having stored a pond of four acres with carps, tench,
and other fish, and only put in two small pikes, at seven years
end, upon the draught, not one fish was left, but the two
pikes grown to an excessive bigness, - halt.
the mind reflects on its own operations about the ideas
got by sensation, and thereby stores itself with a new set of
* , " prior.
ideas, which i call ideas of reflection. lock.
to store the vessel let the care be mire,
with water from the rocks and rosy wine,
and life-sustaining bread. pope's ods.
3. to lay up ; to hoard.
let the main part of the corn be a common stock, laid in
and stored up, and then delivered out in proportion.
store house. n.s.. [store and house.}
1. magazine ; treasury; place in which things are boarded and
reposited against a time of use.
by us it is willingly confessed, that the scripture of god is
a storehouse abounding with inestimable treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, in many kinds over and above things in this
kind barely necessary. hesser.
suffer us to famish, and their forehouses cramm'd with
grain shaftsp. coriolaoui.
joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the egyp-
tians. gen. xli. 56.
to these high pow'rs a storehouse doth pertain,
where they all arts and gen'ral reasons lay;
which in the soul, ev’n after death, remain,
bacon.
and no lethean flood can wash away. davies,
my heart hath been a storehouse long of things
and sayings laid up, portending strange events. milton.
the image of god was resplendent in man's practical un-
derstanding, that storehouse of the soul, in which are treasured
up the rules of action and the seeds of morality. south.
as many different sounds as can be made by single articula-
tions, so many letters there are in the storehouse of nature. hold,
2. a great mass reposited.
they greatly joyed merry tales to feign,
of which a storehouse did with her remain.
sto'rer. m. s. [from store.] one who lays up.
storied. adj. [from story.] furnished with stories; adorned
with historical pictures.
let my due feet never fail
to walk the studious cloisters pale,
and love the high embowed roof,
with antick pillar massy proof,
and storied windows richly dight,
pairy queen.
casling a dim religious light. milton.
some greedy minion or imperious wife,
the trophy'd arches, story'd halls invade. pope.
stork. m. s. [rronc, saxon ; ciconia, pat.] a bird of pas-
sage famous for the regularity of its departure.
its beak and legs are long and red; it feeds upon serpents,
frogs, and insects : its plumage would be quite white, were
not the extremity of its wings, and also some part of its head
and thighs, black: it sits for thirty days, and lays but four
eggs : they go away in the middle of august, and return in
spring. - calmet.
the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times. jar.
who bid the stork, columbus like, explore
heavens not his own, and worlds unknown before ?
who calls the council, states the certain day,
who forms the phalanx, and who points the way ? pope.
sto'rksbill. n.f. [geranium, lat..] an herb. ainsworth.
storm. n.s. [y/torm, welsh; reopm, saxon; storm, dutch;
stormo, italian.]
1. a tempest; a commotion of the elements.
o turn thy rudder hitherward a while,
here may thy storm-beat vessel safely ride. spensir.
we hear this fearful tempest sing,
yet seek no shelter to avoid the sidron. shakespears.
them she upstays, mindless the while
herself, though fairest unsupported flower,
from her best prop so far and storm so nigh. milton.
sulphurous hail shot after us in storm. milich.
then stay my child ! storms beat and rolls the main;
oh! beat those storms, and roll the seas in vain. papt.
2. assault on a fortified place.
how by storm the walls were won,
* or how the victor sack'd and burnt the town. dryden.
3. commotion; sedition; tumult; clamour; bustle.
whilst i in ireland nourish a mighty band,
i will stir up in england some black storm. shakespeare.
her sister -
began to scold and raise up such a storm,
that mortal ears might hardly endure the din. shakosh.
4. asiliclion;
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t o \
s t o
affiaion; calamity; distress.
4. a brave man struggling in the storms of fate.
violence; vehemence; tumultuous force.
5. as oft as we are delivered from those either imminent or
resent calamities, against the storm and tempest whereof we
all instantly craved favour from above, let it be a question
what we should render unto god for his blessings, universally,
sensibly, and extraordinarily bestowed. hooker.
1, srorm. v. 4. [from the noun.j. to attack by open force.
from ploughs and harrows sent to seek renown,
they fight in fields, and storm the shaken town.
pope.
- dryden.
there the brazen tow'r was storm'd of old,
when jove descended in almighty gold. pope.
t. storm. to. 77.
1. to raise tempests.
so now he storms with many a sturdy floure,
so now his blustering blast each coast doth scoure. spensor.
1. to rage; to fume; to be loudly angry.
hoarse, and all in rage,
as mock'd they storm. milton's paradis. loft.
when you return, the master storms, the lady scolds. swift.
while thus they rail, and scold, and storm,
it passes but for common form.
- swift.
sro'rmy. adj. [from storm.]
i. tempestuous.
bellowing clouds burst with a stormy sound,
and with an armed winter strew the ground. addison.
the tender apples from their parents rent
by stormy shocks, must not neglected lie. philips.
1. violent; passionate.
story. n. s. [recen, saxon; storie, dutch ; storia, italian ;
iodiz.
1. history; account of things past.
the fable of the dividing of the world between the three
sons of saturn, arose from the true story of the dividing of the
earth between the three brethren, the sons of noah. raleigh.
thee i have heard relating what was done
fre my remembrance: now hear me relate
my sory, which perhaps thou hast not heard. milton.
the four great monarchies make the subject of ancient
for, and are related by the greek and latin authors. temple.
matters of fast, concerning times, places, persons, ac-
tions which depend upon sory, and the relation of others,
these things are not capable of being proved by such scientifi-
cal principles. // ilkins.
governments that once made such a noise, as founded up-
on the deepest counsels and the strongest force ; yet by some
slight miscarriage, which let in ruin upon them, are now so
utterly extinct, that nothing remains of them but a name ;
nor are there the least traces of them to be found, but only in
?ory. south.
2. small tale; petty narrative; account of a single incident.
in the road between bern and soleurre, a monument erect-
ed by the republick of bern tells us the story of an english-
man not to be met with in any of our own writers. addison.
3. an idle or trifling tale; a petty fiction.
these flaws and starts would well become
a woman's story at a winter's fire,
authoris'd by her grandame. shakespeare's macbeth.
this scene had some bold greek or british bard
beheld of old, what stories had we heard
offairies, satyrs, and the nymphs their dames,
their feasts, their revels, and their am’rous flames. denham.
my maid left on the table one of her story-books, which i
found full of strange impertinence, of poor servants who came
to be ladies. swift.
1. [rton, place, saxon.] . a floor; a flight of rooms.
avoid enormous heights of seven stories, and the contrary
fault of low distended fronts. j/otton.
sonnets or elegies to chloris,
might raise a house about two stories;
a lyrick ode would slate ; a catch
would tile; an epigram would thatch.
t. sto'ry. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to tell in history; to relate.
how worthy he is, i will leave to appear hereafter, rather
than sory him in his own hearing. shakespeare's cymbeline.
'tis not vain or fabulous
what the sage poets, taught by th’ heav'nly muse,
story'd of old in high immortal verse,
of dire chimeras and enchanted isles,
and rifted rocks, whose entrance leads to hell. milton.
it is storied of the brazen colossus, in the island of rhodes,
that it was seventy cubits high : the thumbs of it being so big,
that no man could grasp one of them with both his arms. //i.
recite them, nor in erring pity fear,
to wound with storied griefs the filial car.
2. to range one under another.
because all the parts of an undisturbed fluid are of “4”
gravity, or gradually placed or storied according to the dis-
ference of it; any concretion that can be supposed to be natu-
swift.
pope.
rally and mechanically made in such a fluid, must have a like
structure of its several parts; that is, either be all over of a
similar gravity, or have the more ponderous parts nearer to
its basis. bently's sermons.
r
sro *xro. * f [story and tell.] one who relates tales
in conversation; an historian, in contempt.
in such a satire all would seek a shar:
and every fool will fancy he is there; 2
old /?orytellers too must pine and die.
to see their antiquated wit laid by o
like her, who miss'd her name in * lampoon,
and griev'd to find herself decay’d so soon. - * * * &gt;
o will be no longer postered with dull,
ous storytellers. stołft' ote conversati
srove. n. s. [/'02, islandick, a fo...". o
esuve, french ; /love, dutch. - &gt; }:04, saxon 3
1. a hot-house; a place artificially made warm.
fishermen who make holes in the ice, to dip up such fish
with their nets as resort thither for breathing, light on fwidow.
congealed in clods, of a slimy substance, and caro, them
home to their stoves, the warmth recovereth them to fire and
flight. carew's survey of cornwal.
stoves, which could autumn of cold winter make,
fountains in autumn to bring winter back. beaum. psyche.
. the heat which arises out of the lesser spiracles brings forth
nitre and sulphur; some of which it affixes to the tops and
sides of the grottos, which are usually so hot as to serve for
natural /loves or sweating-vaults. woodward.
the most proper place for unetion is a stove. jwiseman.
2. a place in which fire is made, and by which heat is commu-
nicated.
if the season prove exceeding piercing, in your great house
kindle some charcoals; and when they have done smoking,
put them into a hole sunk a little into the floor, about the
middle of it. this is the safest stove. evelyn.
to stove. v. a. [from the noun..] to keep warm in a house
artificially heated.
for december, january, and the latter part of november,
take such things as are green all winter; orange trees, lemon
trees, and myrtles, if they be slaved; and sweet marjoram
warm set.
dryden.
dry, tedi-
- bacon.
to srous d. v. n. [ sound, i grieved, islandick.]
1. to be in pain or sorrow. out of use.
2. for stunn'd. - spensor.
stou n'd. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. sorrow; gricf; mishap. out of use. the scots retain it.
begin and end the bitter baleful stound,
if less than that i fear.
spensor.
the fox his copesinate found, pens.
to whom complaining his unhappy /?ound,
he with him far'd some better chance to find. spenser.
2. astonishment; amazement.
thus we stood as in a sound,
and wet with tears, like dew, the ground. gay.
3. hour; time; season. spenser.
sirou r. n.s. [/iur, runick, a battle; resonan, saxon, to dis-
tu; b.] assault; incursion; tumult. obsolete.
and he that harrow'd hell with heavy slour,
the faulty souls from thence brought to his heavenly bowr.
spenser's fairy queen.
love, that long since has to thy mighty powre
per force subdu'd my poor captived heart,
and raging now therein with restless slowre,
do'st tyrannize in every weaker part.
the giant struck so mainly merciless,
that could have overthrown a stonny tower,
and were not heavenly grace that him did bless,
he had been pouldered all as thin as flower,
but he was wary of that deadly slowre. spensor.
stout. adj. [stout, dutch ; folz, proud, german; stautan,
gothick, is to strike. j
1. strong; lusty ; valiant.
when i was young,
i do remember how my father said,
a souter champion never handled sword. shakes. hon. vi.
some captain of the land or fleet, -
stout of his hands, but of a soldier's wit:
cries, i have sense to serve my turn, in store,
and he's a rascal who pretends to more.
2. brave; bold; intrepid.
the sout-heartel are spoiled. psal. lxxvi. 5.
he lost the charaster of a bold, sout, and magnanimous
spenser.
dryon.
man, which he had been long reputed to be. clare'.…”.
3. obstinate ; pertinacious; resolute; proud.
- the lords all stand,
to clear their cause, most resolutely stout. diniel.
there virtue and stout honour pass'd the guard,
those only friends that could not be debard.
4. strong; firm.
the soutes vessel to the storm gave way,
and suck'd through loosen'j planks the rushing sea. drydor.
- s1 cu's.
latha r?.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
‘s t r
$rout. n.f. a cant name for strong beer,
should but his muse descending drop
a slice of bread and mutton chop,
or kindly, when his credit’s out,
surprise him with a pint of stout;
exaited in his mighty mind,
he flies and leaves the stars behind. swift.
sirou'ri.y. adv. [from stout..] lustily; boldly; obstinately.
stout ness. n. s. [from stout.]
1. strength ; valour.
2. boldness; fertitude.
his fashfulness in youth was the very true sign of his virtue
and stoutness after. ascham's schoolmaster.
3. obstimacy ; stubbornness.
come all to ruin, let
thy mother rather feel thy pride, than fear
thy dangerous slottness : for i mock at death
with as stout heart as thou. shakespeare's coriolanus.
to stow. v. a. s.rtop, sax. shoe, old frisick, a place; sowen,
dutch, to lay up..] to lay up ; to reposit in order ; to lay
in the proper place.
foul thief where hast thou sow'd my daughter shak.
i” th’ holsters of the saddle-bow,
two aged pistols he did sic w. hudibras.
some slow their oars, or stop the leaky sides. dryden.
all the patiots were beheaded, slowed in dungeons, or
condemned to work in the mines. addson.
the goddess shov'd the vessel from the shores,
and slow'd within its womb the naval stores. pope.
so grieves th' advent’rous merchant, when he throws
all his long-toil'd-for treasure his ship slows,
into the angry main.
stow'age. m. s. [from slow.]
1. room for laying up.
in every vessel is stewage for immense treasures, when the
cargo is pure builion, or merchandize of as great a value. add.
2. the state of being laid up.
'tis plate of rare device, and jewels
of rich and exquisite form, their value's great;
and i am something curious, being strange,
to have them in safe stowage. shakespeare's cymbeline.
3. money paid for stowing of goods.
stowe, sloe. whether singly or jointly, are the same with the
saxon reop, a place. gilson's camden.
stra’bis m. n.s.. [sirabisme, fr. jirabismus, lat. j a squint-
ing ; act of looking asquint.
to sr ra’ddle. v. n. [supposed to come from striddle or stride.]
to stand or walk with the feet removed far from each other
to the right and left; to part the legs wide.
let man survey himself, divested of artificial charms, and
he will find himself a forked straddling animal, with bandy
legs. arbuthnot and pope.
to stra(ggle. v. a. [of this word no etymology is known:
it is probably a frequentative of siray, from slravviare, italian,
of extra viam, latin.]
1. to wander without any certain dire&amp;tion; to rove ; to
ramble.
but stay, like one that thinks to bring his friend
a mile or two, and sees the journey's end:
i straggle on too far. suck'ing.
a wolf spied out a straggling kid, and pursued him. l’eir.
children, even when they endeavour their utmost, cannot
keep their minds from siraggling. locke.
2. to wander dispersedly.
he likewise enriched poor fraggling soldiers with great
quantity. shakespeare's timon.
they found in burford some of the straggling soldiers, who
out of weariness stayed behind. clarendon.
form straggling mountaineers for publick good,
to rank in tribes, and quit the savage wood; -
houses to build, and them contiguous make,
for cheerful neighbourhood and safety's fake. tate.
3. to exuberate; to shoot too far.
were they content to prune the lavish vine,
of //raggling branches, and improve the wine.
trim off the small superfluous branches on each side of the
hedge that straggle too far out. mortimer's huffandry.
4. to be dispersed; to be apart from any main body; to stand
single.
foirs passed the syrens, they came between scylla and
charybdis, and the straggling rocks, which seemed to cast out
carew.
great store of flames and smoke. raleigh.
wide was his parish, not contracted close
in streets, but here and there a straggling house;
yet still he was at hand. dryden.
stra ggle r. m. s. [from straggle.]
1. a wanderer; a rover; one who forsakes his company; one
who rambles without any settled dire&amp;tion.
the last should keep the countries from passage of stragglers
from those parts, whence they use to come forth, and often-
times use to work much mischief. sperser's ireland,
4
let's whip these stragglers o'er the sers again,
lash hence these over-weening rags of france,
these famish'd beggars. shakespeare's richard iii.
bottles milling are supposed to be haif stolen by arage,
and the other half broken. - soft.
2. any thing that pushes beyond the rest, or stands fing's.
let thy hand supply the pruning knife,
and crop luxuriant/raggiers, nor be leth
to strip the branches of their leafy growth. drydin.
his pruning hook corrects the vines,
and the loose stragglers to their ranks confines. p.
straight, adj. [/track, old dutch. it is wełł o:
aosworth, that for not crooked we ought to write straight, o
for narrow strait; but for sireight, which is sometimes found
there is no good authority.] 2
1. not crooked; right.
beauty made barren the swell'd boast - -
of him that best could speak; feature, laming.
the shrine of venus, or straight-pight minerva. shai.
a hunter's horn and cornet is oblique; yet they have no.
wise straight horns; which, if they be of the same bore won
the oblique, differ little in sound, save that the /?raight require
somewhat a stronger blast. bacon's natural f for;
there are many several sorts of crooked lines; but there.
one only which is straight. dryda.
water and air the varied form confound;
the straight looks crooked, and the square grows round.
- or.
when i see a slrait staff appear crooked while wo.
the water, the water gives me a false idea. watts's lorict.
2. narrow; close. this should properly be strait, offroi, fr.
[see strait.]
queen floz oth used to say of her instructions to great of.
fices, that cy were like to garments, strait at the first put-
tog on, but did by and by wear loose enough. bacon.
3. tense; tight. of this sense it is doubtiul whether it be.
longs to strait, close, narrow; or to straight, not creased. post
the cood straight, may mean, draw; it till it has new fore,
tie it so ait about you, may mean, draw it into a narrower can.
o this ambiguity has perhaps confounded the ortho-
graphy.
straight. adv. [sorax, danish; //rack, dutch..] immedi-
ately ; directly. this sense is naturally derived from the ad-
jective, as a straight line is the shortest line between two points.
if the devil come and roar for them,
i will not send them. i will after straight,
and tell him so. shakespeare's henry iv.
those flinks which the nostrils straight abnor and expel, are
not the most permicious. bacon's natural hilary.
with chalk i first describe a circle here, -
where the aetherial spirits must appear:
come in, come in ; for here they will be strait:
around, around the place i fumigate. drydan.
i know thy generous temper well,
fling but the appearance of dishonour on it,
it straight takes fire, and mounts into a blaze. aidson.
to str a1 ght en. v. a. [from //raight.]
1. to make not crooked ; to make straight.
a crooked stick is not straightened, except it be as far bent
on the clean contrary side. hooker.
of ourselves being so apt to err, the only way which we
have to straighten our paths is, by following the rule of his
will, whose footsteps naturally are right. hooker.
2. to make tense; to tighten.
stra1 ghtly. adv. [from straight.]
1. in a right line; not crookedly,
2. tightly; with tension.
stra1 ghtness. n.s.. [from straight ]
1. rectitude; the contrary to crookedness.
some are for masts, as fir and pine, because of their length
and straightness. bacon's natural history.
2. tension; tightness. -
stra1'ghtways, adv. [siraight and way. it is very often
written straightways, and therefore is perhaps more properly
written straightwise.j immediately; straight.
let me here for ay in peace remain,
or straightway on that last long voyage fare. spenser.
soon as he entered was, the door slraightway
did shut. sponsor.
like to a ship, that, having 'scap'd a tempest,
is straightway claim'd and boarded with a pirate. shakos.
the turks slraightway breaking in upon them, made a
bloody fight. knalles,
as iron is out of the fire, it deadeth straightways. baron.
the found of a bell is strong; continueth some time after
the percussion; but ceaseth straightways if the bell or string be
touched. -- bacon's natural hijoy.
the sun's power being in those months greater, it then
straightways hurries steams up into the atmosphere. jp'odward.
to strain. v. a. softreindre, french.]
1. to squeeze through something.
their
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
s t r
their aliment ought to be light, rice boiled in whey and
strained. - arbuthnot on diet.
2. to purify by filtration.
earth doth not strain water so finely as sand. bacon.
3. to squeeze in an einbrace.
i would have sirain'd him with a strict embrace;
but through my arms he slipt and vanish'd. dryden.
old evander, with a close embrace,
strain'd his departing friend ; and tears o'erflow his face.
- dryden's aeneid.
4. to sprain; to weaken by too much violence.
the jury make no more scruple to pass against an english-
man and the queen, though it be to strain their oaths, than to
drink milk unstrained. spenser's state of ireland.
prudes decay’d about may tack,
strain their necks with looking back. swift.
to put to its utmost strength.
by this we see in a cause of religion, to how desperate ad-
ventures men will strain themselves for relief of their own
part, having law and authority against them. hooker.
too well i wote my humble vaine,
and how my rhimes been rugged and unkempt;
yet as icon my cunning i will strain. spensor.
thus nine enemy fell,
and thus i set my foot on's neck;-even then
the princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
strain, his young nerves, and puts himself in posture
that acts my words. shakespeare's cynibeline.
my earthly by his heavenly overpower'd,
which it had long stood under, strain'd to th’ height
in that celestial colloquy sublime,
as with an ooject that excels the sense,
dazzled and spent, funk down. misten's par. loft.
the lark and innet sing with rival notes;
they strain their warbling throats,
5.
to welcome in the spring. dryden.
noryct content, she strains her malice more,
and adds new ills to those contriv'd before. dry set.
it is the worst fort of good husbandry for a father not to
souin himself a little for his son's breeding. lzoke.
our words flow from us in a smooth continued stream,
without those strainings of the voice, motions of the body, 2nd
majesty of the band, which are so much celebrated in the ora-
tors of greece and rome. afterbury.
strain'd to the root, the stooping forest pours
a rustling shower of yet untimely leaves. thomson.
6. to make strait or tense.
a bigger string more strained, and a lessor string less strained,
may fall into the same tone. . bacon.
thou, the more he varies forms, beware
to strain his fetters v. th a stricter care. dryden's wirgil.
7. to push beyond the proper extent.
see they suffer death,
but in their deaths remember they are men,
strain not the laws to make their torture grievous. addison.
there can be no other meaning in this expression, how-
ever some may pretend to strain it. swift.
your way is to wrest and /lrain some principles maintained
both ly then and mc, to a sense repugnant with their other
known doctrines. j/aterland.
8. to force; to constrain ; to make uneasy or unnatural.
the lark sings so out of tune,
straining harsh discords and unpleafing strains. she offeare.
he talks and plays with fatima, but his mirth
ls forc'd and /l/ ain'd: in his looks appears
a wild distracted fierceness. denham.
t strain. v. n.
1. to make violent efforts.
to build his fortune i will /?rain a little,
for ’tis a bond in men.
you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
straining upon the start.
shaiso. 7 inzn.
shakesp. hon. v.
they strain,
that death may not them idly find t'attend -
their certain fast, but work to meet their end. daniel.
straining with too weak a wing,
we needs will write epistles to the king. pope.
2. to be filtered by compression. -
cesar thought that all sea sands had natural springs of fresh
water: but it is the sea-water; because the pit filed according
to the measure of the tide, and the sea-water passing or strain-
ing through the funds, leaveth the saltness bchad to.ca. bacon.
strain. n.s.. [from the verb.] -
1. an injury by too much violence. -
credit is gained by custon, and seldom recovers a strain ;
but if broken, is never well set again. - temple.
in all pain there is a deformity by a solution of continuity,
as in cutting; or a tendency to solution, as in convulsions or
frains. g rew.
1. [rzenze, saxon.] race; generation; descent. . speyer.
thus far i can praise him; he is of a noblesion,
of approv'd valour. słakosheart.
vol. ii.
i ... trojan youths, born of their noblest/lrains,
* alive; and, yet enrag'd, will empty all their vein:
of vital spirits. chapman's iliad.
why dost thou falsely feign
thyself a sidney : from which noble strain
he |poung, that could so far exalt the name
of love. jvaller
turn then to pharamond, and charlemagne -
and the long heroes of the gallick /?rain. 5 **** prior.
3. hereditary disposition.
amongst these sweet knaves and all this courtesy the arain
of man's bred out into baboon and monk. - -
- y. shakespeare.
intemperance and just breed diseases, which so
spoil the /drain of a nation. ision.
4. a stile or manner of speaking.
according to the genius and strain of the book of proverbs,
the words wisdom and righteousness are used to signify all re-
ligion and virtue. * . tillotson.
in our liturgy are as great strains of true sublime eloquence,
as of any where to be found in our language. swift.
macrobius speaks of hippocrates' knowledge in very lofty
jorains. baker.
5. song ; note; sound.
wilt thou love such a woman what, to make thee an in-
strument, and play false strains upon thee shakespeare.
orpheus self may heave his head
from golden lunter on a bed
9; heap'd elysian flowers, and hear
such stroin, as would have won the ear
of pluto, to have quite set free
his half-regain’d eurydice. - milton,
their heav'nly harps a lower strain began, -
and in soft musick mourn the sail of man. dryden.
when the first bold vessel dar'd the seas,
high on the stern the thracian rais'd his strain,
while argo saw her kindred trees
descend holi, pelion to the main. pope's st. cecilia.
some future/hain, in which the muse shaji tell
flow science dwindles, and how volumes swell. 1 oung.
6. rank; character. -
but thou who lately of the common si-ain,
wort one of us, if still thou do it retail,
the same ill habits, the same follies too, -
still thou art bound to vice, and still a slave. dryden,
7. turn ; ter.dency : inborn disposition.
because hereticks have a slrain of madness, he applied her
with some corporal chastisements, which with respite of time
oight haply reduce her to good order. 11ayward.
8. manner of speech or action.
such take too high a strain at the first, and are magnani-
mous more than tract of years can uphold, as was scipio afri-
canus, of whom livy saith, ultima prionis cedelant. bacon.
sr**i's er. m. s. [from strain..] an instrument of filtra-
tion.
the excrementitious moisture passeth in birds through a
fiver and more delicate strainer than it doth in boasts: for
feathers pass through quills, and hair through skin. ca.on.
shave the goat's shaggy beard, lest thou too late
in vain should it seek a jirainer to dispart
the husky terrche dregs from purer must. philips.
the stomach and intestines are the press, and the lacteal
vesicle the strainers to separate the pure emulsion from its
feces. arbuthno-
these when condens'd, the airy region pours
on the dry earth, in rain or gentle showers,
th’ infinuating drops sink through the sand,
and pass the porous strainers of the land. blackmore.
strait. adj. [estroit, french; stretto, italian.]
1. narrow ; close; not wide. -
witnesses, like watches, go
just as they're set, too fast or slow ;
and where in conscience they're //reight lac'd,
'tis ten to one that side is cast. hudibras.
they are afraid to meet her, if they have miss'd the church;
but then they are more afraid to see her, if they are laced as
jirait as they can possibly be. law.
2. close; intimate. - -
he, forgetting all former injuries, had received that naughty
plexistus into a straight degree of favour, his goodness being as
apt to be deceived, as the other's craft was to deceive. sidney.
3. strict; rigorous. -
therefore hold i strait all thy commandments; and all false
ways i utterly abhor. psalms, common prayer.
fugitives are not relieved by the profit of their lands in
england, for there is a straighter order taken. spensor.
he now, for sooth, takes on him to reform
some certain edicts, and some slrait decrees
that lay too heavy on the commonwealth.
proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle glo'ster,
than from the evidence of good esteem -
he be approv’d in practice culpable. shałos). henry vi.
4. difficult; distressful. -
25 k. - 5. it
shakespeare.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
5. it is used in opposition to crooked, but is then more properly
written/raight. [see straight.]
a bell or a cannon may be heard beyond a hill which inter-
cepts the fight of the sounding body, and sounds are propa-
gated as readily through crooked pipes as through freight ones.
newton's opticks.
strait. n.s.
1. a narrow pass, or frith.
plant garrisons to command the soreights and narrow pas-
sages. spenser.
honour travels in a soreight so narrow,
where one but goes abreast. shakesp. troil. and crossida.
fretum magellanicum, or magellan's straits. abbot.
they went forth unto the straits of the mountain. judith.
the saracens brought together with their victories their
language and religion into all that coast of africk, even from
egypt to the streights of gibraltar. brerewood on languages.
2. distress; difficulty.
the independent party which abhorred all motions towards
peace, were in as great soreights as the other how to carry on
their designs. clarendon.
it was impossible to have administred such advice to the king,
in the sireight he was in, which being pursued might not have
proved inconvenient. - - clarendon.
thyself
bred up in poverty, and sireights at home,
lost in a desart here, and hunger-bit. milton's par. reg.
thus adam, sore beset ! reply'd,
o heav'n in evil //reight this day i stand
before my judge. mł'ton's par. loft.
'tis hard with me, whatever choice i make,
i must not merit you, or must forsake :
but in this sireight, to honour i’ll be true,
and leave my fortune to the gods and you. dryden.
kings reduced to /?rrights, cither by their own, or by the
negligence of their predecessors, have been always involved in
dark and mean intrigues. davenant.
some modern authors observing what shrait; they have been
put to in all ages, to find out water enough for noah's flood,
say, noah's flood was not universal, but a national inunda-
tion. burnet's theory.
let no man who owns a providence grow desperate under
any calamity or strait whatsoever, but compose the anguish of
his thoughts upon this one consideration, that he comprehends
not those strange unaccountable methods by which providence
may dispose of him. o south.
caesar sees.
the sireights to which you're driven, and as he knows
cato's high worth, is anxious for your life. addison.
ulysses made use of the pretence of natural infirmity to con-
ceal the straits he was in at that time in his thoughts. broome.
she watches their time of need and adversity, and if she
can discover that they are in great streights or affliction, she
gives them speedy relief. law.
t., strait. v. a. [from the noun..] to put to difficulties.
- - if your lass
interpretation should abuse, and call this
your lack of love or bounty; you were straited
for a reply, at least, if you make care
of happy holding her. shakespeare's jwinter's tale.
to str a1 ten. v. a. [from strait..]
1. to make narrow.
the city of sidon has a secure haven, yet with something a
dangerous entrance, straitened on the north side by the sea-
ruined wall of the mole. sandys's journey.
lf this be our condition, thus to dwell
in narrow circuit, straiten’d by a foe,
subtile or violent. milton's par. loft.
whatever straitems the vessels, so as the channels become
more narrow, must heat; therefore strait cloaths and cold
baths heat. arbuthnot on diet.
2. to contract; to confine.
the straiting and confining the profession of the common
law, must naturally extend and enlarge the jurisdiction of the
chancery. clarendon.
the landed man finds him aggrieved by the falling of his
rents, and the streightning of his fortune, whilst the monied
man keeps up his gain. locke.
feeling can give us a notion of all ideas that enter at the
eye, except colours; but it is very much streightened and con-
fined to the number, bulk, and distance of its objects. addison.
the causes which straiten the british commerce, will en-
large the french. - addison's state of the war.
3. to make tight; to intend. see straight.
stretch them at their length,
and pull the streighten’d cords with all your strength. dryd.
morality, by her false guardians drawn, -
chicame in furs, and casuisiry in lawn,
gasps, as they straiten at each end the cord,
and dies when dulness gives her page the word.
4. to deprive of necessary room.
dunciad.
waters when stralined, as in the falls of bridges, give a roar.
ing noise. bacon's natural history.
he could not be streightned in room or provisions, or com-
pelled to fight. clarendon.
- the airy crowd
swarm’d, and were straiten’d. milton,
several congregations find themselves very much strained,
and if the mode encrease, i wish it may not drive many ordi-
nary women into meetings, addison’s speciator.
5. to distress; to perplex.
men by continually striving and fighting to enlarge their
bounds, and encroaching upon one another, seem to be strait-
ned for want of room. a).
straith anded. adj. [from strait and hand.] parsimonious;
sparing; niggardly.
straitla’ce d. adj. [strait and lace.]
1. griped with stays.
let nature have scope to fashion the body as she thinks
best ; we have few well-shaped that are straitlaced, or much
tamper'd with. locke on education.
2. stiff; constrained; without freedom.
straitly. adv. [from strait..]
1. narrowly.
2. strictly; rigorously.
those laws he straitly requireth to be observed without
breach or blame. hooker.
3. closely ; intimately.
straitn ess. n. s. [from strait..]
1. narrowness.
the town was hard to befiege, and uneasy to come unto,
by reason of the straitness of all the places. 2 maccab. xii.
it is a great errour, and a narrowness or straitness of mind,
if any man think that nations have nothing to do one with an-
other, except there be an union in sovereignty, or a conjunc-
tion in pact. bacon's holy war.
the straitness of my conscience will not give me leave to
swallow down such camels. king charles.
2. striciness; rigour.
if his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it
shall become him well. shakspeare.
among the romans, the laws of the twelve tables did ex-
clude the females from inheriting, and had many other sirait-
noses and hardships which were successively remedied. hale.
3. distress; difficulty.
4. want; scarcity.
the siraitness of the conveniences of life amongst them had
never reached so far, as to the use of fire, till the spaniards
brought it amongst them. locke.
strake. the obsolete preterite of strike. struck.
did'st thou not see a bleeding hind
whose right haunch earst my stedfast arrow strake. spensor.
fearinglest they should fall into the quick-sands, they strak,
sail, and so were driven. acts xxvii. 17.
strake.. n. s.
1. a long mark; a streak. see streak.
2. a narrow board.
so m. s. [renanb, saxon; strande, dutch; strend, islan-
ick.]
1. the verge of the sea or of any water.
i saw sweet beauty in her face;
such as the daughter of agenor had,
that made great jove to humble him to her hand,
when with his knees he kiss'd the cretan /irand. shakes.
some wretched lines from this neglected hand,
may find my hero on the foreign /irand,
warm'd with new fires.
2. a twist of a rope. i know not whence derived.
to strand. v. a. [from the noun.j. to drive or force upon
the shallows.
tarchon's alone was lost, and stranded stood,
stuck on a bank, and beaten by the flood. dryden's an.
i have seen of both those kinds from the sea, but so few that
they can only be such as have strayed from their main refi-
dence, and been accidentally intercepted and stranded by great
‘storms. jwoodward on fossils,
some from the stranded vessel force their way,
fearful of fate they meet it in the sea;
some who escape the fury of the wave,
sicken on earth, and sink into a grave.
strange. adj. [estrange, fr. extraneus, lat.]
1. foreign; of another country.
i do not contemn the knowledge of strange and divers
tongues. a cham’s schoolmaster.
the natural subjects of the state should bear a sufficient
proportion to the strange subjects that they govern. bacon.
2. not domestick.
as the man loves least at home to be,
that hath a sluttish house, haunted with sprites;
so she, impatient her own faults to see,
turns from herself, and in strange things delights. davies.
3. wonderful; causing wonder.
prior.
prior.
it
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- -
s t r
it is evident, and i: is one of the strange/?secrets in sounds,
what the whole sound is not in the whole air only; but is also
in every small part of the air. bacon's natural history.
stated at length, ere long i might perceive
strange alteration in me.
thus the slrange cure to our spilt blood apply'd,
sympathy to the distant wound does guide. cowley.
it is strange they should be so filent in this matter, when
there were so many occasions to speak of it, if our saviour had
plainly appointed such an infallible judge of controversies.
tillotson.
strange to relate, from young itilus' head
a lambent flame arose, which gently spread
around his brows, and on his temples fed. dryden's en.
4- odd ; irregular ; not according to the common way.
desire my man's abode, where i did leave him:
he's strange and peevish. shakesp. cymbeline.
a strange proud return you may think i make you, madam,
when tell you it is not from every body i would be thus
obliged.
5. unknown; new.
long custom had inured them to the former kind alone, by
which the latter was new and /irange in their ears. ihooker.
here is the hand and scal of the duke: you know the cha-
racter, i doubt not ; and the signet is not strange to you. sh.
joseph saw his brethren, but made himself /trange unto
them. gen. lxii. 7.
miltoh.
suckling.
here passion first i felt,
commotion strange /
6. remote.
she makes it //, ange, but she would be best pleas'd
to be so anger'd with another letter.
. uncommonly good or bad.
this made david to admire the law of god at that stranse
rate, and to advance the knowledge of it above all other know-
ledge. tillotson.
8. unacquainted.
they were now, like sand without lime, ill bound toge-
ther, at a gaze, looking/trange one upon another, not know-
ing who was faithful. ba.on.
$1 range. inters. an cypression of wonder.
strange / what extremes should thus preserve the show,
high on the alps, or in deep caves below. ii air.
strange / that fatherly authority should be the only original
of government, and yet all mankind not know it. loco.
to strange. v. n. [sion ice adjective.] to wonder; to be
astonished.
were all the assertions of aristotle such as thrology pro-
nounceth impietics, which we /orange not at from one, of
whom a father faith. no dewn celuit, ne: curavit. glanv.
si rangely. adv. [from , orange. j
1. with some relation to foreigners.
as by strange fortune
it came to us, i do in justice charge thee
that thou commend it /?rangely to some place,
where chance may nurse or end it. shalep. j/inter's tale.
2. wonderfully ; in a way to cause wonder, but commonly with
a degree of dislike.
my former speechcs have but hit your thoughts,
which can interpret faither: only, i say,
things have been /trangely borne. shakes?. macbeth.
how strangely active are the arts of peace,
whose restless motions less than wars do cease;
peace is not freed from labour, but from noise;
and war more force, but not more pains, employs. dryden.
we should carry along with us some of those virtuous qua-
lities, which we were strangely careless if we did not bring from
home with us. spratt's sermons.
in a time of adiction the remembrance of our good deeds
will strangely cheer and support our spirits. calamy.
it would sirangely delight you to see with what spirit be con-
verses, with what tenderness he reproves, with what affection
he exhorts, and with what vigour he preaches. law.
how strangely crowds misplace things, and miscal',
madness in one is liberty in all ! harte.
strangen ess. n.f. [from strange.]
1. foreignness; the state of bclonging to another country.
if i will obey the gospel, no distance of place, no /orange-
nos of country can make any man a stranger to me. spratt.
2. uncommunicativeness; distance of behaviour.
ungird thy strangens, and tell me what i shall vent to my
lady. - shaopeare's twelfth night.
milan.
shak speare.
will you not observe -
the arancers of his alter'd countenance shakos. h. vi.
3. remoteness from common manners or notions; uncouthness.
men worthier than himself
here tend the savage // angens, he puts on ;
and undergo, in an observing kind, -
his humourous predominance. shao. trail, and crossida.
4. mutual dislike. -
in this peace there was an article that no englishman should
2.
** into scotland, and no scottishman into england, with-
out letters commendatory: this might seem a means to con-
tinue a /?rangeness betwee - -
- * n the nations; but it was do -
lock in the borderers. &gt; s gone to
5. wonderfulness; power of raising wonder.
if a man,
- for curiosity or jorangeness sake, would make a
}. p'9" a word, let him consider the motion of the
i. ** of voice, and the like sounds made in inanimate
odlts. - -
thi ised bacon's natural history:
is raised greater tumults and boilings in the hearts of
men, than the strangens, and seeming unicasonableness of all
the former articles. south
stra'nger. m. s. se/iranger, fr.]
1. a foreigner; one of another country.
i am a most poor woman, and a stranger,
born out of your dominions; having irere
no judge indiff'rent. shakespeare's hanry viii.
your daughter hath made a gross revolt;
tying her duty, beauty, wit and fortunes
to an extravagant and wheeling stranger
of here and every where.
there is no place in europe so much frequented
whether they are such as come out of curiosity, or such who
are obliged to attend the court of rome. addison on italy.
after a year's inter-regnum from the death of romulus, the
senate of their own authority chose a successor, and a /?ranger,
merely upon the fame of his virtues.
2. one unknown.
strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.
you did void your rheum upon my beard,
and foot me, as you spurn a /tranger cur
(over your thicshold. shosp. merchant of penice.
we ought to acknowledge, that no nations are wholly
alions and jirangers the one to the other. bacon.
his perusal of the writings of his friends and/irangers. fell.
! hey coine, and near him plac'd the stranger guest. pope.
thus the majestick mother of mankind,
to her own charms most amiably blind,
on the greea snagin innocently stood,
and gaz'd indulgent on the crystal flood;
survey'd the //ranger in the painted wave,
and failing, prais d the beauties which she gave.
3. a guest; one not a domestick.
he will vouchsafe
this day to be our guest: bring forth and pour
abundance, fit to honour and receive
our heavenly stranger.
4. one unacquainted.
my child is yet a stranger in the world;
she hath not seen the change of fourteen years. shakespeare.
i was no stranger to the original: i had als, studied virgil's
design, and his disposition of it. dryden.
5. one not admitted to any communication of fellowship.
i unspeak my detrastion; here abjure
the taints and blames upon myself,
for /trangers to my nature. shaks, eare’s m.beth.
melons on beds of ice are taught to bear,
and /orangers to the fun y : ripen here. granville.
7, stranger. v. a. [from the noun..] to cstrange; to ali-
cinate.
will you with those of rimities she owes,
dower'd with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath,
take her or leave her f shakespeare.
to s i rangle. v. a. [/irangulo, lat.]
1. to choak ; to suffocate; to kill by intercepting the breath.
his face is black and full of blood;
his eye-balls farther out, than when he liv'd ;
staring full ghastly, like a/irangled man. shakes. h. vi.
shall i not then be stifled in the vault,
to whose foul mouth no health some air breathes in,
and there be /orangled ere my romeo comes shakespeare.
do'st thou not know that thou hast slrangled thine husbands?
tob. iii. 8.
the lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and
sorangled for his lioncsics, and filled his holes with prey. neh.
so heinous a crime was thc sin of adultery, that our saxon'
ancestors compelled the adulteress to strangle herself; and he
who debauched her was to be hanged over her grave. moss.
2. to suppress; to hinder from birth or appearance.
- by th’ clock, 'tis day;
and yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp:
is’t night's predominance, or the day's shame : shak. .11a:8.
sir rangler n.s.. [from strange.] one who strangles.
the band that seems to tie their friendship together, will
be the very strangler of their amity. so...?nt, cud cleopatra.
s rangles. n. j. [from /trangle. j swellings in a horse's
throat.
sfr angula rion. n.s. [from strangle.] the at of strang-
ling; suffocation; the state of being strangled.
a spunge is mischievous, not in itself, for its powder is
harmless; but because, being received into the stomach, it
swelleth,
bacon:
shakespeare.
by strangers,
swift.
shakespeare.
12, no.
-
jolt.r.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
s t r
swelleth, and, occasioning its continual distension, induceth
a strangulation. brown's vulgar errours.
the reduction of the jaws is difficult, and, if they be not
timely reduced, there happen paralysis and strangulation.
i?’iseman.
stra'ngury. m. s. sogo.sysosz; strangurie, fr.] a difficulty
of urine attended with pain.
strap., n.s.. [/troppe, dutch ; stroppa, italian.] a narrow
long slip of cloath or leather.
these cloaths are good enough to drink in, and so be these
boots too; an' they be not, let them hang themselves in their
own siraps. shakespeare's twelfth night.
i found but one husband, a lively cobler, that kicked and
spurred all the while his wife was carrying him on ; and had
scarce passed a day without giving her the discipline of the
jirap. addison's spediator.
to st rap. v. a. [from strap.] to beat with a strap.
stra ppado. n.s. chastisement by blows.
were i at the strappado, or all the racks in the world, i
would not tell you on compulsion. shakespeare.
st ra(pping, adj. vast; large; bulky. used of large men
or women in contempt. -
strata. m. s. [the plural of siratum, lat..] beds; layers.
a philosophical term. .
‘she terrestrial matter is disposed into strata, or layers,
placed one upon another ; in like manner as any earthy sedi-
ment, settling down from a fluid, will naturally be. jp'oodw.
with how much wisdom are the strata laid,
of different weight and of a different kind,
of fundry forms for fundry ends design'd
strata gem. n. s. [son?” ; stratageme, fr.]
1. an artifice in war ; a trick by which an enemy is deceived.
- john talbot, i did send for thee,
to tutor thee in soratagems of war.
ev'ry minute now
should be the father of some stratagem. shaos. henry iv.
2. an artifice; a trick by which son,e advantage is obtained.
rouse up your courage, call up all your counsels,
and think on all those stratagem; which nature
keeps ready to encounter sudden dangers. denham's sophy.
those oft are stratagems which errours seem ;
nor is it homer nods, but we who dream.
blackmore.
shakesp. henry vi.
pope.
to stratify. v. a. [stratifier, fr. from stratum, lat..] to
range in beds or layers. a chymical term.
stra’s u.m. m. s. [latin.] a bed; a layer. a term of phi-
losophy.
another was found in a perpendicular fissure of a stratum of
stone in langron iron-mine, cumberland. jp'ozdward.
drill'd through the sandy stratum, ev'ry way
the waters with the sandy jiratum rose.
straw, n.s. [ref:eop, saxon; stroo, dutch.]
1. the stalk on which corn grows, and from which it is
threshed. *
i can counterfeit the deep tragedian,
tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
intending deep suspicion.
plate fin with gold,
and the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
arm it in rags, a pigmy’s straw doth pierce it. shakespeare.
apples in hay and straw ripened apparently; but the apple
in the straw more. bacon's natural history.
my new straw hat, that's trimly lin'd with green,
let peggy wear. gay's pastorak.
more light he treads, more tall he seems to rise,
thomson.
shakesp. rich. iii.
and struts a straw breadth nearer to the skies. tickel.
2. anything proverbially worthless.
thy arms, thy liberty, beside
all that's on th’ outfide of thy hide,
are mine by military law,
of which y. not bate one straw. hudibras.
'tis not a straw matter whether the main cause be right or
wrong. l'estrange.
stra’w berry. m. s. [ fragaria, lat.] a plant. 44iller.
content with food, which nature freely bred,
on wildings and on strawberries they fed. dryden.
strawberris, by their fragrant smell, seem to be cordial:
the seeds obtained by shaking the ripe fruit in winter, are an
excellent remedy against the stone. the juice of strawberries
and limmons in spring-water is an excellent drink in bilious
fevers. arbuthnot on diet.
sfr a'w berr y tree. n.s.. [arbutus, lat.] it is ever green,
the leaves roundkh and serrated on the edges: the fruit is
of a fleshy substance, and very like a strawberry. 41iller,
str aw bullor, adj. [/?raw and built.] made up of straw.
they on the smoothed plank, -
the suburb of their strawbait citadel,
new rubb'd with balm. expatiate. milton.
stra woolou red. adj. [/fraw and colour.] of a light yellow.
i will discharge it in your straw.colour’d beard. shakespeare.
2. to stretch.
so. adj. [from straw.] made of straw; consisting of
raw.
there the strawy greeks, ripe for his edge,
fall down before him, like the mower's swath. shakespeare.
in a field of corn, blown upon by the wind, there will ap-
pear waves of a colour differing from that of the rest; the
wind, by depressing some of the ears, and not others, makes
the one reflect more from the lateral and strawy parts than the
rest. boyle on colouri.
to st ray. v. n. [stroe, danish, to scatter; stratviare, italian,
to wander.]
i. to wander ; to rove.
my eye, descending from the hill, surveys
where thames among the wanton valley sorays. denham,
lo, the glad gales o'er all her beauties stray,
breathe on her lips, and in her bosom play. pope.
2. to rove out of the way; to range beyond the proper limits.
what grace hath thee now hither brought this way :
or doeu thy feeble feet unweeting hither slray. spensor.
no: where can i stray,
save back to england all the world's my way. shakspeare.
she doth stray about -
by holy crosses, where she kneeling prays
for happy wedlock hours. shakespeare.
wand’rest thou within this lucid orb, -
and stray'd from those fair fields of light above,
amidst this new creation want'st a guide
to reconduct thy steps ? dryden.
3. to err; to deviate from the right.
we have erred and slroyed. -
to stray. v. a. to mislead. obsolete.
hath not else his eye
stray'd his affection in unlawful love 2
stray. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. any creature wandering beyond its limits ; any thing lost by
wandering.
she hath herself not only well defended,
but taken and impounded as a stray
the king of scots.
should i take you for a stray,
you must be kept a year and day. hudibra;.
when he has traced his talk through all its wild tambles,
let him bring home his soray; not like the lost sheep with joy,
but with tears of penitence. government of the tongue.
seeing him wander about, i took him up for a siray. dryd.
he cries out, neighbour, hast thou seen a siray
common prayer.
shakespeare.
shakespeare's henry v.
of bullocks and of heifers pass this way addison.
2. act of wandering. -
i would not from your love make such a stray,
to match you where i hate. shakespeare.
streak. m. s. [renice, saxon; soreke, dutch; firicia, ital.]
a line of colour different from that of the ground. sometimes
written sirake.
the west yet glimmers with some streaks of day ;
now spurs the lated traveller apace,
to gain the timely inn. shakspeare's macbeth.
what mean those colour'd /freaks in heav'n,
distended, as the brow of god appeas'd milton.
the night comes on, we cager to pursue
*till the last streaks of dying day withdrew,
and doubtful moonlight did our rage deceive. dryden.
ten wildings have i gather'd for my dear;
how ruddy, like your lips, their streaks appear ! drydin.
while the fantastick tulip strives to break
in two-fold beauty, and a parted sireak. prizr.
to streak, v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to stripe; to variegate in hues; to dapple.
all the yeanlings which were streak’d and pied,
should fall as jacob's hire. shakesp. merchant of penice.
a mule, admirably streaked and dappled with white and
black. sandys's journey.
to morrow, ere fresh morning streak the east,
with first approach of light we must be ris'n,
and at our pleasant labour, to reform
yon flow'ry arbours. -
now let us leave this earth, and lift our eye
to the large convex of yon' azure sky:
behold it like an ample curtain spread,
now streak'd and glowing with the morning red;
anon at noon in flaming yellow bright,
and chufing sable for the peaceful night.
obsolete.
she lurks in midst of all her den, and streaks
from out a ghastly whirlpool all her necks ;
where, glotting round her rock, to fish she falls. chapman.
milton.
prior.
streaky. adj. [from streak.) striped ; variegated by hues.
when the hoary head is hid in snow,
the life is in the leaf, and still between
the fits of falling snows appears the streaky green. dryden.
stra ww.ox m. a. s. [araw and warm; phryganion, lat.] a stream, n.s. [repeam, saxon; siraum, islandick; /?room,
worm bred in straw.
dutch..]
1. a
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">a running water; the course of running water; current.
- as plays the sun upon the glassy stream,
twinkling another counterfeited beam. shakes. hen. vi.
he brought streams out of the rock, and caused waters to
run down like river. ps. lxxviii. 16.
cocytus nam’d, of lamentation loud
heard in the rueful stream ; fierce phlegethon,
whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage;
far off from these, a slow and filent stream,
lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
her wat'ry labyrinth. milton.
o could i flow like thee, and make thy stream
my great example, as thou art my theme,
tho' deep, yet clear, tho' gentle, yet not dull,
strong without rage, without o'erflowing, full. denham.
thus from one common source our streams divide;
ours is the trojan, yours th’arcadian side. dryden.
divided interests, while thou think'st to sway,
draw like two brooks thy middle aream away. dryden.
1. anything issuing from a head, and moving forward with con-
tinuity of parts.
the breath of the lord is like a stream of brimstone. isa.
you, drances, never want a stream of words. dryden.
the stream of beneficence hath, by several rivulets which
have since fallen into it, wonderfully enlarged its current.
- - atterbury.
3. any thing forcible and continued.
had their cables of iron chains had any great length, they
had been unportable; and, being short, the ships must have
sunk at an anchor in any stream of weather. raleigh.
it is looked upon as intolence for a man to adhere to his own
opinion, against the current stream of antiquity. locke.
. course; current.
the very stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed,
must give him a better proclamation. shak's ears.
t. st ream. v. n. [/freyma, islandick.]
1. to flow ; to run in a continuous current.
god bad the ground be dry,
all but between those banks where rivers now
stream, and perpetual draw their humid train. milton.
on all sides round
streams the black blood, and smokes upon the ground. pope.
2. to emit a current; to pour out water in a stream 3 to be
overflown.
then grateful greece with streaming eyes would raise
historick marbles to record his praise. pope.
3. to issue forth with continuance, not by fits.
now to impartial love, that god most high,
domy fighs stream. shakes. all's well that ends well.
from opening skies may streaming glories shine,
and saints embrace thee. pope.
to stream. v. a. to mark with colours or embroidery in
long tracks.
the herald's mantle is streamed with gold. bacon.
stream.e.r. n.s.. [from stream.] an ensign ; a flag; a pen-
non; any thing flowing loosely from a stock.
his brave fleet
with filken streamers, the young phoebus fanning. shakes.
the rosy morn began to rise,
and wav'd her saffron streamer through the skies. dryden.
brave rupert from afar appears,
whose waving streamers the glad general knows. dryden.
the man of sense his meat devours;
but only smells the peel and flow'rs:
and he must be an idle dreamer,
who leaves the pie, and gnaws the streamer. prior.
stre’amy. adj. [from stream.]
1. abounding in running water.
arcadia,
however streamy now, adust and dry,
deny'd the goddess water: where deep melas,
and rocky cratis flow, the chariot smoak'd -
obscure with rising dust. prior.
2. flowing with a current.
before him flaming his enormous shield,
like the broad sun, illumin’d all the field :
his nodding helm emits a streamy ray. pope's iliad.
street. n.s. [rzmat, saxon; siraz, german ; strada, spa-
nish and ital. streede, danish; siraet, dutch; strata”, lat. j
1. a way, properly a paved way, between two rows of houses.
heied us through fair/irects; and all the way we went there
were gathered people on both sides, standing in a row. bacon.
the streets are no larger than alleys. sandys.
when night
darkens the streets, then wander forth the sons
of belial, flown with insolence and wine ; -
witness the sireets of sodom. milton.
the italians say the ancients always confidered the situation
of a building, whether it were high or low, in an open square,
or in a narrow street, and more or less deviated to their rule
of art. addison on italy.
vol. ii.
when you tattle with some - * -
crony servant in the same sorce
leave your own street-door open. y go
2. proverbially, a publick place. to-' s 1 a
- that there be no leading into captivity, and no connplain-
ing in out/#t. psa in coiv. 14
o polick ways would be so crowded, that we s!..ould
wo s' tel .." - addison's speciator.
et us reflect upon what we daily see practised in the world,
and can we believe, if an apost - -
* postle of christ appeared in our
streets, he would retract his cautio
conformed to the world ion, and command us to be
streetwa lker. m. s. [sireet and walk -
- - - - - 11 o’. a -
tute that offers herself to sale in the o” prosti
strength.. n.s. [ref:enos, saxon.]
1. force ; vigour ; power of the body. -
but strength from truth divided, and from
o
illaudable, nought merits but dios. m just
ro or's sermons.
for- - milton.
thou must outlive
thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
to wither'd, weak, and grey. assion.
th’ insulting trojan came,
and menac'd us with force, our fleet with flame:
was it the strength of this tongue valiant lord,
in that black hour, that sav'd you from the sword? drydon
2. power of endurance; firmness; durability; toughness; harones.
not founded on the brittle strength of bones. y aftion.
firm dorick pillars found thy solid base, -
the fair corinthian crown the higher space,
and all below is strength, and all above is grace. dryden.
3. vigour of any kind ; power of any kind.
strength there must be, either of love, or war, even such
contrary ways leading to the same unity. hoyday.
god, in all things wise and just,
hinder'd not satan to attempt the mind
of man, with strength entire and free-will arm'd. milton.
this act
shall crush the strength of satan. w milton.
4. power of resistance; sureness; fastness.
our castle's sirength
will laugh a fiege to scorn. -
5. support; security ; that which supports.
bereave me not thy aid, -
thy counsel in this uttermost distress,
my only strength and stay. milton.
6. power of mind; force of any mental faculty.
aristotle's large views, acuteness and penetration of thought,
shakes care.
and strength of judgment, few have equalled. locke.
he enjoyed the greatest strength of good-sense, and the most
exquisite taste of politeness. addison.
we, like friendly colours, found our hearts unite,
and each from each contract new strength and light. pope.
7. spirit; animation.
methinks i feel new strength within me rise,
wings growing, and dominion given. milton.
adam and first matron eve
had ended now their orisons, and found
strength added from above, new hope to spring
out of despair. milton.
8. vigour of writing ; nervous diction; force opposed to soft-
ness, in writing or painting. -
leave such to tune their own dull rhymes, and know
what's roundly snooth, or languishingly slow,
and praise the easy vigour of a line,
where denham's strength and waller's sweetness join. pope.
caracci's strength, coreggio's softer line,
paulo's free stroke, and titian's warmth divine. pope.
9. potency of liquors.
io. fortification ; fortress.
the rashness of talking should not only be retarded by the
guard of our heart, but fenced in by certain strengths placed
in the mouth. ben. j.hnson's discoveries.
he thought
this inaccessible high sirength to have seiz'd. milton.
betray'd in all his strengths, the wood beset;
all instruments, all arts of ruin met. denham.
11. support; maintenance of power.
what they boded would be a mischief to us, you are pro-
viding shall be one of our principal strengths. spratt's sermoni.
12. legal force; validity; seeurity.
13. confidence imparted.
certain services were due from the soldier to his captain,
and from the captain to the prince, and upon the strength of
such tenures, in after times, the descendents of these people
and their kings did subsist and make their wars. davenant.
the allies, after a successful summer, are too apt, upon the
strength of it, to neglect their preparations for the ensuing
campaign. addison.
14. armament; force ; poweri
what is his strength by land 2 shakso. ant, and clopat.
nor was there any other strength designed to attend about
his highness than one regiment. clarendom.
2.5 l 15. persuasive
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
ts t r
i
asive prevalence; argumentative force. - -
15. o: it may then stand very well with strength
- ason, thus to answer: hooker.
o o o: o to strengthen. not used.
- edward's happy-order'd reign, most fertile breeds -
plenty of mighty spirits, to strength his state. daniel.
7, strengthen. * * [from strength.]
1. to make strong:
--- firm; to establish.
2. to con ity i. by nothing so much strengthened and confirmed
authori - - -
as y custom; for no on easily distrusts the things which he
joimen have been alway; bred up to. temple.
orhee, bold longinus' all the nine inspire,
and bles, your critick with a poet's fire:
a. aident judge, who, zealous in his trust,
with warmth gives sentence, yet is always just;
whose own example strengthens all his laws,
and is himself that great sublime he draws. pope;
if it were true that women were thus naturally vain and
light, then how much more blameable is that education, which
soms contrived to strengthen and increase this folly. law.
. to animate ; to fix in resolution. - w
i.e. us rise up and build : so they strengthened their hands for
this work. neh. ii. 18.
charge joshua, and encourage him. and strengthen him. deut.
4. to make to increase in power or security.
let noble warwick, cobham, and the rest,
with powerful policy strengthen themselves. shakes. h. vi.
they sought the strengthening of the heathen. 1 mac. vi.
7, stre's gthen. v. m. to go strong.
oh men for flatt'ry and deceit renown'd? . .
thu, when y' are young ye learn it all like him,
*till, as your years increase, that strengthens too,
to undo poor maids. otway's orphan.
t. disease that shall destroy at length, -
grows with his growth, and strength.” with his so
- ope.
srse’so the ner. l n: s [from firengthen: by contraction
stre’ngth ner. } firengthner.] . .
... that which gives strength; that which makes strong.
garlick is a great strengthner of the stomach upon decays of
appetite or indigestion. temple.
2. [in medicine.] strengtheners add to the bulk and firmness of
the solids: cordials are such as drive on the vital actions : but
these such as confirm the stamina. . . $2%inty.
stre’ngthless. adj. [from strength.]
1. wanting strength ; deprived of strength.
¥ore those feet, whose strengthies stay is numb,
unable to support this lump of clay. shakesp. henry vi.
as the wretch, whose fever-weaken'd joints,
like strengthloss hinges, buckle unor life,
impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire *
out of his keeper's arms. shakesp. henry iv,
2. wanting potency weak: , used of liquors. -
this liquor must be inflammable or not, and yet subtile and
pungent, which may be called spirit; or else strengthis, or in-
fipid, which may be named phlegm. boyle.
strenuous. adj. [strenuus, lat.]
1. brave; bold; active; valiant : dangerously laborious.
nations grown corrupt
love bondage more than liberty;
bondage with ease than strenuous liberty. milton's agonistes.
2. zealous; vehement.
he resolves to be strenuous for taking off the test: against
the maxims of all wife christian governments, which always
had some established religion, leaving at best a toleration to
others. swift to pope.
citizens within the bills of mortality have been sirenuous
against the church and crown. swift.
stre’nuously. adv. [from strenuous.]
1. vigorously; actively.
many can use both hands, yet will there divers remain that
can sirenuously make use of neither. brown's vulgar errours. .
2. zealously; vehemently; with ardour.
writes dispute sirenuously for the liberty of conscience, and
inveigh largely against all ecclesiasticks under the name of
high church. swift.
of here was no true catholick but strenuously contended for
it jwaterland.
stresperous. adj. [strepo, lat.] loud; noisy.
porta conceives, because in a sireperous eruption it riseth
against fire, it doth therefore resist lightning. brown.
st. ress. m. s. [reece, saxon, violence; or from disirs..]
1. importance; important part.
‘ihe sires of the fable lies upon the hazard of having a
numerous stock of children. l'estrange.
this, on which the great stres of the business depends,
would have been made out with reasons sufficient. locke.
2. importance imputed; weight ascribed.
a body may as well lay too little as too much stoos, "pon a
dream; but the less we heed them the better. l'estrange.
6
so lo wo-m-
it shewed how very little stress is to be said
dents they bring. stress is to id upon the o:
consider how great a stros; he laid upon this duty :
upon earth, and how earnestly he recommended it 3i. e
3. violence; force, either acting or suffered. erbury.
at last th by stress of weather driv'n, -
t -
ast they landed. dryden's aem.
though the faculties of the mind are improv •rr.
yet they must not be put to a stros beyond . i.
to st ress. v. a. [evidently, from distress.] to distres. of.
put to hardships or difficulties. 5 to
stirred with pity of the siressed pl;
...o.o.o.
o ch. v. a. [rznecan, saxon; -
1. to extend ; to o: to . ioso, dutch.]
i *a* out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy
as g. - -
stretch thine hand unto the poor. e.” viii. 8.
take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand. • vii. 32.
eden stretch'd her line
from auran, eastward to the royal towers
of great seleucia, built by grecian kings. mi
2. to elongate, or strain to a greater space. tiion,
regions to which
all thy dominion, adam, is no more
than what this garden is to all the earth
and all the sea, from one entire globose 2
stretch'd into longitude.
3. to expand; to . amilton,
leviathan on the deep,
ax. vii. 19.
stretch'd like a promontory, sleeps. mi
what more likely to stretch forth the heavens, and o:
foundation of the earth, than infinite power o:
4. to strain to the utmost.
w u%; if it durst speak,
ou retch thy spirits up into the air. . ki
5. to make tense. y 1p p air. shak. king lear.
so the slreich'd cord the shacki’d dancer tries. smith
6. to carry by violence farther than is right; to strain : is.
to siretch a text; to stretch credit. ... --
to stre orch. v. n.
1. to be extended, locally, intellectually, or consequentially.
it idolatry is a horrible fin, yet doth repentance stretch unto
a third a fourth 2 whitgifte.
what will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom *
shake •
this to rich ophir's rising morn is known, d sian
and stretch'd out far to the burnt swarthy zone. cowley.
your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath. milton.
2. to bear extension without rupture.
the inner membrane, that involved the liquors of the egg,
because it would stretch and yield, remained unbroken. boyle.
3. to sally beyond the truth. -
what an allay do we find to the credit of the most pro-
bable event, that is reported by one who uses to stretch
government of the tongue.
strerch. n.s.. [from the verb.] -
1. extension; reach ; occupation of more space.
at all her stretch her little wings she spread
and with her feather'd arms embrac'd the dead:
then flickering to his pallid lips, she strove
to print a kiss. dryden's ceyx and alyo.
disruption, as strong as they are, the bones would be in
some danger of, upon a great and sudden stretch or contortion,
if they were dry. ray on the creation.
2. force of body extended.
he thought to swim the stormy main,
by stretch of arms the distant shore to gain. dryden's zn.
3. effort; struggle: from the act of running.
those put a lawful authority upon the stretch to the abuse
of power, under the colour of prerogative. l’estrange.
upon this alarm we made incredible firetches towards the
south, to gain the fastnesses of preston. addison.
4. utmost extent of meaning.
quotations, in their utmost stretch, can fignify no more
than that luther lay under severe agonics of mind. atterbury.
5. utmost reach of power.
this is the utmost stretch that nature can,
and all beyond is fulfome, false, and vain. granville.
stre’rcher. m. s. [from stretch.]
1. anything used for extension.,,,
his hopes cnstil'd
his strength, the firitcher of ulysses' string
and his steeles piercer. chapman.
2. a term in bricklaying.
tooth in the stfetching course two inches with the stretcher
only. - moxon.
3. the timber against which the row; plants his feet.
this fiery speech inflames his fearful friends,
they tug at ev'ry oar, and every stretcher bends, po
o
job."
flock"
so sos th:
losso flo
|s thy hers
o 10c
: a s
go upo
**i.
wome.
#: ow.
goist.
*:0s.
*. deal
sis, fli
withese
#mid-
solar
of of
o shells
the salt,
wo to
o, than
to same
*ate,
offp.
these c
gos c.
&amp; jok
deca.
so to
yo'
iyu.
cn:
#bolt,
srosoft
first,
pists
quits, s
stick,
the
the
the
nicke
tiqua
ignot
the
gthey
hod
t
the
abso
will
hik
rtin
of
th;
of
oth
is:
!: (s
|c
in
n
t
*
{
!
|
,
wo
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s. t. r.
t strew. v. a. [the orthography of this word is doubtful:
‘. is sometimes written strow, and sometimes strow, i have
o both : skinner proposes strow, and junius writes straw.
their reasons will appear in the word from which it may be
derived. strawa", gothick ; stroyen, dutch; reneaplan, sax.
...wen, german ; stree", danish. perhaps strow is best,
being that which reconciles etymology with pronunciation.
trow.
i. 3. being scattered.
1. the snow which does the top of pindus strew,
did never whiter shew. spenser.
is thine alone the seed that strews the plain -
the birds of heav'n shall vindicate their grain. pope.
spread by scattering.
2. to y. thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
and not have strew'd thy grave. shakos. hamlet.
here be tears of perfect moan,
wept for thee in helicon;
and some flowers and some bays,
for thy herse, to strew the ways. milton.
to scatter loosely.
3. the calf he burnt in the fire, ground it to powder, and
strated it upon the water, and made israel drink of it. ex.
with furies and nocturnal orgies fir’d,
whom ev’n the savage beasts had spar'd, they kill'd,
and strew'd his mangled limbs about the field. dryden. -
stre'wment. n.j. [from strew.] any thing scattered in de-
coration.
her death was doubtful.—for charitable prayers,
shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her;
yet here she is allow'd her virgin chants,
her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
of bell and burial. shakespeare's hamlet.
striae. m. s. [latin.] in natural history, the small channels
in the shells of cockles and scallops,
the salt, leisurely permitted to shoot of itself in the liquor,
exposed to the open air, did shoot into more fair crystalline
ftriae, than those that were gained out of the remaining part
of the same liquor by a more hasty evaporation. 2, lo'.
striate. adj. [from striae, lat. yirie, fr.] formed in
stri’ated. } striae.
these effluviums fly by striated atoms and winding particles,
as des cartes conceiveth, or glide by streams attracted from
either pole unto the equator. brown's /u.g., h., rours.
des cartes imagines this earth once to have be a a sun, and
so the centre of a lesser vortex, whose axis so kept the same
posture, by reason of the striate particles fi.uing no fit pores
for their passages, but only in this direction. ray.
crystal, when incorporated with the fibrous talcs, shews,
if broke, a striated or fibrous texture, like those talcs loodw.
srri’ature. n.s.. [from striae : jirieure, fr.] disposition of
striae.
parts of tuberous hæmatitae shew several varieties in the
crusts, striature, and texture of the body. j/oodward.
strick. m. s. soy: ; sirix, lat j a bird of bad omen.
the ill-fac'd owl, death's dreadful messenger,
the hoarse night-raven, trump of doleful drere,
the leather-winged bat, day's enemy,
the rueful strick, still waiting on the bier. spensor.
stri'cken. the ancient participle of shrike; but it has in the
antiquated phrase stricken (that is, advanced in years) a mean-
ing not borrowed from shike.
the cunningest mariners were so conquered by the storm,
as thcy thought it best with /?ricken sails to yield to be go-
verned by it. saney.
that shall i shew, as sure as hound
the siricken deer doth challenge by the bleeding wound.
spenser.
abraham and sarah were old, and well /?, i.ken in age. gen.
with blindness were these shicken. j//l. xix. 17.
parker and vaughan, having had a controversy touching
certain arms, were appointed to run some courses, when
parker was stricken into the mouth at the first course. bacon.
though the earl of ulster was of greater power than any
other subject in ireland, yet was he so far stricken in years, as
that he was unable to manage the martial affairs. pavies.
strickle, or strickes, or stritchel. m. s. that which strikes
the coin to level it with the bushel. ainsworth.
strict. aff. [/iricius, lat.)
1. exact; accurate; rigorously nice.
thou'lt fall into deception unaware, -
not keeping strołosi watch. milton.
as legions in the field their front display,
to try the fortune of some doubtful day,
and move to meet their foes with so er pace,
stria to their figure, though in wider space. dryden.
he checks the bold design;
and rules as siric; his labour'd works corfine,
as if the stagyrite o'crook'd each oe. pope.
2. severe; rigorous; not mild ; not indulgent. . .
implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
to the striel deputy. shakos. 41...sure for jjoasart.
thy will
y nature free, not over-rul’d by fate -
#o or /rid necessity. milton.
f a stric hand be kept over children from the be inning,
they will in that age betraaable, and if, as they grow up,
*ogous be, as they deserve it, gently relaxed, former re-
straints will increase their love.
n he ri - locke.
uma the rites of strict religion knew ; -
on ev'ry altar laid the incenso do. prior.
3. confined ; not extensive.
as they took the com
larger, so their dealings
4. close; tight.
the god, with speedy pace,
just thought to strain her in a stro embrace.
pass of their commission /rior or
were more or less moderate. hooter.
--- - - dryden.
. the fatal noose performed its office, and with most firict
ligature squeezed the blood into his face. 4, buil/not.
5. tense; not relaxed.
we feel our fibres grow stri: or lax
of the air.
stri'crly, adv. [from strial.]
1. exactly ; with rigorous accuracy.
his horse-troupes, that the vantgard had, he stricly did
command,
to ride their horses temperately. chao man.
the other parts being grosler, composed not only water,
joie") so called, but the whole mass of liquid bodies. barnet.
charge him soriciy
not to proceed, but wait my farther pleasure. dryden.
2. rigorously; severely; without remission or indulgence.
in the discharge of thy place, set before thee the best ex-
amples ; and after a time set before thee thine own, and
examine thyscir stricoy whether thou didst not best at first.
according to the state
arbuthnot.
- - bacon.
god may with the greatest justice stricily require endeavours
from us, and without any inconsistency with his goodness in-
flict penalties on those who are wanting. rogers.
a weak prince again disposed the people to new attempts,
which it was the clergy's duty to endeavour to preven", if some
of them had not proceeded upon a topick that, strict y fol-
lowed, would enslave all mankind. s-wift.
3. closely; tightly ; with tenteness.
stri'corn ess. n.s.. [from strict.]
1. exactness; rigorous accuracy; nice regularity.
i could not grant too much or distrust too little to men,
that pretended singular piety and religious strictness. k. charles.
such of them as cannot be concealed connive at, though
in the strictness of your judgment you cannot pardon. drydon.
who were made privy to the secrets of heaven, but such as
performed his revealed will at an higher rate of stricinos, than
the rest ? south.
eusebius, who is not in sorions to be rec'oned with the
ante-nicenes. slater land.
though in so, iołnes, our saviour might have pleaded exemp-
tion from the jewish tribute, he exerted his divine power in
a miracle to pay it.
2. severity ; tigour.
these commissioners proceeded with such /?rion'ss; and se-
verity as did much obscure the king's inercy. bacon's hen. vii.
3. close: ess; tightness; not laxity.
st r is cru r e m. s. [from striciura, lat. a spark.]
1. a stroke; a touch.
the god of nature implanted in their vegetable natures
certain passive slricssures, or signatures of that wisdom which
hath made and ordered all things with the highest reason.
hale.
rogers.
2. contraction; closure by contraction.
as long as there is this it, with a free passage by urine, and
jiriciure of the vessels, so long is water safely taken. arbuth.
3. a slight touch upon a subject; not a set discourse.
thus have past through all your letter, and given myself
the liberty of these yiriciures, by way of reflection on all and
every passage. hammond.
str ide. n.s. [rzraebe, saxon.] a long step ; a step taken
with great violence; a wide divarication of the legs.
i'll speak between the change of man and boy,
with a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps
into a manly flride. shakesp. aserchant of venice.
the monther moved on with horrid/drides. 4.ilton.
her voice theatrically loud,
and masculine her slride. swift.
to sr ride, v. m. preter. i strade or slrid; part, pass. jiridden.
[from the noun.]
1. to walk with long steps.
mars in the middle of the shining shield
is grav'd, and / ride, along the liquid field. drydon.
to jove, or to thy father neptune, pray,
the brethren cry'd, and instant / ode away. poe.
2. to stand with the legs far from each other.
to stride. v. a. to pass by a step.
see him slo i.e
vallies wide. arbuthnot.
str1'do lous.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r.
stri''dulous. adj. [soridulus, latin.j. making a small noise:
it arises from a small and stridulous noise, which, being
firmly rooted, maketh a divulsion of parts. brown.
strife. m. s. [from strive.]
1. contention; contest; discord; war; lawsuit. -
i and my people were at great slrife with the children of
ammon. udg. xii. 2.
some preach christ even of envy and /rise, and some of
good-will. phil. i. 15.
he is proud, knowing nothing; but doating about questions
and strife of words. 1 tim. vi. 4.
these acts of hateful strife, hateful to all,
how hast thou disturb’d heav'n's blessed peace |
these vows, thus granted, rais’d a strife above
betwixt the god of war and queen of love :
she granting first, had right of time to plead;
but he had granted too, and would recede.
'tis this that shakes our country with alarms,
and gives up rome a prey to roman arms,
produces fraud, and cruelty, and slrise.
inheriting no sirise,
nor marrying discord in a noble wife.
2. contest of cmulation.
thus gods contended, noble strife /
who most should ease the wants of life. congreve.
by wise governing, it may be so ordered, that both sides
shall be at strife, not which shall flatter most, but which shall
do the prince and the publick the most honest and the most
milton.
dryden.
addison.
pope,
faithful service. davenant.
3. opposition; contrariety; contrast.
artificial sirise
lives in those touches, livelier than life. shakespeare.
4. natural contrariety ; as, the strife of acid and alkaly.
stri feful. adj. [sirise and full.] contentious; discord-
ant.
th'ape was strifeful and ambitious,
and the fox guileful and most covetous. spemser.
i know not what new creation may creep forth from the
joris ful heap of things, into which, as into a second chaos,
we are follen. jdr. maine.
stri'gment. m. s. [//rigmentum, from siringo, lat. to scrape.]
scraping; recrement.
many, besides the strigments and sudorous adhesions from
mens hands, acknowledge that nothing proceedeth from gold
in its usual decoction. brown's pulgar errours.
to strike. v. a. preter. i struck or strook; part. pass. //ruck,
jłrucken, stricken, or shrook. [arenican, saxon; streichen, ger-
man; adsorykia, islandick; stricker, danish.]
1. to act upon by a blow; to hit with a blow.
he at philippi kept
his sword e'en like a dancer, while i struck
the lean and wrinkled cassius. shakesp. ant. and cleopat.
we will deliver you the cause,
why i, that did love caesar when i struck him,
proceeded thus. shakesp. julius caesar.
i must
but wail his fall, whom i myself struck down. shak. macb.
then on the croud he cast a furious look,
and wither'd all their strength before he shrook.
2. to punish ; to afflict.
to punish the just is not good, nor to strike princes for
equity. prov. xvii. 26.
3. to dash; to throw by a quick motion.
dryden.
the blood /lrike on the two side-posts. ex. xii. 7.
4. to notify by sound.
the windsor bell hath struck twelve. shakesp.
the drums presently striking up a march, they plucked up
their ensigns, and forward they go. knolles.
a judicious friend moderates the pursuit, gives the signal
for action, presses the advantage, and strikes the critical mi-
inute. collier of friendship.
5. to stamp; to impress.
the memory in some men is very tenacious; but yet there
seems to be a constant decay of all our ideas, even of those
which are struck deepest, and in minds the most retentive. loc.
6. to contract; to lower; to vale. it is only used in the phrases
to strike sail, or to strike a flag.
how many nobles then would hold their places,
that must shrike sail to spirits of vile sort | shakes. h. iv.
to this all differing passions and interests should strike sail,
and, like swelling streams, running different courses, should
yet all make haste into the sea of common safety. temple.
they strike sail where they know they shall be mastered,
and murder where they can with safety. dryden.
now, did i not so near my labour's end,
strike sail, and hast'ning to the harbour tend,
my song to flow'ry gardens might extend. ~5
7. to alarm; to put into emotion; to surprise.
the rest, struck with horror stood,
to see their leader cover'd o'er with blood. j/zoller.
jack straw at london-stone, with all his rout,
struck not the city with so loud a shout. dryden.
his virtues render our assembly awful,
they strike with something like religious fear. addis. co.
didst thou but view him right, shouldst see him black
with murder, treason, sacrilege, and crimes,
that strike my soul with horror but to name them. alison,
we are no sooner presented to any one we never saw be.
fore, but we are immediately struck with the idea of a proud
£ a reserved, an affable, or a good-natured man. adio.
nice works of art strike and surprise us most upon the first
view ; but the better we are acquainted with them, the les,
we wonder. :
court virtues bear, like gems, the highest rate,
born where heav'n's influence scarce can penetrate;
in life's low vale, the soil the virtues like,
they please as beauties, here as wonders strike.
8. [faedus ferire.] to make a bargain.
sign but his peace, he vows he'll ne'er again
the sacred names of fops and beaus profane :
strike up the bargain quickly; for i swear,
as times go now, he offers very fair.
i come to offer peace; to reconcile
past enmities; to slrike perpetual leagues
with vanoc. a. philips's britan,
9. to produce by a sudden action.
the court paved, striketh up a great heat in summer, and
much cold in winter. bacon.
waving wide her myrtle wand,
she strikes an universal peace through sea and land. milon.
these men are fortune's jewels moulded bright,
brought forth with their own fire and light;
if i her vulgar stone for either took,
4tteriury.
pofte -
dryden,
out of myself it must be struck. cowly.
take my caduceus !
with this the infernal ghosts i can command,
and strike a terror through the stygian strand. drydon.
io. to affect suddenly in any particular manner.
when verses cannot be understood, nor a man's good wit
seconded with the forward child understanding, it sirikes a man
more dead than a great reckoning in a little room. shaff.
strike her young bones, --
ye taking airs, with lameness. shakoftara.
he that is stricken blind cannot forget
the precious treasure of his eye-sight lost. shakes eart.
so ceas'd the rival crew, when purcell came,
they sung no more, or only sung his fame;
struck dumb, they all admir’d. dryden.
humility disarms envy, and strikes it dead. collier.
then do not slrike him dead with a denial,
but hold him up in life. addison's catc.
ii. to cause to sound by blows: with up only emphatical.
strike up the drums, and let the tongue of war
plead for our int’rest, and our being here. shakespeare.
12. to forge ; to mint.
though they the lines on golden anvils beat,
it looks as if they struck them at a heat. tate.
some very rare coins struck of a pound weight, of gold and
silver, constantine sent to chilperick. arbuthnot.
13. it is used in the participle, i know not well how, for ad-
vanced in years.
the king
is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen
well /lruck in years; fair and not jealous. shakespeare.
14. to strike off. to erase from a reckoning or account.
deliver helen, and all damage else
shall be struck off. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
i have this while with leaden thoughts been prest;
but i shall in a more convenient time
strike off this score of absence. shakespeare's othells.
when any wilful sin stands charged on our account, it will
not be struck off till we forsake and turn away from it.
- kettleworth.
askomen's opinions: scoto now shall tell
how trade increases, and the world goes well :
strike off his pension by the setting sun,
and lritain, if not europe, is undone. pot.
15. to strike off. to separate by a blow, or any sudden
action.
germany had /ricken off that which appeared corrupt in
the doctrine of the church of rome; but seemed nevertheless
in discipline still to retain there with great conformity. hicker.
they followed so fast that they overtook him, and with-
out further delay //ruck off his head. knolles.
he was taken prisoner by surinas, lieutenant-general for
the king of parthia, who stroke off his head. hakewis.
a mass of water would be struck off and separate from the
rest, and tost through the air like a flying river. burnit.
16. to strike out. to produce by collision.
my thoughtless youth was wing'd with vain desires;
my manhood long misled by wand'ring fires,
follow'd false lights; and when their glimpse was gone,
my pride struck out new sparkles of her own. dryan.
17. to strike out. to blot; to efface.
by
- 3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
by expurgatory animadversions, we might strike out great
numbers of midden qualities, and having once a conceded list,
with more safety attempt their reasons.
to methodize is as neceiiry as to strike out.
18. to strike out. to bring to light.
19. i, strike out. to form at once by a quick effort.
wnether thy hand strike out some free defi 3p),
where life awakes and dawns at ev'ry line, -&gt;
or biend in beauteous tints the colour'd mass,
an: from the canvass call the minick face.
t; strike. v. n.
1. to not a blow.
i in mice own woe charm’d,
could not find death, where i did hear him groan;
nor feel him where he /?rock. shakesp. cymbeline.
it pleased the king
to shoe at me upon his misconstruction;
when he tript me behind. shakesh. king lear.
he wither'd all their strength before he siro. dryden.
2. to collide; to clash.
holding a ring by a thread in a glass, tell him that holdeth
it, it shall strike so many times against the side of the glass,
and no inore. bacon's natural hyloy.
3. to act by repeated percussion.
bid thy mistress when my drink is ready,
she strike upon the bell. shakes. machets.
those antique minstrels, sure, were charles-like kings,
cities their lutes, and subjects hearts their strings;
on which with so divine a hand they so ask,
brown.
pope.
pope.
consent of motion from their breath they took. jvaller.
4. to sound by the titoke of a hammer.
caesar, 'tis /', we'en eight. shakespeare.
deep thoughts will often suspend the senses so far, that about
a man clocks may shiko, and bells ring, which he takes no
notice of. grew.
5. to o ke an atta k.
is not the king's name forty thousand names
arm, arm, my name; a puny subject soikes
at thy great glory. shaksp. richard ii.
when by their designing leaders taught
to strike at power, which for themselves they sought:
the vulgar gull'd into rebellion arm’d,
their blood to action by their prize was warm'd.
6. to act by caternal influx.
consider the rod and white colours in porphyre; hinder
drydon.
light but from sorting on it, and its colours vanish. locke.
7. to sound with blows.
whilst any trump did sound, or drum struck up,
his sword did ne'er cave striking in the field. shakespeare.
8. to be dashed.
the admiral galley, where in the emperor was, struck upon
a sand, and there stuck fast. knzlies.
9. to pass with a quick or strong effo.
now and then a glittering beam of wit or passion strikes
through the obscurity of the poem: any of these effect a pre-
sent liking, but not a lasting admiration. doylen.
10. to pay homage, as by lowering the sai!.
\\ c sce the wind fit fore upon our fails;
and yet we strive not, but securely perish. shaocare.
i'd rather chop this hand off at a blow,
and with the other fling it at thy face,
than bear so low a sail, to stroke to thee. shakes rare.
the interest of our kingdom is ready to strike to that of
your poorest fishing towns: it is hard you will not accept our
services. swift.
11. to be put by some sudden act or motion into any state; to
break orth.
itsira. on a sudden into such reputation, that it scorns any
longer to sculk, but owns itself publickly. gov. of the tongue.
11. to sir rike in with. to conform; to suit itself to ; to
join with at once.
those who, by the prerogative of their age, should frown
youth into sobriety, imitate and /oise in with them, and are
really vitious that they may be thought young. south.
they catch at every shadow of relief, arise in at a venture
with the next companion, and so the dead commodity be taken
off, care not who be the chapman. - norris.
the cares or pleasures of the world strike in with every
thought. - alison.
he immediately sor: in ot', them, but described this
march to the temple with so much horrour, that he shivered
every joint. adison's freeholder.
13. t. strs: cut. to spread or rowc ; to make a sudden co-
cursion. - -
in this plain was the last general rendezvous of mankind ;
and from thence they were broken into companies and dis-
persed, the several successive generations, like the waves of
the sea over-reaching one another, and striking "t farther and
farther upon the land. burmet's theory.
when a great man sirikes out into a sudden irregularity. he
needs not quest on the refect of a retinue. . color.
so n.s. a bushel; a dry measure of capacity; four pecks.
ol. 11.
r: -
wing, cartnave and bushel, peck, srike ready at hand.
tor's husandry.
having its sol is a plane shorter than the jointer,
*..." o: exactly flat and straight, and is used for
str1 ke r o * hort joint. mixon's 4&amp;chanical exercises.
a bin. - h rom strike..] person or thing that strikes.
firiker op then must be blameless, not given to wine, no
- - - - - 1 tim. iii. 3.
#, o: with his staff to have struck the slriker. sar as.
1 he/truer must be dense, and in its best velocity. digby.
stri'k no. part. adj. [from *] affecting; surprising.
string. m ... -- song; surprising. . .
... n.f. [roning, saxon ; //reng, german and danish :
!--- - - j. 7 an and danish;
siringhe, dutch ; //rioga, latin.]
1. a slender rope; a small ord; any slender and flexible band.
any lower bullet hanging upon the other above it,
conceived, as if the weight of it were in that point where its
/?ring touches the upper. wilkin,'. dedalus
2. a riband. -
round ormond's knce thou ty's the mystick string,
that makes the knight companion to the king. prior
3. a thread on which any things are filed.
their priests pray by their beads, having a soring with a
hundred of nutshells upon it; and the repeating of certain
words with them they account meritorious. stillingsleet.
4. any set of things filed on a line. -
. i have caught two of these dark undermining vermin, and
inten! to make a string of them, in order to hang them up in
one of my papers. addison's speciator.
5. the chord of a musical instrument.
thus when two brethren /?rinos are set alike,
to move them both, but one of them we strike.
stri’ke block. m. s.
must be
- - cowley.
the firing that jars
when rudely touch'd, ungrateful to the sense,
with pleasure fee's the master's flying fingers,
swells into harmony, and charms the hearers. rowe.
by the appearance they make in marble, there is not one
/?ring-instrument that seems comparable to our violins. addis.
6. a small fibre. . -
duckweed putteth forth a little siring into the water, from
the bottom. bacon.
in pullingbroom up, the least strings left behind will grow.
4/ortioner's husbandry.
7. a nerve; a tendon.
the most piteous tale, which in recounting,
his grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
began to crack. shakesp. king lear.
the string of his tongue loosed. 44ark xxvii. 35.
8. the nerve of the bow.
the wicked tend their bow, they make ready their arrows
upon the sting. psalm xi. 2.
tn' impetuous arrow whizzes on the wing,
sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quiv'ring string. pope.
9. any concatenation or series; as, a string of propositions.
10. to have two str is gs to the bow. to have two views or
two expedients; to have double advantage, or double secu-
rity.
. no lover has that pow'r
t'enforce a desperate amour,
as he that has two sirings toos bow,
and burns for love and money too. hadzhras.
to string. v. a. preterite i strung, part, pass sirung. [from
the noun.]
1. to furnish with strings.
has not wise nature sorung the legs and feet
with firmest nerves, design'd to walk the street? gy.
2. to put a stringed instrument in tune.
here the muse so oft her harp has sirung,
that not a mountain rears its head unsung. addison.
3. to file on a string.
men of great learning or genius are too full to be exact;
and therefore chuse to throw down their pearls in heaps before
the reader, rather than be at the pains of stringing them. speef.
4. to make tense.
toil sirung the nerves, and purified the blood. dryden.
stri's go d. a.s.. [from string.] having strings ; produced by
firings. -
praise him with firinged instruments and organs. psalons.
divinely warbl’d voice,
answering the stringed noise,
as all their souls in blissful rapture took. milton.
stringent. adj. [sarinzens, latin.] binding ; contracting.
stringhalt. m. s. s.siring and halt.)
stringhalt is a sudden twitching and snatching up of the
hinder leg of a horse much higher than the other, or an in-
voluntary or convulsive motion of the muscles that extend or
bend the hough. farrier's didz.
s rr1's gless. a 'i. [from soring.] having no strings.
nothing; all is said;
his tongue is now a stringles; instrument,
words, life, and all, old lancaster hath spent. shakes?eare.
stri's gy. adj. [from siring.] fibrous; consisting of small
threads; filamentous.
25 m a plain
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
s t r
a plain indian fan, made of the small stringy parts of roots
spread out in a round flat form. grew.
by melting expensive sweats, and an obstinate flux of the
bely, the stringy parts of the tendons and membranes are left
unrecruited. wo blackmore.
to strip. v. a. s.slreopen, dutch ; bertrupce, stripped, sax.]
1. to make naked ; to deprive of covering: with of before the
thing taken away. go - -
they began to strip her of her cloaths when i came in
among them. - * - sidney.
they stript joseph out of his coat. gen. xxxvii. 23.
scarce credible it is how soon they were stript and laid naked
on the ground. . . . . . hayward.
hadst thou not committed
notorious murder on those thirty men
at askelon, who never did thee harm,
then like a robber/lrip'ds; them of their robes. milton.
you cloath ail that have no relation to you, and sop your
master that gives you food. * l'e/orange.
a rottling tempest through the branches went,
that shript them bare.
he saw a beauteous maid
with hair dishevel'd, issuing through the shade,
- -
-to-
stript of her cloaths. dryden.
he left the pillagers, to rapine bred,
without controul to strip and spoil the dead. dryden.
the bride was put in form to bed;
he follow'd stript. swift.
2. to deprive; to divest. - -
the apostle, in exhorting men to contentment, although
they have in this world no more than bare food and raiment,
giveth us to undersland, that those are even the lowest of things
necessary, that if we should be slript of all these things, with-
out which we might possibly be, yet these must be left. hooker.
now this curious built phaeacian ship,
returning from her convoy, i will sirip
of all her fleeting matter.
: chapman.
selves entirely up to the will of god. duppa.
it is difficult to lead another by words into the thoughts of
things stripped of those specifick differences we give them. locke.
one would imagine these to be the expressions of a man
blessed with ease and affluence, not of one just stript of all those
advantages, and plunged in the deepest miseries; and now sit-
ting naked upon a dunghill. atterbury.
3. to rob ; to plunder ; to pillage: as, a thief stripped the
house.
that which lays a man cpen to an enemy, and that which
strips him of a friend, equally attacks him in ail those interests
that are capable of being weakened by the oho, and supported
by the other. -- south.
4. to peel; to decorticate.
if the leaves or dried stocks be siripped into small straws,
they arise unto amber, wax, and other electerics, no other
ways than those of wheat or rye. brown's wugar erroars.
5. to deprive of all. -
when some fond easy fathers strip themselves before they
lie down to their long sleep, and settle their whole estates
upon their sons, has it not been seen that the father has been
requited with beggary :
6. to take off covering: with off emphatical.
he slipt off his cloths. * . 1 sam. xix. 24.
logick helps us to strip off the outward disguise of things,
and to behold and judge of them in their own nature. jwatts.
7. to cast off. not in use.
- - his unkindness
that sorpt her from his benediction, turn'd her
to foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
to her doghearted daughters: these things sting him. shak.
8. to separate from something adhesive or connected. not
accurately used.
amongst men who examine not scrupulously their own
ideas, and sorip them not from the marks men use for them,
but confound them with words, there must be endless dis-
pute." . . . " lotke.
strip. m. s. [probably for stripe.] a narrow shred.
these two apartments were hung in close mourning, and
only a strip of bays round the other rooms. swift.
7% strip e. v. a. [/?repen, dutch.] -
1. to variegate with lines of diff rent colours.
2. to beat ; to lash. * * * * * * - - - - -
strip f. n.s. [/frepe, dutch.] - *''
1. a lineary variation of colour. this seems to be the original
notion of the word. * * * -
gardeners may have three roots among an hundred that
are rare, as purple and carnation of several stripes. bacon.
2. a shred of a different colour. - - -
one of the most valuable trimmings of their cloaths was a
long / ripe sowed upon the garment, called latus clavus. arb.
3. a weal, or discolouration made by a lash or blow.
cruelty marked him with ing'orious siripes.
- thomson.
4. a blow ; a lash.
* membrance of wicked actions.
dryden's knight's tale,
we strip and divest ourselves of our own will, and give our-
south. -
a body cannot be so torn with //ripes, as a mind with re
- r
to those that are yet within the reach of the so
reproofs of their own conscience, i would address to. ".
would not seek to remove themselves from that wo.
discipline. t "... loop.
str (red, part, a j. [from stripe i distingushed by . y.
different colour. - -\ . s of
stri'plus g. m.s. (of uncertain etymology.) a youth
in the state of adolescence. - -
* thwart the lane, -
he, with two striplings, lads, more like to run
the country base, than to commit such slaughter,"
jade good the passage. shakes; ca. comha',
now a stripsing cherub he appears, o “*” onlon,
not of the prime, yet such as in his face
youth finil'd celestial. . . . 4milton's parado; la
compositions on any important subjects are not mo,
be wrung from poor striplings, like blood out of the no. or
the plucking of untimely fruit. a siston on bio.
as when young striplings whip the top for sport, -
qn the smooth pavement of an empty court;
"the wooden engine whils. . . . . dodo's £o
as every particular member of the body is nourished wo .
several qualified juice, so children and striforgi, closen and
* young men, must have divers diets.” %, * 3inent,
stripper. m. s. [from strip.] one that strips. . . .”
to strive. v. m. preterite f strove, anciently i firsved
pass, striven. [streven, dutch ; striver, french.]
1. to struggle; to labour; to make an effort. -
the immutability of god they strive unto, by working
after one and the same manner. ho,
many brave young minds have, through hearing the po
; 0;le
; past.
and eulogies of worthy men, been stirred up to affect the like
commendations, and so /l, ive to the like deserts. soesor
strive with me in your prayers to god for mic. roy
so have i sirived to preach the gospel. ren. xv. 20
was it for this that rome's best blood he spilt, -
with so much falsehood, so much guilt
was it for this that his ambition //, ove
to equal caesar first, and after jove 2 culy.
our blessed lord commands you to sirive to enter in ; be-
cause many will fail, who only seek to enter. law.
these thoughts he strove to bury in expence,
rich meats, rich wines, and vain magnificence. harte,
2. to contest 5 to contend; to struggle in opposition to another:
with again/l or with before the person opposed.
do as adversaries do in law, -
strive mightily, but cat and drink as friends.
strive for the truth unto death. ecclus. iv. 28.
why dost thou sirive against him job xxxiii. 12.
charge them that they frive not about words to no profit.
- - 2 tim. ii. 14.
avoid contentions and //rivings about the law. tit. iii. 3.
this is warrantable conflict for trial of our faith; so that
these strivings are not a contending with superior powers. l'ei.
thus does every wicked man that contemns god; who
can soye or destroy bin who strives with his maker ; tilson.
if intestine broils alarm the hive,
for two pretenders oft for empire strive,
the vulgar in divided factions jar;
shakespeare.
and murm'ring sounds proclaim the civil war. dryden,
3. to oppose by contraricty of qualities.
now private pity strove with publick hate,
reason with rage, and eloquence with fate. denham.
4. to vie; to be comparable to ; to emulate; to contend in
cxcellence.
nor that sweet grove
qf daphne by orontes, and the inspir’d
qaftalian spring, might with this paradise
of eden strive. - milton.
stri'v e.r. m. s. [from strive..] one who labours; one who
contends.
stro'k a l. n.s. an instrument used by glass-makers. baily,
stroke, or strook. old preterite of sorite, now commonly so a 4.
he hoodwinked with kindness, least of all, men knew who
stroke him.
stroke. n.s. [from sorook, the preterite of strike..]
1. a blow ; a knock; a sudden act of one body upon another.
- th' oars were silver,
which to the turie of flutes kept stroke, and made
the water which they beat to follow faster,
as amorous of their strokes. shakesp. int. and cleopatra,
his white-man'd steeds that bow'd beneath the yoke,
he chear'd to courage with a gentle stroke,
then urg'd his fiery chariot on the foc,
o-- -
siary.
and rising, shook his lance in act to throw. dryden,
2. a hostile blow.
as cannons overcharg’d with double cracks,
so they redoubled strokes upon the foe. shakes rare.
he entered and won the whole kingdom of naples, without
striking a stroke. - boczn.
both
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
s t r
both were of shining steel, and wrought so pure,
as might the strokes of two such arms endure. drden.
i had a long design upon the ears of curl, but the foue
would never allow me a fair stroke at them, though my pon-
knife was ready. swift.
3. a sudden disease or a sliction.
take this purse, thou whom the heav'ns plagues
have hun-bled to a sorches. shaftsp. king lear.
at this one stroke tire man look’d dead in law:
- his flotterers scaoper, and his friends withdraw.
# the sound of the clock.
what is't o'clock 2–
upon the stroke of four.
5. the touch of a pencil.
oh, lasting as those colours may they shine !
free as thy so oke, yet faultless as thy line.
6. a touch; a in...sterly or eminent cfsort.
another in my place wou'd take it for a notable stroke of
o to compliment the reader. l'estrange.
the bridest strokes of poetry, when managed artfully, most
delight the reader. dryden's state of innocence.
as he purchased the first success in the present war, by for-
cing into the service of the confederates an army that was
..". again:t them, he will give one of the finishing stroke; to
it, and help to conclude the great work. addison.
a verdict more puts me in postession of my estate, 1 que-
flion not but you will give it the finishing strose. a latinot.
harte.
shakesp. richard iii.
pope.
-
isiodore's collection was the great and bold stroke, which
in its main parts was been discovered to be an impudent for-
gery. bater on learning.
7. an effect su'de:'y or unexpectedly produced.
8. power; t ficacy.
thee having equal authority for instruction of the young
prince, and well agreeing, bare equal stroke in divers fa ul-
tics. hayward.
perfeoł'y opacous bodies can but reflect the incident beans,
those that are diaphanous refract them too, and that reto action
has such a stroke is the production of colours, generated by
the trajection of light through drops of water, that exhibit a
rainbow through divers other transparent bodies. boyle.
he has a gro...t, to 2's with the reader when he condemns any
of my poems, to make the world have a better o, inion of
them. dr, sen.
the subtile coluvia of the male sced have the greatest stroke
in generation.
t. s. roi, e. v. a. strican, saxon.
1. to rub gently with the band by way of kindness or cadcar-
ment ; to ivoro.
thus children do the silly birds they find
with stroaking hurt, and too much cramming kill.
the senior weaned, his younger shall teach,
more stron and made of, when ought it doth aile,
more gentle ye make it for yoke or the paile. tosor.
thy praise or dispruise is to me alike,
one deth not so to me, nor the other shike. pen /hns.
ise set for h a proclamation strakorg the people w to fair
promises, and humouring them with invectives against the
ray.
sidney.
king and government. ba, on.
he dry d the falling drops, and yet more kind,
he strok'd her cheeks. dryden.
c me, let us praslise death,
stroke the grom lion toil he grow familiar. dryden.
she pluck'd the rising flow’rs, and fed
the gentle beast, and fondly streak'd his head. addison.
2. to rub gently in one direction.
when the big udder'd cows with patience sland,
waiting the ston, of the damsel’s hand. gay.
to st roll. v. n.
vagrant.
she's mine, and thine, and so cling up and down. granv.
your wine lock'd up, your butler strell'd abroad. pope.
these mothers sirol, to beg sustenance for their helpless in-
suits. swift.
$1 poiler. m. s. [from stall.] a vagrant; a wanderer; a
vag.bond. - -
two brother-hermits, sints by trade,
douis'd in tatter'd habits, went
to a small villa e down in kent;
where, in rejors conting strain, -
they be od soon door to door in vain. swift.
the men o' casure, who never go to church, form their
ideas of the cler, from a few foot stratic they often observe
to wander; to ramble; to rove ; to be a
in the streets. - swift.
$f roso. n. j. (from strand.] the beach ; the bank of the
water. obsoletc. -
so locks the to ord whereon th’ imperious flood
hath left a witness'd usurpation. shaxsp. h iv.
strong. a so. [reranz, saxon.]
1. vigorous; forceful; of great ability of body.
i hough 'gan the villain wax so ficroe and strong,
that nothing may sustain his furious force,
5
~- he cast him down to groun
- - - d, and all along
rew him through dirt
--- and mire. . sensor,
i he strowingd mercury shoald fetch thee up,
#. set thee by jove's side. shakesp. afti on clopatra.
o on may be strong to labour. pat. cxliv, 14.
* mosion and sibellian race,
strong limb'd and stout.
* — dryden.
h off. to greater strength must yield; y
- **, *.ith parthenius, were by rapo kill’d. ' ' *****
2. fortified; secure f.” po ki dryden.
vvithin troy 's strong immures
the ravish'd helen with wanton paris (,
an army of english engaged betwee
number, fresh and in vigour on the one
in fortification, and strong in men on t
it is no matter how things are, so a mon observe but the
agreement of his own imaginations, and talk conformably, it
is all truth : such castles in the air will be as strong holds of
truth as the demonstrations of euclid. locke
3. powerful; mighty. --
while there was war between the houses of saul and david
abner made himself strong for saul. -
the merchant-adventurers being a
well underset with rich men and goo
cops. soear.
o an army of a greater
side, and a town/iran:
he other. bacon.
2 sam. iii. 6.
slrong company, and
good order, held out bravely.
- bacon.
those that are strong at sca may casily bring them to what
terms they please. - adolfson.
the weak, by thinking themselves strono, are induced to
proclaim war against that which ruins them; and the strong,
by conceiting themselves weak, are thereby rendered as useles.
as if they really were so. south's sirmons.
4. supplied with forces. it has in this sense a very particular
contrustion. we say, a thousand slrong; as we say, twenty
years old, or ten yards long. **
when he was not six and twenty soong,
sisk in the world's regard, wretched and low,
my father gave him welcome to the shore. soo. hon. iv.
he was, at his rising from exeter, between six and seven
thousand /?' ong.
- in britain's lovely isle a shining throng
war in his cause, a thousand beautics/ ong.,
5. violent; forcible; impetuous.
a river of so strong a current, that it suffereth not the sea to
flow up its channel.
bacon.
tickell-
heylyn.
but her own king she likens to his thames,
serene yet strons, majestick yet sedate,
swift without violence, without terror great. prior.
6. hale; healthy.
petter is the poor being sound and strong in constitution,
to an a rich man affi &amp;ed in his body. eccles xxx. 14.
7. forcibly acting on the imagination.
this is one of the so ongos; examples of a personation that
ever was.
dacon.
8. arder to eager; positive; zealous.
he mother, ever strong against that match,
ard firm for dotor caius, hath appointed,
that he shall shuffle her away. shakes care.
in ch ice of committees for ripening business for the
council, it is better to chute indifferent persons, than to make
an indifferency, by putting in those that are strong on both
sides. - bacon.
the knight is a much stronger tory in the country than in
town, which is necessary for the keeping up his interest. adz.
9. full ; having any quality in a great deg ce; affecting the
sight forcibly. -
by mixing such powders, we are not to expect a strong and
full white, such as is that of paper ; but tone dusky obscure
one, such as might arise from a mixture of light and dark-
ness, or from white and black, that is, a grey or dun, or
ruffet brown. - - n. itton's opticks.
thus shall there be made two bows of colours, an interior
and /or:rger, by one reflexion in the drops, and an exterior
and fainter by two ; for the light becomes fainter by every
reflexion. newton's opticks.
1o. potent; intoxicating.
get strong beer to rub your horses heels. -
11. having a deep tincture; affecting the taste forcibly.
many of their propositions favour very strong of the old
leaven of innovations. - - airg charles.
12. affetting the smell powerfully.
the prince of cambay's daily food
is asps, and basilisk and toad,
which makes him have so strong a breath,
each night he stinks a queen to death. hadi'raj.
add with cecropian thyme strong-scented centaury. dryd.
the heat of a human body, as it grows more intense,
makes the urine smell more strong. arbuthnot.
13. hard of digestion; not easily nutrimental.
swist.
strong meat belongcth to them that are of full age. hor.
14. furnished with abilities for any thing.
i was stronger in prophecy than in criticism. 1)rydon.
15. valid :
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t r
s t r
15. valid ; confirmed. -
in process of time, an ungodly custom grown strong, was
kept as a law. wisdom xiv. 16.
16. violent; vehement; forcible. - - *
in the days of his flesh be offered up prayers, with strong
crying and tears. * * . . . . heb. v. 7.
the scriptures make deep and sorcing impressions on the
minds of men: and whosoever denies this, as he is in point of
religion atheistical, so in understanding brutish. . j. corbet.
17. cogent; conclusive. . . . . . . .
messengers
os strong prevailment in unharden'd youth. shakes care.
produce your cause ; bring forth your y/rong reasons. ... isa.
what sirong crics must they be that shall drown so loud a
clamour of impieties. decay of piety.
the strongest and most important texts are these which have
been controverted; and for that very reason, because they
are the stronges?. j/aterland.
18. able; skilful; of great force of mind.
there is no english soul
more /iranger to dire&amp;t you than yourself,
lf with the sap of reason you would quench,
or but allay the fire of passion. shakesp. henry viii.
19. firm ; compact not soon broken. . -
full on his ankle fell the pond’rous stone,
burst the slrong nerves, and crash'd the solid bone. pope.
20. forcibly written ; comprising much meaning in few words.
like her sweet voice is thy harmonious song,
as high, as sweet, as easy, and as strong. . ... smith.
st ron gfi’s r ed. adj. [sirong and f/1.] stronghanded.
john, who was pretty strongfjied, gave him such a squeeze
as made his eyes water. . . . t arbuthnot.
stro's gh an g. m. s. [/irang and hand.] force; violence.
when their captain dieth, if the seniory should descend to
his child, and an infant, another would thrust him out by
fronghand, being then unable to defend his right. spensor.
they wanting land wherewith to sustain their people, and
the tuscans having more than enough, it was their meaning
to take what they needed by sronghai.d. raleigh.
st ro'ngly. adv. [from sorong.]
1. with strength ; powerfully ; forcibly.
the colewort is an enemy to any plant, because it draweth
frongly the fattest juice of the earth. - bacon.
r the dazzling light -
had flash'd too slrongly on his aking sight. addison.
water impregnated with salt attenuates strongly. arbuthnot.
when the attention is slrongly fixed to any subject, all that
is said concerning it makes a deeper impression. //atts.
2. with strength ; with firmness ; in such a manner as to last;
in such a manner as not easily to be forced.
great dunfinane he slrongly fortifies. o, shakespeare.
let the foundations be strongly laid. bzra vi. 3.
3. vehemently; forcibly ; eagerly.
all these accuse him strongly. shakespeare.
the ruinous consequences of wood's patent have been
strongly represented by both houses. swift.
sfr o'ngw ater. m. s. [/irong and water.] distilled spirits.
metals receive in readily sirong waters; and slrongwaters do
readily pierce into metals and stones; and some will touch
upon gold, that will not touch upon silver.
bacon's natural history.
st rook. the preterite of strike, used in poetry for struck.
a sudden tempest from the desart flew,
with horrid wings, and thunder'd as it blew :
then whirling round, the quoins together /iroak. sandys.
- that conqu'ring look
when next beheld, like light'ning slrook
my blasted soul, and made me bow. . . - waller.
he, like a patient angler, gre he sirook, -
would let them play a while upon the hook. dryden.
str of h.e. m. s. [sarophe, fr. sooo..] . a stanza.
stroy e. the preterite of shive. o -
- having quite lost the way of nobleness, he strove to climb
to the height of terribleness. - sidney.
to st rout. v. n. [/irusson, german.] to swell with an ap-
pearance of greatness; to walk with affected dignity; to strut.
this is commonly written sirut, which seems more proper.
to strout. v. a. to swell out; to puff out ; to enlarge by
affectatic:1.
i will make a brief list of the particulars in an historical
truth nowise /?routed, nor made greater by language. bacon.
to st row. v. n. [see to strew.] -
1. to spread by being scattered.
angel forms lay entranc'd,
thick as autumnal leaves that slrow the brooks
in valombrosa. - milton's par. lost.
2. to spread by scattering; to besprinkle. -
all the ground
with shiver'd armour strown. milton's par. lost.
come, shepherds come, and strow with leaves the plain;
such funeral rites your daphnis did ordain. dryden.
7
. ...with offer floats the standing water strow,
with massy stones make bridges if it flow. dryden,
3. to spread.
there have been three years dearth of corn, and every place
strow'd with beggars. swift,
4. to scatter ; to throw at random.
synah, can i tell thee more ?
and of our la’ies bowre;
but little need to strow my store, -
suffice this hill of our. spetsr.
the tree in storms
the glad earth about her strows,
with treasure from her yielding boughs. waler,
possession kept the beaten road,
a rid gather'd all his brother strow'd. …” swift.
to strowl. v. n. to range; to wander. [see st roll.j
'tis she who nightly strowl, with saunt'ring pace. gay.
to stroy. v. a. [for destroy.] ---
' dig garden, stroy mallow, now may you at ease. tiffar,
struck. the old preterite and participle passive of strike.
this message bear: the trojans and their chief
bring holy peace, and beg the king's relief;
struck with so great a name, and all on fire, .
the youth replies; whatever you require. - dryden,
in a regular plantation, i can place myself in its several
centers, so as to view all the walks jiruck from them. speciator.
high on his car sesostris struck my view, " -
whom scepter'd slaves in golden harness drew. " pope.
some to conceit alone their taste confine, -
and glitt'ring thoughts struck out at ev'ry line. s pope.
stru'cken. the old participle passive of strike. "
down fell the duke, his joints dissolv’d asunder,
blind with the light, and strucken dead with wonder. firs.
all liquors strucken make round circles, and dash. bacon,
silent, and in face - -
confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute. * milon.
stru’cture; n.s.. [structure, fr. strucura, from strucius, lat.]
1. act of building; practice of building. -
. his son builds on, and never is content,
till the last farthing is in structure spent. *dryden,
2. manner of building ; form; make. -
several have gone about to inform them, but for want of
infight into the strucure and constitution of the terraqueous
globe, have not given satisfaction. hoodward.
3. edifice; building.
ecbatana her stru'ffure vast there shews,
and hecatompylos her hundred gates. ... milton.
high on a rock of ice the structure lay. - pope.
there stands a structure of majestick frame. pope.
strude, or strode. n.s. a stock of breeding mares, bailey.
to stru'ggle. v. n. [of uncertain etymology.]
i. to labour; to act with effort.
2. to strive; to contend; to contest.
no man is guilty of an act of intemperance but he might
have forborn it; not without some trouble from the strugglings
of the contrary habit, but still the thing was possible. south.
in the time of henry viii. differences of religion tore the
nation into two mighty factions, and, under the name of
papist and protestant, siruggled in her bowels with many va-
rious events. temple.
i repent, like some despairing wretch,
that boldly plunges in the fightful deep,
then pants, and /ruggles with the whirling waves;
and catches every slender reed to save him. sinish,
3. to labour in difficulties ; to be in agonies or distress.
strong virtue, like strong nature, struggles still,
exerts itself, and then throws off the ill. dryden.
'tis wisdom to beware .
and better shun the bait, than struggle in the snare. dryden.
if men /?ruggle through as many troubles to be miserable as
to be happy ; my readers may be persuaded to be good. spe:l.
stru'ggle, n.s. [from the verb.]
1. labour ; cffort.
2. contest; contention.
when, in the division of parties, men only strove for the
first place in the prince's favour, an honest man might look
upon the struggle with indifference. addion.
it began and ended.without any of those unnatural /?ruggl:
for the chair, which have disturbed the peace of this great
city. * * attortury.
3. agony ; tumultuous distress.
siru'44a. m. s. [latin.] a glandular swelling ; the king's
evil.
a gentlewoman had a siruma about the instep, very hard
and deep about the tendons. roseman's surgery.
stru'mous. adj. [from siruma.] tainted with the king's evil.
how to treat them when sirumous, scirrhous, or cancerous.
isistman.
a glandulous consumption, such as does not affect the
lungs with a rupture of its vessels, and coughing up blood, is
produced by sorumous or scrophulous humours. b'arimore.
stru’mpet.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t u
srgumpet. m. s. a whore; a prostitute. of doubtful original.
stropo vieux mot palliardise. stuprum, lat. trevoux.
how like a younker or a prodigal
the skarfed bark puts from her native bay,
hugg’d and embraced by the strumpet wind
how like a prodigal doth she return,
lean, rent, and beggar'd by the strumpet wind. shakes.
ne'er could jo. p #so
with all her double vigour, art and nature,
once stir my temper, but this virtuous maid
subdues me quite. shakesp. measure for meosure.
if to preserve this vessel for my lord
from any other foul, unlawful touch,
be not to be a strumpet, i am none. shakespeare's othello.
common fame is as false and impudent as a common strum-
pet. l'//irange.
honour had his due ;
before the holy priest my vows were ty'd:
so came i not a strumpet but a bride. dryden.
t. strumpet. v. a. to make a whore; to debauch.
if we two be one, and thou play false,
i do digest the poison of thy flesh,
being strumpeted by the contagion. shakespeare.
srrung. the preterite and participle passive of siring.
the sirung bow points out the cynthian queen. gay.
t, strut. v. n. [/frussen, german.]
1. to walk with affected dignity; to swell with stateliness.
adore our errours, laugh at's while we sirut
to our confusion. shakespeare's ant. and cleopatra.
does he not hold up his head and strut in his gait? shalop.
though thou sirut and paint,
yet art thou both shrunk up and old.
the false syren
stout on th' waves, and shews the brute below. drydon.
we will be with you ere the crowing cock
salutes the light, and struts before his feather'd flock. dryd.
2. to swell ; to protuberate. -
the goats with strutting dugs shall homeward speed.
b.n. johnson.
dryden.
the pow'r appeas'd, with winds suffic’d the sail,
the bellying canvass/frutted with the gale. dryden.
as thy strutting bags with money rise,
the love of gain is of an equal size. dryden.
strut. n.s.. [from the verb..] an affectation of stateliness in
the walk.
certain gentlemen, by smirking countenances and an un-
gainly strut in their walk, have got preferment. swift.
stub. m. s. [rteb, sax. slubbe, danish ; /*b, dutch; /loes,
lat.]
1. a thick short stock left when the rest is cut off.
dametas guided the horses so ill, that the wheel coming
over a great stub of a tree, overturned the coach. sidney.
all about, old stocks and /lubs of trees,
whereon nor fruit nor leaf was ever seen,
did hang upon the ragged rocky knees. sponsor.
to buy at the sub is the best for the buyer,
more timely provision, the cheaper is fire. tassor.
upon cutting down of an old timber tree, the sub hath put
out sometimes a tree of another kind. bacon's nat. history.
we here
live on tough roots and stubs, to thirst inur’d,
men to much misery and hardships born. milton.
prickly stubs instead of trees are found,
or woods with knots and knares deform'd and old ;
headless the most, and hideous to behold. dryden.
2. a log; a block. -
you shall have more adoe to drive our dullest and laziest
youth, our stocks and stubs, from the infinite desire of such 4.
happy nurture, than we have now to haul our choicest wits to
that asinine feast of sow-thistles and brambles. milton.
t. stub. v. a. [from the noun..] to force up ; to extirpate.
his two tusks serve for fighting and feeding ; by the help
whereof he /lubs up edible roots out of the ground, or tears
off the bark of trees. grew's museum.
the other tree was griev'd,
grew scrubby, dry'd a-top, was stunted ; -
so the next parson stubb’d and burnt it. swift.
sru'bbed. adj. [from slab.] truncated; short and thick.
a pain he in his head-piece feels,
against a subted tree he reels,
and up went poor hobgoblin's heels.
to spight the coy nymphs,
hang upon our slubbed horns
garlands, ribbons, and fine poesies. bon. johnson.
stu'bbedness. n.s. (from slubbed.] the state of being short,
thick, and truncated. - -
stubble. n.s. [ouble, fr. /*pel, dutch ; stipula, latin.]
the stalks of corn left in the field by the reaper.
this suggested
at some time, when his soaring insolence
shall reach the people, will be the fire
vol. ii.
drayton. ;
** their dry full, and their blaze
shall darken him for ever shak
- d's pa'are.
you, by thus much seene, so
know o, the subile, what the corn: hath bene. chapman.
- if a small red flower in the stubble-fields, called the winco-
pipe: open in the morning, be sure of a fair day.
his succeeding years a
of his own harvest r
-- - - dryden.
t hrice happy duck, employ'd in threshing stubble,
thy toil is lessen’d and thy profits double. "
after the first crop is off they
- bacon.
fford him little more than the slubbie
- swift.
plow o: wheat slubble.
s ti ! &gt; -
stu’bborn. adj. [this word, of whi artimer’s husandry.
- - - ch no obvious etymo-
logy appears, is derived by minshew from słauthorn, referred
by junius to oxes, and deduced bette + - or--&gt;
joub, perhaps from o r by mr. lye, from
1. obstinate; inflexible; contumacious.
strifeful atin in their stubborn mind,
coals of contention and hot vengeance tin'd. spensor.
then stood he neere the doore, and proud to draw
the silverne bow, thrice tried, and thrice gave law.
chapman.
the queen is obstinate,
stubborn to justice, apt t'accuse it, and
12isdainful to be tried by’t. shakspeare's henry viii.
he believed he had so himbled the garrison, that they would
be no longer so stubborn. clarendon.
i'll not flatter this tempestuous king,
but work his stubborn soul a nobler way. dryden.
2. persisting; persevering; steady.
all this is to be had only from the epistles themselves, with
jorn attention, and more than common application. looe.
3. stiff; not pliable; inflexible; not easily admitting impression.
love softens me, and blows up fires which pass
through my tough heart, and melt the sluiborn mass.
dryden.
take a plant of stubborn oak,
and labour him with many a sturdy stroak. dryden.
4. hardy; firm.
patience under torturing pain,
where /lubbo, n stoicks would complain. swift.
5. hash; rough; rugged.
we will not oppose anything that is hard and stubborn, but
by a soft answer deaden their force. burnet.
6. in all its uses it commonly implies something of a bad qua-
lity, though locke has catachrestically used it in a sense of
praise.
sru'book nly, alo. [from stubborn.] obstinately; contuma-
ciously; inflexibly.
stubbornly he did repugn the truth,
bout a certain question in the law. shakes. h. vi.
he wilfully neglects his book, and stubbornly refuses any
thing he can do.
so close they cling, so stubbornly retire,
their love's more violent than the chymist's fire. garth,
sorus bb or n n ess. n. f. [from stubborn.] obstinacy; vicious
stoutness; contumacy; inflexibility. dryden has used it in
commendation.
happy is your grace,
that can translate the stubbornnes of fortune
into so quiet and so sweet a style. shakesp. as you like it.
he chose a course least subject to envy, between stiff sub-
locke.
bornness and filthy flattery. hayward.
patriots, in peace, assert the people's right,
with noble stubbornnes, resisting might. dryden.
stubbornnes, and an obstinate disobedience, must be mas-
tered with blows. locke.
it failed, partly by the accidents of a storm, and partly by
the stubbornnes; or treachery of that colony for whose relief it
was designed. swift.
stubby. adj. [from stub.] short and thick; short and strong.
the base is surrounded with a garland of black and stubby
bristles. grew's 44tsoum.
stu'b's ail. m. s. [stub and nail.] a nail broken off; a short
thick nail. -
stu cco. n. s. [ital, stuc, fr.] a kind of fine plaster for
walls.
palladian walls, venetian doors,
grotesco roofs, and stucco floors. pope.
stock. the preterite and participle passive of sick.
what more infamous brands have records stuck upon any,
than those who used the best parts for the worst ends
decay of piety.
the partners of their crime will learn obedience,
when they look up and see their fellow-traitors
stuck on a fork, and black'ning in the sun. addison.
when the polypus from forth his cave,
torn with full force, reluctant beats the wave,
his ragged claws are stuck with stones and sands. pope.
stuck o'er with titles, and hung round with strings,
that thou may’st be by kings, or whores of kings. pope.
25 n stuc k.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t u
s t u
stuck. n.s. a thrust. -
i had a pass with rapier, scabbard and all, and he gives me
the stuck in with such a mortal motion, that it is inevitable,
shakespeare's twelfth night.
stu'ckle. m. s. [stook, scottish..] a number of sheaves laid
together in the field to dry.
stud. n s. [rtubu, saxon.]
1. a post; a stake. in some such meaning perhaps it is to be
taken in the following passage, which i do not understand.
a barn in the country, that hath one single stud, or one
height of studs to the roof, is two shillings a foot.
martimer's husandry.
2. a nail with a large head driven for ornament; any ornamen-
tal knob or protuberance.
- handles were to add,
ainsworth.
for which he now was making studi. chapman's iliad.
a belt of straw, and ivy buds,
with coral clasps and amber studi. raligh.
crystal and myrrhine cups emboss'd with gems,
and studs of pearl. milton's par. regain'd.
upon a plane are several small oblong studs, placed regularly
in a quincunx order. jwoodward on fossils.
a desk he had of curious work,
with glitt'ring studs about. swift.
3. [scobe, saxon ; stad, islandick, is a stallion.] a collection
of breeding horses and mares.
in the studs of ireland, where care is taken, we see horses
bred of excellent shape, vigour, and size. temple.
to stu d. v. a. [from the noun..] to adorn with studs or
shining knobs.
thy horses shall be trapp'd,
their harness studded all with gold and pearl. shakespeare.
a silver studded ax, alike bestow'd. dryden's a&amp;n.
stu'dent. r. s. [studens, lat..] a man given to books; a
scholar ; a bookish man.
keep a gamester from dice, and a good student from his
book. shakesp. merry //ives of i/indsor.
this grave advice some sober student bears,
and loudly rings it in his fellow's ears. dryden's pers.
a student shall do more in one hour, when all things concur
to invite him to any special study, than in four at a dull sea-
son. jwatts's logick.
i slightly touch the subject, and recommend it to some
student of the profession. arbuthnot on coins.
stu'died. adj. [from study.]
1. learned; versed in any study; qualified by study.
he died
as one that had been studied in his death,
to throw away the dearest thing he ow'd,
as 'twere a careless trifle.
i am well studied for a liberal thanks,
which i do owe you. shak. ant. and cleopatra.
it will be fit that some man, reasonably studied in the law,
go as chancellor. bacon.
2. having any particular inclination. out of use.
a prince should not be so loosely studied as to remember so
weak a composition. - shakspeare.
stu'dier. m. s. [from study..] one who studies.
lipsius was a great studier of the stoical philosophy : upon
his death-bed his friend told him, that he needed not use ar-
guments to persuade him to patience, the philosophy which he
had studied would furnish him ; he answers him, lord jesus,
give me christian patience. 7 illotson.
there is a law of nature, as intelligible to a rational crea-
ture and studier of that law, as the positive laws of common-
wealths. locke.
stu'dious. adj. [studieux, fr. studiosus, lat.]
1. given to books and contemplation; given to learning.
a proper remedy for wandering thoughts, he that shall pro-
pose, would do great service to the studious and contemplative
shakespeare.
part of mankind. locke.
2. diligent; busy.
studious to find new friends, and new allies. tickel.
3. attentive to ; careful: with of.
divines must become studious of pious and venerable anti-
quity. //hite.
the people made
stout for the war, and studious of their trade. dryden.
there are who, fondly studious of increase,
rich foreign mold on their ill-natur'd land
induce. philips.
4. contemplative; suitable to meditation.
let my due feet never fail
to walk the studious cloister's pale. milton.
him for the studious shade
kind nature form’d.
stu'diously. adv. [from studious.]
1. contemplatively; with close application to literature.
2. diligently ; carefully; attentively. .
on a short pruning hook his head reclines,
and studiously surveys his gen’rous wines.
thomson's summer.
dryden's aen.
all of them studiously cherished the memory of their honour-
able extraction. afterbury.
$10 piousness. m. s. [from stadious.] addiction to study.
study. m. s. softude, fr. judim, lat.] -
1. application of mind to books and learning.
during the whole time of his abode in the university,
hammond generally spent thirteen hours of the day in siu do.
a.l.
study gives strength to the mind; conversation, grace.
temple.
engage the mind in study by a consideration of the doin.
pleasures of truth and knowledge. j/atti.
2. perplexity; deep cogitation.
th’ idea of her life shall sweetly creep
into his sudy of imagination. shak. much //,.
the king of castile, a little confused, and in a /iudy, said,
that can i not do with my honour. bacon's henry vii.
3. attention ; meditation ; contrivance.
what can happen
to me above this wretchedness? all your siudies
make me a curse like this. shakesp. henry viii.
without study this art is not attained, not fit to be attained.
- hajday.
2. just men they seem’d, and all their /, ły bent
to worship god aright, and know his works.
4. any particular kind of learning.
studies serve for delight in privateness and retiring, for or-
nament in discourse, and for ability in the judgment and dis-
position of business.
5. subject of attention.
the holy scriptures, especially the new testament, are
her daily sudy. law.
6. apartment set off for literary employment.
get me a taper in my /iudy, lucius. shak. jul. cos.
knock at the study, where, they say, he keeps,
to ruminate strange plots. shakesp titus andronicus.
let all studies and libraries be towards the east. jwotton.
some servants of the king visited the lodgings of the accused
al/iton.
bacon's effoys.
members, and sealed up their studies and trunks. clarendon.
both adorn'd their age;
one for the study, t'other for the flage. dryden,
to stu'dy. v. n. [studeo, lat. studier, fr.]
i. to think with very close application; to muse.
i found a moral first, and then studied for a fable.
2. to endeavour diligently. -
study to be quiet, and do your own business. 1 the
to stu’dy. v. a.
1. to apply the mind to.
nothing lovelier can be found
in woman, than to study houshold good. a silton.
if a gentleman be to study any language, it ought to be that
of his own country. locke.
2. to consider attentively.
he hath studied her well, and translated her out of honesty
into english. shakesp. amerry i/ives of hindsor.
study thyself: what rank, or what degree,
the wise creator has ordain’d for thee. dryden's prs.
you have studied every spot of ground in flanders, which
has been the scene of battles and fieges. dryden.
3. to learn by application.
you could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen lines,
which i would set down. shakespeare's hamlet.
stuff. m. s. [stoff, dutch ; oftoff, fr.]
1. any matter or body.
let phidias have rude and obstinate stuff to carve: though
his art do that it should, his work will sack that beauty, which
swift.
... iv. iss
otherwise in fitter matter it might have had. hocker.
the workman on his stuff his skill doth show,
and yet the stuff gives not the man his skill. davier.
of brick, and of that stuff, they cast to build
a city and tow’r. a silton.
pierce an hole near the inner edge, because the triangle
hath there most substance of stuff. moxon's mech. exer.
2. materials out of which anything is made.
thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth,
that thou art even natural in thine art. shakesp. timon.
caesar hath wept ;
ambition should be made of sterner stuff. shakes. jul. caos.
success or loss, what is or is not, serves
as stiff for these two to make paradoxes.
thy father, that poor rag,
must be thy subject, who in spight put stuff
to some she-beggar, and compounded thee
poor rogue hereditary, shakespeare's timon.
degrading prose explains his meaning ill,
and shews the stuff, and not the workman's skill. room.
3. furniture; goods.
fare away to get our stuff aboard. shakespeare.
he took away locks, and gave away the king's stuff. hayw.
groaning waggons loaded high
with stuff,
shakespears.
cowley’s davideos.
4. that
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t. u
that which fills anything. -
4. with some sweet oblivious antidote
cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff
which weighs upon thc heart.
. essence; elemental part.
5 though in the trade of war i have slain men,
yet do i hold it very stuff o' th' conscience
to do no contriv'd murther. shakspeare's othello.
6. any mixture or medicine.
i did compound for her
a certain stuff, which, being ta'en, would seize
the present powcrof life. shakspeare's cymbeline.
7. cloth or texture of any kind.
$. textures of wool thinner and flighter than cloath.
let us turn the wools of the land into cloaths and stuff of
our own growth, and the hemp and flax growing here into
linen cloth and cordage. bacon's advice to polliers.
9. matter of thing. in contempt.
o proper stuff!
this is the very painting of your fear.
such stuff as madmen
tongue and brain not.
at this fusly stuff
the large achilles, on his prest bed lolling,
from his deep chest laughs out a loud applause. shakspeare.
please not thyself the fiatt'ring crowd to hear,
'tis fulfonze stuff to feed thy itching ear. dryden's pers.
anger would indite
shakes care.
shales. macbeth.
shakespeare.
such woful stuff as i or shadwell write. dryden's juven.
to-morrow will be time enough
to hear such motifying shift. swift.
the free things to at among rakes pass for wit and spirit,
must be shocking off to the ears of persons of delicacy. clariff.
10. it is now seldom used in any sense but in contempt or dis-
like.
7, sru ff. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fill very full with anything.
when we've stuff'd
these pipes, and these conveyances of blood,
with wine and feeding, we have suppler souls. shakespeare.
ea h thing beheld, did yeclo
our admiration: shelves with cheeses heapt ;
sheds sloft with lambs and goats, distinctly kept. chapman.
though plentcous, all too little seems
to stuff this maw, this vast unhide-bound corps. milton.
what have we more to do than to so four guts with these
figs ? l'e/trange.
this crook drew hazel-boughs adown,
and /off"d her apron wide with nuts so brown. gy.
2. to fill to uneasiness.
with some oblivious antidote
cleanse the sloff'd bosom of that perilous stuff
which weighs upon the heart. shakespeare.
. to thrust into any thing.
put roses into a glass with a narrow mouth, /?offng them
close together, but without bruising, and they retain smell
and colour fresh a year. bacon's natural history.
4. to fill by being put into anything.
grief fills the room up of my absent child,
lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
stuff; out his vacant garments with his form. shakespeare.
with inward arms the dire machine they load,
and iron bowels/?off the dark abode. dryden's acn.
o.ficious baucis 'ays
two cushions stuff"d with straw, the seat to raise. dryden.
a bed,
the stuffing leaves, with hides of bears o'erspread. dryden.
. to swell out by putting something in.
i will be the man that shall make you great. i cannot
perceive how, unless you give me your doublet, and stuff me
out with straw. shakoffeare's henry iv.
the gods for fin
should with a swelling dropsy soff thy skin.
6. to fill with something improper or superfluous.
it is not usual among the best patterns to stuff the report of
particular lives with matter of publick record. js atton.
those accusations are soff d with odious generals, that the
dryden.
proofs seldom make good. - clarendon.
for thee i dim these eyes, and so this head
with all such reading as was never read. pope.
7. to obstruct the organs of scent or respiration.
these gloves the count sent me; they are an excellent per-
fume.— i am suff, cousin, i cannot smell. shakespeare.
8. to fill meat with something of high relish. o
she went for parsly to stuff a rabbet. shakespeare.
he aim'd at all, yet never could excel - - -
in anything but stuffing of his ve...l. king's cookery.
9. to form by stuffing. - - -
an eastern king put a judge to death for an iniquitous sen-
tence, and ordered his hide to be soff d into a cushion: “”
placed upon the tribunal. swift.
to stuff. v. n. to feed gluttonousy.
wedg'd in a spacious elbow-chair,
and on her plate a treble share,
as if she ne'er could have enough, -
taught harmless men to cram ano fluff.
stu f fing. n s [from stuff.]
1. that by which any thing is filled.
oo:: was a farrago out of the neighbouring nations; and
reece, though one tonarchy under alexander, yet the peo-
- ar - -
ple that were the stuffng and materials thereof, existed before.
hale.
swift.
2. relishing ingredients put into meat.
arrach leaves are very good
- - in too o a.
stuk e, or stuck. n.s. s f pottage nd so nngs. mort.
*** * * */. i so, fr. stu co, italian.j a compo-
sition of lime and marble, powdered ver
fine, commonl
… " ... . . - - y y ity
called plaster of paris, with which figures and other orna.
ments resembling sculpture are made.
see stucco. paily.
stul m. m. s. a shaft to draw water out of a mine. %.
stuori loos' exce. n.s.. [stultus and leguentia, lat..] foolish
talk.
dic?.
stum. n s [stom, swedish, supposed to be contracted from
muslim, lat. j
1. wine yet unfermented; must.
an uncluous clammy vapour, that arises from the sium of
grapes, when they lie m shed in the vat, puts out a iight,
when dipped into it. addison on italy.
2. new wine used to raise fermentation in dead and vapid
wines.
let our wines without mixture or stum be all fine,
or call up the master, and brek his dull noddle. b. johns.
3. wine revived by a new fermentation.
drink ev'ry letter on't in stum,
and make it brisk champaigne become. hudibras.
7% stum. v. a. [from the noun..] to renew wine by mixing
fresh wine and raising a new ferinentation. o
vapid wines are put upon the lees of noble wines to give
then spirit, and we stom our wines to renew their spirits.
flyer.
to stumblf. v. 7... [this word joins derives from stop,
and says the original meaning is to spie, or trip against a
/tump. i rather think it comes from tumble.]
1. to trip in walking.
when she will take the rein, i let her run ,
but she'll not som/le. shakosh. //inter's tale.
a headstall being restrained to keep him from stumbling,
hath been often but it. ' shaos. laming of the shrew.
as we pic'd along
upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
methought that glo'fter stumbled; and, in falling,
struck me, that sought to stay him, overboard. shakes.
the way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at
what they stumble.
cover'd o'er with blood,
which from the patriot's breast in torrents flow'd,
he faints: his steed no longer bears the rein;
but stumbles o'er the heap his hand had slain.
2. to slip; to err; to side into crimes or blunders.
he that loveth his brother, abideth in the light, and there
is none occasion of stunt ling in him. i jo. ii. io.
this my day of grace
they who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
but hard be harden'd, blind be blinded more,
that they may stumble on, and deeper fall. milton.
3. to strike against by chance; to light on by chance: with
to so.
this extreme dealing had driven her to put herself with a
great lady of that country, by which occasion she had stumbled
upon such mischances as were little for the honour of her or
her family. sidney.
what man art thou, that, thus bescreen'd in night,
so stumblist on my counsel. shak. romeo and juliet.
a mouse, bred in a cheft, dropped out over the side, and
fumbled upon a delicious morse!. l'estrange.
ovid stumbled, by some inadvertency, upon livia in a bath.
dryden.
many of the greatest inventions have been accidentally
fumbled upon by men busy and inquisitive. ray.
write down p and b, and make signs to him to endeavour
to pronounce them, and guide him by shewing him the motion
of your own lips; by which he will, with a little endeavour,
stumble upon one of them. iholder's elements of speech.
to stu m elf. v. a.
1. to obstruct in progress; to make to trip or stop.
2. to make to boggle ; to offend.
such terms amus’d them all,
and stumbled many. milton's parads: lost.
if one illiterate man was stumbled, 'twas likely others of his
form would be so too. foll.
one thing more stumbles me in the very foundation of this
prov. iv. 19.
prior.
hypothesis. locke.
stu’ī; als. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. a trip in walking.
2. a blunder; a failure.
7 - one
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t u
* &gt; *
s t u
one stumble is enough to deface the character of an honour-
able life. - -&gt; l'estrange.
. stu'mbler. m. s. [from stumble. j . one that stumbles.”
be sweet to all: is thy complexion sour
then keep such company ; make them thy allay :
get a sharp wife, a servant that will low'r ; , , -
astumbler stumbles least in rugged way. herbert.
stu'mbling block. r. n. s. [from stumble.} cause of stum-
...; bling ; cause of errour ; cause of of
fence." - - -
we preach christ crucified, unto the jews a stumblingblock,
and unto the greeks foolishness. . . . . . 1 car. i. 23.
shakespeare is a fumblingblock to these rigid criticks. speci.
this stumbling/?one we hope to take away... burnet.
stump. m. s. [siumpe, danish; /īompe, dutch ; sompen, dan.
to lop.] ...the part of any solid body remaining after the rest
is taken away. - *. -
he struck so strongly, that the knotty sting
of his huge tail he quite in funder cleft ; -
five joints thereof he hew'd, and but the slump *:
. .” - -: - - - pen ere
your colt's tooth is not cast yet—not while i have a slump.
--- - - - - - - shakespeare.
3.
o
-
he through the bushes scrambles; … . ."
a slump doth trip him in his pace ; ,
down comes poor hob upon his face,
amongst the briers and brambles. . . . . drayton's nymphid.
who, 'cause they’re wasted to the stumps,
are represented best by rumps. -- . hudibras.
a coach horse snapt off the end of his finger, and i dressed
the sump with common digestive. . . . wisman's surgery.
a poor als, now wore out to the stumps, sell down under
his load. - - o l'e/irange.
against a slump his tusks the monster grinds,
and in the sharpen'd edge new vigour finds, dryden.
a tongue might have some resemblance to the slump of a
feather. grew's musaeum.
worn to the slumps in the service of the maids, 'tis thrown
out of doors, or condemned to kindle a fire. swift.
stu'mpy. adj. [from slump.] full of stumps; hard ; stiff;
strong. a bad word. *
... they burn the stubble, which, being so slumpy, they seldom
plow in., mortimer.
to stun. v. a. [rzunan, saxon, xerzun, noise.]
1. to confound or dizzy with noise.
... an universal hubbub wild -
of stunning sounds, and voices all confus'd,
assaults his ear. milton.
still shall i hear, and never quit the score,
stunn'd with hoarse codrus' theseid o'er and o'er. dryden.
too strong a noise slums the ear, and one too weak does not
act upon the organ. cheyne.
. so alma, weary'd of being great,
and nodding in her chair of state,
* stunn’d and worn out with endless chat,
"of will did this, and nan said that.
shouts as thunder loud afilict the air,
and stun the birds releas'd.
the britons, once a savage kind,
descendents of the barbarous huns,
with limbs robust, and voice that slums,
you taught to modulate their tongues,
prior.
prior.
and speak without the help of lungs. - swift.
2. to make senseless or dizzy with a blow. - '' *
one hung a pole-ax at his saddle-bow, .
and one a heavy mace to stun the foe. . . * drydon.
stung. the preterite and participle passive of sing.
. to both these sisters have i sworn my love: -
each jealous of the other, as the sung
are of the adder. shakespeare's king lear.
... with envy slung, they view each other's deeds,
the fragrant work with diligence proceeds. dryden's afn.
stunk. the preterite of sink. - . -
to stunt. v. a. [/lunta, islandick.] to hinder from growth.
though this usage slunted the girl in her growth, it gave
her a hardy constitution; she had life and spirit. , arbuthnot.
there he stopt short, nor since has writ a tittle,
but has the wit to make the most of little ;
* * like sounted hide-bound trees, that just have got .
sufficient sap at once to bear and rot. * * - pope.
the tree grew scrubby, dry'd a-top and stunted,
and the next parson stubb’d and burnt it. swift.
stupe. n. j. [/lupa, lat.] cloath or flax dipped in warm
medicaments, and applied to a hurt or fore. * ***
a fomentation was by some pretender to surgery applied
with coarse woollen stupes, one of which was bound upon his
leg. * iłoseman's surgery.
t2 soupe. v. a. [from the noun..] to foment; to dress with
stupes. - - *
#. escar divide, and soupe the part affeoted with wine. .
* - - - * - //seman.
stupefaction, n.s. [stupefaction, fr. j'oposacius, lat..] in-
* ois, dulness ; stupidity; sluggishness of mind; heavy
o y. o
all resistance of the dictates of conscience brings a hardness
o and stupefaction upon it. south.
- she sent to ev'ry child
firm impudence, or stupefaction mild;
and strait succeeded, leaving shame no room, -
cibberian forehead, or cimmerian gloom. pope
stupefa"ctive, adj. [from stupefadius, lat. stupefosis, fr.
s causing insensibility; dulling §a. as. ...]
tick; opiate. ... • * * * -
it is a gentle fomentation, and hath a very little mixture,
of some stupefactive. bacon's natural history.
opium hath a soupsactive part, and a heating part; the one
moving sleep, the other a heat. - bacon.
stupe's pous, adj. i/tupendus, lat..] wonderful; amazing;
astonishing. -
...all those supendous acts deservedly are the subjea of a
history, excellently written in latin by a learned prelate.
* * * * * * * * * * * - - clarendon.
* * &gt; great joy was at their meeting, and at fight **
of that stupendous bridge his joy increas'd. milton.
* * * * portents and prodigies their souls amaz'd; - -
but most, when this stupendous pile was rais'd. , dryden.
` mortals, fly this curst detested race: * . . .
a hundred of the same stupendous size, * * * *
, a hundred cyclops live among the hills. aldson.
our numbers can scarce give us an idea of the vast quantity
... of systems in this /iupendo's piece of archite&amp;ure. cheyne.
soft. adj. e. #". lat.] ... " ty
*1. dulli wanting sensibility; wanting apprehension; heavy;
sluggish of understanding. -
o that men should be so/upid grown - * -
as to forsake the living god. milto.
men, boys'and women, slupid with surprise, o's
where e'er she passes, fix their wond'ring eyes. drydon.
- - - -
if i by chance succeed, "..
know, i am not so stupid, or so hard,
- not to feel praise, or fame's deserv'd reward.
* * " . with wild surprise a -
a moment stupid motionless he stood. thomson.
2. performed without skill or genius. - -
wit, as the chief of virtue's friends,
disdains to serve ignoble ends:
qbserve what loads of stupid rhimes -
oppress us in corrupted times. - swift.
stupi pity. m. s. [stupidite, fr. supiditas, lit.j dulness;
heaviness of mind; sluggishness of understanding.
shadwel alone, of all my sons, is he
who stands confirm'd in full/lufidity.
stupidly, adv. [from stupid.] -
1. with suspension or inactivity of understanding.
that space the evil one abstracted stood
from his own evil, and for the time remain'd -
... stupidly good. amilton's paradis, loft.
2. dully ; without apprehension.
on the shield there was engraven maps of countries, which
ajax could not comprehend, but looked on as ftupidly as his
s “fellow-beast the lion. - dryden.
tupiffer. n.s.. [from stupiff.] that which causes stupidity.
to stu'pify. ..!. {so}}. latin. this word #.
therefore be spelled stupefy; but the authorities are against it.]
1. to make stupid; to deprive of sensibility; to dull.
- * * those
will stupify and dull the sense a while. shafts. cymbeline.
* . consider whether that method, used to quiet some con-
sciences, does not stupefy more. ' decay of piety.
. the fumes of his passion do as really intoxicate his discern-
ing faculty, as the fumes of drink discompose and stupify the
brain of a man overcharged with it. , * south.
envy, like a cold poison, benumbs and stupifies; and, con-
scious of its own impotence, folds its arms in despair. collier.
2. to deprive of material motion.” . . . . . . ~ :
* * : it is not malieable; but yet is not fluent, but stupified. bac.
* . pounce it into the quicksilver, and so proceed to the stupi-
fying. . . . . . . . * * * , * baron.
stu por. m. s. [latin; stupear, fr. jo suspension or diminu-
tion of sensibility. - - -
. a pungent pain in the region of the kidneys, a stupor, or
dull pain in the thigh and j. are o of #:
mation of the kidneys. - - - arbuthnot on diet.
to stu'prate. v. a. [supro, lat.] to ravish ; to violate.
stupration. n.s.. [stupratio, from supra, lat.j rape; vio-
1 * * *
o, dryden.
dryden.
lation.
stupration must not be drawn into practice. -- brown,
stu'rdily. adv. [from sturdy..] … . . . . . . .
1. stoutly ; hardily. - * -
2. obstimately; resolutely. -- ~~ - - -
o: then withdraw 'zs * --
** from cambridge, thy old nurse: and, as the rest,
-- here toughly chew and sturdily digest .
th’ immense vast volumes of our common law. donne.
2 stu'rdin ess.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s t y
.
|
sru’spiness. n.s.. [from sturdy.]
1. stoutness; hardiness.
sacrifice not his innocency to the attaining some little skill
of bustling for himself, by his conversation with vitious boys,
when the chief, use of that sturdinos, and standing upon his
own legs, is only for the preservation of his virtue. lock.
2. brutal sirength. -
§turdy., adj. [oftouri, fr.]
1. hardy; stout; brutal; obstinate. it is always used of men
with some disagreeable idea of coarseness or rudeness.
this must be done, and i would fain see
mortal so sturdy as to gainsay. hudibrar.
aw'd by that house, accustom'd to command,
the sturdy kerrs in due subjection stand,
nor bear the reins in any foreign hand. dryden.
asturdy hardened finner shall advance to the utmost pitch
of impiety with less reluctance than he took the first steps,
whilst his conscience was yet vigilant and tender. atterbury.
2. strong ; forcible.
the ill-apparelled knight now had gotten the reputation of
some sturdy lout, he had so well defended himself. sidney.
ne ought his sturdy strokes might stand before,
that high trees overthrew, and rocks in piecestore. spensar.
3. stiff; stout. -
he was not of any delicate contexture, his limbs rather
furdy than dainty. - watton.
sturdiest oaks
bow'd their stiff necks, loaden with stormy blasts,
or torn up sheer. milton's par. rog.
sru'rgeon. m. s. [stario, tursso, lat.] a sea fish.
it is part of the scutellated bone of a sturgeon, being flat, of
a porous or cellular constitution on one side, the cells being
worn down, and smooth on the other. joozdwara.
sturk. m. s. [ronc, saxon.] a young ox or heifer. bailey.
thus they are still called in scotland.
t, stut. v. n. [stutten, to hinder, dutch..] to speak
t, stutter. with hesitation; to stammer.
divers sout: the cause is the refrigeration of the tongue,
whereby it is less apt to move ; and therefore naturals stut.
bacon.
stu'tt e. r. } n. s. [from stut..] one that speaks with hesi-
sru'rt er er. tation; a stammerer.
many stutters are very cholerick, choler inducing a dryness
in the tongue. bacon's natural history.
sty. n. s. [rzoe, saxon.]
1. a cabbin to keep hogs in.
tell richmond,
that in the sty of this most bloody boar,
my son george stanley is frank'd up in hold. shakos. r. iii.
when her hogs had miss'd their way,
th'untoward creatures to the sty i drove,
and whistl'd all the way. gay.
may thy black pigs lie warm in little sty,
and have no thought to grieve them 'till they die, king.
2. any place of bestial debauchery.
they all their friends and native home forget,
to roll with pleasure in a sensual sty. milton.
with what ease
might's thou expel this monster from his throne,
now made a sty. milton's paradie regain'd.
. (i know not how derived.) a humour in the eyelid.
#. §. v. a. [from the noun..] to shut up in a sty.
here you sty me -
in this hard rock, while you do keep from me
the rest of th’ island. shakespeare's tompost.
t, sty. v. n. to soar ; to ascend. spenser.
sry'gian. adj. [stygius, lat.] hellish; insernal; pertaining
to styx, one of the poetical rivers of hell. -
at that so sudden blaze the stygian throng
bent their aspect.
style. m. s. [stylus, lat.]
1. manner of writing with regard to language.
happy
that can translate the stubbornness of fortune
into so quiet, and so sweet a style. shakspeare.
their beauty i will rather leave to poets, than venture upon
so tender and nice a subject with my severer style. more.
proper words in proper places, make the true definition of
a stile. swift.
milt z/2-
-
let some lord but own the happy lines,
how the wit brightens, and the style refines. pope.
1. manner of speaking appropriate to particular charaoters.
no she is held for base, where love well named is. sidn.
there was never yet philosopher,
that could endure the toothach patiently,
however they have writ the slyle of gods,
and make a pish at chance and sufferance.
3. mode of painting. -
the great stile stands alone, and does not require, perhaps
does not as well admit, any addition from inferior beauties.
the ornamental stile also possesses its own peculiar merit; how-
ever, though the union of the two may make a fort of com-
vol. ii.
shakespeare.
posite hik, yet that joi. is likel - :-----a
- - y to be more imperfeoł th
either of those which go to its composition. p k.
4. it is likewise applied to musick.
5. title; appellation.
ford's a knave, and i will • -- -
- g: - -
know him for knive and ...:” his stile; thou shalt
- shakespeare.
- the king gave them in his commission the style and o:
tion which belonged to them. clarendon
o virgin' or what other name you bear -
above that style; o more than mostal fair
let not an humble suppliant sue in vain. dryden's aen
propitious hear our pray’r, -
whether the style of tit.n please thee more,
whose purple rays th’ achaenenes adore. pope's statius.
6. course of writing. unusual.
while his thoughts the ling'ring day beguile
to gentle arcite let us turn our style. &gt; dryden
7. style of court, is properly the practice observed by any
court in its way of proceeding. ayl
- - - - - - offe's parergon.
8. a pointed iron used anciently in writing on tales of wax.
9. anything with a sharp point, as a graver ; the pin of a dial.
placing two stiles or needles of the same steel, touched with
the same loadstone, when the one is removed but half a span
the other would stand like hercules's pillars. brow.
io. the stalk which rises from amid the leaves of a flower.
style is the middle prominent part of the flower of a plant,
which adheres to the fruit or seed: 'tis usually slender and
long, whence it has its name. quincy.
the figure of the flower-leaves, stamina, apices, jir; and
seed-vessel. ray.
to style. v. a. [from the noun..] to call; to term, to
name.
the chancellor of the exchequer they had no mind should
be styled a knight. - clarendon.
err not that so shall end
the strife which thou call'st evil, but we style
the strife of glory. milton's paradise lost.
fortune's gifts, my asions
may stile their own rewards. denham's sophy.
whoever backs his tenets with authorities, thinks he ought
to carry the cause, and is ready to stile it impudence in any
-
one who shall stand out. locke.
his conduct might have made him stil'd
a father, and the nymph his child. swift.
styprick, adj. sovo.zos; styptique, fr. this is usually,
though erroneously, written stiptick. see stip tick.] the
same as astringent ; but generally expresses the most efficacious
sort of astringents, or those which are applied to stop haemor-
rhages. - quincy.
fruits of trees and shrubs contain phlegm, oil, and an
essential salt, by which they are sharp, sweet, sour or styptick.
arbuthnot on aliments.
sty pri'city. n. s. [properly stipticity.] the power of stanch-
ing blood.
catharticks of mercurials precipitate the viscidities by their
sypticity, and mix with all animal acids. foyer.
to sty't hy. v. a. [see stith y.] to forge on an anvil.
by the forge that stythy'd mars his helm,
i'll kill thee every where, yea, o'er and o'er. shakespeare.
sua'sible. adj. [from suadeo, lat.] easy to be persuaded.
suasive. adj. [from suadeo, lat..] having power to persuade.
it had the passions in perfeot subjection; and though its
command over them was ... and political, yet it had
the force of coaction, and despotical. south.
su asoky. adj. [juajorius, lat.] having tendency to per-
suade. -
suavity. n.s.. [s.avite, fr. suavitas, lat.]
1. sweetness to the senses.
she desired them for rarity, pulchritude, and suavity.
brown.
2. sweetness to the mind.
sub, in composition, signifies a subordinate degree.
sub acid. adj. [sub and acidus, lat.] sour in a small degree.
the juice of the stem is like the chyle in the animal body,
not sufficiently concocted by circulation, and is commonly
futacid in all plants. arbuthnot on aliments.
suba"ck id. adj. [/ub and acrid.] sharp and pungent in a small
degree. -
the green choler of a cow tasted sweet, bitter, subacrid, or
a little pungent, and turned syrup of violets green. floyer.
to suba"ct. v. a. [subacius, lat.] , to reduce; to subdue.
tangible bodies have no pleasure in the consort of air, but
endeavour to subao it into a more dense body. bacon.
sua action. m. s. [subacius, lat.] the act of reducing to
any state, as of mixing two bodies completely, or beating any
thing to a very small powder.
there are of concoction two periods: the one assimilation,
or absolute conversion and subasion; the other maturation ;
whereof the former is most conspicuous in living creatures, in
which there is an absolute conversion and assimilation of the
nourishment into the body. bacon's natural history.
susa ltern. adj. [subalterne, french..] inferiour; subordi-
25 nate ;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u b
s u b
nate; that which in different respe&amp;s is both superiour and
inferiour. it is used in the army of all officers below a cap-
ta, il.
love's subalterns, a duteous band,
like watchmen round their chief appear;
- each had his lanthorn in his hand,
and venus, mask'd, brought up the rear. prior.
there had like to have been a duel between two subalterns,
upon a dispute which should be governor of portsmouth. add.
one, while a subaltern officer, was every day complaining
against the pride of colonels towards their officers; yet, after
he received his commission for a regiment, he confessed the
jpirit of colone ship was coming fast upon him, and it daily
increased to his death. swift.
this fort of universal ideas, which may either be considered
as a genus or species, is called shoaltern. jwatts.
sup alt e. rna or e. adj. [jubalternus, latin.] succeeding by
turns, dic?.
st. bas, ri'ng ent. adj. [sub and affringent.] astringent in a
small degree. -
suph e'api.e. n.s.. [sub and beadle.] an under beadle. ,
they ought not to execute those precepts by simple messen-
gers, or sublicades, but in their own persons. a liffe.
su bc elf's 11 al. adj. [sab and celiftia!..] placed beneath the
heavens. ,
the most refined glories of subcely?ial excellencies are but
rhore saint resemblances of these. glanville.
subcha’ntfr. m. s. [sub and chanter; succentor, lat.j. the
deputy of the precentor in a cathedral.
subct. a via n. adj. [sub and clavus, latin.]
sutclavian is applicd to any thing under the armpit or shoul-
der, whether artery, nerve, vein, or muscle. &amp;#incy.
the liver, though scated on the right side, yet, by the sub-
clavian division, doth equi-distantly communicate its activity
unto either arm. brown's wulgar errours.
the chyle first mixeth with the blood in the subclavian
vein, and enters with it into the heart, where it is very im-
perfectly mixed, there being no mechanism nor fermentation
to convert it into blood, which is effected by the lungs. arb.
subcosstellation. m. s. [sub and consiellation.] a subordi-
nate or secondary constellation.
as to the picture of the seven stars, if thereby be meant
the pleiades, or subconsiellation upon the back of taurus, with
what congruity they are described in a clear night an ordinary
eye may discover. brown's pulgar errours.
subco’ntrary. adj. [sub and contrary..] contrary in an in-
feriour degree.
if two particular propositions differ in quality, they are sub-
contraries : as, some vine is a tree ; some vine is not a tree.
these may be both true together, but they can never be both
false. j/atts.
subcontra'cted. part. adj. [sub and contracied.] contracted
after a former contract.
your claim,
i bar it in the interest of my wife;
'tis she is subcontracied to this lord,
and i her husband contradict your banes. shake?. k. lear.
sup cut a’neous, adj. [sub and cutaneous.] lying under the
skin.
subde(acon. n.s.. [subdeaconus, latin.]
in the romish church they have a subdeacon, who is the
deacon's servant. ayliff's parergon.
suppe’an. n.f. [subdecanus, lat.] the vicegerent of a dean.
whenever the dean and chapter confirm any act, that such
confirmation may be valid, the dean must join in person, and
not in the person of a deputy or subdean only. ayliffe.
subdecusp le. adj. [sub and decuplus, lat..] containing one
part of ten. -
sub der 1so rious. adj. [sub and derisor.] scoffing or ridi-
culing with tenderness and delicacy. not used.
this subdersorious mirth is far from giving any offence to us:
it is rather a pleasant condiment of our conversation. more.
subdi+1 rious, adj. [ subditilius, latin.j. put secretly in the
place of something else. o
to sub d1 v e(rsify. v. a. [sub and diversy..] to diversify
again what is already diversified.
the same wool one man felts into a hat, another weaves it
into cloth, another into arras; and these variously subdiversi-
fied according to the fancy of the artificer. hole.
to subdiv 1 pe. v. a. [subdivisor, french ; sub and divide.]
•to divide a part into yet more parts. -
in the rise of eight, in tones, there be two beenols, or half
notes; so as if you divide the tones equally, the eight is but
seven whole and equal notes ; and if you subdivide that into
half notes, as in the stops of a lute, it maketh the number
thirteen. bacon's nat. hisł.
when brutus and cassius were overthrown, soon after an-
tonius and oetavianus brake and so bdivided. bacon.
the glad father glories in his child,
when he can subdivide a fraction. roscommon.
when the progenies of cham and japhet swarmed into
colonies, and those colonies were subdivided into many o
in time their descendants lost the primitive rites of divin
ship, retaining only the notion of one deity. drydon
supplvi'sion. m. s. [sold vision, french; from subdivid.j' ---
1. the act of subdividing.
when any of the parts of any idea are farther divided in
order to a clear explication of the whole, this is called jo.
division; as when a year is divided into months, each month
into days, and each day into hours, which may be farther sub
divided into minutes and seconds. watts's lo .
2. the parts distinguished by a second division. gick,
how can we see such a multitude of souls cast under so
many subdivisions of misery, without reflecting on the absur-
dity of a government that sacrifices the happiness of so man
reasonable beings to the glory of one add. o
in the decimal table the subdivisions of the cubit, as o
palm, and digit, are deduced from the shorter cubit. drini.
suopologs. asj. [sabdalus, latin.) cunning; subtle; sly -
to subdu’ce. s -
to subdu’ct. }v. a. [salduco, subducius, latin.]
1. to withdraw ; to take away.
or nature fail'd in me, and left some part
not proof enough such object to sustain;
or from my fide subduciing, took perhaps -
more than enough. 44ilton's parad; loft
2. to substract by arithmetical operation. --
take the other operation of arithmetick, subduction: if out
of that supposed infinite multitude of antecedent generations
we should subduce ten, the residue must be less by ten than it
was before, and yet still the quotient must be infinite. hall,
subdu’ction. m. s. (from subdues.]
1. the act of taking away. -
possibly the divine beneficence subdueting that influence
which it communicated from the time of their first creation.
they were kept in a state of immortality till that moment of
the subdu'lion. hale's origin of mankind.
2. arithmetical substraction.
suppose we take the other operation of arithmetick, slo.
tion: if out of that infinite multitude of antecedent genera-
tions we should subduct ten, the residue must be less by ten
than it was before that subdussion, and yet still the quotient be
infinite. - bait.
to subdu’e. v. a. [from suld, or subjuga, latin.]
1. to crush ; to oppress; to fink; to overpower.
nothing could have subdu'd nature
to such a lowness, but his unkind daughters. shakespeare.
them that rose up against me, hast thou subdued under me.
2 sam. xxii. 40.
the soul of man. milton.
2. to conquer; to reduce under a new dominion.
be fruitful, and replenish the earth, and subdue it. gen. i. 28.
augustus caesar subdued egypt to the roman empire. peach.
to overcome in battle, and subdue
nations, and bring home spoils. milton.
the romans made those times the standard of their wit,
thers,
c wor-
if aught were worthy to subdue
when they subdued the world. spratt.
3. to tame; to subact ; to break.
nor is't unwholesome to subdue the land
by often exercise; and where before
you broke the earth, again to plow. may's pirgil.
subpu‘ement. n.s.. [from subdue.] conquest. a word not
used, nor worthy to be used. - -
i have seen thee,
as hot as perseus, spur thy phrygian fleed,
bravely despising forfeits and subduements. shakesfeare.
subdu'e.r. m. s. [from subdue.] conquerour; tamer.
great god of might, that reigneth in the mind,
and all the body to thy hest dost frame;
victor of gods, subduer of mankind,
that dost the lions and fell tygers tame,
who can express the glory of thy might? spensor.
their curious eye -
discerns their great subduer's awful mien
and corresponding features fair. piłło.
figs are great soldiers of acrimony, useful in hoarseness and
coughs, and extremely emolient. .# buthnot.
seppu ple. - }% [sibliople, fr. sub and duplus, latin.)
sublu'plicate. 5 containing one part of two.
as one of these under pulleys doth abate half of that heavi-
ness which the weight hath in itself, and cause the power to
be in a subduple proportion unto it, so two of them do abate
half of that which remains, and cause a subquadruple prepor-
tion, and three a subsextuple. // ilkins's al math. a sag.
the motion generated by the forces in the whole passage of
the body or thing through that space, shall be in a subduplicate
proportion of the forces. - newton'. oft.
sebjacent, adj. [subjacens, latin.] lying under.
the superficial parts of mountains are washed away by
rain", and borne down upon the sahja ent plains. jooodward.
t: subject. v. 3, say-oui, latin.]
- 1. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u b
s u b
o
*
~
--
... --
1. to put under. -
the angel led them dircoł, and down the cliff as fast
to the subjecled plain. milton.
the medal bears each sorm and name:
in one short view, subjecied to our eye, --
gods, emp'rors, heroes, sages, beauties lic. pope.
2. to reduce to submission; to make subordinate; to make
submisfive.
think not, young warriors, your diminish’d name
shall lose of lustre, by subjecling rage
to the cool dictates of experienc'd age.
3. to enslave ; to make obnoxious.
i live on bread like you, feel want like you,
taste grief, need friends, like you : subjected thus,
how can you say to me, i am a king? shakesp. rich. ii.
i see thee, in that fatal hour,
subjecsed to the victor's cruel pow'r,
led hence a slave. dryden.
the blind will always be led by those that see, or fall into
the ditch: and he is the most subjected, the most enslaved, who
is so in his understanding. locke.
4. to expose; to make liable.
if the vessels yield, it subje?; the person to all the inconve-
niencies of an erroneous circulation. arbuthnot.
5. to submit; to make accountable. -
god is not bound to subject his ways of operation to the
scrutiny of our thoughts, and confine himself to do nothing
but what we must comprehend. - locke.
6. to make subservient
he subjected to man's service angel-wings.
su'bject. adj. [subjectus, latin.]
1. placed or situated under.
th’eastern tower;
whose height commands, as subjesi, all the vale .
to see the fight. shakesp. troilus and crossida.
2. living under the dominion of another. -
esau was never subjeo to jacob, but founded a distinct people
and government, and was himself prince over them. locke.
christ, since his incarnation, has been subject to the fa-
ther, and will be so also, in his human capacity, after he has
dryden.
milton,
delivered up his mediatorial kingdom. //aterland.
3. exposed; liable; obnoxious.
most siljes is the fattest soil to weeds;
and he the noble image of my youth
is overspread with them. shałoszare.
all human things are subjec7 to decay,
and when fate summons, monarchs must obey. dryden.
4. being that on which any action operates, whether intellectual
or material.
i enter into the subjeci matter of my discourse.
su'bject. m. s. [suffet, french.j
1. one who lives under the dominion of another: opposed to
governor.
every subjec's duty is the king's,
but every subjec's soul is his own.
never subject long'd to be a king,
as i do long and wish to be a subjeci. shakesh. henry vi.
those i call subjects which are governed by the ordinary
laws and magistrates of the sovereign. davies.
we must understand and confess a king to be a father; a
suljece to be a son ; and therefore honour to be by nature most
due from the natural subject to the natural king. holyday.
the subjeci must obey his prince, because god commands
dryden.
shaksp. henry v.
it, human laws require it. swift.
were subjeci; so but only by their choice,
and not from birth did forc'd dominion take,
our prince alone would have the publick voice. dryden.
heroick kings, whose high perfections have made them
awful to their subjecis, can struggle with and subdue the cor-
ruption of the times. davenant.
2. that on which any operation, either mental or matcrial, is
performed. -
now spurs the lated traveller apace,
to gain the timely inn, and near approaches
the subject of our watch. shakespeare's macbeth.
this subject for heroick song pleas'd me. 41ilton.
here he would have us fix our thoughts; nor are they too
dry a subjec for our contemplation. decay of piety.
i will not venture on so nice a subjeci with my severer style.
a fire.
make choice of a subjec beautiful and noble, which being
capable of all the graces that colours, and elegance of design,
can give, shall afford a perfect art, an ample field of matter
wherein to expatiate. - dryden.
. the sibject of a proposition is that concerning which any
thing is affirmed or denied. jo'atts's logick.
my real design is, that of publishing vour praises to the
world; not upon the sojo of your noole birth. swift.
3. that in which any thing inheres or exists. -
anger is certainly a kind of baseness, as it appears well in
the weakness of those subjects in whom it reigns, children,
women, old folks, sick folks. bacon.
4. i'm grathmar.] the nominative case to a verb is called by
grammarians the subject of the verb. clarke's lat. gram
subje"ction. n. / [from jaljec, j e
1. 1 he act of subduing.
. after the conquest of the kingdom and fobjecion of the re-
bels, enquiry was made who there were that fighting against
the king had saved themselves by flight. e” “”5
2, [sujettion, fr. j the state of being under government.
because the sojection of the boy to the will is by natural
necessity, the subjection of the will unto god voluntary ; we
**{ose stand in need of direction after what so. wis
and desires may be rightly conformed to his. hooker.
how hard it is now for him to frame himself to subjection
that having once set before his eyes the hope of a som,
hath found encouragement. soft.
, both in subjection now to sensual appetite. asion.
subje/ctive. adj. [from subject.] relating not to the object.
but the subject. c ject,
... certainty, according to the schools, is distinguished into
objective and subjecfive: objective is when the proposition is
***inly true in itself; and subjective, when weard certain of
the truth of it. //atts.
subingre'ssion. n.s.. [sub and ingroso, latin.] secre. en-
trance. -
the pressure of the ambient air is strengthened upon the ac-
cession of the air sucked out; which forcoth the neighbouring
air to a violent subingression of its parts. 8 boyle.
to subjoi'n. v. a. [jib and joinde, french; sojungo, latin.}
to add at the end; to add afterwards. z **3 v2 "...i
he makes an excuse from ignorance, the only thing that
$ould take away the fault; namely, that he know no o
he was the high-priest, and stooins a reason. south.
§ous...aff. s/abitao, latin.) sudden; hasty.
to sut3jugate. v. a. [sooter, fr. subjugo, lat.j to
conquer; to subdue ; to bring under doomson by force.
o fav'rite virgin, that hast warm'd the breas:
whose sov’reign distates subjugate the east » prior.
he //jugated a king, and called him his vasul. bor.
subjogation. m. s. [from softgate.] the all of subduing.
this was the condition of the learned part of the world, af-
ter their subjugation by the turks. - hale.
subju'nction. m. s. [from solingo, latin.] the state of
being subjoined; the act of subjoining. -
the verb undergoes in greek a different formation; and in
dependence upon, or subjunion to some other vers. clarke.
su(bjunctive. adj. [siojanoivus, latin; jojonels, fr. j
1. subjoined to something else.
2. [in grammar.] - * ,
the verb undergoes a different formation, to signify the
same intentions as the indicative, yet not absolutely but rela-
tively to some other verb, which is called the subjun'ssive
mood. z - clarke.
$gal apsa rian. {*. [sao and losis, latin.] done after
subla'psary. the fall of man.
the decree of reprobation, according to the suhlopsirian
doctrine, being nothing else but a mere preterition, or non-
election of some persons whom god left as he found, involved
in the guilt of the first adam's transgression, without any
actual personal fin of their own, when he withdrew so.
others as guilty as they. hammond.
subla'tion. n.s.. [subatio, latin j the ad of taking away.
sublevation. n.s.. [siblev, lat.]"the at of raising on high.
$9b mable, adj. [from subime. possibie to be fusioned.”
sublimapleness, n. s. (from jidonia%.j quality of admit-
ting sublimation. -
he obtained another concrete as to taste and smell, and easy
subtimalients, as common salt armoniack.
to sublima e. v. a. [from stoline
1. to raise by the force of chemical file.
2. to exalt ; to heighten; to elevate. -
and as his actions rose, so raise they still their vein
in words, whose weight best suit a solinated strain. drayton.
not only the gross and illiterate fools, but the most aerial
and sublimated, are rather the more proper fuel for an immate-
rial fire. decay of piety.
the precepts of christianity are so excellent and refined,
and so apt to cleanse and solinate the more gross and corrupt
as shews flesh and blood never revealed it. ` , d.coy of pij.
su’blimate. m. s. [from sublime.]
r. any thing raised by fire in the retort. - -
enquire the manner of sublimino, and what metals endure
fobliming, and what body the sublimate makes.
2. quicksilver raised in the retort. * - -
su'boo atc. adj. raised by fire in the vessel.
the particles of mercury uniting with the acid particles of
spirit of salt compose mercury subsionate, and with the particles
, of sulphur, cinnaber. - newton's optic's.
sube 1: a tron. n.s.. [solination, fr. from solinate.]
* a chemical operation which raises bodies in the vessel by the
force of fire. - - - -
- suhlmation differs very little from distillation, excepting that
in distillation only the fluid parts of bodies are raised, but
ii.ak.
lw * -
in
8
. . .
bacon.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u b
s u : b |
in this the solid and dry; and that the matter to be distilled
may be either solid or fluid, but sublimation is only concerned
about solid substances. there is also another difference, name-
ly, that rarefaction, which is of very great use in distillation,
has hardly any room in sublimation; for the substances which
are to be sublimed being solid, are incapable of rarefaction ;
and so it is only impulse that can raise them. quincy.
separation is wrought by weight, as in the settlement of
liquors, by heat, by precipitation or sublimation; that is, a
calling of the several parts up or down, which is a kind of at- .
traction. bacon's natural history.
since oil of sulphur per campanam is of the same nature
with oil of vitriol, may it not be inferred that sulphur is a
mixture of volatile and fixed parts so strongly cohering by at-
traction, as to ascend together by sublimation? newt. opt.
2. exaltation ; elevation ; act of heightening or improving.
she turns
bodies to spirits, by sublimation strange. davies.
shall he pretend to religious attainments, who is defe&amp;tive
and short in moral, which are but the rudiments and first
draught of religion, as religion is the perfection, refinement,
and sublimation of morality ? south.
subli'me. adj. [sublimis, latin.]
1. high in place ; exalted aloft.
they sum'd their pens, and soaring th'air sublime
with clang despis'd the ground. milton.
sublime on these a tow’r of steel is rear'd
and dire tisiphone there keeps the ward.
high in excellence; exalted by nature.
my earthly strained to the height
in that celestial colloquy sublime.
can it be, that souls sublime
return to visit our terrestrial clime;
and that the gen'rous mind, releas'd by death,
can cover lazy limbs
3. high in stile or sentiment; lofty; grand.
easy in stile thy work, in sense sublime.
4. elevated by joy.
all yet left of that revolted rout,
heav'n-fall'n, in station stood or just array,
sublime with expectation.
their hearts were jocund and sublime,
drunk with idolatry, drunk with wine.
5. lofty of mien ; elevated in manner.
he was sublime, and almost tumorous in his looks and ges-
tures. wotton.
his fair large front and eye sublime declar'd
absolute rule. milton.
subli'me. n.s. the grand or lofty stile. the sublime is a
gallicism, but now naturalized.
longinus strengthens all his laws,
and is himself the great sublime he draws. pope.
the sublime rises from the nobleness of thoughts, the
magnificence of the words, or the harmonious and lively turn
of the phrase; the perfect sublime arises from all three together.
addison.
&gt; dryden.
2 -
milton.
dryden.
prior.
milton.
milton.
to subli'm e. v. a. [sublimer, fr. from the adjective.]
1. to raise by a chemical fire.
study our manuscripts, those myriads
of letters, which have past 'twixt thee and me,
thence write our annals, and in them lessons be
to all, whom love's subliming fire invades.
2. to raise on high.
although thy trunk be neither large nor strong,
nor can thy head, not helpt, itself sublime,
yet, like a serpent, a tall tree can climb.
3. to exalt; to heighten; to improve.
flow’rs, and then fruit,
man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublim'd
to vital spirits aspire. milton.
the fancies of most are moved by the inward springs of the
corporeal machine, which even in the most sublimed intellec-
tuals is dangerously influential. glanville.
art being strengthened by the knowledge of things, may
pass into nature by slow degrees, and so be sublimed into a pure
genius, which is capable of distinguishing betwixt the beauties
of nature and that which is low in her. dryden's dufresnoy.
meanly they seek the blesfing to confine,
and force that sun but on a part to shine;
which not alone the southern wit sublimes,
but ripens spirits in cold northern climes. pope.
to subli’m e. v. m. to rise in the chemical vessel by the force
of fire.
the particles of sal ammoniack in sublimation carry up the
particles of antimony, which will not sublime alone. newt. opt.
this salt is fixed in a gentle fire, and sublimes in a great
ont. arbuthnot on aliments.
subli’mely. adv. [from sublime.] loftily; grandly.
in english lays, and all sublimely great,
donnee
denham.
thy homer charms with all his ancient heat. parnel.
fustian's so sublimely bad;
it is not poetry, but prose run mad. pope.
subli'meness. n. s. [sublimitas, lat.] the same as subli-
mit v. -
sorry. n: s [from sublime; fablimite, fr. sublimitas, lat.]
1. height of place; local elevation.
2. height of nature ; excellence.
as religion looketh upon him who in majesty and power
is infinite, as we ought we account not of it, unless we esteem
it even according to that very height of excellency which our
hearts conceive, when divine sublimity itself is rightly confi-
dered. - hooker.
in respea of god's incomprehensible sublimity and purity,
this is also true, that god is neither a mind nor a spirit like
other spirits, nor a light such as can be discerned. raleigh.
3. loftiness of style or sentiment,
milton's distinguishing excellence lies in the sublimity of his
thoughts, in the greatness of which he triumphs over all the
poets, modern and ancient, homer only excepted. addison.
subli'ngual. adj. [sublingual, french; sub and lingwa, lat.]
placed under the tongue. -
those subliming humours should be intercepted, before they
mount to the head, by sublingual pills.
arvey.
sublu'n ar. ;
adj. [sublunaire, fr. sub and luna, latin.) si-
su'blun ary. § tuated beneath the moon; earthly; terrestrial;
of this world.
dull sublunary lovers' love,
whose soul is sense, cannot admit
of absence, 'cause it doth remove
the thing which elemented it. donne.
night measur'd, with her shadowy cone,
half way up hill this vast sublunar vault. milton.
through seas of knowledge we our course advance,
discov'ring still new worlds of ignorance;
and these discov'ries make us all confess
that sublunary science is but guess. denham.
the celestial bodies above the moon being not subject to
chance, remained in perpetual order, while all things subunay
are subject to change. dryden's dufroshy.
ovid had warn’d her to beware
of strolling gods, whose usual trade is,
under pretence of taking air,
to pick up sublunary ladies.
the fair philosopher to rowley flies,
where in a box the whole creation lies;
she sees the planets in their turns advance;
and scorns, poitier, this sublunary dance. young.
su’bmarine. adj. [sub and mare.] lying or acting under the
sea.
this contrivance may seem difficult, because these subma-
rine navigators will want winds and tides for motion, and the
fight of the heavens for direetion. j/ilkins.
not only the herbaceous and woody submarine plants, but
also the lithophyta, affect this manner of growing, as i ob-
served in corals. ray on the creation.
to subme’rge. v. a. [submerger, fr. submerge, lat..] to
swift.
drown; to put under water.
so half my egypt were submerg’d and made
a cistern for scal’d snakes. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
subme’rsion... n. s. [submersion, fr. from submersus, latin.]
the aet of drowning ; state of being drowned.
the great atlantick island is mentioned in plato's timaeus,
almost contiguous to the western parts of spain and africa,
yet wholly swallowed up by that ocean; which, if true, might
afford a passage from africa to america by land before that
submersion. hale's origin of mankind.
to submi'nister. v. a. [subministro, latin..] to sup-
to subm1'n1st rate. } ply; to afford. a word not much in
use.
some things have been discovered, not only by the industry
of mankind, but even the inferiour animals have subminisłrid
unto man the invention of manythings, natural, artificial,
and medicinal. hale's origin of mankind.
nothing subministrates apter matter to be converted into
pestilent seminaries, than steams of nasty folks. harvey.
to suemi'niste r. v. n. to subserve.
paffions, as fire and water, are good servants, but bad mas.
ters, and subminister to the best and worst purposes. l'estr.
submi’ss. adj. [from submisus, lat..] humble ; submissive;
obsequious.
king james, mollified by the bishop's submis; and eloquent
letters, wrote back, that though he were in part moved by his
letters, yet he should not be fully satisfied except he spake
with him. bacon's henry vii.
nearer his presence, adam, though not aw’d.
yet with submis approach, and reverence meek,
as to a superior nature, bowed low. milton’s par. loft.
rejoicing, but with awe,
in adoration at his feet i fell
submiss : he rear'd me. milton,
submission... n.s.. [soumission, fr. from shbmisus, latin.]
1. delivery of himself to the power of another.
submission, dauphin 'tis a mere french word,
we english warriors wot not what it means. shakespeare.
2. acknowledgement
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u e
s u b
2. acknowledgment of inseriority or dependance; humble or
suppliant behaviour.
in all submission and humility,
york doth present himself unto your highness. shakespeare.
great prince, by that submission you'll gain more
than e'er your haughty courage won before. halifax.
acknowledginent of a fault; confession of errour.
3. be not as extreme in softon, as in offence. shakes care.
4. onsequousness: resignation; obedience. -
no duty in religion is more justly required by god almigh-
ty, than a perfect jomon to his will in all things. temple.
sufi missive: ado. [/acous, lat.] humble; testifying sub-
million or inferiority.
on what so move message art thou sent? shakespeare. '
her at his fee ou on joe in distress
he thus with peaceful words uprais'd. milton,
sudden form the golden throne,
with a su. m.o.o step. i hatic d own ;
the glowing garland from my hair i took,
love in my heart, obedience in my look. prizr.
$ormi'ss:w fly. 6 o'. [sion submissive..] humbly; with con-
feifion of interiority.
the ord, less, *
soft in her tone, submissio replies. dryon's aneid.
but speech ev'n there sonovel, withdraws
from rights of subjects, and the poor man's cause: {
then pompous silence reigns, and stills the noisy laws.
p pe.
foo'ssive sess. m. s. stron submissive..] humility; conses.
fien of faolt, or interiority.
if thou sin in wine and war tonness,
boast not thereof, nor make thy shame thy glory;
frailty gots pardon by sabonistv’ mess, -
but he that boats, shuts that out of his sory :
he makes fiat war with god, and doth defy,
with his poor clod of earth, the spacious sky. her her?,
scott'ssly. a.k.. [from foomis.j. humbly; with submission.
hunity consists, not in wearing mean cloaths, and going
softov and suori,y, but in mean opinion of thvielf. i aylor.
7, submi f. v. a. [own-tre, fr. submitto, latin.]
1. to let down ; to folk.
sometimes the hill somit; itself a while
in son il desceets, which do its height beguile,
and sometimes mounts, but so as billows play,
woole rise not hinders, but makes short our way. dryden.
- neptune stood,
with all his hosis of waters at command,
beneath them to somit th' officious flood,
and with his tride… shov'd them off the sand. dryden.
1. to subject; to reign without resistance to authority.
return to thy mistres, and submit thyself under her hands.
gen. xvi. 9.
christian peerlesomit themselves to conformable observance
cf the lawful and religious constitutions of their spirit tal
rulers. // hite.
will ye somit your neck, and chuse to bend -
the supple one- ? milton.
3. to leave to discretion; to refer to judgment.
whether the condition of the clergy be able to bear a heavy
borden, is sobrmitted to the house. swift.
t, suso r. v. n. to be subject; to acquiesce in the autho-
rity of another; to yield.
to thy husband's will
thine shill submit : he over thee shall rule. milton.
our religion requires from us, not only to sorego pleasure,
but to submit to pain, disgrace, and even death. rogers.
sunwu's riple. m. s. a submitotiple number or nuantity, is
that which is contained in another number, a certain number
of times exactly: thus 3 is submultiple of 21, as being coo-
tained in it seven times exactly. harris.
sunocra’, e. adj. isab and octavus, lat, and ouple..] con-
suboctuple. ; taining one part of cight. - -
as one of these under pulleys abates half of that heaviness
of the weight, and causes the power to be in a subduple pro:
portion, so two of them abate half of that which remains, and
cause a subquad, upie proportion, three * subsextuple, four 3.
fool. // sons'; if thematical magick.
haj they creasd the cube of a foot for their principal con-
cave, and geometrically taken its subolave, the congio, from
the cube of half a foot, they would have divided the con-
gius into eight parts, each of which would have been regu-
larly the coe of a quarter foot, their well-known pain :
this is the course taken for our gallon, which has the pint
for is so love. aft's ahnst an coins.
soo's is acy. . . . [from sordinate.] sordinary is the
st. poor of nancy. } proper and analogical word.
1, the state of being subject. - . . .
-- pursuing the imagination through all its extravagancies, so
no improper method of correcting, and bringing it to act in
johord roy to reason. spectator.
r. series of subordination. - . . .
the so-dimany of the government changing hands so
vol. ii.
often, mal.
terests “s an unsteadiness in the pursuit of the publick iii-
o: temple:
subq rdinate, aff, [sh and ordinatus, emp
- - latin.
1. inferiour in order; in nature: j
- ; in dignity or power.
it was subordinate, not enslaved to the understanding ; not
as a servant to a master,
- but as a queen to her king, who ac-
knowledges 2. subjection, yet o a majesty. g- south.
whether dark presages of the night proceed from any latent
power of the soul, during her abstraction, or from any opera-
tion of sabordinate spirits, has been a dispute. addison.
2. descending in a regular series. **
the two armies were assigned to the leading of two gene-
rals, rather courtiers than martial men, yet assisted with sub-
ordinate commanders of great experience. bacon,
his next subordinate
awak'ning, thus to him in secret spake.
these carry such plain characters of disagreem
that the several kinds and salardinate species of each are easily
distinguished. - - woodward.
to stoo rdinate. v. a. isob and ordino, latin.] to range
under another. not in use, but proper and elegant. -
if i have subordinated picture and sculpture to architeaure
as their mistress, so there are other inferior arts subordinate to
them. - //otton,
s" poss pis a tely. adv. [from subordinate.]. in a series regu-
larly descending. - -
it being the highest step of ill, to which all others subordi-
mately tend, one would think it could be capable of no im-
provement. o decay of piety.
su popis arios. n. s. [ soardination, fr. from subordinate.]
1. "i he state of being inferior to another.
nor can a council national decide,
but with subordination to her guide.
2. a series regularly descending. -
the natural creatures having a local subordination, the ra-
tional having a political, and sometimes a sacred. holyday.
3. place of rank. * * *
if we would suppose a ministry, where every fingle person
was of dittinguished piety, and all great officers of state and
law diligent in chuang persons, who in their several subordi-
nations would be obliged to follow the examples of their supe-
riors, the empire of irreligion would be soon destroyed. swift,
to sc born. v. a. [saorner, fr. suborno, latin.]. -- -
1. to procure privately ; to procure by secret collusion. .
his judges were the self-same men by whom his accusers
were salormed. ... hooker.
fond wretch thou know'st not what thou speak'il,
or else thou art so born'd against his honour - … --
in hateful practice. - - - shakespeare.
reason may meet - - - - -
some specious object, by the foe saborn'd? . . . . .
and fall into deception. - - - alfiltons
his artful bosom heaves dissembl’d sighs; • *
and tears saborn'd fall dropping from his eyes. prior.
2. to procure by indirect means.
- behold : *
those who by ling'ring sickness lose their breath, -
and those who by despair suborn their death: ... dryden.
suporna’rson. n.s. [subarnation, fr. from suborn.] the crime
of procuring any to do a bad action. ** **
thomas earl of desmond was, through false subornation
of the queen of edward iv. brought to his death at tredagh
most unjustly. - - spenser's ireland.
you set the crown - --- * *
upon the head of this forgetful man, . . . . .”
and for his sake wear the detested blot -
of murd’rous suharnation. shakesh. hen. iv.
the fear of punishment in this life will preserve men from
few vices, since some of the blackest often prove the surest
steps to favour; such as ingratitude, hypocrisy, treachery, and
suharnation. - swift.
subo'o. ner. m. s. [ suborneur, fr. from suborn.) one that
procures a bad action to be done.
scopoe's a. n.s. isab and pena, latin.] ajwrit command-
ing attendance in a court under a penalty.
sunog adru'ple. adj. [sub and quadruple.j. containing one
part of four. --&gt; * - - - - - o
as one of these under pulleys abates half of that heaviness
the weight hath in itself, and causes the power to be in a
subduple proportion unto it, so two of them abate half of
that which remains, and cause a subquadruple proportion.
//ilkins's mathematical magick.
schooist gople. adj. isab and quintuple..] containing one
part of five. - -
' ' if unto the lower pulley there were added another, then
the power would be unto the weight in a subquintuple popor-
tion. wilkins's math. magick.
subsector. n.s.. [sub and reim, j the rector's vicege-
- rent.
he was chosen subreclor of the college. jwalton.
supreoption. n.s.. [subreption, fr. subroptus, lat.] the act of
obtaining a favour by surprise or unfair representation: dic7.
25 p subreptitiqu.s.
- milton.
ent braffinity,
-
* * dryden.
* -
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u b
s u b
sub rept "rious, adj. [surreptice, fr. surreptitius, lat.] frau-
dulently obtained from a superior, by concealing some truth,
which would have prevented the grant. bailey.
to su'brog at e. v. a... [subrogo, lat.] see surroc ate.
to subscri'be. v.a. [souscrire, fr. subscribo, lat.] -
1. to give consent to, by underwriting the name.
they united by subscribing a covenant, which they pre-
tended to be no other than had been subscribed in the reign of
king james, and that his majesty himself had subscribed it;
by which imposition people of all degrees engaged themselves
in it. clarendon.
the reader sees the names of those persons by whom this
letter is subscribed. addison.
2. to attest by writing the name.
their particular testimony ought to be better credited, than
some other subscribed with an hundred hands. whitgifte.
3. to submit. not used.
... the king gone to-night ! subscrib'd his pow'r
confin'd to exhibition all is gone. shakespeare.
to subscr1'be. v. n. * *
1. to give consent.
osius, with whose hand the nicene creed was set down,
and framed for the whole christian world to subscribe unto, so
far yielded in the end, as even with the same hand to ratify the
- arrians confession. hooker.
advise thee what is to be done,
, and we will all subscribe to thy advice. shakespeare.
if wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,
thou should'st have said, go porter, turn the key,
all cruels else subscrib'd. - shakespeare's king lear.
so spake much humbled eve; but fate -
subscrib'd not : nature first gave signs, impress'd *
. . on bird, beast, air. milton's par. loft.
2. to promise a stipulated sum for the promotion of any under-
taking. -
son. m. s. [from subscriptio, lat.]
1. one who subscribes.
2. one who contributes to any undertaking.
let a pamphlet come out upon a demand in a proper junc-
ture, every one of the party who can spare a shilling shall be a
subscriber. swift.
subscription. n. s. [from subscriptio, lat.]
i. any thing underwritten.
- the man asked, are ye christians ? we answered we were;
fearing the less because of the cross we had seen in the subscrip-
... tion. bacon.
2. consent or attestation given by underwriting the name.
3. the aet or state of contributing to any undertaking.
- the work he ply'd;
stocks and subscriptions pour on ev'ry fide. pope.
south-sea subscriptions take who please,
, leave me but liberty. pope.
4. submission; obedience. . not in use.
. i tax not you, you elements, with unkindness;
i never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,
you owe me no subscription. shakesp. king lear.
subse’ction. n.s.. [sub and sediio, lat..] a subdivision of a
larger se&amp;tion into a lesser. a se&amp;tion of a se&amp;tion. dic7.
subsectitive. adj. [from subsequor.] following in train.
subseptu'ple. adj. [sub and septuplus, lat..] containing one
of seven parts. . .
if unto this lower pully there were added another, then the
power would be unto the weight in a subquintuple proportion;
if a third, a subseptuple. wilkins.
su’bsequence. n.s.. [from subsequor, lat..] the state of fol-
lowing ; not precedence.
. by this faculty we can take notice of the order of prece-
dence and subsequence in which they are past. grew.
subsequent. adj. [subsequent, fr. subsequens, lat..] this
word is improperly pronounced long in the second syllable by
shakespeare.] following in train; not preceding.
in such indexes, although small pricks
to their subsequent volumes, there is seen
the baby figure of the giant mass
of things to come, at large.
shakespeare's troilus and crossida.
the subsequent words come on before the precedent vanish.
*
bacon.
why does each consenting sign
with prudent harmony combine
in turns to move, and subsequent appear
to gird the globe and regulate the year * prior.
this article is introduced as subsequent to the treaty of
munster, made about 1648, when england was in the utmost
confusion. - * . " to of swift.
subsequent ly. adv. [from subsequent.] not so as to go be-
fore ; so as to follow in train. - -
to men in governing most things fall out accidentally, and
come not into any compliance with their preconceived ends ;
but they are forced to comply subsequently, and to strike in
with things as they fall out, by postliminious after-applica-
tions of them to their purposes. * -- * * south.
to subsetve. v. a. [subservia, lat.] to serve in s,
dination; to serve instrumentally. -
not made to rule, .
but to subserve where wisdom bears command. moon.
it is a greater credit to know the ways of captivving o
ture, and making her subserve our purposes, thri, , , ,
bor.
- - - - .4c
learned all the intrigues of policy. to anoi..
the memory hath no special part of the brai, o, e. '0
its own service, but uses all those parts which sub . . . jur.
sations, as well as our thinking powers. -" -
subse’rv1 en ce. } m. s. [from subserve.j
subse'rv1ency. use, or operation.
wicked spirits may by their cunning, carry farther in a
seeming confederacy or subservien y to the designs of a good
angel. - - - - djden.
. . there is an immediate and agi, sosorvince of the soils.
the empire of the soul. bale's orog - of silancina.
we cannot look upon the body, wherein appells o much
fitness, use, and subserviency to infinite functions, any other-
wise than as the effect of contrivance. bently
there is a regular subordination and subfrviency amon.
the parts to beneficial ends. cheyne's philo ophical pinil -
subse'rvient. adj. [subserviens, lat..] subordinate; inst.
mentally useful. -
hammond had an incredible dexterity, scarce ever readin
anything which he did not make subservient in one kind .
other. feil.
philosophers and common heathens believed one god, to
whom all things are referred; but under this god they wo.
shipped many inferior and subservient gods. stillingfleet.
these ranks of creatures are subservient one to another
and the most of them serviceable to man. r.
while awake, we feel none of those motions continuals
made in the disposal of the corporeal principles subservient her.
111. grew.
sense is subservient unto fancy, fancy unto intelle&amp;t. §.
we are not to confider the world as the body of god; he
is an uniform being, void of organs, members or parts, and
they are his creatures subordinate to him, and subservient to
his will. newton's optiki,
most criticks, fond of some subservient art,
still make the whole depend upon a part;
they talk of principles, but notions prize,
and all to one lov'd folly sacrifice. pope.
subse’ztuple. adj. [sub and sextuplus, lat.] containing one
part of six. o
one of these under pullies abates half of that heaviness the
weight hath, and causes the power to be in a subduple propor-
tion unto it, two of them a subquadruple proportion, three a
subsextuple. //ilkins' aa thematical mogico.
to subsi le. v. n. [subsido, lat.] to sink; to tend down.
wards. it is commonly used of one part of a compound,
finking in the whole. pope has used it rather improperly.
he shook the sacred honours of his head
with terror trembled heav'n's subsiding hill,
and from his shaken curls ambrosial dews distill, drydon.
now jove suspends his golden scales in air,
weighs the mens wits against the lady's hair;
the doubtful beam long nods from side to side:
at length the wits mount up, the hairs subside. pope.
subs1'dence. } n-s: [from subside.] the aet of sinking; ten-
subs i'dency. dency downward.
this gradual subsidency of the abyss would take up a con-
siderable time. burnet's theory.
this miscellany of bodies being determined to subsidence
merely by their different specifick gravities, all those which
had the same gravity subsided at the same time. j%odward.
by the alternate motion of those air-bladders, whose sur-
faces are by turns freed from mutual contaet, and by a sudden
subsidence meet again by the ingress and egress of the air, the
liquor is still farther attenuated. arbuthnat.
suns, piary, adj. [subsidiaire, fr. subsidiarius, lat. from sub-
jidy..] assistant; brought in aid. -
bitter substances burn the blood, and are a sort of sal/idiary
gall. arbuthnot on aliments.
su'bsidy. m. s. [subside, fr. softdium, lat..] aid, com-
monly such as is given in money. *
they advised the king to send speedy aids, and with much
j” so
instrumental ionos,
alacrity granted a great rate of subsidy. bacon.
'tis all the subsidy the present age can raise. dryden.
it is a celebrated notion of a patriot, that a house of com-
mons should never grant such subsidies as give no pain to the
people, left the nation should acquiesce under a burden they
did not feel." * * - - - - addison.
to subs, gn., v. a...[sulsigno, lat.j. to fign under.
neither have they seen any dced before the conquest, but
subsgned with crosses and single names without surnames.
camden.
to subsist. v. n. [sulffer, fr. soft, lat.]
1. to be ; to have existence. - *
2. to continue; to retain the present state or condition.
film we soft, but possible to swerve. - milton.
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u b
the very foundation was removed, and it was a moral im-
possibility that the republick could subsist any longer. swift.
3. to have means of living ; to be maintained.
he shone so powerfully upon me, that like the heat of a
russian summer, he ripened the fruits of poetry in a cold cli-
mate, and gave me wherewithal to suft in the long winter
which succeeded. dryden.
let us remember those that want necessaries, as we our-
selves should have desired to be remembred, had it been our
sad lot to subsist on other mens charity. atterbury.
4. to inhere; to have existence by means of something else.
though the general natures of these qualities are sufficiently
distant from one another, yet when they come to subsis? in par-
ticulars, and to be clothed with several accidents, then the
discernment is not so easy. south.
subsi'st ence, or sub/ftency. m. s. [sul/jiance, fr. from sub-
off.
.# being.
the flesh and the conjunction of the flesh with god began
both at one instant, his making and taking to himself our flesh
was but one act; so that in christ there is no personal subs/i-
once but one, and that from everlasting. hooker.
we know as little how the union is dissolved, that is the
chain of these differing subsistencies that compound us, as how
it first comm need. glanville.
not only the things had sal/jfence, but the very images were
of some creatures existing. stillingfieet.
2. competence; means of supporting life.
his viceroy coul,' only propose to himself a comfortable sub-
since out of the plunder of his province. addison.
3. inserence in tomething else.
sis ent, adj. [sas;’ens, lat.]
1. having real being.
such as deny spirits subsident without bodies, will with dif-
ficulty affirm the separate existence of their own.
2. inherent.
these qualities are not subslent in those bodies, but are
operations of fancy begotten in something else. bentley.
substance. m. s. [/ot/?ance, fr. sublantia, lat.]
1. being; something existing ; something of which we can say
that it is.
since then the soul works by herself alone,
springs not from sense, nor humours well agreeing,
her nature is peculiar, and her own ;
brown.
she is a substance, and a perfest being. davies.
the strength of gods,
and this empyreal sal/lance cannot fail." milton.
2. that which supports accidents.
what creatures there inhabit, of what mold,
and st/lance o milton.
every being is confidered as subsisting in and by itself, and
then it is called a subs?ance ; or it subsists in and by another,
and then it is called a mode or manner of being. // atts.
. the essential part.
it will serve our turn to comprehend the sub/?ance, without
confining ourselves to scrupulous exactness in form. digby.
this edition is the same in sal/lance with the latin. burn.
they are the best epitomes, and let you see with one cast of
the eye the sal/?ance of a hundred pages. addison.
4. something real, not imaginary ; something solid, not empty.
shadows to-night
have struck more terror to the soul of richard,
than can the sub/?ance of ten thousand soldiers
arm'd in proof and led by shallow richmond. shakes eare.
he the future evil shall no less
in apprehension than in substance feel. milton.
heroick virtue did his actions guide,
and he the substance, not th' appearance chose :
to rescue one such friend be took more pride,
than to destroy whole thousands of such foes. dryd, n.
god is no longer to be worshipped and believed in as a god
foreshewing and assuring by types, but as a god who has per-
formed the substance of what he promised.
5. body; corporeal nature. -
between the parts of opake and coloured bodies are many
spaces, either cmpty or replenished with mediums of other
densities; as water between the tinging corpuscles wherewith
any liquor is impregnated, air between the aqueous globules
that constitute clouds or mists, and for the most part spaces
void of both air and water; but yet perhaps not wholly void
of all sibiance between the parts of hard bodies. newton.
the qualities of plants are more various than those of ani-
mal substan.es. ari uthnot on alimont.
there may be a great and constant cough, with an ex-
traordinary discharge of flegmatick matter, while, notwith-
#anding the sittance of the lungs remains sound. bla.onore.
6, wealth ; means of life.
he hath eaten me out of house and home, and hath put all
my substance into that fat beliy of his, but i will have some of
it out again. shakspeare's henry iv.
we are destroying many thousand lives, and exhausting
our softance, but not for our own interest. swift.
nejo 11.
s u b.
supera'ntial. adi. ss. manti
1. real; actually #so tielle, fr. from substance.]
if this *heist would have his chance to be a real and sub-
stantial *got, he is more stupid than the vulgar. bentley.
2. true; solid; real; not merely seeming.
9 belled blessed nights i am joid
*ing in night, all this is but a dream; &gt;
too flattering sweet to be substantial,
o . . being, i lent
ut of my side to thec o
s...}. , nearest my heart,
if happiness be a substantial good,
not fram'd of accidents, nor subject to them
i err'd to seek it in a blind revenge. 2
- time, as a river, hath brought down to us what
light and superficial, while things more solid and jobstantial
have been immersed. cio.
the difference betwixt the empty vanity of ostentain, and
... the substantial ornaments of virtue. 7
shakspeare,
milton;
denham.
is more
- - - l’estrange.
qbservations are the only sure grounds whereon §:
lasting and substantial philosophy. j/oodward.
a solid and substantial greatness of soul, looks down with
neglect on the censures and applauses of the multitude.
- - addison.
this useful, charitable, humble employment of yourselves,
is what i recommend to you with greatest earnestness, as being
a substantial part of a wise and pious life.
- law.
3. corporeal; material.
now shine these planets with substantial rays?
does innate lustre gild their measur'd days prior.
the sun appears flat like a plate of filver, the moon as big
as the sun, and the rainbow a large sal/fantial arch in the sky,
all which are gross falshoods.
j/atts.
4. strong; stout; bulky.
sub/?antial doors,
cross-barr'd and bolted fast, fear no assault. milton.
5. responsible; moderately wealthy; possessed of substance.
trials of crimes and titles of right shall be made by verdict
of a jury, chosen out of the honest and most substantial free-
holders. sponser on ireland.
the merchants, and substantial citizens, cannot make up
more than a hundred thousand families. addison on the isar.
subst:ant i als. n. s. [without singular.] essential parts.
although a custom introduced against the sobstantials of an
appeal be not valid, as that it should not be appealed to a su-
perior, but to an inferior judge, yet a custom may be intro-
duced against the accidentals of an appeal. aylift's pa, ergon.
substa no. 1a(lity. n.s. [from substantial.]
1. the state of real existence,
2. corporcity; materiality.
body cannot act on any thing but by motion; motion can-
not be received but by quantity and matter: the soul is a
stranger to such gross sul/antiality, and owns nothing of these.
glanville's s. psis.
sunst a’ntially. adv. [from substantial.]
1. in manner of a substance; with reality of existence.
in him his father shone substantially express'd.
2. strongly; solidly.
having so substantially provided for the north, they promised
themselves they should end the war that summer. clarendon.
3. truly; solidly; really; with fixed purpose.
the laws of this religion would make men, if they would
truly observe them, sul/fantially religious towards god, chase
and temperate. till son.
4. with competent wealth.
subst antialn ess. m. s. [from sil/?artial.]
1. the state of being substantial.
2. firmness; strength; power of holding or lasting.
when sol/antiainess combineth with delightfulness, fulness
with fineness, how can the language which consisteth of these
sound other than most full of sweetness f camden’s remains.
in degree of substantialn's next above the dorique, sustain-
ing the third, and adorning the second story. iłotor.
to subst a’nt1a re. v. a. [from substance.) to make to exist.
the accidental of any act is said to be whatever advenes to
the aet itself already substantiated. /liffe's parengon.
su'est ant1 v f. n.f. [ substantif, fr. substantivum, lat.) a
noun betokening the thing, not a quality.
claudian perpetually closes his sense at the end of a verse,
commonly called golden, or two substantives and two adjec-
tives with a verb betwoxt them to keep the peace. dryden.
supsta’nt 1 v f. aaj. substantivus, lat.]
1. solid; depending only on itself. not in use.
he considered how sufficient and sul/lantive this land was to
maintain itself, without any aid of the foreigner. pa:n.
2. betokening existence.
one is obliged to join many particulars in one proposition,
because the repetition of the sal/lantive verb would be tedious.
. . a futhnot,
surst a’ntively. cov. [from soy?artive..] as a substantive.
to su'bs ru's e. v. a. s. su"/iitter, fr. suisittitus, fom su! and
/fatuo, lat.) to put in the place of another. i
in
milton.
6.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u b
s u b
in the original designs of speaking, a man can substitute
none for them that can equally conduce to his honour.
government of the tongue.
if a swarthy tongue
is underneath his humid palate hung,
reject him then, and substitute another. dryden.
some few verses are inserted or sal/lituted in the room of
others. congreve.
su'estitute. n.s.. [sib/itut, fr. from the verb.]
1. one placed by another to at with delegated power.
were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy 2
to him and his substitutes. shakespeare.
you've taken up,
under the counterfeited zeal of god,
the subjects of his sabstitute, my father,
and here upswarm'd them. shakes. henry iv.
hast thou not made me here thy substitute,
and these inferior far beneath me set milton.
providence delegates to the supreme magistrate the same
power for the good of men, which that supreme magistrate
transfers to those several substitutes who act under him. addis.
2. it is used likewise for things; as, one medicine is a substitute
for another.
substitution. m. s. s substitution, fr. from substitute.] the
act of placing any person or thing in the room of another ; the
state of being placed in the room of another.
he did believe
he was the duke, from subs?itution,
and executing th’ outward face of royalty,
with all prerogative. shakeshcare's tempes?.
nor sal, sulphur, or mercury can be separated from any
perfect metals; for every part, so separated, may easily be re-
duced into perfoet metal without substitution of that which
chymists imagine to be wanting. bacon’s phys. rem.
to substract. v. a. s. subtraho, lat. sousiracion, fr.]
1. to take away part from the whole. -
2. to take one number from another.
substra'cs son. n.s. [suffraire, soul/?raftion, fr.]
1. the aet of taking away part from the whole.
i cannot call this piece tuily's nor my own, being much
altered not only by the change of the style, but by addition
and substratiion, denham.
2. [in arithmetick.] the taking of a lesser number out of a
greater of like kind, whereby to find out a third number,
being or declaring the inequality, excess, or difference be-
tween the numbers given. cocker’s arithmetick.
subst ru’ction. m. s. [sub/iruclio, from sub and siruo, latin.]
underbuilding.
to found our habitation firmly, examine the bed of earth
upon which we build, and then the underfillings, or substruc-
tion, as the ancients called it. j/otton's archite&amp;ure.
substylar. adj. [sub and stylus.] subsylar line is, in dialing,
a right line, whereon the gnomon or style of a dial is erected
at right angles with the plane. ixic7.
erect the style perpendicularly over the subsoilar line, so as
to make an angle with the dial-plane equal to the elevation of
the pole of your place. amoxon's mech. exer.
subsu'lt ive. { adj. [sulfillus, lat.] bounding; moving by
5, 2
su psu'lto ry. starts.
subsu'lt or ily. adv. [from subsidtory.] in a bounding man-
ner; by fits; by starts. -
the spirits spread even, and move not subsultorily; for that
will make the parts close and pliant. bacon's nat. hiss.
subt a’ng ent. n.s. in any curve, is the line which deter-
mines the intersection of the tangent in the axis pions;
ic.
to subte'nd. v. a. [sub and tendo, lat..] to be extended under.
in rectangles and triangles the square, which is made of the
side that subtendeth the right angle, is equal to the squares
which are made of the fides containing the right angle. brown.
from aries rightways draw a line, to end
in the same round, and let that line subtend
an equal triangle: now since the lines
must three times touch the round, and meet three signs,
where e'er they meet in angles, those are trines. creech.
subte'nse. n. s. [sah and tensus, lat.] the chord of an arch.
su’bi er. [latin.] in composition, signifies under.
so adj. [subterfluo, lat..] running under.
su bterfu’ge. m. s. [subterfuge, fr. subter and fugio, lat.] a
shift ; an evasion ; a trick.
the king cared not for subterfuges, but would stand envy,
and appear in any thing that was to his mind. bacon.
notwithstanding all their fly subterfuges and studied evasions,
yet the product of all their endeavours is but as the birth of
the labouring mountains, wind and emptiness. glanv.
affect not little shifts and subterfages to avoid the force of
an argument. - //atts.
sub'r erra neal. y aii. s. sub and terra, lat. sufferraine, fr.
subterra nean. subterranean or subterraneous is the word
su(bterra neous. now used.] lying under the earth;
su(bterrany. placed below the surface."
metals are wholly subterrany, whereas plants are part above
earth, and part under. bacon's natural history
in subterranies, as the fathers of their tribes, are brimso
and mercury. bacon's natural history
the force / -
of subterranean wind transports a hill
torn from pelorus, or the shatter'd side
of thund'ring ætna, whose combustible
and fuel'd entrails thence conceiving fire,
sublim’d with mineral fury, aid the winds. milion,
alteration proceeded from the change made in the neig.
bouring subterraneal parts by that great conflagration, bole.
tell by what paths, what subterranean ways,
back to the fountain's head the sea conveys
the refluent rivers. blackmore.
let my soft minutes glide obscurely on,
like subterraneous streams, unheard, unknown. norris,
this subterraneous passage was not at first designed so much
for a highway as for a quarry. addison.
rous’d within the subterranean world,
. th’ expanding earthquake unresisted shakes
aspiring cities. o thomson,
subterranity. m. s. [sub and terra, lat.] a place use:
ground. not in use.
we commonly consider subterranities not in contemplations
sufficiently respective unto the creation. brown.
su'btile. adj. [subtile, fr. fabtilis, lat. this word is often
written subtle.] -
1. thin ; not dense; not gross.
from his eyes the fleeting fair
retir’d, like subtle smoke dissolv’d in air. dryden's georg.
deny des cart his subtile matter,
you leave him neither fire nor water. prior.
is not the heat conveyed through the vacuum by the vibra-
tions of a much subtiler medium than air, which, after the air
was drawn out, remained in the vacuum ? newton's opt.
2. nice; fine; delicate; not coarse,
but of the clock which in our breasts we bear,
the subtile motions we forget the while.
thou only know'st her nature, and her pow'rs;
her subtile form thou only can'st define.
i do distinguish plain
each subtile line of her immortal face.
3. piercing; acute.
pass we the slow disease and subtile pain,
which our weak frame is destin’d to sustain;
the cruel stone, the cold catarrh. prior.
4. cunning ; artful , sly; subdolous. in this sense it is now
commonly written subtle. milton seems to have both. [see
subtle.]
arrius, a priest in the church of alexandria, a subtile witted
and a marvellous fair spoken man, was discontented that one
should be placed before him in honour, whose superior he
thought himself in desert, because through envy and stomach
prone unto contradistion. hooker.
think you this york
was not incensed by his subtle mother,
to taunt and scorn you ? shakesp. richard iii.
o subtile love, a thousand wiles thou hast
by humble suit, by service, or by hire,
to win a maiden's hold. fairfax.
a woman, an harlot and subtile of heart. prov. vii. 10.
nor thou his malice, and false guile, contemn:
subtile he needs must be, who could seduce
angels. milton's paradis. loft.
5. deceitful.
like a bowl upon a subtle ground,
i’ve tumbled past the throw.
6. refined; acute beyond necessity.
things remote from use, obscure and subtle.
su'btilely. adv. [from sultile.]
1. in a subtile manner; thinly; not densely.
2. finely; not grossly.
the constitution of the air appeareth more subtilly by worms
in oak-apples than to the sense of man. bacon.
in these plaisters the stone should not be too subtilely pow-
dered ; for it will better manifest its attraction in more sen-
fible dimensions. brown’s pulgar errours.
the opakest bodies, if subtilely divided, as metals dissolved
in acid menstruums, become perfectly transparent. newton.
3. artfully ; cunningly.
by granting this, add the reputation of loving the truth
fincerely to that of having been able to oppose it sotilely. boyle.
others have sought to ease themselves of affliction by dis-
puting subtily against it, and pertinaciously maintaining that
afflictions are no real evils. tillotson's sermoni.
su'btileness. m. s. [from subtile.]
1. fineness; rareness.
2. cunning; artfulness.
to subt1'liat e. v. a. [from saltil..] to make thin.
davies.
davies.
davies.
shakesh. coriolanus.
milton.
a very dry and warm or subtiliating air opens the surface of
harvey on the plague.
2. su bo iliatiox.
the earth.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u b
s u c
o
o
subtilia’tion, n.s.. [subtiliation, fr. from subtiliate.] the
act of making thin.
by subtiliation and rarefaction the oil contained in grapes, if
distilled before it be fermented, becomes spirit of wine. boyle.
su'btilty. m. s. [subtilite, fr. from subtile.]
1. thinness; fineness; exility of parts.
the subtities of particular sounds may pass through small
crannies not confused, but its magnity not so well. bacon.
how shall we this union well express
nought ties the soul, her subtity is such. davies.
the corporcity of all bodies being the same, and saltity in
all bodies being essentially the same thing, could any body by
subtilty become vital, then any degree of subtily would produce
some degree of life. grew’s cosmol.
bodies the more of kin they are to spirit in subtity and re-
finement, the more spreading and self-diffusive are they. norris.
2. nicety; exility.
whatsoever is invisible, in respe&amp;t of the fineness of the
body, or su'tily of the motion, is little enquired. bacon.
3. refinement; too much acuteness.
you prefer the reputation of candour before that of subtily.
boyle.
intelligible discourses are spoiled by too much subtity in nice
divisions. locke.
greece did at length a learned race produce,
who needful science mock'd, and arts of use; o
mankind with idle suftisties embroil,
and fashion systems with romantick toil. blackmore.
they give method, and shed subtilty upon their author. bak.
4. cunning; artifice; slyness.
- finding force now faint to be,
he thought grey hairs afforded subtilty. sidney.
the rudencis and barbarity of savage indians knows not so
perfectly to hate all virtues as some mens subtity. k. charles.
sleights proceeding -
as from his wit and native subtlety. a silion.
subtilization. m. s. [from subtilize j -
1. subtilization is making any thing so volatile as to rise readily
in steam or vapour. - - quincy.
fluids have their resistances proportional to their densities,
so that no subtilization, division of parts, or refining can alter
these resistances. chyne's phil. princ.
2. refinement; superfluous acuteness. - *
to su bt1l17 e. v. a. [subtilizer, fr. from sobtile j
1. to make thin; to make less gross or coarse.
chyle, being mixed with the choler and pancreatick juices,
is further subtilized, and rendered so fluid and penetrant, that
the thinner and finer part easily finds way in at the streight ori-
fices of the lacteous veins. ray on the creation.
body cannot be vital; for if it be, then is it so either as
subtilized or organized, moved or endowed with life. grew.
2. to refine; to spin into useless niceties.
the most obvious verity is subtilized into niceties, and spun
into a thread indiscernible by common opticks. glanville.
to subtil1(z e. v. m. to talk with too much refinement.
qualities and moods some modern philosophers have shti-
lized on. - digby on bodies.
su’bt le. adj. [written often for subtile, especially in the sense
of cunning.] sly ; artful; cunning.
some subtle headed fellow will put some quirk, or devise
some evasion, whereof the rest will take hold. sponsor.
shall we think the subtle witted french
conj'rers and forc’rers, that, afraid of him,
by magick verse have thus contriv'd his end ?
shakespeare's henry vi.
the serpent, sobtles' beast of all the field. milton.
the arabians were men of a deep and subtle wit. spratt.
su'btly. adv. [from subtle.]
1. slily ; artfully ; cunningly.
thou see'st how subtly to detain thee i devise;
inviting thee to hear, while i relate. milton's par. loft.
2. nicely; delicately.
in the nice bee, what sense so subtly true,
from poisonous herbs extracts the healing dew pope.
to subtr act. v. a. s. subtradio, latin. they who derive it
from the latin write subtract ; those who know the french
original, write substract, which is the common word.] to
withdraw part from the rest.
reducing many things unto charge, which, by confusion,
became concealed and subtracted from the crown. davies.
what is su' tracted or subducted out of the extent of the
divine perfection, leaves still a quotient infinite. hase.
the same swallow, by the subtraciing daily of her eggs,
lay nineteen successively, and then gave over. ray.
su btr action. m. s. see substract 1on.
subtr act e.r. m. s. [ subtraho, lat.] the number to be
taken out of a larger number.
subtra he'nd. m. s. [sultrahendum, lat.] the number out
of which part is taken.
subtr1'ple. adj. [subtriple, fr. sub and triplus, lat.] - con-
taining a third or one part of three.
vol. ii.
the power will be in a saltriple proportion to the weight.
//ilkins's math. matic.
subvent an eous. adj. [subventaneus, lat.) addle ; windy.
suitable unto the relation of the mares in spain, and their
/obventaneous conceptions from the western wind. brown.
to suby r.s.e. v. a. s. subversus, lat.] to subvert. speyer
uses subvers in the same sense.
empires solvers'd, when ruling fate has struck
th’ unalterable hour. thomson's autumn.
subve'rsios. m. s. [subversion, fr. soversus, lat.) over-
throw ; ruin ; destruction.
these seek subversion of thy harmles, life. shak. h. vi.
it is far more honourable to suffer, than to prosper in their
ruin and subversion. t king charles.
these things refer to the opening and shutting the abyss,
with the dissolution or subversion of the earth. burnet.
laws have been often abused, to the oppression and the
fobversion of that order they were intended to preserve. rogers.
subversiy e. adj. [from subvert.] having tendency to over-
turn : wish of.
lying is a vice subversve of the very ends and design of
conversation. - - rogers.
to subvert. v. a. s.silvertir, fr. silverto, lat.]
1. to overthrow ; to overturn ; to destroy ; to turn upside
down. - - -
god, by things deem'd weak,
soverts the worldly strong and worldly wise. molton.
no proposition can be received for divine revelation, if
contradictory to our clear intuitive knowledge; because this
would silvert the principles of oil knowledge. locke.
trees are subverted or broken by high winds. mortimer.
2. to corrupt ; to confound. -
strive not about words to no purpose, but to the stoverting
of the hearers. 2 tin. ii. 14.
sub verter. m. s. [from subvert.] overthrower; destroyer.
o traytor; worse than simon was to troy; -
o vile subverter of the gallick reign,
more false than gano was to charlemagne. . dryden.
they anathematize them as .cnemies to god, and sub-
verters of souls. jwaterland.
su(burb. n.s. [suburbium, lat.]
1. building without the walls of a city.
there's a trim rabble let in ; are all these your faithful
friends o' th' suburbs shakespeare's henry viii.
what can be more to the disvaluation of the power of the
spaniard, than to have marched seven days in the heart of his
countries, and lodged three nights in the suburbs of his prin-
cipal city ? bacon's war with spain.
2. the confines; the outpart. -
the suburbs of my jacket are so gone,
i have not left one skirt to fit upon.
- they on the smoothed plank,
the suburb of their strawbuilt citadel, -
expatiate. - - milton.
when our fortunes are violently changed, our spirits are
unchanged, if they always stood in the suburbs and expectation
of sorrows. taylor.
suburban, adj. [suburbanus, lat. from suburb.] inhabiting
the suburb. -
poor clinches the suburban muse affords,
cleaveland.
and panton waging barmless war with words. . dryden.
then weds an heiress of suburban mould, -
ugly as apes, but well endow’d with gold. harte.
sub wo'rker. n.s.. [sub and worker.j underworker; subor-
dinate helper. - -
he that governs well leads the blind; but he that teaches
gives him eyes: and it is glorious to be a subworker to grace,
in freeing it from some of the inconveniences of original sin.
south.
succed an eous. adj. [succedaneus, lat..] supplying the place
of something else. -
nor is aotius strictly to be believed when he prescribeth the
stone of the otter as a succedaneous unto casioneum. brown.
i have not discovered the menstruum: i will present a stic-
cedaneous experiment made with a common liquor. . boyle.
succe daneu.m. n.s. (latin...] that which is put to serve
for something else. .
to succe ed. v. n. [succeler, fr. succedo, lat.]
1. to follow in order.
if i were now to die,
*twere to be most happy; for i fear,
my soul hath her consent so absolute,
that not another comfort like to this
succeeds in unknown fate. shakespeare’s othello.
those of all ages to succeed will curse my head. a lilton.
2. to come into the place of one who has quitted or died.
workmen let it cool by degrees in such relentings of neal-
ing heats, lest it should shiver in pieces by a violent succeeding
of air in the room of the fire. digby on bodies.
enjoy 'till i return
short pleasures; for long woes are to succeed, assistan.
- 25 q. - - t if
t<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u c
s u c
if the father left only daughters, they equally furteeded to
him in copartnership, without prelation or preference of the
eldest to a double portion. hale.
revenge succeeds to love, and rage to grief. dryden.
while these limbs the vital spirit feeds,
while day to night, and night to day succeeds,
burnt-off'rings morn and ev’ning shall be thine, ,
and fires eternal in thy temples shine. dryden.
these dull harmless makers of lampoons are yet of dan-
gerous example to the publick: some witty men may succeed
to their designs, and, mixing sense with malice, blast the re-
putation of the most innocent. dryden.
the pretensions of saul's family, who received his crown
from the immediate appointment of god, ended with his reign;
and david, by the same title, succeeded in his throne, to the
exclusion of jonathan. locke.
. to obtain one's wish ; to terminate an undertaking in the
desired effect.
'tis almost impossible for poets to succeed without ambi-
tion: imagination must be raised by a desire of fame to a desire
of pleasing. dryden.
this address i have long thought owing; and if i had
never attempted, i might have been vain enough to think i
might have succeeded. dryden.
a knave's a knave to me in ev'ry state;
alike my scorn, if he succeed or fail:
sporus at court, or japhet in a jail. pope.
4. to terminate according to wish ; to have a good effect.
if thou deal truly, thy doings shall prosperously succeed to
thee. tob. iv. 6.
this was impossible for virgil to imitate, because of the
severity of the roman language : spencer endeavoured it in
sheperd's kalendar; but neither will it succeed in english.
dryden.
5. to go under cover. -
please that silvan scene to take,
where whistling winds uncertain shadows make;
or will you to the cooler cave succeed,
whose mouth the curling vines have overspread. dryden.
to succe’ed. v. a. * * *
1. to follow ; to be subsequent or consequent to.
in that place no creature was hurtful unto man, and those
destructive effects they now discover succeeded the curse, and
came in with thorns and briars. brown's vulgar errours.
2. to prosper; to make successful. -
now frequent trines the happier lights among,
and high-rais'd jove from his dark prison freed,
those weights took off that on his planet hung,
will gloriously the new laid works succeed.
succeed my wish, and second my design,
the fairest deiopeia shall be thine, ;
and make thee father of a happy line. dryden's afn.
succe'eder. n.s.. [from succeed.] one who follows; one who
comes into the place of another.
now this great succeeder all repairs,
he builds up strength and greatness for his heirs,
out of the virtues that adorn'd his blood. daniel.
nature has so far imprinted it in us, that should the envy of
predecessors deny the secret to succeeders, they yet would find
it out. suckling.
they make one man's particular fancies, perhaps failings,
confining laws to others, and convey them to their succeeders,
who afterwards misname all unobsequiousness as presumption.
boyle.
success. n.s.. [succes, *...s.o. lat.]
1. the termination of any affair happy or unhappy. success
without any epithet is commonly taken for good success.
for good success of his hands, he asketh ability to do of him
that is most unable. wisd. xiii. 19.
perplex'd and troubled at his bad success
*.
dryden.
the tempter stood. milton.
not lemuel s mother with more care
did counsel or instruct her heir ;
or teach, with more success, her son
the vices of the time to shun. waller.
every reasonable man cannot but wish me succes; in this at-
tempt, because i undertake the proof of that which it is every
man's interest that it should be true. - tillotson.
whilst malice and ingratitude confess,
they've strove for ruin long without success. garth.
gas sulphuris may be given with success in any disease of the
lungs. arbuthnot on diet.
military successes, above all others, elevate the minds of a
people." atterbury.
2. succession. obsolete. - - **
all the sons of these five brethren feigned --
by due success, and all their nephews late,
even thrice eleven descents, the crown retained. spenser.
successful. adj. [success and full.] prosperous; happy; for-
tunate. * * * ** * * a
they were terrible alarms to persons grown wealthy by a
-
long and successful imposture, by persuading the world that men
might be honest and happy, though they never mortified.
corrupt appetites. - so
h’ observ'd the illustrious throng, -
their names, their fates, their condua and their care
in peaceful senates and successful war. drydon
this is the most proper and most successful season to no
and attack the advancing enemy. t
- the early hunter
blesses diana's hand, who leads him safe
q'er hanging cliffs; who spreads his net successal,
and guides the arrow through the panther's heart.
successfully. adv. [from successful..] prosperously; la
fortunately.
he is too young, yet he looks so shakftar,
they would want a competent instrument to collo ani
convey their rays successfully, or so as to imprint the species
with any vigour on a dull prejudicate faculty. ammond
the rule of imitating god can never be successal, proposed
but upon christian principles; such as that this world'i. a
place not of rest, but of discipline. durir
a reformation successfully carried on in this great o
would in time spread itself over the whole kingdom, s.
bleeding, when the expectoration goes on successol, s:
presseth it. arbuthnot on diet.
"succe’ssful ness, n. s. [from successful.] happy conclusion;
desired event ; series of good fortune. 3.
an opinion of the successfulness of the work is as necessary to
found a purpose of undertaking it, as the authority of com-
mands, or the persuasiveness of promises. . . alammond
succession. m. s. [succession, fr. successio, lat..] i -
1. consecution; series of one thing or person following an-
other. . . . . - - - - - -
st. augustine, having reckoned up a great number
bishops of rome, saith, in all this co, ; jo:
there is not one found a donatist. . . . . hooker
reflection on appearances of several ideas, one after a
other, in our minds, furnishes us with the idea ofjuscoffin.
let a cannon-bullet pass through a room, and take *
any limb of a man, it is clear that it must strike successively
the two sides of the room, touch one part of the flesh first
, and another after, and so in succession. , * * * lo.
2. a series of things or persons following one another.
these decays in spain have been occasioned by so long a
war with holland; but most by two successions of inadve
princes. - - bacon.
the smallest particles of matter may cohere by the strongest
attractions, and compose bigger particles of weaker virtue;
and many of these may cohere and compose bigger particles,
whose virtue is still weaker ; and so on for divers fuccessions,
until the progression end in the biggest particles, on which the
operations in chymistry and the colours of natural bodies de-
pend. newton's opticis,
3. a lineage; an order of descendants. -
caffibelan,
and his succession, granted rome a tribute.
shakespeare's cymbeline.
a long succession must ensue; espeare's cy
and his next son the clouded ark of god
shall in a glorious temple enshrine. milton's par. loft.
4. the power or right of coming to the inheritance of ancestors.
what people is so void of common sense,
to vote succession from a native prince
successive, adj. [success, fr.]
1. following in order; continuing a course or consecution un-
interrupted. - -
three with fiery courage he assails,
and each successive after other quails,
still wond'ring whence so many kings should rise. daniel.
god hath set -
labour and rest, as day and night, to men
successive. f. - . milton's par. loft.
god, by reason of his eternal indivisible nature, is by one
single act of duration present to all the successive portions of
ckmore,
prior.
cki] };
** *
dryden.
time, and all successively existing in them. south.
send the successive ills through ages down,
and let each weeping father tell his son. prior.
2. inherited by succession. not in use. - -
countrymen, -
plead my successive title with your swords. shakespeare.
the empire being eleetive, and not successive, the emperors,
in being, made profit of their own times. raleigh.
succe’ssively, adv. [successivement, fr. from successive.) in
uninterrupted order ; one after another. -
- three sons he left,
all which successively by turns did reign.
is it upon record for else reported - -
successively from age to age shakesp. richard iii,
that king left only by his fix wives three children, who
reigned successively, and died childless. , bacon,
- we
fairy &amp;n.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u c
we that measure times by first and last,
the fight of things successively do take,
when god on all at once his view doth cast, -
and of all times doth but one instant make. davier.
i inclined the paper to the rays very obliquely, that the most
refrangible rays might be more copiously reflected than the rest,
and the whiteness at length changed successively into blue, in-
digo, and violet. newton's opt.
no such motion of the same atom can be all of it existent
at once; it must needs be made gradually and successively, both
as to place and time, seeing that body cannot at the same in-
stant be in more places than one. bentley's sermons.
we have a tradition coming down to us from our fathers;
a kind of inheritance successively conveyed to us by the primi-
tive saints from the apostles themselves. j/aterland.
successive ness. n. s. (from successive.] the state of being
successive.
all the notion we have of duration is partly by the successive-
ness of its own operations, and partly by those external mea-
sures that it finds in motion. hale.
succe'ssless. adj. [from success.] unlucky; unfortunate;
failing of the event desired.
a second colony is sent hither, but as successles; as the first.
eylyn.
the hopes of thy successles love resign. dryden.
the bavarian duke,
bold champion brandishing his noric blade,
best temper'd steel, successles; prov’d in field.
passion unpity'd, and successles; love,
plant daggers in my heart.
successles, all her soft caresses prove,
to banish from his breast his country's love. pope.
su'ccessour. n.s.. [successeur, fr. successor, lat. this is
sometimes pronounced successour, with the accent in the mid-
dle.) one that follows in the place or character of another:
correlative to predecessour.
this king by this queen had a son of tender age, but of
great expectation, brought up in the hope of themselves, and
already acceptation of the inconstant people, as successor of his
father's crown. sidney.
the successor of moses in prophecies. eccluf. xlvi. 1.
the fear of what was to come from an unacknowledged
juccessour to the crown, clouded much of that prosperity then,
which now shines in chronicle. clarendon.
the second part of confirmation is the prayer and benedic-
tion of the bishop, the successour of the apostles in this office.
hammond on fundamentals.
the surly savage offspring disappear,
and curse the bright successor of the year;
yet crafty kind with daylight can dispense. dryden.
whether a bright successor, or the same. tate.
the descendants of alexander's successors cultivated naviga-
tion in some lesser degree. arbuthnot.
succi'nct. adj. [succine!, fr. succinius, lat.]
1. tucked or girded up ; having the cloaths drawn up to dis-
engage the legs.
his habit fit for speed succini. milton's par. loft.
his vest succine! then girding round his waist,
forth rush'd the swain.
four knaves in garbs succine!.
2. short; concise ; brief.
a strict and succino stile is that where you can take nothing
away without loss, and that loss manifest. ben. johnson.
let all your precepts be succinct and clear,
that ready wits may comprehend then soon. roscommon.
succi'ncrly. adv [from succino.) briefly ; concisely ; with-
out superfluity of diction. - - -
i shall present you very succinctly with a few refle&amp;tions that
philips.
addison's cato.
pope.
pope.
most readily occur. - boyle.
i'll recant, when france can shew me wit
as strong as ours, and as succineily writ. roscommon.
succi'ncts ess. n.s.. [from succinct.] brevity; conciseness.
su'ccory. m. s. [cichorium, lat.] a plant. miller.
a garden-sallad
of endive, radishes, and surrory. dryden.
the medicaments to diminish the milk are lettuce, purslane,
endive, and soccery. hoseman of tumours.
t. succour. v. a. s. secourir, fr. soccurro, lat..] to help;
as that famous queen
of amazons, whom pyrrhus did destroy,
did shew herself in great triumphant joy,
a goateful beast will fland upon record, against those that
in their prosperity forgot their friends, that to their loss and
hazard flood by and juscoured them in their adversity. l'estr.
1. aid; assistance; relief of any kind; help in distress.
my father, -
flying for sarcour to his servant banister,
to assist in difficulty or distress; to relieve.
to soccur the weak state of sad afflicted troy. shensor. }
succour. m. s. [from the verb; souri, fr.]
being distress'd, was by that wretch betray'd. shakosofare.
2
s u c
here's a young maid wi
- with -
and faints for jo ith travel oppress'd,
shak
2. the person or things that bring help. akespeare.
*:: nothing else but a betraying of succours which reason
- - j/i/d. xvii. 12.
our watchful general hath discern'd from |
he mighty succoor which made gl
su'ccou re r. n: s [from jaccour.] e glad the foe. dryden.
helper : • re!;
su' she hath been a succourer of #an. per ; *:::::::::
u ccour less. '. s... - - - . . . . .
friends j,” [from succour.] wanting relief; void of
succourles, and sad,
she with extended arms his aid implores.
su'ccule nce.
§:... } n, s. [from succulent.) juiciness.
solost. * [succulent, fr. succulenius, lat.) juicy;
these plants have a strong, dense,
which is not apt to exhale.
- - bacon.
divine providence has spread her table every where, not
with a juiceless green car;
- - - *', but with succulent herbage and
nourishing grass, upon which most beast feed. 41 re.
on our account has jove,
indulgent, to all lands some succulent plant
allotted, that poor helpless man might slack
his present thirst. philips.
to succumb. v. n. [succumb, lat. succember, fr.] to yield;
to sink under any difficulty. not in use, except among the
scotch.
thomson.
and socculent moisture,
to their wills we must soccumb,
&amp;uccumque trahunt, 'tis our doom.
socosation, n.s.. [succus, lat.] a trot.
they move two legs of one side together, which is toluta-
tion or ambling, or lift one foot before and the cross foot be-
hind...which issuousition or trotting. brown's pugar err.
they rode, but authors do not say
whether tolutation or succusation.
susou'ssion, n.s...[succusi, lat.]
1. the act of shaking.
2. [in physick.] is such a shaking of the nervous parts as is
procured by strong stimuli, like sternutatories, risłion, and
the like, which are commonly used in apoplectick affections.
when any of that risible species were brought to the doctor,
and when he confidered the spasms of the diaphragm, and all
the muscles of respiration, with the tremulous succession of the
whole human body, he gave such patients over. mart. scrib.
such. pronoun. [suleiks, gothick; su'k, dutch; rpile, sax.]
1. of that kind ; of the like kind. with as before the tring
to which it relates, when the thing follows: as, such a power
as a king's; such a gift as a kingdom.
'tissu h another fitchew marry, a perfum'd one. shakes.
can we find such a one as this, in whom the spirit of ged
is ? - gen. xli. 38.
the works of the flesh are manifest, such are drunkenness,
revelings, and sixth like. - gal. v. 21.
you will not make this a general rule to debar such from
preaching of the gospel, as have through infirmity fallen.
//hitgifte.
such another idol was manah, worshipped between mecca
and medina, which was called a rock or stone. stillingfleet.
such precepts as tend to make men good, singly considered,
may be distributed into such as enjoin piety towards god, or
hudibras.
butler.
such as require the good government of ourselves. tillotson.
if my song be such,
that you will hear and credit me too much,
attentive litten. * - dryden.
such are the cold riphean race, and such
the savage scythian. - dryden's pīrg.
as to be perfectly just is an attribute in the divine nature,
to be so to the utmost of our abilities is the glory of a man:
such an one, who has the publick administration, acts like the
representative of his maker. addison.
you love a verse, take such as i can send. pope.
2. the same that : with as.
this was the state of the kingdom of tunis at such time
as barbarossa, with solyman's great fleet, landed in africk.
anoles.
3. comprehended under the term premised, like what has been
said.
that thou art happy, owe to god;
that thou continu'it such, owe to thyself. milton.
to assert that god looked upon adam's fall as a sin, and
punished it as suck, when, without any antecedent sin, he
withdrew that actual grace, upon which it was impossible for
him not to fall, highly reproaches the essential equity of the
divine nature. south.
no promise can oblige a prince so much,
still to be good, as long to have been such. . . dryden.
4. a manner of expressing a particular person or thing.
i saw him yesterday y
with such and such. shakespeare's hans,
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u d
if you repay me not on such a day,
in such a place, such sum or sums, as are
express'd in the condition, let the forfeit
be an equal pound of your flesh. . . shak. merch. of venice.
i have appointed my servants to such and such place. i sam.
scarce this word death from sorrow did proceed,
when in rush'd one, and tells him such a knight
is new arriv'd. - daniel’s civil war.
himself overtook a party of the army, consisting of three
thousand horse and foot, with a train of artillery, which he left
at such a place, within three hours march of berwick. clarend.
that which doth constitute any thing in its being, and
distinguish it from all other things, is called the form or es-
sence of such a thing. folkins.
the same sovereign authority may enaet a law, command-
ing such or such an action to-day, and a quite contrary law for-
bidding the same to-morrow. south.
those artists who propose only the imitation of such or such
a particular person, without election of those ideas before men-
tioned, have been reproached for that omission. dryden.
to suck. v. a. [rucan, saxon ; sigo, suchum, latin ; succer,
french.]
1. to draw by making a rarefaction of the air.
2. to draw in with the mouth.
the cup of astonishment thou shalt drink, and suck it out.
ezek. xxiii. 34.
we'll hand in hand to the dark mansions go,
where, sucking in each other's latest breath,
we may transfuse our souls, dryden.
still she drew
the sweets from ev’ry slow'r, and suck'd the dew. dryden.
transfix’d as o'er castalia's streams he hung,
he suck'd new poisons with his triple tongue. pope's statius.
3. to draw the teat of a female.
defire, the more he suck'd, more sought the breast,
like dropsy folk still drink to be a thirst. sidney.
a bitch will nurse young foxes in place of her puppies, if
you can get them once to suck her so long that her milk may
go through them. - locke.
did a child suck every day a new nurse, it would be no
more affrighted with the change of faces at six months old
than at fixty. locke.
4. to draw with the milk.
thy valiantness was mine, thou sack'ds; it from me;
but own thy pride thyself. shakesp. coriolanus.
5. to empty by sucking.
a fox lay with whole swarms of flies sucking and galling of
him. l'e/orange.
bees on tops of lilies feed,
and creep within their bells to suck the balmy seed. dryden.
6. to draw or drain.
i can suck melancholy out of a song, as a weazel sucks
eggs. shakespeare.
pumping hath tir’d our men ;
seas into seas thrown, we suck in again. donne.
a cubical vessel of brass is filled an inch and a half in half
an hour; but because it sucks up nothing as the earth doth,
take an inch for half an hour's rain. burnet.
all the under passions,
as waters are by whirlpools suck'd and drawn,
were quite devoured in the vast gulph of empire. dryden.
old ocean, suck'd through the porous globe, -
had song ere now forsook his horrid bed. thomson.
t. suck. v. n.
1. to draw by rarefying the air.
continual repairs, the least defects in sucking pumps are con-
stantly requiring. mortimer's husbandy.
2. to draw the breast.
such as are nourished with milk find the paps, and suck at
them ; whereas none of those that are not designed for that
nourishment ever offer to suck. ray on the creation.
i would
pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
to win thee, lady. shakesp. merchant of wenice.
a nursing father beareth with the sucking child. numb. xi.
3. to draw ; imbibe.
the crown had sucked too hard, and now, being full, was
like to draw less. - bacon's henry viii.
suck. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the act of sucking. -
i hoped, from the descent of the quicksilver in the tube,
upon the first sack, that i should be able to give a nearer guess
at the proportion of force betwixt the preliure of the air and
the gravity of quicksilver. boyle.
2. milk given by females.
they draw with their sock the disposition of nurses. spens.
i have given suck, and know -
how tender’tis to love the babe that milks me. shakespeare.
those first unpolish'd matrons
gave suck to infants of gigantick mold.
- - - - - dryden.
it would be inconvenient for birds to give suck.
ray.
su'ck er. m. s. [succur, french; from suck.]
1. any thing that draws.
2. the embolus of a pump.
oil must be poured into the cylinder, that the suc'er may
slip up and down in it more smoothly. boyle.
the ascent of waters is by suckers or forcers, or something
equivalent thereunto. jilkins's daeda.o.
3. a round piece of leather, laid wet on a stone, and drawn up
in the middle, rarifies the air within, which pressing upon
its edges, holds it down to the stone.
one of the round leathers where with boys play, called
sackers, not above an inch and half diameter, being well soaked
in water, will stick and pluck a stone of twelve pounds up
from the ground. grew's 44t/acum.
4. a pipe through which anything is sucked.
mariners aye ply the pump,
so they, but chearful, unfatigu'd, still move
the draining sucker. philips,
5. a young twig shooting from the stock. this word was per-
haps originally surcle, [surculus, latin.]
the cutting away of suckers at the root and body doth make
trees grow high. bacon's natural hyłory.
out of this old root a sucker may spring, that with a little
shelter and good seasons may prove a mighty tree. ray.
su'cket. n. j. [from suck.] a sweetmeat, to be dissolved in
the mouth.
nature's confectioner, the bee,
whose suckets are moist alchimy;
the still of his refining mold,
minting the garden into gold. cleaveland.
su’cking bot tl e. m. s. [suck and bottle..] a bottle which to
children supplies the want of a pap.
he that will say, children join these general abstract specu-
lations with their suckingbottles, has more zeal for his opinion,
but less sincerity. - locke.
to su’ckle. v. a. [from suck.] to nurse at the breast.
the breast of hecuba,
when she did sole hector, look'd not lovelier. shakes.
she nurses me up and suckles me. l'e/orange,
two thriving calves she suckles twice a-day. dryan.
the roman soldiers bare on their helmets the first history
of romulus, who was begot by the god of war, and sold
by a wolf. addison on italy.
su'ckling.. n.s.. [from suck.] a young creature yet fed by the
pap,
i provide a suckling,
that ne'er had nourishment but from the teat. drydon.
young animals participate of the nature of their tender all-
ment, as sucklings of milk. arbuthnot on aliments.
su’ction... n.s.. [from suck; succion, fr.] the aet of sucking.
sounds exteriour and interiour may be made by suction, as
by emission of the breath. &amp;0/1.
though the valve were not above an inch and a half in dia-
meter, yet the weight kept up by suction, or supported by the
air, and what was cast out of it weighed ten pounds. boyle.
cornelius regulated the sad?ion of his child. arbuthnot.
sudation. m. s. [sid, latin.] sweat.
su’da to ry. m. s. [ sudo, latin.] hot-house; sweating-bath.
sut) den. adj. [soudain, french ; roben, saxon.]
1. happening without previous notice; coming without the
common preparatives; coining unexpectedly.
we have not yet set down this day of triumph;
to morrow, in my judgment, is too sudder. soeare.
there was never any thing so suddin but caesar's thrasoni-
cal brag, of i came, saw and overcame. soakspeare.
herbs sudden flower'd,
opening their various colours. milton.
his death may be sudden to him, though it comes by never
so slow degrees. duty of ajan.
2. hasty; violent; rash; passionate; precipitate. not in use,
i grant him
sudden, malicious, smacking of ev'ry sin.
su'dden. n.s.
1. any unexpesled occurrence; surprise. not in use.
parents should mark the witty excuses of their children at
fuddains and surprisals, rather than pamper them. joztion.
2. on or of a sudden, or upon a sud den. sooner than was
expected; without the natural or commonly accustomed pre-
paratives.
following the flyers at the very heels,
with them he enters, who upon the sudden
clapt to their gates. shakespeare's macbeth.
how art thou lost, how on a sudden lost asikan.
they keep their patients so warm as almost to stifle them,
and all on a sudden the cold regimen is in vogue. baker.
when you have a mind to leave your master, grow rude
and saucy of a sudden, and beyond your usual behaviour. swift.
su'ddenly. adv. [from sudden.]
1. in an unexpected manner; without preparation; hastily.
you shall find three of your argosies
are richly come to harbour suddenly.
soakspeare.
sasoffeare.
if
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u f
s u f
if elision of the air made the sound, the touch of the bell or
firing could not extinguish so suddenly that motion.
to the pale foes they suddenly draw near,
and summon them to unexpected fight. dryden.
she struck the warlike spear into the ground,
which sprouting leaves did suddenly enclose,
and peaceful olives shaded as they rose. dryden.
2. without premeditation. - w
if thou can's accuse,
do it without invention suddenly. shaks). henry vi.
su/pdf nness. m. s. [from sudden.] state of being sudden; un-
expected presence; manner of coming or happening unex-
pcctedly.
all in the open hall amazed stood,
at sadisonness of that unwary fight,
bacon.
and wond’red at his breathless hasty mood. spensr.
he specdily run forward, counting his suddennes; his most
advantage, that he might overtake the english. spenser.
the rage of people is like that of the sea, which once
breaking bounds, overflows a country with that suddenness and
violence as leaves no hopes of flying. temple.
sudorifice. (judorifipue, fr. judor and facio, lat..] pro-
voking or causing sweat.
physicians may well provoke sweat in bed by bottles, with
a deco&amp;tion of sudorifick herbs in hot water. bacon.
exhaling the most liquid parts of the blood by soloisick or
watery evaporations, brings it into a morbid state. arbuthnot.
sudori'fick. m. s. a medicine promoting sweat. .
as to sodorificki, consider that the liquid which goes off by
sweat is often the most subtile part of the blood. arbuthnot.
su'doro vs. adj. [from sador, latin.] consisting of sweat.
not used.
beside the strigments and sudorous adhesions from men's
hands, nothing proceedeth from gold in the usual decostion
thereof. brown's pulgar errourr.
suds. m. s. [from reopen, to seeth; whence robben, saxon.]
1. a lixivium of soap and water.
2. to be in the sups. a familiar phrase for being in any diffi-
culty.
to . v. a. [saiver, french.]
1. to prosecute by law. -
if any sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him
have thy cloak also. matt. v. 49.
2. to gain by legal procedure.
3. [in falconry..] to clean the beak, as a hawk.
is su e. v. n. to beg; to entreat; to petition.
full little knowest thou that hast not try’d,
what hell it is in swing long to bide. spensor.
if me thou deign to serve and sue,
at thy command lo all these mountains be. sponsor.
when maidens sue,
men give like gods. shakeshcare.
we were not born to sue but to command. shakespeare.
ambassadors came unto him as far as the mouth of the eu-
phrates, suing unto him for peace. knolles.
for this, this only favour let mesoe,
refuse it not : but let my body have
the last retreat of human kind, a grave. dryden's zneid.
despise not then, that in our hands bear we
these holy boughs, and sae with words of pray’r. dryden.
'twill never be too late,
to sue for chains, and own a conqueror. aldison's cato.
the fair fgyptian
courted with freedom now the beauteous slave,
now salt ring stood, and threat'ning now did rave. blackm.
by adverse destiny constrain'd to sue
for counsel and redress, he sues to you.
pope's odosy.
t. su e. va. to obtain by intreaty: with out. the czpres-
fion is perhaps improper.
nor was our blefied saviour only our propitiation to die
for us, but he is still our advocate, continually interceding
with his father in the behalf of all true penitents, and suing
out a pardon for them in the court of heaven. .. gala”y.
suet. n.s.. [suet, an old french word, according to skinner. j
a hard fat, particularly that about the kidnies.
the steotoma being suet, yields not to escaroticks. isosom.
su'ety. adj. [from/uet.] consisting of fuel resembling suct.
if the matter forming a wen resembles fat or a suety sub-
stance, it is called steatoma. sharp's surgery.
to suffer. v. a. [suffero, latin; soffir, french.j
1. to bear; to undergo; to feel with sense of pain. -
a man of great wrath shall suffir punishment. prov. xix:
a woman jiffered many things of physicians, and spent all
she had. alsar &amp; v. 26.
shall we then live thus vile, the race of heav'n
thus trampl’d, thus expell'd to suffer here
chains and these torments better these than worse,
by my advice; since fate inevitable
subdues us, and omnipotent decree,
the victor's will. to suffer, as to do,
our strength is equal, nor the law unjust ..
that so ordains. milan.
vql. ii.
obedience impos'd,
on penalty of death, and suffering death. amilton
2. to endure to support; not to fift: under. •
our spirit and strength entire
strogly to soffir and support our pains. milt:
3. to allow ; to permit ; not to hinder. --
he wonored that your lordship
would suffer him to spend his youth at home. slass care
oft have i seen a hot o'erweening cur **** * *
run back and bite, because he was withheld :
who being /offered, with the bear's fell paw -
hath clapt his tail betwixt his legs and cry’d shakes? are
* - my duty cannot suffer - - to f : -
to obey in all your daughter's hard commands. shakorare
rebuke thy neighbour, and not so for fin upon him io.
i suffer them to enter and possess. - anon.
he that will suffer himself to be informed by ob -
will find few signs of a soul accustomed to much thi
new-born child.
4. to pass through; to be affeded by ; to be abed upon.
the air now must suffer change. milton
to su'ffer. v. n. -
1. to undergo pain or inconvenience.
servation,
nking in a
locke.
my breast i arm to overcome by softring. a solton.
prudence and good-breeding are in all stations necessary;
and most young men suffer in the want of then. locke.
2. to undergo punishment.
the father was first condemned to suffer upon a day ap-
pointed, and the son afterwards the day following. clarendon.
he thus
was forc'd to suffer for himself and us!
heir to his father's sorrows with his crown. dryden.
3. to be injured.
publick business suffors by private infirmitics, and king-
doms fall into weaknelles by the diseases or decays of those
that manage them. temple.
su'ff erable. adj. [from suffer.] tolerable; such as may be
cndured.
thy rages be
now no more sofferable. chapman.
it is suffrable in any to use what liberty they list in their
own writing, but the contracting and extending the lines and
sense of others would appear a thankless office. //otton.
su'ff erably. aaw. [from sufferable.] tolerably; so as to be
chdured.
an infant titon held she in her arms;
yet suffrally bright, the eye might bear
the ungrown glories of his beamy hair. addison.
su'ff erance. m. s. [from suffer, scuffrance, french.]
1. pain ; inconvenience; misery.
he must not only die,
but thy unkindness shall the death draw out
to ling’ring sofferance. shakesp. a seasure for masore.
how much education may reconcile young people to pain
and suffrance, the examples of sparta shew. locke on education.
2. patience; moderation.
he thought to have slain her in his fierce despight,
but hasty heat tempering with sufferance wise,
he staid his hand. spensor.
he hath given excellent sufferance and vigorousness to the
sufferers, arming them with strange courage. taylor.
nor was his sufferance of other kinds less exemplary than
that he evidenced in the reception of calumny. fell.
and should i touch it nearly, bear it -
with all the suff"rance of a tender friend. otway's orphan.
3. toleration; permission; not hindrance.
in process of time, somewhiles by s france, and some-
whiles by special leave and favour, they erected to themselves
oratories not in any sumptuous or stately manner. 11:24, 1.
most wretched man,
that to affections does the bridle lend ;
in their beginning they are weak and wan,
but soon through sufferance grow to fearful end. spe’sor.
some villains of my court
arc in consent and suffrance in this.
both glori, d to have 'scap'd the stygian flood,
as gods, and by their own recover'd strength;
not by the suff'rance of supernal pow'r, a,ilton's par. loft.
su'ff er fr. m. s. [from soff. r.)
1. one who endures or undergoes pain or inconvenience.
this evil cn the philistines is fail'n,
the sufferers then will scarce molest us here,
from other hands we need not much to fear. milton.
he when his love was bounded in a few,
that were unhappy that they might be true,
made you the favorite of his last sad times,
that is, a suff'rer in his subjects crimes. dryden.
she returns to me with joy in her face, not from the fight of
her husband, but from the good luck she has had at cards ;
and if she has been a loser, i am doubly a sufferer by it: she
comes home out of humour, because she has been throwing
away my estate. addison's speciator.
25 r the
shakespeare.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u f
s u f
the history of civil wars and rebellions does not make such
deep and lasting impressions, as events of the same nature in
which we or our friends have been sufferers. addison.
often these unhappy sufferers expire for want of sufficient
vigour and spirit to carry on the animal regimen. blackmore.
2. one who allows; one who permits.
su'ffering.. n.s.. [from suffer.] pain suffered,
rejoice in my sufferings for you.
with what strength, what steadiness of mind,
he triumphs in the midst of all his sufferings 2 addison.
we may hope the sufferings of innocent people, who have
lived in that place which was the scene of rebellion, will sc-
cure from the like attempts. addison.
it increased the smart of his present sufferings to compare
them with his former happiness. atterbury.
then it is that the reasonableness of god's providence, in
relation to the sufferings of good men in this world, will be
fully justified. nelson.
to suffice. v. n. [soffre, french; sift-in, latin.] to be
enough; to be sufficient; to be equal to the end or purpose.
if thou ask me why, sufferth, my reasons are good. shakesp.
- to recount almighty works
what words or tongue of seraph can soffice,
or heart of man soff.e to comprehend ? milton.
the indolency we have, sufficing for our present happiness,
we desire not to venture the change; being content; and that
is enough. locke.
he lived in such temperance, as was enough to make the
longest life agreeable; and in such a course of piety, as suf-
ficed to make the most sudden death so also. pope.
to suff 1'ce. v. a.
1. to afford; to supply.
a strong and succulent moisture is able, without drawing
help from the earth, to suffice the sprouting of the plant. bac.
thou king of horned floods, whose plentecus urn
suffices fatness to the fruitful corn,
shall share my morning song and evening vows.
the pow'r appeas'd, with winds suffe'd the sail;
the bellying canvas strutted with the gale.
2. to satisfy to be equal to want or demand.
israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations.
parched corn she did eat, and was suffed, and left.
let it suffice thee that thou know't us happy.
he our conqueror left us this our strength,
that we may so suffice his vengeful ire.
when the herd suffic'd, did late repair
to ferny heaths, and to the forest lare.
suff 1'ciency. m. s. [suffsance, fr. from soff.ient.]
1. state of being adequate to the end proposed.
'tis all men's office to speak patience
to those that wring under the load of sorrow ;
but no man's virtue nor soff.iency
to be so moral, when he shall endure -
the like himself. shakespeare.
his sufficiency is such, that he bestows and possesses, his
plenty being unexhausted. boyle.
this he did with that readiness and sofficiency, as at once
gave testimony to his ability, and to the evidence of the truth
he asserted. fell.
2. qualification for any purpose.
i am not so confident of my own sofficiency, as not willing-
ly to admit the counsel of others. king charles.
the bishop, perhaps an irishman, being made judge by
that law, of the sufficiency of the ministers, may dislike the
englishman as unworthy. spenser's ireland.
their pensioner de wit was a minister of the greatest au-
col. i. 24.
dryden.
dryden.
ezek.
ruth.
milton.
milton.
dryden.
thority and sufficiency ever known in their state. temple.
3. competence ; enough.
an elegant sufficiency, content. thomson.
4. supply equal to want.
the most proper subjecls of dispute are questions not of the
very highest importance, nor of the meanest kind; but rather.
the intermediate questions between them: and there is a large
suffiency of them in the sciences. imatts's improv. of the mind.
5. it is used by temple for that conceit which makes a man think
himself equal to things above him ; and is commonly com-
pounded with self.
sofficiency is a compound of vanity and ignorance.
sufficient. adj. [suffsant, fr. sufficiens, latin.]
1. equal to any end or purpose; enough ; competent; not de-
ficient.
sufficient unto the day is the evil theeof.
heaven yet retains
number sufficient to possess her realms. milton.
man is not sufficient of himself to his own happiness. tillotson.
it is siftient for me, if, by a discourse something out of
the way, i shall have given occasion to others to cast about
for new discoveries. locke.
she would ruin me in silks, were not the quantity that goes
to a large pin-cushion sufficient to make her a gown and petti-
co3t. - addison.
sufficient benefice is what is competent to maintain a man
temple.
matt. vi. 34-
and his family, and maintain hospitality; and likewise to pay
and satisfy such ducs belonging to the bishop. also's pa, ero.
seven months are a sufficient time to correct vice in a ya.
hoo. - - swift.
2. qualified for any thing by fortune or otherwise.
s n saying he is a good man, understand me, that he is of-
ficient. - shakes). march no of pozi.e.
suff1'ciently, adv. [from suffient.] to a sufficient degree;
enough.
if religion did possess sincerely and sufficiently the hearts
of all men, there would need be no other restraint from
evil. .
- lozier.
seem i to thee sufficiently possess'd
of has piness milon.
ali to whom they are proposed, are by his grace fossiently
moved to a tend and afient to them ; fujiciently, but not irre.
sistibly; for if all were irresisłibly moved, all would embrace
them ; and if none were sufficienty moved, none would en-
brace them. rogers,
in a few days, or hours, if i am to leave this carcase to be
buried in the earth, and to find myself either for ever happy
in the favour of god, or eternally separated from all light and
peace ; can any words/off inty express the littleness of every
thing else law.
suff1 sance. m. s. [french.] excess; plenty. obsolete.
there him resis in riotous soft.nce -
of all gladfulness and kingly joyance. sponsor.
to suffocate. v. a. [soft; or, fr. softco, latin j. to
choak by exclusion or interception of air.
let gallows gape for dog, let man go free,
and let not hemp his windpipe sojocate.
this chaos, when degree is suffocate,
follows the choaking. shakoff. troilus and cross.
air but momentally remains in our bodies, only to rest.
gerate the heart, which being once performed, left being self-
heated again, it should suffocate that part, it hasleth back the
same way it passed. brown's pugar eri cars.
a swelling discontent is apt to socate and strangle with-
out passage. - collier of friendship.
all involv’d in smoke, the latent foe
from every cranny suffocated falls. thomson.
suffocation. m. s. [suffocation, fr. from suffocate.] the act
of choaking; the state of being choaked.
diseases of stoppings and soffications are dangerous. bacon,
white consists in an equal mixture of all the primitive co-
lours, and black in a suffocation of all the rays of light. cheyne.
mushrooms are best correoied by vinegar; some of them
being poisonous, operate by suffocation, in which the best re-
medy is wine or vinegar and salt, and vomiting as soon as
possible. arbuthnot on dict.
su'ff ocative. adj. [foom suffocate.] having the power to
choak.
from rain, after great frosts in the winter, glandulous tu-
mous and suffcotive catarrhs proceed. arbuthnot on air.
sut fragan. m. s. [ suffragant, fr. suffraganeus, latin.) a
bishop considered as subject to his metropolitan.
the four archbishops of mexico, lima, s. foy, and do-
minico, have under them twenty-five suffragan bishops, all
literally endowed and provided for. hojt.
. suffragan bishops shall have more than one riding appa-
ritor. - aysis”; paregon.
becket, archbishop of canterbury, insolently took upon
him to declare five articles void, in his epistle to his softa-
gans. - hale.
to su'ffrag ate. v. n. [suffragor, latin.] to vote with ;
to agree in voice with.
no tradition could universally prevail, unless there were
some common congruity of somewhat inherent in nature,
which suits and soffragates with it, and closeth with it. hale.
su'ffrag e. m. s. isuffrage, fr. suffragium, latin.] vote;
voice given in a controverted point.
noble confederates, thus far is perfeoł,
only your suffrages i will expect
at the as mbly for the chufing of consuls. ben. johnson.
they would not abet by their suffrage; or presence the de-
signs of those innovations. king charles.
the fairest of our island dare not commit their cause to the
shakosheart.
ffrage of those who most partially adore them. addison.
fabius might joy in scipio, when he saw
a beardless consul made against the law;
and join his suffrage to the votes of rome. dryden.
this very variety of sea and land, hill and dale, is extreme-
ly agreeable, the ancients and moderns giving their suffrage;
unanimously herein. hoodward’s natural history.
laetantius, and st. austin confirm by their suffrage the os-
servation made by the heathen writers. atterbury.
to the law and to the testimony let the appeal be in the first
place; and next to the united suffrage of the primitive church-
es, as the best and safest comment upon the other. waterland.
suffraginous. adj. [suffrago, latin.] belonging to the
knee joint of beasts.
in elephants, the bought of the forelegs is not direetly back-
- ward,
5
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">2.
ward, but laterally, and somewhat inward; but the hotogh or
suffraginous flexure behind, rather outward. brown.
suffumiga/tion. n.). [/offirmigation, fr. softimigo, lat.]
operation of fumes raised by fire.
if the matter be so gross as it yields not to remedies, it may
be attempted by suffumigation. // isoman's surgery.
suffu'mig e. m. s. lsuffumigo, lat.] a medical fume. not
used." - -
for external means, drying suffirmiges or smoaks are pre-
scribed with good success; they are usually composed out of
frankincense, myrrh, and pitch. harvey.
to suffuse. v. a. s. suffyu, latin.] to spread over with
something expansit'le, as with a vapour or a tincture.
suspicions, and fantastical surmise,
and jealousy suffos'd with jaundice in her eyes.
- to that recess,
when purple light shall next soff's the skies,
with me repair. -
instead of love-enliven'd cheeks,
with flowing rapture bright, dark looks succeed,
suffus'd and glaring with untender fire.
suffu's 10 n. m. s. [suffusion, french ; from suffs...]
1. the act of overspreading with any thing.
2. that which is suffused or spread.
a drop serene hath quench'd their orbs,
or dim suffusion veil’d.
the disk of phoebus, when he climbs on high,
appears at first but as a bloodshot eye;
and when his chariot downward draws to bed,
his ball is with the same suff/on red. dryden.
to those that have the jaundice or like suff/on of eyes,
objects appear of that colour. o ray.
sug. m. s. [ sugo, latin, to suck.]
many have sticking on them sigs, or trout-lice, which is
a kind of worm like a clove or pin, with a big head, and
sticks close to him, and sucks his moisture. j/alton.
su(gar. m. f. (sucre, french ; saccharum, latin.]
1. the native salt of the sugar-cane, obtained by the expression
and evaporation of its juice. - 3/incy.
all the blood of zelmane's body flirred in her, as wine
will do when sugar is hastily put into it.
lumps of sugar lose them:elves, and twine
their subtile essence with the soul of wine.
dryden.
pope.
thomson.
milton.
sidn ty.
c affaw.
a grocer in london gave for his rebus a sogar-loat itand-
ing upon a flat steeple. pea, ham.
saccharum candidum shoots into angular figures, by placing
a great many sticks a-cross a vessel of liquid sugar. grew.
if the chlid must have fgar-plums when he has a mind,
rather than be out of humour; why, when he is grown up,
must he not be satisfied too with wine : lo ae.
in a sugar baker's drying-room, where the air was heated
fifty-four degrees beyond that of a human body, a sparrow
died in two minutes. arbuthnot on air.
a piece of some geniculated plant, seeming to be part of
a sugar-cane. woodward on fossils.
2. anything proverbially sweet. -
your fair discourse has been as sugar,
making the hard way sweet and delectable.
3. a chymical dry chrystallization.
sugar of lead, though made of that insipid metal, and four
salt of vinegar, has in it a sweetness surpassing that of com-
mon sugar. boyle.
shakespeare.
to su(gar. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to impregnate or season with sugar.
short thick sobs
in panting murmurs, still'd out of her breast,
that ever-bubbling spring, the sugar'd nest
of her delicious soul, that there does lie,
bathing in streams of liquid melody.
to sweeten. -
thou would'st have plung’d thyself
in general riot, and never learn’d
the icy precepts of respect, but followed
the sugar'd game before thee. shak speare's timon.
his glosing fire his errand daily said, - -
crashaw.
and soar'd speeches whisper’ in mine ear. fairfax.
who casts out threats, no man deceives,
but flatt'ry still in sugar'd words betrays,
and poison in high tasted meats conveys. denham.
sau'g ar can py. m. s. from sugar and candy.] sugar candied,
or crystallised.
su'ggary. adj. [from sugar..] sweet ; tasting of sugar.
voith the sugg’ry sweet thereof allure
chaste ladics ears to phantasies impore.
spenser.
to suggest. v. a. s. suggero, suggestum, lat. saggerer, fr.]
1. to hint; to intimate; to insinuate good or ill; to tell pri-
watcly. -
- are you not asham'd
what spirit suggests this imagination 2 shakespeare.
i could never have suffered greater calamities, by denying
to sign that justice my conscience suggested to me. k. charles.
these rosnish casuists speak peace to the consciences of
men, by sogoffing something to them, which shall satisfy
their minds, notwithstanding a known, actual, avowed con-
tinuance of their fins. south.
some ideas make themselves way, and are suggested to the
mind by all the ways of sensation and reflexion., locke.
refleet upon the different state of the mind in thinking,
which those instances of attention, reverie and dreaming, na-
turally enough suggest. docke.
search for some thoughts thy own suggesting mind
and others dictated by io, o g 2
shall rise spontaneous. - pope's odyssey.
2. to seduce; to draw to ill by infinuation. out of use.
when devils will their blackest sins put on,
they do suggest at first with heav'nly shows. . shakespeare.
knowing that tender youth is soon suggsled,
i nightly lodge her in an upper tower. shakespeare.
3. to inform secretly. out of use. * -
we must sugges? the people, in what hatred
he still hath held them, that to's power he would
have made them mules. shakesp. coriolanus.
suggest er. m.s.. [from suggest.] one that remindeth another.
sugge's tion. n.s.. [suggestion, fr. from sugges.]
1. private hint ; intimation; insinuation; secret notification.
it allayeth all base and earthly cogitations, banisheth and
driveth away those evil secret siggestions which our invisible
enemy is always apt to minister. hocker.
he was a man
of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
himself with princes: one that by suggestion
tied all the kingdom. shakesp. henry viii.
native and untaught suggestions of inquisitive children. locke.
another way is letting the mind, upon the sugg/lion of any
new notion, run after similies. - locke.
2. secret incitement.
althur, they say, is kill'd to-night
on your suggestion. shakesp. king john.
to sc guilat e. v. a. [saggill, latin.] to beat black and
bloc, to make livid by a bruise.
the head of the os humeri was bruised, and remained
juggilated long after. wiseman's surgery.
su'ici d e. m. s. [suicidium, latin.]
1. self-murder; the horrid crime of destroying one's self.
child of despair, and suicide my name. savage.
to be cut off by the sword of injured friendship is the most
o
dreadful of all deaths, next to suicide. clariff.
2. a self-murderer.
if fate forbears us, fancy strikes the blow,
we make misfortune, suicides in woe. 7%ung.
suro l.a.g.e. m. s. isouillage, french..] drain of filth. obso-
lete.
when they have chosen the plot, and laid out the limits
of the work, some italians dig wells and cisterns, and other
conveyances for the saillage of the house. //otton.
su(ing. m. s. [this word seems to come from ser, to sweat,
french; it is perhaps peculiar to bacon.] the act of soaking
through anything. -
note the percolation or suing of the verjuice through the
wood; for verjuice of itself would never have passed through
the wood. - bacon.
suit. r. s. [spite, french.]
1. a set ; a number of things correspondent one to the other.
whole verses they deduc’d from those first golden times,
of fondry sorts of feet, and fundry suits of rhimes. drayton.
we, cre the day, two suits of armour sought,
which borne before him, on his steed he brought. dryden.
2. cloaths made one part to answer another.
what a beard of the general's cut, and a horrid suit of the
camp, will do among foaming bottles, and ale-wash'd wits,
is wonderful. shakespeare's henry v.
him all repute
for his device in handsoming a suit;
to judge of lace, pink, panes, print, cut and plait,
of all the court to have the best conceit. donne.
three or four suits one winter there does waste,
one suit does there three or four winters last. cowley.
his majesty was supplied with three thousand sits of cloaths,
with good proportions of shoes and stockings. clarendon.
3. consecution; series; regular order.
every five and thirty years the same kind and suite of wea-
, ther comes about again ; as great frost, great wet, great
droughts, warm winters, summers with little heat; and they
call it the prime.
4. out of suits. having no correspondence.
suppose, from cards.
wear this for me; one out of suits with fortune,
that would give more, but that her hand lacks means. shak.
5. [suite, french..] retinue ; company. obsolete.
plexirtus's ill-led life, and worse gotten honour, should have
tumbled together to destruction, had there not come in ty-
deus and telenor, with fifty in their suite to his defence.
sidney.
mine
bacon.
a metaphor, i
6. [from to sue..] a petition; an address of entreaty.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">e s u i
s u l
mine ears against your suits are stronger than
your gates against my force.
she gallops o'er a courtier's nose ;
and then dreams he of smelling out a suit. : shakespeare.
had i a suit to mr. shallow, i would humour his men with
the imputation of being near their master. . . . shakespeare.
many shall make suit unto thee. , job xi. 19.
my mind, neither with pride's itch, nor yet hath been
poison'd with love to see or to be seen ; ,
i had no suit there, nor new suit to shew : . . . .
yet went to court. * * * donne.
it will be as unreasonable to expect that god should attend
and grant those suits of ours, which we do not at all consider
ourselves. . . - - . . . . . duty of man.
7. courtship. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
he that hath the steerage of my course, , ,
direct my suit. . . . . . . "shakesp. romeo and juliet.
their determinations are to return to their home and to
trouble you with no more suit, unless you may be won by
some other sort than your father's imposition. shakespeare.
8. in spenser it seems to signify pursuit; prosecution.
high amongst all knights hast hungthy shield,
thenceforth the suit of earthly conquest shoone, -
and wash thy hands from guilt of bloody field. spenser.
9. [in law.] suit is sometimes put for the instance of a cause,
and sometimes for the cause itself deduced in judgment. ayliffe.
all that had any suits in law came unto them. susanna.
wars are suits of appeal to the tribunal of god's justice,
where there are no superiors on earth to determine the cause.
- * * bacon's war with spain.
involve not thyself in the suits and parties of great person-
ages. - taylor's guide to devotion.
to alibech alone refer your suit,
and let his sentence finish your dispute. dryden.
a suit of law is not a thing unlawful in itself, but may be
innocent, if nothing else comes in to make a sin thereof; but
then it is our fin, and a matter of our account, when it is
either upon an unjustifiable ground, or carried on by a sinful
management. kettlewell.
john bull was flattered by the lawyers that his suit would
not last above a year, and that before that time he would be
in quiet possession of his business. arbuthnot.
to suit. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fit; to adapt to something else.
suit the aetion to the word, the word to the action, with
this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
... nature. shakespeare's hamlet.
the matter and manner of their tales, and of their telling,
are so suited to their different educations and humours, that
shakspeare.
, - . . . * : *.
* -
each would be improper in any other. dryden.
2. to be fitted to; to become. -
compute the gains of his ungovern'd zeal, o
ill suits his cloth the praise of railing well. dryden.
her purple habit sits with such a grace
on her smooth shoulders, and so suits her face. dryden.
if different sects should give us a list of those innate practi-
cal principles, they would set down only such as suited their
distinet hypotheses. ilocke.
raise her notes to that sublime degree,
which suits a song of piety and thee. prior.
3. to dress; to clothe.
such a sebastian was my brother too,
so went he suited to his watry tomb:
if spirits can assume both form and suit,
you come to fright us. shakspeare's twelfth night.
be better suited; -
these weeds are memories of those misfortunes:
i pry'thee put them off to worser hours. shakespeare.
i'll disrobe me, s , -
of these italian weeds, and suit myself ,
as do's a briton peasant. shakespeare's cymbeline.
to suit. v. n. to agree; to accord. dryden uses it both
with to and with. - -
the one intense, the other still remiss,
cannot well suit with either; but soon prove
tedious alike.
the place itself was suiting to his care,
milton.
uncouth and savage as the cruel fair. . . . dryden.
pity does with a noble nature suit. . dryden.
constraint does ill with love and beauty suit. dryden.
this he says, because it suits with his hypothesis, but proves
it not. " * - locke.
give me not an office -- . .
* that suits with me so ill; thou know'st my temper.
- --- addison.
suitable. adj. [from suit.]. fitting; according with ; agree-
able to : with to. -
through all those miseries, in both there appeared a kind
of nobleness not suitable to that affliction. sidney.
what he did purpose, it was the pleasure of god that so-
lomon his son should perform, in manner suitable to their pre-
sent and ancient state. booker.
~ *
to solemn ads of royalty and justice, their soilo, one
ments are a beauty; are they only in religion a stain ; i.
it is very suitable to the principles of the roman cho.
for why should not their science as well as service be in i.
unknown tongue 2 - - * * * * #.
as the blesfings of god upon his honest industry had to.
great, so he was not without intentions of making suitable re.
turns in acts of charity. . - * * attoriar,
expression is the dress of thought, and still to ... "
appears more decent, as more suitable; - " . . . . . .
a vile conceit in pompous words express'd, . . . . . .
is like a clown in regal purple dress'd. - poe
it is as great an absurdity to suppose holy prayers and o
yine petitions without an holiness of life suitats to them, . to
suppose an holy and divine life without prayers. law
suitableness. n.s. [from suitable.} : fitness; agreeablene.
in words and styles, suitablems, makes them acceptabi. ini
effective. - - - v "glanvil,
with ordinary minds, it is the suitablengs, not the ei.
dence of a truth that makes it to be yielded to ; and it is sel.
dom that anything practically convinces a man that does not
please him first. * south
he creates those sympathies and suitablenesses of nature this
are the foundation of all true friendship, and by his provide.
brings persons so affected together. south
. . consider the laws themselves, and their fitablons, or un.
suitableness to those to whom they are given. tillosin
sui tably. adv. [from suitable.] agreeably; according ..."
whosoever speaks upon an occasion may take any text it.
able thereto ; and ought to speak suitably to that text. south
some rank deity, whose filthy face o
we suitably o'er stinking stables place. dryden
suit covenant. m. s. [in law.] is where the ancestor of one m
covenanted with the ancestor of another to sue at his court.
* , s: , , , baily.
suit court. n.s. [in law.]. is the court in which tenants owg
attendance to their lord. o * * * baily
suit service. m. s. [in law.] attendance which tenants owe (,
the court of their lord. baily.
is a m. -
§:} of sioms it.
1. one that sues; a petitioner; a supplicant. o
as humility is in suiters a decent virtue, so the testification
thereof; by such effectual acknowledgments, not only argueo,
a sound apprehension of his supereminent glory and majesty
before whom we stand, but putteth also into his hands a kind
of pledge or bond for security against our unthankfulness.
** **** ... " * : * : hooker.
she hath been a suitor to me for her brother, a -o,
cut off by course of justice... or shakes, meos for masure.
my piteous soul began the wretchedness s': - ".
of suitors at court to mourn. donne.
not only bind thine own hands, but bind the hand ofsuit-
ors also from offering. * , or baron,
yet their port ". * … . . .
not of mean suitors; nor important less : -
seem'd their petition, than when the ancient pair,
deucalion and chaste pyrrha, to restore - - - - - -
the race of mankind drown'd, before the shrine -
of themis stood devout. a4ilton's paradis, loft.
i challenge nothing; ~ *
but i'm an humble suitor for these prisoners. denham.
my lord, i come an humble suitor to you. rowe.
2. a woer; one who courts a mistress. * * *
i would i could find in my heart that i had not a hard
heart; for truly i love none. . " o
— a dear happiness to women they would else have been
troubled with a pernicious suitor. … shakespeare.
he passed a year under the counsels of his mother, and then
1 * * *-*.
became a suitor to fir roger ashton's daughter, . wotton.
by many suitors sought, she mocks their pains,
, and still her vow’d virginity maintains. . . . dryden.
he drew his seat, familiar, to her fide, -
far from the suitor train, a brutal crowd. pope's odyssy.
sv tress. n.s.. [from suiter.] a female supplicant.
: - - - 'twere pity -:
that could refuse a boon to such a firs; ;
y’ have got a noble friend to be your advocate.
su'lcated. adj. [sulcus, lat.] furrowed.
all are much chopped and sulcated by having lain exposed
on the top of the clay to the weather, and to the erosion of the
vitriolick matter mixed amongst the clay, jo'azoward.
sull. m. s. a plough. * * - ainsworth.
sut len, adj. [of this word the etymology is obscure.]
1. gloomily angry; sluggishly discontented. o
wilmot continued still sailen and perverse, and every day
grew more insolent. - - * clarendon.
. a man in a jail is fallen and out of humour at his first com-
ing in. l'asirange.
forc’d by my pride, i my concern suppress'd, --
~3
rowe.
pretended drowsiness, and wish of rest;
and sullen i forsook th’ imperfeot feast,
6
* *
lf
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u l
s u m
e fit down salon and ina&amp;ive, in expedation that god sulphureous.
should do all, we shall find ourselves miserably deceived. rog. su(lphurous.
2. mischievou" ; malignant.
such stolen planets at my birth did shine,
they threaten every fortune mixt with mine.
the sullen fiend her sounding wings display'd,
unwilling left the night, and sought the nether shade. dry.
3. intractable; obstinate. -
things are as sullen as we are, and will be what they are,
whatever we think of them. tiloson.
4. giogony dark; cloudy; dismal.
why are thine eyes fixt to the sullen earth,
gazing at that which seeins to dim thy fight? shak. h. vi.
night with her sullen wings to double shade,
the desart fowls in their clay nests were couch'd, ,
and now wild beasts came forth the woods to roam. milt.
a glimpse of moon shine, streak'd with red;
a shuffled, su'len, and uncertain light,
that dances through the clouds, and shuts again. dryden.
no checriful breeze this sallen region knows;
the dreaded east is all the wind that blows. pope.
5. heavy ; dull; sorrowful.
be thou the trumpet of our wrath, - -
and sullin presage of your own decay. shaos. king john.
su'll esly. a v. [from suen ] gloomily; malignantly ; in-
tractably.
to say they are famed without the assistance of some prin-
ciple that has wisdom in it, and come to pass from chance, is
follonly to affort a thing because we will aslert it. a1are.
- he in chains demanded more
than he impos'd in victory before:
he sullany reply'd, he could not make * .
these offers now, . dryden's indian emperor.
the gen'ral mends his weary pace,
and sullen' to his revenge he sails;
so glides some trodden serpent on the grass, - -
! and long behind his wounded volume trails. dryden.
| su'll enn ess. n.s. (from sullen.] gloominess; moroseness;
sluggish anger; malignity; intractability. -
speech being as rare as precious, her silence without sullen-
nes, her modesty without affectation, and her shamesastness
without ignorance. sidney.
l to fit my sullennes, -
| he to another key his stile doth dress. - donne.
in those vernal seasons, when the air is calm and pleasant,
i it were an injury and sullenn's against nature not to go out,
and see her riches. milton.
quit not the world out of any hypocrisy, sullenn's, or su-
perstition, but out of a sincere love of true knowledge and vir-
tuc. - more.
with these comforts about me, and sullennes enough to use
no remedy, zulichem came to see me. temple.
su'll ens. n.s. [without singular..] morosa temper; gloomi-
ness of mind. a burlesque word. -
let them die that age, and suslims have. shakes eare.
su’lli ac e. m. s. [souillage, fr.] pollution; filth; stain of
dirt; foulness. not in use.
require it to make some restitution to his neighbour for
what it has detracted from it, by wiping off that sulliage it has
cast upon his fame. government of the tongue.
calumniate stoutly; for though we wipe away with never
so much care the dirt thrown at us, there will be left some
sulliage behind. decay of piety.
to su’lly. v. a. [sauiller, fr.] to soil; to tarnish; to dirt;
to spot.
silvering will sully and canker more than gilding. bacon.
the falling temples which the gods provoke,
and statues sully'd yet with sacrilegious smoke. rossommon.
he's dead, whose love had suij'd all your reign,
and made you empress of the world in vain.
lab'ring years shall weep their destin'd race,
charg’d with ill omens, silly'd with disgrace. prior.
publick justice may be done to those virtues their humility
took care to conceal, which were sullied by the calumnies and
slanders of malicious men. nelson.
let there be no spots to sully the brightness of this solem-
nity. alterbury.
ye walkers too, that youthful colours wear,
three sillying trades avoid with equal care;
the little chimney-sweeper skulks along,
and marks with footy flains the heedless throng. gay,
su'lly. m. s. [from the verb.] soil; tarnish; spot.
you laying these light sullies on my son,
as 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working. shakespeare.
a noble and triumphant merit breaks through little spots
and sullies in his reputation. addison's speciator.
sulphur, n.s. (latin.] brimstone.
in his womb was hid metallick ore,
the work of sulphur. milton.
sulphur is produced by incorporating an oily or bituminous
matter with the fossil salt. //codward.
vol. ii.
dryden.
dryden.
l
adj. [sulphureus, lat.] made of brim-
stone; having the qualities of brim-
stone; containing sulphur; impregnated with sulphur.
my hour is almost come,
when i to sulphurous and tormenting flames
must render up myself. shakspeare's hamlet.
dart and javelin, stones and sulphurous fire. milton.
is not the strength and vigour of the action between light
and sulphureous bodies, observed above, one reason why sul-
phureous bodies take fire more readily, and burn more vehe-
mently than other bodies do - newton's opt.
the fury heard, while on cocytus' brink,
her snakes unty'd sulphureous waters drink. pope.
- no sulphureous glooms
- swell'd in the sky, and sent the lightning forth. thomson.
sulphu’reousness. n.s.. [from sulphureous.] the state of
being sulphureous. - - -
su'lpau rwort. n.s. [peucedanum, lat.] the same with
hogs f enel.
su’lphu ry. adj. [from sulphur.]. partaking of sulphur.
su'ltan. n.s. [arabick.] the turkish emperour.
by this scimitar,
that won three fields of sultan solyman. shakespeare.
su'lt ana. } n.s. [from sultan.] the queen of an eastern
su’lt an ess. emperour,
turn the sultana's chambermaid. cleaveland.
lay the tow'ring sultanes; aside. . . irene.
su’lt a nry. n.s. (from sultan.] an eastern empire. --
i affirm the same of the salianry of the mamalukes, where
slaves, bought for money, and of unknown descent, reigned
over families of freemen. bacon,
su’ltriness. n.s. [from saltry j the state of being sultry :
close and cloudy heat.
su'ltry. adj. [this is imagined by skinner to be corrupted
from siphury, or swestry.j hot without ventilation ; hot
and close ; hot and cloudy.
it is very sustry and hot. shakespeare's hamlet.
the sultry breath
of tainted air had cloy'd the jaws of death.
such as born beneath the burning sky,
and sustry sun betwixt the tropicks lie.
our foe advances on us,
and envies us even lybia's sultry desarts. addison's cato.
then would sultry heats and a burning air have scorched
and chapped the earth, and galled the animal tribes in houses
or dens. cheyne.
sum. n.s. [summa, lat. somme, fr.]
1. the whole of anything; many particulars aggregated to a
total.
we may as well conclude so of every sentence, as of the
whole sum and body thereof, - hooker.
how precious are thy thoughts unto me, o god! how
great is the sum of them. ps. cxxxix. 17.
th' almighty father, where he fits
shrin'd in his sanetuary of heav'n secure,
consulting on the sum of things, foreseen
sandys.
dryden's 42n.
this tumult, and permitted all, advis'd. milton.
such and no less is he, on whom depends
the sum of things. dryden.
weighing the sum of things with wise forecast,
solicitous of publick good. philips.
2. quantity of money.
i did send to you
for certain sums of gold, which you deny'd me. shakoff.
they who constantly set down their daily expences, have
yet some set time of casting up the whole sum. duty of man.
britain, once despis'd, can raise
as ample sums as rome in caesar's days. c. arbuthnof.
3. [somme, fr. j compendium; abridgment; the whole ab-
stracted.
this, in effect, is the sum and substance of that which they
bring by way of opposition against those orders, which we
have common with the church of rome. hooker.
they replenished the hearts of the nearest unto them with
words of memorable consolation, strengthened men in the fear
of god, gave them wholsome instructions of life, and con-
firmed them in true religion: in sum, they taught the world
no less virtuously how to die, than they had done before how
to live. booker.
this having learn'd, thou hast attain'd the sam
of wisdom. milton.
in sum, no man can have a greater veneration for chaucer
than myself. dryden.
thy sum of duty let two words contain;
be humble, and be just. prior.
in sum, the gospel, considered as a law, prescribes every
virtue to our conduct, and forbids every sin. fogers.
4. the amount; the result of reasoning or computation.
i appeal to the readers, whether the sum of what i have said
be not this. tillotson.
5. height; completion.
25 s thus
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u m
thus i have told thee all my state, and brought
my story to the sum of earthly bliss, -
which i enjoy. milton's par. loft.
in laying ay or no, the very safety of our country, and the
sum of our well being, lies. - i.'esłrange.
to sum. v. a. [sommer, fr. from the noun.] *
1. to compute; to colle&amp;t particulars into a total ; to cast up.
it has up emphatical. - -
you cast th' event of war,
and somm'd th’ account of chance. shak. henry iv.
the high priest may sum the filver brought in. 2 kings xxii.
in sickness time wiłl seem longer without a clock than with
it; for the mind doth value every moment, and then the hour
doth rather sum up the moments than divide the day. bacon.
he that would reckon up all the accidents preferments de-
pend upon, may as well undertake to count the sands, or sum
up infinity. . . r . . - south.
2. to comprise ; to comprehend ; to collect into a narrow com-
pass. . . • * - * .
so lovely fair ** * * *
that what seem’d fair in all the world, seem’d now
mean, or in her summ'd tip, in her contain'd. milton.
to conclude, by summing up what i would say concerning
what i have, and what i have not been, in the following pa-
per i shall not deny that i pretended not to write an accurate
treatise of colours, but an occasional essay. boyle.
go to the ant, thou sluggard, in few words sums top the
moral of this fable." i'losira"ge,
this atlas must our sinking state uphold;
in council cool, but in performance bold:
he sums their virtues in himself alone,
and adds the greatest, of a loyal son. dryden's aurengz.
a fine evidence summ'd up among you! . dryden.
3. [in falconry.j. to have feathers full grown.
with prosperous wing full summ’d, milton.
su(m.a. cii-tree. m. y [sumach, fr.] a plant. the flowers
are used in dying, and the branches for tanning, in america.
• * , - 44iller.
§u'mless. adj. [from som.] not to be computed.
make his chronicle as rich with prize,
as is the ouzy bottom of the sea
with sunken wreck and sum's treasuries. shak. hen. v.
a sumless journey of incorporeal speed. milton.
above, beneath, around the palace shines,
the famless treasure of exhausted mines. pope.
‘su'mmarily adv. [from summary.) briefly ; the shortest way.
the decalogue of moses declareth summarily those things
which we ought to do; the prayer of our lord, whatsoever
we should request or desire . . hooker.
while we labour for these demonstrations out of scripture,
- and do summarily declare the things which many ways have
been spoken, be contented quietly to hear, and do not think
my speech tedious... o hooker.
when the parties proceed summarily, and they chuse the
ordinary way of proceeding, the cause is made plenary. , ayl.
su’mma ry. adj. [sommaire, fr. from sum.] short; brief;
compendious.
- the judge -
flireeted them to mind their brief,
nor spend their time to shew their reading,
she'd have a summary proceeding. swift.
su'mmary. n. s. [from the adj.] compendium; abstract 3
abridgment. . - - -
we are enforc'd from our most quiet sphere
by the rough torrent of occasion; ..
and have the summary of all our griefs, -
when time shall serve, to shew in articles. shakes. h. iv.
in that comprehensive summary of our duty to god, there is
no express mention thereof. rogers.
$u'mmer. m. s. [rumen, saxon; somer, dutch..], , , ,
*1. the season in which the sun arrives at the hither solstice.
sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud;
nd, after summer, evermore succeeds
the barren winter with his nipping cold. shakes. h. vi.
can't such things be, - - -
and overcome us like a summer's cloud,
*
without our special wonder shakespeare's macbeth.
an hundred of summer fruits. 2 sa. xvi.
he was fitting in a summer parlour. judg. iii. 20.
in all the liveries deck'd of summer's pride. milton.
they marl and sow it with wheat, giving it a summer fal-
lowing first, and next year sow it with pease. mortimer.
dry weather is best for most summer corn. martimer.
- the dazzling roofs,
resplendent as the blaze of summer noon,
or the pale radiance of the midnight moon. pope.
child of the sun,
see sultry summer comes. thomson.
2. [trabs summaria.] the principal beam of a floor. -
oak, and the like true hearty timber, may be better trusted
in cross and transverse works for summers, or girders, or bind-
ing beams, wotton.
then enter'd fin, and with that sycamore,
whose leaves first shelter'd man from drought and dew
working and winding slily evermore, 1.
the inward walls and summer; cleft and tore;
but grace shor'd these, and cut that as it grew. hort
su'mmer. v. n. [from the noun..] to pass the summer. "
the fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beads shall
winter upon them. • xviii. 6
to su'mmer. v. a. to keep warm. -
maids well summer'd, and warm kept, are like flies at bar.
tholomew-tide, blind, though they have their eyes. shako,
su'mmer house, n. s. [from summer and house.j. an apost-
ment in a garden used in the summer.
i'd rather live
with cheese and garlick, in a windmill, far,
than feed on cates, and have him talk to me,
in any summerhouse in christendom. shakes. henry iv
with here a fountain, never to be play'd, -
- and there a summerhouse, that knows no shade. poe,
there is so much virtùe in cight volumes of spedators, so
a reverence of things sacred, so many valuable remarks for
our conduct in life, that they are not improper to lie in par-
lours or summerhouses, to entertain our thoughts in any no-
ments of leisure. //atti.
so n: s [soubrosault, fr. somerset is a cor.
su'mmer set. ruption.] . a high leap in which the hocis
are thrown over the head.
to
some do the summersault,
and o'er the bar like tumblers vault. hudibral.
frogs are observed to use divers summersaults. walton.
and if at first he fail, his second summersault
he instantly assays. drayton,
the treasurer cuts a caper on the strait rope: i have seen
him do the summerset upon a trencher fixed on the rope, which
is no thicker than a common packthread. swift,
su'mmit. n.s...[summitas, lat..] the top; the utmost height,
have l fall'n or no c
—from the dread summit of this chalky bourn!
look up a-height, the shrill-gorg’d lark so far
cannot be seen or heard. shakos, king lear.
aftna's heat, that makes the summit glow,
enriches all the vales below. . - swift.
to summon. v. a. [summoneo, lat.]
1. to call with authority; to admonish to appear; to cite.
catesby, sound lord hastings, -
and summon him to-morrow to the tower. shak. r. iii,
the course of method summoneth me to discourse of the in-
habitants. carew's survey of cornwal.
the tirs in is assisted by the governour of the city, where
the feast is celebrated, and all the persons of both sexes are
fumimoned to attend. bacon.
rely on what thou hast of virtue, summon all. milton.
nor trumpets summon him to war, -
nor drums disturb his morning sleep. dryden.
we are summon'd in to profess repentance and amendment
of all our fins. kettlewell.
love, duty, safety, summon us away;
'tis nature's voice, and nature we obey." pope.
2. to excite; to call up ; to raise: with to emphatical.
when the blast of war blows in our ears,
stiffen the finews, summon up the blood. shakes. henry v.
su'mmon er. m. s. [from summon.] one who cites; one who
summons. -
close pent up guilts
rive your concealing continents, and ask
these dreadful summoners grace. shakesp. king lear.
su'mmons. m. s. [from the verb.] a call of authority ; almo-
nition to appear; citation.
what are you? .
your name, your quality, and why you answer,
this present summons 2 shakespeare’s king lear.
he sent to summon the seditious, and to offer pardon; but
neither summons nor pardon was any thing regarded. hayw.
the sons of light -
hasted, resorting to the summons high,
and took their seats. milton’s paradise loft.
this summons, as he resolved unfit either to dispute, or dis-
obey, so could he not, without much violence to his inclina-
tions, submit unto. - , fell,
strike your sails at summons, or prepare
to prove the last extremities of war. - dryden.
su'mpter. m. s. [sommier, fr. smaro, italian.] a horse that
carries the cloaths or furniture.
feturn with her -
persuade me rather to be a slave and simpter
to this detested groom. shakespeare's king liar.
with full force his deadly bow he bent,
and feather'd fates among the mules and sompters sent.
- drydon.
sumpter mules, bred of large flanders mares. aft:
su'mption. n.s.. [from sumptus, lat..] the aet of taking. not
in use.
the
3.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u 3.
s u n -
the sampton of the mysteries does all in a capable subseet.
taylor.
stopruary. off. [sion’tuarius, lat..] relating to expence ;
r. nilating the soft of life.
to remove that material cause of sedition, which is want
and poverty in the estate, serveth the opening and well ba-
lancing of trade, the banishing of idleness, the repressing of
waste and excess by sumptuary laws. bacon.
sumptuo's itx. n. s. [from sumptuous.] expensiveness; cost-
liness. not used.
he added yumptuosity, invented jewels of gold and stone, and
some engines for the war. rao go.
sump tuous. adi (sumptuosus, from surplus, lat.] costly ;
expensive 5 splendid, -
we see how most christians flood then affeded, how joy-
ful they were to behold the sumptuous stateliness of houses built
unto god's glory. ho or.
we are too negaiscent and samptuous in our tables and at-
tendance. atterbay.
sorrucosy. gov. [from signptuous.]
1. expensively , with great cost.
this monum: nt five hundred years hath stood,
which i have famo.act, is re-edified. shak. ‘l irus ardron.
ethelwoli, bishop of winchester, in a famine, sold all the
rich vets is she ornaments of the church, to relieve the poor
with bread ; and faiu, there was no reason that the dead tem-
les of god should be sumptuously furnished, and the living
temples suffer penury. bacon's apophthegm.
2. solendidly. -
a good employment will make you live tolerably in lon-
don, or stroy here. - swift.
su men'uous n ess. r. s. (from signptuous.j expensiveness; coll-
liness.
i will not fall out with those that can reconcile sumptuousnes:
and charity. boyle.
sun. n.s.. [fanno, gothick; runna, runne, saxon ; son,
dutch.j
1. the luminary that makes the day. -
doth beauty keep which never son can burn,
nor storms do turn ? sidney.
bid her steal into the pleached bow'r,
where honeysuckles, ripen'd by the sun,
forbid the sun to enter. shakeshcare.
though there he but one son existing in the world, yet the
idea of it being abstracted, so that more substances might each
agree in it, it is as much a sort as if there were as many sun;
as there are stars. - locke.
by night, by day, from pole to pole they run;
or from the setting seek the rising sun. harte.
2. a sunny place; a place eminently warmed by the sun.
i his place has choice of sun and shade. 41ilton.
3. any thing eminently foem “d.
i will never consent to put out the sun of sovereignty to
posterity, and all succeeding kings. king charles.
4. un or the sun. in this world. a proverbial expression.
there is no new thing under the sun. eccl. i. o.
to sus. v. a. [from the noun...] to insolate; to expose to the
sun ; to warm in the sun.
the cry to shady delve him brought at last,
where manoroa earst did sun his treasury. spensor.
what aim it thou at delicious fare; -
and then to so; thyself in open air. dryden's p. s.
su'neeam. a. s. [ son and beam.) ray of the sun.
the roman eagle, wing'd
. from the spungy south to this part of the west,
vanish'd in the sunbeams. shakspeare's cymbeline.
gliding through the ev'n
on a sanbeam. milton's par. loft.
there was a god, a being distinet from this visible world;
and this was a truto wrote with a sunbeam, legible to all man-
kind, and received by universal consent. south.
su'n beat, fart. adj. [jun and beat.) shone on fiercely by the
usl.
its length runs level with th' atlantic main,
and wearies fruitful nilus to convey
his sunbeat waters by so long a way. dryden's jaw.
su'n bright, adj. [jun and bright...] resembling the sun in
brightness.
gathering up himself out of the mire,
with his uneven wings did fiercely fall
upon his sunbright shield. sponsor.
now would i have thee to my tutor:
how and which way i may bestow myself,
to be regarded in her sunlright eye. shał speare.
high in the midst, exaltcq as a god,
th' apostate in his sunbri. ht chariot sat,
idol of a jetty divine! inclos'd
with flaming cherubims, and golden shields. milton.
sunbu'rs is a n.s. [jun and burning.] the effect of the sun
upon the face.
if thou can't love a fellow of this temper, kate, whose
the heat of the sun may darken the colour of the oir,
which we call sunburning. . - cy's.
su's pur.n.t. participial adj. [sun and burnt.]
1. tanned ; discoloured by the fun.
where such radiant lights have shone, }
no wonder if her cheeks be grown . .
sunlournt with lustre of her own. craveland.
sunburnt and swar by though she be, *
she’ll fire for winter nights provide. dryd it.
one of them, older and more sunbarnt than the rest, told
him he had a widow in his line of life. addison.
2. scotched by the fun. -
how many nations of the sonburnt soil
idoes niger ble of how many drink the nile blackoore.
su'nclap. fart, a #. [son and clad. clothed in radiance ;
bright. - -
sco pay. m. s. [ sum and day.] the day anciently delicated to
, the fun; the first day of the week; the christian sabbath,
if thou wilt nec.'s thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print
of it, an figh away so. shakespeare.
an' she were not kin to me, she would be as fair on friday
as helen is on sunday. - shao. 7 rows and crossida.
at prime they enter'd on the sonday morn;
-
rich tap'stry spread the streets. - dryden.
our ardeut labours for the toys we seck, -
join night to day, and sunday to the week. yong.
t. su'n der. v. a. [rynonian,
to divide. -
vexation almost stops my breath,
that sundred friends greet in the hour of death, shakes?eare.
it is fundred from the main and by a sandy plain. carew.
she that should all parts to reunion bow,
she that had all magnetick force alone,
to draw and fasten fond ed parts in one.
a fundred clock is piecemeal laid,
not to be lost, but by the maker's hand
repolsh'd, without ciror then to stand.
when both the chicfs are sander'd from the fight,
then to the lawful king restore his right. dryden's wirgi'.
- th’ enormous weight was cast,
which crantor’s body sunder'd at the waist.
bears, tigers, wolves, the lion's angry brood,
whom heav'n endu'd with principles of blood,
he wisely sandred from the test, to yell
in forests.
bring me lightning, give me thunder;
—jove may kill, but ne'er shall sander. granville.
su’n por. m. s. [runben, saxon.] two ; two parts. . .
he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sander. ps.
su’s dew. m. / [ror soft, lat.) an herb. ainsworth.
suspial. n.s.. [jun and dial j a marked plate on which the
shadow points the hour.
bone.
all your graces no more you shall have,
than a sandial in a grave.
the body, though it really moves, yet not changing per-
ceivable distance, seems to stand still ; as is evident in the
sh idows of sodials. locke.
su'n dry. a.s. [runben, saxon.] several ; more than one.
that law, which, as it is laid up in the bosom of god, we
call eternal, receiveth, according unto the different kind of
things which are subject unto it, different and sandy kinds of
in annos. hooker.
not of one nation was it peopled, but of sandy people of
different manners. spenser.
but, dailying in this place so long, why do's thou dwell,
so many sundry things here having yet to tell ? /&gt;rayton.
saxon.] to part : to separate ;
doone.
downs.
dryde *1.
dojo.
he caused him to be arrested upon complaint of sandry
grievous oppresions. davies.
how can she several bodies know,
if in herself a body's form she bear 2
how can a mirrour fondry faces show,
if from all shapes and forms it be not clear * davies.
i have composed find y collects, as the adventual, qua-
dragefinal, paschal or pentecostal. sanderson.
sundry foes the rural realm surround. dryden.
su'n flow er. m. f. [corona solio, lat. j a plant. a filler.
su'nflow er, little. m. s. [helianthemum, lat.) a plant. a sillor.
suno. the preterite and participle passive of song.
a larger rock then heaving from the plain,
ile whirs'd it round, it sing across the main. pope.
from joining stones the city sprung,
while to his harp divine amphion sang. pope.
sunk. the preterite and participle passive of sn}. -
we have large caves: the deepest are son't six hundred fa-
thom, and some digged and made under great hills. bacon.
thus we act and thus we are,
or toss'd by hope or sunk by care. prior.
sunk in thalestris' arms the nymph he found. pope.
his spirit quite sunk with those reflections that solitude and
disappointments bring, he is utterly undittinguished and for-
gotten. soft.
face is not worth saturning, let thine eye be thy cook. shaft, sv'nless, aff, [from son.j. wanting sun; wanting warmth.
he<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u n
s u p
he thrice happy on the sunles; side;
, beneath the whole collected shade reclines.
su’n like. adj. [sum and like..] resembling the sun.
the quantity of light in this bright luminary, and in the
sunlike fixt stars, must be continually decreasing. cheyne.
su’nn.y. adj. [from sun.]
1. resembling the sun; bright.
- she saw duessa sunny bright,
adorn'd with gold and jewels shining clear.
the eldest, that fidelia hight,
like sunny beams threw from her crystal face.
my decay’d fair
a sunny look of his would soon repair.
the chemist feeds
perpetual flames, whose unresisted force
o'er sand and ashes and the stubborn flint
prevailing, turns into a fusile sea,
that in his furnace bubbles sunny red.
2. exposed to the sun; bright with the sun.
about me round i saw
hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains,
and liquid lapse of murm'ring streams. milton's par. loft.
him walking on a sunny hill he found. amilton.
the filmy gossamer now flits no more,
nor halcyons bask on the short sunny shore.
but what avail her unexhausted stores,
her blooming mountains and her sunny shores,
with all the gifts that heaven and earth impart,
the smiles of nature, and the charms of art,
while proud oppression in her vallies reigns,
thomson.
spenser.
spenser.
shakespeare.
philips,
dryden.
and tyranny usurps her happy plains addison.
3. coloured by the sun.
her sunny locks
hang on her temples like a golden fleece, shakespeare.
#. } n. s. [sun and rising.]
1. morning; the appearance of the sun.
send out a pursuivant
to stanley's regiment; bid him bring his power
before sunrising. shakesp. richard iii.
they intend to prevent the sunrising. j/alton's angler.
we now believe the copernican system; yet, upon ordi-
nary occasions, we shall still use the popular terms of sunrise
and sunset. bentley.
2. east.
in those days the giants of libanus mastered all nations,
from the sunrising to the sunset. raleigh's history.
su'nset. n.s.. [sun and set.]
1. close of the day; evening.
when the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew ;
but for the sunset of my brother's son
it rains downright. shakespeare.
the stars are of greater use than for men to gaze on after
funset. raleigh.
at sunset to their ship they make return,
and snore secure on deck ’till rosy morn. dryden.
he now observant of the parting ray,
eyes the calm sunset of thy various day. pope.
2. west.
su'nshine. n.s.. [sun and shine. milton seems to accent it sun-
/hine..] aetion of the sun; place where the heat and lustre of
the sun are powerful.
that man that fits within a monarch's heart,
and ripens in the sunshine of his favour,
would he abuse the count'nance of the king,
alack, what mischiefs might be set abroach,
in shadow of such greatness shakesp. henry iv.
he had been many years in that sunshine, when a new comet
appeared in court. clarendon.
sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,
but all sunshine, as when his beams at noon
culminate from th' equator.
i that in his absence
blaz'd like a star of the first magnitude,
now in his brighter sunshine am not seen. denham's sophy.
nor can we this weak show'r a tempest call,
but drops of heat that in the sunshine fall. dryden.
the more favourable you are to me, the more distinetly i
see my faults : spots and blemishes are never so plainly disco-
vered as in the brightest sunshine. pope.
su’nshine. q adj. [from sunshine. it was anciently accented
§...} on the second syllable.]
1. bright with the sun.
about ten in the morning, in sunshiny weather, we took
several sorts of paper stained. boyle.
the cases prevent the bees getting abroad upon every sun-
shine day. mortimer's husbandry,
2. bright like the sun.
the fruitful-headed beast, amaz'd
at flashing beams of that sunshiny shield,
became stark blind, and all his senses daz'd,
that down he tumbled.
milton.
spenser,
to sup. v. a. [super, norman french; rupan, saxon; jopen
dutch..] to drink by mouthfuls ; to drink by little at a tij
to sip. * -- . - r
then took the angry witch her golden oup,
which still she bore replete with magick arts;
death and despair did many thereof jup. s
there i'll find a purer air. . sup pensor,
to feed my life with ; there i'll sp
balm and neetat in my cup. . crashaw,
we saw, it smelling to every thing set in the room, .
when it had smelt to them all, it supped up the milk. ray
he call'd for drink; you saw him sup, -
... potable gold in golden cup. . . - swi
to sup. v. n. [souper, fr.]. to eat the evening meal,
you'll sup with me?
—anger's my meat; i sup upon myself, ...
and so shall starve with feeding. shakesp. crisland
when they had supped, they brought tobiasin. to
there's none observes, much less repines, -
how often this man sup; or dines. carew
l, see all the pilgrims in the canterbury tales as diffina;
as if i had supped with them. dryden,
late returning home, he susp'd at ease. dryden
to sup. v. a. to treat with supper. -
he's almost supp'd; why have you left the chamber shai.
sup them well, and look unto them all. shakespeare.
let what you have within be brought abroad,
to sup the stranger. chapman's odyssey.
so n: s [from the verb.] a small draught; a mouthful of
iquor.
tom thumb had got a little sup,
and tomalin scarce kift the cup. drayton,
a pigeon saw the picture of a glass with water in’t, and
flew eagerly up to't for a sup to quench her thirst. l'estrange.
the least transgression of your's, if it be only two bits and
one sup more than your stint, is a great debauch. swift,
super, in composition, notes either more than another, or more
than enough, or on the top. -
su'perable. adj. [superabilis, lat, superable, fr.] conquer.
able; such as may be overcome.
su'perableness. n.s.. [from superable.] quality of being
conquerable.
to super abou'nd. v. n. [super and abound..] to be exube-
rant ; to be stored with more than enough.
this case returneth again at this time, except the clemency
of his majesty superabound. bacon.
she superabound, with corn, which is quickly convertible to
coln. howel.
superabu'ndance. n.s. [super and abundance.] more than
enough ; great quantity.
the precipitation of the vegetative terrestrial matter at the
deluge amongst the sand, was to retrench the luxury and super-
abundance of the productions of the earth. woodward.
soas. adj. [super and abundant..] being more than
enoug -
so much superabundant zeal could have no other design than
to damp that spirit raised against wood. swift.
superabu'ndantly. adv. [from superabundant.] more than
sufficiently.
nothing but the uncreated infinite can adequately fill and
superabundantly satisfy the desire. cheyne.
7o supera'pp. v. n. [superaddo, lat.] to add over and
above ; to join any thing extrinsick.
. the peacock laid it extremely to heart that he had not the
nightingale's voice superadded to the beauty of plumes.
- l’estrange.
the schools dispute, whether in morals the external action
superadds any thing of good or evil to the internal elicit aa of
the will; but certainly the enmity of our judgments is
wrought up to an high pitch before it rages in an open denial.
south.
. the strength of any living creature, in those external mo-
tions, is something distinet from and superadded unto its natu-
ral gravity. wilkins's amath. mag.
superappition. m. s. [super and addition.]
1. the act of adding to something else.
the fabrick of the eye, its safe and useful situation, and
the superaddition of muscles, are a certain pledge of the exist-
ence of god. more,
2. that which is added.
of these, much more than of the nicene soperadditions, it
may be affirmed, that being the explications of a father of the
church, and not of a whole universal council, they were not
necessary to be explicitly acknowledged. hammond.
an animal, in the course of hard labour, seems to be no-
thing but vessels: let the same animal continue long in rest, it
will perhaps double its weight and bulk: this /*praddition is
nothing but fat. arbuthnot.
super adve"nient. adj. [superadweniens, lat.] -
1. coming to the increase or assistance of something.
the soul of man may have matter of triumph, when he has
done bravely by a superadvenient affistance of his god. or,
§ 2. coming
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u p
s u p.
;
2. coming unexpectedly.
1, superannuate. v. a. s.sfer and annus, lat.] to im-
air or disqualify by age or length of life,
if such depravities be yet alive, deformity need not despair,
nor will the eldest hopes be ever superannuated. brown.
when the sacramental test was put in execution, the justices
of peace through ireland, that had laid down their com-
missions, amounted only to a dozen, and those of the lowest
fortune, and some of them siperannuatel. - swift.
t. supera'nn 9 at e. v. n. to last beyond the year. not in
use.
the dying of the roots of plants that are annual, is by the
over-expence of the sap into stalk and leaves, which being
prevented, they will super annuate. j.com's natural history.
super annuation. m. s. [from superan, hat...] the state of
being disqualified by years. o
supe’rb. adj. [supe; be, fr. sorbus, lat.) grand; pom-
us; lofty; august; stately; magnificent."
supe's b-lii. y. m. s. [methonica, lat..] a flower.
supe'rbly. adv. [from spel b.] in a superb manner.
super ca'r go. m. s. [/user and cargo.] an officer in the ship
whose business is to manage the trade.
i only wear it in a land of hedors, *
thieves, supercargoes, sharpers, and dire&amp;ors. . . . pope.
st. percole'st 1al. adj. [sper and cel/fill.j placed above the
firmanent.
i dare not think that any supercelon' heaven, or whatso-
ever else, not himself, was increate and eternal. raleigh.
many were for fetching down i know not o:
waters for the purpose. i? -- 'ward’s nat. hyłory.
super cis ery. m. s. [an old word of french origin..] deceit;
cheating. -
super liou.s. ad. [from sporom, latin.] haughty;
dogmatical ; dictatorial; arbitrary; despotick; overbearing.
those who are one while courteous, within a small time
after are so supercilicus, fierce, and exceptious, that they are
short of the true character of friendship. south.
several sif ercisions criticks will treat an author with the
greatest contempt, if he fancies the old romans wore a girdle.
addison.
super coliously. adv. [from supercillows.] haughtily; dog-
matically ; contemptuously.
he, who was a punetual man in point of honour, received
this address superci, cusy enough, so at it to the king without
performing the least ceremony. clarendon.
screr cr'lious n ess. m. s. [from sperciscus.j haughtiness ;
contemptuousness.
superconce prios. m. s. [super and conception.] a concep-
tion admitted after another conception.
those stope, conceptions, where one child was like the father,
the other like the adulterer, seem idle. brown's pulgar err.
super co’n's equen ce. m. s. [super and consequence. j remote
consequence.
not attaining the deuteroscopy, and second intention of the
words, they omit their superconsequences and coherences. brown.
super ( r esce n ce. n. j. [super and crosco, lat.] that which
grows upon another growing thing.
wherever it groweth it maintains a regular figure, like
other supercrescences, and like such as, living upon the stock of
others, are termed parasitical plants. prown's sugar errours.
st. perf at in en.cf. } m. s. [super and emineo, lat.j uncom-
sv per em in en cy. mon degree of eminence ; eminence
above others though eminent.
the archbishop of canterbury, as he is primate over all
england and metropolitan, has a sopereminency, and even some
power over the archbishop of york. ayliff's parergon.
supere'm in en r. adj. [juper and eminent.] eminent in a high
degree.
as humility is in suiters a decent virtue, so the testification
thereof by such effectual acknowledgments not only argueth a
sound apprehension of his supereminent glory and majesty before
whom we stand, but putteth also into his hands a kind of
pledge or bond for security against our unthankfulness.
hooker.
in the most
'e -
supere'min ently. adv. [from sofereminent.]
eminent nanner.
to supere'rog atf. v. n. [softer and erogatio, lat.] to do
more than duty requires.
so by an abbey's skeleton of late,
i heard an eccho supererogate
through impersection, and the voice restore,
as if she had the hiccup o'crand o'er. claveland.
aristotle acted his own instructions, and his obsequious sec-
tators have suffererogated in observance. glanville's szepsis.
st. pere rod aotios. m. s. (from supererogate.] performance of
more than duty requires.
there is no such thing as works of supererogation; no man
can do more than needs, and is his duty to do, by way of
preparation for another world. tillotson.
super &amp; rod aror y. adi. (from storerogate j performed be-
yond the strict demands of duty.
vol. ii.
supererogatory services, and too great benefits from subjeo
to kings, are of dangerous consequence. howel.
superex altation. m. s. [super and exalt.j elevation above
the common rate. - - -
in a superexaltation of courage, they seem as greedy of death
as of victory. - - - - holyday.
supere xcelt ent. adj. [sper and excellent.] excellent be-
yond common degrees of excellence, -
we discern not the abuse: suffer him to persuade us that
we are as gods, something so super excellent, that all must reve-
rence and adore. . decay of piety.
super excre'scence. m. s. [sper and excroft.nce..] something
superfluously growing.
as the escar separated between the scarifications, i rubbed
the superexcrescence of flesh with the vitriol stone, wiseman.
to superfe rat e. v. n. [sper and fetus, lat.] to con-
ceive aster conception.
the female brings forth twice in one month, and so is said
to supersetate, which, saith aristotle, is because her eggs are
hatched in her one after another. grew's musæum.
super feta's 10n. m. s. [sipers.tation, french; from superse-
tate.] one conception following another, so that both are
in the womb together, but come not to their full time for de-
livery together. $2aincy.
superstation must be by abundance of sap in the bough that
putteth it forth. bacon's natural history.
if the saferstation be made with considerable intermission,
the latter most commonly becomes abortive; for the first
being confirmed, engrosseth the aliment from the other.
brown.
su'per fice. n. s. [superficie, fr. superficies, lat..] outside;
surface. -
then if it rise not to the former height
of superfice, conclude that soil is light. dryden.
superficial. adj. [superficiel, fr. from safe fier, lat.]
1. lying on the surface; not reaching below the surface.
that, upon the superficial ground, heat and moisture cause
putrefaction, in england is found not true. bacon.
from these phaenomena several have concluded some general
rupture in the superfeial parts of the earth. burnet.
there is not one infidel living so ridiculous as to pretend to
solve the phaenomena of fight, or cogitation, by those fleeting
faterficial films of bodies. bentley.
2. shallow ; contrived to cover something.
this superficial tale
is but a preface to her worthy praise.
shałoszaro's henry vi.
3. shallow ; not profound ; smattering, not learned.
their knowledge is so very superficial, and so ill-grounded,
that it is impossible for them to describe in what consists the
beauty of those works. dryden.
superf1c1a lity. n. s. [from superficial.] the quality of
eing superficial.
by these salts the colours of bodies receive degrees of luste
or obscurity, superfriality or profundity. brown.
super f 1'cia lly. adv. [from superficial.]
1. on the surface; not below the surface.
2. without penetration; without close heed.
perspective hath been with some diligence inquired; but
the nature of sounds in general hath been superficially observed.
bacon's natural history.
his eye so speficially surveys
these things, as not to mind from whence they grow,
deep under ground. milton's paradis, loft.
3. without going deep ; without searching to the bottom of
things.
you have said well;
but on the cause and question now in hand,
have gloz'd but superficially. shakes. troilus and cressida.
i have laid down superficially my present thoughts. dryden.
superf1 c1alness. n. s. [from superficial.]
1. shallowness ; position on the surface.
2. slight knowledge ; false appearance; show without sub-
stance.
superf/cies. m. s. [latin j outside; surface; superfice.
he on her superficies stretch'd his line. sandys.
a convex mirrour makes objects in the middle to come out
from the superfcies: the painter must, in respect of the light
and shadows of his figures, give them more relievo, dryden.
superf1'ne. adj, [super and fine.] eminently fine.
some, by this journey of jason, understand the mystery of
the philosopher's stone : to which also other superfine chymists
draw the twelve labours of hercules. l'estrange.
if you observe your cyder, by interposing it between a
candle and your eye, to be very transparent, it may be called
superfine. a/artimer’s husbandry.
superflu'ence. m. s. [super and suo, lat.] more than is
necessary.
the supersuence of grace is ordinarily proportioned to the
faithful discharge of former trusts, making use of the foregoing
sufficient grace. - hammond,
25 t superflu'itance.
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u p
s u p *
superflu'it ance. m. s. [super and fiuito, lat..] the aet of
floating above.
sperma ceti, which is a superfaitance on the sea, is not the
sperm of a whale. brown's vulgar errours.
suff rflu'it ant. adj. [supersuitans, lat.] floating above.
a chalky earth, beaten and steeped in water, affordeth a
cream or fatness on the top, and a gross subsidence at the bot-
tom: out of the cream, or superftuitance, the finest dishes are
made; out of the residence, the coarser. brown.
superflu'it y. m. s. [supersuite, fr. from superfluous...] more
than enough , plenty beyond use or necessity. not in use.
having this way eased the church, as they thought, of su-
perft sity, they went on till they had plucked up even those
things which also had taken a great deal deeper root. hooker.
they are as sick that surfeit with too much, as they that
starve with nothing; therefore it is no mean happiness to be
seated in the mean: supersuity comes sooner by white hairs,
but competency lives longer. shakespeare.
a quiet mediocrity is still to be preferred before a troubled
superfluity. suckling.
like the sun, let bounty spread her ray,
and shine that supersuity away. pope.
supe'rfluous. adj. [/uper and fluo, lat. superfu, fr.] exu-
berant; more than enough; unnecessary; offensive by being
more than sufficient. -
i think it superfluous to use any words of a subject so praise
in itself as it needs no praises. sidney.
when a thing ceaseth to be available unto the end which
gave it being, the continuance of it must then appear superfu-
0.445. hooker.
our sperfluous lacqueys and our peasants,
who in unnecessary action swarm
about our squares of battle. shakespeare's henry v.
a proper title of a peace, and purchas'd
at a superfluous rate. shakespeare.
as touching the ministring to the saints, it is superfluous to
write. 2 cor. ix. i.
horace will our superfluous branches prune,
give us new rules, and set our harp in tune. roscommon.
- lf ye know,
why ask ye, and superfluous begin
your message, like to end as much in vain milton.
his conscience chear'd him with a life well spent,
his prudence a superfluous something lent,
which made the poor who took, and poor who gave, con-
tent. harte.
supe'rfluous ness. n. s. [from superfluous.] the state of be-
ing superfluous.
su'per flux. n. s. [super and fluxus, latin.] that which is
more than is wanted.
take physick, pomp ;
expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
that thou may'st shake the superflux to them, shakespeare.
superhu'man. adj. [super and humanus, latin.] above the
nature or power of man. -
superimpregnation. m. s. [super and impregnation.] su-
perconception; superfetation.
su perincu'mbent. adj. [super and incumbens, latin.] ly-
ing on the top of something else.
it is sometimes so extremely violent, that it forces the so-
perincumbent strata; breaks them throughout, and thereby per-
fectly undermines and ruins their foundations. woodward.
to super indu'ce. v. a. [super and induco, latin.]
1. to bring in as an addition to something else.
to superinduce any virtue upon a person, take the living
creature in which that virtue is most eminent. " bacon.
custom and corruption superinduce upon us a kind of neces-
sity of going on as we began. l’estrange.
father is a notion superinduced to the substance or man, and
refers only to an act of that thing called man, whereby he
contributed to the generation of one of his own kind, let man
be what it will. locke.
long custom of sinning superinduces upon the soul new and
absurd desires, like the distemper of the soul, feeding only up-
on filth and corruption. south.
2. to bring on as a thing not originally belonging to that on
which it is brought.
relation is not contained in the real existence of things,
but something extraneous and superinduced. locke.
in children, savages, and ill-natured people, learning not
having cast their native thoughts into new moulds, nor by
superinducing foreign doctrines, confounded those fair charac-
ters nature had written, their innate notions might lie
open. - locke.
superindu'ction. m. s. [from super and induce.] the act of
superinducing.
a good inclination is but the first rude draught of virtue ;
the superinducion of ill habits quickly deface it. south.
superinje’ction. n.s.. [super and injection.] an injection
succeeding another. - dic7.
superinstitution. n. s. [super and institution. in law.]
one institution upon another; as if a be instituted and ad.
mitted to a benefice upon a title, and b be instituted and ad-
mitted by the presentation of another. bailey.
to superintend. v. a. [super and intend..] to oversee;
to overlook; to take care of others with authority.
the king will appoint a council, who may superintend the
works of this nature, and regulate what concerns the colo-
nies. bacon's advice to willier,
this argues design, and a superintending wisdom, power
and providence in this special business of food. derham,
angels, good or bad, must be furnished with prodigious
knowledge, to oversee persia and grecia of old; or if an
such superintend the affairs of great britain now. watts.
superint endence. }": [from super and intend j supe.
superint endency. 5 riour care; the act of overseeing with
authority.
such an universal superintendency has the eye and hand of
providence over all, even the most minute and inconfiderable
things. south.
the divine providence, which hath a visible respect to the
being of every man, is yet more observable in its superinten-
dency over societics. grew.
an admirable indication of the divine superintendence and
management. derham.
super inte'ndent. n.s. [superintendant, fr. from sperintend.]
one who overlooks others authoritatively.
next to brama, one deuendre is the superintendent deity,
who hath many more under him. stillingfieet.
the world pays a natural veneration to men of virtue, and
rejoice to see themselves conducted by those who act under
the care of a supreme being, and who think themselves ac-
countable to the great judge and superintendent of human as-
fairs. addison.
super io'rity.. n.s.. [from superiour.] pre-eminence; the ga.
lity of being greater or higher than another in any respect.
bellarmine makes the formal act of adoration to be sub-
jection to a superiour; but he makes the mere apprehension
of excellency to include the formal reason of it; whereas mere
excellency without superiority doth not require any subjection,
but only estimation. stilingfielt.
the person who advises, does in that particular exercise
a superiority over us, thinking us defective in our conduct or
understanding. addison's speciator.
supe’riou r. adj. [superieur, fr. superior, latin.]
1. higher ; greater in dignity or excellence; preferable or pre-
ferred to another.
in commending another, you do yourself right; for he that
you commend is either superiour to you in that you commend,
or inferiour; if he be inferiour, if he be to be commended,
you much more : if he be superiour, if he be not to be com-
mended, you much less glorious. bacon.
although superior to the people, yet not superior to their
own voluntary engagements once passed from them. taylor.
heaven takes part with the oppressed, and tyrants are upon
their behaviour to a superior power. l’estrange.
superior beings above us, who enjoy perfeot happiness, are
more steadily determined in their choice of good than we, and
yet they are not less happy or less free than we are. locke.
he laughs at men of far superior understandings to his, for
not being as well dressed as himself. swift.
2. upper; higher locally. .
by the refraction of the second prism, the breadth of the
image was not increased, but its superior part, which in the
first prism suffered the greater refraction, and appeared violet
and blue, did again in the second prism suffer a greater refrac-
tion than its inferiour part, which appeared red and yellow.
newton's opticks.
3. free from emotion or concern; unconquered.
from amidst them forth he pass'd,
long way through hostile scorn; which he sustain’d
superior, nor of violence fear'd ought, milton.
here passion first i felt,
commotion strangel in all enjoyments else
superior and unmov’d. milton.
there is not in earth a spectacle more worthy than a great
man superiour to his sufferings. addison's spediator.
supe’riour. m. s. one more excellent or dignified than an-
other.
those under the great officers of state have more frequent
opportunities for the exercise of benevolence than their supe-
riours. addison’s spedator.
superla tion. n. s. [superlatio, latin.] exaltation of any
thing beyond truth or propriety.
there are words that as much raise a style as others can
depress it; superlation and overmuchness amplifies : it may be
above faith, but not above a mean. ben. johnson.
supe/rlative. adj. [superlatif, fr. superlativus, latin.]
1. implying or expressing the highest degree.
it is an usual way to give the superlative unto things of emi-
nence; and when a thing is very great, presently to define it
to be the greatest of all. brown's pogar erreurs.
2
some
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u p
some have a violent and turgid manner of talking and think-
ing; they are always in extremes, and pronounce concerning
every thing in the suo ut, ve. if atts.
2. rising to the highest degree.
the high court of parliament in england is sperlative.
ba, on’s advice to l'illiers.
martyrdoms i reckon amongst miracles; because they seem
to exceed the strength of human nature; and i may do the like
of superlative and admirable hohness. bacon,
the generality of its reception is with many the persuading
argument of its /*perlative desert; and common judges mea-
sure excellency by numbers. glanville.
ingratitude and compassion never cohabit in the same breast;
which shews the sopriative malignity of this vice, and the
baseness of the mind in which it dwells. south,
supe'ri. a riv fly. also (from superlative.
1. in a manner of speech expressing the highest degree.
i sh's not spok/operatively of them ; but that i may truly
say, they are second to none in the christian world. bacos.
2. in the highet degree.
tiberius was b d enough in his youth ; but superiatively and
monstrously so in his old age. south.
the supreme boing is a spirit most excellently glorious, su-
polatively powerful, wife and good, creator of as things. bent.
supe'rlativen f. s. m. s. [from supersative..] the state of be-
ing in the highest degree. -
superlu's as a j. lup-r and luna j not sublunary; placed
above the moon ; not of this world.
the mind, in metaphysicks, at a loss,
may wander in a wilderness of moss;
the head that turns at /up-rivnar things,
pois'd with a tail, may steer on wilkins' wings. . pope.
supe'rnal. adj. [joe: nas, latin.)
o 1. having an higher position ; locally above us.
by heaven and earth was meant the sold matter and sub-
stance, as well of all the heavens and orbs supernal, as of the
globe of the earth, and waters which covered it. ra', 'gh.
2. relating to things above; placed above; celestial; heavenly.
that supernal judge that stirs good thoughts
in any breast of strong authority,
to look into the bolts and stains of right. shakespeare.
he with frequent intercourse
thither will send his winged messengers,
on errands of supernal grace. milton.
* both glorying to have 'scap'd the stygian flood,
as gods, and by their own recover'd strength,
not by the suffrance of supernal pow'r, milton.
supernatant: adj. [/upernatans, latin.] swinning
above.
whilst the substance continued fluid, i could shake it with
the supernatant menstruan, without making between them any
true union. boyle.
surp ern a ratios. m. s. [from spernato, latin.] the act of
swimming on the top of any thing.
touching the surernatation of bodies, take of aquafortis
two ounces, of quicksilver two drams, the dissolution will not
bear a flint as big as a nutmeg. bacon's nat. history.
bodies are differenced by supernatation, as floating on wa-
ter; for chrystal will sink in water, as carrying in its own
bulk a greater ponderosity than the space of any water it doth
occupy; and will therefore only swim in mosten metal and
quicksilver. brown's pulgar errours.
supernatural. adj. [sper and natural.] being above the
powers of nature.
there resteth either no way unto salvation, or if any, then
surely a way which is supernatural, a way which could never
have entered into the heart of a man, as much as once to
conceive or imagine, if god himself had not revealed it ex-
traordinarily ; for which cause we term it the myslery or sc-
cret way of salvation. j/ozłer.
when supernatural duties are necessarily exaded, natural
are not rejected as needless. hooker.
the understanding is secured by the perfection of its own
nature, or by supernatural assistance. tillot/on.
no man can give any rational account how it is possible
that such a general flood should come, by any natural means.
and if it be su'ernatural, that grants the thing i am proving,
namely, such a supreme being as can alter the course of na-
ture. j/zons.
what mists of providence are these,
through which we cannot see *
so fants by usernatural power set free
are left at last in martyrdon to die. dryden.
supernaturally. adv. [from spernatural.] in a manner
above the course or power of nature.
the son of god came to do every thing in miracle, to love
formaturay, and to pardon infinitely, and even to lay down
the sovereign while he assumed the saviour. south.
supernu m erary. adj. [spernumeraire, fr. super and numerus,
lat] being above a sited, a necessary, an usual, or a round
number.
well if thrown out, as supernumerary
to my just number found assion's paradis, loft.
in sixty-three years there may be lost eighteen days, otnit-
ting the intercalation of one day every fourth year, allowed
for this quadrant or six "...so brown.
the odd or stope numerary six hours are not accounted in the
three years after the leap year. hold, r.
besides occasional and supernumerary addresses, hammond's
certain perpetual returns exceeded david's seven times a-
day. p. ss.
the produce of this tax is adequate to the services for which
it is designed, and the additional tax is proportioned to the so-
pernumerary expence this year. addison's freeholder.
antiochus began to augment his fleet; but the roman se-
nate ordered his supernumerary vessels to be burnt. a bathnot.
a supernumerary canon is one who does not receive any of .
the profits or emoluments of the church, but only lives and
serves there on a future expectation of some prebend. also.
su'per plan r. m. s. [soper and plant..] a plant growing upon
another plant.
no superplant is a formed plant but misletoe. bacon.
su'per plus a g b. m. s. (super and plus, latin.] something
more than enough.
after this there yet remained a superplusage for the assistance
of the neighbour parishes. fell.
to super for derat p. v. a. [super and pondero, latin.] to
weigh over and above. did.
super pr opo r rion. ii. s. [super and proportio, latin.] over-
plus of proportion.
no detect of velocity, which requires as great a superpropor-
tion in the cause, can be overcome in an instant. digby.
scr: a purga"rio n. m. s. (soters urgation, fr. super and parga-
tion.] more purgation than enough.
there happening a sper purgation, he declined the repeating
of that purge. //iseman's surgery.
superr b flexion. m. s. [super and reflexion. j. reflexion of
an image reflected.
place one glass before and another behind, you shall see
the glass behind with the image within the glass before, and
again the glass before in that, and divers such superroff xions,
till the species speciei at last die. bacon's natural sistory.
super sa’li en cy. n. s. [sper and salia, latin. this were
better written spersiliency.) the act of leaping upon any thing.
their coition is by supersaliency, like that of horses. brown.
to superscr1'be. v. a. s. super and scribo, latin.] to in-
scribe u, on the top or outside.
fabretti and others believe, that by the two fortunes were
only meant in general the goddess who sent prosperity or af-
flictions, and produce in their behalf an ancient monument,
safe's rised. zadison.
super scriptios. m. s. [sper and scriptiz, latin.]
1. the act of superscribing.
2. that which is written on the top or outside.
doth this churlish supersoriftion
portend some alteration in good will. shaozar”; ip vi.
read me the sper/cription of these letters; i know rot
which is which, słascspeare's zimon.
no superscriptions of fame,
of honour or good name. sack org.
i learn of my experience, not by talk,
how counterfeit a coin they are who friends
bear in their safe scription; in prosperous days
they swarm, but in adverse withdraw their head. milton.
it is enough her stone
may honour’d be with swers riotion
of the sole lady, who had pow'r to move
the great northumberland. - //or.
72 superse dr. v. a. [super and so lea, latin.j to make void
or inefficacious by superiour power; to set aside.
passion is the drunkenness of the mind; and therefore in
its present workings not controusable by reason; for as much
as the proper effect of it is, for the time, to supersede the work-
ings of reason. south.
in this genuine acceptation of chance, nothing is supposed
that can supersede the known laws of natural motion. bentley.
superse dems. n. / [in law.) is a writ which beth in
divers and fundry cases; in all which it signifies a command
or request to stay or forbear the doing of that which in ap-
pearance of law were to be done, were it not for the cause
whereupon the writ is granted: for example, a man regular)
is to have surety of peace against him of whom he will swear
that he is afraid ; and the justice required hereunto cannot
deny him : yet if the party be formerly bound to the peace, in
chancery or elsewhere, this writ lieth to stay the justice from
doing that, which otherwise he might not deny. cowe/.
the far distance of this county from the court hath afforded
it a supersedeas from takers and purveyours. carew.
super ser v ice a ble. adj. if super and serviceale.] over offi-
cious; more than is necessary or required.
a glass-gazing, supersorviceable finical rogue. shałoffeare.
superstition. m. s. [sper/ition, fr. jupersitio, lorin ]
i. unnecessary
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u p
s u p
1. unnecessary fear or scruples in religion; observance of unne-
cessary and uncommanded rites or practices; religion without
morality.
a rev'rent fear, such supersition reigns
among the rude, ev'n then possess'd the swains. dryden.
2. rite or practice proceeding from scrupulous or timorous reli-
gion. in this sease it is plural.
they the truth
with spersitions and traditions taint. milton.
if we had a religion that consisted in absurd super/litions,
that had no regard to the perfection of our nature, people
might well be glad to have some part of their life excused from
it. law.
3. false religion; reverence of beings not proper objects of re-
verence ; false worship.
they had certain questions against him of their own super-
sition. ael; xxv. 19.
4. over-nicety; exactness too scrupulous.
super stitious. adj. [ supersitieux, fr. supers?itiosus, latin.]
1. addicted to superstition; full of idle fancies or scruples with
regard to religion. -
at the kindling of the fire, and lighting of candles, they
say certain prayers, and use some other supersitious rites, which
shew that they honour the fire and the light. spenser.
have i
been out of fondness spersitious to him :
and am i thus rewarded ? shakesp. henry viii.
nature's own work it seem’d, nature taught art,
and to a supersitious eye the haunt
of wood-gods and wood-nymphs. milton.
a venerable wood,
where rites divine were paid, whose holy hair
was kept and cut with super/litious care. dryden.
2. over accurate; scrupulous beyond need.
supersti’t 1ously. adv. [from supers?itious.]
1. in a superstitious manner; with erroneous religion.
there reigned in this island a king, whose memory of all
others we most adore; not supersitiously, but as a divine in-
strument. bacon.
2. with too much care.
neither of these methods should be too scrupulously and
supersitiously pursued. watts's logick.
to superst ra’in. v. a, [super and strain..] to strain beyond
the just stretch.
in the straining of a string, the further it is strained, the
less super/training goeth to a note. bacon.
to superstruct. v. a. [super/iruo, supersirudus, latin.]
to build upon any thing.
two notions of fundamentals may be conceived, one signi-
fying that whereon our eternal bliss is immediately superstrug-
ed, the other whereon our obedience to the faith of christ is
founded. hammond.
if his habit of fin have not corrupted his principles, the vi-
cious christian may think it reasonable to reform, and the
preacher may hope to supersiruci good life upon such a foun-
dation. hammond's fundamentals.
this is the only proper basis on which to super/iruci first
innocency, and then virtue. decay of piety.
super stru’ction. m. s. [from superstruct.] an edifice raised
on any thing.
i want not to improve the honour of the living by impairing
that of the dead; and my own profession hath taught me not
to cre&amp;t new super/irucians upon an old ruin. denham.
super stru’ctive. adj. [from super/iruci. j. built upon some-
thing else.
he that is so sure of his particular election, as to resolve
he can never fall, must necessarily resolve, that what were
drunkenness in another, is not so in him, and nothing but
the removing his fundamental error can rescue him from the
superforucive, be it never so gross. hammond.
super struct ure. m. s. [super and siruciure.] that which
is raised or built upon something else.
he who builds upon the present, builds upon the narrow
compass of a point; and where the foundation is so narrow,
the super/iruciure cannot be high and strong too. south.
purgatory was not known in the primitive church, and is
a super/iructure upon the christian religion. tillotson.
you have added to your natural endowments the superstruc-
tures of study. dryden.
super subst a’ntial. adj. [super and substantial.] more than
substantial.
supervacaneous. adj. [ supervacancus, lat.] superflu-
cus; needles; unneceilary ; serving to no purpose. dic7.
super v aca’neously. adv. [from the adjective.] needlessly.
super v aca’neouss ess. n. s. [from the adjective j need-
lesiress. bailey.
to supervene. v. n. [supervenia, lat..] to come as an
extrancous addition.
his good-will, when placed on any, was so fixed and
rooted, that even supervening vice, to which he had the great-
eit detestation imaginable, could not easily remove it. fell.
‘7
such a mutual gravitation can never supervene to matter,
unless impressed by a divine power.
super v enien r. adj. [superveniens,
tional.
if it were unjust to murder john, the supervenie.: oath did
not extenuate the fact, or oblige the jurer unto it. bro on.
that branch of belief was in him superveni.nl to christian
practice, and not all christian practice built on that.
super v entio n. m. s. [from supervene.]
veningr.
to supervise. v. a. s. super and visus, latin.]
look ; to oversee; to intend.
m. bayle speaks of the vexation of the supervising of the
press, in terms so feeling that they move compassion. congreve.
supervi’sor. n.s. [from supervise.] an overseer; an inspec-
tor; a superintendant.
a supervisor may fignify an overseer of the poor, an inspec-
tor of the customs, a surveyor of the high-ways, a supervisor
ley.
|
ci-
on
latin.] added; ad
1, am,
the act of super-
to over-
of the excise. /f/att;’; logick.
how satisfy'd, my lord
would you be supervisor, grossly gape on ? shakspeare.
i am informed of the author and supervisors of this pam-
phlet. dryden.
to supervi’ve. v. m. [super and vivo, lat..] to overive;
to outlive. -
upon what principle can the soul be imagined to be natu-
rally mortal, or what revolutions in nature will it not be able
to resist and supervive? clarke.
supination. n.s.. [supination, fr. from supino, latin.] the
act of lying, or state of being laid with the face upward,
supine, adj. [supinus, latin.]
1. lying with the face upward: opposed to prone.
upon these divers positions in man, wherein the spine can
only be at right lines with the thigh, arise those remarkable
postures, prone, supine, and erect. brown's pulgar errouri,
at him he lanc'd his spear, and pierc’d his breast;
on the hard earth the lycian knock'd his head,
and lay supine; and forth the spirit fled. dryden,
what advantage hath a man by this erection above other
animals, the faces of most of them being more supine than
ours. ray on the creation,
2. leaning backwards with exposure to the sun.
if the vine,
on rising ground be plac'd, or hills supine,
extend thy loose battalions. dryden.
3. negligent; careless; indolent; drowsy; thoughtless; inat-
tentive.
these men suffer by their absence, silence, negligence, or
fupine credulity, aing charles.
supine amidst our flowing store g
we slept securely. dryden.
supine in sylvia's snowy arms he lies,
and all the busy cares of life defies. tatler.
he became pusillanimous and spine, and openly exposed to
any temptation. woodward.
suspine. n.f. [supin, french ; supinum, latin.] in grammar,
a term signifying a particular kind of verbal noun.
sup is n ely. adv. [from supine.]
1. with the face upward.
2. drowsily; thoughtlessly ; indolently.
- who on the beds of fin supinely lie,
they in the summer of their age shall die. sandys.
the old imprison'd king,
whose lenity first pleas'd the gaping crowd;
but when long try’d, and found spinely good,
like aesop's log, they leapt upon his back. dryden.
he panting on thy breast supinely lies,
while with thy heav'nly form he feeds his famish'd eyes.
dryden's lucretius.
wilt thou then repine
to labour for thyself? and rather chuse
to lie supinely, hoping heaven will bless
thy slighted fruits, and give thee bread unearn'd? philips,
beneath a verdant laurel's shade,
horace, immortal bard supinely laid.
supin en ess. m. s. [from spine.]
1. posture with the face upward.
2. drowsiness; carelessness; indolence.
when this door is open to let dissenters in, considering
their industry and our supineness, they may in a very few years
grow to a majority in the house of commons. swift.
sup1’nity.. n.s. [from supine.]
1. posture of lying with the face upwards.
2. carelessness; indolence; thoughtlessness.
the fourth cause of errour is a supinity or neglect of enquiry,
even in matters wherein we doubt, rather believing than go-
ing to see.” - brown's polgar errours.
suppedane qus. adj. [sub and pes, lat.] placed under the feet.
he had soder legs, but encreased by riding after meals;
that is, the humour descended upon their pendulofity, they
having no support or suppedaneous stability. brown.
su’pper.
prior.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u p
s u p
supper. n.s. (souter, fr. see sup.] the last meal of the
• day; the evening repast.
to-night we hold a solemn stop, r.
i'll to my book :
for yet, ere so oper-time must 1 perform
much business. shakes care's tomtes?.
shakespeare.
th’ hour of suffer comes unearn'd. a filton.
his physicians, after his great fever that he had in oxford,
required him to eat suffers. fell.
supper less. ads. [from susper.j wanting supper; fasting at
might. - -
suppose a man's going suboerles to bed, should introduce
him to the table of some great prince. speciator.
she ey'd the bard, where surpersos, he sat,
and nin'd. unconscious of his rising fate. pope.
to suppla(nt. v. a. [/*pplanter, fr. job and planta, lat. j
1. to trip up the heels.
his legs entwining
each other, till sounted down he fell;
a monstrous serpent on his belly prone. milton.
the thronoing populace with hasty strides
obstruct the casv wav ; the rocking town
supplants their footsteps; to and fro they reel. philips.
2. to displace by stratagem : to turn out.
it is philoclea his heart is set upon; it is my daughter i
have borne to so of art me. sidney.
upon a just survey, take titus' part,
and o sopp ant us for ingratitude.
3. to displace : to overpower; to force away.
: it be fond. call it a woman's fear;
which tear, it better reasons can solo,
shakespeare.
i will subscribe, and say, i wron "d the duke. shakes rare.
sospecting that the courtier had so plante the friend. i’l.
. the sense in this pallage seems to be onistaken. o
for such doctrines as depend merely upon institution and
the intruction of others, men do frequently differ both from
themselves, and from one another about them ; becau'e' that
which can plant, can stoplant. 12 u \ins.
serplaster. m. s. (trom supplant.] one that supplants; one
... that displaces.
supple. adj. [sootle, fr j
1. pliant ; flexible.
i he joints are more supple to a! feats of adivoy in youth
than afterwards. acon.
will ye submit your necks, and chuse to bend
the supple knee milton.
and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
with supple joints, as lively vigour led. a 'ilton.
no won.en are apter to spin linen well than the irish, who
labouring little in any kind with their hands, have their fingers
more supple and soft than other women of the poorer condition
in england. ‘i emple.
2. yielding; fost; not obstinate.
when we've stuff'd
these pipes and these convevances of blond
with wine and feeding, we have suppler sou's
than in our priestlike fasts.
ev’n footer than thy own, of suposer kind,
more exquisite of taste, and more than man refin'd. dryden.
if punishment reaches not the mind, and makes not the
will supple, it hardens the offender. locke.
3. flattering ; fawning ; bending.
there is something so supple and insinuating in this absurd
unnatural doctrine, as makes it extremely agreeable to a
prince's ear. addison.
4. that which makes supple.
each part depriv'd of sole government,
shall stiff, and tark, and cold appear, like death. shakesp.
to supple. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. to make pliant; to make toft; to make flexible.
poultic's allaying pain, drew down the humours, and sup-
plod the ports, thereby making the passages wider. 7 emple.
to so, pse a carcass, drench it in water. arbuthnot,
2. to make compliant.
knaves having by their own importunate suit,
convinc'd or su pl"d then, they cannot chuse,
but they must blab. shakes care's othe'.
a mother persisting till she had bent her daughter's mind,
and sold her will, the only end of correction, the established
her authority thoroughly ever after. locke on e. acation.
to supple. v. n. to grow soft ; to grow plant.
shakespeare.
* the stones
- did first the rigour of their kind expel,
and to tied into softness as they fell. drydon.
supplemen i. n. s. (sopplement, fr. spplementum, lat.]
1. addition to any thing by which its defects are supplied.
… unto the word of god, being in respect of that end for
which god ordained it, perfeo, exact, and absolute in itself,
we do not add reason as a supplement of any main or defect
- therein, but as a necessory intrument, without which we
could not reap by the scriptures perfection that fruit and bene-
fit which it yieldesh. - hooker.
* vol. ii.
his blood will atone for our imperse&amp;tion, his righteousness
he imputed in supplement to what is lacking in ours. rogers.
instructive satire, true to virtue's cause !
thou shining supplement of publick laws | 1%ung.
2. store ; supply. not in use. -
we had not spent
qur ruddie wine a ship-board; so plement
of large fort, each man to his vessel drew. chapman.
supple me"not al. ; adj, [from supplement.] additional; such
supplementary. as may supply the place of what is lost
or wanting.
soppemental aos of flate were made to supply dese&amp;s of
laws; and so tonnage and poundage were colleeted.
clarendon,
divinity would not then pass the yard and loom, nor
preaching be taken in as an easier supplementary trade, by those
that disliked the pains of their own. decay of piety.
provide his brood next smithfield fair,
with spolemental hobby horses;
and happy be their infant courses. prior.
su'pple n ess. n.s. [ solos?, fr. from so?'...]
1. phantness; flexibility; readiness to take any form.
the fruit is of a pleasant taste, caused by the supplanes, and
gent'eness of the juice, being that which maketh the boughs
also so flexible. bacon's natural history.
2. readiness of compliance; facility.
study gives strength to the mind, conversation grace; the
first apt to give stiffness, the other stolencs. temple,
a compliance and shop/ones of their wills, being by a steady
hand introduced by parents, will secon natural to them, pre-
venting all occasions of struggling. locke.
supri. et of y. ad. [from supples, lat..] drought in to fill up
deficiencies.
supple roo y. m. s. [sp?letorium, lat..] that which is to fill
up deficiencies.
that suppletory of an implicit belief is by romanists con-
ceived sufficient for those not capable of an explicit. hamm.
su'pp1. as r. adj. [/uppliant, fr.] entreating; beseeching ;
precatory; submissive.
to those legions your lev
must be suppliant. shałozeare's cymbeline.
to bow and sue for grace with sppliant knee. milton.
the rich grow suppliant, and the poor grow proud :
those offer mighty gain, and these ask more. dryden.
constant to his first decree,
to baw the haughty neck, and raise the suppliant knee.
t prior.
scorps. as r. n.s.. [from the adjective..] an humble petitioner;
one who begs submissively.
a petition frog i. florentine i undertook,
vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech
of the poor suff/iant.
hourly suitors come:
the east with incense and the west with gold,
will stand like suppliants to receive her doom. dryden.
spare this life, and hear thy suppliant's prayer. dryden.
supplican t. m. /. [from sip:licate.) one that entreats or
implores with great submission; an humble petitioner.
the prince and people of nineveh assembling themselves
a main army of supplicants, god did no withstand them.
sakoare.
hooker.
the wise splicant, though he prayed for the condition he
thought most desirable, yet left the event to god. rogers.
abraham, instead of indulging the suposiant in his desire of
new evidence, refers him to what his brethren had. atterbury.
to supplicate. v. n. [softlier, fr. supplico, lat. from
supfl. x.) to implore; to entreat; to petition ...bmissively
and humb'y.
many things a man cannot with any comeliness say or do,
a man cannot brook to supplicate or beg. bacon.
thither the kingdoms and the nations come,
in sutolicating crowds to learn their doom. addison.
supplication. n.s.. [spplication, fr. from supplicate.]
1. petition humbly delivered ; entreaty. -
my lord protector will come this way by and by, and then
we may deliver our supplications in the quill. shakspeare.
my mother bows, -
as if olympus to a mole-hill should
ln supplication nod. shakespeare's coriolanus.
2. petitionary worship; the adoration of a suppliant or peti-
tloner.
praying with all prayer and suplication, with all perseve-
rance and supplication for all saints. eph. vi. 18.
bend thine ear t
to soft"cation; hear his fighs though mute. milton.
a second sort of publick prayer is, that all in a family that
are members of it join in their common supplications. -
duty of man.
these prove the common pracice of the worship of images
in the roman church, as to the rites of supplication and adora-
tion, to be as extravagant as among the heathens. still ng.
we should testify our dependence upon god, and our con-
25 u - - fidence
;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u p
s u p
fidence of his goodness by constant prayers and supplications
for mercy. tillotson.
to supply”. v. a. isopfleo, lat. suppleer, fr. j
1. to fill up as any deficiencies happen.
out of the fry of these rakehell horseboys are their kearn
supplied and maintained. spenser.
2. to give something wanted; to yield; to afford.
they were princes that had wives, sons, and nephews ;
and yet all these could not supply the comfort of friendship.
bacon.
i wanted nothing fortune could supply,
nor did she slumber 'till that hour deny.
3. to relieve with something wanted.
although i neither lend nor borrow,
yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
i'll break a custom. shakop. morchant of wenice.
4. to serve instead of.
burning ships the banish’d sun supply,
dryden.
and no light shines but that by which men die. waller.
5. to give or bring, whether good or bad.
nearer care supplies
sighs to my breast, and sorrow to my eyes. prior.
6. to fill any room made vacant.
upstart creatures to supply our vacant room. milton.
the sun was set; and vesper, to softply
his absent beams, had lighted up the sky. dryden.
7. to accommodate; to furnish.
while trees the mountain-tops with shades supply,
your honour, name, and praise shall never die. dryden.
the reception of light must be supplied by some open form
of the fabrick. j%tton.
my lover, turning away several old servants, supplied me
with others from his own house. swift.
supply". m. s. [from the verb..] relief of want; cure of defi-
cic in cles.
i mean that now your abundance may be a supply for their
want, that their abundance also may be a supply for your want.
2 car. viii. 14.
art from that fund each just supply provides,
works without show, and without pomp presides.
to suppo'rt. v. a. i supporter, fr. supportare, ital.]
1. to sustain; to prop; to bear up. -
stooping to support each flow'r of tender stalk. amilton,
the palace built by picus, vast and proud,
supported by a hundred pillars stood. 2. dryden.
the original community of all things appearing from this
donation of god, the sovereignty of adam, built upon his
private dominion, must fall, not having any foundation to
support it. * locke.
2. to endure any thing painful without being overcome.
pope.
strongly to suffer and support our pains. milton.
could'st thou support that burden : milton.
this fierce demeanour, and his insolence,
the patience of a god could not support. dryden.
3. to endure; to bear.
she scarce awake her eyes could keep,
unable to support the fumes of sleep. dryden.
none can support a diet of flesh and water without acids, as
salt, vinegar, and bread, without falling into a putrid fever.
arbuthnot.
4. to sustain ; to keep from fainting. -
with inward consolations recompens'd,
and oft supported. milton.
suppo rt. n.s.. [sipfort, fr. from the verb.]
1. act or power of sustaining.
though the idea we have of a horse or stone be but the col-
lection of those several sensible qualities which we find united
in them, yet, because we cannot conceive how they should
subsist alone, we suppose them existing in and supported by
some common subject, which support we denote by the name
substance, though it be certain we have no clear idea of that
support. locke.
2. prop; sustaining powsr.
3. necessaries of life.
4. maintenance; supply.
suppo'rtable. adj. [supportable, fr. from support.] tole-
rable; to be endured.
accents the first syllable.
as great to me, as late; and, supportable
to make the dear loss, have i ineans much weaker
than you may cali to comfort you. shak. tempes'.
alterations in the project of uniting christians might be
very supportable, as things in their own nature indifferent. sw.
i wish that whatever part of misfortunes they must bear,
may be rendered supportable to them. pope.
suppo'rtable ness. n. s. [from supportable.] the state of
being tolerable.
suppo'rtan ce. ! m. s. [from spport.] maintenance; sup-
support ation. port. both these words are obsolete.
give some supportance to the bending twigs. shakespeare.
his quarrel he finds scarce worth talking of, therefore draw
for the supportance of his vow. shakesp. twelfth night.
it may be observed that shakespeare
the benefited subject should render some small port
his gain, for the supportation of the king's expence. -
suppo'rter. m. s. [from support.j
1. one that supports.
you must walk by us upon either hand,
and good supporters are you. shakes. 4 seas for masi,
because a relation cannot be founded in nothing, o:
thing here related as a supporter, or a support, is not repf e
sented to the mind by any distinct idea. i.
2. prop; that by which any thing is borne up from falling vskt.
more might be added of helms, crests, mantles, sis.
porters. p-
the sockets and supporters of flowers are figured.
we shall be discharged of our load; but you, that are de
signed for beams and supporters, shall bear. l'eslran .
there is no loss of room at the bottom, as there is o:
building set upon supporters. martime
3. sustainer; comforter. 7.
the saints have a companion and supporter in all their mis-
ries. south
4. maintainer; defender. - * -
the beginning of the earl of essex i must attribute in great
part to my lord of leicester; but yet as an introducer off:
porter, not as a teacher. motion.
such propositions as these are competent to blast and des.
any cause which requires such aids, and stands in need off.
supporters. hammond.
all examples represent ingratitude as fitting in its throne,
with pride at its right hand, and cruelty at its left; worth;
ion of
bacon.
camden,
bacon.
supporters of such a reigning impiety. south
al. was no more, when loyalty was gone, -
whe great supporter of his awful throne. dryden,
5. soporters. n.s. pl. [in heraldry.) beasts that support to
arrns.
supop's able, adj. [from suppose.] that may be supposed.
invincible ignorance is, in the far greatest number of men
ready to be confronted against the necessity of their believi.
y'all the severals of any supposable catalogue. annund.
suppo's a l. m. s. [from suppose.] position without proof; im.
gination; belief.
young fortinbras,
holding a weak supposal of our worth,
thinks our state to be out of frame. &amp;lakoffeare
little can be looked for towards the advancement of muri
theory, but from those that are likely to mend our prospect:
the defect of events, and sensible appearances, suffer is to pro.
ceed no further towards science, than to imperfect guesses and
timorous supposals. gianv. steps. preface.
when this comes, our former supposal of sufficient grace, as
of the preaching of the word, and god's calls, are utterly at
an end. - hammond.
interest, with a jew, never proceeds but upon fupposal at
least of a firm and sufficient bottom. south.
artful mon endeavour to entangle thoughtless women by
bold supposals and offers. clarissa.
7% suppose. v. a. [supposer, fr. /appano, lat.]
1. to lay down without proof; to advance by way of argument
or illustration without maintaining the truth of the position.
where we meet with all the indications and evidences of
such a thing as the thing is capable of, supposing it to be true,
it must needs be very irrational to make any doubt of it. wii,
2. to admit without proof.
this is to be entertained as a firm principle, that when we
have as great assurance that a thing is, as we could possibly,
flopposing it were, we ought not to make any doubt of its ex-
istence. - tilleson.
suppose some so negligent that they will not be brought to
learn by gentle ways, yet it does not thence follow that the
rough discipline of the cudgel is to be used to all. locke.
3. to imagine; to believe without examination.
tell false edward, thy supposed king,
that lewis of france is sending over maskers. shakespeare.
let not my lord suppose that they have flain all the king's
sons; for ammon only is slain. 2 sa. xiii. 32.
i suppose we should compel them to a quick result. mill.
4. to require as previous to itself.
this supposeth something, without evident ground.
5. to make reasonably supposed.
6. to put one thing by fraud in the place of another. -
one falshood always suppos's another, and renders all you
can say suspected. female souixote.
su'ppose, n.s.. [from the verb.] supposition; position with-
out proof; unevidenced conceit.
we come short of our suppose so far,
that after sev’n years sie e, yet troy-walls stand.
shakes eart,
is egypt's safety, and the king's, and your’s,
fit to be trusted on a bare suppose
that he is honest dryden's clements.
suppo's er. m. s. [fion, soft.] one that counterfeits.
thou hast by marriage made thy daughter mine,
while counterfeit suppoers blver'd thine eyne. shakespeare.
- supposition.
halt.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u p
s u r
:
o
supposi' to n. m. s. s spposition, fr. from sofas j position
laid down ; hypothesis; imagination yet unproved.
in saying he is a good man, understand me that he is suff-
cient; yet his means are in suspotion. shocare.
sing, syren, for thyself, and i will dote;
spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs,
and as a bed i'll take thee, and there lye ;
and in that glorious supposition think
he gains by death, that hath such means to die. shakosh.
this is only an infallibility upon supposition, that if a thing
be true, it is impossible to be false. tootson.
such an original irresistible notion is neither requisite upon
supposition of a deity, nor is pretended to by religion. bently.
supposition ious. adj. [from oppositus, supposititias, lnt.]
1. not genuine; put by a trick into the place or character be-
longing to another.
the destruction of mustapha was so fatal to solyman's line,
as the succession of the turks from solyman is suspected to be
of strange biood ; for that selymus ii. was thought to be sip-
positious. bacon.
it is their opinion that no man ever killed his father; but
that, if it should ever happen, the reputed son must have been
illegitimate, soo/stitious, or begotten in adultery. addison.
there is a latin treatise among the supposi:i-iv; pieces,
ascribed to athanasius. //aterland.
2. supposed ; imaginary ; not real.
some alterations in the globe tend rather to the benefit of
the earth, and its productions, than their destruction, as all
these stoostitious ones manifestly would do. 17% oward.
supposit is riousness. n.s.. [from stop:/tition.] state of being
counterfeit.
suppositively. adv. [from soos...] upon supposition.
the unreformed finner may have some hope softpositively, if
he do change and repent : the honest penitent may hope posi-
tively. hammond.
suppositor y. m. s. [suppositoire, fr. softtorium, lat...] a
kind of solid clyster.
nothing relieves the head more than the piles, therefore
suppositories of honey, aloes, and rock-salt ought to be tried.
arbuthnot.
to suppress. v. a. [supprino, soppresis, lat. s. sprimer,
fr.]
1. to crush ; to overpower; to overwhelm ; to subdue ; to re-
duce from any state of activity or commotion.
glo'ster would have armour out of the tower,
to crown himself king and sopres; the prince. shak. h. vi.
every rebellion, when it is suppressed, doth make the sub-
ject weaker, and the prince stronger. davies on ireland.
sir william herbert, with a well armed and ordered com-
pany, set sharply upon them ; and oppressing some of the for-
wardest of them by death, sopros. d the residue by fear.
hayward.
2. to conceal ; not to tell ; not to reveal.
things not reveal’d, which th' invisible king,
only omniscient, hath suppress'd in night. moston.
still she suppresses the name, and this keeps him in a pleasing
suspense; and, in the very close of her speech, she indirectly
mentions it. broome on the odyssey.
3. to keep in ; not to let out.
well did'st thou, richard, to stores, thy voice;
for had the passions of thy heart built out,
i fear we should have seen decypher'd there
more renerous spight, more furious raging broils. shak.
so n. j. [josion, fr. jorosio, lat. from jup-
• * j,
1. the ot of suppressing.
2. not publication.
you may depend upon a sorosion of these verses. pope.
surro essor. m. s. [from stors;...] one that suppresses,
crushes, or conceals.
7: supp, " a 1 e. v. a. [from fus furio, lat, suspurer, fr.]
to generate as or matter.
this disease is generally fatal: if it suppurates the pus, it is
evacuated into the lower belly, where it produceth putrefac-
tion. arbuthnot on dict.
7, su'frcrate. v. n. to grow to pus.
suppur aorios. r. s. [ souration, fr. from sourate.]
1. the ripening or change of the matter of a tumour into pus.
if the inflammation be gone too far towards a susparation,
then it must be promoted with suppuratives, and opened by
incision. f is man.
this great attrition must produce a great propensity to the
putrescent alkaline condition of the fluids, and consequently
to supporations. arbut not on aliments.
2. the matter suppurated.
the great physician of souls sometimes cannot cure with-
out cutting us : fin has festered inwardly, and he must launce
the imposthume, to let out death with the supparation. south.
st pruxative, adj. [sorts, fr. from jitpurate.] di-
gotive generating matter.
suri utation. n.) isotoutition, fr. soft, lat.] reckon-
*3; account 5 calculation ; computation. -
from these differing properties of day and year arise diffi-
culties in carrying on and reconciling the fportation of time
in long measures. holder co one.
the jews saw every day their messiah flis father removed
from then ; that the promises of their doctors, about his
speedy manifestations, were false; that the predictions of the
prophets, whom they could now no longer understand, vete
covered with obscurity ; that all the // potations of time either
terminated in jesus christ, or were without a period, 1/3/s.
73 suppu' re. v. a. [from suppatz, lat..] to reckon; to cal-
culate.
supra. [latin.] in composition, signifies above, or before.
supr ala psa'ria n. } a? [sora and lapsis, lat.] antece-
supr al ap's ary. dent to the fall of man.
the supralasarians, with whom the object of the decree is
hono conditus, man created, not yet fallen; and the st:blapsa-
rians, with whom it is man fallen, or the corrupt mass.
hammond.
supr avulcar. adj. [ sopra and vulgar..] above the vulgar.
none of these motives can prevail with a man to furnish
himself with supravulgar and noble qualities. collier.
supre'macy. m. s. [from supreme.] highest place ; highest au-
thority; state of being supreme.
no appeal may be made unto any one of higher power, in
as much as the order of your discipline admitteth no standing
incouality of courts, no spiritual judge to have any ordinary
superior on earth, but as many supremacies as there are parishes
and several congregations. płazer.
as we under heav'n are supreme head,
so, under him, that great sopremacy,
where we do reign, we will alone uphold. shaft. k. john.
i am asham'd that women
should seek for rule, supremacy, and sway,
when they are bound to serve, love, and obey. shaos.
put to proof his high sopramay,
whether upheld by strength, or chance, or fate. milton.
henry viii. had no intention to change religion: he con-
tinued to burn protestants after he had cast off the pope's su-
premacy. sws?.
you're formed by nature for this spremacy, which is granted
from the distinguishing charaster of your writing. dryden.
from soone wild curs that from their masters ran,
abhorring the supremacy of man, {
in woods and caves the rebel race began. dryden.
sopremacy of nature, or sopremacy of perfeoion, is to be pos-
sessed of all perfection, and the highest excellency possible.
- //arcr'an.'.
to deny him this supremacy is to dethrone the dcity, and
give his kingdom to another. zooge's.
supreme. a j. [supremino, lat.]
1. highest in dignity; highest in authority. it may be observed
that superiour is used often of local elevation, but spreme only
of intelle&amp;tual or political.
as no man serveth god, and loveth him not; so neither
can any man fineerely love god, and not extremely abhor
that fin which is the high st degree of treason against the so-
preme guide and monarch of the whole world, with whose
divine authority and power it investeth others. hooker.
the god of soldiers,
with the consent of sopreme jove, insorm
thy thoughts with nobleness. shakoff care's coriolants.
my soulakes
to know, when two authoritics are up,
neither supreme, how soon confusion
mav enter 'twixt the gap of both. słos. coronto.
this strength, the seat o deity sorome. 4 sillon.
the monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
shoots rising up, and spreads by slow degrees;
three centuries he grows, and three he stays
supreme in state, and in three more decays.
2. highest; most excellent.
no single virtue we could most commend,
whether the wife, the mother, or the friend;
for she was all in that spreme degree,
that as no one prevail'd, so all was she.
to him both heav'n *
the right had giv'n,
and his own love bequeath'd sureme command. drydon.
supremely. adv. [from the adjective..] in the highest de-
gree.
the starving chemist in his golden views
supremely blest, the poet in his muse. pope.
sur. [fur, french.) in composition, means upon or over and
above.
suraddition. m. s. [sar and addition.] something added to
the name.
he serv'd with glory and admir’d success,
so gain'd the suraddition, leonatus. shosh. cym'eline.
su'ral. adj. [from sara, latin.] being in the calf of the leg.
he was wounded in the inside of the calf of his leg, into the
stral artery. ii is man's surgery.
su’ran ce. n.s.. [from sure.] warrant; security; asurance.
•y . we
drydon.
drydon.
4.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">'s u r
s u. r.
o give some surance that thou art revenge ; -
stab them, or tear them on thy chariot wheels. shakespeare.
to surbate. v. a. [solbatir, fr j. to bruise and batter the
feet with travel; to harass ; to fatigue.
their march they continued all that night, the horsemen
often alighting, that the foot might ride, and others taking
many of them behind them ; however they could not but be
extremely weary and surbated. clarendon.
chalky land surbates and spoils oxens feet. amortioner.
sur bet. 1 he participle passive of surboat, which spenser seems
to have used for surbate. -
a bear and tyger being met
in cruel fight on lytick ocean wide,
espy a traveller with feet surbet,
whom they in equal prey hope to divide. spensor.
to surce*as e. v. n. [sur and coffer, fr. cesso, lat.]
1. to be at an end ; to stop; to cease; to be no longer in use
or being.
small favours will my prayers increase:
granting my suit, you give me all;
and then my prayers must needs sorceds ;
for i have made your godhead fall.
2. to leave off; to practise no longe: ; to refrain finally.
to fly altogether from god, to despair, that creatures un-
worthy shall be able to obtain any thing at his hands, and
under that pretence to stroease from prayers, as bootless or
fruitless offices, were to him no less injurious than pernicious
donne.
to our own souls. hooker.
nor did the british squadrons now surcease
to gall their foes o'erwhelm'd. philips.
so pray'd he, whilst an angel's voice from high,
bade him sorcease to importune the sky.
to surcea’s e. v. a. to stop; to put to an end. obsolete.
all pain hath end, and every war hath peace ;
but mine no price, nor prayer, may surcease. spensor.
surce a's e. m. s. cessation; stop.
it might very well agree with your principles, if your dis-
cipline were fully planted, even to send out your writs of sur-
cease unto all courts of england for the most things handled in
them. hooker.
sur cfia’r g f. m. s. [surcharge, fr. from the verb.] burthen
added to burthen ; overburthen ; more then can be well
borne.
the air, after receiving a charge, doth not receive a sur-
charge, or greater charge, with like appetite as it doth the first.
bacon's natural history.
an object of sorcharge or excess destroyeth the sense ; as the
light of the sun, the eye; a violent so ind near the ear, the
hearing. bacon's natural history.
the moralists make this raging of a lion to be a surcharge
of one madness upon another. l’e/irange.
to surcha r ge. v. a. [surchargir, fr.] to overload; to
overburthen.
they put upon every portion of land a reasonable rent,
which they called romescot, the which might not sur harge
the tenant or freeholder. spenser on ireland.
tamas was returned to tauris, in hope to have suddenly
surprised his enemy, surcharged with the pleasures of so rich a
city. knolles's history of the turks.
harte.
more remov’d,
left heav'n surcharg’d with potent multitude,
might hap to move new broils. a/illon's paradis. loft.
he ceas'd, discerning adam with such joy
surcharg’d, as had, like grief, been dew'd in tears
without the vent of words. milton's paradise lost.
when graceful sorrow in her pomp appears,
sure she is dress'd in melcfinda’s tears:
your head reclin'd, as hiding grief from view, -
droops like a rose surcharg’d with morning dew. dryden.
surcha'rger. m.s.. [from surcharge.] one that overburthens.
surc1'ngle. m. s. [ sur and cingulum, lat.]
1. a girth with which the burthen is bound upon a horse.
2. the girdle of a cassock.
justly he chose the sorcingle and gown. a sarzel.
su'rcl e. n.s. s jurculus, lat. j a shoot ; a twig ; a sucker.
not in general use.
it is an arboreous excrescence, or superplant, which the
tree cannot assimilate, and therefore sprouteth not forth in
boughs and surcles of the same shape unto the tree. brown.
the basilica dividing into two branches below the cubit,
the outward sendeth two surcles unto the thumb. brown.
su'rco a.t. n. s. [surcot, old french ; sur and coat.] a short
coat worn over the rest of the dress. -
the honourable habiliments, as robes of state, parliament-
robes, the surcoat, and mantle. - camden.
the commons were besotted in excess of apparel, in wide
furcoats reaching to their loins. camdin.
that day in equal arms they fought for fame;
their swords, their shields, their yu, coats were the same.
- dryden.
surd, adj. [surdus, lat.]
i deaf; wanting the sense of hearing.
2. unheard; not perceived by the ear.
3. not expressed by any term.
surdnu‘mber. m. s. [from surd and number.] that is incom.
mensurate with unity.
su'rp1ty. m. s. [from surd.] deafness.
sure, adj. [sure, fr.]
1. certain ; unfailing; infallible.
the testimony of the lord is sure, and giveth wisdom unto
the simple. psalm xix.
who knows, 7.
let this be good, whether our angry foe
can give it, or will ever ? how he can
is doubtful ; that he never will, is sure. milt. par. loft.
2. certainly doomed.
our coin beyond sea is valued according to the silver in it;
sending it in bullion is the safest way, and the weighties: i.
fure to go. life
3. confident ; undoubting ; certainly knowing. -
friar laurence met them both ;
him he knew well, and guess'd that it was she ;
but, being mask'd, he was not sure of it.
let no man seek what may befall ;
evil he may be sure.
the youngest in the morning are not sure
that 'till the night their life they can secure. denham
while fore of battle, while our wounds are green, -
why would we tempt the doubtful dye agen :
in wars renew’d, uncertain of success,
sure of a share, as umpires of the peace. dryden
if you find nothing new in the matter, i am sure much es.
will you in the stile. l/ake.
be silent always, when you doubt your sense;
and speak, though sure, with seeming diffidence. pope.
4. safe; firm; certain ; past doubt or danger. to make sure is
to secure, so as that nothing shall put it out of one's possession
or power.
thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt
have known that the heavens do rule. don. iv. 26.
he bad me make sure of the bear, before i sell his skin.
l'estrange.
they would make others on both fides sure of pleasing, in
preference to instruction. dryden's dufrosho;.
they have a nearer and surer way to the felicity of life, &amp;
tempering their passions, and reducing their appetites. tomple.
a peace cannot fail, provided we make sure of spain.
temple,
shakoshtar,
millon.
revenge is now my joy; he's not for me,
and i’ll make sure he ne'er shall be for thee.
i bred you up to arms, rais'd you to power,
§ to make sure the vengeance of this day,
which even this day has ruin'd. dryd. spani -
make cato sure, .." give up utica, yd. spanish fryar
caesar will ne'er refuse thee such a trifle, addison,
they have reason to make all actions worthy of observation,
which are sure to be observed. atierbury.
5. firm ; stable ; steady ; not liable to failure.
thou the garland wear'st successively;
yet though thou stand'st more sure than i could do,
thou art not firm enough. shakesp. henry iv.
i with your horses swift and sire of foot,
and so i do commend you to their backs.
shakespeare's macbeth,
i wrapt in sure bands both their hands and feet,
dryden.
and cast them under hatches. chapman,
virtue, dear friend, needs no defence;
the sure/t guard is innocence. roscommon.
partition firm and sure the waters to divide. 41ilton.
doubting thus of innate principles, men will call pulling
up the old foundations of knowledge and certainty: 1 persuade
myself that the way i have pursued, being conformable to
truth, lays those foundations jurer. locłe,
to prove a genuine birth,
on female truth assenting faith relies:
thus manifest of right, i build my claim,
sure founded on a fair maternal fame.
6. to be sur e. certainy.
properly be sure.
objects of sense would then determine the views of all such,
to be sure, who conversed perpetually with them. atterbury.
though the chvinist could not calcine the caput myt am,
to obtain its fixed salt, to be sure it must have some. artuosit.
sure, adv. [surement, french.j certainly ; without doubt;
doubtless. it is generally without emphasis ; and, notwit.
**ng its original meaning, expresses rather doubt than as-
scrtion.
something, sure, of flate
hath puddled his clear spirit. shakes tart,
her looks were flush'd, and fullen was her mien,
that fore the virgin goddess, had she been
pote's ods.
this is a vicious expression: more
aught but a virgin, must the guilt have seen. adison,
sure the queen would wish him still unknown:
she loaths, detests him, flies his hated presence. smi 8.
- sari,
2 -
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">t-
s u r
* ,
i."
'sars, upon the whole, a bad author deserves better usage
than a bad critick. - pope.
sus efo'or ed. adj. [sure and foot..] treading firmly ; not
stumbling.
true earnest sorrows, rooted miseries,
anguish in grain, vexations ripe and blown,
surefooted griefs, solid calamities. herbert.
su’r ely. adv. [from sure.] -
1. certainly ; undoubtedly ; without doubt. it is often used
rather to intend and strengthen the meaning of the sentence,
than with any distinet and explicable meaning.
in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die. gen.
thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive. a siston.
he that created something out of nothing, surely can raise
great things out of small. south.
the curious have thought the most minute affairs of rome
worth notice; and surely the consideration of their wealth is
at least of as great importance as grammatical criticisms. a. b.
surely we may presume, without affecting to fit in the seat
of god, to think some very fallible men liable to errors.
//aterland.
2. firmly ; without hazard.
he that walketh righteously, walketh sarely.
su"reness. n.s. (from sure.] certainty.
the subtle ague, that for sureme/s sake
takes its own time th'assault to make. cowley.
he diverted himself with the speculation of the seed of co-
ra!; and for more suremes; he repeats it. j7%adward.
su’re fishi p. m. s. (from surrey.] the office of a surety or
bondsman; the act of being bound for another.
ldly, like prisoners, which whole months will swear
that only suretiship hath brought them there. donne.
if here not clear'd, no storeti/hip can bail
condemned debtors from th' eternal gaol. idenham.
hath not the greatest slaughter of armies been effected by
strata gem and have not the faircit estates been destroyed by
furti, p * south.
sure i y. m. s. [surete, french.]
1. certainty; indubitableness.
know of a surety that thy sced shall be a stranger. gen. xv.
2. security ; safety.
there the princesses determining to bathe, thought it was so
privileged a place as no body durit presume to come thither;
yet, for the more sarety, they looked round about. soday.
3. foundation of stability ; support.
we our state
hold, as you your's, while our obedience holds;
- on other surety none. milton.
4. evidence ; ratification ; confirmation.
she call'd the saints to surety,
that she would never put it from her finger,
unless she gave it to yourself. soaks care.
5. security against loss of damage ; security for payment.
- there remains unpaid
a hundred thousand more, in sorety of the which
one part of acquitain is bound to us. shako/?care.
6. hostage ; bondsman ; one that gives security for another ;
one that is bound for another.
that you may well perceive i have not wrong'd you,
one of the greatest in the christian world
shall be my surety. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
i will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him.
gen. xliii. 9.
yet be not surety, if thou be a father;
love is a personal debt: i cannot give
my child, en's right, nor ought he take it. herbert.
all, in infancy, are by others presented with the desires of
the parents, and intercession of sureties, that they may be early
admitted by baptism into the school of christ. hammond.
su rf ac e. a. s. [sur and face, french..] superficies; outside;
superfice. it is accented by milton on the last syllable.
which of us who beholds the bright surface
of this ethereous mold, whereon we stand. milton.
errours like straws upon the surface flow ;
he who would search for pcar's must dive below. dryden.
all their surface, shall be truly plain, or truly spherical, and
look all the famie way, so as together to compose one eyesi
surface. newton's opt.
7, su rfe it. v. a. [from sur and faire, french, to do more than .
enough, to overao..] to feed with meat or drink to satcty and
ickness; to cam overinuch.
the surfeit.d grooms
do mock their charge with snores. shakspeare.
to suor ff, p. v. n. to be fed to satiety and sickness.
they are as sick that surfeit with too much, as they that
starve with nothing. shakesp. morchart of penice.
take fed leit your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness. luke xxi. 34.
though some had so surfeited in the vineyards, and with
- the wines, that they had been left behind, the generosity of
the spaniards sent them all home. clarondon.
they must be let locse to the childish play they fancy,
vol. 11.
which they should be weaned from, by being made to surfit
of it. locke.
sus r f fit. m. s. [from the verb.j sickness or satiety caused
by overfulness.
when we are sick in fortune, often the surfits of our own
behaviour, we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon
and stars. shakesp. king lear.
how ill white hairs become a fool and jester
i have long dream'd of such a kind of snail, -
so satseit swell’d, so old, and so profane. shakes). h. iv.
now comes the sick hour that his so fit made ;
now shall he try his friends that flattes'd him. shak. r. ii.
why, disease, dost thou molest
ladies, and of them the best ?
do not men grow sick of rites,
to thy altars, by their nights
spent in sofits 2 ben. johnson.
surfeits many times turn to purges, both upwards and
downwards. bacon's natural history.
peace, which he lov’d in life, did lend
hcr hand to bring him to his end;
when are and death coll'd for the score,
no surf, its were to reckon for. crashaw.
our father
has ta'en himself a surfit of the world, - -
and cries, it is not safe that we should taste it. otway.
su’r fei er. m. s. [from surfeit..] one who riots; a glutton.
- i did not think
this am’rous strfeiter would have donn'd his helm
for such a petty war. shosh. alt. and cleopatra.
su'rfe it war er. m. s. [sofit and water.j water that cures
furfeits.
a little cold-distilled poppy water, which is the true surfit-
water, with case and abstinence, often ends disłempers in the
beginning. locke.
surge. m. s. [from surg, latin.] a swelling sea; wave roil-
ing above the general surface of the water; billow ; wave.
the realin was left, like a ship in a storm, amidst all the
ragicg surges, unruled and undirected of any. spensor.
the wind shak'd surge, with high and monstrous main,
seems to cast water on the burning bear,
and quench the guards of the ever-fired pole:
i never did like molcstation view
. on the enchased flood.
he trod the water,
v’hose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
the saroe most swoon that met him. shakes. tomoff.
it was formerly famous for the unfortunate loves of hero
and leander, drowned in the uncompassionate surger. sandys.
the sulph’rous hail
shot after us in storm, o'erblown, hath laid
the fiery surge, that from the precipice
of heav'n receiv'd us falling. milton's paradis, loft.
he sweeps the skies, and clears the cloudy north:
he flies aloft, and with impetuous roar
pursues the foaming surges to the shore. dryden.
thetis, near ismena's swelling flood,
with dread beheld the rolling surge, sweep
shakes care.
in heaps his slaughter'd sons into the deep. pope.
to surge. v. n. [from serg, latin.] to swell; to rise
high.
from midst of all the main
the surging waters like a mounton rise. sponsor.
he, all in rage, his sea-god fire befought,
some cursed vengeance on his son to cast;
from surging gulfs two monsters straight were brought. spens.
the serpent mov’d, not with indented wave,
prone on the ground, as since ; but on his rear,
circular base of rising folds, that tower'd
fold above fold, a surging maze milton's parai. loft.
surging waves against a solid rock,
though all to shivers dash'd, th'assault renew,
vain batt'ry, and in froth or bubbles end. milton.
su'rgeon. m. s. [corrupted by conversation from chirurgeon.]
one who cures by manual operation; one whose duty is to
act in external maladies by the direction of the physician.
the wound was past the cure of a better surgeon than my-
self, so as i could but receive some few of her dying words. sid.
i meddle with no woman's matters; but withal, i am after-
gton to old shoes. shakesp. julius casar.
he that hath wounded his neighbour, is tied to the expences
of the surgeon, and other incidences. taylor.
though most were forely wounded, none were slain:
the surgeons soon despoil'd them of their arms,
and some with salves they cure. dryden.
su'rc eon ry. {" s. [for chi urgery..] the act of curing by
surgery. manual operation. -
it would seem very evil surgery to cut off every unsound
part of the body, which, being by other due means recovered,
might afterwards do good service. spensor.
strangely visited people,
the mere despair of surgery, he cures. shakesp. macbeth.
25 x they
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u r
s u r
they are often tarr'd over with the surgery of our sheep, and
would you have us kiss tar? shakespeare.
su'rgy. adj. [from surge.] rising in billows.
i do publick or domestick cares constrain
this toilsome voyage o'er the surgy main :
su'rlily. adv. [from surly.] in a surly manner.
su'r liness. n. j. [from surly. ] gloomy moroseness ; sour
anger.
thus pale they meet; their eyes with fury burn;
none greets; for none the greeting will return;
but in dumb surliness, each arm'd with care
his foe profest, as brother of the war. dryden.
su'rlin g. m. s. [from surly..] a sour morose fellow. not
used.
these sour surlings are to be commended to sieur gau-
lard. camden.
surly. adj. [from run, sour, saxon.] gloomily morose;
rough ; uncivil ; four ; silently angry.
'tis like you’ll prove a jolly surly groom,
that take it on you at the first so roundly.
that surly spirit, melancholy,
had bak'd thy blood, and made it heavy thick,
which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
making that idiot laughter keep men's eyes,
and strain their cheeks to idle merriment.
against the capitol i met a lion,
who glar'd upon me, and went surly by,
without annoying me. shakesp. julius caesar.
repuls'd by surly grooms, who wait before
the sleeping tyrant's interdicted door.
what if among the courtly tribe
you lost a place, and sav'd a bribe
and then in surly mood came here
to fifteen hundred pounds a year,
and fierce against the whigs harangu'd
the zephyrs floating loose, the timely rains,
now soften’d into joy the surly storms. thomson.
to su rm1's e. v. a. s. surmise, french..] to suspect; to image
imperfectly ; to imagine without certain knowlege.
man coveteth what exceedeth the reach of sense, yea some-
what above capacity of reason, somewhat divine and heavenly,
which with hidden exultation it rather surmiseth than con-
ceiveth; somewhat it seeketh, and what that is directly it
knoweth not; yet very intentive desire thereof doth so incite
it, that all other known delights and pleasures are laid aside,
and they give place to the search of this but only suspected
desire. hooker.
of questions and strifes of words cometh envy, railings,
and evil surmisings. 1 tim. vi. 4.
surmise not
pope.
shakespeare.
shak. k. john.
dryden.
swift.
his presence to these narrow bounds confin'd. milton.
it wasted nearer yet, and then she knew *
that what before she but surmis'd, was true. dryden.
this change was not wrought by altering the form or posi-
tion of the earth, as was surmised by a very learned man, but
by dissolving it. //oodward.
sur m1's e. m. s. [ surmise, french..] imperfeot notion; suspi-
cion; imagination not supported by knowlege.
to let go private surmises, whereby the thing itself is not
made better or worse; if just and allowable reasons might lead
them to do as they did, then are these censures frustrate. hook.
they were by law of that proud tyranness,
provok'd with wrath, and envy's false surmise,
condemned to that dungeon merciless,
where they should live in woe, and die in wretchedness. spen.
my compassionate heart
will not permit my eyes once to behold
the thing, whereat it trembles by surmise. shakespeare.
my thought, whose murthering yet is but fantastical,
shakes so my single state of man, that function
is smother'd in surmise. shakesp. macbeth.
no sooner did they espy the english turning from them,
but they were of opinion that they fled towards their shipping:
this surmis was occasioned, for that the english ships removed
the day before. płayward.
we double honour gain
from his surmise prov’d false. milton.
hence guilty joys, distastes, surmises,
false oaths, false tears, deceits, disguises. pope.
no man ought to be charged with principles he actually
disowns, unless his practices contradict his profession ; not
upon small surmises. swift.
t. surmount. v. a. [surmonter, french.]
1. to rise above. | -
the mountains of olympus, atho, and atlas, over-reach
and surmount all winds and clouds. raleigh.
2. to conquer; to overcome.
though no resistance was made, the english had much ado
to surmoint the natural difficulties of the place the greatest part
of one day. hayward.
he hardly escaped to the persian court; from whence, if
the love of his country had not surmounted its base ingratitude
to him, he had many invitations to return at the head
persian fleet; but he rather chose a voluntary death.
3. to surpass; to exceed.
what surmounts the reach
of human sense, i shall delineate so,
by lik’ning spiritual to corporeal forms, * * *
as may express them best. milton’s parads: loft
surmountabie. adj. [from /armount..] conquerable; i.
perable.
surmo‘unter. m. s. [from surmount.] one that rises above
another.
sur mo'unting.. n. s. the aet of getting uppermost.
su'rmullet. n.s.. [mugil, lat.] a sort of fish. 4isivorth
surname. m. s. [surnom, french.] --
i. the name of the family; the name which one has over and
above the christian name.
many which were mere english joined with the irish against
the king, taking on them irish habits and customs, which
could never since be clean wiped away; of which sort be most
of the surnames that end in an, as hernan, shiman, and mun-
gan, which now account themselves natural irish. speoser.
he, made heir not only of his brother's kingdom, but of
his virtues and haughty, thoughts, and of the surname also of
barbarosła, began to aspire to the empire. knoles'; histry
the epithets of great men, monsieur boileau is of opinio,
were in the nature of surnames, and repeated as fuch. po.
2. an appellation added to the original name.
witness may
my surname coriolanus: the painful service,
the extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
shed for my thankless country, are requited
but with that surname. shakesp. coriolanui,
to su’rname. v. a. [surmommer, fr. from the noun.] to
name by an appellation added to the original name.
another shall subscribe with his hand unto the lord, and
furname himself by the name of israel. lsa. xliv, 5.
pyroicus, only famous for counterfeiting earthen pitches,
a scullery, rogues together by the ears, was so named rupo.
graphus. peachain on drawing.
how he, surnam'd of africa, dismiss'd &amp;
in his prime youth the fair iberian maid. miłon.
god commanded man what was good; but the devil sur-
named it evil, and thereby baffled the command. south.
to su rpa'ss. v.a. [surpasser, french..] to excel; to exceed;
to go beyond in excellence.
the climate's delicate,
fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
the common praise it bears. shakes?, winter's tal.
o, by what name, for thou above all these,
above mankind, or aught than mankind higher,
surpasses; far my naming ! how may i -
adore thee, author of this universe milton.
achilles, homer's hero, in strength and courage surpassa
of th:
swift.
o
s:
the rest of the grecian army. dryden.
a nymph of late there was,
whose heav'nly form her fellows did surpass,
the pride and joy of fair arcadia’s plains. dryden.
under or near the line are mountains, which, for bigness
and number, surpas; those of colder countries, as much as
the heat there surpasses that of those countries. jwoodward.
surpa'ssable, adj. [from surpass and able.] that may be ex-
celled. dic7.
surpa'ssing. participial adj. [from surpass.] excellent in an
high degree.
othou ! that with surpassing glory crown'd,
look'st from thy sole dominion like the god
of this new world. milton's paradis? loft.
his miracles proved him to be sent from god, not more by
that infinite power that was seen in them, than by that fur-
passing goodness they demonstrated to the world. calamy.
surpa'ssingly. adv. [from surpassing.] in a very excellent
iilanner. dic.
su'rplice. m. s. [surpells, surplis, fr. superpellicium, lat.]
the white garb which the clergy wear in their acts of mini-
stration.
it will wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of
a big heart. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
the cinetus gabinus is a long garment, not unlike a sur-
plice, which would have trailed on the ground, had it hung
loose, and was therefore gathered about the middle with a
girdle. addison.
su’rplus. . }*s [sur and plus, french..] a supernume-
su'rplus age. s. rary part; overplus; what remains when use
is satisfied.
if then thee list my offered grace to use,
take what thou please of all this surplusage;
if thee list not, leave have thou to refuse. speoser.
that you have vouchsaf'd my poor house to visit,
it is a surplus of your grace. shakespeare.
when the price of corn falleth, men give over surplus til-
lage, and break no more ground. carew's survey of cornwall.
we made a substance so disposed to fluidity, that by so small
:
2.il
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u r
s u r.
t
&gt;
i.--
an agitation as only the surplus.ge of that which the ambient
air is wont to have about the middle even of a winter's day,
above what it hath in the first part. boyle.
the officers spent all, so as there was no surplusge of trea-
sure; and yet that all was not sufficient. davies.
whatsoever degrees of assent one affords a proposition be-
yond the degrees of evidence, it is plain all that surplusge of
assurance is owing not to the love of truth. locee,
so : m. s. [surprise, french; from the verb,]
i. the act of taking unawares; the state of being taken un-
aware.s.
parents should mark heedfully the witty excuses of their
children, especially at suddains and surprisal: ; but rather mark
than pamper them. wotton.
this let him know,
left, wiifully transgressing, he pretend
surprisal, unadmonish'd, unforewarn'd. milton's par. loft.
i set aside the taking of st. jago and st. domingo in his-
paniola, as surprizes rather than encounters. bacon.
this trange surprisal put the knight
and wrathful squire into a fright. hudibras.
there is a vast difference between thern, as vast as between
inadvertency and deliberation, between surprize and set pur-
pose. - south.
he whose thoughts are employed in the weighty cares of
empire, is not presumed to inspect minuter things so carefully
as private persons ; the laws therefore relieve him against the
surprises and machinations of deceitful men. davenant.
2. a dish, i suppose, which has nothing in it.
few care for carving trifles in disguise,
or that fantatick dish some call surprise.
. sudden confusion or perplexity.
#2 surprise. v. a. [surpris, french, from surprendre.]
1. to take unawares; to fall upon unexpectedly. -
the castle of macduff i will surprise,
seize upon fife, give to the edge o' th' sword
his wife, his babes. shakespeare's macbeth,
- now do our ears before our eyes,
like men in mists,
discover who'd the state surprize,
king's cookery.
and who resists. ben. johnson.
bid her well beware,
lest, by some fair appearing good surpris'd, -
she dictate false, and misinform the will. milton.
how shall he keep, what, sleeping or awake,
a weaker may surpriso, a stronger take pope.
who can speak
the mingled passions that surpriz'd his heart! thomson.
2. to astonish by something wonderful.
people were not so much frighted as surprized at the bigness
of the camel. d'esirange.
3. to confuse or perplex by something sudden.
up he starts, discover'd and surpris’d. milton.
surpri's ing. participial adj. [from surprise.] wonderful ;
raising sudden wonder or concern.
the greatest actions of a celebrated person, however sur-
prising and extraordinary, are no more than what are expected
from him. addison's spediator.
surpri’s ingly. adv. [from surprising.] to a degree that
raises wonder; in a manner that raises wonder.
if out of these ten thousand, we should take the men that
are employed in publick business, the number of those who
remain will be surprizingly little. addison.
su'roy edry. m. s. [sur and cuider, old fr. to think.] over-
weening ; pride; insolence. obsolete.
they overcominen, were deprived
of their proud beauty, and the one moiety
transform'd to fish for their bold surquedry.
- late-born modesty
hath got such root in easy waxen hearts,
that men may not themselves their own good parts
extol, without suspect of surquedry. donne.
surrebutter. m. s. [in law. j a second rebutter; answer
to a rebutter. a term in the courts.
surrejoi'nder. n. s. [ surrejoindre, french. in law.] a
second defence of the plaintiff’s action, opposite to the rejoin-
der of the defendant, which the civilians call triplicatio. #.
to surre'nder. v. a. s. surrendre, old french.]
21. to yield up 3 to deliver up.
solemn dedication of churches serve not only to make them
publick, but further also to surrender up that right which
otherwise their founders might have in them, and to make
god himself their owner. hooker.
recal those grants, and we are ready to surrender ours, re-
sume all or none. - davenant.
2. to deliver up an enemy : sometimes with up emphatical.
ripe age bade him surrender late,
his life and long good fortune unto final fate. fairfax.
ide willing to surrender up the castle, forbade his soldiers to
have any talk with the enemy. knalles,
spenser.
surrender up to me thy captive breath, -
y pow'r is nature's pow'r, my name is death. harts:
to surre'nder. v. n. to yield; to give one's self up.
this mighty archimedes too surrenders now. glanvilk,
surre'nder.
surre'ndry. ; n. / [from the verb.]
1. the act of yielding.
our general mother, with eyes
of conjugal attraction unreprov’d, -
and meek surrender, half-embracing lean'd , * *
on our first father. milton's paradis, loft.
having mustered up all the forces he could, the clouds above
and the deeps below, he prepares for a surrender; asserting,
from a mistaken computation, that all these will not come up
to near the quantity requisite. woodward.
juba's surrender
would give up africk unto caesar's hands. addison.
2. the act of resigning or giving up to another.
if our father carry authority with such disposition as he bears,
this last surrender of his will but offend us. shakespeare.
that hope quickly vanished upon the undoubted intelli-
gence of that surrender. clarendon.
as oppressed states made themselves homagers to the ro-
mans to engage their protection, so we should have made an
entire surren ory of ourselves to god, that we might have gain-
ed a title to his deliverances. decay of piety.
in passing a thing away by deed of gift, are required a sur-
render on the giver's part of all the property he has in it; and
to the making of a thing sacred, this surrender by its right
owner is necessary. - south.
surreption. m. s. [surreptus, latin.] sudden and unper-
ceived invasion or intrusion.
sins compatible with a regenerate estate, are fins of a sud-
den surreption. . . hammond.
surreptitious. adj. [surreptitius, latin.] done by
stealth ; gotten or produced fraudulently.
scaliger hath not translated the first ; perhaps supposing it
surreptitious, or unworthy so great an assertion. brown.
the masorites numbered not only the se&amp;tions and lines,
but even the words and letters of the old testament, the bet-
ter to secure it from surreptitious practices. gov. of the tongue.
a corre&amp;t copy of the dunciad, the many surreptitious ones
have rendered necessary. letter to publ. of pope's dunciad.
surrepti'tiously. adv. [from surreptitious.] by stealth;
fraudulently.
thou hast got it more surreptitiously than he did, and with
less effect. government of the tongue.
to su(rr og atf. v. a. [surrogo, latin.] to put in the place
of another.
su'rrogate. m. s. [surrogatus, latin.] a deputy ; a dele-
gate; the deputy of an ecclesiastical judge.
surrogation; n.s.. [surrogatio, lat.] the act of putting
in another’s place. - - -
to surrou'nd. v. a. [surronder, fr.] to environ; to en-
compass; to enclose on all sides.
yelling monsters that with ceaseless cry
surround me, as thou sawest. milton.
cloud and ever-during dark -
surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
cut off. o milton.
bad angels seen -
on wing under the burning cope of hell,
*twixt upper, neather, and surrounding fires. milton.
as the bodies that surround us diversely affect our organs,
the mind is forced to receive the impressions. locke.
su r so lid. m. s. [in algebra.] the fourth multiplication or
power of any number whatever taken as the root. trevoux.
su rso'lid problem. n.s.. [in mathematicks.] that which can-
not be resolved but by curves of a higher nature than a conick
se&amp;tion. harris.
surtout. m. s. [french..] a large coat worn over all the
rest.
the surtout if abroad you wear,
repels the rigour of the air;
would you be warmer, if at home
you had the fabrick, and the loom * prior.
sir roger she mortally hated, and used to hire fellows to
squirt kennel-water upon him, so that he was forced to wear
a surtout of oiled cloth, by which means he came home pretty
clean, except where the surtout was a little scanty. arbuthnot.
to su r v ene. v. a. [survenir, fr.] to supervene; to come
as an addition. - -
hippocrates mentions a suppuration that survenes lethargies,
which commonly terminates in a consumption. harvey.
to survey. v. a. [surveoir, old french.]
1. to overlook; to have under the view; to view as from a
higher place.
round he surveys, and well might where he stood,
so high above. milton.
though with those streams he no resemblance hold,
whose foam is amber, and their gravel gold;
his
- --
---
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u s
s u s
his genuine and less guilty wealth to explore,
search not his bottom, but survey his shore. denham,
2. to oversee as one in authority.
3. to view as examining. -
the husbandman's self came that way,
of custom to survey his ground. * * spenser.
early abroad he did the world survey, . . . . .
as if he knew he had not long to stay. waller.
- with alter'd looks
all pale and speechless, he survey'd me round. pryden.
4. to measure and estimate land or buildings.
surve y. m. s. [from the verb.] -
1. view ; prospect.
her stars in all their vast survey
useless besides - milton.
under his proud survey the city lies, , ,
and like a miit beneath a hill doth rise. . . denham.
no longer letted of his prey,
he leaps up at it with enrag’d desire, -
o'erlooks the neighbours with a wide survey,
and nods at ev'ry house his threat'ning fire. . dryden.
2. superintendence.
§. mensuration.
urvey'or. m. s. [from survey.]
1. an overseer; one placed to superintend others.
were’t not madness then,
to make the fox surveyor of the fold shakesp. henry vi.
bishop fox was not only a grave counselior for war or peace,
but also a good surveyor of works. bacon's henry vii.
2. a measurer of land.
should we survey
the plot of situation, and the model;
question surveyors, know our own estate,
how able such a work to undergo,
to weigh against his opposite. shakespeare's henry iv.
decempeda was a measuring-rod for taking the dimensions
of buildings; from hence came decempedator, for a surveyor,
used by cicero. arbuthnot on aliments.
surveyoks.h.i.p. m. s. [fiom surveyor.] the office of a sur-
veyor.
to survisew. v. a. [survenir, old french..] to overlook;
to have in view ; to survey. not in use.
that turret's frame most admirable was,
like highest heaven compassed round,
and lified high above this earthly mass,
which it surview’d, as hills do lower ground. spensor.
to surv1ve. v. n. [supervivo, latin; survivre, fr.]
1. to live after the death of another.
i'll assure her of
her widowhood, be it that she survives me,
in all my lands and leases whatsoever. shakespeare.
those that survive, let rome reward with love. shak.
try pleasure,
which when no other enemy survives,
still conquers all the conquerors. denham.
2. to live after any thing.
now that he is dead, his immortal fame surviveth, and
flourisheth in the mouths of all people. spenser.
the love of horses which they had alive,
and care of chariots after death survive. dryden.
the rhapsodies, called the characteristicks, would never
have survived the first edition, if they had not discovered so
strong a tineture of infidelity. jwatts.
3. to remain alive.
no longer now that golden age appears,
when patriarch-wits surviv'd a thousand years;
now length of fame, our second life, is lost,
and bare threescore is all ev'n that can boast;
our sons their father’s failing language see,
and such as chaucer is, shall dryden be. pope.
survive r. m. s. [from survive..] one who outlives another.
your father lost a father,
that father, his ; and the survivor bound
in filial obligation, for some term,
to do obsequious sorrow. shakespeare's hamlet.
although some died, the father beholding so many descents,
the number of survivors must still be very great. brown.
i did discern
from his survivors, i could nothing learn. denham.
her majesty is heir to the survivor of the late king. swift.
surviv er ship. n.s.. [from surviver.] the state of outliving
another.
. . such offices granted in reversion were void, unless where
the grant has been by survivership. ayliffe's parergon.
susceptibi lity. m. s. [from susceptible.j. quality of admit-
ting ; tendency to admit.
the susceptibility of those influences, and the effects thereof,
is the general providential law whereby other physical beings
are governed. hale.
susce/ptible. adj. [ sas...ptible, fr. prior has accented
this improperly on the first syllable.] capable of admitting;
disposed to admit.
he moulded him platonically to his own idea,
first in the choice of the materials, because he found him;
ceptible of good form. }.
in their tender years they are more susceptible of ...”
olighting
- - - tuo
impressions than afterwards, when solicited by vulgar i.
tions. l'est, o:
children's minds are narrow, and usually susceptibi, but i
one thought at once. 4-ace on educati u
blow with empty words the softeptible flame. .
susception. n.s. isosceptus, latin.) act of taking. or.
a canon, promoted to holy orders, before he is of a law
ful age for the susception of orders, shall have a voice in i.
chapter. - aydiffe's pa, ...
susceptive. adj. [from sosceptus, lat. this word is most
analogical, though less used than susceptible.] capable to:
in 1:.
since our nature is so susceptive of errours on all fides it i
fit we should have notices given us how far other person. o:
become the causes of false judgments. %atti's lazio
suscı(piency. m. s. [from suscipient.] reception; admin.
suscitient. n.s.. [susciftions, lat..] one who tak...".
that admits or receives. - ; one
to suscitate. v. n. [s/citer, french; foscito, lat.] to
rouse; to excite.
it concurreth but unto predisposed effects, and only soft-
tate; those forms whose determinations are seminal, and ro-
ceed from the idea of themselves. , brown', augar }.
suscitation, n.s.. [suscitation, fr. from softitate.] the ai
of rousing or exciting. -
to suspect. v. a. [susicio, suspecium, lat.]
i. to imagine with a degree of fear and jealousy what is not
known. -
nothing makes a man systec much, more than to know
little ; and therefore men should remedy suspicion by procuring
to know more. 's
bacon,
let us not then sospect our happy state, 4&amp;n
as not secure. -- milton
from her hand i could fished? no ill. afti.
2. to imagine guilty without proof.
- though many poets may suspecf themselves for the partia-
lity of parents to their youngest children, i know myself too
well to be ever satisfied with my own conceptions. dryden.
some would persuade us that body and extension are the
same thing, which change the signification of words, which i
would not sisted them of, they having so severely condemned
the philosophy of others. - locke.
3. to hold uncertain ; to doubt,
i cannot forbear a story which is so well attested, that i
have no manner of reason to suffect the truth. asadison,
to suspect. v. m. to imagine guilt. :/
if i s/ped without cause, let me be your jest. shakespeare.
suspe"ct, part, adj. [suspe?, french..] doubtful.
sordid interests or affectation of strange relations are not
like to render your reports suspect or partial. glanville,
suspe'ct. n.s.. [from the verb..] suspicion; imagination with-
out proof. obsolete.
no fancy mine, no other wrong susped?,
make me, o virtuous shame, thy saws neglect. sidney.
the sale of offices and towns in france,
if they were known, as the suffeo is great,
would make thee quickly hop without a head. shakespears.
my most worthy master, in whose breast
doubt and suspect, alas! are plac'd too late,
you should have fear'd false times, when you did feast. shak.
there be so many false prints of praise, that a man may
justly hold it a suspect. bacon.
. nothing more jealous than a favourite towards the wain-
ing time and suspect of satiety. psation.
they might hold sure intelligence
among themselves, without suffed t'offend. daniel,
if the king ends the differences, and takes away the susped,
the case will be no worse than when two duellists enter the
field. suckling.
to susoe’nd. v. a. isospendre, french; softendo, latin.)
1. to hang; to make to hang by any thing.
as 'twixt two equal armies fate
suspends uncertain victory;
qur souls, which to advance our state,
were gone out, hung 'twixt her and me. dinne.
it is reported by rufinus, that in the temple of serapis
there was an iron chariot suspended by loadstones; which stones
removed, the chariot fell and was dashed to pieces. brown,
2. to make to depend upon.
god hath in the scripture suspended the promise of eternal
life upon this condition, that without obedience and holiness
of life no man shall ever see the lord. tillotson.
3. to interrupt; to make to stop for a time. -
the harmony
suspended hell, and took with ravishment
the thronging audience. milton.
the guard nor fights nor flies; their fate so ilear,
at once suspends their courage and their fear. idenham.
th:
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s u s
o
the british dame, famed for resistless grace,
contends not now but for the second place;
our love suspended, we neglect the fair,
for whom we burn'd, to gaze adoring here.
4. to delay ; to hinder from proceeding.
suspend your indignation against my brother, till you can
derive from him better testimony of his intent. , shakespeare.
his answer did the nymph attend ;
her looks, her sighs, her gestures all did pray him;
but godfrey wisely did his grant suspend,
he doubts the worst, and that a while did stay him. fairf.
to themselves i left them ;
for i suspend their doom. - milton.
the reasons for suspending the play were ill founded.
dryden.
this is the hinge on which turns the liberty of intellectual
beings, in their steady prosecution of true felicity, that they
can suspend this prosecution in particular cases, till they have
looked before them. locke.
5. to keep undetermined.
a man may suspend his choice from being determined for or
against the thing proposed, till he has examined whether it be
really of a nature to make him happy or no. locke.
6. to debar for a time from the execution of an office or enjoy-
ment of a revenue.
good men should not be suspended from the exercise of their
ministry, and deprived of their livelihood for ceremonies,
which are on all hands acknowledged indifferent. sanderson.
the bishop of london was summoned for not suspending
dr. sharp. swift.
susp e"nse. n.s.. [suspens, fr. suspensus, lat.]
1. uncertainty ; delay of certainty or determination; indeter-
mination.
till this be done, their good affection towards the safety of
the church is acceptable ; but the way they prescribe us to
granville.
preserve it by, must rest in suspense. hooker.
such true joy's suspense
what dream can i present to recompense 2 waller.
ten days the prophet in suspense remain'd,
would no man's fate pronounce; at last constrain'd
by ithacus, he solemnly design'd
me for the sacrifice.
2. act of withholding the judgment.
in propositions, where though the proofs in view are of
most moment, yet there are sufficient grounds to suspect that
there is fallacy, or proofs as considerable to be produced on
the contrary side, there suspense or dissent are often voluntary.
locke.
whatever necessity determines to the pursuit of real bliss,
the same necessity establishes suspense, deliberation and scru-
tiny, whether its satisfaction misleads from our true happiness.
denham.
locke.
3. stop in the midst of two opposites.
for thee the fates, severely kind, ordain
a cool suffense from pleasure or from pain. pope.
suspe’nse. a.s. s.sosbensus, lat.]
1. held from proceeding.
the great light of day yet wants to run
much of his race, though steep, suspense in heav'n
held by thy voice. milton's paradise losł.
2. held in doubt ; held in expectation.
the self-same orders allowed, but yet established in more
wary and suspense manner, as being to stand in force till god
fhould give the opportunity of some general conference what
might be best for every of them afterwards to do; had both
prevented all occasion of just dislike which others might take,
and reserved a greater liberty unto the authors themselves, of
entring unto further consultation afterwards. hooker.
this said, he sat ; and expectation held
his looks suspense, awaiting who appear'd
to second or oppose. milton.
suspe’nsion. n.s.. [suspension, fr., from suspend.]
1. act of making to hang on any thing.
2. act of making to depend on anything.
3. act of delaying:
* had we had time to pray,
with thousand vows and tears we should have sought,
that sad decree's suspension to have wrought. jwaller.
4. act of withholding or balancing the judgment.
in his indian relations, wherein are contained incredible
accounts, he is furcy to be read with suspension; these are
they which weakned his authorities with former ages, for he
is seldom mentioned without derogatory parentheses. brown.
the mode of the will, which answers to dubitation, may
be called suspension; and that which in the fantastick will is
obstinacy, is constancy in the intellectual. grew.
5. interruption; temporary cetiation. -
nor was any thing done for the better adjusting things in
the time of that suspension, but every thing left in the same
state of unconcerned ess as before. clarendon.
6. temporary privation of an office ; as, the clerk incurred sus-
pension.
vol. ii.
suspe’nsory, adj. [suspensaire, fr. sspensus, lat..] that by
which a thing hangs,
there are several parts peculiar to brutes which are wanting
in man, as the seventh or suspensory muscle of the eye. ray.
suspicion. m. s. [ suspicion, fr. suspicio, lat. j the act of
suspecting; imagination of something ill without proof.
this suspicion miso for the hoggish shrewdness of her brain,
and mopsa for a very unlikely envy stumbled upon. sidney.
suspicions amongst thoughts are like bats amongst birds,
they ever fly by twilight; they are to be repressed, or at the
least well guarded, for they cloud the mind. bacon.
, suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes;
for treason is but trusted like a fox,
who ne'er so tame, so cherish'd and lock'd up,
will have a wild trick of his ancestors. shakespeare.
though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
at wisdom's gate; and to simplicity
resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill
where no ill seems. - milton's par. loft.
suspicious. adj. [suspiciosus, lat.]
1. inclined to suspect; inclined to imagine ill without proof.
nature itself, after it has done an injury, will for ever be
fuspicious, and no man can love the person he suspects. south.
2. indicating suspicion or fear.
a wise man will find us to be rogues by our faces; we have
a suspicious, fearful, constrained countenance, often turning
... and slinking through narrow lanes. swift.
3. liable to suspicion; giving reason to imagine ill.
they, because the light of his candle too much drowned
theirs, were glad to lay hold on so colourable matter, and
exceeding forward to traduce him as an author of suspicious in-
novations. hooker.
i spy a black suspicious threat'ning cloud,
that will encounter with our glorious sun. shakespeare.
authors are suspicious, nor greedily to be swallowed, who
pretend to deliver antipathies, sympathies, and the occult ab-
strusities of things. brown's wugar errours.
his life
private, una&amp;ive, calm, contemplative,
little suspicious to any king. milton.
many mischievous inse&amp;ts are daily at work, to make peo-
ple of merit suspicious of each other. pope.
susp1’cious ly. adv. [from suspicious.]
1. with suspicion.
2. so as to raise suspicion.
his guard entering the place, found plangus with his sword
in his hand, but not naked, but standing suspiciously enough,
to one already suspicious. sidney.
suspiciousness. n.s.. [from suspicious.] tendency to suspicion.
to make my estate known seemed impossible, by reason of
the suspiciousness of miso, and my young mistress. sidney,
suspira'tion. m. s. [suspiratio, from suspiro, lat.] sigh; act
of fetching the breath deep.
not customary suits of solemn black;
nor windy suspiration of forc’d breath
that can denote me truly. shakespeare,
in deep suspirations we take more large gulphs of air t , cool
our heart, overcharged with love or sorrow. more,
to susp1’re. v. n. [suspiro, lat.]
1. to figh; to fetch the breath deep.
2. it seems in shakespeare to mean only, to begin to breath; pers
haps mistaken for respire.
since the birth of cain, the first male child,
to him that did but yesterday suspire,
there was not such a gracious creature born.
to sustai'n. v. a. [souslenir, fr. suffineo, lat.]
1. to bear ; to prop ; to hold up.
the largeness and lightness of her wings and tail suffain her
without lastitude. 07"ee
vain is the force of man,
to crush the pillars that the pile suftain. dryden's znaid.
2. to support; to keep from sinking under evil.
the admirable curiosity and singular excellency of this de-
sign will suffain the patience, and animate the industry of him
who shall undertake it. holder.
if he have no comfortable expe&amp;tations of another life to
sustain him under the evils in this world, he is of all creatures
shakespeare.
the most miserable. tilloison.
3. to maintain; to keep.
what food
will he convey up thither to sustain
himself and army: milton.
but it on her, not she on it depends;
for she the body doth suftain and cherish, davies.
my labour will sustain me. milton.
4. to help; to relieve; to assist.
they tharged on pain of perpetual displeasure, neither to
entreat for him, or any way sustain him. shakespeare.
his sons who seek the tyrant to sustain,
and long for arbitrary lords again,
he dooms to death, asserting publick right.
5. to bear ; to endure.
25 y
dryden's aen.
can
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w a
s w a
can ceyx then sustain to leave his wife,
and unconcern’d forsake the sweets of life. dryden.
shall turnus then such endless toil sustain,
in fighting fields, and conquer towns in vain. dryden.
the mini stands collected within herself, and sustains the
shock with all the force which is natural to her; but a heart
in love has its foundations sapped. addison.
6. to bear without yielding. . .
sacharisla's beauty's wine,
which to madness doth incline;
such a liquor as no brain -
that is mortal can sustain.
7. to suffer; to bear as inflicted.
. if you omit
the offer of this time, i cannot promise,
but that you shall sustain more new disgraces, - -
with these you bear already. shakesp. henry viii.
were it i thought death menac'd would ensue
this my attempt, i would softain alone
. the worst, and not persuade thee. - milion.
sust ai'n able, adj. [sousienable, fr. from suffain.] that may
be sustained.
sust a1(ner, n. s. [from sustain.]
1. one that props; one that supports.
2. one that suffers ; a sufferer.
thyself hast a sustainer been
of much affliction in my cause.
su'st enan.cf. m. s. [ solstenance, fr.]
1. support; maintenance.
scarcely allowing himself fit softenance of life, rather than
he would spend those goods for whose sake only he seemed to
joy in life. sidney.
there are unto one end sundry means; as for the su/tenance
of our bodies many kinds of food, many sorts of raiment to
clothe our nakedness. hooker.
is then the honour of your daughter of greater moment to
her, than to my daughter her’s, whose sustenance it was add.
2. necessaries of life; victuals.
the experiment cost him his life for want of suffenance.
l’estrange.
the ancients were inventers of all arts necessary to life and
suffenance, as plowing and sowing. temple.
sustent ation. n.s.. [suffentation, fr. from sustento, lat.]
1. support; preservation from falling.
these steams once raised above the earth, have their ascent
and softentation aloft promoted by the air.
2. use of victuals. - *
a very abstemious animal, by reason of its frigidity, and
latitancy in the winter, will long subsist without a visible sus-
tentation. brown's pulgar errours.
3. maintenance; support of life. -
when there be great shoals of people, which go on to po-
pulate, without foreseeing means of life and suffentation ; it is
of necessity that once in an age they discharge a portion of
their people upon other nations. bacon.
susu rra'tion. n.s.. [from susurro, lat.] whisper ; soft
n) urn lur.
sute. n.s.. [for suite.] sort. i believe only misprinted.
touching matters belonging to the church of christ, this
we conceive that they are not of one sute. hooker.
su’tler. m. s. [soeteler, dutch ; sudler, german.] a man that
sells provisions and liquor in a camp.
- i shall sutler be
unto the camp, and profits will accrue. shakesp. hen. v.
send to the jutler's; there you're sure to find
the bully match'd with rascals of his kind.
su'ture. m. s. [ sutura, lat.]
1. a manner of sewing or stitching, particularly of stitching
wounds.
wounds, if held in close conta&amp;t for some time, reunite by
inosculation: to maintain this situation, several sorts of sutures
have been invented; those now chiefly described are the in-
terrupted, the glovers, the quill'd, the twisted and the dry
futures, but the interrupted and twisted are almost the only
useful ones. . sharp's surgery.
2. suture is a particular articulation: the bones of the cranium
are joined to one another by four sutures. $2uincy.
many of our vessels degenerate into ligaments, and the
satures of the skull are abolished in old age. arbuthnot.
swab. m. s. (swabb, swedish..] a kind of mop to clean floors.
to swab. v. a. [rpebban, saxon.] to clean with a mop. it
... is now used chiefly at sea. -
he made him swab the deck. - shelvock's woyage.
swa’bber. n.s.. [swabber, dutch..] . a sweeper of the deck.
. the master, the swabber, the boatswain and i,
lov’d mall, meg, and marrian, and margery. shak.
was any thing wanting to the extravagance of this degene-
rate age, but the making a tarpawlin and a swabber the hero
of a tragedy. dennis.
to swa'ddle. v. a. [rpeban, saxon.]
1. to swathe; to bind in cloaths, generally used of binding
newborn children.
waller.
chapman's iliad.
dryden.
boyle.
- invested by a veil of clouds,
• and swaddled as new-born in sable shrouds;
for these a receptacle i design'd.
how soon doth man decay !
when cloths are taken from a chest of sweets,
- to swaddle infants, whose young breath
scarce knows the way ; -
those clouts are little winding sheets,
which do consign and send them unto death. herbert,
they swaddled ine up in my night-gown with long pieces
of linen, 'till they had wrapt me in about an hundred yards of
sands,
swathe. - 4dison,
2. to beat; to cudgel. a low ludicrous word.
great on the bench, great in the saddle,
that could as well bind o'er as swaddle. hudbrai.
swa’ddl e. m. s. [from the verb.] cloaths tound round the body.
i begged them to uncase me : no, no, say they ; and upon
that carried me to one of their houses, and put me to bed in
all my swaddles. addison.
swa'ddlingband.
. s. s from swaddle.
swa'ddling cloath. } zo %. {...} o wrapped
swa'ddling clout. - - -
from thence a fairy thee unweeting reft,
there as thou slept'st in tender swaddlingband,
and her base elfin brood, there for thee left,
such men do changelings call, so changed by fairies theft.
- sten'er.
that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swadling-
clouts. - shakespeare's hamlet.
the swaddlingbands were purple, wrought with gold. dryd.
to swag. v. n. [rigan, saxon; sveigia, islandick.] to fink
down by its weight; to hang heavy. -
they are more apt, in swagging down, to pierce with their
points, than in the jacent posture, and crevice the wall. ivott.
being a tall fish, and with his sides much compressed, he
hath a long fin upon his back, and another answering to it on
his belly; by which he is the better kept upright, or from
swagging on his sides. grew.
to swag e. v. a. [from affivage.] to ease ; to soften; to mi-
tigate. -
apt words have pow'r to swage
the tumours of a troubled mind,
and are as balm to fester'd wounds.
nor wanting pow'r to mitigate and swage,
with solemn touches, troubled thoughts, and chase
anguish, and doubt, and fear from mortal minds. milton.
i will love thee,
though my distracted senses should forsake me,
i'd find some intervals, when my poor heart -
should swage itself, and be let loose to thine. otway.
to swa'gger. v. n. [swadderen, dutch, to make a noise;
rpexan, saxon.] to bluster; to bully ; to be turbulently
and tumultuously proud and insolent.
drunk? squabble swagger ? and discourse fustian with
one's own shadow oh thou invincible spirit of wine ! shak.
'tis the gage of one that i should fight withal, if he be
alive; a rascal that swagger'd with me last night. shakespeare.
the lesser size of mortals love to swagger for opinions, and
to boast infallibility of knowledge. glanv. sceps.
many such asles in the world huff, look big, stare, dress,
milton.
cock, and swagger at the same noisy rate. l'estrange.
he chuck'd,
and scarcely deign'd to set a foot to ground,
but swagger'd like a lord. dryden.
confidence, how weakly soever founded, hath some effect
upon the ignorant, who think there is something more than
ordinary in a swaggering man, that talks of nothing but de-
monstration. tilloism.
to be great, is not to be starched, and formal, and super-
cilious; to swagger at our footmen, and browbeat our infe-
riors. - collier on pride.
what a pleasure is it to be victorious in a cause to swag-
ger at the bar for a lawyer i was born, and a lawyer i will
be. - a bothnot's history of john bull.
swa'gge rer. m. s. [from swagger.] a blusterer; a bully; a
turbulent noisy fellow.
he's no swaggerer, hostess; a tame cheater: you may stroke
him as gently as a puppy greyhound. shakesp. henry iv.
swa’ go y. adj. [from swag.] dependent by its weight.
the beaver is called animal ventricosum, from his swaggy
and prominent belly. brown's poulgar eircurs.
swal n. m. s. [rpen, saxon and runick.]
1. a young man.
that good knight would not so nigh repair,
himself estranging from their joyance vain,
whose fellowship seem'd far unfit for warlike swain. soesor.
2. a country servant employed in husbandry.
it were a happy life
to be no better than a homely swain.
3. a pastoral youth.
3!est swains / whose nymphs in cov'ry grace excel;
bleit nymphs whose swains those graces iing so well. pope.
słaz. henry vi,
*
leave
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w / a.
s. w. a.
leave the meer country to meer country swins,
and dwell where life, in all life's glory reigns. harte.
swa’inmore, n s. [ swainmotus, law lat..] a court touching
matters of the forest, kept by the charter of the forest thrice
in the year. this court of swainmate is as incident to a for
rest, as the court of piepowder is to a fair. the swainmote is
a court of freeholders within the forest. - cowel.
t, swale. \ v. a. [rpelan, saxon, to kindle.] to waste or
to sw e a l. } blaze away; to melt: as, the candle swales."
swa’llet, n. s. among the tin-miners, water. breaking in
upon the miners at their work. . . . ." . ' ' " bailey.
swallow. n. s. [rpalere, saxon; hirundy.j. a small bird of
passage; or, as some say, a bird that lies hid and sleeps in the
winter. - .
the swallow follows not summer more willingly than we
your lordship: - - shakespeare's timon.
daffodils,
that come before the swallow dares. shakesheare.
the swallows make use of celendine, and the linnet of eu-
phragia. * * * * - more.
when swallows fleet soar high and sport in air,
he told us that the well: in would be clear. " " ' " gay,
to sw a'llow. v. a. [rpelyan, saxon; swelgen, dutch..]
1. to take down the throat. " - - o -
if little faults
shall not be wink'd at, how shall we stretch our eye,
whose capital crimes chew'd, swallow'd, and digested,
appear before us shakespeare's henry v.
men are, at a venture, of the religion of the country; and
must therefore swallow down opinions, as filly people do em-
piricks pills, and have nothing to do but believe that they will
do the cure. locke.
2. to receive without examination.
confider and judge of it as a matter of reason, and not
fwallow it without examination as a matter of faith. locke.
3. to engross; to appropriate ; often with up emphatical.
far be it from me, that i should swallow up or destroy. 2 sa.
homer excels all the inventors of other arts in this, that he
has swallowed up the honour of those who succeeded him. pope.
4. to absorb ; to take in ; to sink in any abyss ; to engulph :
with to. - -
though you untie the winds, and let them fight
against the churches, though the yesty waves
confound and swallow navigation up.
i may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb
of this deep pit, poor basfianus' grave. shak. tit. audron.
death is swallowed up in victory. i cor. xv. 54.
if the earth open her mouth and swallow them up, ye shall
understand that these men have provoked the lord. num. xvi.
in bogs swallow'd up and lost. - a/ilton.
he hid many things from us, not that they would swallow
ap our understanding, but divert our attention from what is
more important. decay of piety.
nature would abhor -
to be forced back again upon herself,
shakespeare.
dryden.
and like a whirlpool swallow her own streams.
should not the sad occasion swallow up
my other cares, and draw them all into it allison.
5. to occupy. -
the necessary provision for life swallows the greatest part of
their time. locke.
6. to seize and waste. -
corruption swallow’d what the liberal han
of bounty scatter'd. - thomson's autumn.
7. to engross; to engage completely. -
the priest and the prophet are swallowed up of wine. isa.
8. swallow implies, in all its figurative senses, some nauseous
or contemptuous idea, something of grossness or of folly.
swa’llow. m. s. [from the verb.] the throat; voracity.
had this man of merit and mortification been called to ac-
count for his ungodly sit allow, in gorging down the estates of
helpless widows and orphans, he would have told them that it
was all for charitable uses. - south.
swa’1. lowr ail. m. s. a species of willow.
the shining willow they call swallowtail, because of the
pleasure of the leaf. bacon's natural history.
swa’llowwor t. n. s. sas lopia.] a plant. ''
sw am. the preterite of swim. -
sw amp. n.f. [swamms, gothick; rpam, saxon; suamm,
hslandick; swamme, dutch; sucmp, danish; ficanp, swedish ;]
a marsh; a bog; a fen.
swas mp y. adj. [from fivamp.] boggy; fenny.
- wampy fens breathe destructive myriads. ' thomson.
svvan. m. s. [rpan, saxon ; suan, danish ; sivaen, dutch ;
cycnits 1 . . . . . . .
the swan is a large water-fowl, that has a long neck,
and is very white, excepting when it is young. its legs and
feet are black, as is its bill, which is like that of a goose, but
something rounder, and a little hooked at the lower end of
it: the two sides below its eyes are black and shining like
cbc.ny. swans use wings like fails, which catch the wind,
so that they are driven along in the water. they feed upon
herbs and some fort of grain like a goose, and some are said to
have lived three hundred years. there is a species of swans
with the feathers of their heads, towards the breast, marked
at the ends with a gold colour inclining to red. the swan is
reckoned by moses among the unclean crores; but it was
consetrated to apollo the god of musick, because it was said
to fing melodiously when it was near expiring; a tradition
generally received, but fabulous. . . . a. coins.
- - - - - - with untainted eye
compare her face with some that i shall show,
• and i will make thee think thy fican a crow. shojar: -
let musick sound, while he doth make his choice; “. . . .
then if he lose, he makes a jivan like end. . shakoff care.
the fearful inatrons raise a screaming cy, ** … .
w
-- old feeble fied with fainter groans reply; . . . . . . . .
* ‘’a jarring soond results, and mingles in the sky, , . . .
like that of swans remurm'ring to the floods. dron.
. the idea, which an englishman signifies by the names can -
is a white colour, long-neck, black beak, black legs, and
whole feet, and all these of a certain size, with a power of
swimming in the water, and making a certain kind of noise,
a -- ) - - - - - locke.
swa'nskin. m. s. “[swan and skin..] a kind of soft flannel,
imitating for warmth the down of a swan.
swap; 6d. [44 so, to do at a snatch, islandick.) hastly,
with hasty violetige; as, he did it swap. it seems to be of the
fame original with sweep. a low word.
to swap. v. a. to exchange. see io swop. .
swas d. m. s. [sward, swedish.]. . .
1. the skin of bacon. -
2. the surface of the ground; whence greensward, or greensword.
water, kept too long, loosens and softens the soard, makes
it subject to rushes and coarse grass. k. on 7 user.
the noon of night was past, and then the foe
came dreadless o'er the level swart, that lies
between the wood and the swift streaming ouse. a. philips.
to plant a vineyard in july, when the earth is very dry and—
combustible, plow up the swarth, and burn it. mortimer.
sware. the preterite of swear. -
swar m. n.s. dryeanm, saxon; swerm, dutch.]
1. a great body or number of bees or other small animals, par-
ticularly those bees that migrate from the hive. ,
a swarm of bees that cut the liquid sky,
. . upon the topmast branch in clouds alight.
2. a multitude; a croud.
from this swarm of fair advantages, -
you grip'd the general sway into your hand. shakespeare.
if we could number up those prodigious swarm; that had
settled themselves in every part of it, they would amount to
more than can be found. - addison on italy.
this oval in of themes that settles on my pen,
which i, like summer-flies, shake off again,
* let others fing. 7%ung.
to swar m. v. n. [speanman, saxon; sw-rmen, dutch.]
1. to rise as bees in a body, and quit the hive. - -
all hands employ'd,
like labouting bees on a long summer's day;
some sound the trumpet for the rest to swarm. dryden.
swarm'd on a rotten stick the bees i spy’d. gay.
when bees hang in swarming time, they will presently rise,
if the weather hold. . alsortinier's husbandry.
2. to appear in multitudes; to croud; to throng.
the merciless macdonel,
the multiplying villanies of nature o
do swarm upon. shakespeare's macbeth.
our superfluous lacqueys, and our peasants,
who in unnecessary action swarm
about our squares of battle. shakespeare's henry v.
what a multitude of thoughts at once
awaken'd in me swarm, while i consider
what from within i feel myself, and hear
what from without comes often to my ears. milton.
then mounts the throne, high plac'd before the shrine;
in crowds around the swarming people join. dryden's aem.
3. to be crouded; to be over-run; to be thronged.
these garrisons you have now planted throughout all ire-
land, and every place swarms with soldiers. spenser.
her lower region swarms with all sort of fowl, her rivers
with fish, and her seas with whole shoals. jhowel.
those days swarmed with fables, and from such grounds
took hints for fictions, poisoning the world ever after. brown.
life swarms with ills, the boldest are afraid,
where then is safety for a tender maid
4. to breed multitudes.
not so thick swarm'd once the soil -
bedropp'd with blood of gorgon. milton's paradis. loft.
5. it is used in conversation for climbing a tree, by embracing it
with the arms and legs.
swart. ad. [..svarts, gothick; rpeast, saxon; swart,
swar.th. } dutch..]
8
dryden's £n.
1%ung.
1. black;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w a
1. black; darkly brown; tawney. * --
. a nation strange, with visage swart,
~ and courage fierce, that all men did affray,
through the world then swarmed in every part.
a man - -
of swarth complexion, and of crabbed hue, . . . . . . .
that him full of melancholy did shew. " . ." spensor.
whereas i was black and swart before; ,
with those clear rays which she infus'd on me; o
that beauty am i blest with, which you see. shak. h. vi.
no goblin, or swart fairy of the mine,
hath hurtful power o'er true virginity.
2. in milton it seems to fignify gloomy; malignant.
ye valleys low, -
on whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks. milton.
to swart. v. a. [from the noun..] to blacken ; to dusk.
the heat of the sun may swart a living part, or even black
a dead or dissolving flesh. brown's vulgar errours.
swa'rthily. adv. [from swarthy.] blackly; duskily; tawnily.
swa'rt hiness. n.s. [from swarthy.] darkness of complexion;
tawniness. -
swa’rthy. adj. [see swart..] dark of complexion; black;
dusky; tawney. - - - -
set me where, on some pathless plain,
the swarthy africans complain. roscommon.
though in the torrid climates the common colour is black
or swarthy, yet the natural colour of the temperate climates is
more transparent and beautiful. hale's origin of mankind.
here swarthy charles appears, and there
his brother with dejected air. '
did they know cato, our remotest kings
would pour embattled multitudes about him;
their swarthy hosts would darken all our plains,
doubling the native horrour of the war, ... -
. . . .and making death more grim. " addison.
swash. m. s. [a cant word.]. a figure, whose circumference
is not round, but oval; and whose moldings lie not at right
angles, but oblique to the axis of the work. moxon.
swash. m. s. [from the verb.] impulse of water flowing with
violence. . . . . . . . . ." . " dic7.
to swash. v. n. to make a great clatter or noise: whence
swashbuckler. not in use. o
we'll have a swashing and a martial outside,
as many other mannish cowards have,
that do outface it with their semblances. shakespeare.
draw, if you be men: gregory, remember thy swashing
blow shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
swa's her... n.s.. [from swash..] one who makes a show of va-
lour or force of arms. obsolete.
i have observed these three swashers; three such anticks do
not amount to a man. shakes. henry v.
swatch. m. s. a swathe. not in use.
one spreadeth those bands so in order to lie,
as barlie in swatches may fill it thereby.
swath. n. s. [ swade, dutch.]
1. a line of grass cut down by the mower.
with tossing and raking, and setting on cox,
grasse, lately in swathes, is meat for an ox. tuffer.
the strawy greeks, ripe for his edge,
fall down before him, like the mower'sswath. shakesp.
as soon as your grass is mown, if it lie thick in the swath,
neither air nor sun can pass freely through it. 41ortimer.
2. a continued quantity. -
an affection’d ass, that cons state without book, and utters
it by great swaths. shak. twefth night.
3. [8peban, to bind, saxon.] a band; a fillet.
an indian comb, a stick whereof is cut into three sharp
and round teeth four inches long : the other part is left for
the handle, adorned with fine straws laid along the sides, and
lapped round about it in several distinet swaths. grew.
long pieces of linen, they folded about me, ’till they had
wrapped me in above an hundred yards of swathe. guardian.
to swan he. v. a. [rpeban, saxon.] to bind, as a child
with bands and rollers.
he had two sons; the eldest of them at three years old,
i' th' swathing cloaths the other, from their nursery -
were stol’n. shakespeare's cymbeline.
their children are never swathed, or bound about with any
thing, when they are first born; but are put naked into the
bed with their parents to lie. abbot's descript. of the world.
swath'd in her lap the bold nurse bore him out,
* - -
* , spensor.
milton.
addison.
, tasir.
with olive branches cover'd round about, dryden.
master's feet are swath'd no longer,
if in the night too oft he kicks, * - - - - -
or shows his loco-motive tricks. ... prior.
jo sway. v. a. [schweben, german, to move.] -
1. to wave in the hand; to move or wield any thing massy: as,
to sway the scepter. - -
glancing fire out of the iron play'd,
as sparkles from the anvil rise, to a * * *
when heavy hammers on the wedge are sway’d. spensor.
3 -
3. to biass; to direct to either side. o -
heav'n forgive them, that so much have sway’d .
your majesty's good thoughts away from me. shakespeare.
- i took your hands ; but was, indeed, .
sway'd srom the point, by looking down on caesar.
- * - * * . … shakespeare.
the only way t” improve our own, * *
by dealing faithfully with none; . . - -
as bowls run true by being made
... qn purpose false, and to be sway’d. hudibrar.
when examining these matters, let not temporal and little
advantages sway you against a more durable interest. tillotson.
3. to govern ; to rule ; to overpower; to influence.
the lady's mad; yet if 'twere so, -
she could not sway her house, command her followers,
with such a smooth, discreet, and flable bearing. shakes.
the will of man is by his reason sway’d;
and reason says, you are the werthier maid. shakespeare.
on europe thence, and where rome was to sway
the world. - - - - - - - milton's paradje loft.
- a gentle nymph, not far from hence, , .
that with moist curb sways the smooth severn stream,
sabrina is her name. . - - 44ilton.
take heed lest passion sway. , , o .
thy judgment to do ought, which else free will
would not admit. . s . . . 4milton's paradise loft.
the judgment is swayed by passion, and stored with lubri-
cous opinions, instead of clearly conceived truths. glanv.
. . . . . . . . this was the race , , , , , , -
to sway the world, and land and sea subdue. ... dryden.
*** with these i went, . . . - * * *
nor idle stood with unaffaing hands, -
* when savage beasts, and men's more savage bands,
their virtuous toil subdu'd; yet those i sway’d
with pow'rful speech: i spoke, and they obey'd. dryden.
they will do their best to persuade the world that no man
acls upon principle, that all is swayed by particular malice.
. . . . . . . o - - - davenant.
to sway. v. n. o .* * *
1. to hang heavy; to be drawn by weight.
in these personal respects, the balance sways on our part.
bacon.
2. to have weight; to have influence.
the example of sundry churches, for approbation of one
thing, o much ; but yet still as having the force of an
example only, and not of a law. . * hooker.
3. to bear rule ; to govern. • *
the mind i sway by, and the heart i bear,
shall never sagg with doubt, nor shake with fear. shafts.
had'st thou sway’d as kings should do, . .
they never then had sprung like summer flies. . . . shakes.
aged tyranny sways not as it hath power, but as it is suf-
fered. shakesp. king lear.
here thou shalt monarch reign;
there did'st not: there let him still victor sway. … milton.
sway. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the swing or sweep of a weapon.
to strike with huge two-handed sway. ..., milton,
2. any thing moving with bulk and power.
- are not you mov’d, when all the sway of earth
shakes like a thing unfirm 2 shak. julius cesar.
3. weight; preponderation; cast of the balance.
- expert
when to advance, or stand, or turn the sway
of battle. milton.
4. power ; rule; dominion. . . . . . . . .
this sort had some fear that the filling up the seats in the
consistory, with so great number of laymen, was but to please
the minds of the people, to the end they might think their
own sway somewhat. . . . . . . . . . . . hooker.
. . . . only retain . . . . . . . . . .
the name and all th’ addition to a king; . . . . . . . .
". the sway, revenue, execution of th' hest, *
beloved sons, be yours. . . . . . shakes. king lear.
s: her father counts it dangerous ... -
that she should give her sorrow so much sway,
and in his wisdom hastes our marriage, ... . . . . .
to stop the inundation of her tears. . ; shałospeare.
too truly tamerlane's successors they ; , . . . .
. each thinks a world too little for his sway, dryd. aurangz.
- when vice prevails, and impious men bear/way,
the post of honour is a private station. .” addison's cats.
. influence; direetion; weight on one side. . . . . . . . . .
ne subject to the
in the end, very few excepted, all beca
fway of time : other odds there was none, saving that some
fell sooner, and some later, from the soundness of belief. hook.
an evil mind in authority doth not only follow, the sway of
the desires already within #.. to itself new desires,
not before thought of, . . . . . . . . , , , , , sidney.
they rush along, the rattling woods give way, so
the branches bend before their sysopy /way-- * * poo
- ico o
* * *
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w e
s w e
1, swear, v.o. preter. swore or sware; part pass form.
waran, gothick; rpenian, saxon; sweeron, dotch.
1.to obtest some superiour power; to utter an oath.
if a man, vow, a vow unto the lord, or swear an oath to
bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word. num.
thee, thee an hundred languages shall claim,
and savage indians swear by anna's name. tickel.
2. to declare or promise upon oath.
we shall have old swearing
that they did give the rings away to men:
but we'll outface them, and outswear them too. shakespeare,
i gave my love a ring, and made him swear
never to part with it; and here he stands,
i dare be sworn for him, he would not leave it,
nor pluck it from his finger.
i would have kept my word;
but, when i swear, it is irrevocable. shakes. henry vi.
jacob said, swear to me; and he sware unto him. gen.
bacchus taken at rhodes by demetrius poliorcetes, which
he so esteemed, that, as plutarch reports, he sware he had
rather lose all his father's images than that table.
3. to give evidence upon oath.
at what ease
might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt
to swear against you ? shak. henry viii.
to obtest the great name profanely.
because of swearing the land mourneth.
obey thy parents, keep thy word justly;
swear not. shakes. king lear.
none so nearly disposed to scoffing at religion as those who
have accustomed themselves to swear on trifling occasions. till.
hark! the shrill notes transpierce the yielding air,
and teach the neighb'ring ecchos how to swear. 1%ung.
to swe a r. v. a.
1. to put to an oth ; to bind by an oath administred.
moses took the bones of joseph ; for he had straitly sworn
the children of israel. ex. xiii. 19.
swom ashore, man, like a duck; i can swim like a duck,
i'll be sworn. shakespeare's tempoff.
let me swear you all to secrecy;
and, to conceal my shame, conceal my life. dryden.
2. to declare upon oath: as, he swore treason agains? his friend.
3. to obtest by an oath.
now by apollo, king, thou swear's thy gods in vain.
—o vastal miscreant' shakespeare.
swe’arer. m. s. (from swear.] a wretch who obtests the great
name wantonly and profanely.
and must they all be hang'd that swear and lie
—every one.
— who must hang them *
—why, the honest men.
—then the liars and swearers are fools; for there are liars
and swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang them
up. shakspeare.
take not his name, who made thy mouth, in vain:
it gets thee nothing, and hath no excuse :
lust and wine plead a pleasure, avaiice a gain;
but the cheap swearer through his open sluice
lets his soul run for nought. herbert.
of all men a philosopher should be no swearer; for an oath,
which is the end of controversies in law, cannot determine
any here, where reason only muft induce. brown.
it is the opinion of our most refined swearers, that the same
oath or curse cannot, consistently with true politeness, be re-
peated above nine times in the same company by the same per-
son. swift's polite conversation.
sweat. n.s. [rpeat, saxon; sweet, dutch.]
1. the matter evacuated at the pores by heat or labour.
sweat is salt in taste ; for that part of the nourishment which
is fresh and sweet, turneth into blood and flesh; and *:::::
is that part which is excerned. ason.
some insensible effluvium, exhaling out of the stone, comes
to be checked and condensed by the air on the superficies of it,
as it happens to sweat on the skins of animals. boyle.
soft on the flow'ry herb i found me laid
shakspeare.
peacham.
jer. xxiii. 16.
in balmy sweat. milton.
when lucilius brandishes his pen,
and flashes in the face of guilty men,
a cold sweat stands in drops on ev'ry part, -
and rage succeeds to tears, revenge to finant. dryden.
sweat is produced by changing the balance between the
fluids and solids, in which health consists, so as that projectile.
motion of the fluids overcome the resistance of the solids. arb.
2. labour; toil; drudgery.
this painful labout of abridging was not easy, but a mat-
ter of sweat and watching. 2 mac. ii. 26.
-- the field -
to labour calls us, now with sweat impos'd. milton.
what from johnson's oil and sweat did flow,
or what more easy nature did bestow
on shakespeare's gentler muse, in thee full grown
their graces both appear.
vol. ii.
denham,
3. evaporation of moisture.
- - - *
ke ** 8* in the mow ; and therefore those that are to be
. . to be thrashed 'till march, that they have had a
orough sweat in the mow. mortioner's husbandry.
72 sweat. v so * . . - - -
• v. 7. preterite fivef - - ~------
[from the noun. fivet, sweated; particip, pass, sweaten,
** to be moist on the body with heat or labour.
let them be fret, marry them to your heirs,
why foat they under burdens; shak. 4.1.xch. of venice,
- mistress page at the door, fweating and blowing, and look-
ing wildly, would necds speak with you. so.
when he was brought *gain to the bar, to hear
his knell rung out, his judgment, he was airs.
with such an agony, he sical extremely.
- - - - shakespeare' - *
about this tine in autumn, there ... . fo
other parts of the kingdom a disease then new ; which, of the
accidents and manner thereof they called the sweating no.
ikoo's henry vii.
a young tall squire only
did from the camp at firit before him go ;
at first he did, but scarce could follow strait,
sweating beneath a shield's unruly weight.
2. to toil; to labour; to drudge.
how the drudging goblin swet
to earn his cream bowl duty set;
when in one night, ere glimpse of morn,
his shadowy flail hath thresh'd the corn.
our author, not content to see
that others write as carelessly as he ;
though he pretends not to make things complete,
yet, to please you, he'd have the poe's /wcat.
3. to emit moisture.
wainscots will swat so that they run with water. bacon.
in cold evenings there will be a moisture or sweating upon
the stool. a sortimer.
to sw f.a.t. v a.
1. to emit as sweat.
grease that's sweaten
from the murtherer's gibbet, throw
into the flame. shakspeare's macbeth.
for him the rich arabia sweats her gum. dryden.
2. to make to sweat.
swe ater. m. s. (from sweat..] one who sweats.
sw eat y. adj. i from sweat j
1. covered wih sweat; moist with sweat.
the rabblement houted and clap'd their chop’d hands, and
threw up their sweaty night-caps. shako/p. julius casar.
a sweaty reaper from his tillage brought
first-fruits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf. milton,
2. confitting of sweat.
and then, so nice, and so genteel,
such cleanliness from head to heel;
no humours gross, or frowsy steams,
no noisome whiffs, or sweaty streams. swift.
3. laborious ; toilsome. -
those who labour
the sweaty forge, who edge the crooked scythe,
bend stubborn steel, and harden gleening armour,
acknowledge vulcan's aid. -
to swif e p. v. a. [rsapan, saxon.]
1. to drive away with a besom.
2. to clean with a besom. -
what woman, having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one,
doth not sweep the house, and seek diligently ’till she find it
luke xv. 8.
cowley.
milton,
i}or,
ter.
3. to carry with pomp.
let frantick talbot triumph for a while,
and, like a peacock, sweep along his tail.
shakes care's henry vi,
4. to drive or ero, off with celerity and violence.
- though i could,
with barefac'd power, sweep him from my fight,
and bid my will avouch it; yet i must not. shakes care.
the river of kishon swept them away. judges v.
the blustering winds striving for victory, swept the snow
from off the tops of those high mountains, and cast it down
unto the plains in such abundance, that the turks lay as men
buried alive. knolic.’s hyory.
flying bullets now
to execute his rage appear too slow ;
they miss or sweep but common souls away;
for such a loss opdam his life must pay. jwiller.
my looking is the fire of pestilence,
that sweeps at once the people and the prince. dryden.
i have already swept the stakes, and with the common good
fortune of prosperous gamesters can be content to fit. dryden.
is this the man who drives me before him
to the world's ridge, and sweeps me off like rubbish *.
drydow,
fool 1 time no change of motion knows ;
with equal speed the torrent flows
25 z to
-
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w. e.
s w e.
to swep fame, pow'r, and wealth away :
the past is all by death possest,
and frugal fate that guards the rest,
by giving, bids them live, to-day. fenton.
a duke holding in a great many hands, drew a huge heap.
of gold; but never observed a sharper, who under his arm
fwoot a great deal of it into his bat. swift.
5. to pass over with celerity and force.
6. to rub over.
their long descending train
with rubies edg’d, and sapphires swept the plain. dryden.
7. to strike with a long stroke.
descend, ye nine ; descend and sing;
the breathing instruments inspire,
wake into voice each silent string,
and sweep the sounding lyre.
to swe ep. v. n.
1. to pass with violence, tumult, or swiftness.
first quotation we should read swoop.
haste me to know it, that i with wings as swift
as meditation or the thoughts of love
may sweep to my revenge. shakespeare.
a poor man that oppresseth the poor, is like a sweeping rain
which leaveth no food. prov. xxviii. 3.
cowen in her course
tow'rds the sabrinian shores, as sweeping from her source,
pope.
perhaps in the
takes towa. drayton.
- before tempestuous winds arise,
stars shooting through the darkness gild the night
with sweeping glories and long trails of light. dryden.
2. to pass with pomp 5 to pass with an equal motion.
she sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies,
more like an empress than duke humphrey's wife. shak.
in gentle dreams i often will be by, -
and sweep along before your closing eye. dryden.
3. to move with a long reach.
nor always errs; for oft the gauntlet draws
a sweeping stroke along the crackling jaws. dryden.
sw e ep. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the act of sweeping.
2, the compass of any violent or continued motion.
a door drags when by its ill hanging on its hinges, or by
the ill boarding of the room the bottom edge of the door rides
in its sweep upon the floor. m.xon's mech. exercises.
- a torrent swell’d
with wintry tempests, that disdains all mounds,
breaking away impetuous, and involves
within its sweep, trees, houscs, men.
3. violent and general destruction.
in countries subject to great epidemical sweeps, men may
live very long ; but where the proportion of the chronical
distemper is great, it is not likely to be so. graunt.
4. direetion of any motion not rectilinear.
having made one incision a little circularly, begin a second,
bringing it with an opposite sweep to meet the other. sharp.
swee per. m. s. [from sweep.] one that sweeps.
sweetings. n.s.. [from sweep.] that which is swept away.
philips.
should this one broomstick enter the scene, covered with
dust, though the sweepings of the finest lady's chamber, we
should despise its vanity. swift.
swee pnet. n.s.. [sweep and net.] a net that takes in a great
compass.
she was a sweepnet for the spanish ships, which happily fell
into her net. camden.
swee'p's take. m. s. [sweep and soake..] a man that wins all.
is’t writ in your revenge,
that sweepsake you will draw both friend and foe,
winner and loser shakespeare.
swee'py. adj. [from sweep. j passing with great speed and vio-
lence over a great compass at once.
they rush along, the rattling woods give way,
the branches bend before their sweepy sway.
sw eet. adj. [rpeze, sax. soot, dutch.]
i. pleasing to any sense.
sweet o the pleasant perceptions of almost every sense:
sugar is sweet, but it hath not the same sweetness as musick;
nor hath musick the sweetness of a rose, and a sweet prospect
differs from them all: nor yet have any of these the same
sweetness as discourse, counsel, or meditation hath; yet the
royal psalmist saith of a man, we took sweet counsel together;
dryden.
and of god, my meditation of him shall be sweet. j/atts.
2. luscious to the taste. -
this honey tasted still is ever sweet. davies.
3. fragrant to the smell. - - -
balm his foul head with warm distilled waters,
and burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet. shakes).
where a rainbow hangeth over or toucheth, there breath-
eth a sweet smell; for that this happeneth but in certain mat-
ters which have some sweetness which the dew of the rainbow
draweth forth. bacon.
shred very small with thime sweet-margory and a little win-
ter favoury. - j/alton's avgler.
4. melodious to the ear.
the balmy zephyrs, silent since her death,
lament the ceasing of a sweeter breath.
the streets with treble voices ring,
to sell the bounteous product of the spring;
sweet-smelling flow’rs, and elders early bud.
pope,
goy.
the dulcimer, all organs of sweet stop. milton.
her speech is grac'd with sweeter sound
than in another's song is found.
no more the streams their murmurs shall forbear
a sweeter musick than their own to hear;
but tell the reeds, and tell the vocal shore,
fair daphne's dead, and musick is no more.
5. pleasing to the eye.
- heav'n bless thee
thou hast the sweetest face i ever look'd on.
6. not salt. -- -
the white of an egg, or blood mingled with salt water, ga-
thers the saltness, and maketh the water sweeter; this may be
by adhesion. bacon’s natural history.
the sails drop with rain,
sweet waters mingle with the briny main.
7. not sour.
time changeth fruits from more four to mere sweet; but
contrariwise liquors, even those that are of the juice of fruit,
from more sweet to more sour. bacon's natural history.
trees whose fruit is acid last longer than those whose fruit
is sweet. bacon.
when metals are dissolved in acid menstruums, and the
acids in conjunction with the metal act after a different man-
ner, so that the compound has a different taste, much milder
than before, and sometimes a sweet one; is it not because the
acids adhere to the metallick particles, and thereby lose much
of their activity. 'ewton's optics;
8. mild ; soft; gentle.
let me report to him
your sweet dependency, and you shall find
j/aller.
pope,
shakspeare.
dryden,
a conqu'ror that will pray in aid for kindness. shakesp.
the pleiades before him danc'd, -
shedding sweet influence. a milton,
mercy has, could mercy’s self be seen,
no sweeter look than this propitious queen. waller.
9. grateful; pleasing.
nothing so sweete is as our countrie's earth,
and joy of those, from whom we claime our birth. chapm.
sweet interchange of hill and valley. milton.
euryalus, -
than whom the trojan host
no fairer face or sweeter air could boast.
10. not stale; not stinking:
sweet. m. s.
1. sweetness; something pleasing. -
pluck out
the multitudinous tongue, let them not lick
the sweet which is their poison. shakesp. coriolanus.
what softer sounds are these salute the ear, t
from the large circle of the hemisphere, }
as if the center of all sweets met here ! ben, johnson.
if ev'ry sweet and ev'ry grace -
dryden's aneid.
as, that meat is sweet.
must fly from that forfaken face. carew.
hail! wedded love,
perpetual fountain of domestick sweets 1 milton.
taught to live - -
the easiest way nor with perplexing thoughts
to interrupt the sweet of life. . . . . milton's paradise loft.
now since the latian and the trojan brood
have tasted vengeance, and the sweets of blood, -
speak. dryden's aemeid,
can ceyx then sustain to leave his wife,
and unconcern'd forsake the sweets of life . dryden.
we have so great an abhorrence of pain, that a little of it
extinguishes all our pleasures; a little bitter mingled in our
eup leaves no relish of the sweet. lott.
love had ordain'd that it was abra's turn -
to mix the sweets, and minister the urn. prior.
2. a word of endearment.
- sweet / leave me here a while,
my spirits grow dull, and fain i would beguile
the tedious day with sleep. . .
. wherefore frowns my sweet?
have i too long been absent from these lips ? ben. johnson.
3. a perfume. w
shakosheart.
as in perfumes,
'tis hard to say what scent is uppermost;
nor this part musick or civet can we call,
or amber, but a rich result of all :
so she was all a sweet.
flowers
innumerable, by the soft south-west
open'd, and gather'd by religious hands, -
rebound their sweets from th’ odoriferous pavement. prior.
swee"thread, m. s. the pancreas of the calf.
dryden,
*
never
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w e
never tie yourself always to eat meats of easy digesture, as
veal, pullets, or sweetbre...i. “roy on consumptions.
sweet road and collops were with skewoo, prick'd
about the sides; imbibing what they deck'd. dryden.
when you roast a breasi of veal, remember your sweetheart
the butler loves a sweetbread. - swift.
swee"rbr1a r. m. s. s sort and briar.] a fragrant shrub.
for march come violets and poach-tree in blossom, the cor-
nelian-tree in blossom, and sweetoriar. bacon.
sweet broom. n.s. (grica, lat.] an herb. ainsworth.
sweet cice ly. m. s. i myrrhus, loat.j a plant. 44tler.
to sweet en. v. a. [from sweet.]
1. to make sweet.
the world the garden is, she is the flow'r
that sweetens all the place; she is the guest
of rarest price.
sidney.
here is the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes of ara-
bia will not sweeten this little hand. shakespeare.
give me an ounce of civet to jorton my imagination.
sh 4. - kı l r.
with faires flow's fidele, */9. king lea
i'll streeten thy sad grave. shakesp. cymbeline.
be humbly minded, know your post; -
sweeten your tea, and watch your toast. swift.
2. to make mild or kind.
all kindnesks descend upon such a temper, as rivers of
fresh waters falling into the main sea ; the sea swallows them
all; but is not changed or sweet was by them. south.
devotion soft.cns his heart, enlightens his mind, sweetens
his temper, and makes “...") thing that comes from him in-
fructive, amiable, and affecting. law.
3. to make less painful.
she the sweetness of my heart, even size tons the death
which her sweetness brought upon me.
thou shalt secure hor helples, sex from harms,
and she thy cares will sweet n with her chaos. dryden.
interest of state and change of circumstances may have
five tened these reflections to the politer fort, but impressions
are not so easily worn out of the minds of the vulgar. adson.
thy mercy sweet':ed ev'ry soil,
made ev'ry region please;
the hoary alpin hills it warm’d,
and smooth'd the tyrrhene seas.
4. to paliate; to reconcile.
these lesions may be gilt and sweetenel as we order pil's and
potions, so as to take of the disgust of the reinedy. l'eor.
5. to make gratiful or pleasing.
i would have my love
angry sometimes, to sweeten of the rest
of her behaviour. len. johnson's cotiline.
6. to soften ; to make delicate.
corregio has made his memory immortal, by the strength
he has given to his figures, and by sweetening his lights and
shadows, and melting them into each other so happily, that
they are even imperceptible. dryden's dyrosnoy.
to swhere n. v. n. to grow sweet.
where a wasp hath bitten in a grape, or any fruit, it will
sweeten hastily. lacon's natural hytery.
swfor ener. m. s. [from sweeten.]
1. one that palliates; one that represents things tenderly.
but you who, till your fortune's made,
must be a sweetner by your trade,
must swear he never incant us ill. swisł.
those softeners, sweeteors, and compounders, shake their
heads so strongly, that we can hear their pockets jingle. swift.
2. that which contemporates acrimony.
powder of crabs eyes and claws, and burnt egg-shells, are
prescribed as sweetenor of any sharp humours. temple.
sweet heart. n. s. [ sweet and heart.) a lower or mistress.
mittress, retire yourself -
into some covert; take your sweethearts -
and pluck o'er your brows. shakespeare.
sweetheart, your colour, i warrant you, is as red as any
rose. shako/eare.
one thing, sweetheart, i will ask, o
take me for a new-fashion'd mask. clear eland,
a wench was wringing her hands and crying; sh; had new-
ly parted with her sweet, eart. l'//trange.
she interprets all your dreams for these,
foretells th' estate, when the rich uncle dies,
and sees a sweet eart in the sacrifice. don's javera'.
sweet inc. n.s. [from sweet.]
1. a sweet luscious apple. -
a child will chute a sworting because it is presently fair and
pleasant, and refuse a runnet, because it is then groen, hard
and four. a jam's schozimosler.
2. a word of endearment.
trip no further, pretto swor:; -
journeys end in lovers meeting.
swee rish. adj. [from scot.] somewhat sweet.
they esteemed that tood pituitous naturally, which abound-
“d with an exceeding quantity of sw.e. chie. 1 loor.
sidney.
addison's spoilt.r.
soa's eare. -
s w e
sweetly, adv,
nes [from sweet.] in a sweet manner; with sweet-
c18. -
the best "one for my beloved goeth down sweety. cant.
“”ore his great commission in his look; -
but sweetly *"per'd awe, and soften’d all he spoke. dryden.
no poet ever sweety sung,
unless he were like phobos young •
nor ever nymph inspir'd to rhyme,
unless like venus is or prime. swift.
sw ee **** - / [/wet and weat..] delicacies made of
fruits preserved with sugar.
mopsa, as glad as of jortmeats to go of such an errand,
quickly returned. sidney.
why all the charges of the nuptial feast,
wine and deserts, and /weetmeats to digest. dryd wi
there *** plenty, but the dishes were ill sorted; whole
pyramids of sweetmeats for boys and women, but little solid
meat for men. dryden.
make your transparent sweetmeats truly nice,
with indian sugar and arabian spice. king's cookery.
if a child cries for any unwholesome fruit, you purchase his
quiet by giving him a less hurtful sweetmeat; this may preserve
his health, but spoils his mind. locke.
at a lord-mayor's feast, the sweetmeats do not make ap-
p**** till people are cloyed with beef and mution. addison.
they are allowed to kis, the child at meeting and parting;
but a professor, who always stands by, will not suffer them to
* bring any presents of toys or sweetmeat. . swift.
*******s. m. s. [from sweet.] the quality of being sweet
in any of its senses; fragrance; melody; lusciousness, deli-
ciousness; agreeableness; delightfulnes; gentleness of man-
ners midness of aspect.
she the sweetness of my heart, even sweetening the death
which her sweetness brought upon me. sidney.
the right form, the true figure, the natural colour that is
fit and due to the dignity of a man, to the beauty of a woman,
to the sweeins of a young babe. ascharn.
o our lives sweetnes, 1 -
that we the pain of death would hourly bear,
rather than die at once. shakesp. king lear.
where a rainbow toucheth, there breatheth forth a sweet
s": so this happeneth but in certain matters, which have
in themselves fone sweetness, which the gentle dew of the rain-
bow draweth forth. bacon.
his sweetnes, of carriage is very particularly remembered by
his contemporaries. i'll.
screne and clear harmonious horace flows,
with sweetnos not to be exprest in prose. rosommon.
suppose two authors equally sweet, there is a great distinc-
tion to be made in sweetnyi; as in that of sugar and that of
honey. dryden.
this old man's talk, though honey flow'd
in every word, would now lose all its sweetts. addison.
praise the easy vigour of a line,
where denham's strength and waller's sweetness join. pope.
a man of good education, excellent understanding, and
***t tasie : these qualities are adorned with great nodefly
and a most amiable sweetness of temper. swift.
swo or william. a m. s. [armeria, lat..] plants. a species
sw e et willow. ; of gilliflowers.
sw e erwi'llow. n.s. gale or dutch myrtle.
7", writ: v. m. participle pass, swollen. [spellan, sax. swolen,
dutch...]
1. to grow bigger; to grow turgid; to extend the parts.
propitious tyber mooth'd his wat'ry way,
he roll'd his river back, and pois'd he stood,
a gentle swelling and a peaceful flood. dryden's zneid.
2. to turnity by obstruction.
strangely visited people,
all swol'n and ulc’rous; pitiful to the eye, - -
the more despair of surgery he cures. shakes. macbeth.
swol's is his breast; his inward pains encrease, - -
all means are us'd, and all without success. dryden.
3. to be exasperated.
- my pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
my mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs. shakspeare.
4. to look big.
here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock. shake?.
5. to be turgid. used of style.
- peleus and telephus exil'd and poor,
forget their swelling and gigantick words. rosonmor.
6. to protuberate.
. this iniquity shall be as a breach ready to fall, swelling out
in a high wall. la, xxx. 13.
7. to rise into arrogance; to be elated.
in all things else above our humble fate, -
your equal mind yet swell, not into state. drydon.
8. to be inflated with anger.
i will help every one from him that /weeth against him,
and will set him at rest. pums xii. 6.
we have made peace of enmity
between these swelling wrong-incensed peers. *†:
- e
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w e
s w i
. the hearts of princes kiss obedience,
so much they love it; but to stubborn spirits
they swell and grow as terrible as storms.
9. to grow upon the view. -
o for a muse of fire, that would ascend
the brightest heaven of invention
a kingdom for a stage, princes to act,
and monarchs to behold the swelling scene. shakespeare.
io. it implies commonly a notion of something wrong.
your youth admires
the throws and swellings of a roman foul,
cato's bold flights, th” extravagance of virtue. #.
• immoderate valour swells into a fault. addison.
to swell. v. a.
1. to cause to rise or encrease; to make tumid.
wind, blow the earth into the sea, - - -
or swell the curled waters 'bove the main. shakespeare.
you who supply the ground with seeds of grain,
and you who swell those seeds with kindly rain.
2. to aggravate ; to heighten. -
it is low ebb with his accuser, when such peccadillos are put
to swell the charge. - atterbury.
3. to raise to arrogance. . -
all these miseries proceed from the fathe natural causes,
which have usually attended kingdoms swolen with long plenty,
pride, and excess. - clarendon.
the king of mes, who swoln with pride,
refus’d his presents, and his prayers dehy'd.
swell. n.f. [from the verb.] extension of bulk.
‘. the swan's down feather;
that stands upon the swell at full of tide,
and neither way inclines. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
swe'll ing. m. s. [from swell.]
4. morbid tumour. l
there is not a chronical disease that more frequently intro-
duces the distemper i am discoursing of, than strumous or scro-
phulous swellings or ulcers. blackmore.
2. protuberance; prominence.
the superficies of such plates are not even, but have many
cavities and swellings, which, how shallow soever, do a little
vary the thickness of the plate. newton's opticks.
3. effort for a vent.
my heart was torn in pieces to see the husband suppressing
and keeping down the swellings of his grief. tatler.
to swel t. v. n. to break out in sweat, if that be the mean-
1})
shakespeare.
dryden.
dryden.
9. -
* chearful blood in faintness chill did melt,
which, like a fever fit, through all his body swelt.
spenser's fairy queen.
to swe'lter. v. m. [this is supposed to be corrupted from
saltry..] to be pained with heat.
if the sun’s excessive heat
makes our bodies swelter,
to an osier hedge we get
for a friendly shelter;
there we may
think and pray,
before death
--- stops our breath.
to swe’lt er. v. a. to parch, or dry up with heat.
some would always have long nights and short days; others
again long days and short nights; one climate would be scorch-
ed and sweltered with everlasting dog-days, while an eternal
december blasted another. bentley's sermons.
swe’lt ry. adj. [from swelter.] suffocating with heat.
chalkhil.
swept. the participle and preterite of sweep.
to swerp. v. n. to breed a green turf. [see to
swar d.]
the clays that are long in swerding, and little subject to
weeds, are the beft land for clover. martimer.
to swerve. v. n. [swerven, saxon and dutch.]
i. to wander; to rove. -
. a maid thitherward did run,
to catch her sparrow which from her did swerve. sidney.
the swerving vines on the tall elms prevail,
unhurt by southern show’rs or northern hail. dryden.
2. to deviate ; to depart from rule, custom or duty.
that which angels do clearly behold, and without any
swerving observe, is a law celestial and heavenly. hooker.
howsoever swervings are now and then incident into the
course of nature, nevertheless so constantly the laws of nature
are by natural agents observed, that no man denieth ; but
those things which nature worketh are wrought always, or
for the most part after one and the same manner. hooker.
the ungodly have laid a snare for me; but yet i swerve
not from thy commandments.
- - were i the fairest youth
that ever made the eye swerve. shakespeare,
there is a protection very just which princes owe to their
servants, when, in obedience to their just commands, upon
extraordinary occasions, in the execution of their trusts, they
swerve from the strict letter of the law. clarendon.
common prayer. "
till then his majesty had not in the least fwerved from that
act of parliament. clarendon
annihilation in the course of nature, defeat and sworvin,
in the creature, would immediately follow. hakewill
firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve. it.
many who, through the contagion of ill example, so
exceedingly from the rules of their holy faith, yet wool.
on such an extraordinary warning be brought to comply wo
them. 4tterbury's sirmo
3. to ply; to bend. -
- now their mightiest quell'd, the battle swerva
with many an inroad gor'd. miller
4. [i know not whence derived.] to climb on a narrow bo.
ten wildings have i gather'd for my dear, y.
upon the topmost branch, the tree was high,
yet, nimbly up from bough to bough i sworv'd. dog
she fled, returning by the way she went, "jan,
and swerv'd along her bow with swift ascent. dryden.
swift. adj. [rport, saxon.]
• i. ors far in a short time ; quick; fleet; speedy; nimble;
rapid. - -
thou art so far before,
that swiftoff wing of recompence is slow
to overtake thee. - shaloftwar,
yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb."
unable to support this lump of clay,
swift-winged with desire to get a grave. shakespeare.
men of war, whose faces were like the faces of lions, and
as swift as the roes upon the mountains. i chron. xii. 8.
we imitate and practise to make swifter motions than any
out of other muskets. bacon.
to him with swift ascent he up return'd. milton.
things that move so swift as not to affect the senses dis.
tinetly, with several distinguishable distances of their moto.
and so cause not any train of ideas in the mind, are not o
ceived to move. looke.
it preserves the ends of the bones from incalescency, which
they, being solid bodies, would contract from any soft ino-
tion. ray,
thy stumbling founder'd jade can trot as high
as any other pegasus can fly;
so the dull eel moves nimbler in the mud,
than all the swift-fin'd racers of the flood. dost.
clouded in a deep abyss of light,
while present, too severe for human fight,
nor staying longer than one swift-wing'd night. prior.
mantiger made a circle round the chamber, and the swift-
footed martin pursued him. arbuthnoi.
there too my son,-ah once my best delight,
once swift of foot, and terrible in fight. pope's odyssey.
swift they descend, with wing to wing conjoin'd, -
, , stretch their broad plumes, and float upon the wind. pape.
2. ready.
let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak. ja, i. 19.
- to mischief swift. milton.
swift. m. s. the current of a stream.
he can live in the strongest swifts of the water. woon.
swift. m. s. [from the quickness of their flight; apu.j a
bird like a swallow ; a martin. o -
swifts and swallows have remarkably short legs, and their
toes grasp any thing very strongly. derham.
swiftly, adv, (from swift.] fiectly; rapidly; nimbly; with
celerity; with velocity. - -
these move swiftly, and at great distance; but then they
equire a medium well disposed, and their transmission is easily
stopped. bacon's natural hijiory.
pleas'd with the passage, we slide swifty on, --
and see the dangers which we cannot shun. dryden.
in decent order they advance to light;
yet then too swiftly fleet by human fight, ;
and meditate too soon their everlasting flight. prizr.
swiftness. n.s. (from swift.] speed; nimbleness; rapidity;
quickness; velocity; celerity.
let our proportions for these wars
be soon collected, and all things thought upon,
that may with reasonable swiftnes; add
more-feathers to our wings.
we may outrun
by violent swiftness that which we run at;
and lose by over-running. shakesp. henry viii.
shakesp. henry v.
speed to describe whose swiftness number fails. ashton.
exulting, till he finds their nobler sense
their disproportion'd speed does recompense;
then curses his conspiring feet, whose scent -
betrays that safety which their swiftness lent. ixenham.
such is the mighty swiftnes of your mind,
that, like the earth's, it leaves our sense behind. dylan.
to swig. v. n. [swiga, islandick.] to drink by large draugots.
to swill. v a. [rpilgan, saxon.]
1. to drink luxuriously and glossly.
- the wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
that spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines,
st. i.is
s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w i
swill your warm blood like wash, and m
in your embowel'd bosoms. shakesp. richard iii.
the most common of these causes are an hereditary dispo-
sition, and swilling down great quantities of cold liquors. arb.
such is the poet, fresh in pay,
the third night's profits of his play;
his morning draughts till noon can swill,
among his brethren of the quill.
2. to wash; to drench.
as fearfully as doth a galled rock
o'erhang and jutty his confounded base,
swill'd with the wild and wasteful ocean.
with that a german oft has swill"d his throat
deluded, that imperial rhine bestow'd
the generous rummer.
3. to inebriate; to swell with plenitude.
i should be loth
to meet the rudeness and swill'd insolence
of such late wassailers.
he drinks a swilling draught; and lin'd within,
will supple in the bath his outward skin. dryden.
swill: "...s [from the verb.] drink, luxuriously poured down.
akes his trough
swift.
shakespeare.
philipi.
milton.
give swine such swill as you have. mortimer.
thus as they swim in mutual swill, the talk
reels fast from theme to theme. thomson.
swi'ller. m. s. [from swill.] a luxurious drinker.
to swim. v. n. preterite swam, swom, or swum. [rpmman,
saxon; swanmen, dutch.]
1. to float on the water; not to sink.
i will scarce think you have swam in a gondola. shakespeare.
we have ships and boats for going under water, and brook-
o of seas; also swimming-girdles and supporters. bacon.
o move progressively in the water by the motion of the
limbs.
leap in with me into this angry flood,
and swim to yonder point. shakesp. julius cæsar.
i have ventur'd, -
like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
these many summers in a sea of glory;
but far beyond my depth. shakesp. henry viii.
the soldiers counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of
them should swim out and escape. 47: xxvii. 42.
the rest driven into the lake, where seeking to save their
lives by swimming, they were slain in coming to land by the
spanish horsemen, or clfe in their swimming shot by the har-
quebusiers. knoller.
animals swim in the same manner as they go, and need
no other way of motion for natation in the water, than for
progression upon the land. brown's pulgar errouri.
the frighted wolf now swims among the sheep,
the yellow lion wanders in the deep :
2.
the stag swim, faster than he ran before. dryden.
blue triton gave the signal from the shore,
the ready nereids heard and swam before,
to sindoth the seas. dryden.
3. to be conveyed by the stream.
with tenders of our protection of them from the fury of
those who would soon drown them, if they refused to swim
down the popular stream with them. king charles.
i swam with the tide, and the water under me was buoyant.
- dryden.
4. to glide along with a smooth or dizzy motion.
she with pretty and with swimming gate
following, her womb then rich with my young squire
would imitate. shakespeare.
a hovering mist came swimming o'er his fight,
and seal’d his eyes in everlasting night. dryden.
my slack hand dropt, and all the idle pomp,
priests, altars, victims swam before my fight ! smith.
the fainting soul stood ready wing'd for flight,
and o'er his eye-balls swum the shades of night. pope.
5. to be dizzy i to be vertiginous. -
i am taken with a grievous swimming in my head, and such
a mist before my eyes, that i can neither hear nor see. dryd.
6. to be floated.
when the heavens are filled with clouds, when the earth
swims in rain, and all nature wears a lowring countenance, i
withdraw myself from these uncomfortable scenes into the vi-
sionary worlds of art. addison's spectator.
sudden the ditches swell, the meadows swim. thomson.
7. to have abundance of any quality; to flow in any thing.
they now swim in joy, -
ere long to swim at large, and laugh; for which
the world a world of tears must weep.
t. swi m. v. a. to pass by swimming. -
sometimes he thought to swim the stormy main,
by stretch of arms the distant shore to gain. dryden.
swim. n.s. [from the verb.] the bladder of fishes by which
they are supported in the water. -
the braces have the nature and use of tendons, in contract-
ing the swim, and thereby transfusing the air out of cne blad-
der into another, or discharging it from them both. grew.
vol. ii.
milton.
s w i
swi'mmer. m. s. from swi
1. one who # favim.]
birds find ease in the depth of the air,
as swimm -
de p water. swimmers do in a
- bacot.
latirostrous and flat billed birds, being generally swimmers,
the organ is wisely contrived for aftion. roturf.
life is oft preserv'd
by the bold swimmer, in the swift illapse
of accident disastrous, thomson
2. the swimmer is situated i -
k ted in the fore legs of a horse, above the
nees, and upon the infide, and almost upon the back parts
of the hind legs, a little below the ham : this part is without
hair, and resembles a piece of hard dry horn. farrier's dict.
swi'mmingly. adv. [from swimmi - -
- - - blonnnn.nor. smoothly :
obstruction. a low word. g-l y; without
john got on the battlements,
the cause goes on swimmingly.
swine. n.s. [rpin, saxon; swyn,
plural of some old word, and is no
bers.] a hog;
and nastiness.
o monstrous beast ! how like a swine he lies 1
he will be swine drunk; and in his sleep he does littl
and called to nick, i hope
arbuthnot,
dutch. it is probably the
- w the same in both num-
a pig. a creature remarkable for stupidity
shakesp.
- h
save to his bedcloaths. s.
now i fat his swine, for others cheere. chapman.
who knows not circe,
the daughter of the sun ? whose charmed cup
whoever tasted, lost his upright shape,
and downward fell into a grovelingswine. milton,
had the upper part, to the middle, been of human shape,
and all below swine, had it been murder to destroy it? locke.
how instinet varies in the grov'lingswine,
compar'd, half reasoning elephant, with thine ! pope.
swi'nebre ad. n.s. [oyolaminus.] a kind of plant; truffles.
bailey.
swi'n egr ass. n. s. scentinodir, lat.) an herb.
sw1 neherd. a. s. [rpin and pyro, saxon.] a keeper of hogs.
there swineherd, that keepeth the hog. tuffer.
the whole interview between ulysses and eumeus has
fallen into ridicule: eumeus has been judged to be of the
same rank and condition with our modern swineherds. broome.
swiss epipe. m. s. [turdus iliacus.] a bird of the thrush kind.
bailey.
to swing. v. n. [rpingan, saxon.]
1. to wave to and fro hanging loosely.
i tried if a pendulum would swing faster, or continue swing-
ing longer in our receiver, in case of exsuction of the air, thin
otherwise. boyle.
if the coach swung but the least to one side, she used to
shriek so loud, that all concluded she was overturned. a buthn.
jack hath hanged himself: let us go see how he swings.
arbuthnot.
when the swinging signs your ears offend
with creaking noise, then rainy floods impend. gay.
2. to fly backward and forward on a rope.
to swi ng. v. a. preterite swang, swung.
1. to make to play loosely on a string.
2. to whirl round in the air.
his sword prepar’d,
he swang about his head, and cut the winds. shakspeare.
take bottles and swing them : fill not the bottles full, but
leave some air, else the liquor cannot play nor flower. bacon.
swinging a red-hot iron about, or fastening it unto a wheel
under that motion, it will sooner grow cold. brown.
swing thee in the air, then dash thee down,
to th’ hazard of thy brains and shatter'd fides, milton.
3. to wave loosely.
if one approach to dare his force,
he swings his tail, and swiftly turns him round. dryden.
swis g. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. motion of any thing hanging loosely.
in casting of any thing, the arms, to make a greater swing,
are first cast backward. bacon's natural history.
men use a pendulum, as a more steady and regular motion
than that of the earth; yet if any one should ask how he cer-
tainly knows that the two successive swings of a pendulum are
equal, it would be very hard to satisfy him. locke.
2. a line on which anything hangs loose.
3. influence or power of a body put in motion.
the ram that batters down the wall,
for the great swing and rudeness of his poize,
they place before his hand that made the engine.
shakespeare.
in this encyclopaedia, and round of knowledge, like the
great wheels of heaven, we're to observe two circles, that,
while we are daily carried about, and whiled on by the swing
and rapt of the one, we may maintain a natural and proper
course in the sober wheel of the other. brown.
the descending of the earth to this orbit is not upon that
mechanical account cartefius pretends, namely, the strong
swing of the more solid globuli that overflow it. more.
4. course; unrestrained liberty; abandonment to any motive.
26 a fa&amp;s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s w i
s w o
fa&amp;s unjust
commit, even to the full swing of his lust. chapman.
take thy swing ;
* for not to take, is but the self-same thing. dryden.
these exubera : productions only excited and fomented his
loss; so the t his whole time lay upon his hands, and gave
him leisure to contrive and with full swing pursue his follies.
//codward.
let them all take their swing -
to pillage the king,
and get a blue ribband instead of a string.
5. unrestrained tendency.
\v here the swing goeth, there follow, fawn, flatter, laugh,
and lie justily at other mens liking. astham's schoolmaster.
those that are so persuaded, desire to be wise in a way that
will gratify their appetites, and so give up themselves to the
song of their unbounded propensions. glanville.
were it not for these, civil government were not able to
stand before the prevailing suing of corrupt nature, which
would know no honesty but advantage. - south.
to swinge. v. a. [rpingan, saxon. the g in this word,
and all its derivatives, sounds as in gem, giant.]
1. to whip; to bastinade; to punish.
sir, i was in love with my bed: i thank you, you swing'd
me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you for
your's. shakes. two gent. of werona.
this very rev'rend letcher, quite worn out -
with rheumatisms, and crippled with his gout,
forgets what he in youthful times has done,
and swinges his own vices in his son. dryd jun, juvenal.
the printer brought along with him a bundle of those pa-
pers, which, in the phrase of the whig coffeehouses, have
swift.
swinged off the examiner. swift.
2. to move as a lash. not in use.
he, wroth to see his kingdom fail,
swinges the scely horror of his folded tail. milton.
swing e. m. s. [from the verb.] a sway; a sweep of anything
in motion. not in use.
the shallow water doth her force infringe,
and renders vain her tail's impetuous swinge.
sw1'ng e bu ckler. m. s. [swinge and buckler.]
man who pretends to feats of arms.
you had not four such swingebucklers in all the inns of court
again. shakespeare's henry iv.
swi'nger. m. s. [from swing.] he who swings; a hurler.
swi'ng ing. adj. [from swinge.] great; huge. a low word.
the countryman seeing the lion disarmed, with a swinging
cudgel broke off the match. l’e//range.
a good swinging sum of john's readiest cash went towards
building of hocus's countryhouse. arbuthnot.
swi'ngingly. adv. [from swinging, or swinge.] vasily;
greatly. -
henceforward he’ll print neither pamphlets nor linen,
and, if swearing can do't, shall be swingingly o
wift.
//aller.
a bully ; a
to swi'no 1 e. v. m. [from swing.]
1. to dangle; to wave hanging.
2. to swing in pleasure.
swi'nish. adj. [from swine.] befitting swine; resembling
swine; gross; brutal.
they clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase
soil our addition. shakespeare's hamlet.
swinish gluttony
ne'er looks to heav'n amidst his gorgeous feast;
but, with besotted base ingratitude, -
crams and blasphemes his feeder. milton.
to sw1n k. v. n. [rpincan, saxon.] to labour; to toil; to
drudge. obsolete.
riches, renown, aud principality,
for which men swink and sweat incessantly. spensor.
for they do swink and sweat to feed the other,
who live like lords of that which they do gather. spenser.
to sw1nk. v. a. to overlabour. obsolete.
the labour'd ox
in his loose traces from the furrow came,
and the swink'd hedger at his supper sat. milton.
sw1nk. m. s. [rpinc, saxon.] labour ; toil; drudgery. ob-
solete.
ah, piers, been thy teeth on edge, to think
how great sport they gaynen with little swinke * spenser.
thou's but a lazy loorde,
and rekes much of thy swinke. spenser.
sw1tch. m. s. a small flexible twig.
fetch me a dozen crabtree staves, and strong ones; these
are but switches. shaksp. henry viii.
when a circle 'bout the wrist
is made by beadle exorcist, -
the body feels the spur and switch. hudibras.
mauritania, on the fifth medal, leads a horse with some-
thing like a thread; in her other hand she holds a switch.
- addison.
to sw1tch. v. a. [from the noun..] to lash; to jerk.
lay thy bridle's weight
most of thy left side; thy right horse then switching, all to
throat • ? y
spent in encouragements, give him; and all the rein let
float. chapman's iliad
swi'vel. m. s. something fixed in another body so as to turn
round in it. -
swo bber. m. s. [see swabe er.]
r. a sweeper of the deck.
cubb’d in a cabbin, on a mattress laid,
on a brown george with lousy swobbers fed. dryon
2. four privileged cards that are only incidentally used in tests, -
at the game of whist. §
the clergyman used to play at whist and swolbers: playin
now and then a sober game at whist for pastime, it might ;
pardoned; but he could not digest those wicked fwobbers, sw
swo'llen. th iciple passi ~...~! -
swoln. } e participle passive of swell.
unto his aid she hastily did draw
her dreadful beast, who, swoln with blood of late,
came ramping forth with proud presumptuous gait. spensor
when thus the gather'd storms of wretched love -
in my swoln bosom with long war had strove,
at length they broke their bounds: at length their force
bore down whatever met its stronger course;
laid all the civil bonds of manhood waste,
and scatter'd ruin as the torrent past. - prior
whereas at first we had only three of these principles, their
number is already swoln to five. bafter on learning.
swo m. the preterite of swim.
to swoon, v. m. sarpunan, saxon.] to suffer a suspension
of thought and sensation ; to faint.
so play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
come all to help him, and so stop the air
by which he should revive. shakoffear,
if thou stand'st not i' th' state of hanging, or of some death
more long in spectatorship, and crueler in suffering, behold
now presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee. shak,
we see the great and sudden effect of smells in fetching men
again, when they swoon. c
the most in years swoon'd first away for pain;
then, scarce recover'd, spoke.
the woman finds it all a trick,
that he could swoon when she was sick;
and knows that in that grief he reckon'd
on black-ey'd susan for his second. prior.
there appeared such an ecstacy in his action, that he seemed
ready to swoon away in the surprize of joy. tatler.
swoon. m. s. [from the verb..] a lipothymy; a fainting fit.
to swoop. v. a. [i suppose formed from the found.] c
1. to seize by falling at once as a hawk upon his prey.
a fowl in madagascar, called a ruck, the feathers of whose
wings are twelve paces, can with as much ease swoop up an
elephant as our kites do a mouse. wilkins.
this mould'ring piecemeal in your hands did fall,
and now at last you came to swoop it all.
2. to prey upon; to catch up.
the physician looks with another eye on the medicinal herb
thap, the grazing ox, which swoops it in with the common
grass. - glanv, &amp;ps.
3. to pass with violence. not used.
the nine-ston'd trophy thus whilst she doth entertain,
proud tamer swoops along with such a lusty train,
as fits so brave a flood.
swoop. m. s.
quarry.
all my pretty ones :
did you say all what, all o hellkites all !
what, all my pretty chickens and their dam,
at one fell swoop p shakespeare’s macbeth.
the eagle fell into the fox's quarters, and carried away a
whole litter of cubs at a swoop. l’estrange.
to swop. v. a... [of uncertain derivation.] to change; to ex-
change one thing for another. a low word.
when i drove a thrust home, he put it by,
and cried, as in derision, spare the tripling;
qh that insulting word ' i would have swoop'd
youth for old age, and all my life behind,
to have been then a momentary man. dryden's clement.
sword. n.s.. [ryeono, saxon; sweerd, dutch..]
1. a weapon used either in cutting or thrusting; the usual wei-
pon of fights hand to hand.
old unhappy traitor, the sword is out
that must destroy thce. shakesp. king lear.
each man took his sword, and slew all the males. gen.
but the sword -
of michael from the armoury of god
was giv'n him temper’d so, that neither keen
nor solid might resist that edge: it met -
the sword of satan with steep force to smite
descending, and in half cut sheer; nor stay’d,
but with swift wheel reverse, deep ent'ring shar'd
bacon.
dryden,
dryden.
drayton.
[from the verb.] fall of a bird of prey upon his
all
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s y c
s y l
*
*
all his right side: then satan first knew pain,
and writh’d him to and fro convolv’d ; so fore
the griding sword with discontinuous wound
pass'd through him.
2. destruction by war; as fire and sword.
the sword without, and terrour within. deut. xxxii. 25.
3. vengeance of justice. -
justice to merit does weak aid afford,
she quits the balance, and resigns the sword.
4. emblem of authority.
this i, her sword bearer, do carry,
for civil deed and military.
swo'rded. adj. [from sword. j girt with a sword.
the sworded seraphim
are seen in glitt'ring ranks with wings display’d. ... milton.
swo'rder. n.s.. [from sword.] a cut-throat; a soldier. in
contempt.
a roman sworder and banditto slave
murther'd sweet tully.
caesar will
unflate his happiness, and be stag'd to th’ shew
against a sworder. o shakes care.
swo'rdf is h. m. s. [xiphias.] a fish with a long sharp bone
issuing from his head. - o
aswordfish small him from the rest did sunder,
that in his throat him pricking softly under,
his wide abyss him forced forth to spew. spensor.
malpighi observed the middle of the optick nerve of the
swordfish to be a large membrane, folded, according to its
length, in many doubles, like a fan. derham's physico-theol.
our little fleet was now engag’d so far,
that, like the swordfish in the whale, they fought;
the combat only seem’d a civil war,
*till through their bowels we our passage wrought. dryden.
swo'rd grass. n.f. [gladiolus.] a kind of sedge; glader. ains.
swo'rdknot. m. s. [sword and knot..] ribband tied to the hilt
of the sword.
wigs with wigs, swordknots with swordknots strive,
beaus banish beaus, and coaches coaches drive. pope.
swo'rdlaw. n.s. violence; the law by which all is yielded
to the stronger.
milton.
dryden.
hudibras.
shafts. henry vi.
so violence
proceeded, and oppression, and swordlaw,
through all the plain, and refuge none was found. milton.
swo'rdman. m. s. [ sword and man.] soldier; fighting man.
worthy fellows, and like to prove most finewy swordmen.
shak. all's well that ends well.
at lecca's house,
among your swordmen, where so many associates
both of thy mischief and thy madness met. ben. johnson.
essex was made lieutenant-general of the army, the darling
of the swordmen. clarendon.
swo'rdplayer. m. s. [sword and play.] gladiator; fencer ;
one who exhibits in publick his skill at the weapons by fighting
rizes.
p these they called swordplayers, and this spectacle a sword-
fight. hakewill on providence.
swore. the preterite of fivear. -
how soon unsay
what feign'd submission swore. milton.
sworn. the participle passive of swear.
what does else want credit, come to me,
and i’ll be sworn 'tis true. - shakespeare.
i am sworn brother, sweet,
to grim necessity; and he and i
will keep a league 'till death. shakesp. richard ii.
they that are mad against me, are sworn against me. p/.
he refused not the civil offer of a pharisee, though his sworn
enemy; and would cat at the table of those who sought his
ruin. calamy’s sermons.
to shelter innocence, -
the nation all elects some patron-knight,
sworn to be true to love, and slave to fame,
and many a valiant chief enrols his name.
swu m. preterite and participle passive of swim.
air, water, earth,
by fowl, fish, beast, was flown, was soon, was walk'd
frequent. milton's paradise lost.
swu ng. preterite and participle passive of swing.
her hand within her hair she wound,
swung her to earth, and dragg'd her on the ground. addis.
syb. adj. tproperly sih, rib, saxon.] related by blood. the
scottish diale&amp;t still retains it.
if what my grandsire to me said, be true,
siker i am very sy' to you. sponsor's pasorals.
sy’camine. w. n.s. a tree. the sycamore of scripture is
sy'camor e. ; not the same with curs.
sycamore is our acer majus, one of the kinds of maples: it is
a quick grower. amortimer’s hushandry.
if ye had faith as a grain of mustard-seed, ye might say
unto this sailine tree, be thou plucked up, and it should
obey you.} loce xvii. 6.
granville.
i was no prophet, but an herdman, and a gatherer of sea-
snare fruit. amos vii. 14.
go to yonder sycamore-tree, and hide your bottle of drink
under its hollow root. jo alton's angier.
sycamore; with eglantine were spread;
a hedge about the sides, a covering over head.
sycophant. n.s. [rox.c41;; sycophanta,
bearer; a makebate; a malicious parasite.
accusing sycophants, of all men, did best sort to his nature;
but therefore not seeming socophants, because of no cvil they
said, they could bring any new or doubtful thing unto him,
but such as already he had been apt to determine; so as they
came but as proofs of his wisdom, fearful and more secure,
while the fear he had figured in his mind had any possibility of
event. - sidney.
men know themselves void of those qualitics which the im.
pudent sycophant, at the same time, both ascribes to them, and
in his sleeve laughs at them for believing. south.
to sy'cophant. v. n. [aux.p2%; from the noun..] to
play the sycophant. a low bad word. -
his sophanting arts being detected, that game is not to be
played the second time; whereas a man of clear reputation,
though his barque be split, has something left towards setting
up again. government of the tongue.
sycopha’ntick, adj. [from sycophant..] talebearing; mis-
chievously officious. -
to sycoph a.n rise. v. n. [avoc: 2:123; ; from soant..] to .
play the talebearer. - dicf.
syha bic al...aff. [from syllable.] relating to syllables; con-
fisting of syllables.
sylla bic ally, adv. [from solabical.] in a syllabical manner.
syha bick, adj. [/yllabique, fr. from syllable.] relating to
syllables.
syllable., n.s. savxx23; ; syllabe, fr.]
1. as much of a word as is uttered by the help of one vowel, or
one articulation. -
i heard
each sollable that breath made up between them. shakesh.
there is that property in all letters of aptness to be con-
joined in syslables and words, through the voluble motions of
the organs from one stop or figure to another, that they mo-
dify and discriminate the voice without appearing to discon-
tinue it. holder's elements of speech.
2. anything proverbially concise.
abraham, job, and the rest that lived before any syllable of
the law of god was written, did they not sin as much as we
do in every action not commanded ? hooker.
to-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, "
creeps in this petty pace from day to day, /
to the last syllable of recorded time; -
and all our yesterdays have lighted fools
the way to dusty death. shoes. macbeth.
he hath told so many melancholy stories, without one sys-
lable of truth, that he hath blunted the edge of my fears. swift.
to syllable. v. a. [from the noun..] to utter; to pro-
nounce; to articulate. not in use.
airy tongues that syllable mens names
on sands and shores, and desart wildernesses.
syllabub. m. s.
acids.
no syllabubs made at the milking pail,
but what are compos'd of a pot of good ale. beaumont.
two lines would express all they say in two pages: 'tis
nothing but whipt syllabuh and froth, without solidity. follon.
syllabus. m. s. sovxx262s.) an abstract; a compendium
containing the heads of a discourse. - -
syyllogism. m. s. [avxxoyo; ; syllogisme, fr.] an ar-
gument composed of three propositions: as, every man thinks;
peter is a man, therefore peter thinks.
a piece of rhetorick is a sufficient argument of logick, an
apologue of æsop beyond a sologism in barbara. brow.
what a miraculous thing should we count it, if the flint
and the steel, instead of a few sparks, should chance to knock
out definitions and soil.gisms 2 bentley.
syl log1's t1c al. a j. [avxxoy, six's ; from syllogism...] re-
syl logi's rick. { taining to a syllogism ; consisting of a
syllogism.
though we suppose subject and predicate, and copula, and
propositions and syllogiftical connexions in their reasoning,
there is no such matter ; but the intire business is at the same
moment present with them, without deducing one thing from
another. hale's origin of mankind.
though the terms of propositions may be complex, yet
where the composition of the whole argument is thus plain,
simple, and regular, it is properly called a simple syllogism,
since the complexion does not belong to the soil gioiok form of
it. - - - l/atts's logi.k.
syl logi'stic ally. adv. [from syllogi?ical.] in the form of a
syllogism.
a man knows first, and then he is able to prove sologisti-
cally; so that syllogisin comes after knowledge, when a man
has no need of it. looe.
6 : 2
dryden.
lat.] a tale-
a/ision.
[rightly sillabub, which see..] misk and
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s y m
s y m
to symbolize. v. a.
to syllogize. v. n. [syllogizer, fr. royßw.] to reason
by syllogism.
logick is, in effect, an art of syllogizing. baker.
men have endeavoured to transform logick into a kind of
mechanism, and to teach boys to syllogize, or frame arguments
and refute them, without real knowledge. //atts.
sy’lv an. adj. [better silvan.] woody ; shady; relating to
woods.
cedar and pine, and fir and branching palm,
asylvan scene ! and as the ranks ascend,
shade above shade, a woody theatre
of stateliest view. milton's paradise lost.
eternal greens the mossy margin grace,
watch'd by the sylvan genius of the place. pope.
sy’lv an. n.s.. [sylvain, fr.] a wood-god, or satyr; perhaps
sometimes a rustick.
her private orchards wall'd on ev'ry side;
to lawless sylvans all access deny'd. pope.
symbol. n. j. [symbole, fr. riswooxov ; symbolum, lat.]
1. an abstract; a compendium; a comprehensive form.
beginning with the symbol of our faith, upon that the au-
thor of the gloss enquires into the nature of faith. baker.
. a type; that which comprehends in its figure a representa-
tion of something else.
salt, as incorruptible, was the symbol of friendship; which,
if it casually fell, was accounted ominous, and their amity of
no duration. brown's vulgar errours.
words are the signs and symbols of things; and as, in ac-
counts, ciphers and figures pass for real sums, so words and
names pass for things themselves. south's sermons.
the heathens made choice of these lights as apt symbols of
eternity, because, contrary to all sublunary beings, though
they seem to perish every night, they renew themselves every
morning. addison on medals.
symbo'lical. adj. [symbolique, fr. rup,00xixo; ; from symbol]
representative; typical; expresfing by signs; comprehending
something more than itself.
by this incroachment idolatry first crept in, men convert-
ing the symbolical use of idols into their proper worship, and
receiving the representation of things unto them as the sub-
stance and thing itself. brown.
the sacrament is a representation of christ's death, by such
symbolical actions as himself appointed. taylor.
symbo lic all y. adv. [from symbolical.] typically; by re-
presentation.
this distinetion of animals was hieroglyphical, in the in-
ward sense implying an abstinence from certain vices, symboli-
cally intimated from the nature of those animals. brown.
it symbolically teaches our duty, and promotes charity by a
real signature and a sensible sermon. taylor.
symbolization. m. s. [from symbolize.] the aet of symbo-
lizing; representation; resemblance.
the hierogliphical symbols of scripture, excellently in-
tended in the species of things sacrificed in the dreams of pha-
raoh, are oftentimes racked beyond their symbolizations.
brown's vulgar errours.
to symboli'ze. v. n. [symboliser, fr. from symbol..] to have
something in common with another by representative qua-
lities.
our king finding himself to symbolize in many things with
that king of the hebrews, honoured him with the title of this
foundation. bacon.
the pleasing of colour symbolizeth with the pleasing of any
single tone to the ear; but the pleasing of order doth symbolize
with harmony. bacon's natural history.
aristotle and the schools have taught, that air and water,
being symbolizing elements, in the quality of moisture, are
easily transmutable into one another. boyle.
they both symbolize in this, that they love to look upon
themselves through multiplying glasses. howel.
i affectedly symbolized in careless mirth and freedom with
the libertines, to circumvent libertinism. more.
the soul is such, that it strangely symbolizes with the thing
it mightily desires. south's sermons.
to make representative of something.
some symbolize the same from the mystery of its colours.
brown's vulgar errours.
symmetrian. n. s. [from symmetry.] one eminently studious
of proportion.
his face was a thought longer than the exact symmetrians
would allow. sidney.
symmetrical. adj. [from symmetry.] proportionate; having
parts well adapted to each other.
symmetr1st. n.s.. [from symmetry.] one very studious or
observant of proportion.
some exact symmetrifts have been blamed for being too true.
wotton's architecture.
symmetry. m. s. [symmetrie, french; aw and oreov.]
adaptation of parts to each other; proportion; harmony;
agreement of one part to another.
she by whose lines proportion should be
examin'd, measure of all symmetry; 3
whom had that ancient seen, who thought souls made
of harmony, he would at next have said
that harmony was she.
and in the symmetry of her parts is found
a pow'r, like that of harmony in sound.
symmetry, equality, and correspondence of parts,
discernment of reason, not the object of sense. are
nor were they only animated by him, but their measur. i
symmetry were owing to him. drydon
§::::::::::"; adj. [sympathetique, fr. from smoj
so 'i o o sensation; being affei:
either by what happens to the other ; - - -
of o o ; feeling in consequence
hereupon are grounded the gross mistakes, in th
diseases, not only from 'o receipts, but .
&gt;
donne,
i/aller,
is the
charms, and all incantatory applications. brou,
united by this sympathetick bond, rown,
you grow familiar, intimate, and fond. roscommon
to confer at the distance of the indies by sympathi coil-
veyances, may be as usual to future times as to us in a literar
correspondence. y
to you our author makes her soft request,
who speak the kindest, and who write the best:
your sympathetick hearts she hopes to move,
from tender friendship and endearing love. prior
all the ideas of sensible qualities are not inherent in the i.
animate bodies ; but are the effects of their motion upon our
nerves, and sympathetical and vital passions produced withi.
ourselves. bently
sympath eotically. adv. [from sympathetick.] with ji.
pathy; in consequence of sympathy.
to sympathize. v. n. [sympatiser, fr. from sympathy.]
i. to feel with another; to feel in consequence of what another
feels; to feel mutually.
the men sympathize with the mastiffs in robustious and
rough coming on. shakespeare
the thing of courage, -
as rouz'd with rage, with rage doth sympathize. shakoftar,
nature, in awe to him, w
hath doff’d her gaudy trim,
with her great master so to sympathize. milton,
the limbs of his body is to every one a part of himself: he
jympathizer, and is concerned for them. locke.
their countrymen were particularly attentive to all their
story, and sympathized with their heroes in all their adventures.
addison's speciator.
though the greatness of their mind exempts them from
fear, yet none condole and sympathize more heartily. collier,
2. to agree to fit. not proper.
green is a pleasing colour, from a blue and a yellow mixed
together, and by consequence blue and yellow are two colours
which sympathize. dryden's dufresney.
so thy. {{ #". fr. avur&amp;siz.] fellow-
celing ; mutual sensibility ; the quality of bei
the o of another. y; quality eing affected by
a world of earthly blesfings to my soul,
if sympathy of love unite our thoughts. shakesp. h. vi.
ou are not young; no more am i : fo to, then, there's
jompathy: you are merry, so am i; has has then there's
more sympathy: you love sack, and so do i; would you desire
better sympathy p shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
but what it is,
the action of my life is like it, which i'll keep,
if but for sympathy. shakespeare's cymbelint,
i started back ;
it started back: but pleas'd i soon return'd;
pleas'd it return’d as soon, with answering looks
of sympathy and love. milton's paradis: loft.
they saw, but other fight instead, a crowd -
of ugly serpents: horror on them fell,
and horrid sympathy.
or sympathy, or some connat'ral force,
pow'rful at greatest distance to unite,
with secret amity, things of like kind,
by secretest conveyance. milton's paradis, loft.
there never was any heart truly great and generous, that
was not also tender and compassionate: it is this noble quality
that makes all men to be of one kind; for every man would
be a distinet species to himself, were there no sympathy among
individuals. south's sirmin.
can kindness to desert, like your's, be strange 2
kindness by secret sympathy is ty'd ; o
for noble souls in nature are ally'd, dryden.
there are such associations made in the minds of most men,
and to this might be attributed most of the jympathies and an-
tipathies observable in them. - lo:#t.
sympho'nious, adj. [from symphony.] harmonious; agreeing
in sound.
glanv. stops.
milton,
up he rode,
follow'd with acclamation and the sound
symphonious of ten thousand harps, that tun’d
angelick harmonies.
milan.
symphony.
;
s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s y n
s y n
symphony. m.s. [somphonie, french; ro, and two.] con-
cert of instruments; harmony of mingled sounds.
a learned searcher from pythagoras's school, where it was a
maxim that the images of all things are latent in numbers, de-
termines the coineliest proportion between breadths and
heights, reducing symmetry to symphony, and the harmony of
found to a kind of harmony in fight. //atton.
speak ye who best can tell, ye sons of light,
angels for ye behold him, and with songs
and choral symphonies, day without night,
circle his throne rejoicing. milton's par. losł.
the trumpers sound,
and warlike symphony is heard around;
the marching troops through athens take their way;
the great earl-marshal orders their array. dryden.
sy'mphysis. m. s. savy and pow.]
symphysis, in its original signification, denotes a connas-
cency, or growing together; and perhaps is meant of those
bones which in young children are distinet, but after some
years unite and consolidate into one bone. iłoseman.
sympo's ack, adj. [symposia?ue, french ; rugwrotizos.] re-
lating to merry makings; happening where company is drink-
ing together.
by desiring a secrecy to words spoke under the rose, we
only mean in society and compotation, from the ancient cus-
tom of symposiack meetings to wear chaplets of roses about their
heads. brown's wulgar errours.
in some of those symposack disputations amongst my ac-
quaintance, i affirmed that the dietetick part of medicine de-
pended upon scientifick principles. arbuthnot.
symptom. n.s.. [symptome, french ; row-lap 2.] -
1. something that happens concurrently with something else,
not as the original cause, nor as the necessary or constant
effect. -
the symptoms, as dr. sydenham remarks, which are com-
monly scorbutick, are often nothing but the principles or seeds
of a growing, but unripe gout. blackmore.
2. a sign; a token. -
ten glorious campaigns are passed, and now, like the fick
man, we are expiring with all sorts of good symptoms. swift.
symptom a^t ical. nadj. [symptomatique, french ; from symp-
symptomatick. } tom.] happening concurrently, or oc-
casionally. -
symptomatical is often used to denote the difference between
the primary and secondary causes in diseases; as a fever from
pain is said to be symptomatical, because it arises from pain
only; and therefore the ordinary means in fevers are not in
such cases to be had recourse to, but to what will remove the
pain; for when that ceases, the fever will cease, without any
dire&amp;t means taken for that. 2:lincy.
by fomentation and a cataplasm the swelling was discussed;
and the fever, then appearing but symptomatical, lessened as the
heat and pain mitigated. joseman's surgery.
symptom a^tically. adv. [from symptomatical.] in the na-
ture of a symptom.
the causes of a bubo are vicious humours abounding in
the blood, or in the nerves, excreted sometimes critically,
sometimes symptomatically. - wiseman.
synago"gical. adj. [from synagogue.] pertaining to a syna-
ogue.
socogue. m. s. [synagogue, french; ruvoywyn.] an
assembly of the jews to worship.
go, tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. shakesp.
as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sab-
bath. gospel.
synale'pha. m. s. savv2xo1pm.] a contraction or excision
of a syllable in a latin verse, by joining together two vowels
in the scanning or cutting off the ending vowel; as, ill”
ego. bailey.
virgil, though smooth, is far from affecting it: he fre-
quently uses synalephas, and concludes his sense in the middle
of his verse. dryden.
synarth rosis. n.s. [riv and 3:3:02.] a close conjunetion
of two bones.
there is a conspicuous motion where the conjunetion is
called diarthrosis, as in the elbow; an obscure one, where the
conjunction is called synarthrosis, as in the joining of the car-
pus to the metacarpus. //seman's surgery.
synchond rosis. n.s. sov and x&amp;346p.]
synchondrosis is an union by gristles of the sternon to the
ribs. - wiseman.
synchr o'nical. adj. [gov and x86/gp.] happening together
at the same time.
it is disficult to make out how the air is conveyed into the
left ventricle of the heart, the systole and diastole of the heart
and lungs being far from synchronical. boyle.
sy'nch ron is m. m. s. . [avy and x8693,.] concurrence of
events happening at the same time.
the coherence and synchronism of all the parts of the mo-
saical chionology, after the flood, bears a most regular testi-
mony to the truth of his history. hale.
vol. ii.
synchr onous, a j. [go, and z;evôp.] happening at the
same time.
the variations of the gravity of the air keep both the solids
and fluids in an oscillatory motion, synchronous and proportional
to their changes. arbuthnot on air.
syncope. m. s. [syncope, french; coyoto.]
1. fainting fit.
the symptoms attending gunshot wounds are pain, fever,
delirium, and syncope. //seman.
2. contraelion of a word by cutting off part in the middie.
syncopist, n. s. [from syncoe.] contrator of words.
to outshine all the modern syncopisis, and thoroughly con-
tent my english readers, i intend to publish a spectator that
shall not have a single vowel in it. speciator.
to syndicate. v. n. [syndiguer, french; c3, and 3.x:..] to
judge; to pass judgment on ; to censure. an unusual word.
not in use.
aristotle undertook to censure and /yndicate his master, and
all law-makers before him. hakewill on providence.
syndrom e. m. s. [rvvo.] concurrent action; concur-
rence.
all things being linked together by an uninterrupted chain
of causes, every single motion owns a dependance on such a
syndrome of prerequired motors. glanville's scepsis.
syne’cdoche. m. s. [synecdoche, french; awswoxx.]" a
figure by which part is taken for the whole, or the whose for
part.
because they are instruments of grace in the hand of god,
and by these his holy spirit changes our hearts: therefore the
whole work is attributed to them by a synecdoche; that is, they
do in this manner the work for which god ordained them.
taylor's worthy communicant.
synecdo'chical, adj. [from synecdoche.] expressed by a sy-
necdoche 5 implying a synecdoche.
should i, lindamer, bring you into hospitals, and shew
you there how many souls, narrowly lodged in synecdochical
bodies, see their earthen cottages moulder away to dust, those
miserable persons, by the loss of one limb after another, sur-
viving but part of themselves, and living to see themselves
dead and buried by piecemeal? boyle's seraphick love.
synneuro'sis. n.s. [roy and videov.]
synneuros is when the connexion is made by a ligament.
of this in symphysis we find instances, in the connexion of the
ossa pubis together, especially in women, by a ligamentous
substance. in articulation, it is either round, as that which
unites the head of the os femoris to the coxa ; or broad, as
the tendon of the patella, which unites it to the os tibiae.
- joseman's surgery.
synod. n.s.. [synod, french; rovo.]
1. an assembly called for consultation : it is used particularly of
ecclesiasticks. a provincial synod is commonly used, and a
general council.
the glorious gods fit in hourly synod about thy particular
prosperity. shakesp. coriolanus.
since the mortal and intestine jars
*twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
it hath in solemn synod been decreed,
t’admit no traffick to our adverse towns. shakespeare.
the opinion was not only condemned by the synod, but im-
puted to the emperor as extreme madness. bacon.
flea-bitten synod, an assembly brew'd
of clerks and elders ana, like the rude
chaos of presbyt'ry, where laymen guide
with the tame woolpack clergy by their fide. cleaveland.
his royal majesty, according to these presbyterian rules,
shall have no power to command his clergy to keep a national
synod. jwhite.
well have ye judg'd, well ended long debate,
synod of gods! and, like to what ye are,
great things resolv’d. milton's paradise lost.
let us call to synod all the blest,
through heav'n's wide bounds. milton.
the second council of nice, he saith, i most irreverently
call that wise synod; upon which he falls into a very tragical
exclamation, that i should dare to refle&amp;t so much dishonour on
a council. stillingfleet.
parent of gods and men, propitious jovel
and you bright synod of the pow'rs above,
on this my son your gracious gifts bestow. dryden,
2. conjunction of the heavenly bodies.
howe'er love's native hours are set,
whatever starry synod met,
'tis in the mercy of her eye,
if poor love shall live or die. crashaw.
their planetary motions and aspects
of noxious efficacy, and when to join
in synod unbenign. milton.
as the planets and stars have, according to astrologers, in
their great synods, or conjunctions, much more powerful in-
fluences on the air than are ascribed to one or two of them out
of that aspect; so divers particulars, which, whilst they lay
26 b scattered
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">s y n
s y s
scattered among the writings of several authors, were in-
considerable, when they come to be laid together, may
oftentimes prove highly useful to physiology in their conjunc-
tions. boyle.
synodal. m. s. [from synod.] money paid anciently to the
bishop, &amp;c. at easter visitation.
sy'no dal.
so [synodique, french ; from synod.]
syn o' dick.
1. relating to a synod; transacted in a synod.
the various dignity of their several churches, and of their
many funetions, rules, and orders in them, by reason of the
frequency of their synodical and processional meetings, have
necessarily raised many questions of place among them.
- selden.
st. athanasius writes a synodical epistle to those of antioch,
to compose the differences among them upon the ordination
of paulinus. stillingficef.
2. [synodique, french..] reckoned from one conjunction with
the sun to another.
the diurnal and annual revolutions of the sun, to us are
the measures of day and year; and the synodick revolution of
the moon measures the month. holder.
the moon makes its synodical motion about the earth in
twenty-nine days twelve hours and about forty-four minutes.
- locke's elements of natural philosophy.
syno’d1c ally. adu. [from synodical.] by the authority of a
synod or publick assembly. -
it shall be needful for those churches snodically to determine
something in those points. saunderson.
the alterations made by the commissioners were brought to
the convocation, then sitting, where they were synodically
agreed upon. nelson.
syno(nyma. m. s. [latin; a wovgo;..] names which signify
the same thing.
to syno"nom is e. v. a. [from synonyma.] to express the same
thing in different words.
this word fortis we may synonymise after all these fashions,
stout, hardy, valiant, doughty, courageous, adventurous, brave,
bold, daring, intrepid. camden's remains.
syno nymous. adj. [synonyme, fr. avvosvuo.os.] expressing the
same thing by different words.
when two or more words signify the same thing, as wave
and billow, mead and meadow, they are usually called synony-
mous words. //atts's logick.
these words consist of two propositions, which are not
distinet in sense, but one and the same thing variously ex-
pressed; for wisdom and understanding are synonymous words
here. tillotson.
fortune is but a synonymous word for nature and necessity.
- - bentley's sermosis.
syno’nymy. m. s. sovovoziz j. the quality of expressing by
different words the same thing.
synot’sis. m. s. [toyoyo.] a general view; all the parts
brought under one view.
syno ptical. adj. [from synopsis.] affording a view of many
parts at once. -
we have colle&amp;led so many synoptical tables, calculated for
his monthly use. evelyn's kalendar.
synta’ctica l. adj. [from sntaxis, latin.]
1. conjoined ; fitted to each other.
2. relating to the construction of speech.
y n t a x. - z
too. } m. s. saltsvrozoic.]
i. a system; a number of things joined together.
they owe no other dependance to the first than what is
* common to the whole syntax of beings. glanville.
2. that part of grammar which teaches the construction of
words.
i can produce a hundred instances to convince any reason-
able man, that they do not so much as understand common
grammar and syntax. swift.
so n: s [a sorts.] the aa of joining: opposed to
d?? (?!y//5.
the sontoss consists in assuming the causes discovered and
established as principles, and by them explaining the phaeno-
mena proceeding from them, and proving the explanations.
newton’s optics;
synthe"rick. adj. [rvyserix; ] conjoining; compounding:
forming composition: opposed to analytick. c 2
synthetick method is that which begins with the parts, and
leads onward to the knowledge of the whole; it begins with
the most simple principles and general truths, and proceeds ;
degrees to that which is drawn from them or compounded of
them ; and therefore it is called the method of composition
watts' loo.
syphon. m. s. [this should be written sphon; asoj a
tube; a pipe.
take your glass, sophon, or crane, and draw it off from its
last faeces into small bottles. 44%rtimer.
syringe. m. s. sovo.] a pipe through which any liquor
is souirted.
the heart seems not designed to be the fountain or conser-
vatory of the vital flame, but as a machine to receive the blood
from the veins, and force it out by the arteries through the
whole body as a syringe doth any liquor, though not by the
same artifice. roy.
to syringe. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to spout by a syringe. -
a flux of blood from the nose, mouth, and eye, was flopt
by the syringing up of oxycrate. j/ iseman's surgery.
2. to wash with a syringe. o
syring9 to my. n.s.. [a sely; and teroua.] the aa or prac-
tice of cutting fistulas or hollow fores.
syrits. m. s. [latin.] a quick sand; a bog.
a boggy syrtis, neither sea, nor good dry land. milton,
system. m. s. [ssieme, fr. a synaz.]
1. any complexure or combination of many things ading toge-
ther.
2. a scheme which reduces many things to regular dependence
or co-operation.
3. a scheme which unites many things in order.
he presently bought a system of divinity, with design to
apply himself straightway to that study. poll.
aristotle brings morality into system, by treating of happi-
ness under heads, and ranges it in classes according to its dif-
ferent objects, distinguishing virtues into their several kinds,
which had not been handled systematically before. baker.
the best way to learn any science is to begin with a regu-
lar system, or a short and plain scheme of that science well
drawn up into a narrow compass. æatts.
systema 1 ical. adj. [systematique, fr. avgrazrix}; ; from
system.] methodical; written or formed with regular subor-
dination of one part to another.
it will be necessary, in a discourse about the formation of
the world, to give you a brief account of some of the most
principal and systematical phaenomena that occur in it. b.ntler.
now we deal much in essays, and unreasonably despise
s/fematical learning; whereas our fathers had a just value for
regularity and systems. j/attr.
soorisatio. adv. [from s/fematical.] in form of a
itcsl.
y i treat of the usefulness of writing books of essay, in com-
parison of that of writing systematically. boyle.
aristotle brings morality into system, and ranges it into
classes according to its different objects, distinguishing virtues
into their several kinds, which had not been handled s/fema-
tically before. baker.
sy's tole. m. s. [s/?ole, fr. avgo.]
i. [in anatomy..] the contraction of the heart.
the sole resembles the forcible bending of a spring, and
the diastole its flying out again to its natural site. ray.
2. |...” french...] in granmar, the shortening of a long syl-
able.
</p></div>

alphasectend
