
<div class="page"><div class="seq">page 772</div><p class="text">f.
a consonant generally reckoned by authors, and
admitted by scaliger, among the semi-vowels, and
according to that opinion distinguished in the enu-
meration of the alphabet by a name beginning with
9 a vowel, yet has so far the the nature of a mute,
that it is easily pronounced before a liquid in the same syl-
lable. it has in english an invariable sound, formed by com-
pression of the whole lips and a forcible breath. its kindred
letter is v, which, in the islandick alphabet, is only distin-
guished from it by a point in the body of the letter.
fana'ceous. adj. ifataceus, latin.] having the nature of a
bean. dic7.
fa'ble. n.s.. [fable, french; fabula, latin.]
1. a feigned flory intended to enforce some moral precept.
jotham's fable of the trees is the oldest extant, and as beau-
tiful as any made since. addison's spediator.
2. a fiction in general.
triptolemus, so sung the nine,
strew'd plenty from his cart divine;
but, spite of all those fable makers,
he never sow'd on almaign acres. dryden.
palladius coming to die somewhere in the north part of
britain, may seem to give some kind of countenance to those
fables that make him to have lived many years among the
scots. lloyd.
3. a vitious or foolish fiaion.
but refuse profane and old wives fables. 1 tim. iv. 7.
4. the series or contexture of events which constitute a poem
epick or dramatick.
the moral is the first business of the poet: this being
formed, he contrives such a defign or fable as may be most
suitable to the moral. dryden's dufresnoy,
the first thing to be considered in an epick poem is the
fable, which is perfect or imperfeoł, according as the action,
which it relates, is more or less so. addison's spectator.
5. a lye; a vicious falsehood. this sense is ". familiar.
it would look like a fable to report that this gentleman gives
away a great fortune by secret methods. addison.
to fa'ble. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to feign; to write not truth but fiction.
that saturn's sons receiv'd the three-fold reign
of heav'n, of ocean, and deep hell beneath,
old poets mention, fabling. prior.
vain now the tales which fabling poets tell,
that wav'ring conquest still desires to rove
in marlbro's camp the goddess knows to dwell. prior.
2. to tell falshoods; to lye: a familiar use.
he fables not: i hear the enemy. shakesp. henry vi.
to fa'ble. v. a. to feign ; to tell falsely.
- we mean to win,
or turn this heav’n itself into the hell
thou fableft. milton's paradis, loft,
ladies of th’ hesperides, they seem'd
fairer than feign'd of old, or fabl’d since
of fairy damsels met in forest wide, -
by knights. milton's parads, loft.
fa’bled. adj. [from fable.] celebrated in fables.
hail, falled grotto . thail, elysian soils
thou fairest spot of fair britannia's isle ! tickell.
fabler. m. s. [from fable.] a dealer in fiction; a writer of
feigned stories.
to fa'bricate. v. a. [fabricor, latin.]
1. to build; to construct.
2. to forge; to devise falsely. this sense is retained among
the scottish lawyers; for when they suspect a paper to be
forged, they say it is fabricate.
far rication, n.s. [from fabricate.] the aet of building;
construction.
this fabrication of the buman body is the immediate work
of a vital principle, that formeth the first rudiments of the
human nature. ahalo's origin of mankind.
fa'brick, n. s. [fabrica, latin.]
1. a building; an edifice.
f a c
there must be an exquisite care to place 'the columns, st
in several stories, most precisely one over another, that so the
solid may answer to the solid; and the vacuities to the vacui-
ties, as well for beauty as strength of the fabrick. isotton.
2. any system or compages of matter; anybody formed by the
conjunction of disfimilar parts. -
still will ye think it strange,
that all the parts of this great fabrick change;
quit their old station and primeval frame. prior,
to fa'brick, v. a. [from the noun..] to build; to form; to
construct. -
shew what laws of life
the cheese inhabitants observe, and how
fabrick their mansions. phillips.
fa'bulist. n.s.. [fabulifle, french..] a writer of fables.
quitting æsop and the fabuliffs, he copies boccace. croxal.
our bard's a fabulift, and deals in fiction. garrick.
fabulo'sity. , n.s.. [fabulositas, latin.] fulness of feigned
istories; fabulous invention.
in their fabulosity they report, that they had observations for
twenty thousand years. abbot's descript. of the ip?rld.
fa‘bulous. adj. [fabulosas, latin.] feigned; full of fables,
invented tales. -
a person terrified with the imagination of spectres, is more
reasonable than one who thinks the appearance of spirits fabu-
lous and groundless. - addison's speciator.
fa‘bulously, adv, [from fabulous.] in fiction; in a fabulous
manner.
there are many things fabulously delivered, and are not to
be accepted as truths. brown's vulgar errours.
face. n.s.. [face, french, from facies, latin.]
1. the visage.
the children of israel saw the face of moses, that the skin
of moses's face shone. exod. xxxiv. 35.
a man shall see faces, which, if you examine them part by
part, you shall never find good; but take them together, are
not uncomely. bacon.
from beauty still to beauty ranging,
in ev'ry face i found a dart. addison's spectator.
2. countenance; cast of the features; look; air of the face.
kickt out, we set the best face on't we could. dryd. pirg,
seiz'd and ty'd down to judge, how wretched it
who can't be filent, and who will not lye:
to laugh, were want of goodness and of grace;
and to be grave, exceeds all power of face, pepe,
3. the surface of any thing.
a mist watered the whole face of the ground. gen. ii. 6.
4. the front or forepart of any thing.
the breadth of the face of the house, towards the east, was
an hundred cubits. ezek. xli. 14.
5. visible state of affairs,
he look'd, and saw the face of things quite chang'd,
the brazen throat of war had ceas'd to roar;
all now was turn'd to jollity and game,
to luxury and riot, feast and dance. milton.
this would produce a new face of things in europe. addis.
6. appearance; resemblance; look.
keep still your former face, and mix again
with these lost spirits; run all their mazes with 'em ;
for such are treasons. ben. johnson.
at the first shock, with blood and powder stain'd,
nor heav'n, nor sea, their former face retain'd;
fury and art produce effects so strange,
they trouble nature, and her visage change. j/aller.
his dialogue has so much the face of probability, that some
have mistaken it for a real conference. baker.
7. presence ; fight; state of confrontation.
ye shall give her unto eleazar, and one shall slay her before
his face. umb. xix. 3.
jove cannot fear; then tell me to my face,
that i of all the gods am least in grace. t dryden's iliad.
8. soone, boldness; freedom from bashfulness or con-
\lkloll.
they're
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 773</div><p class="text">f a c
*f hey're thinking, by his face,
to fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
but 'tis not so. shakespeare's julius cæsar.
how many things are there which a man cannot, with any
face or comliness, say or do himself? a man can scarce allege
his own merits with modesty, much less extol them: a man
- may at first seem perplexed with many difficulties, yet
many things may be suggested to make it morefacile and com-
modious. wilkins's math. magick.
2. easily surmountable; easily conquerable.
the facile gates of hell too slightly barr'd. milton.
this ma
- 3. easy of access or converse; not haughty; not supercilious
cannot sometimes brook to supplicate or beg. bacon, not austere. 2 gnty;. percllious ;
you'll find the thing will not be done i meant she should be courteous, facile, sweet,
with ignorance and face alone. phudibras.
you, says the judge to the wolf, have the face to challenge
that which you never lost ; and you, says he to the fox, have
the confidence to deny that which you have stolen. l'e
hating that solemn vice of greatness, pride;
. i meant each softest virtue there should meet,
fit in that softer bosom to refide. ben. johnson.
raphael now, to adam's doubt propos'd,
this is the man that has the face to charge others with false benevolent and facile, thus reply'd. - milton.
citations. - willotson, preface. 4. pliant; flexible; easily persuaded to good or bad; ductile to
9. diffortion of the face. a fault. -
shame itself! - too facile then, thou did'st not much gainsay ;
why do you make such faces? shakespeare's macbeth. no. did'st permit, approve, and fair dismiss. milton.
face to face. [an adverbial expression.] - ince adam and his facile consort eve
r 1. when both parties are present. lost paradise, deceiv'd by me. milton.
- it is not the manner of the romans to deliver any man to - some men are of that facile temper, that they are wrought
s die, before that he which is accused have his accusers face to upon by every object they converse with, whom any aff:c-
face. - aeïs, xxv. 16. tionate discourse, or serious sermon, or any notable accident,
o 2. nakedly; without the interposition of other bodies. shall put into a fit of religion, which yet usually lasts na
- now we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face. longer than till somewhat else comes in their way. calamy.
1 &amp;r. xiii. 12. to faci'litate. v. a. [faciliter, french..] to make easy ;
to face. v. n. [from the noun.] to free from difficulty; to clear from impediments.
1. to carry a false appearance; to play the hypocrite. choice of the likeliest and best prepared metal for the ver-
thou needs must learn to laugh, to lye, sion will facilitate the work. bacon's natural hyłory.
to face, to forge, to scoff, to company. hubberd's tale. they renewed their assault two or three days together, and
2. to turn the face; to come in front. planted cannon to facilitate their passage, which did little hurt;
face about, man; a soldier, and afraid of the enemy dryd. but they still lost many men in the attempt. clarendon.
then thrice the mounted squadrons ride around though perspective cannot be called a certain rule of pic-
o, the fire, and arcite's name they thrice resound; ture, yet it is a great succour and relief to art, and facilitates
s hail and farewel they shouted thrice amain, the means of execution.
thrice facing to the left, and thence they turn'd again. dry,
to face. v. a.
1. to meet in front; to oppose with confidence and firmness.
i'll face
this tempest, and deserve the name of king. dryden.
we get intelligence of the force of the enemy, and cast
dryden's dufreshoy.
• what produceth a due quantity of animal spirits, ne-
cessarily facilitates the animal and natural motions.
arbuthnot on diet.
a war on the side of italy would cause a great diversion of
the french forces, and facilitate the progress of our arms in
spain.
swift.
about for a sufficient number of troops to face the enemy in factity. m. s. [facilite, french; facilitar, latin.]
the field of battle. addison on the war. i. easiness to be performed ; freedom from difficulty.
they are as loth to see the fires kindled in smithfield as his yet reason faith, reason should have ability
lordship ; and, at least, as ready to face them under a popish to hold these worldly things in such proportion,
- persecution. swift. as let them come or go with even facility. sidney.
*. to oppose with impudence: commonly with down.
we trapann'd the state, and fac’d it down
with plots and projects of our own. hudibras.
because he walk’d against his will,
... men down that he stood still. prior,
3. to stand opposite to. -
on one side is the head of the emperor trajan; the reverse
has on it the circus maximus, and a view of the side of the
palatine mountain that faces it. addison on italy.
piety could not be diverted from this to a more commo-
dious business by any motives of profit or facility. raleigh.
a war upon the turks is more worthy than upon any other
gentiles, both in point of religion and in point of honour;
though facility and hope of success might invite some other
choice. bacon's holy war.
2. readiness in performing; dexterity.
they who have studied have not only learned many excel-
lent things, but also have acquired a great facility of profiting
to- the temple is described square, and the four fronts with themselves by reading good authors. dryden's dufreshoy.
. open gates, facing the different quarters of the world. pope. the facility which we get of doing things, by a custom of
4. to cover with an additional superficies ; to invest with a doing, makes them often pass in us without our notice. locke.
covering. 3. vitious ductility; easiness to be persuaded to good or bad;
o: the fortification of soleurre is faced with marble. addison. ready compliance. - -
- where your old bank is hollow, face it with the first spit of facility is worse than bribery; for bribes come now and
o earth that you dig out of the ditch. mortimer’s husbandry. then: but if importunity or idle respects lead a man, he shall
: fa'celess. 4d}. [from face..] being without a face. baily. neo be without them. --- bacon.
o facepal'nter. n.s. [face and painter.] a drawer of por- tis a great error to take facility for good-nature; tender-
traits; a painter who draws from the life. ness without discretion, is no better than a more pardonable
facepainting. n.s.. [face and painting.] the art of draw- folly: - - l’estrange.
:* ing portraits. 4. easiness of access 3. complaisance; condescension ; affability.
georgione, the cotemporary of titian, excelled in portraits he opens and yields himself to the man of business with
o: or facepainting. dryden's dufresnoy. difficulty and reluctancy; but offers himself to the visits of a
"... fa'cot. n. s. [facette, french.] a small surface; a super- friend with facility, and all the meeting readiness of appetite
- ficies cut into several angles. and desire. - south.
---. honour that is gained and broken upon another, hath the facine rious. adj. [corrupted by shakespeare from facinorous;
. quickest reflection, like diamonds cut with facets. bacon. facing, facinario, latin.] wicked ; facinorous.
o face"tious. adj. [facetieux, french; facetiae, lat.] gay; tis trange, 'tis very strange, that is the brief and the
cheerful; lively; merry; witty. it is used both of persons tedious of it; and he's of a most facinerious spirit that will not
of "o acknowledge it. shakoff. all's well that end well.
o socrates, informed of some derogating speeches used of him facing, n.s. [from to face..] an ornamental covering; that
o: behind his back, made this facetious reply, let o: me . is put on the outside of any thing by way of deco-
*... too when l am absent. government of the tongue. ration. - - - - -
*"... face"riously. adv. [from facetious.] gaily; cheerfully ; o o: and dignities were but the facings and o:
s wittily; merrily. of his go. ..., - - - 1 atton.
* f. n. s. [from facetious.] cheerful wit: mirth; faci no. [facinora, latin.] wicked; atroci-
...” iety. ous; detestably bad. - - -
| fs. adj. [facile, french; facilis, latin.] . faci'norousness. n, s. [from facinorous.] wickedness in a
* . 1. easy; not difficult; performable or attainable with little high degree. -
*" labour. fact. n.s...[fadium, latin.] - - - - barely s
, then also those poets, which are now counted most hard, 1. o #: o o o: something not barely up-
... will be both facile and pleasant. milton on education. posed or suspected, but really done. - : “
o to ..s. ima o is as facile a performance as the in matter of fact they say there is some credit to be given to
\o gination. - sti f ; but not in matter of opinion and
- goteham's design of hedging in the cuckoo. glanville. the testimony of man; both acknowledged and uni-
*. sh by dividing it into parts so distinet, the order in which they o : a.o. too “o
.” ]] - - k facile and de- versally practised also through9 * “. •re, .
j." to each disposed, will render the "...s.o. as ao are not to mistake the causes of these *:
- q
o<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 774</div><p class="text">f a d
f a c
so much less are they to mistake the faci or effect, and rashly
to take that for done which is not done. bacon.
those effects which are wrought by the percussion of the
sense, and by things in fact, are produced likewise in some
degree by the imagination : therefore if a man see another eat
four or acid things, which set the teeth on edge, that object
tainteth the imagination. , bacon's natural history.
matter of fact breaks out and blazes with too great an evi-
dence to be denied. south's sermons.
2. reality; not supposition ; not speculation.
if this were true in fact, i do not see any colour for such
a conclusion. addison on the war.
manifold fins, though in speculation they may be separable
from war, in reality and faci never fail to attend it. smalridge.
3. action ; deed.
unhappy man to break the pious laws
of nature, pleading in his children's cause:
howe'er the doubtful fact is understood,
'tis love of honour and his country's good;
the consul, not the father, sheds the blood.
fa’ction. 's [faction, french ; facio, latin.]
1. a party in a state.
the queen is valued thirty thousand strong;
if she hath time to breathe, be well aslur’d
her facion will be full as strong as ours. shakesp. henry vi.
he has been known to commit outrages,
and cherish factions. shakespeare's timon.
by one of simon's faction murders were committed. mac.
by the weight of reason i should counterpoise, the over-
balancing of any faciions. king charles.
2. tumult; discord; dissension.
they remained at newbery in great faction among them-
selves. clarendon.
faction ary. m. s. [facionaire, french..] one of a faction;
a party man. a word not in use. -
pr’ythee, fellow, remember my name is menenius; always
faaionary of the party of your general. shakesp. coriolanus.
fa’ctious. adj. [facieux, french.]
1. given to faction; loud and violent in a party; publickly
dissentious; addicted to form parties and raise public dis-
turbances.
he is a traitor; let him to the tower,
and crop away that fadiious pate of his. shakesh. hen. vi.
befaciious for redress of all these griefs. shak. jul. casar.
2. proceeding from publick dissensions; tending to publick
discord.
grey-headed men and grave, with warriors mix’d,
assemble; and harangues are heard; but soon
in facious opposition. milton's paradise loft.
faelious tumults overbore the freedom and honour of the
two houses. king charles.
why these fadious quarrels, controversies, and battles
amongst themselves, when they were all united in the same
design : dryden's juvenal, dedication.
fa’ctiously. adv. [from fadious.] in a manner criminally
dissentious or tumultuous.
i intended not only to oblige my friends, but mine ene-
mies also; exceeding even the desires of those that were fac-
tiously discontented. - king charles.
fa‘ctious ness. n.s.. [from factious.] inclination to publick
dissension; violent clamourousness for a party.
fact1'tious. adj. [faciitius, latin.] made by art, in oppo-
sition to what is made by nature.
in the making and distilling of soap, by one degree of fire
the salt, the water, and the oil or grease, whereof that faeli-
tious concrete is made up, being boiled up together, or easily
brought to incorporate. boyle.
hardness wherein some stones exceed all other bodies, and
among them the adamant all other stones, being exalted to that
degree that art in vain endeavours to counterfeit it; the facii-
tious stones of chymists, in imitation, being easily detected by
an ordinary lapidist. ray on the creation.
factor. m. s. [facieur, french; facior, latin.]
1. an agent for another; one who transacts business for another.
commonly a substitute in mercantile affairs.
take on you the charge
and kingly government of this your land;
not as protector, steward, substitute,
or lowly facior for another's gain. , shakoff. richard iii.
piercy is but my factor, good my lord,
to engross up glorious deeds on my behalf. shak. hen. iv.
- you all three,
the senators alone of this great world,
chief factors for the gods. , shakesp. anthony and cleopatra.
we agreed that i should send up an english facior, that
whatsoever the island could yield should be delivered at a rea-
sonable rate. raleigh's apology.
the scots had good intelligence, having some factors doubt-
less at this mart, albeit they did not openly trade. hayward.
vile arts and restless endeavours are used by some sly and
venemous factors for the old republican cause. south.
all the season that i could ever hear alleged, by the chief
dryden.
faclors for a general intromisfion of all sorts, se&amp;ts and persua-
sions, into our communion, is, that those who separate from
us are stiff and obstinate, and will not submit to the rules and
orders of our church, and that therefore they ought to be taken
away. solith.
forc’d into exile from his rightful throne,
he made all countries where he came his own;
and viewing monarchs secret arts of sway,
a royal factor for their kingdoms lay. dryden.
2. [in arithmetick.] the multiplicator and multiplicand. harris.
factory. m. s. [from facior.j
1. a house or district inhabited by traders in a distant country.
2. the traders embodied in one place.
facto"rum. n. s. [factotum, latin. it is used likewise in
burlesque french..] a servant employed alike in all kinds of
business: as scrub in the stratagem.
f4'cture. m. s. [french.] the act or manner of making
any thing.
fa culty. n. s. [faculte, french ; facultas, latin.]
i. the power of doing anything; ability whether corporal or
intelle&amp;tual.
there is no kind of faculty or power in man, or any crea-
ture, which can rightly perform the functions allotted to it
without perpetual aid and concurrence of that supreme cause
of all things. hooker.
orators may grieve; for in their sides,
rather than heads, their faculty abides. denham.
reason in man supplies the defect of other faculties where-
in we are inferior to beasts, and what we cannot compass by
force we bring about by stratagem. l'e/irange.
2. powers of the mind, imagination, reason, memory.
i understand in the prime end
of nature, her the inferior; in the mind
and inward faculties, which most excel. milton.
in the ordinary way of speaking, the understanding and
will are two faculties of the mind. lockr.
neither did our saviour think it necessary to explain to us
the nature of god, because it would be impossible, without
bestowing on us other faculties than we possess at present.
swift.
3. mechanical power.
the fifth mechanical faculty is the wedge used in cleaving
wood. wilkins.
4. [in physick.] a power or ability to perform any action, na-
tural, vital, and animal: by the first they understand that by
which the body is nourished, or another like it generated:
the vital faculty is that by which life is preserved, and the or-
dinary functions of the body performed; and the animal fa-
culty is what conducts the operations of the mind. quincy.
5. a knack; habitual excellence; dexterity.
he had none of those faculties, which the other had, of re-
conciling men to him. clarendon.
our author found out monarchical absolute power in that
text, he had an exceeding good faculty to find it himself where
he could not shew it others. locke.
he had an excellent faculty in preaching, if he were not too
refined. swift.
6. quality personal ; disposition or habit of good or ill.
i'm traduc’d by tongues which neither know
my faculties nor person, yet will be
the chronicles of my doing. shakespeare's henry viii.
7. natural virtue; efficacy.
in requital ope his leathern scrip,
and shew me simples of a thousand names,
telling their strange and vigorous faculties.
8. power ; authority.
this duncan
hath born his faculties so meek, hath been
so clear in his great office, that his virtues
will plead like angels. shakespeare's macbeth.
9. privilege; right to do any thing.
law hath set down to what persons, in what causes, with .
what circumstances, almost every faculty or favour shall be
granted. hooker.
10. faculty, in an university, denotes the masters and professors
of the several sciences: as, a meeting of the faculty or fa-
culties.
facu'nd. adj. [facundus, latin.] eloquent. dia.
to fa‘ddl.e. v. n. [corrupted from to fiddle, or toy with the
fingers..] to trifle; to toy; to play. a low word.
to fade. v. n. [fade, french, insipid, languid.] -
i. o from greater to less vigour; to grow weak; to lan-
gui -
2. to tend from a brighter to a weaker colour.
the greenness of a leaf ought to pass for apparent, because
soon fading into a yellow, it scarce lasts at all, in comparison
of the greenness of an emerald. boyle on colours.
the spots in this stone are of the same colour throughout,
even to the very edges; there being an immediate transition
from white to black, and the colours no or declining
gradually. %2dward on faso.
3. to wither, as a vegetable.
milton.
ye
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 775</div><p class="text">f a i
o
-
ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden
that hath no water. ls. i. 30.
4. to die away gradually; to vanish; to be worn out.
where either through the temper of the body, or some
other default, the memory is very weak, ideas in the mind
quickly fade. locke.
the stars shall fade away, the sun himself
grow dim with age, and nature sink in years. addis. cato.
5. to be naturally not durable ; to be transient; easily to lose
vigour or beauty.
the glorious beauty on the head of the fat valley shall be a
'ading flower. is, xxviii. 4.
the pictures drawn in our minds are laid in fading colours,
and, if not sometimes refreshed, vanish and disappear. locke.
narcissus’ change, to the vain virgin shows
who trusts to beauty, trusts the fading rose. gay's fan.
2 fade. v. a. to wear away; to reduce to languor; to de-
prive of freshness or vigour; to wither.
this is a man old, wrinkled, faded, withered ;
and not a maiden, as thou say'st he is. shakespeare.
his palms, though under weights they did not stand,
still thriv'd ; no winter could his laurels fade. dryden.
restless anxiety, forlorn despair,
... and all the faded family of care. garth's dispens.
to fadge. v. n. [3erezan, saxon; fugen, german.]
1. to suit; to fit; to have one part consistent with another.
how will this fadge o my master loves her dearly,
and i, poor monsler, fond as much on him;
and she, mistaken, seems to doat on me.
2. to agree; not to quarrel; to live in amity.
when they thriv'd they never fadg’d,
but only by the ears engag’d ;
that dogs that snarl about a bone,
and play together when they've none.
3. to succeed ; to hit.
the fox had a fetch; and when he saw it would not fidge,
away goes he presently. l’e/irange.
4. this is a mean word not now used, unless perhaps in ludi-
crous and low compositions. -
faeces. m. s. [latin.] excrements; settlings after distillation
and infusion. $29tncy.
to fag. v. a... [fatigo, latin.] to grow weary; to faint
with weariness.
creighton with-held his force ’till the italian begun to fag,
and then brought him to the ground. asackenzie's lives.
fa ce’nd. n.s. (from fag and end..] -
1. the end of a web of cloth, generally made of coarser ma-
terials.
2. the refuse or meaner part of any thing.
in the world's fagend
a nation lies. fanshaw.
when they are the worst of their way, and fixt in the
fagend of business, they are apt to look not kindly upon those
who go before them, collier on envy.
fagot. n.s.. [faged, welsh and armorick; fagot, french.]
1. a bundle of sticks bound together for the fire.
about the pile of fagots, sticks and hay,
the bellows raised the newly kindled flame. fairfax.
spare for no fagots, let there be enow ;
place pitchy barrels on the fatal stake.
shakespeare's henry vi.
mitres or fagots have been the rewards of different persons,
according as they pronounced these consecrated syllables or
in ot. watts on the mind.
2. a bundle of sticks for any purpose.
the black prince filled a ditch with fagots as successfully as
the generals of our times do it with fascines. addison.
3. a soldier numbered in the muster-roll, but not really
existing.
to i.r. v. a. [from the noun..] to tie up ; to bundle
together.
he was too warm on picking work to dwell,
but fagoted his notions as they fell,
and if they rhym'd and rattled, all was well. dryden.
to fail. v. n. [sailler, french; facin, welsh. pezron.]
1. to be deficient; to cease from former plenty; to fall short ;
not to be equal to demand or use.
the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decayeth and
drieth up. - job, xiv. 11.
wherefore should not strength and might
there fail where virtue fails, or weakest prove
where boldest, though to fight unconquerable milton.
where the credit and money fail, barter alone must do.
locke.
shakespeare.
hudibras.
2. to be extinet; to cease; to be no longer produced.
help, lord, for the godly man ceaseth ; for the faithful fail
from among the children of men.
whether such virtue spent of old now fail'd -
more angels to create. milton.
3. to cease; to perish; to be lost.
by fate the strength of gods
and this empyrcal substance cannot fail. milton.
vol. i.
ps, xii. 1.
for titan, by the mighty loss dismay’d,
among the heavens th’ immortal fact display'd,
left the remembrance of his grief should fail. addison,
4. to die; to lose life.
had the king in his last fickness fail'd,
their heads should have gone off. shakesh. henry viii.
both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall
fall down, and they all shall fail together. is, xxxi. 3.
5. to sink; to be born down; to come to an end.
neither will i be always wroth; for the spirit should fail
before me. is. lvii. 16.
his works, which in our fall, ,
for us created, needs with us must fail,
dependent made. milton.
6. to decay; to decline; to languish.
let none henceforth seek needless cause t'approve
the faith they owe ; when earnestly they seek
such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail. milton.
i perceive
thy mortal fight to fail: objec's divine
must needs impair and weary human sense. milton.
7. to miss ; not to produce its effect.
consider of deformity not as a sign, which is deceivable,
but as a cause which seldom faileth of the effect. bacon.
all these puisiant legions, whose exile
hath emptied heav'n, shall fail to re-ascend. milton.
this jest was first of th’ other house's making,
and, five times try’d, has never fail'd of taking. dryden.
a persuasion that we shall overcome any difficulties, that we
meet with in the sciences, seldom fails to carry us through
them. locke.
he does not remember whether every grain came up or not ;
but he thinks that very few failed. amortimer’s husbandry.
8. to miss ; not to succeed in a design ; to miscarry.
i am enjoin'd, by oath, if i fail
of the right casket, never in my life
to woo a maid in way of marriage. shak. merch. of wen.
at least our envious foe hath fail'd, who thought
all like himself rebellious. milton.
in difficulties of state, the true reason of failing proceeds
from failings in the administration. l’estrange.
men who have been busied in the pursuit of the philoso-
pher's stone, have failed in their design. addison's guardian.
9. to be deficient in duty.
or nature fail'd in me, and left some part
not proof enough such object to sustain. milton.
endeavour to fulfill god's commands, to repent as often as
you fail of it, and to hope for pardon of him. jwake.
to fail. v. a.
1. to desert; not to continue to assist or supply; to disappoint.
the ship was now left alone, as proud lords be when
fortune fails them. sidney.
so hast thou oft with guile thine honour blent;
but little may such guile thee now avail,
if wonted force and fortune do not much me fail. spensor.
there shall be signs in the sun, the moon, and the stars,
mens hearts failing them for fear. luke, xxi. 26.
nor could the muse defend
her son, so fail not thou who thee implores, milton.
i laugh, when those who at the spear are bold
and vent'rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear. milton.
her heart failed her, and she would fain have compounded
for her life. l’estrange.
he presumes upon his parts that they will not fail him at
time of need, and so thinks it superfluous labour to make any
provision beforehand. locke.
2. not to assist; to negle&amp;t; to omit to help.
since nature fails us in no needful thing,
why want i means my inward self to see ? . davies.
3. to omit; not to perform.
the inventive god who never fails his part,
inspires the wit when once he warms the heart. dryden.
4. to be wanting to.
there shall not fail thee a man on the throne. i kings.
fail. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. miscarriage; miss; unsuccessfulness.
2. omission ; non-performance.
mark and perform it, seest thou? for the fail
of any point in't shall not only be
death to thyself, but to thy lewd-tongu'd wife. shakespeare.
he will without fail drive out from before you the canaan-
ites. jos. iii. 10.
3. deficience ; want. -
4. death; extinction.
how grounded he his title to the crown
upon our fail? shakespeare's henry viii.
failing.. n. j. [from fail.] deficiency; imperfection; fault
not atrocious ; lapse. - -
besides what failings may be in the matter, even in the
expressions there must often be great obscurities. digby.
to failings mild, but zealous for desert ;
the clearest head and the sincerest heart. pope.
8 s even
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 776</div><p class="text">f a i
even good men have many temptations to subdue, many
conflicts with those enemies which war against the soul, and
many failings and lapses to lament and recover. rogers.
failu re. m. s. [from fail.]
1. deficience; cessation.
there must have been an universal failure and want of
springs and rivers all the summer season. woodward.
2. omission; non-performance; slip.
he that, being subject to an apoplexy, used still to carry his
remedy about him ; but upon a time shifting his clothes, and
not taking that with him, chanced upon that very day to be
surprised with a fit : he owed his death to a mere accident, to
a little inadvertency and failure of memory. south.
3. a lapse; a slight fault.
'alln. adj. [feagn, saxon.]
1. glad ; merry; cheerful; fond.
land in this sense.
and in her hand she held a mirrour bright,
wherein her face she often viewed fain. fairy queen.
my lips will be fain when i sing unto thee, and so will my
soul whom thou hast delivered. psalm lxxi.
2. forced; obliged; compelled. [this signification seems to
have arisen from the mistake of the original signification in
fome ambiguous expressions; as, i was fain to do this, would
equally suit with the rest of the sentence, whether it was un-
derstood to mean i was compelled, or i was glad to do it for fear
i. worse. thus the primary meaning seems to have been early
ost
j every weight to shroud it did constrain,
and this fair couple eke to shroud themselves were fain. spen.
whosoever will hear, he shall find god; whosoever will
study to know, shall be also fain to believe. hooker.
i was fain to forswear it; they would else have married me
to the rotten medlar. shakesp. measure for measure.
when hildebrand had accursed henry iv. there were none
so hardy as to defend their lord; wherefore he was fain to
humble himself before hildebrand. raleigh's essays.
the learned castalio was fain to make trenchers at basle,
to keep himself from starving. locke.
fain. adv. [from the adjective..] gladly; very desirously; ac-
cording to earnest wishes.
now i would give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of
barren ground: i would fain die a dry death. shakespeare.
why would'st thou urge me to confess a flame
i long {.. stifled, and would fain conceal. addison's cato.
fain would i raphael's godlike art rehearse,
and show th’ immortal labours in my verse. addison.
. the plebeians would fain have a law enacted to lay all mens
rights and privileges upon the same level. swift.
to fain. v. n. [from the noun.] to wish; to desire fondly.
fairer than fairest, in his faining eye,
whose sole aspect he counts felicity.
to faint. v. n. [faner, french.]
1. to decay; to wear or waste away quickly.
gilded clouds, while we gaze upon them, faint before the
eye, and decay into confusion. pope.
the show'ry arch
delights and puzzles the beholder's eyes,
that views the watry brede with thousand shews
of painture vary’d; yet unskill'd to tell
or where one colour rises, or where one faints. philips.
2. to lose the animal funetions; to sink motionless and senseless.
their young children were out of heart, and their women
and young men fainted for thirst, and fell down. judith.
we are ready to faint with fasting. 1 mac. iii. 17.
upon hearing the honour intended her, she fainted away,
and fell down as dead. guardian.
3. to grow feeble; to decline in force or courage.
they will stand in their order, and never faint in their
watches. ecclus. xliii. 10.
the imagination cannot be always alike constant and strong,
and if the success follow not speedily it x's and lose
strength. bacon's natural history.
o pity and shame, that they who to live well,
enter'd so fair, should turn aside to tread
it is still retained in scot-
spenser on love.
paths indireet, or in the midway faint. milton.
how while the fainting dutch remotely fire,
and the fam'd eugene's iron troops retire. smith.
4. to fink into dejection.
left they faint
at the sad sentence rigorously urg’d,
all terror hide. milton.
to faint., v. a. to deject; to depress; to enfeeble. a
word little in use.
it faints me
to think what follows.
faint. adj. [fane, french.]
i. languid; weak; feeble.
in intemperate climates, the spirits, exhaled by heat or com-
prest by cold, are rendered faint and sluggish. temple.
words pronounced at length, sounded faint and languid.
swift.
shakespeare's henry viii.
2. not bright; not vivid; not striking.
the blue compared with these is a faint and dark colour,
and the indigo and violet are much darker and fainter. newton.
the length of the image i measured from the saints and
utmost red at one end, to the faintest and utmost blue at the
other end, excepting only a little penumbra. newton's ot.
from her naked limbs of glowing white, -
in folds loose floating fell the fainter lawn. thomson.
3. not loud; not piercing.
the pump after this being employed from time to time, the
sound grew fainter and fainter. boyl.
4. feeble of body.
two neighbouring shepherds, faint with thirst, flood at
the common boundary of their grounds. rambler.
5. cowardly; timorous; not vigorous; not ardent.
faint heart never won fair lady. proverb in camden's rem.
our faint egyptians pray for antony;
but in their servile hearts they own oetavius.
6. dejected; depressed. *
onsider him that endureth such contradiction against him-
self, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. heb. xii. 3.
. not vigorous; not active.
the defe&amp;ts which hindered the conquest, were the faint
prosecution of the war, and the looseness of the civil govern-
incint. davies on ireland.
fainthea'rted. adj. [faint and heart.] cowardly; timo-
rous; dejected; easily depressed.
fear not, neither be fainthearted. js. vii. 4.
they should resolve the next day as victorious conquerors
to take the city, or else there, as fainthearted cowards, to end
their days. knolles's history of the turki.
now the late fainthearted rout,
o'erthrown and scatter'd round about,
chac'd by the horrour of their fear,
from bloody fray of knight and bear,
took heart again and fac'd about,
as if they meant to stand it out. hudibrar.
villain, stand off! base, groveling, worthless wretches,
mongrils in faction; poor fainthearted traitors. addis. cats.
fainthe a'r'tedly. adv. [from fainthearted.] timorously;
in a cowardly manner.
fainthea. rtedness. n. s. [from fainthearted.] cowardice;
timorousness; want of courage.
fa'inting. m. s. [from faint..] deliquium; temporary loss
of animal motion.
these faintings her physicians suspect to proceed from con-
tusions. wiseman's surgery.
fa‘intish ness. n. s. [from faint..] weakness in a slight de-
gree; incipient debility.
a certain degree of heat lengthens and relaxes the fibres;
whence proceeds the sensation of faintishnes; and debility in a
hot day. arbuthnot on air.
fa'1ntling. adj. [from faint.] timorous; feebleminded. a
burlesque or low word.
there's no having patience, thou art such a fainting filly
creature. arbuthnot's history of john ball.
faintly. adv. [from faint.]
1. feebly; languidly.
love's like a torch, which, if secur'd from blasts,
will faintly burn; but then it longer lasts:
expos'd to storms of jealousy and doubt,
the blaze grows greater, but ’tis sooner out.
2. not in bright colours.
nature affords at least a glimm'ring light;
the lines, tho’ touch'd but faintly, are drawn right. pope.
3. without force of representation.
i have told you what i have seen and heard but faintly;
nothing like the image and horrour of it. shakesp. k. lear.
an obscure and confused idea represents the object so fainty,
dryden.
jz alsh.
that it doth not appear plain to the mind. jwatts.
4. without strength of body. -
with his loll'd tongue he faintly licks his prey,
his warm breath blows her flix up as she lies. dryden.
5. not vigorously; not actively.
though still the famish'd english, like pale ghosts,
faintly besiege us one hour in a month. shakesp. henry vi.
6. timorously; with dejection; without spirit.
loth was the ape, though praised, to adventure;
yet faintly 'gan into his work to enter. hubberd’s tale.
he faintly now declines the fatal strife;
so much his love was dearer than his life.
faintness. n. s. [from faint.]
1. languor; feebleness; want of strength. -
if the prince of the lights of heaven, which now as a giant
doth run his unwearied courses, should through a languishing
faintness begin to stand. płocker.
this proceeded not from any violence of pain, but from a
general languishing and s". of spirits, which made him
think nothing worth the trouble of one careful thought.
- temple.
jdenham.
2. ina&amp;tivity; want of vigour.
this evil proceeds rather of the unsoundness of the coun-
sels,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 777</div><p class="text">f a i
f a i
.
o,
ot
o
oi.
o
sels, or of faintness in following and effe&amp;ing the same, than
of any such fatal course appointed of god. spunser.
3. timorousness; dejection.
the paleness of this flow'r
bewray'd the faintness of my master's heart. shak. hen. vi.
fa inty. adj. [from faint.] weak; feeble; languid; debi-
litated; enfeebled.
when winter frosts constrain the field with cold,
the fainty root can take no steady hold. dryden's virgil.
the ladies gasp'd, and scarcely could respire;
the breath they drew, no longer air, but fire:
the fainty knights were scorch'd, and knew not where
to run for shelter; for no shade was near. dryden.
fair. adj. [fazen, saxon; faur, danish.]
1. beautiful; elegant of feature; handsome. fair seems in the
common acceptation to be restrained, when applied to wo-
men, to the beauty of the face.
he only fair, and what he fair hath made,
all other fair like flowers untimely fade, spenser.
thou art a fair woman to look upon. gen. xii. 11.
2. not black; not brown; white in the complexion.
i never yet saw man,
but she would spell him backward; if fair fac'd,
she'd swear the gentleman should be her sister;
if black, why, nature, drawing of an antick,
made a foul blot. shak. much ado about nothing.
let us look upon men in several climates: the ethiopians
are black, flat-nosed, and crisp-haired: the moors tawny ; the
northern people large, and fair complexioned. hale.
3. pleasing to the eye; excellent or beautiful in general to the
eye or mind.
that which made her fairness much the fairer was that it
was but an ambassador of a most fair mind. sidney.
carry him gently to my faires chamber,
and hang it round with all my wanton pictures. shakespeare.
thus was he fair in his greatness, and in the length of his
branches. ezek. xxxi. 7.
for as by depredations wasps proclaim
the faires fruit, so these the fairst fame. 1%ung.
4. clear; pure.
a standard of a damask-rose, with the root on, was set in
a chamber where no fire was, upright in an earthen pan, full
of fair water, half a foot under the water. bacon.
even fair water, falling upon white paper or linnen, will
immediately alter the colour of them, and make it sadder than
that of the unwetted parts. boyle on colours.
5. not cloudy; not foul; not tempestuous.
fair is foul, and foul is fair;
hover through the fog and filthy air.
fair weather cometh out of the earth. -
about three of the clock in the afternoon the weather was
very fair and very warm. clarendon.
6. favourable; prosperous: as, a fair wind.
in vain you tell your parting lover,
you wish fair winds may waft him over. prior,
7. likely to succeed.
yourself, renowned prince, stood as fair
as any comer i have look'd on yet,
for my affection. shakesp. merchant of penice.
the caliphs obtained a mighty empire, which was in a fair
way to have enlarged, until they fell out. , raleigh's essays.
o pity and shame that they who to live well
enter'd so fair, should turn aside to tread
paths indirect, or in the midway faint. milton.
8. equal; just.
the king did so much desire a peace, that no man need
advise him to it, or could divert him from it, if fair and ho-
nourable conditions of peace were offered to him. clarendon,
9. not effected by any infidious or unlawful methods; not foul.
after all these conquests he passed the rest of his age in his
own native country, and died a fair and natural death. temple.
10. not practising any fraudulent or insidious arts: as, a fair
rival, a fair disputant. -
virtuous and vicious ev'ry man must be,
few in th’ extreme, but all in the degree;
the rogue and fool by fits is fair and wise,
and ev'n the best, by fits, what they despise. pope.
ii. open; direct.
for still, methought, she sung not far away;
at last i found her on a laurel-spray:
close by my side she sat, and fair in sight,
full in a line, against her opposite. dryden.
12. gentle; mild; not compulsory.
all the lords came in, and, being by fair means wrought
thereunto, acknowledged king henry. spenser on ireland.
for to reduce her by main force, -
is now in vain; by fair means, worse. hudibras.
13. mild; not severe. -
not only do's degrade them, or remit
to life obscur'd, which were a fair dismission;
but throw'st them lower than thou did'st exalt them high.
. milton's agonisłes.
shakesp. macbeth.
‘hob
14. pleasing; civil.
good fir, why do you start, and seem to fear
things that do sound so fair? shakespeare's macbeth,
when fair words and good counsel will foot previl upon
us;, we must be frighted into our duty. l’estrange,
15. equitable ; not injurious.
his doom is fair,
that dust i am, and shall to dust return. milton.
16. commodious; easy,
*hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice,
astand where you may make the fairoft shoot. shakespeare.
1 looked for the jugular veins, opened the fairoft, and took
away a dozen ounces of blood. wiseman,
17. liberal; not narrow.
. he through his virtue was as free from greediness, as through
his fair livelihood, far from neediness. carew,
fair, adv. [from the adjective.]
1. gently; decently; without violence.
he who fair and softly goes sleadily forward, in a course
that points right, will sooner be at his journey's end than he
that runs after every one, though he gallop. locke,
2. civilly; complaisantly.
well, you must now speak fir john falstaff fair. shakesp.
one of the company spoke him fair, and would have stopt
his mouth with a |. l'estrange.
in this plain fable you th’ effect may see -
of negligence, and fond credulity; r;
and learn besides of flatt’rers to beware,
then most pernicious when they speak too fair. dryden.
his promise palamon accepts; but pray'd
to keep it better than the first he made:
thus fair they parted 'till the morrow's dawn;
for each had laid his plighted faith to pawn. dryden,
kalib ascend, my fair spoke servant rise,
and sooth my heart with pleasing prophecies. dryden,
this promised fair at first. - addison on italy.
3. happily; successfully.
q, princely buckingham, i’ll kiss thy hand,
in sign of league and amity with thee:
now fair befal thee and thy noble house !
thy garments are not spotted with our blood. shak. r. iii.
4. on good terms.
there are other nice, though inferior cases, in which a
man must guard, if he intends to keep fair with the world,
and turn the penny. collier on popularity.
fair. m. s.
1. a beauty; elliptically a fair woman.
of sleep forsaken, to relieve his care, -
he sought the conversation of the fair. dryden's falks.
gentlemen who do not design to marry, yet pay their de-
voirs to one particular fair. spectator.
2. honesty; just dealing.
i am not much for that present; we’ll settle it between our-
selves: fair and square, nic, keeps friends together. arbuthiict.
fair... n.s.. [foire, french; feria, or forum, latin.] an an-
nual or stated meeting of buyers and sellers; a time of traf-
fick more frequented than a market. the privilege of hold-
ing fairs in england is granted by the king.
with filver, iron, tin and lead they traded in thy fairs.
ezek. xxvii. 12.
his corn, his cattle, were his only care,
and his supreme delight a country fair. dryden. .
the ancient nundinae, or fairs of rome, were kept every
ninth day: afterwards the same privileges were granted to the
country markets, which were at first under the power of the
consuls. arbuthnot on coins.
fa'iring. m. s. [from fair.] a present given at a fair.
sweetheart, we shall be rich ere we depart,
if fairings come thus plentifully in. shakesp. love's lab. loft.
like children that esteem every trifle, and prefer a fairing
before their fathers. ben. johnson.
now he goes on, and sings of fairs and shows ;
for still new fairs before his eyes arose:
how pedlars stalls with glitt'ring toys are laid,
the various fairings of the country maid. gay's pasiorals.
fairly. adv. [from fair.]
1. beautifully: as, a city fairly situated.
2. commodiously; conveniently ; suitably to any purpose or
design.
waiting 'till willing winds their sails supply'd,
within a trading town they long abide,
full fairly situate on a haven's side. dryden.
3. honessly; justly; without shift; without fraud; not foully.
there is due from the judge to the advocate some com-
mendation and gracing where causes are fairly pleaded. bacon.
to the first advantages we may fairly lay claim; i wish we
had as good a title to the latter. - atterbury.
it is a church of england man's opinion, that the freedom
of a nation consists in an absolute unlimited legislative power,
wherein the whole body of the people are fairly represented,
and in an executive duly limited. swift.
4. ingenuously; plainly; openly. the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 778</div><p class="text">f a i.
f a i
the stage how loosely does astrea tread,
who fairly puts all characters to bed! pope.
5. candidly; without finistrous interpretations.
as i interpret fairly your design,
so look not with severer eyes on mine.
6. without violence to right reason.
where i have enlarged them, i desire the false criticks
would not always think that those thoughts are wholly mine;
but that either they are secretly in the poet, or may be fairly
deduced from him. £)ryden.
this nutritious juice being a subtile liquor, scarce obtain-
able by a human body, the serum of the blood is fairly sub-
stituted in its place. arbuthnot on aliments.
7, without blots.
here is th’ indictment of the good lord hastings,
which in a set hand fairly is engross'd.
8. completely; without any deficience.
all this they fairly overcame, by reason of the continual
presence of their king. spenser's state of ireland.
let them say, 'tis grossly done; so it be fairly done, no
• matter. shaftspeare's merry isives of windsor.
our love is not so great, hortensio, but we may blow our
nails together, and fast it fairly out. shak. tam. of the shrew.
fa‘irness. n.s.. [from fair.)
1. beauty; elegance of form.
that which made her fairnes, much the fairer, was that it
was but a fair embassador of a most fair mind, full of wit,
and a wit which delighted more to judge itself than to show
itself. - sidney.
2. honesty; candour; ingenuity.
there may be somewhat of wisdom, but little of goodness
or fairns; in this conduct. atterbury's sermons, preface.
fa 1r spok en. adj. [from fair and speak.] bland and civil in
language and address.
arius, a priest in the church of alexandria, a subtlewitted
and a marvellous fairspoken man, but discontented that we
should be placed before him in honour, whose superior he
thought himself in desert, because through envy and stomach
prone unto contradiction. hooker.
fairy, n. s. spenho, saxon; fee, french. ab isz, terra,
fit &amp; fitz macedonum dialecto; unde evoo, figo, &amp; roma-
nis inferi, qui scoto-saxonibus dicuntur feries, nostratiq;
vulgo corruptius fairies, xzrax.3%vol. 3.xigovs, five dii manes.
baxter's glossary.
1. a kind of fabled beings supposed to appear in a diminutive
human form, and to dance in the meadows, and reward clean-
liness in houses; an elf; a fay.
nan page, my daughter, and my little son,
and three or four more of their growth, we'll dress
like urchins, ouphes, and fairies, green and white. shakesp.
then let them all encircle him about,
and fairy like too pinch the unclean knight;
and ask him, why, that hour of fairy revel,
in their so sacred paths he dares to tread -
in shape prophane. shakoff. merry ivives of windsor.
by the idea any one has of fairies, or centaurs, he cannot
know that things, answering those ideas, exist. locke.
fays, fairies, genii, elves, and demons hear. pope.
2. enchantress. warburton.
to this great fairy i’ll commend thy acts,
make her thanks bless thee. shakesp. anth, and cleopatra.
fatry. adj. -
1. given by fairies.
be secret and discrete; these fairy favours
are lost when not conceal’d. dryden's spanish fryar.
such borrowed wealth, like fairy money, though it were
gold in the hand from which he received it, will be but leaves
and dust when it comes to use. locke.
2. belonging to fairies.
this is the fairy land: oh, spight of spights,
we talk with goblings, owls, and elvish sprights. shakesp.
fa’irystone. n. s. [fairy and stone..] a stone found in gra-
vel-pits.
faith. m. s. [foi, french ; fede, italian; fides, latin.]
1. belief of the revealed truths of religion. -
the name of faith being properly and strictly taken, it
must needs have reference unto some uttered word, as the ob-
ject of belief. - hooker.
faith, if it have not works, is dead. jam. ii. 17.
vision in the next life is the perfecting of that faith in this
life, or that faith here is turned into vision there, as hope into
enjoying. hammond’s prac7. catech.
then faith shall fail, and holy hope shall die;
one lost in certainty, and one in joy. prior.
2. the system of revealed truths held by the christian church;
the credenda.
felix heard paul concerning the faith.
this is the catholick faith.
3. trust in god.
faith is an entire dependence upon the truth, the power, the
justice, and the mercy of god; which dependence will cer-
tainly incline us to obey him in all things. swift.
dryden's aurengz.
aas, xxiv. 24.
common prayer.
shop. r. iii.
4. tenet held. -
which to believe of her,
must be a faith, that reason, without miracle,
should never plant in me. shakespeare's king lear,
5. trust in the honesty or veracity of another.
6. fidelity; unshaken adherence.
her failing, while her faith to me remains,
i should conceal. milton's paradis. loft.
7. honour; social confidence.
for you alone
i broke my faith with injur’d palamon. dryd. knight's tal.
8. sincerity; honesty; veracity. -
sir, in good faith, in meer verity. shakesp. k. lear.
they are a very froward generation, children in whom is
no faith. deut. xxxii. 20.
9. promise given.
i have been forsworn,
in breaking faith with julia whom i lov’d. shakespeare.
faithere ach. m. s. [faith and breach.] breach of fidelity;
disloyalty; perfidy.
now minutely revolts upbraid his faithbreach;
those he commands, move only in command,
nothing in love. shakespeare's macbeth.
fait he d. adj. [from faith..] honest; sincere. a word not
in use. -
thou bastard i would the reposal
of any trust, virtue, or worth in thce, -
make thy words suith'd? shakespeare's king lear.
faith ful. adj. [faith and solo.] -
1. firm in adherence to the truth of religion.
to the saints which are at ephesus, and the faithful in
christ jesus. - - eph. i. 1.
be thou faithful unto death, and i will give thee a crown
of life. rev. ii. 10.
2. of true fidelity ; loyal ; true to the allegiance or duty pro-
fesled. -
i have this day receiv'd a traitor's judgment,
and by that name must die; yet, heav'n bear witness,
and, if i have a conscience, let it sink me,
ev’n as the axe falls, if i be not faithful. soak. hon. viii.
so spake the seraph abdiel, faithful found;
among the faithless, faithsul only he. amilton.
3. honest; upright; without fraud.
my servant moses is faithful in all mine house. numbers.
4. observant of compact or promise ; true to his contract; sin-
cere; veracious.
well i know him ;
of easy temper, naturally good,
and faithful to his word.
fatthfull s. adv. [from faithful.]
1. with firm belief in religion.
2. with full confidence in god. -
3. with strict adherence to duty and allegiance.
his noble grace would have some pit
upon my wretched women, that so long
have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully. - -
- - shakespeare's henry viii.
4. without failure of performance; honesty; exactly.
... if on my wounded breast thou drop a tear,
think for whose sake my breast that wound did bear;
and faithfully my last defires fulfil,
as i perform my cruel father's will. dryden's ovid.
5. with earnest professions; with strong promises.
for his own part, he did faithfully promise to be still in the
king's power. bacon's hen. vii.
6. honestly ; without fraud, trick, or ambiguity.
they suppose the nature of things to be truly and faithfully
signified by their names, and thereupon believe as they hear,
and practise as they believe. south's sermons.
7. in shakespeare, according to mr. warburton, fervently; per-
haps rather confidently; steadily.
if his occasions were not virtuous,
i should not urge it half so faithfully.
faith fulness. n. s. [from faithful.]
1. honesty; veracity.
for there is no faithfulnes; in your mouth ; your inward
part is very wickedness. ps. lix.
the band that knits together and supports all compacts, is
truth and faithfulness. south.
2. adherence to duty ; loyalty.
the same zeal and faithfulnes; continues in your blood,
which animated one of your noble ancestors to sacrifice his
life in the quarrel of his sovereign. dryden.
fatthless, adj. [from faith.]
1. without belief in the revealed truths of religion; uncon-
verted.
whatsoever our hearts be to god and to his truth, believe
we, or be we as yet faithless, for our conversion or confirma-
tion, the force of natural reason is great.
never dare missortune cross her foot,
unless she doth it under this excuse,
that she is issue to a faithloss jew. shakesp. merch. of pen.
2. perfidious ;
dryden's don sebastian,
shakoff. timon.
fa
i.
hooker.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 779</div><p class="text">f a l
f a l
2. perfidious; disloyal; not true to duty, profession, promise,
or allegiance.
both
fell by our servants, by those men we lov’d most ;
a most unnatural and faithles, service. shakesp. hen. viii.
abdiel, faithful found ;
among the faithles.
faithlessness. n. s. [from faithloss.]
1. treachery; perfidy.
2. unbelief as to revealed religion.
fa'itour., n. s. [faitard, french.] a scoundrel; a rascal; a
mean fellow; a poltron. an old word now obsolete.
to philemon, false faitour, philemon,
milton's paradise loft.
i cast to pay, that i so dearly bought. fairy queen.
into new woes unweeting i was cast,
by this false faitour. fairy queen.
fake. m. s. [among seamen.] a coil of rope. harris.
falca'de., n. s... [from falx, falcis, latin.]
a horse is said to make falcades when he throws himself
upon his haunches two or three times, as in very quick cur-
vets; therefore a falcade is that action of the haunches and of
the legs, which bend very low, when you make a stop and
half a stop. farrier’s dicf.
fa(lcated. adj. . [falcatus, latin.] hooked; bent like a
reaping hook or scythe.
the enlightened part of the moon appears in the form of a
sickle, or reaping hook, which is while she is moving from
the conjunction to the opposition, or from the new moon to
the full ; but from full to a new again, the enlightened part
appears gibbous, and the dark falcated. harris.
falcation. m. s. [falcis, latin.] crookedness; form like
that of a reaper's hook.
the locusts have antennae, or long horns before, with a
long falcation or forcipated tail behind. brown.
jfa'lchion, n. s. sensis falcatus; in french fauchon.] a short
crooked sword; a cymeter.
i’ve seen the day, with my good biting falchion,
i would have made them skip: i am old now. shakespeare.
old falchions are new temper'd in the fires;
the sounding trumpet every soul inspires.
what fighs and tears
hath eugene caused how many widows curse
his cleaving falchion / phillips.
fatlcon. n. j. [faulcon, french; falconne, italian; falco,
latin. , credo, a rostro falcato five adunco, from the falcated or
crooked bill.]
1. a hawk trained for sport.
as venus' bird, the white, swift, lovely dove,
o! happy dove that art compar'd to her,
doth on her wings her utmost swiftness prove,
finding the gripe of falcon fierce not far. sidney.
air stops not the high soaring of my noble falcon. walton.
apulian farms, for the rich soil admir’d,
and thy large fields where falcons may be tir’d. dryd, juv.
say, will the falcon, stooping from above,
smit with her varying plumage, spare the dove : pope.
2. a sort of cannon, whose diameter at the bore is five inches
and a quarter, weight seven hundred and fifty pounds, length
seven foot, load two pounds and a quarter, shot two inches and
a half diameter, and two pounds and a half weight. harris.
fa'lcon er. n.s.. [faulconnier, french.]. one who breeds and
trains hawks; one who follows the sport of fowling with
hawks.
hist! romeo, hist! o for a falo'ner's voice,
to lure this tarsel gentle back again. shakespeare.
the universal remedy was swallowing of pebblestones; in
imitation of falconers curing hawks. temple.
i have learnt of a falconer never to feed up a hawk, when
i would have him fly. dryden's don sebastian.
a falo'ner henry is, when emma hawks;
with her of tarsels and of lures he talks. prior.
fa'iconet. n. s. [falconette, french.] a sort of ordnance,
whose diameter at the bore is four inches and a quarter, weight
four hundred pounds, length six foot, load one pound and a
quarter, shot something more than two inches diameter, and
one pound and a quarter weight. - harris.
mahomet sent janizaries and nimble footmen, with certain
falconets and other small pieces, to take the streights. knolles.
fa'ldage. m. s. [faldagium, barbarous latin.]. a privilege
which anciently several lords reserved to themselves of setting
up folds for sheep, in any fields within their manors, the bet-
ter to manure them; and this not only with their own, but
their tenants sheep. this faldage in some places they call a
dryden's aen.
foldcourse, or freefold. - pharris.
fa‘ldfee. m. s. [fald and fee.]. a composition paid anciently
by tenants for the privilege of faldage. dic.
fa'lding. m. s. a kind of coarse cloth. dic7.
ta'ldstool. n.s.. [fald or fold and stool.] . a kind of stool
placed at the south-side of the altar, at which the kings of
england kneel at their coronation.
23 fall. v. n. pret. i fell; compound pret. i have fallen, or
so solo, saxon; fallen, german.].
• vol. is
1. to drop from a higher place.
thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring
not blood upon thine house, if any man fall from thence. deur,
i shall fall
like a bright exhalation in the evening,
and no man see me more. shakespeare's henry viii,
2. to drop from an erect to a prone posture,
saul fell all along on the earth.
that is a step,
qn which i must fall down, or else o'erleap;
for in my way it lies. shakespeare's macbeth,
3. to drop; to be held or adhere no longer.
his chains fell off from his hands.
4. to move down any descent.
all liquid bodies are diffusive for their parts being in mo-
tion, have no connexion one with another, but glide and fall
off any way, as gravity and the air presseth them. burnet,
5. to drop ripe from the tree,
as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from
the fig-tree. is xxxiv. 4.
6. to pass at the outlet: as a river.
caesar therefore gave orders to build his gallies on the loir,
and the rivers that fall into it. arbuthnot on coins,
7. to be determined to some particular direction.
birds and fowls that rest one foot to ease the other, natu-
rally lay their heads under their wings, that the center of gra-
vity may fall upon the foot they stand on. cheyne,
8. to apostatise; to depart from faith or goodness.
labour to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the
same example of unbelief. pieb. iv. 11.
they brought scandal
to israel, diffidence of god, and doubt
in feeble hearts, propense enough before
1 sam, xxviii. 20.
acis, xii. 7,
to waver or fall off, and join with idols. milton.
whether some spirit on holy purpose bent,
or some fall’n angel from below broke loose,
who comes with envious eyes, and curst intent,
to view this world and its created lord. dryden,
9. to die by violence.
god and good angels fight on richmond's side,
and richard fall in height of all his pride. shak, rich. iii.
if one should be a prey, how much the better
to fall before the lion than the wolf i shakespeare,
what other oath,
than honesty to honesty engag’d
that this shall be, or we will fall for it, shakes, j. cesar.
a thousand shall fall at thy fide, and ten thousand at thy
right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. ps, xci. 7.
ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you
by the sword. lev. xxvi, 7.
they not obeying,
incurr'd, what could they less the penalty;
and manifold in fin, deserv'd to fall.
almon falls, old tyrrheus' eldest care,
pierc'd with an arrow from the distant war.
io. to come to a sudden end.
the greatness of these irish lords suddenly fell and vanished,
when their oppressions and extortions were taken away. davies.
he first the fate of caesar did foretell,
and pity'd rome when rome in caesar fell;
in iron clouds conceal’d the publick light,
and impious mortals fear'd eternal night. dryden's virgil.
11. to be degraded from an high station; to sink into mean-
ness or disgrace; to be plunged into sudden misery. o
what can be their business
with a poor weak woman fallon from favour ! shakespeare.
12. to decline from power or empire; to be overthrown.
what men could do,
is done already : heaven and earth will witness,
if rome must fall, that we are innocent. addison's cato.
13. to enter into any state worse than the former.
he fell at difference with ludovico sfortia, who carried the
keys which brought him in, and shut him out. bacon’s h. vii.
some painters taking precepts in too literal a sense, have
fallen thereby into great inconveniencies. dryden.
14. to come into any state of weakness, terrour, or misery.
these, by obtruding the beginning of a change for the en-
tire work of new life, will fall under the former guilt. hamm.
one would wonder how so many learned men could fall
into so great an absurdity, as to believe this river could pre-
serve itself unmixt with the lake. addison on italy.
the best men fall under the severest pressures. wake.
15. to decrease; to be diminished, as in weight.
from the pound weight, as pliny tells us, the as fell to
two-ounces in the first punick war: when hannibal invaded
italy, to one ounce; then, by the papirian law, to half an
oun cee arbuthnot on coins,
16. to ebb; to grow shallow ; as, the river falls.
17. to decrease in value; to bear less price.
when the price of cornfalleth, men generally break no more
milton.
dryden's afn.
ground than will supply their own turn. carew,
but now her price is fall'n, shakespeare's king lear.
- 8 t rents<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 780</div><p class="text">f a l
f a l
rents will fall, and incomes every day lessen, 'till industry
and frugality, joined to a well ordered trade, shall restore to
the kingdom the riches it had formerly. locke.
18. to fink; not to amount to the full.
the greatness of an estate, in bulk and territory, doth fall
under measure; and the greatness of finances and revenue doth.
bacan.
fall under computation.
19. to be rejecied; to become null. - -
this book must stand or fall with thee; not by any opinion
i have of it, but thy own. locke.
zo. to decline from violence to calmness, from intenseness to
remission.
he was stirr'd,
and something spoke in choler, ill and hasty;
but he fell to himself again, and sweetly
in all the rest shew'd a most noble patience.
at length her fury fell, her foaming ceas'd ;
and ebbing in her soul, the god decreas'd. , dryden's aen,
21. to enter into any new state of the body or mind.
in sweet musick is such art,
killing care and grief of heart,
fall asleep, or hearing die. shakesp. henry viii.
solyman, chased with the loss of his gallies and best sol-
diers, and with the double injury done unto him by the vene-
tians, foll into such a rage that he cursed barbarotia. knolles.
when about twenty, upon the falseness of a lover, she fell
distracted. temple.
a spark like thee, of the man-killing trade,
fell sick, and thus to his physician said:
methinks i am not right in ev'ry part,
i feel a kind of trembling at my heart;
my pulse unequal, and my breath is strong;
besides a filthy furr upon my tongue. dryden's pers.
and have you known none in health who have pitied you ;
and behold, they are gone before you, even since you fell into
this distemper ? wake's preparation for death.
he died calmly, and with all the easiness of a man falling
shakespeare.
afleep. - - atterbury.
portius himself oft fall; in tears before me,
as if he mourn'd his rival's ill success. addison's cato.
for as his own bright image he survey'd,
he foll in love with the fantastick shade. addison's ovid.
i fell in love with the character of pomponius atticus: i
longed to imitate him. blount to pope.
22. to sink into an air of discontent or dejecaion of the look.
if thou persuade thyself that they shall not be taken, let
not thy countenance fall. judith, vi. 9.
if you have any other request to make, hide it not ; for ye
shall find we will not make your countenance to fall by the
answer ye shall receive. bacon's new atlantis.
i have observ'd of late thy looks are fallen,
o'ercast with gloomy cares and discontent. addison's cato.
23. to fink below something in comparison.
fame of thy beauty and thy youth,
among the rest, me hither brought:
finding this fame fal; short of truth,
made me stay longer than i thought.
24. to happen; to befall. -
for such things as do fall scarce once in many ages, it did
suffice to take such order as was requisite when they fell. hook.
oft it falls out, that while one thinks too much of his
doing, he leaves to do the effect of this thinking. sidney.
a long advertent and deliberate connexing of consequents,
which falls not in the common road of ordinary men. hale.
since this fortune falls to you,
be content and seek no new. shakesp. merchant of venice.
if the worst fall that ever fell, i hope, i shall make shift
to go without him. shakespeare's merchant of venice.
o, how feeble is man's power,
that if good fortune fall,
cannot add another hour,
nor a lost hour recall !
since both cannot possess what both pursue,
i'm griev'd, my friend, the chance should fall on you. dry.
i had more leisure, and disposition, than have since fallen
waller.
donne.
to my share. wift.
25. to come by chance; to light on.
i have two boys
seek percy and thyself about the field;
but seeing thou fall's on me so luckily, -
i will assay thee. shakespeare's henry iv.
the romans fell upon this model by chance, but the spar-
tans by thought and design. - swift.
26. to come in a stated method.
the odd hours at the end of the solar year, are not indeed
fully six, but are deficient 1o 44” ; which deficiency, in 134
years, colle&amp;ted, amounts to a whole day: and hence may be
seen the reason why the vernal equinox, which at the time of
the nicene council fell upon the 21st of march, falls now
about ten days sooner. holder on time.
it does not fall within my subject to lay down the rules of
odes. felton on the classicks.
27. to corne unexpe&amp;tedly.
i am fallen upon the mention of mercuries. boyl.
it happened this evening that we fell into a very pleasing
walk, at a distance from his house. addison's specials:
28. to begin any thing with ardour and vehemence.
the king understanding of their adventure, suddenly fall
to take pride in making much of them, sidney.
each of us fell in praise of our country mistresses. so.
and the mixt multitude fell a lusting. num. ii. 4.
it is better to sound a person afar off, than to fall upon the
point at first; except you mean to surprize him by some short
question. baton.
when a horse is hungry, and comes to a good pasture, he
falls to his food immediately. hale's origin of mankind.
they fell to blows, insomuch that the argonauts slew the
most part of the deliones. l’estrange,
29. to handle or treat directly.
we must immediately fall into our subjec, and treatevery
part of it in a lively manner, addison's speciator.
3o. to come vindictively ; as a punishment.
there fell wrath for it against israel. 2 chron,
31. to come by any mischance to any new possessor.
the stout bishop could not well brook that his province
£hould fall into their hands, knolles's history of the tarłł.
32. to drop or pass by carelessness or imprudence.
ulysses let no partial favours fall,
the people's parent, he protected all. pope's odis).
some expressions fell from him, not very favourable to the
people of ireland. swift.
33. to come forcibly and irresistibly.
fear fell on them all.
a kind refreshing sleep is fallen upon him:
i saw bion stretcht at ease, his fancy lost
in pleasing dreams, 4ddison's cats,
34. to become the property of any one by lot, chance, inhe-
ritance, or otherwise.
all the lands, which will fall to her majesty thereabouts,
are large enough to contain them. spensor an ireland.
if you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
preferment falls on him that cuts him off. shakesp. k. lear.
then 'tis most like
4eïs, xix. 17.
the sovereignty will fall upon macbeth. shakespeare.
after the flood, arts to chaldea foll; -
the father of the faithful there did dwell,
who both their parent and instructor was, denham.
you shall see a great estate fall to you, which you would
have lost the relish of, had you known yourself born to it. add.
if to her share some female errours fall,
look on her face, and you'll forget them all, pope.
in their spiritual and temporal couits the labour falls to their
vicars-general, proctors, apparitors, and seneschals. swift.
35. to languish; to grow faint.
their hopes or fears for the common cause rose or foll with
your lordship's interest. addison on italy.
36. to be born ; to be yeaned.
lambs must have care taken of them at their first falling,
else, while they are weak, the crows and magpies will be apt
to pick out their eyes. a4artimer’s husbandy.
37. to fall away. to grow lean.
watery vegetables are proper, and fish rather than flesh: in
a lent diet people commonly fall away. arbuthnot on diet.
38. to fall away. to revolt; to change allegiance.
the fugitives fell away to the king of babylon. 2 kings.
39. to fall away. to apostatise; to fink into wickedness.
these for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall
away. luke, viii. 1 2.
say not thou, it is through the lord that i fell away; for
thou oughtest not to do the things that he hateth. eccles: xv.
40. to fall away. to perish; to be lost.
still propagate; for still they fall away;
'tis prudence to prevent th' entire decay. dryden's wirgil.
how can it enter into the thoughts of man, that the soul,
which is capable of such immense perfeołions, and of receiving
new improvement to all eternity, shall fall away into nothing,
almost as soon as it is created f addison's speciator.
4 i. n. fall away. to decline gradually; to fade; to lan-
gulin.
in a curious brede of needlework one colour fall, away by
such just degrees, and another rises so insensibly, that we see
the variety, without being able to distinguish the total vanish-
ing of the one from the first appearance of the other. addison.
42. to fall back. to fail of a promise or purpose.
we have often fallen back from our resolutions.
43. to fall back. to recede; to give way.
44. to fall down. [down is sometimes added tofall, though it
adds little to the signification.] to prostrate himself in ado-
i at 10n. -
all kings shall fall down before him; all nations shall serve
him. - ps. lxxii. 11.
shall i fall down to the flock of a tree? if xliv. 19.
45. to fali down. to fink; not to stand.
as she was speaking, she fill down for faintness. esh. xv.
down
7aylor.
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 781</div><p class="text">:a::
7 :::
o
#z.
joi
, a.
…:
---
elio
:
-
-
o
.
o
2.
:
*
no
down fell the beauteous youth; the yawning wound
gush'd out a purple stream, and stain'd the ground. dryden.
46. to fall down. to bend as a suppliant.
they shall fall down unto thee; they shall make supplica-
tion unto thee. is xlv. 14.
47. to fall from. to revolt; to depart from adherence.
clarence
is very likely now to fall from him. shakesp. henry vi.
the emperor being much solicited by the scots not to be a
help to ruin their kingdom, fell by degrees from the king of
england. hayward,
48. to fall in. to concur; to coincide.
- objections fall in here, and are the clearest and most con-
vincing arguments of the truth. . isoodward's nat. history.
his reasonings in this chapter seem to fall in with each
other ; yet, upon a closer examination, we shall find them
proposed with great variety and distinction. atterbury.
any single paper that fall; in with the popular taste, and
pleases more than ordinary, brings one in a great return of
letters. - addison,
when the war was begun, there soon fell in other inci-
dents at home, which made the continuance of it neces-
sary. swift.
49. to fall in. to comply; to yield to.
our fine young ladies readily fall in with the dire&amp;tion of
the graver sort. spectator.
it is a double misfortune to a nation, which is this given
to change, when they have a sovereign that is prone to fall in
with all the turns and veerings of the people. addison.
you will find it difficult to persuade learned men # in
with your projects. addison on medals.
that prince applied himself first to the church of england;
and, upon their refusal to fall in with his measures, made the
like advances to the dissenters. - swift.
50. to fall off. . to separate; to be broken.
love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide; in cities,
mutinies; in countries, discord. shakesp. king lear.
51. to fall off. to perish ; to die away.
languages need recruits to supply the place of those words
that are continually falling off through disuse. felton.
52. to fall off. to apost-tise; to revolt; to forsake.
" oh, hamlet, what a falling off was there ! shakespeare.
- revolted mortimer ?
—he never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
but by the oft :/.. § soft. henry iv.
they, accustomed to afford at other times either silence or
thort assent to what he did purpose, did then fall off and for-
sake him. hayward.
what cause
mov’d our grand parents, in that happy state,
favour'd of heav'n so highly, to fall a
from their creator, and transgress his will milton.
those captive tribes fell off
from god to worship calves. milton's paradise loft.
were i always grave, one half of my readers would fall off
from me. addison's spectator.
53. to fall on. to begin eagerly to do any thing.
some coarse cold sallad is before thee set;
bread with the bran perhaps, and broken meat;
fall on, and o appetite to eat. dryden's pers
54. to fall on. to make an assault; to begin the attack.
they fell on, i made good my place : at length they came
to th’ broomstaff with me; i defied 'em still. shak. hen. viii.
fall on, fall on, and hear him not ;
but spare his person for his father's sake. dryd. span. fryar.
draw all; and when i give the word, fall on. oedipus.
he pretends, amongst the rest, to quarrel with me, to have
fallen foul on priesthood. dryden's fables, prof.
55. to fall over. to revolt; to desert from one side to the
other.
s and do'st thou now fall over to my foes?
thou wear a lion's hide doff it, for shame,
and hang a calve's skin on those recreant limbs. sh. k. john.
56. to fall out. to quarrel; to jar ; to grow contentious.
little needed those proofs to one who would have fallen out
with herself, rather than make any conjectures to 2 elmane's
speeches. sidney.
how fell you out, say that
—no contraries hold more antipathy,
than i and such a knave. shakespeare's king lear.
meeting her of late behind the wood,
seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool,
i did upbraid her, and fall out with her. shakespeare.
the cedar, by the instigation of the loyalists, fell out with
the homebians, who had elected him to be their king. howel.
a soul exasperated in ills, fall out
with every thing, its friend, itself. addison's cato.
it has been my misfortune to live among quarrelsome neigh-
bours: there is but one thing can make us fall out, and that is
the inheritance of lord strut's estate. arbuthnot's john bull.
57. 32 fail out. to happen ; to befall.
who think you is my dorus fallen out to be : sidney,
now, for the most part, it so falth out, touching things
which generally are received, that although in themselves th:
be most certain, yet, because men presume then granted of all,
we are hardliest able to bring proof of their certainty. hooker.
it so fell out, that certain players
we o'er-rode on the way; of those we told him. shakes.
yet so it may fall out, because their end -
is hate, not help to me. milton's agonises.
there fell out a bloody quarrel betwixt the frogs and the
mice. £’effrange.
if it so fall out that thou art miserable for ever, thou hast
no reason to be surprised, as if some unexpected thing had
happened. yillotson.
58. to fall to. to begin eagerly to eat. ts.
the men were fashion'd in a larger mould,
the women fit for labour, big and bold;
gigantick hinds, as soon as work was done,
to their huge pots of boiling pulse would run; -
hall to, with eager joy, on homely food. doydon'; juv.
59. to fall to. to apply himself to.
they would needs fall to the practice of those virtues which
they before learned. sidney:
i know thee not, old man; fall to thy prayers:
how ill white hairs become a fool and jester's sh. h. iv.
having been brought up an idle horseboy, he will never
after fall to labour; but is only made fit for the halter. spenser.
they fell to raising money under pretence of the relief of
ireland. clarendon.
my lady falls to play : so bad her chance,
he must repair it. pope.
60. to fall under.
of. -
we know the effects of heat will be such as will scarce fall
ander the conceit of man, if the force of it be alogether kept
in. - - bacon's natural hi/ory.
those things, which are wholly in the choice of another,
fall under our deliberation. taylor's rule of living holy.
the idea of the painter and the sculptor is undoubtedly
that perfect and excellent example of the mind, by imitation
of which imagined form all things are represented, which fall
wnder human light. dryden's dufresnoy,
61. to fall under. to be ranged with: to be reckoned with.
no rules that relate to pastoral can affect the georgicks,
which fall under that class of poetry which confists in giving
plain instructions to the reader. addison on the georgicks.
62. to fall upon. to attack; to invade; to assault.
auria falling upon these gallies, had with them a cruel and
deadly fight. knolles.
an infection in a town first falls upon children, weak con-
stitutions, or those that are subject to other diseases; but,
spreading further, seizes upon the most healthy. temple:
man falls upon every thing that comes in his way; not a
lso or a mushroom can escape him. addison's speciator.
o get rid of fools and scoundrels was one part of my de-
sign in falling upon these authors. pope to swift.
63. to fall upon. to attempt.
i do not intend to fall upon nice philosophical disquisitions
about the nature of time. holder on time,
64. to fall upon. to rush against. -
at the same time that the storm bears upon the whole spe-
cies, we are falling foul upon one another. addison.
65, fall is one of those general words of which it is very dif-
ficult to ascertain or detail the full signification. it retains in
most of its senses some part of its primitive meaning, and
implies either literally or figuratively descent, violence, or sud-
‘denness. in many of its senses it is opposed to ris. but in
others has no counterpart, or correlative.
to fa li. v. a.
1. to drop ; to let fall. -
to-morrow in the battle think on me, . .
and fall thy edgeless sword, despair and die. sh. rich. iii.
if that the earth could teem with woman's tears,
each drop, she falls, would prove a crocodile. shak. othello.
draw together;
and when i rear my hand, do you the like,
to fall it on gonzalo. shakespeare's tempest,
i am willing to fall this argument: 'tis free for every man
to write or not to write in verse, as he thinks it is or is not his
talent, or as he imagines the audience will receive it. dryden.
2. to sink; to depress: the contrary to raise. -
if a man would endeavour to raise or % his voice still by
half notes, like the stops of a lute, or by whole notes alone
without halfs, as far as an eight, he will not be able to frame
his voice unto it. bacon's natural history.
3. to diminish ; to let sink: opposed to raise.
upon lessening interest to four per tent, you fall the price of
your native commodities, or lessen your trade, or else prevent
not the high use. locke.
4. to yean; to bring forth. -
they then conceiving, did in yeaping time -
fall party-colour'd lambs, and those were jacob's. shakesp.
fall, n, s. [from the verb.] -
- 1. the
to be subject to ; to become the subject
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 782</div><p class="text">f a l
f a l
1, the aet of dropping from on high.
high o'er their heads a mould'ring rock is plac'd,
that promises a fall, and shakes at every blast, dryd. æn.
2. the act of tumbling from an erect posture.
i saw him run after .#. butterfly ; and when he caught
it, he let it go again, and after it again; and over and over he
comes, and up again, and caught it again; or whether his fall
enraged him, or how it was, he did so set his teeth, and did
tear it. shakespeare's coriolanus.
3. the violence suffered in dropping from on high.
my son coming into his marriage-chamber, happened to
have a fall, and died. 2 esdr. x. 48,
spirit of wine, mingled with common water, if the first
fall be broken, by means, of a sop, or otherwise, stayeth
above; and if once mingled, it severeth not again, as oil
doth. - bacon's physical remains.
a fever or fall may take away my reason. locke.
some were hurt by the fall; they got by leaping upon the
ground. gulliver’s travels.
4. death; overthrow ; destruction incurred.
wail his fall,
whom i myself struck down. shakespeare's macbeth.
our fathers were given to the sword, and for a spoil, and
had a great fall before our enemies. judith, viii. 9.
i will begin to pray for myself and for them ; for i see the
falls of us that dwell in the land. 2 esdr. viii. 17.
5. ruin; dissolution.
- paul's, the late theme of such a muse, whose flight
has bravely reach'd and soar'd above thy height;
now shalt thou stand, though sword, or time, or fire,
orzeal more fierce than they, thy fall conspire. denham.
6. downfal; loss of greatness; declension from eminence; de-
gradation; state of being deposed from a high station; plunge
from happiness or greatness into misery or meanness, or from
virtue to corruption. in a sense like this we say the fall of
man, and the fall of angels.
her memory served as an accuser of her change, and her
own handwriting was there to bear testimony against her fall.
sidney.
perhaps thou talk'st of me, and do'st enquire ey
of my restraint; why here i live alone ;
and pitiest this my miserable* daniel's civil war.
he, careless now of int’rest, fame, or fate,
perhaps forgets that oxford e'er was great;
or deeming meanest what we greatest call,
beholds thee glorious only in thy fall.
7. declension of greatness, power, or dominion.
*till the empire came to be settled in charles the great,
the fall of the romans huge dominion concurring with other
universal evils, caused those times to be days of much afflic-
tion and trouble throughout the world. hooker.
8. diminution; decrease of value.
that the improvement of ireland is the principal cause
why our lands in purchase rise not, as naturally they should,
with the fall of our interest, appears evidently from the effect
the fall of interest hath had upon houses in london. child.
9. declination or diminution of sound ; cadence ; close of
musick.
that strain again; it had a dying fall:
o, it came o'er my ear, like the sweet south
that breathes upon a bank of violets,
stealing and giving odours. shakesp. twelfth night.
how sweetly did they float upon the wings
of filence, through the empty-vaulted night,
at ev'ry fall smoothing the raven down
of #: *till it smil’d 1
10. declivity; steep descent.
waters when beat upon the shore, or straitned, as the falls
of bridges, or dashed against themselves by winds, give a roar-
ing noise. bacon's natural history.
11. cataract; cascade; rush of water down a steep place.
there will we sit upon the rocks,
and see the shepherds feed their flocks
by shallow rivers, to whose falls
k. birds sing madrigals. shakespeare.
a whistling wind, or a melodious noise of birds among the
spreading branches, or a pleasing fall of water running vio-
lently, these things made them to swoon for fear. wisd.
down through the crannies of the living walls
the crystal streams descend in murm'ring falls. dryd. wirg.
the swain, in barren deserts, with surprize -
sees lilies spring, and sudden verdure rise ;
and starts, amidst the thirsty wilds, to hear
pope to parnel.
milton.
new falls of water murm'ring in his ear. pope's mosiah.
now under hanging mountains,
beside the falls of fountains,
he makes his moan;
and calls her ghost,
for ever, ever, ever lost pope's st. cecilia.
12. the outlet of a current into any other water.
before the fall of the po into the gulph, it receives into its
channel considerable rivers. addison on italy.
4.
13. autumn; the fall of the leaf; the time when the leaves
drop from the trees.
what crowds of patients the town-doctor kills,
of how last fall he rais'd the weekly bills. dryden's juv.
14. any thing that comes down in great quantities.
upon a great fall of rain the current carried away a huge
heap of apples. l’estrange.
15. the aet of felling or cutting down ; as, the fall of timber.
falla’cious, adj. [fallax, latin; fallacieux, french.]
1. producing mistake; sophistical. it is never used of men, but
of writings, propositions, or things. -
the jews believed and assented to things neither evident
nor certain, nor yet so much as probable, but actually false
and fallacious ; such as the absurd doctrines and stories of their
rabbies. south's sermons.
2. deceitful; mocking expectation.
the force of that fallacious fruit,
that with exhilerating vapour bland
about their spirits had play'd, and inmost pow'rs
made err, was now exhal’d. milton's paradise lost.
false philosophy inspires -
fallacious hope. milton.
falla'ciously. adv. [from fallacious...] sophistically ; with
purpose to deceive ; with unsound reasoning.
we shall so far encourage contradiction, as to promise not
to oppose any pen that shall fallaciously refute us. brown.
we have seen how fallaciously the author has stated the cause,
by supposing that nothing but unlimited mercy, or unlimited
punishment, are the methods that can be made use of.
addison.
fallasciousness. n.s.. [from fallacious.] tendency to de-
ceive; inconclusiveness.
fa'llacy. n.s.. [fallacia, latin; fallace, french.] sophism;
logical artifice; deceit; deceitful argument; delusory mode of
ratiocination.
most princes make themselves another thing from the
people by a fallacy of argument, thinking themselves most
kings when the subject is most basely subjected. sidney.
until i know this sure uncertainty,
i'll entertain the favour'd fallacy. , , shak. comedy of errourt.
it were a mere fallacy, and mistaking to ascribe that to the
force of imagination upon another body, which is but the
force of imagination upon the proper body. bacon.
all men, who can see an inch before them, may easily de-
tect gross fallacies. ryden.
fallib1'lity. m. s. [from fallible.] liableness to be deceived;
uncertainty; possibility of errour.
there is a great deal of fallibility in the testimony of men;
yet some things we may be almost as certain of as that the sun
{hines, or that five twenties make an hundred. watts.
fatllible. adj. [fallo, latin.] liable to errour; such as
mo, be deceived.
o not falsify your resolution with hopes that are #.
to-morrow you must die. shakesp. measure for measure.
he that creates to himself thousands of little hopes, uncer-
tain in the promise, fallible in the event, and depending upon
a thousand circumstances, often fail his expectations. taylor.
our intelle&amp;tual or rational powers need some assistance,
because they are so frail and fallible in the present state. watts.
fa'll ing. } n: s [from fall.] indentings opposed to promi-
fa‘lling in. w nence.
it shows the nose and eyebrows, with the several promi-
mencies and fallings in of the features, much more diffinetly
than any other kind of figure. addison on medals.
fa llingsickness. n.s...[fall and sickness.] the epilepsy; a
disease in which the patient is without any warning deprived
at once of his senses, and falls down.
did caesar swoon —he fell down in the market-place, and
foam'd at mouth, and was speechless.-he hath the falling-
aoi. shakespeare's julius caesar.
he dogfisher is good against the falling/ickness.
jwalton.
fatllow. adj. [palepe, saxon.]
1. pale red, or pale yellow.
how does your fallow greyhound, fir
i heard say, he was out-run at cotsale. shakespeare.
the king, who was excessively affected to hunting, had a
great desire to make a great park for red as well as fallow deer
between richmond and hampton-court. clarendon.
2. unsowed; left to rest after the years of tillage. . [supposed
to be so called from the colour of naked ground.]
the ridges of the fallow field lay traversed, so as the eng-
lish must cross them in presenting the charge. hayward.
3. plowed, but not sowed; plowed as prepared for a second
aration.
her predecessors, in their course of government, did but
sometimes cast up the ground; and so leaving it follow, it be-
came quickly overgrown with weeds. howe's pocal forest.
4. unplowed; uncultivated.
her fallow lees -
the darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
doth root upon. shakespeare's henry v.
5. unoccupied; neglected.
shall
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 783</div><p class="text">f a l
f a l
o:
&gt;
-
o
shall saints in civil bloodshed wallow
of saints, and let the cause lie follow?
fa'llow... n.s.. [from the ...s
1. ground plowed in order to be plowed again.
the plowing of fallows is a benefit to land. mortimer.
thebest ploughs to plow up summersallow with. mortimer.
2. ground lying at rest.
within an ancient forest’s ample verge,
there stands a lonely but a healthful dwelling,
built for convenience, and the use of life;
around it fallows, meads, and pastures fair,
a little garden, and a limpid brook,
by nature's own contrivance seems dispos'd. rowe's j. shore.
to fa llow. v. n. to plow in order to a second plowing.
begin to plow up fallows: this first fallowing ought to be
very shallow. mortimer's husbandry.
fa'llow ness. n. s. [from fallow.] barrenness; an exemp-
tion from bearing fruit.
like one, who, in her third widowhood, doth profess
herself a nun, ty'd to retiredness,
, , , § affects my muse now a chaste fallowns. donne.
false. adj. [falsus, latin ; faux, jause, french.]
1. not morally true; expressing that which is not thought.
innocence shall make
false accusation blush, and tyranny
tremble at patience. shakespeare's iwinter's tale.
... there are false witnesses among men. l’estrange.
2. no. true; conceiving that which does not exist.
'or how can that be false, which ev'ry tongue
of ev'ry mortal man affirms for true :
which truth hath in all ages been so strong,
as loadstone like, all hearts it ever drew. davies.
a farce is that in poetry which grotesque is in a picture:
the persons and action of a farce are all unnatural, and the
manners false; that is, inconsisting with the characters of
mankind. - dryden's dufreshoy.
3. succedaneous ; supposititious.
take a vessel, and make a false bottom of coarse canvass:
fill it with earth above the canvass. bacon's nat. history.
4. deceiving expectation; not solid; not sound.
he fell, as a huge rocky cliff,
whose false foundation waves have wash'd away.
with dreadful poise is from the main land reft. fairy queen.
when that flood in its own depths was drown'd,
it left behind it false and slipp'ry ground. dryden.
the heart of man looks fair, but when we come to lay
any weight upon’t, the ground is false under us. l’estrange.
5. not agreeable to rule, or propriety.
now, fy upon my false french; by mine honour, in true
english, i love thee, kate. shakespeare's henry v.
6. not honest; not just. -
the true prince may, for recreation, prove a false thief;
for the poor abuses of the times want countenance.
men are spunges, which, to pour out, receive;
who know false play, rather than lose, deceive. ... donne.
7. treacherous; perfidious; traiterous; deceitful; hollow.
i grant him bloody,
luxurious, avaricious, fals, deceitful,
sudden, malicious, smacking of ev'ry sin
that has a name. shakespeare's macbeth.
false of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand. shakesp.
a man to whom he had committed the trust of his person,
in making him his chamberlain; this man, no ways disgraced,
no ways discontent, no ways put in fear, turns false unto him.
bacon's henry vii.
so hast thou cheated theseus with a wile,
against thy vow, returning to beguile
under a borrow'd name; as false to me,
so false thou art to him who set thee free. dryden.
the ladies will make a numerous party against him, for
being false to love in forsaking dido. dryden's virgil.
8. counterfeit; hypocritical; not real; as, a false diamond.
false tears true pity moves: the king commands
to loose his fetters. dryden's an.
9. in all these senses true is the word opposed.
false. adv. not truly; not honestly; not exacily; falsely.
what thou would'st highly,
that thou would'st holily; would'st not play false,
and yet would'st wrongly win. shakespeare's macbeth.
to false. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to violate by failure of veracity.
is’t not enough that to this lady mild,
thou falsed hast thy faith with perjury :
2. to deceive.
fair seemly pleasance each to other makes,
with goodly purposes there as they sit ;
and in his falsed fancy he her takes
to be the fairest wight that lived yet.
3. to make feints; as fencers commonly do.
but, guyon, in the heat of all his strife,
was wary wise, and closely did await
advantage, whilst his foe did rage most rife;
vol. i. -
fairy queen,
fairy queen.
hudibras.
shakesp.
sometimes athwart, sometimes he strook him strait,
and falsed oft his blows t’ illude him with such bait.” f. &amp;
4. this word is now out of use.
falsehearted, adj. [false and heart.] treacherous; per-
fidious; deceitful; hoisow.
the traitorous or treacherous, who have misled others,
are severely punished; and the neutrals and falsehearted friends
and followers, who have started aside like a broken bow, he
noted. bacon’s advice to williers.
faisehoop. m. s. [from fals.]
1. want of truth; want of veracity.
artificer of fraud; he was the first
that practis'd fal/hood under saintly show. milton.
all deception in the course of life is, indeed, nothing else
but a lie reduced to practice, and falsehood passing from words
to things. south.
2. want of honesty; treachery; deceitfulness; perfidy.
nothing wants, but that thy shape,
like his, and colour serpentine, may show
thy inward fraud, to warn all creatures from thee
henceforth; lest that too heav'nly form, pretended
to hellish fal/hood, snare them. milton.
3. a lie; a false assertion.
in your answers there remains sal/hood. job.
4. counterfeit ; imposture.
for no fal/hood can indure
touch of celestial temper, but returns
of force to its own likeness. milton.
fatsely. adv. [from fasc.]
1. contrarily to truth; not truly.
simeon and levi spake not only falsely but infidiously, may
hypocritically, abusing proselytes and religion. gov. of tongue.
already were the belgians on our coast,
whose fleet more mighty every day became
by late success, which they did falsely boast,
and now by first appearing seem'd to claim. dryd. ann. mir.
tell him, i did in vain his brother move,
and yet he falsely said he was in love;
falsely ; for had he truly lov’d, at least -- -
he would have giv'n one day to my request. dryd. aureng.
. such as are treated ill, and upbraided falsely, find out an
intimate friend that will hear their complaints, and endeavour
to sooth their secret resentments. addison's speciatar.
2. erroneously; by mistake.
he knows that to be inconvenient which :ss. think
convenient for us. smalridge's sermons.
3. perfidiously; treacherously; deceitfully.
fa's eness. n.s.. [from saff.j
1. contrariety to truth.
2. want of veracity; violation of promise.
suppose the reverse of virtue were solemnly enacted, and
the practice of fraud and rapine, and perjury and falseness to
a man's word, and all vice were established by a law, would
that which we now call vice gain the reputation of virtue, and
that which we now call virtue grow odious to human na-
ture ? tillotson,
3. duplicity; deceit ; double dealing.
piety is opposed to hypocrisy and infincerity, and all false-
nes; or foulness of intentions, especially to personated devotion.
hammond's fundamentals.
4. treachery; perfidy; traitorousness.
king richard might create a perfeot guess,
that great northumberland, then false to him,
would of that seed grow to a greaterfalsenes. shak. h. iv.
the prince is in no danger of being betrayed by the false-
ness, or cheated by the avarice of such a servant. rogers,
fa is r. n. s. [from false..] a deceiver; an hypocrite. now
obsolete.
such end had the kid ; for he would weaned be
of craft coloured with fimplicity; -
and such end, pardie, does all them remain,
that of such falsers friendship been fain. spenser's paso.
falsifi’able, adv. [from falsify..] liable to be counterfeited
or corrupted.
fai's fication. n.s.. [falsification, french, from falsify.]
1. the aet of counterfeiting any thing so as to make it appear
what it is not.
concerning the word of god, whether it be by miscon-
struction of the sense, or by falsification of the words, wittingly
to endeavour that any thing may seem divine which is not,
is very plainly to abuse, and even to falsify divine evidence,
which injury, offered but unto men, is most worthily counted
heinous. hooker,
to counterfeit the dead image of a king in his coin is an
high offence; but to counterfeit the living image of a king in
his person, exceedeth all falsifications; except it should be that
of a mahomet, that counterfeits divine honour. bacon.
2. confutation.
the poet invents this fiction to prevent posterity from
searching after this isle, and to preserve his story from detec-
tion of falsification. broome.
fa'lsifier, n, s, [from falsify.]
8 u i one
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 784</div><p class="text">f a l.
f a m
3. one that counterfeits; one that makes *y thing to seem
what it is not. -
it happens in theorie
periments, what happens to fa
money will endure some one p^*
f them all proofs.
f 2.% o .# that contrives falsehoods.
boosters are naturally falsifiers, and the people, of al others,
that put their shams the worst together. l’estrange.
q, fossry. v. a. [falsifier, french.
1. to counterfeit ; to forge; to produce something for that
which in reality it is not.
we cannot excuse that church, which through corrupt
translations of scripture, delivereth, instead of divine speeches,
any thing repugnant unto that which god speaketh ; or,
thsough falsified additions, proposeth that to the people of
god as scripture which is in truth no scripture. hooker.
the irish bards use to forge and falsify every thing as they
list, to please or displease any man. spenser on ireland.
falsifying the balance by deceit. amos.
2. to confute; to prove false. -
our saviour's prophecy stands good in the destruction of
the temple, and the dissolution of the jewish deconomy. when
jews and pagans united all their endeavours, under julian the
apostate, to baffle and falsify the prediction. addison.
3. to violate ; to break by falsehood.
it shall be thy work, thy shameful work, which is in thy
power to shun, to make him live to see thy faith falsified. and
his bed defiled. sidney.
he suddenly falsified his faith, and villainously slew selymes
the king, as he was bathing himself, mistrusting nothing less
than the falsehood of the pyrate. knolles's history.
this superadds treachery to all the other pestilent ingre-
dients of the crime; 'tis the falsifying the most important trust.
decay of piety.
s built on too obvious or too few ex-
lsifiers of coin; for counterfeit
f, others another, but none
boyle.
4. to pierce; to run through.
his crest is rash'd away, his ample shield
is falsify'd, and round with jay'lins fill’d. dryden’s afn.
of this word. mr. dryden writes thus: my friends quar-
relled at the word falsified, as an innovation in our language.
the fact is confessed; for i remember not to have read it in
any english author; though perhaps it may be found in spen-
ser's fairy queen. but suppose it be not there: why am i
forbidden to borrow from the italian, a polished language, the
word which is wanting in my native tongue : horace has
given us a rule for coining words, so gracco fonte cadant, espe-
cially when other words are joined with them which explain
the sense. i used the word falsify, in this place, to mean that
the shield of turnus was not of proof against the spears and
javelins of the trojans, which had pierced it through and
through in many places. the words which accompany this
new one, makes my meaning plain:
masi l'ushergo d'ambi era perfetto,
che mai poter falsarlo in nesum canto. ariosto, cant. xxvi.
falsar cannot otherwise be turned than by falsified: for his
fhield was falsed, is not english. i might indeed have con-
tented myself with saying his shield was pierced, and bored,
and stuck with javelins. dryden.
dryden, with all this effort, was not able to naturalise the
new signification, which i have never seen copied, except
once by some obscure nameless writer, and which indeed de-
serves not to be received.
to fa lsify. v. n. to tell lies; to violate truth.
this point have we gained, that it is absolutely and uni-
versally unlawful to lie and falssy. south.
fa is ity. m. s. [falsitas, latin.]
1. falsehood ; contrariety to truth.
neither are they able to break through those errours,
wherein they are so determinately settled, that they pay unto
falsity the whole sum of whatsoever love is owing unto god's
truth. - hooker.
can you on him such falsities obtrude:
and as a mortal the most wise delude: sandys.
probability does not make any alteration, either in the truth
or falsity of things; but only imports a different degree of their
clearness or appearance to the understanding. south.
2. a lye an errour; a false assertion or position.
that danubius ariseth from the pyrenean hills, that the
earth is higher towards the north, are opinions truly charged
on aristotle by the restorer of epicurus, and all easily con-
futable folities. glanville's scepsis.
to fat.t.e.r. v. n. [faltar, to be wanting, spanish; vault-
tur, a stammerer, islandick, which is probabl -
the same radical.] &gt; probably a word from
1. to o in the utterance of words.
ith faltering tongue, and trembli y -
tell ..s.o. 5 * &gt;&gt; ling ev'ry '. queen
the pale assistants on each other star'd, y -
with gaping mouths for issuing words prepar’d
the still-born sounds upon the palate hung,
and dy'd imperfect on the faloring tongue. dryden.
he changes, gods' and falters at -
his fears, his words, his ... ..o.o. -
2. to fail in any act of the body. §uilty. smij,
this earth shall have a feeling; a
prove armed soldiers, ere her o stones
shall falter under foul rebellious ar shak -
he #. his legs falter. ins. % riords.
3. to fail in any act of the understanding. johan's son.
how far ideots are concerned in the want
any or all faculties, an exact observation of th
of faltering would discover.
to fa’lter. v. a. to sift; to cleanse.
be merely rustick or provincial.
barley for malt must be bold, dr
from o, seeds and oats.” y; "o:"...so
fa’lter ingly. adv. [from falter.] with his usandy.
difficulty; with feebleness. 10n; with
to fa‘mble. v. a. [famler, danish. -
speech. this ...'sfind only in oil."o hesitate in the
fame. m. s. [fama, latin; spoo, dorick.]
1. celebrity; renown.
... be builded for the lord m
magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout -
the desire {; fame j i. *:::::::::::::
less. ** - c-
what is this fame, for which we o: *
the owner's wife, which other men enjoy: p "p
2. report; rumour. **
fo have heard the fame of him, and all that he dili,
i shall shew what are true fames. jos. i:
f o i.o [from fame.] renowned; celebrated; mid
he is fam'd for mildness, peace and prayer. , h. w.
he o: to seek the clarian o, yer. shak, h. wi.
avoiding delphos, his more fam'd abode,
since phlegian robbers made unsafe the road. dog
aristides was an athenian philosopher, famed for his o:
ing and wisdom; but converted to christianity. aijin
fame less. adj. [from fame.] having no fame; without o
nown. not in use.
then let me, fameles, love the fields and woods,
the fruitful water'd vales and running floods. may's virgil
familiar. adj. [familiaris, latin.]
1. domestick; relating to a family.
they range familiar to the dome. pot.
2. affable; not formal; easy in conversation.
be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar. shał, haml.
be not too familiar with poins; for he misuses thy favours
so much, that he swears thou art to marry his sister nell. shaft,
3. unceremonious; free, as among persons long acquainted.
kalandar streight thought he faw his niece parthenia, and
was about in such familiar sort to have spoken unto her; but
she, in grave and honourable manner, gave him to understand
that he was mistaken. - sidney.
4. well known ; brought into knowledge by frequent practice
or custom.
i see not how the scripture could be possibly made familiar
unto all, unless far more should be read in the people's hear-
ing than by a sermon can be opened. haskor,
let us chuse such noble counsel,
that war, or peace, or both at once, may be
as things acquainted and familiar to us. shaft. henry iv.
our sweet
recess, and only consolation left
familiar to our eyes | milton's paradise loft.
one idea which is familiar to the mind, connected with
others which are new and strange, will bring those new ideo
into easy remembrance. iwatts on the mind.
5. well acquainted with; accustomed; habituated by ot".
or chang'd at length, and to the place conform'd
in temper and in nature, will receive -- "
familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain. milo.
the senses at first let in particular ideas; and the mind, by
degrees, growing familiar with some of them, they " lodg:
in the memory, and names got to them. - *:
he was amazed how so impotent and growting?" ins:
as i, could entertain such inhuman ideas, and in so
manner, as to appear wholly unmoved at all the £o
blood and desolation. - gulliver's troi.
patient permit the sadly-pleasing strain; *
familiar now with grief, '. tears refrain, po 30's,
6. common; frequent. ha:
to a wrong hopothesis, may be reduced the erroo o:
may be occasioned by a true hypothesis, but no rightly o
stood : there is nothing more familiar than this. fian-
7. easy; unconstrained.
or
c
or weaknes; of
eir several ways
- lok.
this word o o
ust be exceedin
he unreins - alison,
his muse, and sports in loose familiar strain.” y
8. too nearly acquainted. ... .......s. and bo
a poor man found a priest familiar with ho wife, ".
-
f,
f;
!.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 785</div><p class="text">f a m
f a n -
!.
o,
so cause he spake it abroad, and could not prove it, the priest
o sued him for defamation. camden.
o fami'liar. m. s.
1. an intimate; one long acquainted. .
o the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar. , shakesh.
o 's when he finds himself avoided and neglected by ho
o hars, this affects him. ogers.
o, 2. a demon supposed to attend at call.
so love is a familiar; there is no evil angel but love.
- shakespeare.
% l, familia rity.. n.s.. [familiarite, french; from familiar.]
o 1. easiness of conversation; omisfion of ceremony; affability.
o, 2. acquaintance ; habitude.
!. we contract at last such an intimacy and familiarity with
o them, as makes it difficult and irksome for us to call off our
minds. s atterbury.
|{ 3. easy intercourse. -
o they say any mortals may enjoy the most intimate familia-
o rities with these gentle spirits. pope.
- to familiarize. v. a. [familiariser, french.]
o, 1. to make familiar; to make easy by habitude ; to make
o connnnon.
so 2. to bring down from a state of distant superiority.
l the genius smiled upon me with a look of compassion and
affability that familiarized him to my imagination, and at once
o dispelled all fear and apprehensions. addison's spediator.
fami'll arly, adv. [from familiar.]
to 1. unceremoniously; with freedom like that of long acquaint-
.* ance.
because that i familiarly sometimes.
*s do use you for my fool, and chat with you,
your sawciness will jest upon my love. shak, com. of err.
he talks as familiarly of john of gaunt as if he had been
sworn brother to him; and i’ll be sworn he never saw him but
once in the tiltyard, and then he broke his head. , shakesp.
the governour came to us, and, after salutations, said fami-
iiarly, that he was come to visit us, and called for a chair and
sat him down. bacon's new atlantis.
2. commonly; frequently; with the unconcernedness or easi-
ness of long custom.
lesser mists and fogs than those which covered greece with
fo long darkness, do familiarly present our senses with as great
alterations in the sun and moon. raleigh's history.
3. eas. without solemnity; without formality.
orace still charms with graceful negligence,
and without method talks us into sense ;
will, like a friend, familiarly convey
the truest notions in the easiest way. pope.
fami llz. [en famille, french..] in a family way; domesti-
cally.
*dauled mortals, whom the great
chuse for companions tete a tete ;
who at their dinners, en famille,
get leave to fit whene'er you will.
fa'mily. n.s.. [familia, latin; famille, french:1
1. those who live in the same house; household.
the night made little impression on myself; but i cannot
:- answer for my whole family; for my wife prevailed on me to
take somewhat. swift.
2. those that descend from one common progenitor; a race; a
tribe ; a generation. . -
es of gershon was the family of the libnites.
3. a course of descent; a genealogy.
if thy ancient but ignoble blood
has crept through scoundrels ever since the flood,
go and complain thy family is young,
nor own thy fathers have been fools son .
4. a class ; a tribe; a species.
:::::
swift.
numb.
oily and watry.
o
food; dearth ; distress for want of victuals.
our castle's strength
will laugh a fiege to scorn: here let them lie,
*till famine and the ague eat them up.
that come by sea, but principally by the goodness of god.
this city never felt a siege before,
but from the lake receiv'd its daily store ;
which now shut up, and millions crowded here,
famine will soon in multitudes appear.
7. fa'mish. v. a. [from fames, latin; famis, old french.]
1. to kill with hunger; to starve; to destroy by want of food.
shakespeare.
what, did he marry me to famish me?
the pains of famish’d tantalus he'll feel,
and sisyphus, that labours up the hill
the rowjing rock in vain; and curst ixion's wheel. dryd.
2. to kill by deprivation or denial of any thing necessary to life.
milton uses it with of
fa(mous. adj. [fameux, french ; famosus, latin.]
pope.
there be two great families of things, sulphureous and mer-
curial, inflammable and not inflammable, mature and crude,
- bacon's natural history.
fa’mine. m. / [famine, french ; fames, latin.] scarcity of
shakesp. macbeth.
famizes have not been of late observed to be rare, partly
because of the industry of mankind, partly by those supplies
hale.
dryd. indian emp.
thin air
above the clouds will pine his entrails gross, -
and famish him of breath if not of bread. milton.
to fa: mish. v. n. to die of hunger; to suffer extreme hunger.
you are all resolved rather to die than to famish. shakes). t
fa'mishment. m. s. [from famish.] the pain of hunger;
want of food. l
apicius, thou did'st on thy gut bestow
full ninety millions; yet, when this was spent,
ten millions still remain'd to thee; which thou,
fearing to suffer thirst and famishment,
in poison'd potion drank'st. hakewill on providence.
famo'sity. n.s. [from famous.] renown ; celebrity. dic.
1. renowned ; celebrated ; much talked of and praised.
henry the fifth, too famous to live long;
england ne'er lost a king of so much worth. shak. hen. vi.
there rose up before moses two hundred and fifty princes
of the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown.
- numb. xvi. 2.
she became famous among women; for they had executed
judgment upon her. ezek. xxiii. 10. ,
pyreius was only famous for counterfeiting all base things ; |
as earthen pitchers, a scullery, rogues together by the ears, -
and swine tumbling in the mire; whereupon he was surnamed - |
rupographus. . peacham on drawing. |
i shall be nam'd among the famous/? . t
of women, sung at solemn festivals. milton's agonisłes. -
many, besides myself, have heard our famous waller own,
that he derived the harmony of his numbers from the godfrey
of bulloign, turned into english by fairfax. dryden.
2. it has sometimes a middle signification, and imports fame
whether for good or ill.
, menecrates and menas, famous pyrates,
make the sea serve them. shakesp. anthony and cleopatra.
fa'mously. adv. [from famous.] with great renown; with
great celebration.
then this land was famously enriched
with politick grave counsel; then the king
had virtuous uncles to protect his grace. shakes). rich. iii.
they looked on the particulars as things famously spoken of.
and believed, and worthy to be recorded and read. grew's cos.
fa mous ness. n.s.. [from famous.] celebrity; great fame.
fan. # [vannus, latin.]
1. an instrument used by ladies to move the air and cool them-
selves.
with scarfs, and fans, and double change of brav'ry,
with amber bracelets, beads, with all this knav'ry.
shakespeare,
flavia, the least and slightest toy
can with resistless art employ:
in other hands the fan would prove
an engine of small force in love;
but she, with such an air and mien,
not to be told or safely seen,
direets its wanton motions so,
that it wounds more than cupid's bow;
* gives coolness to the matchless dame, i
to every other breast a flame. atterbury.
the modest fan was lifted up no more,
and virgins smil'd at what they blush'd before. pope.
2. anything spread out like a woman's fan into a triangle with
a broad base. * * * * *
as a peacock and crane were in company, the peacock
spread his tail, and challenged the other to shew him such a
fan of feathers. . . . . . l’e/orange.
3. the instrument by which the chaff is blown away when corn
is winnowed. . [wan, french.]
flaile, strawfork, and rake, with a fan that is strong. tuss.
asses shall eat clean provender, winnowed with the shovel
and with the fan. . . . is, xxx. 24.
in the wind and tempest of fortune's frown,
distinetion, with a broad and powerful fan,
puffing at all, winnows the light away. shak, troil, and cr.
for the cleansing of corn is commonly used either a wicker-
fan, or a fan with sails. , mortimer's husbandry.
4. any thing by which the air is moved ; wings.
the pris’ner, with a spring from prison broke;
then stretch'd his feather'd fans with all his might,
and to the neighb'ring maple wing'd his flight.
5. an instrument to raise the fire.
nature worketh in us all a love to our own counsels: the
dryd.
contradiction of others is a fan to inflame that love. hooker.
to fan. v. a. -
1. to cool or recreate with a fan.
she was fanned into slumbers by her slaves. spectator.
2. to ventilate; to affect by air put in motion.
let every feeble humour shake your hearts;
your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
fan you into despair. shakespeare's coriolanus.
the norweyan banners flout the sky,
and fan our people cold. shakespeare's *f;
he<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

4-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 786</div><p class="text">f a n
f a n
the air
floats as they pass, fann'd with unnumber'd plumes:
from branch to branch the smaller birds with song
solac'd the woods, and spread their painted wings,
*till ev'n. milton's paradise loft.
the fanning wind upon her bosom blows;
to meet the fanning wind the bosom rose:
the fanning wind and purling streams continue her repose.
. dryden's cymon and iphigenia.
calm as the breath which fans our eastern groves,
and bright, as when thy eyes first lighted up our loves. dryd.
and now his shorter breath, with sultry air,
pants on her neck, and fans her parting hair. pope.
3. to separate, as by winnowing.
i have collected some few, therein fanning the old, not
omitting any. bacon's apophthegms.
not so the wicked; but as chaff, which, fann'd,
the wind drives, so the wicked shall not stand -
in judgment. "i milton.
fana ticism. m. s. [from fanatick.] enthusiasm; religious
frenzy.
a aurch whose doctrines are derived from the clear foun-
tains of the scriptures, whose polity and discipline are formed
upon the most uncorrupted models of antiquity, which has
stood unshaken by the most furious assaults of popery on the
one hand, and fanaticism on the other; has triumphed over
all the arguments of its enemies, and has nothing now to con-
tend with but their slanders and calumnies. rogers.
fanatick. adj. [fanaticus, latin; fanatioue, fr.] en-
thusiastick; struck with a superstitious frenzy.
osiris, isis, orus, and their train,
with monst’rous shapes and forceries abus’d
famatick egypt, and her priests, to seek
their wand'ring gods disguis'd in brutish forms. milton.
fana tick. m. s. [from the adjective..] an enthusiast; a man
mad with wild notions of religion.
the double armature of st. peter is a more destructive en-
gine than the tumultuary weapon snatcht up by a fanatick.
decay of piety.
fa'nciful. adj. [fancy and full.]
1. imaginative ; rather guided by imagination than reason: of
persons.
some fanciful men have expected nothing but confusion and
ruin from those very means, whereby both that and this is
most effectually prevented. woodward's natural history.
2. dire&amp;ted by the imagination, not the reason; full of wild
images: of things.
what treasures did he bury in his sumptuous buildings
and how foolish and fanciful were they hayward.
it would show as much singularity to deny this, as it does a
fanciful facility to affirm it. garth's preface to ovid.
fa'ncifully. adv. [from fanciful..] according to the wild-
ness of imagination.
fa'ncifulness. n.s.. [from fanciful..] addiction to the plea-
sures of imagination ; habit of following fancy rather than
reason.
albertus magnus, with somewhat too much curiosity, was
somewhat transported with too much fancifulness towards the
influences of the heavenly motions, and astrological calcula-
tions. hale's origin of mankind.
fatncy. m. s. [contracted from phantasy, phantasia, latin;
£zyrzasz.] -
1. imagination; the power by which the mind forms to itself
images and representations of things, persons, or scenes of
being.
g shakespeare, fancy's sweetest child!
warble his native wood-notes wild. milton.
- in the soul
are many lesser faculties, that serve
reason as chief: among these fancy next
her office holds; of all external things,
which the five watchful senses represent,
she forms imaginations, airy shapes,
which reason joining, or disjoining, frames
all what we affirm, or what deny, and call
our knowledge, or opinion. milton's paradis, loft.
though no evidence affects the fancy so strongly as that of
sense, yet there is other evidence, which gives as full satis-
faction and as clear a conviction to our reason. atterbury.
love is by fancy led about, -
from hope to fear, from joy to doubt:
whom we now a goddess call,
divinely grac'd in every feature,
strait's a deform’d, a perjur’d creature;
love and hate are fancy all. granville.
2. an opinion bred rather by the imagination than the reason.
mens private fancies must give place to the higher judgment
of that church which is in authority over them. hooker.
a person of a full and ample fortune, who was not disturbed
by any fancies in religion. - clarendon.
i have always had a fancy, that learning might be made a
play and recreation to children. locłe.
3. taste; idea; conception of things.
the little chapel called the salutation is very neat, and built
with a pretty fancy. addison on itaj,
4. image; conception ; thought.
how now, my lord, why do you keep alone;
of sorriest fancies your companions making,
using those thoughts which should indeed have died
with them they think on f shakespeare's macbeth.
5. inclination; liking; fondness.
his fancy lay extremely to travelling. l’estrange.
or you, fair hermia, look you arm yourself,
to fit your fancies to your father's will;
or else the law of athens yields you up
to death, or to a vow of single life. shakotare.
a resemblance in humour or opinion, a fancy for the same
business or diversion, is a ground of affection. collier.
6. in shakespeare it signifies love. -
tell me where is fancy bred,
or in the heart, or in the head
how begot, how nourished :
it is engender'd in the eyes,
with gazing fed, and fancy dies
in the cradle where it lies.
7. caprice; humour; whim.
true worth shall gain me, that it may be said
desert, not fancy, once a woman led. dryden's ind. emp.
the sultan of egypt kept a good correspondence with the
jacobites towards the head of the nile, for fear they should
take a fancy to turn the course of that river. arbuthnot.
one that was just entring upon a long journey, took up a
fancy of putting a trick upon mercury. l’estrange.
8. faise notion. -
the altering of the scent, colour, or taste of fruit, by in-
fusing, mixing, or cutting into the bark or root of the tree,
herb, or flower, any coloured, aromatical, or medicinal sub-
stance, are but fancies: the cause is, for that those things have
passed their period, and nourish not. bacon's natural hijiory.
9. something that pleases or entertains without real use or value.
london-pride is a pretty fancy for borders. martimer.
to fa'ncy. v. n. [from the noun..] to imagine; to believe
without being able to prove. -
all are not always bound to hate and punish the true ene-
mies of religion, much less any whom they may fancy to be
so: all are always obliged to love its true friends, and to pray
for its very enemies. spratt's sermons.
if our search has reached no farther than simile and meta-
phor, we rather fancy than know, and are not yet penetrated
into the inside and reality of the thing; but content ourselves
with what our imaginations furnish us with. locłe.
to fa'ncy. v. a.
1. to portray in the mind; to image to himself; to imagine.
but he whose noble genius is allow'd,
who with stretch'd pinions soars above the crowd;
who mighty thought can clothe with manly dress,
he whom i fancy, but can ne'er express. dryden's juv.
2. to like; to be pleased with.
ninus both admiring her judgment and valour, together
with her person and external beauty, fancied her so strongly,
as, neglecting all princely respects, he took her from her
shakesp. merchant of penia.
husband. raleigh's history.
it is a little hard that the queen cannot demolish this town
in whatever manner she pleaseth to fancy. swift.
fa'ncy monger. m. s. [from fancy..] one who deals in tricks
of imagination.
there is a man haunts the forest, that abuses our young
plants with carving rosalind on their barks; hangs odes upon
hawthorns, and elegies on brambles; all, forsooth, deifying
the name of rosalind. if i could meet that fancymonger, i
would give him some good counsel; for he seems to have the
quotidian of love upon him. shakesp. as you like it.
fa'ncysick, adj. [fancy and sick.] one whose imagination
is unsound; one whose distemper is in his own mind. -
'tis not necessity, but opinion, that makes men miserable;
and when we come to be fancysick, there's no cure. l’estrange.
fand for found. it is retained in scotland.
this when as true by tryal he out fand, -
he bade to open wide his brazen gate. spensor.
fan.e. n.s.. [fane, french; fanum, latin.] a temple; a place
consecrated to religion. a poetical word.
norfane, nor capitol,
the prayers of priests, nor times of sacrifice,
embarments all of fury, shall lift up
their rotten privilegel shakespeare's coriolanus.
old calibe, who kept the sacred sane
of juno, now she seem’d. dryden’s 45*.
yet some #s. repair’d, and humble rites
perform'd to thor and woden, fabled gods,
who with their vot’ries in one ruin shar'd. philips.
a sacred fane in egypt's fruitful lands,
hewn from the theban mountain's rocky womb. tickell.
the fields are ravish'd from th’ industrious swains,
from men their cities, and from gods their fanes. pope.
2. fanfaron-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 787</div><p class="text">f a n
's
o
---
fa nfaron. n.£ [french, from the spanish. originally in
arabick it signifies one who promises what he cannot perform.
menage.]
1. a bully; a heotor.
virgil makes aeneas a bold avower of his own virtues,
which, in the civility of our poets, is the character of a fan-
farm or hector. dryden on dramatick poesy.
2. a blusterer; a boaster of more than he can perform.
there are fanfarons in the trials of wit too, as well as in
feats of arms; and none so forward to engage in argument or
discourse as those that are least able to go through with it. l'eff.
fanfaro natpe, n. s. [from fanfaron, french..] a bluster;
a tumour of fictitious dignity.
the bishop copied this proceeding from the fanfaronade of
monsieur bouffleurs. swift.
to fang. v. a. spangan, saxon; vangen, dutch..] to seize;
to gripe; to clutch. to vang is yet used in devonshire.
destruction fang mankind shakespeare's timon.
fang. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the long tusks of a boar or other animal by which the prey
is seized and held; anything like 'em.
here feel we but the penalty of adam,
the season's difference; as the icy fang
and churlish chiding of the winter’s wind;
which, when it bites and blows upon my body,
ev’n till i shrink with cold, i smile and say
this is no flattery. shakespeare's as you like it.
some creatures have overlong or outgrowing teeth, which
we call fangs or tusks; as boars, pikes, salmons, and dogs,
though less. bacon's natural history.
prepar'd to fly,
the fatal fang drove deep within his thigh,
and cut the nerves : the nerves no more sustain
the bulk; the bulk, unprop'd, falls headlong on the plain.
dryden's ovid.
then charge, provoke the lion to the rage
of fangs and claws, and, stooping from your horse,
rivet the panting savage to the ground. addison's cato.
2. the nails; the talons. -
3. any shoot or other thing by which hold is taken.
the protuberant fangs of the yuca are to be treated like
the tuberoses. evelyn's kalendar.
fa'nged. adj. . [from fang.j. furnished with fangs or long
teeth; furnished with any instruments of destruction, which
can be exercised in imitation of fangs.
my two schoolfellows,
whom i will to: as i will adders fang'd,
they bear the mandate. shakespeare's hamlet.
not scythians, nor fierce dacians, onward rush
with half the speed, nor half so swift retreat :
in chariots, fang'd with scythes, they scour the field,
drive through our wedg’d battalions with a whirl,
and strew a dreadful harvest on the plain. phillips's briton.
fatngle. m. s. [from penzan, saxon, to attempt. skinner.]
silly attempt; trifling scheme. it is never used, or rarely,
but in contempt with the epithet new; as, new fangles, new
fangleness.
fa'ngled. adj. . [from fangle.] this word seems to fignify
gawdy; ridiculously shewy; vainly decorated: new fangled, is
therefore new fashioned; dressed out in new decorations.
quick wits be in desire new fangled, and in purpose uncon-
{tant. ascham.
a book 1 oh, rare one !
be not, as in this fangled world, a garment
nobler than that it covers. shakespeare's cymbeline.
fa'ng less. adj. [from fang.] toothless; without teeth.
the king hath wasted all his rods
on late offenders, that he now doth lack
the very instruments of chastisement;
so that his pow'r, like to a fangles; lion,
may offer, but not hold. shakespeare's henry iv.
fa'ngor. m. s. a quantity of wares: as raw filk, &amp;c.
containing from one or two hundred weight three *;
ic7.
fannel. m. s. [fanon, french..] a sort of ornament like a
scarf, worn about the left arm of a mass-priest when he of
ficiates. dicf.
fa'nner. m. s. [from fan.] one that plays a fan.
i will send unto babylon fanners that shall fan her. jerem.
fa'n'tasie d. adj. [from fantasy..] filled with fancies or wild
imaginations.
as i travell’d hither through the land,
i found the people strangely fantasied. , shakesp. k. john.
fanta's m. m. s. [see phantasm.] a thing not real, but
appearing to the imagination.
£o. o: { adj. [fantastique, french; from fantasy.]
1. irrational ; bred only in the imagination.
the delight that a man takes from another's fin, can be
nothing else but a fantastical, preternatural complacency,
arising from that which he really has no feeling of south.
2. subsisting only in the fancy; imaginary.
vol. i.
present feats
are less than horrible imaginings:
my thought, whose nurther yet is but fantastical,
shakes so my single state of man, that function
is smother'd in surmise; and nothing is,
but what is not. shakespeare's macbeth,
men are so possessed with their own fancies, that they take
them for oracles; and are arrived to some extraordinary reve-
lations of truth, when indeed they do but dream dreams, and
amuse themselves with the fantasick ideas of a busy imagina-
tion. decay of piety,
3. unreal; apparent only ; having the nature of phantoms
which only assume visible forms occasionally.
are ye fantastical, or that indeed
which outwardly ye shew
4. uncertain; unsteady; irregular.
nor happiness can i, nor misery feel,
from any turn of her fantastick wheel. prior.
5. whimsical ; fanciful; capricious; humorous; indulgent of
one's own imagination.
they put such words in the mouths of one of these fantas.
tical mind-infected people, that children and musicians call
lowers. sidney.
i'll knit it up in silken strings,
with twenty odd conceited true love knots:
to be fantastick, may become a youth
of greater time than i. shakoff. two gent, of verona.
duumvir is provided with an imperious, expensive and fan-
tastick mistress; to whom he retires from the conversation of
a discreet and affectionate wife. tatler.
we are apt to think your medallists a little fantasical in the
different prices they set upon their coins, without any regard
to the metal of which they are composed. addison.
fan'tastically, adv. [from fantastical.]
1. by the power of imagination.
2. capriciously; humourously; unsteadily.
england is so idly king’d,
her sceptre so fantastically borne,
by a vain, giddy, shallow, humourous youth,
that fear attends her not. shakespeare's henry v.
3. whimsically ; in compliance with mere imagination.
one cannot so much as fantastically chuse, even or odd, he
f thinks not why. grew's cosmol.
antasticalness, -
fanta'stick ness. }*s [from fantastical.]
1. humourousness; mere compliance with fancy.
2. whimsicalness; unreasonableness.
i dare not assume to myself to have put him out of conceit
with it, by having convinced him of the fantasticalnes; of it.
tillotson, preface.
. caprice; unsteadiness. tson, of
a ntasy. m. s. [fantasie, fr. phantasia, latin; pavraria..]
1. fancy ; imagination; the power of imagining. see fancy.
how now, horatio 2 you tremble and look pale !
is not this something more than fantasy 2 shakesp. hamlet.
i talk of dreams,
which are the children of an idle brain,
begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
which is as thin of substance as the air,
and more unconstant than the wind. shak. rom, and juliet.
he is superstitious grown of late,
quite from the main opinion he held once
offantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies ... shał, jul, cesar.
go you, and where you find a maid,
that ere she sleep hath thrice her prayers said,
rein up the organs of her fantasy,
sleep she as sound as careless infancy.
these spirits of sense, infantasy's high court,
judge of the forms of objects, ill or well;
and so they send a good or ill report
down to the heart, where all affections dwell, davies.
by the power of fantasy we see colours in a dream, or a
mad man sees things before him which are not there. newton.
2. idea; image of the mind.
and with the sug'ry sweet thereof allure,
chaste ladies ears to fantasies impure.
3. humour; inclination.
i would wish that both you and others would cease from
drawing the scriptures to your fantasies and affections. whitg.
fa(ntom. n. s. [see phantom.] something not real, but
appearing to the imagination.
fap. adj. fuddled; drunk. it seems to have been a cant
word in the time of shakespeare.
the gentleman had drunk himself out of his five senses; and
being fap, fir, was, as they say, cashiered. shakespeare.
far. adv. [peon, saxon; fatt, erse.]
1. to great extent in length.
pay sacred rev'rence to apollo's song,
lest wrathful the far-shooting god emit
his fatal arrows. prior,
2. to a great extent every way. this is less proper.
vast and great
8 x is
shakespeare's macbeth.
shakespeare.
hubberd’s tale.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 788</div><p class="text">f. a. r.
f a r
is what i love: the far extended ocean
to a little riv'let i prefer.
with costly cates rome stain'd her frugal board;
then with ill-gotten gold she bought a lord:
corruption, discord, luxury combin'd, -
down sunk the far fam'd mistress of mankind. arbuthnot.
from the same lineage stern aeastes came,
the far fam'd brother of th' enchantress dame.
3. to a great distance progressively.
be factious for redress of all these griefs,
and i will set this foot of mine as far
as who goes farthest. shakespeare's julius caesar.
is it far you ride :
—as %. my lord, as will fill up the time
*twixt this and supper. . shakespeare's macbeth.
far from that hated face the trojans fly;
all but the fool who sought his destiny.
4. remotely; at a great distance. - - - - - -
he meant to travel into far countries, until his friends af-
fedtion either ceased or prevailed. sidney.
in a kingdom rightly ordered, after a law is once published,
it presently takes effect far and wide; all states framing them-
selves thereunto. hooker.
and after that long strayed here and there,
through every field and forest far and near. hubb. tale.
far be it from me to justify the cruelties used towards them,
which had their reward soon after. bacon's holy war.
he sent light horsemen into mesopotamia with a guide, be-
cause the country was unto him best known; following not
prior.
pope.
dryden's aen.
far after himself with all his army. knolles.
and yet the lights which in my tower do shine,
mine eyes, which view all objects nigh and far,
look not into this little world of mine. davies.
god hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
and not molest us; unless we ourselves
seek them with wand'ring thoughts, and notions vain. milt.
i have been hunting up and down, far and near, since your
unhappy indisposition, to find out a remedy. l’estrange.
the nations far and near contend in choice,
and send the flow'r of war by publick voice. dryden.
the painted lizard and the birds of prey,
foes of the frugal kind, be far away.
but from the reading of my book and me,
be far, ye foes of virtuous poetry |
who fortune's fault upon the poor can throw,
point at the tatter'd coat and ragged shoe. dryden's pers.
far off you view'd them with a longing eye
upon the topmost branch. dryden.
these words are so far from establishing any dominion,
dryden's virgil.
that we find the quite contrary. locke.
'till on the po his blasted corps was hurl’d,
far from his country, in the western world. addis. ovid.
5. to a distance.
as far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed
our transgressions from him. ps. ciii. 12.
neither did those that were sent, and travelled far off, un-
dertake so difficult enterprizes without a conductor. raleigh.
but all in vain which when he saw, he ceas'd
contending, and remov’d his tents far off. milton.
i had always a curiosity to look back into the sources of
things, and view in my mind, so far as i was able, the be-
ginning and progress of a rising world. burnet's theory.
a lion's hide around his loins he wore;
the well-poiz'd javelin to the field he bore,
inur'd to blood; the far destroying dart,
and the best weapon, an undaunted heart. addison's ovid.
6. in a great part. .
when they were by jebus the day was far spent. judg.
7. in a great proportion; by many degrees. it is commonly
used with some word noting the comparative, but dryden has
used it absolutely.
who can find a virtuous woman for her price is far above
rubies. - prov. xxxi. io.
such a communication passeth far better through the water
than air. bacon's natural history.
those countries have far greater rivers, and far higher
mountains to pour down waters, than any part of the old
world. bacon's new atlantis.
- the face of war,
in ancient times, doth differ far - -
from what our fiery battles are. waller.
of negatives we have far the least certainty, and they are
usually hardest, and many times impossible to be proved. tillot.
latin is a more succinet language than the italian, spanish,
french, or even than the english, which, by reason of its
monosyllables, is far the most compendious of them, dryden.
the field is spacious i design to sow,
with oxen far unfit to draw the plough. dryden.
besides, he's lovely far above the rest,
with you immortal, and with beauty blest. pope.
ah i hope not yet to breathe thy native air;
far other journey first demands thy care. pope's odyssey.
8. to a great height; magnificently. this is perhaps only in
shakespeare.
sp i do not think
so fair an outward, and such stuff within,
endows a man but him.
you speak him far.
i don’t extend him, sir. shakespeare's cymbeline,
. to a certain point; to a certain degree.
the substance of the service of god, so far forth as it hath
in it anything more than the law of reason doth teach, may
not be invented of men, as it is amongst the heathen ; but
must be received from god himself. havier.
answer them
how far forth you do like their articles. shakesp. h. iv.
not to resolve, is to resolve; and many times it breeds as
many necessities, and engageth as far in some other sort, as
to resolve. bacon.
of this i need not many words to declare how far it is
from being so much as any part of repentance. ammond.
my discourse is so far from being equivalent to the position
he mentions, that it is a perfect contradiction to it. tillotson.
the custom of these tongues sometimes so far influences the
expressions, that in these epistles one may observe the force of
the hebrew conjugations. locke on st. paul’s epsilo.
lo. far off. at a great distance.
for though i fled him angry, yet recall’d
to life prolong'd, and promis'd race, i now
gladly behold, though but his utmost skirts
of glory, and far off his steps adore. milton,
ii. far off. to a great distance.
cherubic watch, and of a sword the flame
wide-waving, all approach far off to fright,
and guard all passage to the tree of life. milton.
12. off is joined with far, when far, noting distance, is not foll
lowed by a preposition: as, iset the boat far off, iset the boat
far from me. -
13. far is used often in composition: as, farshooting, farseeing.
far-fe"tch, n. s. [far and fetch..] a deep stratagem. aludi-
crous word.
but jesuits have deeper reaches,
in all their politick farfetches;
and from their coptick priest, kircherus,
found out this mystick way to jeer us. . hudibrar.
far-fetched. adj. [far and fetch.]
1. brought from places remote.
of these things others quickly will dispose,
whose pains have earn'd the farfetch'd spoil. milton.
by his command we boldly cross'd the line,
and bravely fought where southern stars arise:
we trac'd the farfetch'd gold unto the mine,
and that which brib'd our fathers made our prize. dryden.
2. studiously sought; elaborately strained; not easily or flatu.
rally introduced.
york, with all his farfetch'd policy. shakesp. henry vi.
for farfetch'd o: s: o jos. ry
and in low prose dull lucifer complain. smith.
under this head we may rank those words, which figni
different ideas, by a sort of an unaccountable farfetched analo-
gy, or distant resemblance, that fancy has introduced between
one thing and another; as when we say, the meat is green
when it is half roasted. watts's logick.
far-piercing. adj. [far and pierce.] striking, or penetrat.
ing a great way.
atlas, her fire, to whose farpiercing eye
the wonders of the deep expanded lie;
th’ eternal columns which on earth he rears,
end in the starry vault, and prop the spheres. pope's odys:
far-shooting. adj. [far and shoot..] shooting to a great
distance.
then loud he call'd aeneas thrice by name;
the loud repeated voice to glad aeneas came;
great jove, he said, and the farshooting god,
f o thy mind to make thy challenge good. dryd. zn.
ar. (7 w.
1. distant; remote.
a man taking a far journey. mark.
but we must beg our bread in climes unknown,
beneath the scorching or the freezing zone;
and some to far oaxis shall be sold,
to try the lybian heat, or scythian cold. dryden's wirgil.
2. it was formerly used not only as an adverb but an adjective,
with %
.. these things seem small and undistinguishable,
like far off mountains turned into clouds. shakespeare.
if we may behold in any creature any one spark of that
eternal fire, or any far off dawning of god's glorious bright-
ness; the same in the beauty, motion, and virtue of this sight
may be perceived. raleigh's history of the iłzrld.
3. from far. in this sense it is used elliptically for a far, or
remote place. -
the lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from
the end of the earth. eut. xxvii. 49.
4. remoter
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 789</div><p class="text">f a r
f a r
s
4. remoter of the two; in horsemanship, the right side of the
horse, which the rider turns from him when he mounts.
no true egyptian ever knew in horses
the far fide from the near. dryden's cleomenes.
5. it is often not easy to distinguish whether it be adjective or
adverb: as, -
the nations far and near center'd in choice. dryden.
far. n.s.. [contracted from farrow.] the offspring of a sow ;
young pigs. - - -
sows, ready to farrow at this time of the year,
are for to be made of and counted full dear;
for now is the loss of the far of the sow
more great than the loss of two calves of the cow. tuffer.
t. farce. v. a. [farcio, latin; farcir, french.]
1. to stuff; to fill with mingled ingredients.
wrestling is a pastime which either the cornishmen de-
rived from corineus, their first pretended founder, or at least
it ministred some stuff to the farcing of that fable. carew.
the first principles of christian religion should not be
farced with school points and private tenets. bp. sanderson.
2. to extend ; to swell out.
'tis not the balm, the sceptre and the ball,
the sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
the entertissu’d robe of gold and pearl,
the farced title running 'fore the king. shakes. henry v.
farce. n. s. [from the verb; or from farcer, french, to
mock.] a dramatick representation written without regu-
larity, and stuffed with wild and ludicrous conceits.
there is yet a lower sort of poetry and painting, which is
out of nature ; for a farce is that in poetry which grotesque
is in a pieture: the persons and actions of a farce are all un-
natural, and the manners false; that is, inconsistent with the
characters of mankind: grotesque painting is the just resem-
blance of this. dryden's dufresnoy.
what should be great, you turn to farce. prior.
they object against it as a farce, because the irregularity of
the plot should answer to the extravagance of the chara&amp;ters,
which they say this piece wants, and therefore is no farce. gay.
fa'rcical, adj. [from farce..] belonging to a farce; appro-
priated to a farce. -
they deny the characters to be farcical, because they are
actually in nature. gay's preface to the what d'ye call it.
fa'rex. n.s. [farcina, italian; fartin, french.] the leprosy
of horses. it is probably curable by antimony.
fa‘rde l. n.s.. [fardello, italian; fardeau, fr.] a bundle; a
little pack. - - - - -
let us to the king: there is that in this fardel will make
him scratch his beard. shakespeare's winter's tale.
who would fardel; bear,
to groan and sweat under a weary life? shakesp. hamlet.
to fare. v. n. [panan, saxon; varen, dutch.]
1. to go; to pass; to travel.
at last, resolving forward still to fare,
until the blust’ring storm is overblown. fairy queen.
his spirits pure were subject to our fight,
like to a man in shew and shape he fared. fairfax.
so on he fares, and to the border comes -
of eden. * milton's paradise lost.
sadly they far'd along the sea-beat shore;
still heav'd their hearts. pope.
. to be in any state good or bad. - -
2 so bids a: well to fare thy nether friend. fairy queen.
a stubborn heart shall fare evil at the last. cclus.
well fare the hand, which to our humble fight
presents that beauty. waller.
so in this throng bright sacharissa far'd,
oppress'd by those who strove to be her guard:
as ships, though never so obsequious, fall
foul in a tempest on their admiral. waller.
so fares the stag among th’ enraged hounds;
repels their force, and wounds returns for wounds. denh.
but as a barque, that, in foul weather,
toss'd by two adverse winds together,
is bruis’d and beaten to and fro,
and knows not which to turn him to;
so far'd the knight between two foes, -
and knew not which of them to oppose. hudibras.
*if you do as i do, you may fare as i fare. l’estrange.
thus fares the queen, and thus her fury blows &gt;
amid'st the crowd. - dryden's zn.
english ministers never fare so well as in a time of war
with a foreign power, which diverts the private feud, and ani-
mosities of the nation. addison's freeholder.
some are comforted that it will be a common calamity,
and they shall fare no worse than their neighbours. , swift.
3. to proceed in any train of consequences good or bad.....
thus it fareth when too much desire of contradiction
causeth our speeches rather to pass by number than to o:
- q6aze)".
**'. ..., it when with truth falsehood contends. milton.
4. to happen to any one well or ill; with it preceding in an
impersonal form-
when the hand finds itself well warmed and covered, let it
refuse the trouble of feeding the mouth, or guarding the head,
'till the body be starved or killed, and then we shall sle how is
will fare with the hand. south.
5. to feed; to eat; to be entertained with food.
the rich man fared sumptuously every day. luke.
feast your ears with the musick awhile, if they will fore so
harshly as on the trumpet’s sound. shakespeare's timon.
men think they have fared hardly, if, in times of extre-
mity, they have descended so low as to eat dogs; but galen
delivereth, that, young, fat, and gelded, they were the food
of many nations. brown's wulgar errours,
fare. n.s.. [from the verb.] -
i. price of passage in a vehicle by land or by water. used only
of that which is paid for the person, not the goods.
he found a ship going to tarshish; so he paid the fare there-
of, and went down into it to go with them unto taishish. jon.
he passage begs with unregarded pray’r,
and wants two farthings to discharge his fare. doyd, juv.
2. food prepared for the table; provisions.
but come, so well refresh'd, now let us play,
as meet is, after such delicious fare. milton,
but when the western winds with vital pow'r
call forth the tender grass and budding flow'r,
then, at the last, produce in open air
both flocks, and send them to their summer's fare. dryden.
this is what nature's want may well suffice;
he that would more is covetous, not wise:
but since among mankind so few there are,
who will conform to philosophick fare,
this much i will indulge thee for thy ease,
and mingle something of our times to please. dryd. },v.
upon his rising up he ordered the peasant to set before him
whatever food he had in his house: the peasant brought out a
great, deal of coarse fare, of which the emperor eat very
heartily. addison's guardian.
far ewe'll adv. [this word is originally the imperative of
the verb /. well, or fare you well; so felix, abi in bonam
rem ; or bene sit tibi; but in time use familiarised it to an ad-
verb, and it is used both by those who go and those who are left.]
i. the parting compliment; adieu.
but farewell, king; sith thus thou wilt appear,
freedom lives hence, and banishment is here. shac. k. lear.
whether we shall meet again, i know not,
therefore our everlasting farewell take;
for ever, and for ever, farewell, caffius. shak. jul. caesar.
be not amazed, call all your senses to you; defend your re-
putation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever. shakes.
an iron slumber shuts my swimming eyes;
and now farewell, involv’d in shades of night,
for ever 1 am ravish'd from thy fight. dryden's virg. geo.
farewell, says he ; the parting sound scarce fell
from his faint lips, but she replied farewell. dryden.
o queen, farewell! be still possest
qf dear remembrance, blessing still and blest pope's ods:
2. it is sometimes used only as an expression of separation with-
out kindness.
farewell the year which threaten’d so
the fairest light the world can show. //aller.
treading the path to nobler ends,
a long farewell to love i gave ;
resolv'd my country and my friends -
all that remain’d of me should have. waller,
3. its original verbal meaning is preserved when it is used plu-
rally.
farewell, master silence: i will not use many words with
you ; fare you well, gentlemen, both. shakesp. henry iv.
farewe’ll. n.s.
1. leave; act of departure. *.
see how the morning opes her golden gates,
and takes her farewell of the glorious sun. shakes). hen. vi.
if chance the radiant sun, with farewell sweet,
extend his ev'ning beam, the fields revive,
the birds their notes renew, and bleeting herds
attest their joy, that hill and valley ring. milton.
as in this grove i took my last farewell,
as on this very spot of earth i fell. dryden.
before i take my farewell of this subject, i shall advise the
author for the future to speak his meaning more plainly. add.
2. it is sometimes used as an adjective; leave-taking.
several ingenious writers, who have taken their leave of
the publick in farewell papers, will not give over so, but in-
tend to appear again; though perhaps under another form, and
with a different title. speciator.
farina'ceous, adj. [from farina, latin.] mealy; tasting
like meal or flower of corn. * *
the properest food of the vegetable kingdom for mankind,
is taken from the farinaceous or mealy seeds of some culmi-
ferous plants; as oats, barley, wheat, rice, rye, maize,
panick, and millet. arbuthnot on ailments.
farm. n.s. [forme, french; peopm, provision, saxon.]
1. ground let to a tenant; ground cultivated by another man
upon<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 790</div><p class="text">f a r
f a s
upon condition of paying part of the profit to the owner or
landlord.
touching their particular complaint for reducing lands and
farms to their ancient rents, it could not be done without a
parliament. hayward.
2. the state of lands let out to the culture of tenants.
the lords of land in ireland do not use to set out their land
in farm, for term of years, to their tenants; but only from
year to year, and some during pleasure. , spensor on ireland.
it is great wilfulness in landlords to make any longer farms
unto their tenants. spenser.
to farm. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to let out to tenants at a certain rent.
we are enforc'd to farm our royal realm,
the revenue whereof shall furnish us
for our affairs in hand. shakespeare's richard ii.
2. to take at a certain rate.
they received of the bankers scant twenty shillings for thirty,
which the earl of cornwall farmed of the king. camden's rem.
. to cultivate land. -
a'rmer. n.s.. [fermier, french ; or from farm.]
1. one who cultivates hired ground.
thou hast seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar, and the
creature run from the cur: there thou might'st behold the
great image of authority; a dog's obey'd in office. shakesp.
2. one who cultivates ground, whether his own or another's.
nothing is of greater prejudice to the farmer than the stock-
ing of his land with cattle larger than it will bear. mortimer.
fa'rmost. n.s.. [superlative of far..] most distant; remotest.
a spacious cave, within its farmost part,
was hew'd and fashion'd by laborious art,
through the hill's hollow sides. dryden's aen.
fa'rness. n. s. [from far..] distance; remoteness. -
their nearness on all quarters to the enemy, and their far-
mes; from timely succour by their friends, have forced the com-
manders to call forth the uttermost number of able hands to
fight. carew's survey of cornwall.
farra'ginous, adj. [from farrago, latin.] formed of dif-
ferent materials.
being a confusion of knaves and fools, and a farraginous
concurrence of all conditions, tempers, sexes and ages, it is
but natural if their determinations be monstrous, and many
ways inconsistent with truth. brown's vulgar errours.
farra go. m. s. [latin.] a mass formed confusedly of se-
veral ingredients; a medley.
fa'rrier. m. s. [ferrier, french; ferrarius, latin.]
1. a shoer of horses.
but the utmost exactness in these particulars belong to far-
riers, saddlers, smiths, and other tradesmen. digby.
2. one who professes the medicine of horses.
if you are a piece of a farrier, as every groom ought to be,
get sack, or strong-beer to rub your horses. swift.
to fa'rrier. v. n. [from the noun..] to practise physick or
chirurgery on horses.
there are many pretenders to the art of farriering and cow-
leeching, yet many of them are very ignorant. mortimer.
fa'rrow. n.s. [peanh, saxon.] a litter of pigs.
pour in sow's blood that hath litter'd
her nine farrow. shakespeare's macbeth.
72 fa'rrow. v. a. to bring pigs. it is used only of swine.
sows ready to farrow this time of the year. tuffer.
the swine, although multiparous, yet being bisulcous, and
only cloven-hoofed, is farrowed with open eyes, as other bi-
sulcous animals. brown.
ev’n her, who did her numerous offspring boast,
as fair and fruitful as the sow that carry'd
the thirty pigs, at one large litter farrow'd , dryd, juv.
fart. n.s. [fene, saxon.] wind from behind.
love is the fart
of every heart;
it pains a man when 'tis kept close ;
and others doth offend, when 'tis let loose. suckling.
to fart. v. a. [from the noun..] to break wind behind.
as when we a gun discharge,
although the bore be ne'er so large,
before the flame from muzzle burst,
just at the breech it flashes first ;
so from my lord his passion broke,
he farted first, and then he spoke. swift.
fa'rther. adv. [this word is now generally considered as
the comparative degree of far; but by no analogy can far
make farther or fartheft; it is therefore probable, that the an-
cient orthography was nearer the true, and that we ought to
write further and furtheft, from forth, forther, forths, fon-
*son, eunosen, saxon ; the o and u, by resemblance of found,
being first confounded in speech, and afterwards in books.]
at a greater distance; to a greater distance; more remotely;
beyond; moreover.
to make a perfect judgment of good pictures, when com-
pared with one another, besides rules, there is farther required
a long conversation with the best pieces. dryden's dufreshoy.
they contented themselves with the opinions, fashions and
things of their country, without looking any farther. lock,
fa'r'ther. adj. [supposed from far, more probably from forth,
and to be written further.]
1. more remote.
let me add a farther truth, that without ties of gratitude,
i have a particular inclination to honour you. dryden.
2. longer; tending to greater distance.
before our farther way the fates allow,
here must we fix on . the golden bough. dryden’s afn.
fa'rtherance. m. s. [more properly furtherance, from fur-
ther.] encouragement; promotion,
that was the foundation of the learning i have, and of all
the fartherance that i have obtained. } cham's schoolmasier.
farthermo‘re. adv. [more properly so besides;
over and above; likewise.
farthermore the leaves, body and boughs of this tree, by so
much exceed all other plants, as the greatest men of power
and worldly ability surpass the meanest. raleigh's history.
to fa'rther. v. a... [more proper to further.] to promote;
to facilitate ; to advance.
he had farthered or hindered the taking of the town. dryd.
farthest. adv. [more properly furtheft.] see farther.
1. at the greatest distance.
2. to the greatest distance.
farthest. adj. most distant; remotest.
yet it must be withal considered, that the greatest part of
the world are they which be fartheft from perfection. hooker.
fa‘rthing. m. s. [peopolins, saxon, from feopen, four, that
is, the fourth part of a penny.]
1. the fourth of a penny; the smallest english coin.
a farthing is the least denomination or fracion of money
used in england. cocker's arithmetica.
else all those things we toil so hard in,
would not avail one single farthing. prior.
you are not obliged to take money not of gold or silver;
not the halfpence or farthings of england. swift.
2. copper money.
the parish find, 'tis true; but our church-wardens
feed on the filver, and give us the farthings. gay.
3. it is used sometimes in a sense hyperbolical: as, it is not
worth a farthing; or proverbial.
his son builds on, and never is content,
*till the last farthing is in structure spent.
4. a kind of division of land. not in use.
thirty acres make a farthing-land; nine farthings a cornish
acre; and four cornish acres a knight's fee. carew.
farthingale. m. s. [this word has much exercised the ety-
mology of skinner, who at last seems to determine that it is
derived from vertu garde: if he had considered what vert fig-
nifies in dutch, he might have found out the true sense..] a
hoop ; circles of whalebone used to spread the petticoat to a
wide circumference.
with silken coats, and caps, and golden rings,
with ruffs, and cuffs, and farthingales, and things. shakes.
tell me,
dryden's juv.
what compass will you wear your farthingale &amp; shakes.
arthur wore in hall
round table, like a farthingal. hudibras.
some will have it that it portends the downfal of the french
king; and observe, that the farthingale appeared in england a
little before the ruin of the spanish monarchy. add/on.
she seems a medley of all ages,
with a huge farthingale to swell her fusian stuff,
a new commode, a topknot, and a ruff. swift.
fa'rthingsworth. n.s.. [farthing and worth.] as much as
is sold for a farthing.
they are thy customers; i hardly ever sell them a farthings:
worth of any thing. arbuthnot's history of john bull.
fa sces. m. s. [latin.] rods anciently carried before the con-
suls as a mark of their authority.
the duke beheld, like scipio, with disdain,
that carthage, which he ruin'd, rise once more;
and shook aloft the fastes of the main,
to fright those slaves with what they felt before. dryden.
fascia. m. s. [latin.] a fillet; a bandage.
fa'sciated. adj. [from fascia.] bound with fillets; tied with
a bandage. dio.
fasciation. m. s. [from fascia.] bandage; the aet or man-
ner of binding diseased parts.
three especial sorts of fasciation, or rowling, have the wor-
thies of our profession commended to posterity. hoseman.
to fa(scinate. v. a. |s. latin.] to bewitch; to
enchant; to influence in some wicked and secret manner.
there be none of the affections which have been noted to
fascinate or bewitch, but love and envy. baton.
such a fascinating fin this is, as allows men no liberty of
consideration. decay of piety.
fascination. n.s. (from fascinate.] the power or act of
bewitching; enchantment; unseen inexplicable influence.
he had such a crafty and bewitching fashion, both to move
3
pity
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 791</div><p class="text">f a s
f a s
pity and to induce belief, as was like a kind of fascination and
enchantment to those that saw him or heard him. bacon.
the turks hang old rags, or such like ugly things, upon
their fairest horses, and other goodly creatures, to secure them
against fascination. //aller.
there is a certain bewitchery or fascination in words,
which makes them operate with a force beyond what we can
naturally give an account of. south.
fascine. m. s. [french..] a faggot. military cant.
the black prince passed many a river without the help of
pontoons, and filled a ditch with faggots as successfully as the
generals of our times do with fascines. addison's speciator.
fa'scinous. adj. [fascinum, lat. j caused or acting by witch-
craft, or enchantment. not in use.
i shall not discuss the possibility of fascinous diseases, farther
than refer to experiment. harvey on consumptions.
fa'shion. m. s. [facon, french ; facies, latin.]
1. form ; make 3 state of any thing with regard to its outward
appearance.
they pretend themselves grieved at our solemnities in erect-
ing churches, at their form and fashion, at the stateliness of
them and costliness, and at the opinion which we have of
them. hooker.
the fashion of his countenance was altered. luke.
stand these poor people's friend.
—i will, ,
or let me lose the fashion of a man. shakesp. henry viii.
2. the make or cut of cloaths.
i'll be at charges for a looking-glass,
and entertain a score or two of taylors,
to study fashions to adorn my body. shakesp. richard iii.
you, sir, i entertain for one of my hundred; only, i do
not like the fashion of your garments. shakesp. king lear.
3. manner; sort ; way.
for that i love your daughter
in such a righteous fashion as i do,
perforce against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
i must advance. shakesp. merry i/ives of jwindsor.
pluck casca by the sleeve,
and he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
what hath proceeded. shakesp. julius casar.
the commisioners either pulled down or defaced all images
in churches; and that in such unseasonable and unseasoned
fosion, as if it had been done in hostility against them. hayw.
4. custom operating upon dress, or any domestick ornaments.
here's the note
how much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
the fineness of the gold, the chargeful fashion. shakoffeare.
5. custom ; general practice.
zelmane again, with great admiration, begun to speak of
him; asking whether it were the fashion or no, in arcadia,
that shepherds should perform such valorous enterprizes
sidney.
though the truth of this hath been universally acknow-
ledged, yet because the fashion of the age is to call every thing
into question, it will be requisite to satisfy mens reason about
it. - tillotson.
no wonder that pastorals are fallen into disesteem, together
with that fishion of life upon which they were grounded. wash.
it was not easily reconciled to the common method; but
then it was the fashion to do such things. arbuthnot.
6. manner imitated from another; way established by precedent.
sorrow so royally in you appears,
that i will deeply put the fashion on,
and wear it in my heart.
7. general approbation ; mode. - - -
a young gentleman accommodates himself to the innocent
diversions in fashion. locke.
his panegyricks were bestowed only on such persons as he
had familiarly known, and only at such times as others cease
to praise, when out of power, or out of fashion. . . pope.
8. rank; condition above the vulgar. it is used in a sense
below that of quality.
it is strange that men of fashion, and gentlemen, should so
grofly belie their own knowledge. raleigh.
9. any thing worn. - -
now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,
i scorn thee, and thy fishion, peevish boy. shaft. hon. vi.
1c. the sarcy, a distemper in horses; the horses leprosy. a
barbarous word. - -
his horse is posses with the glanders, infected with the
fashions, and full of windgalls. shak. taming of the shrew.
t. fa's hon. v. a. s faconner, french, from the noun.]
1. to sorm; to mould to figure.
he loves me well, and i have giv'n him reasons !
send him but hither, and i'll fashion him. shak. jul. casar.
did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and
did not one foshion us in the womb : . job.
the graves of the rebellious generations were already
fishioned in the clouds, which soon after should swallow up all
living creatures. - raleigh's hisłory.
the rib he form'j, and fashion'd with his hands:
vol. i. -
shakespeare.
under his forming hands a creature grew, - -
man like, but different sex. milton's paradis. loft.
inability will every one find in himself, who shall ge about
to fashion in his understanding any simple idea, not received by
his senses from external objecis, or by reflection from the ope-
rations of his mind about them. loc'e.
how could this noble fabrick be design'd,
and fashion'd, by a maker brute and blind?
could it of art such miracles invent
and raise a beauteous world of such extent : blackmore.
a different toil another forge employs,
here the loud hammer fashions female toys;
each trinket that adorns the modern daine,
first to these little artists ow’d its frame.
2. to fit; to adapt; to accommodate. -
laws ought to be fashioned unto the manners and conditions
of the people to whom they are meant, and not to be im-
posed upon them according to the fimple rule of right. spensor.
ne do, i doubt, but that ye well can fossion
yourselves thereto, according to occasion.
nature, as it grows again tow'rds earth,
is fashion'd for the journey, duli and heavy. shakoff. timon.
this cardinal,
though from an humble stock undoubtedly,
was fashion'd to much honour from his cradie. sh. h. viii.
3. to counterfeit. not used. -
it better fits my blood to be disdained of all, than to fashion
a carriage to rob love from any. sh. much ado about nothing.
4. to make according to the rule prescribed by custom.
the value of the labour employed about one parcel of silver
more than another, makes a difference in their price ; and
thus fashioned plate fells for more than its weight. locke,
fa's hron able. adj. [from fashion.]
1. approved by custom; established by custom ; modish.
the eminence of your condition will invite gentlemen to
the study of nature, and make philosophy fashionable. glanv.
examine how the fashionable practice of the world can be
reconciled to this important doctrine of our religion. rogers.
'tis prevailing example that hath now made it fashionable.
bentley.
gay's fan.
hubb. tale.
2. made according to the mode.
rich, fashionable robes her person deck;
pendants her ears, and pearls adorn her neck. dryd. ovid,
3. observant of the mode.
time is like a fashionable host, , ,
that slightly shakes his parting guest by th’ hand;
but with his arms outstretch'd, as he would fly,
grasps in the comer: welcome ever finiles,
and farewell goes out sighing. shakesp. troilus and crossida.
4. having rank above the vulgar, and below nobility.
fa's hion ab . en ess. m. s. [from fashionable.] kolis, ele-
gance; such appearance as is according to the present custom.
why should they not continue to value themselves for this
outside fashionableness of the taylor or tirewoman's making,
when their parents have so early instructed them to do so
locke.
fa's hion ably. adv. [from fashionalie..] in a manner con-
formable to custom , with modish elegance.
he must at length die dully of old age at home, when hete
he might sofashionably and gentecily have been duelied or fluxed
into another world. south.
fa'shionist. n. s. [from fishion.] a follower of the nicee ;
a fop ; a coxcomb. dio.
to fast. v. n. [ sasian, gothick; rarcan, saxon.]
1. to abstain from tood. -
our love is not so great, hortensio,
but we may blow our nails together,
-
and fos; it fairly out. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
i had rather fosi from all four days than drink so much in
one. shakspeare's anthony and cleopatra.
we have some meats, and breads, and drinks, which taken
by men enable them to fift long after. bacon's new atlantis.
2. to mortify the body by religious abstinence.
when thou softoff, anoint thy head and wash thy face, that
thou appear not unto men to foss. azaft. vi.
last night the very god the wo me a vision :
i soft, and pray'd for their intelligence. shakoff. cymbeline.
fast. m. s. [from the verb.] -
1. abstinence from food.
a thousand men have broke their fasis to-day,
that ne'er shall dine, unless thou yield the crown. shakoff.
where will this end ? four times ten days i’ve pas'd,
wand'ring this woody maze, and human food
nortafled, nor had appetite ; that fost
to virtue i impute not, or count part
of what i suffer here. asilico's parad's loft.
happy and innocent were the ages of our forefathers, who
broke their foss with herbs and roots; and when they wore
permitted flesh, eat it only dressed with hunger and fire. taylor.
she's gone unkindly, and refus’d to cast -
one glance to feed me for so long a fast. dryd. tyran. love.
2. religious mortification by abstinence; religious *
8 w. g.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 792</div><p class="text">f a s
f a s
we humble ourselves before god this day, not merely by
the outward solemnities of a fast, but by afflicting our souls as
well as bodies for our sins. atterbury.
nor pray's nor fash; its stubborn pulse restrain;
nor tears, for ages, taught to flow in vain. pope.
fast. adj. [raert, saxon.]
1. firm; immoveable.
he by his strength setteth fast mountains. ps. lxv. 6.
last, the fire and his three sons,
with their four wives; and god made fast the door. milt.
be sure to find,
what i forctold thee, many a hard assay
of dangers and adversities, and pains,
ere thou of israel's sceptre get fast hold.
2. strong; impregnable.
england, by report of the chronicles, was infested with
robbers and outlaws; which, lurking in woods and fast places,
used often to break forth to rob and spoil. spenser on ireland.
3. fixed; adhering; not separable.
lodronius, with the breaking in of the horsemen, was
driven into a marsh ; where, after that he, being almost fast
in the deep mud, had done the uttermost, he yielded himself.
knolles.
a man in a boat, who tugs at a rope that’s fast to a ship,
looks as if he resolved to draw the ship to him. temple.
4. dcep; sound.
i have seen her rise from her bed, take paper, fold it, seal
it, and again return to bed: yet all this while in a most fost
sleep. shakespeare's macbeth.
5. firm in adherence.
quick wits be in desire new-fangled; in purpose, uncon-
stant; light to promise any thing, ready to forget everything,
both benefit and injury; and thereby neither fast to friend,
nor fearful to foe. astham's schoolmaster.
6. [from soft, welsh, quick.]. speedy; quick; swift. it may
be doubted whether this sense be not always adverbial.
this work goeth fast on, and prospereth. ezra, v. 8.
skill comes so slow, and life so fast doth fly,
we learn so little, and forget so much. avies.
the prince groweth up fast to be a man, and is of a sweet
and excellent disposition: it would be a stain upon you if you
fhould mislead, or suffer him to be misled. bacon to williers.
7. fast and loos. uncertain; variable; inconstant; de-
ceitful.
a rope of fair pearl, which now hiding, now hidden by
the hair, did, as it were, play at fosi and loose each with other,
giving and receiving richness. sidney.
if she perceived by his outward chear, -
that any would his love by talk bewray,
sometimes she heard him, sometimes stopt her ear,
and play’d fast and loose the live long day. fairfax.
the folly and wickedness of men, that think to play fast
and loose with god almighty l’e/orange.
if they cohered, yet by the next conflict with other atoms
they might be separated again; and so on in an eternal vicisi-
tude of fast and loose, without ever consociating into the huge
condense bodies of planets. bentley.
fast. adv.
1. firmly ; immoveably.
bind the boy, which you shall find with me,
fast to the chair. shakespeare's king john.
this love of theirs myself have often seen,
haply when they have judg’d me foss asleep. , , shakespeare.
2. closely; nearly. in this sense it is united with some other
word, as by, or beside. -
barbarosła left fourteen galleys in the lake; but the tack-
lings, sails, oars, and ordnance he had laid up in the castle
as by. knolles's hisłory of the turks.
fos! by siloa's brook that flow’d isory of
fast by the oracle of god. milton's paradise left.
let purling streams be in her fancy seen,
and flow'ry meads, and vales of chearful green;
and in the midst of deathless groves
soft sighing wishes lie,
and smiling hopes fast by,
and just beyond 'em ever-laughing loves. dryd. tyr. love.
fasi by the throne obsequious fame resides,
and wealth incessant rolls her golden tides. pope's odyssy.
well known to me the palace you inquire ;
for fasi beside it dwells my honour'd fire. pope's odyssey.
here o'er the martyr king the marble weeps,
and fast beside him once fear'd edward sleeps.
3. swiftly; nimbly.
i would give a thousand pound i could run as fose as thou
can'st. shakespeare's henry iv.
there streams a spring of blood so soft,
milton.
pope.
from those deep wounds, as all embru'd the face. daniel.
the heaviest muse the swiftest course has gone,
as clocks run fosiest when most lead is on. pope.
you are to look upon me as one going fift out of the
world. swift to pope.
4. frequently. -
being tried only with a promise, he gave full credit to that
promise, and still gave evidence of his fidelity as fift as occa-
sions were offered. hammond's pract. catech,
to fa's ten. v. a. [from fast.]
1. to make fast; to make firm ; to fix immoveably.
a mantle coming under her right arm, and covering most
of that side, had no fostening on the left side. sidney.
moses reared up the tabernacle, and fostened his sockets. ex.
by chance a ship was fosten’d to the shore,
which from old clusium king ofinius bore. dryden's en.
2. to hold together; to cement; to link.
she had all magnetick force alone,
to draw and fasten sundred parts in one. donne,
in the sea-coast of india there is no iron, which flies not
like a bird unto those mountains, and therefore their ships are
fastened with wood. brown's pulgar errouri.
3. to affix; to conjoin.
the words whig and tory have been pressed to the service
of many successions of parties, with very different ideas fift-
ened to them. swift's examiner,
4. to stamp 5 to impress; to fix.
thinking, by this face,
to fosten in our thoughts that they have courage;
but 'tis not so. shakspeare's julius casar.
5. to unite inseparably.
their oppressors have changed the scene, and combated the
opinions in their true shape, upon which they could not so
well fashen their disguise. decay of pietr.
6. os. with too. y of piety
could he fosten a blow, or make a thrust, when not suf-
fered to approach ; dryden’s afn. dedication.
to fa's ten. v. n. to fix himself.
this paucity of blood may be observed in other sorts of
lizards, in frogs, and other fishes; and therefore an horse-
leech will hardly soften upon a fish. brown's pulgar erreurs.
he fasten’d on my neck; and bellow'd out,
as he'd burst heaven. shakespeare's king lear.
the wrong judgment that misleads us, and makes the will
often fosten on the worse side, lies in misreporting upon com-
parisons. locke.
fa's tener. m. s. [from faslen.] one that makes fast or firm.
fa'st er. m. s. [from fast.] he who abstains from food. ains.
fa's thanded. adj. [fast and hand.] avaricious; close-
handed ; closefifted ; covetous.
the king being fashanded, and loth to part with a second
dowry, prevailed with the prince to be contracted with the
princess catharine. bacon's henry vii.
fast1dio's ity. m. s. [from fastidious.] disdainfulness; con-
temptuousness. swift.
fastit) ious, adj. [faffidiosus, latin; fossidicux, fostidioise,
french..] disdainful; squeamish; delicate to a vice; inso-
lently nice.
reasons plainly delivered, and always after one manner,
especially with fine and foslidious minds, enter but heavily and
dully. bacon's collection of good and evil.
let their fastidious vain
commisfion of the brain,
run on and rage, sweat, censure, and condemn,
they were not made for thee, less thou for them. b. j.his:
a squeamish fo/?idious niceness, in meats and drinks, must
be cured by starving. l’e/orange.
all hopes, raised upon the promises or supposed kindnesses
of the fylidious and fallacious great ones of the world, shall
fail. - south's sermons.
fasti diously. adv. [from fastidious.] disdainfully; con-
temptuously; squeamishly.
their sole talent is pride and scorn: they look fiftidiously,
and speak disdainfully, concluding, if a man shall fail short of
their garniture at their knees and elbows, he is much inferior
to them in the furniture of his head. government of the tongue.
fasti'giated. adv. [fashigiatus, latin.] roofed; narrowed
up to the top. dio.
fa's ting day. n.s.. [fast and day.] day of mortification by
religious abstinence. -
do not call it a fashingday, unless also it be a day of extra-
ordinary devotion and of alms. taylor's guide to devotion.
fa's tn ess. m. s. [from fos!..]
1. state of being fast.
2. firmness; firin adherence.
such as had given the king distaste, did contend by their for-
wardness to shew it was but their fiffness to the former govern-
ment, and that those affections ended with the time. bacon.
3. strength ; security.
all the places are cleared, and places of fonts laid open,
which are the proper walls and casties of the irish, as they
were of the british in the times of agricola. davies on ireland.
the foes had left the fasings of their place,
prevail'd in fight, and had his men in chace.
4. a strong place ; a place not easily forced.
if his adversary be not will aware of him, he entrenches
himself in a new fosings, and holds out the fiege with a new
artillery. i? atts on the asinia.
5. closeness;
dryden's afa.
t.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 793</div><p class="text">f a t
--
5. closeness; conciseness; not diffusion. not used. - -
bring his stile from all loose grossness to such "...sos. in
latin, as in demosthenes. ascham's sc hoolmasser.
fa'stuous. adj. [fastuosus, latin; faslueux-se, fr.] proud;
haughty. dioï.
fat. adj. [past, saxon.]
1. fullfed ; plump; fleshy: the contrary to loan. -
when gods have hot backs, what shall poor men do for
me, i am here a windsor stag, and the fittos, i think, i'th’
forest. shakespeare's merry wives of windsor.
let our wives
appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow. shakespeare.
'tis a fine thing to be fat and smooth. l’esirange.
spare diet and labour will keep constitutions, where this
disposition is the strongest, from being fat: you may see in
an army forty thousand foot-soldiers without a fat man; and i
dare affirm, that by plenty and rest twenty of the forty shall
grow fat. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. coarse; gross. [fat, french.]
we're hurry'd down
this lubrique and adult’rate age;
nay, added fat pollutions of our own,
to increase the steaming ordures of the stage.
, dull.
3 o souls in whom no heav'nly fire is found,
fat minds, and ever-grov'ling on the ground. dryd. pers.
4. wealthy; rich.
some are allured to law, not on the contemplation of
equity, but on the promising and pleasing thoughts of liti-
gious terms, fat contentions, and flowing fees. milton.
these were terrible alarms to persons grown fat and wealthy
by a long and successful imposture. south.
afat benefice is that which so abounds with an estate and
revenues, that a man may expend a great deal in delicacies of
eating and drinking. ayliff's parergon.
fat. n.s. an oily and sulphureous part of the blood, depo-
sited in the cells of the membrana adiposa, from the innu-
merable little vessels which are spread amongst them. the
fat is to be found immediately under the skin, in most parts of
the body. there are two sorts of fat; one yellow, soft, and
lax, easily melted; another firm, white, brittle, and not
so easily melted, called suet or tallow. some reckon the mar-
row of the bones for a third sort of fat. $2stiny.
in this ointment the strangest and hardest ingredients to
come by, are the moss upon the skull of a dead man unburied,
and the fats of a boar and a bear, killed in the act of genera-
tion. bacon’s natural history.
this membrane separates an oily liquor called fat: when
the fibres are lax, and the aliment too redundant, great part
of it is converted into this oily liquor. arbuthnot on aliments.
to fat. v. a. [from the noun..] to make fat ; to fatten 5 to
make plump and fleshy with abundant food.
oh how this villainy
doth fat me with the very thoughts of it!
ere this
i should have fatted all the region kites
with this slave's offal. jhakespeare's hamlet.
they fat such enemies as they take in the wars, that they
may devour them. abbot's description of the world.
the caribbees were wont to geld their children, on purpose
to fat and eat them. locke.
cattle fatted by good pasturage, after violent motion, some-
times die suddenly. arbuthnot on diet.
to fat. v. n. to grow fat; to grow full fleshed.
clarence, he is well repaid ;
he is frank'd up to fatting for his pains. shakoff. rich. iii.
the one labours in his duty with a good conscience; the
other, like a beast, but fatting up for the slaughter.
l’estrange.
an old oxfats as well, and is as good, as a young. mortimor.
fat. n. s. [faez, saxon ; vatte, dutch. this is generally
written va...] a vessel in which any thing is put to ferment
or be soaked. --
the fats shall overflow with wine and oil. ..., joel, ii. 24.
a white stone used for flagging floors, for cisterns, and tan-
ners fats. //oodward on fossils.
fatal. adj. [fatalis, latin; fatal, french.] ...
m. deadly; mortal; destructive; causing destruction.
o fatal maid!_thy marriage is endow’d
with phrygian, latian, and rutilian blood. dryden's zn.
a palsy in the brain is most dangerous; when it seizeth the
heart, or organs of breathing, fatal. arbuthnot on diet.
2. proceeding by destiny; inevitable ; necessary. -
others delude their trouble by a graver way of reasoning,
that these things are fatal and necessary, it being in vain to
be troubled at that which we cannot help. tillotson.
3. appointed by destiny.
it was fatal to the king to fight for his money; and though
he avoided to fight with enemies abroad, yet he was still en-
forced to fight for it with rebels at home. bacon's henry vii.
it was
still fatal to stout hudibras,
dryden.
shak. tit. andr.
in all his feats of arms, when least
he dreamt of it, to prosper best.
hudibrar.
behold the destin'd place of your abodes; aira:
for thus anchises prophecy'd of old,
and thus our fatal place of rest foretold. dryden's afn.
o race divine;
for beauty still is fatal to the line. dryden.
fa talist. n.s.. [from fate.] one who maintains that aii
things happen by invincible necessity. -
will the obstinate foals; find sufficient apology iwatts.
fatality. m. s. [fatalite, french; from fatal.] -
i. predestination ; predetermined order or series of things and
events; preordination of inevitable causes acting invincibly
in perpetal succession.
the stoicks held a fatality, and a fixed unalterable course of
ovents; but then they held also, that they fell out by a neces-
sity emergent from and inherent in the things themselves,
which god himself could not alter. south.
2. decree of fate. -
. by a strange fatality men suffer their dissenting to be drawn
into the stream of the present vogue. king charles.
all the father's precaution could not secure the son from the
fatality of dying by a lion. l’estrange.
3. tendency to danger; tendency to some great or hazardous
event.
seven times seven, or forty-nine, nine times nine, or
eighty-one, and seven times nine, or the years fixty-three, is
conceived to carry with it the most considerable fatality. bro.
fat ally. adv. [from fatal.]
1. mortally; destructively, even to death.
the stream is so transparent, pure and clear,
that had the self-enamour'd youth gaz'd here,
so fatally deceiv'd he had not been,
while he the bottom, not his face had seen.
'tis the procession of a funeral vow,
which cruel laws to indian wives allow,
when fatally their virtue they approve; -
chearful in flames, and martyrs of their love. dryd. auren.
2. by the decree of fate; by inevitable and invincible determi-
ination.
to say that the world was made casually by the concur-
rence of atoms, is to affirm that the atoms composed the
world mechanically and fataly; only they were not sensible
of it.
denham.
bentley,
fatalness. n.s.. [from fatal.] invincible necessity.
fate. m. s. [futum, latin.]
1. destiny; an eternal series of successive causes
- necessity or chance
approach not me; and what i will is fate. milton.
there is a necessity in fate
why still the brave bold man is fortunate. dryden.
you must obey me soon or late;
why will you vainly struggle with your fate / dryden.
when empire in its childhood first appears,
a watchfulfate o'ersees its rising years. dryden.
random chance, or wilfulfate,
guides the shaft from cupid's bow.
2. event predetermined.
teli me what fate; attend the duke of suffolk :
by water shall he die, and take his end. shakespeare,
3. death ; destruction.
viewing a neighbouring hill, whose top of late
a chapel crown'd, 'till in the common fate
th' adjoining abbey fell.
looking, he feeds alone his famish'd eyes;
feeds ling’ring death, but looking not he dies;
yet still he chose the longest way to fate,
wasting at once his life and his estate.
courage uncertain dangers may abate ;
but who can bear th' approach of certain fate /
the whizzing arrow fings,
and bears thy fate, antinous, on its wings. pope.
4. cause of death.
with full force his deadly bow he bent,
and feather'd fate, among the mules and amo
ryuent.
a. phillips.
denham.
dryden.
dryden.
fa"re d. adj. [from fate.]
1. decreed by fate.
she fled her father's rage, and with a train -
driv'n by the southern blasts was fated here to reign. dryd.
2. determined in any manner by fate.
her aukward love indeed was oddly sited;
she and her polly were too near related. prior.
3. endued with any quality by fate. this stricture used by
dryden is unusual. -
bright vulcanian arms,
fated from sorce of steel by stygian charms, • -
suspended shone on high. dodo's a. m.
4. invested with the power of fatal determination. peculiar to
shakespeare, -
thy fated sky
gives us free scope.
shakeshcare.
father.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 794</div><p class="text">f a t
f a t
father. m. s. traosen, saxon. this word is found like-
wife in the peisian language.]
1. he by whom the son or daughter is begotten.
father is a notion superinduced to the substance, or man,
and refers only to an act of that thing called man, whereby
he contributed to the generation of one of his own kind. locke.
son of bensalem, thy father saith it; the man by whom
thou hast breath and life speaketh the word. bacon.
he shall forget
father and mother, and to his wife adhere. millon.
2. the first ancestor.
it was said
it should not sland in thy posterity;
but that myself should be the root and father
of many kings. shakespeare's macbeth.
abraham is the father of us all. rom. iv. 16.
3. the appellation of an old man.
a poor blind man was accounted cunning in prognosti-
cating weather: epsom, a lawyer, said in scorn, tell me,
father, when doth the sun change the old man answered,
when such a wicked lawyer as you goeth to heaven. camden.
4. the title of any man reverend for age, learning, and piety.
you shall find one well accompanied
with reverend fathers and well learned bishops. sh. r. iii.
5. one who has given original to anything good or bad.
jubal was the father of all such as handle the harp and
organ. gen. iv. 21.
father of verse. pope.
6. the ecclesiastical writers of the first centuries.
men may talk of the fathers, and magnify the fathers, and
seem to make the authority of the fathers next to infallible;
and yet expose them to contempt. stillingfleet.
7. one who acts with paternal care and tenderness. t
i was a father to the poor. ob, xxix. 16.
he hath made me a father to pharaoh, and lord of all his
house. gen. xlv. 8.
8. the title of a popish confessor, particularly of a jesuit.
formal in apparel,
in gait and countenance surely like a father. shakes care.
there was a father of a convent, very much renowned for
his piety and exemplary life; and as persons under any great
affistion applied themselves to the most eminent confessors,
our beautiful votary took the opportunity of confessing herself
to this celebrated father. addison.
9. the title of a scnator of old rome.
from hence the race of alban fathers come,
and the long glories of majestick rome. dryden’s wirgil.
10. the appellation of the first person of the adorable trinity.
the eternal son of god esteemed it his meat and drink to
do the will of his father, and for his obedience alone obtained
the greatest glory. taylor’s rule of living holy.
1 1. the compellation of god as creator.
we have one father, even god. john, viii. 41.
almighty and most merciful father. common prayer.
father-in-law. m. s. [from father.] the father of one's
husband or wife. .
i must make my father-in-law a visit with a great train and
equipage. addison's speciator.
to father. v. a. -
1. to take; to adopt as a son or daughtcr.
ay, good youth,
and rather sither thee than master thee. shakesp. cymbeline.
2. to supply with a father, of certain qualities.
i am no stronger than my sex,
being so father'd and so husbanded. shakesh. jul. caesar.
how light and portable my pain seems now,
when that which makes me bend makes the king bow !
he childed as i father'd. shakespeare's king lear.
3. to adopt a composition.
men of wit,
often father'd what he writ. swift.
4. to ascribe to any one as his offspring, or production: with on.
and left we seem to father any thing upon them more than
is their own, let them read. hosker.
my name was made use of by several persons, one of which
was pleased to failer on me a new set of productions. swift.
magical relations comprehend effects derived and fathered
upon hidden qualities, whereof, from received grounds of art,
no reasons are derived. brown's pulgar errours.
father hood. m. s. [from father.] the character of a father ;
the authority of a father.
who can abide, that against their own doctors, both of
the middle and latest age, six whole books should by their.
fatherhoods of trent be, under pain of a curse, imperiously
obtruded upon god and his church : hall.
we might have had an entire notion of this fatherhood, or
fatherly authority. locke.
father less. adj. [from father.] wanting a father; desti-
tute of a father.
ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherlos child. ex. xxii.
our fatherlos distress was left unmoand;
your widow dolours likewise be unwept. shakos. r. iii.
the fatherles hath no friend. sando,
he caught his death the last county sessions, where he wood
go to see justice done to a poor widow woman and her for.
less children. - addison's sociator.
fatherliness. n.f. [from father.] the tenderness of a fl.
ther; parental kindness.
fatherly. adj. [from father.] paternal; like a father;
tender; protecting ; careful.
let me but move one question to your daughter,
and, by that fatherly and kindly power -
that you have in her, bid her answer truly. shaftaro.
the part which describes the fire, i owe to the pict, and
fatherly affection of our monarch to his suffering subjects. do.
fatherly. adv. in the manner of a father.
thus adam, fatherly displeas'd :
o execrable son so to aspire
above his brethren |
fathom. m. s. [fabm, saxon.]
1. a measure of length containing six foot, or two yards; the
space to which a man can extend both arms.
the extent of this fathom, or distance between the extre-
mity of the fingers of either hand upon czpansion, is coal
unto the space between the sole of the foot and crown. brown.
the arms spread cross in a streight line, and measured from
the end of the long finger on one hand, to that of the other,
a measure equal to the stature, is named a fathem. hilder.
2. it is the usual measure applied to the depth of the sea, when
the line for sounding is called the fathem-line.
dive into the bottom of the deep,
where fathom-line could never touch the ground.
- shakespeare's henry iv.
3. reach; penetration; depth of contrivance; compass of
thought.
‘another of his fathom they have none
to lead their business. shakespeare's othell.
to fathom. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to encompass with the arms extended or encircling.
2. to reach; to master.
leave, leave to fathom such high points as these;
nor be ambitious, ere the time, to please. dryden's pos.
3. to sound; to try with respect to the depth.
'tis too strong for weak heads to try the heights and soon
the depths of his flights. felton on the clajici.
our depths who fathoms. pope.
4. to penetrate into ; to find the bottom or utmost extent: as,
i cannot fathom his design.
fathom less. adj. [from fathom.]
1. that of which no bottom can be found.
2. that of which the circumference cannot be embraced.
will you with counters sum
the vast proportion of his infinite;
and buckle in a waste most fathomless,
with spans and inches so diminutive
as fears and reasons : shakespeare's troilus and crossila.
fat 1dical. adj. [fatidicus, latin; fitidigue, french..] pro-
phetick; having the power to foretel future events.
the oak, of all other trees only fatidical, told them what
a fearful unfortunate business this would prove. howel.
fati'ferous. adj. [satiser, latin.] deadly; mortal; de-
structive. djo.
fa rig able. adj. [fatigo, latin.] easily wearied; susceptible
of weariness.
to fatigate. v. a. [fatigo, latin.] to weary: to fatigue;
to tire ; to exhaust with labour; to oppress with jasiitude.
not in use.
by and by the din of war 'gan to pierce
his ready sense, when straight his doubled spirit
requicken'd what in flesh was fatigate,
and to the battle came he. shakespeare's coriolants.
fati'gue. m. s. [fatigue, french; fatigo, latin.]
1. weariness; laijitude,
2. the cause of weariness; labour; toil.
the great scipio sought honours in his youth, and endured
the fatigues with which he purchased them. dryden.
70 fat, gue. v. a. [fatigue, french ; fortigo, latin.] to
tire ; to weary; to harass with toil; to exhaust with labour.
the man who struggles in the fight,
fatigues left arm as well as right. prior,
fatk1 dneyed. adj. [fat and kidney..] fat: by way of re-
proach or contempt.
peace, ye fat{idney'd rascal; what a brawling do'st that
keep ! shakespeare's henry iv.
fo ling. m. s. [from fat..] a young animal fed fat for the
aughter.
the calf and the young lion, and the song shall lie down
together, and a little child shall lead them. zs. xi. 6.
fatn.e.r. m. s. [from fat..] that which gives fatness.
the wind was west, on which that philosopher bestowed
the encomium of fatner of the earth. a boot.
fatn ess. m. s. [from fat..]
1. the quality of being fat, plump, or full-fed.
2. fat; grease; fulness of flesh,
milion.
7
and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 795</div><p class="text">f a u
f a u
and by his side rode loathsome gluttony,
drformed creature, on a filthy swine;
his belly was upblown with luxury,
and eke with frings, swollen were his eyen.
3. unctuous or greasy matter.
earth and water, mingled by the help of the sun, gather a
nitrous fatness. bacon's natural history.
4. oleaginousness; sliminess; unetuousness.
but the olive-tree said unto them; should i leave my fat-
nes; where with by me they honour god and man, and go to
be promoted over the trees : judges.
by reason of the fatness and heaviness of the ground, egypt
did not produce metals, wood, pitch, and some fruits. arlath.
5. fertility; fruitfulness.
god give thee of the dew of heaven, and the htnes of the
earth, and plenty of corn and wine. en. xxvii. 28.
6. that which causes fertility.
when around
the clou's drop fitness, in the middle sky
the dew supended staid, and left unmoist
the execrable glebe. philips.
vapours and clouds feed the plants of the earth with the
balm of dews and the fatness of showers. bently.
to fatten. v. a. [from fit.)
1. to fed up; to make fleshy; to plump with fat.
frequent blood-letting, in small quantities, often increaseth
the force of the organs of digestion, and fatteneth and increaseth
the distemper.
2. to make fruitful.
town of stuff to fitten land.
dare not, on thy life,
touch aught of mine;
this falchion else, not hitherto withstood,
these hostile fields shall fatten with thy blood.
3. to feed grosly; to increase.
obscene orontes
conveys his wealth to tyber's hungry shores,
and fattens italy with foreign whores. dryden's juvenal.
to fatt en. v. n. [from fat..] to grow fat; to be pampered;
to grow fleshy.
all agree to spoil the publick good,
and villains fatten with the brave man's labour.
apollo check'd my pride, and bad me feed
mojo flocks, nor dare beyond the reed.
et then this little spot of earth well till’d,
a num’rous family with plenty fill’d,
the good old man and thrify housewife spent
their days in peace, and fatten’d with content;
enjoy'd the dregs of life, and liv'd to see
a long-descending healthful progeny. dryden's juvenal.
tygers and wolves shall in the ocean breed,
the whale and dolphin fatten on the mead,
and every element exchange its kind,
when thriving honesty in courts we find.
fatuou.s. adj. [fatuus, latin.]
1. stupid ; foolish; feeble of mind.
we pity or laugh at those fatuous extravagants, while yet
ourselves have a considerable dose of what makes them so. glan.
2. impotent; without force; illusory ; alluding to an ignis
fatwus.
and when that flame finds combustible earth,
thence fatuous fires and meteors take their birth. denham.
fa tutty. m. s. [fatuite, french; from fatuous.] foolish-
mess; weakness of mind; morbid feebleness of intelle&amp;t.
it had argued a very short sight of things, and extreme
fatuity of mind in me, to bind my own hands at their re-
quest. king charles.
these symptoms were so high in some as to produce a sort
of satility or madness. arbuthnot on air.
fa's wit ted. adj. [fit and wit..] heavy; dull; stupid.
thou art so fatwitted with drinking old sack, and unbut-
toning thee after supper, and sleeping upon benches in the
afternoon, that thou hast forgotten. shakesp. henry iv.
fatty. adj. [from fat..] unetuous; oleaginous ; greasy;
partaking of the nature of fat. -
the like cloud, if oily or fatty, will not discharge; not
because it slicketh faster, but because air preyeth upon water,
and flame and fire upon oil. bacon's natural history.
the gourd
and thirsty cucumber, when they perceive
th' approaching olive, with resentment fly
her fatty fibres, and with tendrils creep
diverse, detesting contaet. phillips.
the common symptoms of the muriatick scurvy are, a
saline tasie in the spittle, and a lixivial urine, sometimes with
a fatty substance like a thin skin a-top. arbuthnot on aliments.
fa’us e.t. m. s. [faust, french ; fauces, latin.]. the pipe
inserted into a vessel to give vent to the liquor, and stopped up
by a peg or spigot. it is sometimes improperly written foset.
you were out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a
cause between an orange-wife and a fosst-seller, and adjourned
d o of three-pence to a second audience. shakesp.
ol. 1.
fairy queen.
lib. landiness.
dryden.
otway.
dryden.
granville.
arbuthnot on diet.
if you are sent down to draw drink, and find it wil; not
run, blow strongly into the faucet, and it will immediately
pour into your mouth. swift's direct. to the butler.
fa uchio n. m. s. [see falchion.] a crooked sword.
a stately tomb, whose top a trumpet bore;
a soldier's fauchion, and a seaman’s oar. dryden’s on.
f4ufel. m. j. [french..] the fruit of a species of the palm-
tree.
favi'i. lous. adj. [savilla, latin.] consisting of ashes.
as to foretelling of strangers, from the fungous particles
about the wicks of the candle, it only significth a noid air
about them, hindering the avolation of light and the fou,
particles. f brown's pisgar errours:
a lcqn.
! see }
faulco n.
fa'ulcon ry. f alco nry.
fault. n. s. [ saut, faute, french : faltar, to be deficient,
spanish. the l is sometimes founded, and sometimes mutc.
in conversation it is generally suppressed.]
1. offence ; flight crime; somewhat liable to censure or ob-
jection.
the prophet chuseth rather to charge them with the fast
of making a law unto themselves, than the crime of tsans-
gressing a law which god had made. hooker:
he finds no fault with their opinion about the true god,
but only that it was not clear and distinet enough. stillings...t.
he that but conceives a crime in thought, o
contracts the danger of an actual faul: ;
then what must he expect that still proceeds
to commit fin, and work up thoughts to deeds dryden.
if you like not my poem, the fault may possibly be in my
writing; but more probably 'tis in your morals, which can-
not bear the truth of it. dryden.
they wholly mistake the nature of criticism, who think
its business is principally to find fault. dryden.
to be desirous of a good name, and careful to do every
thing, that we innocently may, to obtain it, is so far from
being a sault, even in private persons, that it is their great and
indispensible duty. atterbury.
before his sacred name flies ev'ry fault,
and each exalted stanza teems with thought. pope.
which of our thrum-cap'd ancestors found fault,
for want of sugar-tongs or spoons for salt king.
being void of all friendship and enmity, they never com-
plain, nor find fault with the times. swift.
2. defect; want; absence.
i could tell to thee, as to one it pleases me, for fault of a
better, to call my friend, i could be sad, and sad indeed too.
- shakespeare's henry iv.
. puzzle ; difficulty: as, the enquirer is at a fault.
6 fault. v. n. [from the noun..] to be wrong; to fail.
which moved him rather in eclogues than otherwise to
write, minding to furnish our tongue in this kind wherein it
faulteth. spensor.
to fault. v. a. to charge with a fault; to accuse.
for that i will not fault thee,
but for humbleness exalt thee. old song.
faulter. m. s. [from fault..] an offender; one who com-
mits a fault.
then she, behold the faulter here in fight;
this hand committed that supposed offence. fairfax.
faultfinder. m. s. [fault and find.] a censurer; an ob-
jector.
faultily. adv. [from faulty.] not rightly; improperly;
defectively; erroneously.
fa ultiness. n.s.. [from faulty.]
1. badness ; vitiousness; evil disposition.
when her judgment was to be practised in knowing faulti-
nes by his first tokens, she was like a young fawn, who com-
ing in the wind of the hunters, doth not know whether it be
a thing or no to be eschewed.
2. delinquency; actual offences.
the inhabitants will not take it in evil part, that the faulti-
nes of their people heretofore is laid open. hooker.
faultless. adj...[from fault..] exempt from fault; perfect;
completely excellent. -
where for our fins he faultles, suffered pain,
there where he died, and where he liv'd again. fairfax.
who durst thy faultles; figure thus defaces dryden's en.
whoever thinks a faultles piece to see,
thinks what ne'er was, nor is, nor e'er shall be. pope.
fa'ulty. adj. [fautif, french, from fault.]
1. guilty of a fault; blameable; criminal; not innocent.
the king doth speak as one which is faulty. 2 sam. xiv. 13.
can thus
th’ image of god in man, created once
so goodly and erect, though faulty fince
to such unsightly sufferings be debas'd :
2. wrong; erroneous. -
the form of polity by them set down for perpetuity, is
three ways faulty; faulty in omitting some things which in
scripture are of that nature, as, namely, the difference that
ought to be of pastors, when they grow to any great multi-
8 z tude 3
sidney.
milton.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 796</div><p class="text">f a v
f a v
tude; faulty in requiring dociors, deacons, and widows, as
things of perpetual necessity by the law of god, which in
truth are nothing less; faulty also in urging some things by
scripture mutable, as their lay-elders. havier.
3. defective; bad in any respect; not fit for the use intended.
by accident of a faulty helmet that parker had on, he was
stricken into the mouth at the first course, so that he died pre-
sently. bacon's henry vii.
t. fa'vour. v. a. [faveo, latin.] - -
1. to support; to regard with kindness ; to be propitious to ;
to countenan ce.
of all the race of silver-winged flies
was none more favourable, nor more fair,
whilst heaven did favour his felicities,
than clarion, the eldest son and heir -
of muscarol. spensor.
the self-same gods that arm'd the queen of troy,
may favour tamora the queen of goths. shak. tit. andr.
men favour wonders. bacon's natural history.
fortune so favoured him, that the town at his first coming
surrendered unto him. krolles's history of the turks.
the good aeneas am i call'd ; a name,
while fortune favour’d, not unknown to fame. dryden.
oh happy youth ! and favour’d of the skies,
distinguish'd care of guardian deities. pope's odyssey.
2. to assist with advantages or conveniences.
no one place about it is weaker than another, to favour an
enemy in his approaches. addison's jwhig examiner.
3. to resemble in feature. -
the porter owned that the gentleman favoured his master.
speciator.
4. to conduce to ; to contribute.
fa'vour. m. s. [favor, latin; fiveur, french.]
1. countenance; kindness; kind regard; propitious aspect:
with of before the favourer.
it pleas'd your majesty to turn your looks
of favour from myself, and all our house. shakoff. h. iv.
the child samuel was in favour, both with the lord and
also with men. 1 sam. ii. 26.
they got not the land by their own sword; but thy right
hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, be-
cause thou haft a favour unto them. ps. xliv. 3.
his dreadful navy, and his lovely mind,
gave him the fear and favour of mankind. waller.
this favour, had it been employed on a more deserving
subject, had been an effect of justice in your nature; but, as
placed on me, is only charity. dryden's aurengzebe, preface.
2. support; defence; vindication; inclination to favour: with
of before the thing favoured. • -
the pleasures which these scriptures ascribe to religion, are
of a kind very different from those in favour of which they
are here alleged. rogers.
at play, among strangers, we are apt to find our hopes and
wishes engaged on a sudden in favour of one side more than
another. swift.
they were invited from all parts for the use of kings,
princes, and ministers. and in short, the favour of learning
was the humour and mode of the age. - temple.
3. kindness granted ; benevolence shewn.
all favours and punishments passed by him, all offices and
places of importance were distributed to his favourites. sidney.
the race is not to the swift, nor yet favour to men of
skill. eccl. ix. 1 i.
o, my royal master!
the gods, in favour to you, made her cruel.
4. lenity; mildness; mitigation of punishment.
i could not discover the lenity and favour of this sentence;
but conceived it rather to be rigorous than gentle. swift.
5. leave; good will; pardon.
worthy macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
—give me your favour; my dull brain was wrought
with things forgot. shakespeare.
yet ere we enter into open act,
with favour, 'twere no loss if't might be inquir’d
hat the condition of these arms would be. b. johnson.
come down, said reynard, let us treat of peace:
a peace, with all my soul, said chanticleer;
but, with your favour, i will treat it here.
6. object of favour; person or thing favoured.
- all these his wond’rous works, but chiefly man,
his chief delight and favour; him, for whom
all these his works so wond’rous he ordain'd.
7. something given by a lady to be worn.
and every one his lovesuit will advance
unto his several mistress, which they'll know
by favours several which they did bestow. shakespeare.
it is received that it helpeth to continue love, if one wear
the hair of the party beloved; and perhaps a glove, or other
like favour, may as well do it. bacon's natural history.
a blue ribband tied round the sword-arm, i conceive to be
the remains of that custom of wearing a mistress's favour on
such occasions of old, spectator.
a. phillips.
dryden.
milton.
:
8. anything worn openly as a token.
here, fluellen, wear thou this favour for me, any stick it
in thy cap. shakesp. henry v.
9. feature ; countenance. it is now little used.
that is only suitable in laying a foul complexion upon a
filthy favour, setting forth both in sluttishness.
young though thou art, thine eye
hath staid upon some favour that it loves. shakes care.
disseat thy favour with an usurped beard. shak. othell,
there's no goodness in thy face: if antony
be free and healthful, why so tart a favour
to trumpet such good tidings shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
yet well i remember -
the favours of these men: were they not mine :
did they not sometime cry, all hail! to me? shakesh. r. ii.
a youth of fine favour and shape. bacon's henry vii.
by their virtuous behaviour they compensate hardness of their
javour, and by the pulchritude of their souls, make up what
is wanting in the beauty of their bodies. south.
fa you rable, adj. [favorable, french ; savorabilis, latin.]
1. kind ; propitious ; affectionate.
famous plantagenet ! most gracious prince,
lend favourable ear to our requests. shakesp. rich. iii.
2. palliative; tender; averse from censure.
none can have the favourable thought,
that to obey a tyrant's will they fought. dryden', juvenal.
3. conducive to ; contributing to ; propitious,
people are multiplied in a country by the temper of the cli-
mate, favourable to generation, health, and long life. temple.
4. accommodate ; convenient.
many good officers were willing to stay there, as a place
very favourable for the making levies of men. clarendon.
5. beautiful; well favoured; well featured. obsolete.
of all the race of silver-winged flies
which do possess the empire of the air,
was none more favourable, nor more fair,
than clarion, the eldest son and heir
of muscarol. spensor.
fa you rableness. m. s. [from favourable.] kindness, os.
nignity.
fa you rably. adv. [from favourable.] kindly; with favour;
with tenderness; with kind regard.
touching actions of common life, there is not any defence
more favourably heard than theirs who allege sincerely for
themselves, that they did as necessity constrained them.
hooker,
she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, and
she weth herself favourably unto them in the ways. wisd. vi.
the violent will condemn the character of absalom, as
either too favourably or too hardl y drawn. dryden.
we are naturally inclined to think favourably of those we
sidney.
love. rogers,
favoured. participial adj. [from favour.]
1. regarded with kindness.
oft with some favour'd traveller they stray,
and shine before him all the desert way. pope's odyssey.
2. [from favour, the noun..] featured. always conjoined
with well or ill.
of her there bred
a thousand young ones, which she daily fed;
sucking upon her poisonous dugs, each one
qf fundry shape, yet all ill-favoured. fairy.ogren.
the ill-favoured and lean-ficshed kine did eat up the seven
well-favoured and fat kine. genesis.
favgur eply. adv. [from favoured.] always joined with
well or ill, in a fair or foul way; with good or bad appearance.”
favourer... n.s. [from favour.] one who favours; one who
regards with kindness or tenderness; a well wisher; a friend.
if we should upbraid them with irreligious, as they do is
with superstitious favourers, the answer which heroin they
would make us, let them apply unto themselves. hocker.
do i not know you for a favourer
of this new sect? ye are not sound. shak. henry viii.
being now a favourer to the briton. shakesp. cymbeline.
conjure their friends they had, labour for sole,
solicit all reputed favourers. daniel’s civil war.
all the favourers of magick were the most profest and bit-
ter enemies to the christian religion. addison.
fa'vourite. m. s. [favori, favorite, french; favoria, ital.]
i. a person or thing beloved ; one regarded with favour; any
thing in which pleasure is taken; that which is regarded with
particular approbation or affection.
every particular master in criticism has his javourite pas-
sages in an author. addison's speciator.
so fathers speak, persuasive speech and misd
their sage experience to the favorite child. pope's odyssy.
2. one chosen as a companion by a superiour; a mean wroteh
whose whole business is by any means to please.
all favours and punishments passed by him, all offices and
places of importance were distributed to his favourites. sidney.
i was a theslalian gentleman, who, by mischance, having
killed a favourite of the prince of that country, was pursued
2 fo
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 797</div><p class="text">f a w
f e a
so cruelly, that in no place but by favour or corruption they
would obtain my destruction. sidney.
the great man down, you mark, his favorite flies;
the poor advanc'd, makes friends of enemies. shak. haml.
bid her steal into the plashed bower,
where honeysuckles, ripen'd by the sun,
• forbid the sun to enter; like to favourites,
made proud by princes that advance their pride
against that power that bred it. shakespeare.
nothing is more vigilant, nothing more jealous than a fa-
vourite, especially towards the waining time, and suspect of
satiety. watton.
this man was very capable of being a great favourite to a
great king. clarendon.
woo. gain, and what the nation owes,
fly the forgetful world.
fa'vour less. adj. [from favour.]
1. unfavoured ; not regarded with kindness; having no pa-
tronage; without countenance.
2. unfavouring; unpropitious.
of that goddess i have sought the fight,
yet no where can her find ; such happiness
heavendoth me envy, and fortune favourless. fairy queen,
fa usen. m. s. a sort of large eel.
he left the waves to wash ; -
the wave sprung entrails, about which fausens and other fish
did shole. chapman's iliads.
fa'usse bray e. m. s. a small mount of earth, four fathom
wide, erected on the level round the foot of the rampart, to
fire upon the enemy, when he is so far advanced that you can-
not force him back; and also to receive the ruins which the
cannons make in the body of the place. harris.
fa utor. m. s. [latin; fauteur, french..] favourer; counte-
nancer; supporter.
i am neither author or fautor of any seoł: i will have no
man addict himself to me; but, if i have any thing right, de-
fend it as truth's, not mine. . . . ben. johnson.
the new mountain in the lucrine lake, which is alleged,
by the fautors of this opinion, as an instance in behalf of it,
was not raised thus. woodward.
fa'utress. m. s. [fautrix, latin ; fautrice, fr.] a woman
that favours, or shows countenance.
it made him pray, and prove -
minerva's aid his fautres still. chapman's iliads,
he comes from banishment to the fautres of liberty, from
the barbarous to the polite. garth's dedicat, to ovid,
fawn. n.s.. [faon, french, from fan, in old french a child,
probably from insans, latin.]. a young deer.
looking my love, i go from place to place,
like a young fawn that late hath lost the hind;
and seek each where, where last i saw her face,
whose image yet i carry fresh in mind. spenser's sonnets.
the buck is called the first year a fawn, the second year a
pricket. shakespeare's love's labour lost.
the colt hath about four years of growth; and so the fawn,
and so the calf. bacon's natural history.
who for thy table feeds the wanton fawn,
for him as kindly spreads the flow'ry lawn. pope.
to fawn. v. n. [of uncertain original. perhaps a contrac-
tion of the french fanfan, a term of fondness for children.]
1. to court by frisking before one ; as a dog.
the dog straight fawned upon his master for old know-
ledge. sidney.
holding corioli in the name of rome,
even like a fawning greyhound. shakespeare's coriolanus.
zo. to court by any means. used by animals.
instead thereof he kiss'd her weary feet,
and lick'd her lily hands with fawning tongue,
as he her wrong'd innocence did weet. fairy queen.
is it not strange that a rational man should worship an ox :
that he should fawn upon his dog? bow himself before a cat?
and adore leeks and garlick : south.
3. to court servilely.
my love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns;
what danger or what sorrow can befal thee,
so long as edward is thy constant friend ?
- shakespeare's henry vi.
and thou, sly hypocrite, who now would'st be
patron of liberty, who more than thou
once fawn'd, and cring'd, and servilely ador'd
heav'n's awful monarch 2 milton's paradise loft.
whom ancus follows, with a fawning air;
but vain within, and proudly popular. dryden's aon.
dext'rous the craving fawning crowd to quit,
and pleas'd to 'scape from flattery to wit.
4. to bring forth a fawn.
fawn. m. s. a servile cringe; low flattery.
you will rather shew our gentle lowts
how you can frown, than spend a fawn upon them
for the inheritance of their loves. shakesp. coriolanus.
fa'w ner. n.s. [from fawn..] one that fawns; one that pays
servile courtship.
pope.
pope.
by softness of behaviour we have arrived at the appellation
of fawners. - speciator.
fa winingly, adv. [from fawn..] in a cringing servic way.
fa xed. adj. [from fax, saxon, hair.] hairy. now ob-
solete.
they could call a comet a faxed star, which is all one with
stella crinita, or cometa. camden's remains.
fay. m. s. [fre, french.]
i. a fairy; an elf.
and the yellow-skirted says
fly after the night-steeds,
leaving their moon-lov'd maze. r milton,
ye sylphs and sylphids, to your chief give ear;
fays, fairies, genii, elves and demons hear ! pope.
2. [from foi, french.] faith. wholly obsolete.
their ill 'haviour garres men mi ay,
both of their doctrine and their say. spenser's pastorals.
ffab erry. m. s. [grasularia.] ... a gooseberry. dic7.
7% feague. v. a. s.gower uses to frige, for to censure; fgen,
german, to sweep; syken, dutch, to strike.] to whip; to
chastise ; to beat.
fe alty... m. s. [faulo, french.] duty due to a superior
lord; fidelity to a master; loyalty.
i am in parliament pledge for his truth,
and lasting fealty to the new-made king.
let my sovereign
command my eldest son, nay all my sons,
as pledges of my fealty and love. shakespeare's henry iv.
man disobeying,
disloyal, breaks his fealty, and fins
against the high supremacy of heav'n.
each bird and beast behold
after their kinds: i bring them to receive
from thee their names, and pay thee fally
with low subjection. milton's paradis? loft,
whether his first design be to withdraw
our fally from god, or to disturb -
conjugal love. milton's paradis, loft.
fear. m. s. [reanan, sax. to fear; vaer, dut. feałle, erse.]
1. dread 3 horrour ; painful apprehension of danger.
fear is an uneasiness of the mind, upon the thought of
future evil likely to befalus. locke.
trembling fear still to and fro did fly,
and found no place where safe she shrowd him might.
fairy queen.
for fear was upon them, because of the people of those
countries, - ezra, iii. 3.
what then remains are we depriv'd of will
must we not wish, for fear of wishing ill dryden's juv.
fear, in general, is that passion of our nature whereby we
are excited to provide for our security upon the approach of
evil. rogers.
2. awe ; dejection of mind at the presence of any person or
thing ; terror impressed: with of before that which impresseth.
and the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall be upon
shak. rich. iii,
milton.
every beast. gen. ix. 2.
3. anxiety; solicitude.
the principal fear was for the holy temple. mac,
4. that which causes fear.
antony, stay not by his fide:
thy demon, that's the spirit that keeps thee, is
noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,
where caesar's is not; but near him, thy angel
becomes a far, as being o'erpower'd. shak. ant. and cleop.
5. the object of fear.
except the god of abraham and the fear of isaac had been
with me. gen. xxxi. 42.
6. something hung up to scare deer by its colour or noise.
he who fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the
pit, and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be
taken in the snare. js, xxiv. 18.
fear. m. s. [poena, saxon.] a companion. obsolete.
but fair clarissa to a lovely fear -
was linked, and by him had many pledges dear. fairy qu.
to fear. v. a. speana, saxon.]
1. to dread; to consider with apprehensions of terrour; to be
afraid of.
now, for my life, hortensio fears his widow.
—then never trust me if i be afraid.
—you are very sensible, yet you miss my sense;
i mean hortensio is afraid of you. shak. tam. of the shrew.
to far the foe, fince fear oppresseth strength,
gives, in your weakness, strength unto your foe. sh. r. ii.
there shall rise up a kingdom, and it shall o: above
all the kingdoms before it. 2 esdr. xii. 13.
when i view the beauties of thy face,
i fear not death, nor dangers, nor disgrace.
2. to fright; to terrify ; to make afraid.
the inhabitants, being feared with the spaniards landing
and burning, fled from their dwellings. carew,
we must not make a scarecrow of the law,
setting it up to fear the birds of prey. sh. meas for meas.
some,
djans
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 798</div><p class="text">some, fitting on the hatches, would seem there,
with hideous gazing, to far away fear.
to fe ar. v. n.
1. to live in horrour; to be afraid.
well you may fear too far.
—safer than trust too far:
let me still take away the harms i fear,
not fear still to be harm'd. shakespeare's king lear.
if any such be here, if any fear
less for his person than an ill report;
if any think brave death outweighs bad life.
2. to be anxious.
then let the greedy merchant far
for his ill-gotten gain ;
and pray to gods that will not hear,
while the debating winds and billows bear
donne.
shak. coriolan.
his wealth into the main. dryden's horace.
see, pious king, with diff'rent strife,
thy struggling albion's bosom torn :
so much she fears for william's life,
that mary's fate she dare not mourn. prior.
ff'arful. adj. [fear and full.]
1. timorous; timid ; easily made afraid.
he's gentle, and not fearful.
them that are of a fearful heart.
2. afraid. it has of before the object of fear.
the irish are more fearful to offend the law than the
english. - davies on ireland.
i have made my heroine fearful of death, which neither
cassandra nor cleopatra would have been. dryden.
. awful; to be reverenced.
who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises'
exodus.
shakspeare's tempoff.
isaiah.
4. terrible; dreadful; frightful; impressing fear.
neither fast to friend, nor farful to foe. aftham's schoolm.
against such monsters god maintained his own, by fearful
execution of extraordinary judgment upon them. ooker.
what god did command touching canaan, concerneth not
us any otherwise than only as a fearful pattern of his just dis-
pleasure. hacker.
all torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement
inhabits here: some heav'nly power guide us
out of this fearful country. shakespeare's tempest.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living god.
heb. x. 31.
lay down by those pleasures the fearful and dangerous
thunders and lightnings, the horrible and frequent earthquakes,
and then there will be found no comparison. raleigh.
this is the natural fruit of sin, and the present revenge
which it takes upon sinners, besides that fearful punishment
which shall be inflicted on them in another life. tillotson.
fe(arfully. adv. [from fearful.]
1. timorously; in fear.
in such a night
did thisbe fearfully o’ertrip the dew,
and saw the lion's shadow. shakesp. merchant of venice.
2. terribly; dreadfully.
there is a cliff, whose high and bending head
looks fearfully on the confined deep. shakesp. king lear.
fe’arfulness. n.f. [from fearful.]
1. timorousness; habitual timidity.
2. state of being afraid ; awe; dread.
is it credible that the acknowledgment of our own un-
worthiness, our professed fearfulness to ask any thing, other-
wise than only for his sake to whom god can deny nothing,
that this should be noted for a popish errour * hooker.
a third thing that makes a government justly despised, is
fearfulness of and mean compliances with bold popular of
fenders. south.
fe(arlesly. adv. [from fearles...] without terrour; intre-
idly.
p 'tis matter of the greatest astonishment to observe the stu-
pid, yet common boldness of men, who so fearlossy expose
themselves to this most formidable of perils. decay of piety.
fe(arles ness. n.s.. [from fearly;..] exemption from fear;
intrepidity; courage; boldness.
he gave instances of an invincible courage, and fearlessnes;
in danger. . clarendon.
fe’arless. adj. [from far..] free from fear; intrepid; cou-
rageous; bold: with of before the subject.
from the ground she fearles doth arise,
and walked forth without suspect of crime.
the flaming seraph, fearless, though alone
encompass'd round with foes, thus answer'd bold. milton.
a nation, whose distinguishing character it is to be more
farles of death and danger than any other. temple.
feas.151'lity.. n.s.. [from feasible.]
1. practicability.
2. a thing practicable.
men often swallow falsities for truths, dubiosities for cer-
tainties, possibilities for feasibilitics, and things impossible for
possibilities themselves. brown's vulgar errours.
fairy queen.
fe/asible. adj. [faisible, french..] practicable; such as
may be effected ; such as may be done.
we conclude many things impossibilities, which yet are
easy feasibles. - glanville's sceps.
things are feasible in themselves; else the eternal wisdom
of god would never have advised, and much less have com-
manded them. - south.
fe asibly. adv. [from feasible.] practicably.
feast. n.s.. [fosle, french ; fosium, latin.]
i. an entertainment of the table ; a sumptuous treat of great
numbers.
here's our chief guest. if he had been forgotten,
it had been as a gap in our great feaft. shakesp. macbeth.
on pharaoh's birthday he made a fraft untô all his ser-
vants. gen. xi. 20.
the lady of the leaf ordain’d a fas,
and made the lady of the flow'r her guest;
when lo! a bow'r ascended on the plain,
with sudden seats ordain'd, and large for either train.
dryden.
2. an anniversary day of rejoicing either on a civil or religious
occasion. opposed to a fast.
this day is call'd the fast of crispian. shakes. hon.v.
3. something delicious to the palate.
many people would, with reason, prefer the griping of an
hungry belly to those dishes which are a fraft to others. lzzi.
to feast. v. n. [from the noun..] to eat sumptuously; to
eat together on a day of joy.
richard and northumberland, great friends,
did fast together. shakespeare's henry iv.
the parish finds, indeed; but our church-wardens
feast on the filver, and give us the farthings.
to f.e.ast. v. a.
1. to entertain sumptuously; to entertain magnificently.
he was entertained and fosted by the king with great shew
gay.
of favour. hayward.
2. to delight; to pamper; to gratify luxuriously. -
all these are our's, all nature's excellence,
whose taste or smell can bless the fasted sense. drydon.
fe‘ast er. m. s. [from fast.]
1. one that fares deliciously. -
those feasiers could speak of great and many excellencies
in manna. - taylor's worthy communicant,
2. one that entertains magnificently.
fe'astful. adj. [frast and full.]
1. festive; joyful.
- the virgins also shall on feastful days
visit his tomb with flowers, only bewailing
his lot unfortunate in nuptial choice,
from whence captivity and loss of eyes. milan's agonski,
therefore be sure
thou, when the bridegroom with his fasful friends
passes to bliss at the mid-hour of night,
hast gain'd thy entrance, virgin wise and pure.
2. luxurious; riotous.
the suitor train
who crowd his palace, and with lawless pow'r
his herds and flocks in feastful rites devour. pope's odisj.
fe'ast rite. n.s.. [feast and rite.] custom observed in en-
tertainments.
also o
his hospitable gate,
unbarr'd to all, invites a numerous train
of daily guests; whose board with plerty crown'd,
revives the fasirites old. *::::.
fe at. n.s. [suit, french.) *
1. act ; deed ; action; exploit. o
pyrocles is his name, renowned far
for his bold feats, and hardy confidence;
full oft approved in many a cruel war.
tarquin’s self he met,
and struck him on his knee; in that day's fats,
when he might act the woman in the scene,
he prov’d th' best man i' th' field. shakoff. coriol.nor.
our soldiers are men of strong heads for action, and per-
form such feats as they are not able to express. addis. speciat.
2. a trick; an artful, festive, or judicrous performance.
the joints are more supple to all feats of activity and mo-
tion in youth than afterwards. bacon’s effyi.
feat. adj. [fait, bien fait, french; homo fossius ad unguem.]
1. ready 3 skilful; ingenious.
never master had
a page so kind, so duteous, diligent;
so tender over his occasions, true,
so feat, so nurse like. shakoshcare's conkline.
2. it is now only used in irony and contempt.
that feat man at controversy.
3. nice; neat.
look how well my garments fit upon me.
much fater than before. shaftoffeare's 7&amp;npoff.
fe‘ateous. adj. [from feat.] neat; dextercus. obsolete.
fox. adv. [from feateous...] neatly; dextreuily. not
1il ullo,
fairy q.:”.
stilling;…t.
i
and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 799</div><p class="text">f e a
f e c
and with fine fingers cropt full falousy
the tender stalks on high. spensor.
feather... n.s.. [reben, saxon; feder, german.]
1. the plume of birds.
look, as i blow this feather from my face.
the brave eagle does with sorrow see
the forest wasted, and that lofty tree,
which holds her nest, about to be o'erthrown,
before the feathers of her young are grown;
she will not leave them, nor she cannot stay,
but bears them boldly on her wings away. j/aller.
when a man in the dark presses either corner of his eye
with his finger, and turns his eye away from his finger, he
will see a circle of colours like those in the feathers of a pea-
cock's tail. newton's opticks.
i am bright as an angel, and light as a father. swift.
2. kind; nature; species: from the proverbial expression, birds
of a feather; that is, of a species.
clifford and the haught northumberland,
and of their feather many more proud birds,
haye wrought the easy-melting king, like wax. sh. h. vi.
i am not of that father to shake off
my friend, when he most needs me. shakesp, timon.
3. an ornament; an empty title.
4. [upon a horse.] a sort of natural frizzling of hair, which,
in some places, rises above the lying hair, and there makes a
figure resembling the tip of an ear of corn. farrier's dict.
to fe"ather. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to dress in feathers.
2. to fit with feathers.
3. to tread as a cock.
dame partlet was the sovereign of his heart;
ardent in love, outrageous in his play,
he feather'd her a hundred times a-day. dryden.
4. to enrich; to adorn; to exalt.
they stuck not to say, that the king cared not to plume his
nobility and people, off". himself. bacon's henry vii.
5. to feather one's nes. [alluding to birds which collect
feathers, among other materials, for making their nests.] to
get riches together.
fe atherbed. n.s. [feather and bed.] a bed stuffed with
feathers; a soft bed.
the husband cock looks out, and strait is sped,
and meets his wife, which brings her fatherbed. donne.
fe"atherdriver. n. s. [feather and drive..] one who
cleanses feathers by whisking them about.
a featherdriver had the residue of his lungs filled with the
fine dust or down of feathers. derham's physico-theology.
fe(athered. adj. [from feather.]
i. clothed with feathers.
i saw young harry with his beaver on,
his cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm’d,
rise from the ground like father'd mercury. shak. h. iv.
so when the new-born phoenix first is seen,
shak. h. vi.
her feather'd subjects all adore their queen. dryden.
dark’ning the sky, they hover o'er, and shroud
the wanton sailors with a father'd cloud. prior.
. then ships of uncouth form shall stem the tide,
and feather'd people crowd my wealthy side. pope.
vultures, harpies, ravens, cormorants, and, among many
other feathered creatures, several little winged boys perch upon
the middle arches. addison's spectator.
2. fitted with feathers; carrying feathers.
an eagle had the ill hap to be struck with an arrow, fea-
ther'd from her own wing. l’estrange.
not the bow they bend, nor boast the skill
to give the feather'd arrow wings to kill. pope's odyssey.
fe"ather edge. n.s.
boards or planks that have one edge thinner than another,
are called featheredge stuff. moxon's mech. exer.
fe athere do ed. adj. [feather and edge.] belonging to a
feather edge.
the cover must be made of fatheredged boards, in the na-
ture of several doors with hinges fixed thereon. mortimer.
featherfew. n.s. a plant both single and double: it is
increased by seeds or slips, and also by dividing the roots: it
flowereth most part of the summer. mortimer's husbandry.
fe ather-grass. n.s. [gramen plumosum.] an herb.
fe ari erless. adj. [from father.] without feathers.
this so high grown ivy was like that featherles bird, which
went about to beg plumes of other birds to cover his naked-
ness. howel's vocal forest.
fe‘ather ly. adj. [from father.] resembling feather.
the accretion or pluvious aggelation of hail about the mo-
ther and fundamental atoms thereof, seems to be some fatherly
particle of snow, although snow itself be sexangular. brown.
fe atherseller. m. s. [father and seller.] one who sells
feathers for beds. -
fe‘athery. adv. [from father.] cloathed with feathers.
or whistle from the lodge, or village cock
count the night-watches to his fathery dames. milton.
fo adv. [from feat..] neatly; nimbly; dextrously.
vol. i. - -
foot itfeatly here and there,
and sweet sprites the burthen bear. shakoff. tempoff.
the moon was up, and shot a gleamy light, -
: saw a quire of ladies in a round,
...that featy footing seem'd to skim the ground. dyin.
{batness. n.s.. [from fat..] neatnes; nicety; dexterity.
feature. n.s.. [failure, old french.]
1. the cast or make of the face,
report the feature of octavia, her years.
2. any lineament or single part of the face.
though ye be the fairest of god's creatures,
yet think that death shall spoil your goodly features. spensor.
we may compare the face of a great man with the character,
and try if we can find out in his looks and features, the haughty,
cruel, or unmerciful temper that discovers itself in the history.
addison on medals.
though various features did the sisters grace,
a sister's likeness was in every face. addison's ovid.
to fe’ature. v. a. to resemble in countenance; to favour.
he liv'd in court most prais'd, most lov’d,
a sample to the young'st; to th’ more mature,
a glass that featur'd them. shakespeare's cymbeline.
to feaze. v. a. [falsez, french.] -
1. to untwist the end of a rope, and reduce it again to its first
stamina.
2. to beat; to whip with rods. ainsworth.
7%. febru'citate. v. n. [febricitor, latin.] to be in a
shakespeare,
fever. dicf.
febr1'culose, adj. isobriculosus, latin.] troubled with a
fever. dicf.
febrifu'ge. n.s.. [febris and fugo, latin; febrifuge, french.]
any medicine serviceable in a fever. $24incy.
bitters, like choler, are the best sanguiners, and also the
best febrifuges. floyer on the humours.
febri*u'ge. adj. having the power to cure fewers.
febrifuge draughts had a most surprising good effect.
arbuthnot.
febrile. adj. [febrilis, latin; febrile, fr.] constituting a
fever; proceeding from a fever. -
the spirits, embroiled with the malignity in the blood, and
turgid and tumified by the febrile fermentation, or by phlebo-
tomy relieved. harvey on consumptions.
february. m. s. [februarius, latin.] the name of the
second month in the year.
you have such a february face,
so full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness
fe'ces. n.s.. [feces, latin ; feces, french.]
1. dregs ; jees ; sediment; subsidence.
hence the surface of the ground with mud
and slime besmear'd, the feces of the flood,
receiv'd the rays of heav'n ; and sucking in
the seeds of heat, new creatures did begin. dryden.
2. excrement.
the symptoms of such a constitution are a sour smell in
their feces. arbuthnot on aliments.
#: n. s. [feculentia, latin.]
1. muddiness; quality of abounding with lees or sediment.
2. lees; feces; sediment; dregs.
pour upon it some very strong lee, to facilitate the separa-
tion of its feculencies. boyle.
whether the wilding's fibres are contriv'd
to draw th' earth's purest spirit, and resist
its seculence, which in more porous stocks
of cyder plants finds passage free. phillips.
fe'culent. adj. [faculentus, lat. feculent, french..] foul;
dreggy; excrementitious.
but both his hands, most filthy seculent,
above the water were on high extent,
and fain'd to wash themselves incessantly,
yet nothing cleaner were for such intent. fairy queen.
they are to the body as the light of a candle to the gross
and feculent snuff, which as it is not pent up in it, so neither
doth it partake of its impurity. glanv. apology.
fe"cund. adj. [faecundus, latin; fecond, french..] fruitful;
rolifick.
p the more sickly the years are, the less found of fruitful of
children also they be. graunt's bills{ mortality.
fecun dation., n.s.. [forcundo, latin.] the aet of making
fruitful or prolifick.
she requested these plants as a medicine of fecundation, or
to make her fruitful. brown's vulgar errours.
to fecu'ndify. v. a. to make fruitful; to make prolifick.
dic7.
shakespeare.
fecu'ndity.. n.s. [from fecund; secondits, french.]
1. fruitfulness; quality of producing or bringing forth in great
abundance.
i appeal to the animal and vegetable productions of the
earth, the vast numbers whereof notoriously testify the ex-
treme luxuriance and fecundity of it. woodward.
2. power of producing or bringing forth.
some of the ancients mention some seeds that retain their
9 a fecundity<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 800</div><p class="text">f e e
f e e
foundity forty years; and i have found that melon-seeds,
after thirty years, are best for raising of melons. ray.
god could never create so ample a world, but he could have
made a bigger; the fecundity of his creative power never grow-
ing barren, nor being exhausted. bentley.
fed. preterite and participle pass of to feed.
for on the grassy verdure as he lay,
and breath'd the freshness of the early day,
devouring dogs the helpless infant tore,
fed on his trembling limbs, and lapp'd the gore... pope.
fedary. m. s. [fordus, latin, or from feudum.] this word,
peculiar to shakespeare, may signify either a confederate ; a
partner ; or a dependent.
damn'd paper
black as the ink that's on thee, senseless bauble!
art thou a fedary for this act, and lookest -
so virgin-like without : shakespeare's cymbeline.
federal. adj. [from fadus, latin.] relating to a league or
contract. -
it is a fideral rite betwixt god and us, as eating and drink-
ing, both among jews and heathens, was wont to be. hamm.
the romans compelled them, contrary to all federal right
and justice, both to part with sardinia, their lawful territory,
and also to pay them for the future a double tribute. grew.
fe(derary. m. s. [from fedus, latin.] a confederate ; an
accomplice.
she's a traitor, and camillo is
a federary with her. shakespeare.
federate. adj. [federatus, latin.] leagued ; joined in
confederacy.
fee. n.s. [peoh, saxon ; foe, danish, cattle ; feudum, low
latin ; feu, scottish.]
1. [in law.] all lands and tenements that are held by any ac:
knowledgment of superiority to a higher lord. all lands and
tenements, wherein a man hath a perpetual estate to him and
his heirs, &amp;c. are divided into allodium and feudum ; allodium
is every man's own land, which he possesses merely in his own
right, without acknowledgment of any service, or payment
of any rent to any other. feudum, or foe, is that which we
hold by the benefit of another, and in name whereof we owe
services, or pay rent, or both, to a superior lord. and all
our land in england, the crown-land, which is in the king's
own hands, in right of his crown, excepted, is in the nature
of feudum : for though a man have land by descent from his
ancestors, or bought it for his money; yet is the land of such
a nature, that it cannot come to any, either by descent or
purchase, but with the burthen that was laid upon him who
had novel fee, or first of all received it as a benefit from his
lord, to him and to all such to whom it might descend, or
be any way conveyed from him. so that no man in england
has direoism dominium, that is, the very property or demesne
in any land, but the prince in right of his crown; for though
he that has fee has jus perpetuum &amp; utile dominium, yet he
owes a duty for it, and therefore it is not simply his own.
fee is divided into two sorts; fee-absolute, otherwise called
fe-simple, and fee-conditional, otherwise termed fee-tail:
fo-fimple is that whereof we are seized in those general words,
to us and our heirs for ever: fe-tail is that whereof we are
seised to us and our heirs, with limitation ; that is, the heirs
of our body. and fre-tail is either general or special: general
is where land is given to a man, and the heirs of his body:
fe-tail special is that where a man and his wife are seised of
land to them and the heirs of their two bodies. cowel.
now like a lawyer, when he land would let,
or sell fe-simples in his master's name. hubberd’s tale.
here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for
entering his fre-simple without leave. shakesp. henry vi.
2. property; peculiar.
what concern they
the general cause or is it a fee-grief,
due to some single breast 2 shakespeare's macbeth.
3. reward; gratification; recompense.
these be the ways by which, without reward,
livings in courts be gotten, though full hard ;
for nothing there is done without a fee. hubberd’s tale.
not helping, death's my fes;
but if i help, what do you promise me ! shakspeare.
4. payments occasionally claimed by persons in office.
now that god and friends
have turn'd my captive state to liberty,
at our enlargement what are thy due fees p shak. hen. vi.
5. reward paid to physicians or lawyers.
he does not refuse doing a good office for a man, because
he cannot pay the fee of it. addison's spectator.
6. portion; pittance; share. obsolete.
in pruning and trimming all manner of trees,
reserve to each cattle their property fees, tussor.
'fe'efarm. n.s.. [see and farm.] tenure by which lands are
held from a superiour lord.
john surrendered his kingdoms to the pope, and took them
back again, to hold in feefarm; which brought him into such
hatred, as all his lifetime after he was possest with fear. davies.
i
to fee. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to reward; to pay. -
no man fees the sun, no man purchases the light, nor err:
if he walks by it. south.
watch the disease in time; for when within
the dropsy rages and extends the skin,
in vain for hellebore the patient cries,
and fees the doctor; but too late is wise. dryden's pers:
2. to biibe ; to hire; to purchase.
i have long loved her, and ingrossed opportunities to meet
her ; feed every slight occasion, that could but niggardly give
me fight of her. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
3. to keep in hire.
there's not a thane of them but in his house
i have a servant feed. shakespeare's macbeth.
feeble. adj. [foible, french..]. weak; debilitated; sickly;
infirm ; without strength of body or mind.
the men carried all the feeble upon asses to jericho. 2 chron.
command th'assistance of a faithful friend,
but feeble are the succours i can send. dryden’s afn.
how i have lov’d, excuse my falt'ring tongue;
my spirits feeble, and my pains are strong. dryden.
we carry the image of god in us, a rational and immortal
soul; and though we be now miserable and feeble, yet we aspire
after eternal happiness, and finally expect a great exaltation of
all our natural powers. bentley.
rhyme is a crutch that helps the weak along,
supports the feeble, but retards the strong. smith.
to fee ble. v. a. [from the noun..] to weaken; to enfeeble;
to deprive of strength or power. not in use.
or as a castle reared high and round,
by subtile engines and malicious slight
is undermined from the lowe h ground,
and her foundation forc'd and felled quite.
shall that victorious hand be fold here,
that in your chambers gave you chastisement sh. k. john.
fe fbi. emi'n ded. adj. [sole and mind.] weak of mind; de-
fe&amp;tive in resolution and constancy.
warn them that are unruly, comfort the fellonindad, fun-
port the weak, be patient toward all men. 1 thoff.
fe(e blen ess. n.s.. [from feeble.] weakness; imbecility; in-
firmity; want of strength.
a better head rome's glorious body fits,
than his that shakes for age and feeblens. shak. tit. aid.
some in their latter years, through the feebleness of their
limbs, have been forced to study upon their knees. south.
fe'ebly. adv. [from feeble.] weakly; without strength.
like mine, thy gentle numbers feebly creep;
thy tragick muse gives smiles, thy comick sleep. dryden.
to feed. v. a. [fodan, gothick; feban, pooban, saxon.]
1. to supply with food.
her heart and bowels through her back he drew,
and fed the hounds that help'd him to pursue. dryden.
boerhaave fed a sparrow with bread four days, in which
time it eat more than its own weight. arbuthnot on diet.
2. to supply; to furnish.
a constant smoke arises from the warm springs that fied
the many baths with which this island is stocked. addison.
the breadth of the bottom of the hopper must be half the
length of a barley corn, and near as long as the rollers, that it
may not feed them too fast. mortimer’s hosandry.
3. to graze; to consume by cattle.
once in three years fed your mowing lands, if you cannot
get manure constantly to keep them in heart. mortimer.
the frost will spoil the grass; for which reason take care to
fed it close before winter. martimer's hussandry.
4. to nourish; to cherish.
how oft from pomp and state did i remove,
to feed despair, and cherish hopeless love?
5. to keep in hope or expectation.
barbarosla learned the strength of the emperor, craftily
feeding him with the hope of liberty. kncles.
6. to delight; to entertain; to keep from satiety.
the alteration of scenes, so it be without noise, seed; and
relieves the eye, before it be full of the same object. bacon.
7. to make fat. a provincial use.
to feed. v. n. -
1. to take food. chiefly applied to animals food.
to fed were best at home;
from thence the sawce to meet is ceremony;
meeting were bare without it. shosh. macort.
2. to prey; to live by eating. -
- i am not covetous of gold;
nor care i, who doth feed upon my cost. shakoff. hon. v.
you cry against the noble senate, who,
under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
would feed on one another. shakesp. corizons.
galen speaketh of the curing of the scirrhus of the liver by
milk of a cow, that fedeth upon certain herbs. boczo.
some birds fed upon the berries of this vegetable. brown.
he feeds on fruits, which of their own accord,
the willing grounds and laden trees afford. dryder's o:
- fic
fairy 24ren.
prizr.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 801</div><p class="text">f e e
f e i
the brachmans were all of the same race, lived in fields 2. the horns or antennae of insects.
and woods, and fed only upon rice, milk, or herbs. temple.
all feed on one vain patron, and enjoy
th’ extensive blesfing of his luxury. pope's effy on man.
3. to pasture; to place cattle to feed.
if a man shall cause a field to be eaten, and shall put in his
infects clean their eyes with their forelegs as well as an:
tennae; and as they are perpetually feeling and searching be-
fore them with ...s. or antennae, i am apt to think that
besides wiping and c eaning the eyes, the uses here named ma
be admitted. derham's physico-theology.
beast, and shall feed in another man's field, he shall make feeling. participial adj. [from fel.]
restitution. ex. xxii. v.
4. to grow fat or plump. a provincial use.
feed. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. food; that which is eaten.
a fearful deer then looks most about when he comes to the
best feed, with a shrugging kind of tremor through all her
principal parts. sidney.
an old worked ox fats as well as a young one: their feed
is much cheaper, because they eat no oats. mortimer’s hush.
2. pasture.
besides his cote, his flocks and bounds of fed
are now on sale. shakespeare's as you like it.
3. meal ; act of eating.
plenty hung
tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
i spared not: for such pleasure till that hour
- at feed or fountain never had i found.
fe'eder. m. s. [from fied.]
i. one that gives food.
the beast obeys his keeper, and looks up,
not to his master's but his feder's hand.
2. an exciter; an encourager.
when thou do'st hear i am as i have been,
approach me, and thou shalt be as thou was’t,
the tutor and the feder of my riots. shakoff. henry iv.
3. one that eats.
with eager feeding, food doth choak thefeeder. shakesp.
but that our feasts
in every mess have folly, and the feders
jest with it as a custom, i should blush
to see you so attired. shakespeare's i/inter's tale.
we meet in aristotle with one kind of thrush, called the
mislel-thrush, or feder upon misseltoe. brown’s pulgar err.
4. one that eats in a certain mode: as, a nice feeder, a gross
feeder.
but such fine feders are no guests for me;
riot agrees not with frugality:
then, that unfashionable man am i,
with me they'd starve for want of ivory. dryden's juv.
to feel. pret, felt; part. pass. felt. v. n. irelan, saxon.j
1. to have perception of things by the touch.
the sense of feeling can give us a notion of extension,
shape, and all other ideas that enter at the eye, except co-
lours. addison's speciator.
2. to search by feeling. see feele r.
they should seek the lord, if happily they might feel after
milton.
denham.
him, and find him. acis.
3. to have a quick sensibility of good or evil, right or wrong.
man, who feels for all mankind. - pope.
4. to appear to the touch.
blind men say black feels rough, and white feels smooth. dry.
of these tumours one feels flaccid and rumpled; the other
more even, flatulent and springy. sharp's surgery.
to feel. v. a.
1. to perceive by the touch.
suffer me that i may feel the pillars.
2. to try; to sound.
he hath writ this to feel my affection to your honour. shak.
3. to have perception of.
the air is so thin, that a bird has therein no feeling of her
wings, or any resistance of air to mount herself by. raleigh.
4. to have sense of external pain or pleasure.
nor did they not perceive the evil plight
in which they were, or the fierce pains not feel. milton.
but why should those be thought to 'scape, who feel
those rods of scorpions and those whips of steel ?, creech.
5. to be affected by ; to perceive mentally.
would i had never trod this english earth,
or felt the flatteries that grow upon it ! shakesh, hen. viii.
the well-sung woes shall sooth my pensive ghost;
judges, xxvi. 26.
he best can paint them who can feel them most. pope.
not youthful kings in battle seiz'd alive,
e’er felt such grief, such terrour, and despair. pope.
6. to know ; to be acquainted with.
his overthrow heap'd happiness upon him;
for then, and not till then, he felt himself,
and found the blessedness of being little. shakes. hen. viii.
feel. n.s.. [from the verb.] the sense of feeling; the touch.
the difference of these tumours will be distinguished by
the feel. sharp's surgery.
fe'eler. m. s. [from feel.]
1. one that feels.
this hand, whose touch,
whose ev'ry touch would force the feeler's soul -
to th' oath of loyalty. shakespeare's cymbeline.
1. expressive of great sensibility.
o wretched state of man in self-division
q well thou say'st a feeling declaration
thy tongue hath made of cupid's deep incision sidney.
thy wailing words do much my spirits move,
they uttered are in such a feeling fashion. sidney.
write ’till your ink be dry, and with your tears
moist it again; and frame some feling line,
that may discover such integrity. sh. two gent. of perona.
2. sensibly fest. this sense is not sufficiently analogical.
a most poor man made tame to fortune's blows,
who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
am pregnant to good pity. soaks care's king leaf.
i had a feeling sense
of all your royal favours; but this last
f strikes through my heart.
e'eling. m. s. [from feel.]
1. the sense # .../ -
why was the fight
to such a tender ball as th’ eye confinid;
so obvious and so easy to be quench'd,
and not, as feeling, through all parts diffus'd,
that she might look at will through every pore ?
2. power of action upon sensibility.
the apprehension of the good, - -
gives but the greater feeling to the worse. shaft. rich. ii.
3. perception ; sensibility.
their king, out of a princely socling, was sparing and com-
passionate towards his subjects. bacon’s henry vii.
great persons had need to borrow other men's opinions to
think themselves happy; for if they judge by their own feeling,
they cannot find it. bacon's essays.
as we learn what belongs to the body by the evidence of
sense, so we learn what belongs to the soul by an inward con-
sciousness which may be called a sort of internal feeling. isatts.
fe'eling ly. adv. [from feeling.]
1. with expreision of great sensibility. - - -
the princes might judge that he meant himself, who spake
southerne.
moon.
so feelingly. sidney.
he would not have talked so feelingly of codrus's bed, if
there had been room for a bedfellow in it. pope.
2. so as to be sensibly felt.
here feel we but the penalty of adam,
the season's difference; as the icy phang,
and churlish chiding of the winter’s wind,
which when it bites and blows upon my body,
ev’n’till i shrink with cold, i smile and say,
this is no flattery: these are counsellors, -
that feelingly persuade me what i am. shakes). as you like it.
he feelingly knew, and had trial of the late good, and of
the new purchased evil. raleigh's history.
feet, n.s. the plural of foot.
his brother's image to his mind appears,
inflames his heart with rage, and wings his feet with fears.
pope's statius.
fe'etless, adj. [from feet.] being without feet.
geoffrey of boulloin broched three feetlos, birds, called al-
lerions, upon his arrow. camden.
to feign. v. a. [feindre, french; fingo, latin.]
i. to invent; to image by an act of the mind.
abominable, inutterable, and worse
than fables yet have feign'd, or fear conceiv'd,
gorgons, and hydras, and chimaeras dire! milton.
no such things are done as thou sayest, but thou feigned?
them out of thine own heart. neh. vi. 8.
2. to make a show of. -
both his hands, most filthy feculent,
above the water were on high extent,
and feigned to wash themselves incessantly. spens. fairy q.
3. to make a shew of ; to do upon some false pretence.
me gentle delia beckons from the plain,
then, hid in shades, eludes her eager swain;
but feigns a laugh to see me search around,
and by that laugh the willing fair is found. pope.
4. to dissemble; to conceal. now obsolete.
each trembling leaf and whistling wind they hear,
as ghastly bug their hair on end does rear; -
yet both do strive their fearfulness to feign. fairy queen.
to feign. v. n. to relate falsely; to image from the inven-
tion; to tell fabulously.
o therefore the poet
did feign that orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods;
since nought so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
but musick for the time doth change his nature. , shaft,
fe'ignedly, adv. [from feign.] in fiction ; not truly.
such<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 802</div><p class="text">f e l
f e l
such is found to have been falsely and feignedly in some of
the heathens. bacon.
fe(igner. m. s. [from feign.] contriver of a
fiction. -
and these three voices differ; all the things done, the
doing and the doer; the thing feigned, the feigning and the
feigner; so the poem, the poesy and the poet. ben. johnson,
feint. participial adj. [from feign, for feigned; or feint, fr.]
counterfeit ; seeming. -
the mind by degrees loses its natural relish of real, solid
truth, and is reconciled insensibly to any thing that can be but
dressed up into any feint appearance of it. locke.
feint. n.s. [feint, french.] -
1. a false appearance; an offer of something not intended to
be
inventer ;
courtly's letter is but a feint to get off. speciator.
2. a mock assault; an appearance of aiming at one part when
another is intended to be struck.
but, in the breast encamp'd, prepares
for well-bred feints and future wars. prior.
fe"landers. m. s. worms in hawks. ainsworth.
to feli(citate. v. a. [feliciter, french; felicito, latin.]
1. to make happy.
i profess
myself an enemy to all other joys ;
and find i am alone felicitate
in your dear highness' love. shakespeare's king lear.
what a glorious entertainment and pleasure would fill and
flicitate his spirit, if he could grasp all in a fing'e survey ! watts.
2. to congratulate.
they might proceed unto forms of speechcs, felicitating the
good, or depreciating the evil to follow. brown.
feiici r a rios. m. s. [french, from solicitate.] congratula-
tion. jdici.
feli'citous. adj. [fix, latin.] happy. dic7.
fe li'citously. adv. [from flicitous.] happily. dic7.
felicity. n.f. [felicitas, latin ; felicite, fr. j happiness;
prosperity ; blissfulness ; blessedness. |
- the joyous day, dear lord, with joy begin,
and grant that we, for whom thou didest die,
being with thy dear blood clean wash'd from fin,
may live for ever in felicity. spenser's sonnets.
- others in virtue plac'd felicity;
but virtue join'd with riches and long life,
in corporal pleasure he, and careless ease. milt. par. reg.
the filicities of her wonderful reign may be complete.
atterbury.
how great, how glorious a felicity, how adequate to the
desires of a reasonable nature, is revealed to our hopes in the
gospel ! rogers.
fe line. adj. [felinus, latin.] like a cat; pertaining to a
caf.
even as in the beaver; from which he differs principally in
his teeth, which are canine, and in his tail, which is feline,
or a long taper. grew's museum.
fell. adj. [felle, saxon.]
i. cruel; barbarous; inhuman.
it seemed fury, discord, madness fell,
flew from his lap when he unfolds the same.
so follos' foes,
whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep,
to take the one the other, by some chance,
some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends. shak.
2. savage; ravenous; bloody.
that instant was i turn'd into a hart,
and my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,
e’er since pursue me. shakespeare's twelfth night.
i know thee, love wild as the raging main,
more foll than tygers on the lybian plain. pope's autumn.
scorning all the taming arts of man,
the keen hyena, folls of the {; thomson's spring.
fell. n.s. spelle, saxon.] the skin; the hide. not used.
wipe thine eye;
the goujers shall devour them, flesh and fell,
ere they shall make us weep. shakespeare's king lear.
the time has been my senses would have cool’d
to hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair -
would at a dismal treatise rouze and flir. shakes. macbeth.
to fell. v. a. [fellen, german.]
1. to knock down ; to bring to the ground.
villain, stand, or i'll fell thee down.
up and down he traverses his ground;
‘now wards a folling blow, now strikes again. daniel.
taking the small end of his musket in his hand, he struck
him on the head with the stock, and felled him. raleigh.
his fall, for the present, struck an earthquake into all
minds; nor could the vulgar be induced to believe he was
felled. howel's vocal fores.
fairfax.
shakesp. henry v.
on their whole host i flew
unarm’d, and with a trivial weapon fell’d
their choicest youth : they only liv'd who fled.
2. it seems improperly joined with down or along.
milton.
whom with such force he struck he foll'd him down,
and cleft the circle of his golden crown. dryden.
i fell'd along a man of bearded face,
his limbs all cover'd with a shining case. dryd. ind. emp.
3. to hew down; to cut down.
then would he seem a farmer that would sell
bargains of woods, which he did lately fell. hubb. tal.
proud arcite and fierce palamon,
in mortal battle, doubling blow on blow;
like lightning flam'd their fauchions to and fro,
and shot a dreadful gleam ; so strong they struck,
there seem'd less force requir'd to fell an oak.
fell. the preterite of to fall.
none on their feet might stand,
though standing else as rocks; but down they fell
by thousands, angel on archangel roll’d.
fe'ller. m. s. [from fell.] one that hews down.
since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.
- if xiv. 8.
felli'fluous. adj. [fel and fluo, latin.] flowing with gall,
diff.
dryden.
ilton.
fe'll moncer. n.s.. [from fell.] . a dealer in hides.
fe'll ness. n. s. [from fell.]. cruelty; savageness; fury; rage.
when his brother saw the red blood trail
adown so fast, and all his armour steep,
for very felness loud he 'gan to weep. fairy queen.
fe'lloe. n.s.. [felge, danish.) the circumference of a wheel;
the outward part. it is often written fally or felly.
out, out, thou strumpet fortune ! all you gods,
in general synod, take away her power;
break all the spokes and fallies from her wheel,
and bowl the round nave down the hill of heav'n. shakes).
axle-trees, naves, felloes, and spokes were all molten. kings.
fe'llow. n. s. [quasi, to follow, minshew; from fe, faith,
and lax, bound, saxon, junius ; fallow, scottish.]
1. a companion; one with whom we consort.
in youth i had twelve fellows like unto myself, but not one
of them came to a good end. ascham's schoolmaster.
to be your follow,
you may deny me: but i'll be your servant,
whether you will or no. shakespeare's tempest.
have we not plighted each our holy oath,
that one should be the common good of both;
one soul should both inspire, and neither prove
his fellow's hindrance in pursuit of love?
2. an associate; one united in the same affair.
each on his fellow for assistance calls;
at length the fatal fabrick mounts the walls. dryden's wirg.
3. one of the same kind.
let partial spirits still aloud complain,
think themselves injur'd that they cannot reign;
and own no liberty, but where they may
without controul upon their fellows prey. waller.
a shepherd had one favourite dog: he fed him with his own
hand, and took more care of him than of his fellows. l'esir.
4. equal ; peer.
so you are to be hereafter fellows, and no longer servants.
dryden.
sidney.
chieftain of the rest
i chose him here: the earth shall him allow;
his fellows late, shall be his subjects now. fairfax.
5. one thing suited to another ; one of a pair.
when virtue is lodged in a body, that seems to have been
prepared for the reception of vice; the soul and the body do
not seem to be follows. addison's speciator.
6. one like or equal to another: as, this knave hath not his
fellow.
7. a familiar appellation used sometimes with fondness; some-
times with esteem; but generally with some degree of con-
tempt.
this is othello's ancient, as i take it.
—the same indeed; a very valiant follow. shakespeare.
an officer was in danger to have lost his place, but his
wife made his peace; whereupon a pleasant fellow said, that he
had been crushed, but that he saved himself upon his horns.
bacon's apophthegms.
full fifteen thousand lusty follows
with fire and sword the fort maintain ;
each was a hercules, you tell us,
yet out they march'd like common men. prior.
8. a word of contempt: the foolish mortal ; the mean wretch ;
the sorry rascal.
those great fellows scornfully receiving them, as foolish
birds fallen into their net, it pleased the eternal justice to make
them suffer death by their hands. sidney.
cassio hath here been set on in the dark
by rodorigo, and fellows that are 'scap'd. shakespeare.
i have great comfort from this follow: methinks he hath
no drowning mark about him ; his complexion is perfect
gallows. shakespeare's tonp:/?.
opinion, that did help me to the crown,
had still kept loyal to possession;
2
and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 803</div><p class="text">f e l
f. e. l.
and left me in reputeless banishment,
a follow of no mark nor likelihood. shakesp. henry iv.
how oft the fight of means, to do ill deeds,
makes deeds ill done for had'st not thou been by,
a fellow by the hand of nature mark'd,
quoted, and figu'd to do a deed of shame,
this murder had not come into my mind. shak. k. john.
the .io.or's abus’d by some most villainous knave,
some base notorious knave, some scurvy follow ! shakesp.
the follow had taken more fish than he could spend while
they were sweet. l’eslrange.
as next of kin, achilles' arms i claim ;
this fellow would ingraft a foreign name
upon our stock, and the sisyphian seed
by fraud and theft asserts his father's breed. dryden.
you will wonder how such an ordinary follow, as this mr.
wood, could have got his majesty's broad seal. swift.
you'll find, if once the monarch agls the monk,
or, cobler-like, the parson will be drunk,
worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow;
the rest is all but leather and prunella. pope.
9. sometimes it implies a mixture of pity with contempt,
the provost commanded his men to hang him up on the
nearest tree : then the follow cried out that he was not the
miller, but the miller’s man. hayward.
10. a member of a college that shares its revenues, or of any
incorporated society.
there should be a mission of three of the follows or brethren
of solomon's house, to give us knowledge of the affairs and
state of those countries to which they were designed. bacon.
to fe'llow. v. a. to suit with ; to pair with 5 to match.
follow is often used in composition to mark community of
nature, station, or employment.
- imagination,
with what's unreal, thou co-aetive art,
and fellow's nothing. shakespeare's jwinter's tale.
fellow-co'mmon er. m.
1. one who has the same right of common.
he cannot appropriate, he cannot inclose, without the con-
sent of all his fellowcommoners, all mankind. locke.
2. a commoner at cambridge of the higher order, who dines
with the fellows.
fellow-cre’ature. m. s. oneothat has the same creator.
reason is the glory of human nature, and one of the chief
eminencies whereby we are raised above our fellowcreatures, the
brutes in this lower world. i/atts's logick, introduction.
fe'llow-heir. m. s. coheir ; partner of the same inheritance.
the gentiles should be followheirs. eph. iii. 6.
fel low-he'lper. m. s. coadjutor; one who concurs in the
same business.
we ought to receive such, that we might be followhelpers to
the truth. 3 john, 8.
fellow-la'bourer. m. s. one who labours in the same
design.
my fellowlabourers have commissioned me to perform in their
behalf this office of dedication. dryden's juv. ded.
fellow-se’r v ant. n.s. one that has the same master.
nor less think we in heav'n of thee on earth,
than of our followservant; and inquire
gladly into the ways of god with man. milton.
fair follows rvant / may your gentle ear
prove more propitious to my slighted care
than the bright dame's we serve. - jvaller.
their fathers and yours were follows rvants to the same
heavenly master while they lived; nor is that relation dissolved
by their death, but ought still to operate among their surviving
children. atterbury.
fellow-soldie r. n.s. one who fights under the same com-
mander. an endearing appellation used by officers to their
men.
come, followsoldier, make thou proclamation. shakoff.
epaphroditus, my brother and companion in labour, and
followsoldier. phil. ii. 25.
fellow-stu'd ent. m. s. one who studics in company with
another, in the same class, under the same master.
i pr’ythee, do not mock me, follow/ludent. shakoff. ham.
if you have no followsludent at hand, tell it over with your
acquaintance. //atts’s logick.
feliow-su’bject. n. s. one who lives under the same go-
vernment,
the bleeding condition of their fellowsiljec's was a feather
in the balance with their private ends. swift.
fellow-su'fferer. m. s. one who shares in the same evils ;
one who partakes the same sufferings with another.
how happy was it for those poor creatures, that your grace
was made their follows forero and how glorious for you, that
you chose to want rather than not relieve : dryden.
we in some measure share the necessities of the poor at the
same time that we relieve them, and make ourselves not only
their patrons but follows: *7te?’s. addison's spectator.
fellow-wri'ter. n. j. one who writes at the same time, or
on the same subject.
vol. i. -
since they cannot raise themselves to the reputation of their
follow-writers, they must fink it to their own pitch, if. they
would keep themselves upon a level with them. addison.
fellowfe'eling. m. s. [follow and feling.]
1. sympathy.
it is a high degree of inhumanity not to have a fellowfeeling
of the misfortune of my brother. - l’eirange.
2. combination; joint interest: commonly in an ill sense. "
even your milkwoman and your nurserymaid have a fl.
lowfeeling. - arbuthnot's history of job; bull.
#::::::::: [fellow and like..] like a companion;
fe'llowly. on equal terms; companionable.
all which good parts, he graceth with a good followiłe,
kind, and respectful carriage. carew's survey of cornwall.
one seed for another to make an exchange,
with followly neighbourhood seemeth not strange. tiffor.
fe llowship. m. s. [from follow.]
1. companionship; consort; society.
this boy cannot tell what he would have,
but kneels and holds up hands for flowship.
shakespeare's coriolanus.
from blissful bowr’s
of amarantine shade, fountain, or spring,
by th’ waters of life, where'er they sat
in fellowships of joy, the sons of light
hasted. milton's paradis loft.
there is no man but god puts excellent things into his
possession, to be used for the common good; for men are :
made for society and mutual followship. calamy's sermons.
god having designed man for a sociable creature, made him
not only with an inclination and under the necessity to have
fellowship with those of his own kind, but furnished him also
with language, which was to be the great instrument and ce-
menter of society. locke.
2. association; confederacy; combination.
we would not die in that man's company,
that fears his followship to die with us. shakes). hen. v.
those laws do bind men absolutely, even as they are men,
although they have never any settled followship, never any so-
lemn agreement amongst themselves. hocker.
most of the other christian princes were drawn into the
followship of that war. knolles's history of the turks.
3. equality.
4. partnership; joint interest.
nearer acquainted, now i feel by proof
that fellowship in pain divides not smart, -
nor lightens aught each man's peculiar load. par. rog.
o love thou sternly dost thy power maintain,
and wilt not bear a rival in thy reign;
tyrants and thou all followship disdain. dryden;
5. company; state of being together.
the great contention of the sea and skies
parted our followship. but hark, a saill shakesp. othello,
6. frequency of intercourse; social pleasure.
in a great town friends are scattered, so that there is not
that followship which is in less neighbourhoods. bacon's essays.
7. fitness and fondness for festal entertainments, with good pre-
fixed.
he had by his excessive good followship, which was grateful to
all the company, made himself popular with all the officers of
the army. clarendon.
8. an establishment in the college, with share in its revenue.
corusodes having, by extreme parsimony, saved thirty
pounds out of a beggarly followship, went to london. swift.
9. [in arithmetick.] that rule of plural proportion whereby
we balance accounts, depending between divers persons, hav-
ing put together a general stock, so that they may every man
have his proportional gain, or sustain his proportional part of
-
loss. , cocker's arithmetick.
fe'lly. adv. [from fell.] cruelly; inhumanly; savagely ;
barbarously. -
fair ye be sure, but cruel and unkind;
as is a tyger, that with greediness
hunts after blood, when he by chance doth find
a feeble beast doth felly him oppress. spenser's sonnets,
felo-de se. m. s. [in law.] he that committeth felony by
murdering himself.
fe'lon. n.s. [felon, french ; folo, low latin; pel, saxon.]
1. one who has committed a capital crime.
i apprehend thee for a solon here. shak. romco and juliet.
the wily fox,
chas'd even amid’ the folds; and made to bleed,
like films, where they did the murd’rous deed. drydon.
2. a whitlow ; a tumour formed between the bone and its in-
vesting membrane, very painful.
the malign paronychia is that which is commonly called a
flon. //seman's surgery,
fi. lon. adj. cruel; traitorous ; inhuman.
ay me what thing on earth, that all things breeds,
might be the cause of so impatient plight !
what fury, or what fiend with for deeds,
hath stirred up so mischievous despight sposor.
9 b - i hen<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 804</div><p class="text">f. e. m.
f e n
then bids prepare th’ hospitable treat,
vain shews of love to veil his felon hate. pope's odyssey.
felo'nious. adj. [from felon.] wicked; traitorous; villa-
nous; malignant; perfidious ; destructive. -
this man conceived the duke's death; but what was the
motive of that felonious conception is in the clouds. iłotton.
-- o thievish night ! -
why should'st thou, but for some folonious end,
in thy dark lanthorn thus close up the stars
that nature hung in heav'n, and fill'd the lamps
with everlasting oil, to give due light
to the misled and lonely traveller
in thy folonious heart though venom lies,
it does but touch thy irish pen and dies. dryden.
fello'niously. adv. [from felonious.) in a felonious way.
fe lonous. adj. [from felon.] wicked; felonious. not used.
i am like for desperate dole to die,
through flamous force of mine enemy. spenser's pasłorals.
fe'lony. m. s. [felonie, fr. flonia, low latin; from felon.] a
crime denounced capital by the law; an enormous crime.
i will make it felony to drink small beer.
shakspeare's henry vi.
felt. the preterite of feel, which see.
felt. m. s. [felt, saxon.]
1. cloth made of wool united without weaving.
it were a delicate stratagem to shoe
a troop of horse with felt. shakespeare's king lear.
2. a hide or skin.
to know whether sheep are sound or not, see that the felt
be loose. mortimer's husbandry.
to felt. v. a. [from the noun..] to unite without weaving.
the same wool one man felts into a hat, another weaves it
into cloth, another into kerfey. hale's origin of mankind.
to feltre. v. a. [from felt.] to clot together like felt.
his feltred locks, that on his bosom fell,
on rugged mountains briers and thorns resemble. fairfax.
fe lu'cca. m. s. [seleu, fr. felkon, arab.] a small open boat
with six oars. dic7.
female. m. s. [f mell, french; fomella, latin.] a she ;
one of the sex which brings young ; not male.
god created man in his own image, male and female created
he them. gen. i. 27.
if he offer it of the herd, whether it be a male or female, he
milton.
shall offer it without blemish. leviticus.
men, more divine,
indu’d with intelle&amp;tual sense and soul,
are masters to their females, and their lords. shakespeare.
female. adj.
1. not male. -
female of sex it seems. milton.
swarming next appear'd
the female bee, that feeds her husband drone. milton.
2. not masculine; belonging to a she. -
- other suns perhaps o
with their attendant moons thou wilt descry,
communicating male and female light,
which two great sexes animate the world. milton.
add what wants
in female sex, the more to draw his love. amilton.
he scrupled not to eat
against his better knowledge, not deceiv'd,
but fondly overcome with female charm. milton.
if by a female hand he had foreseen
he was to die, his wish had rather been
the lance and double ax of the fair warrior queen. dryd.
3. female rhymes. double rhymes so called, because in
french, from which the term is taken, they end in e weak or
feminine. these rhymes are female:
th’ excess of heat is but a fable;
we know the torrid zone is now found habitable. cowley.
the fomale rhymes are in use with the italian in every line,
with the spaniard promiscuously, and with the french alter-
nately, as appears from the alarique, the pucelle, or any of
their later poems. dryden's preface to ann. mirab.
feme covert. n. s. [french.] a married woman ; who is also
said to be under covert baron. *. blount.
feme scle. m. s. [french..] a single woman ; an unmarried
womain.
feminality. m. s. [from formina, latin.] female nature.
if in the minority of natural vigour the parts of feminality
take place, upon the increase or growth thereof the masculine
appears. brown's wulgar errours.
fes minine, adj. [femininus, latin.]
1. of the sex that brings young; female.
- thus we chastile the god of wine
with water that is feminine,
"until the cooler nymph abate
his wrath, and so concorporate.
2. soft; tender ; delicate.
her heav'nly form -
angelick, but more soft and feminine. milton's par. loft.
3. effeminate; emasculated; wanting manliness.
cleaveland.
- ninias was no man of war at all, but altogether feminine
and subjected to ease and delicacy. raleigh's history.
fem n in e. n. f. a she 5 one of the sex that brings young; a
female. ,
o! why did god create at last
this novelty on earth, this fair defect
of nature ? and not fill the world at once
with men, as angels, without feminine 2 milton.
fe'morap, adj. [femoralis, latin.j. belonging to the thigh.
the largest crooked needle should be used in taking up the
femoral arteries in amputation. , sharp's surgery.
fen. a. s. [fenn, saxon ; venne, dutch..] a marsh; low flat
and moist ground ; a moor; a bog.
mexico is a city that stands in the midst of a great marsh or
fen. abbot's description of the iworld.
i go alone,
i.ike to a lonely dragon, that his sen
w makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen. shakesp. coriolan.
the surface is of black son earth. jwoodward on fossils.
he to portina's wat'ry marshes went;
a long canal the muddy fen divides,
and with a clear unsully'd current glides. addison.
fe'neerry. m. s. [fen and berry..] a kind of blackberry.
- skinner.
fen.cf. m. s. [from defence.]
1. guard; security; outwork; defence.
that proved not fence enough to the reputation of their
oppressors. decay of piety.
there's no fence against inundations, earthquakes, or hus-
ricanes. l'estrange.
to put them out of their parents view, at a great distance,
is to expose them to the greatest dangers of their whole life,
when they have the least fence and guard against them. locke.
let us bear this awful corps to caesar,
and lay it in his sight, that it may stand
a fence betwixt us and the victor's wrath. addison's cats.
2. inclosure; mound; hedge; fortified boundary.
in vain did nature's wise command -
divide the waters from the land,
if daring ships, and men prophane,
invade th’ inviolable main;
th’ eternal fences overleap,
and pass at will the boundless deep.
shall i mention make
of the vast mound that binds the lucrine lake
or the disdainful sea, that, shut from thence,
roars round the structure, and invades the fence 2 dryden.
employ their wiles and unavailing care,
to pass the fences and surprise the fair. pope.
3. the art of fencing; defence. -
i bruised my skin th’ other day, with playing at sword and
dagger with a master offence. shakesp. merry wives of winds.
4. skill in defence.
i'll prove it on his body, if he dare,
despite his nice fence and his active practice.
to fence. v. a.
1. to inclose; to secure by an inclosure or hedge.
th’ inhabitants each pasture and each plain
destroyed have, each field to waste is lade;
in fenced towers bestowed is their grain,
before thou cam'st this kingdom to invade. fairfax.
he hath fenced up my way that i cannot pass, and set dark-
ness in my paths. job, xix. 8.
thou hast cloathed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced
me with bones and sinews. job, x. 1 1-
he went about to make a bridge to a strong city, which
was fenced about with walls. 2 mac. xii. 13-
see that the churchyard be fenced in with a decent rail, or
other inclosure. ayliffe's parergon.
2. to guard; to fortify.
so much of adders wisdom i have learnt,
to fence my ear against thy sorceries. milton's agonisies.
with love to friend, th’ impatient lover went,
fenc'd from the thorns, and trod the deep descent. dryden.
to fence. v. n.
1. to practise the arts of manual defence; to practise the use of
weapons. -
he having got some iron, should have it beaten into swords,
and put into his servants hands to fence with, and bang one
another. locke.
2. to guard against; to agt on the defensive.
vice is the more stubborn as well as the more dangerous
evil, and therefore in the first place to be fenced against. looe.
3. to fight according to art, by obviating blows as well as giving.
if a throstle fing, he falls strait a capering :
he will fence with his own shadow. shak. merch. of venice.
a beauteous heifer in the wood is bred;
the stooping warriors aiming head to head,
engage their clashing horns; with dreadful sound
the forest rattles, and the rocks rebound ;
they fence and push, and, pushing, loudly roar,
their dewlaps and their sides are bath'd in gore.
dryden's horace.
shakoshcare.
dryden.
a man
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 805</div><p class="text">f e o
f e r
a man that cannot fence will keep out of bullies and game-
sters company. iocke.
these, being polemical arts, could no more be learned
alone than fencing or cudgelplaying. arbuthnot and pope.
fe'nceless. adj. [from fence.] without inclosure; open.
- each motion of the heart rises to fury,
and love in their weak bosoms is a rage
as terrible as hate, and as destructive:
so the wind roars o'er the wide fenceles; ocean,
and heaves the billows of the boiling deep,
alike from north, from south. rowe's jane shore.
fe'ncer. m. s. [from fence.] one who teaches or practises the
use of weapons, or science of defence.
calmness is great advantage; he that lets
another chafe, may warm him at his fire,
mark all his wand'rings, and enjoy his frets;
as cunning fencers suffer heat to tire. herbert.
a nimble fencer will put in a thrust so quick, that the foil
will be in your bosom when you thought it a yard off. digby.
fe'ncible. adj. [from fence..] capable of defence. addison.
fe'ncingmaster. m. s. [fence and mafter.] one who teaches
the science of defence, or the use of weapons.
fe'ncingschool. n. s. [fence and school.] a place in which
the use of weapons is taught.
if a man be to prepare his son for duels, i had rather mine
should be a good wrestler than an ordinary fencer, which is
the most a gentleman can attain to, unless he will be con-
stantly in the fencingschool, and every day exercising. . . locke.
fen-cricket. n.s. [grillotalpa.] an insect that digs itself holes
in the ground.
to fend. v. a. [from defend..] to keep off; to shut out.
- spread with straw the bedding of thy fold, -
with fern beneath to find the bitter cold. dryden's virgil.
to fend. v. m. to dispute; to shift off a charge.
the dexterous management of terms, and being able to
'fond and prove with them, passes for a great part of learning ;
but it is learning distinct from knowledge. locke.
fender... n.s.. [from find.] -
1. an iron plate laid before the fire to hinder coals that fall, from
rolling forward to the floor.
2. any thing laid or hung at the side of a ship to keep of
violence.
feneration. m. s. [feneratio, latin.] usury; the gain of
interest; the practice of increasing money by lending.
the hare figured not only pusilanimity and timidity from
its temper, but fineration and usury from its fecundity and
superfetation. brown's wulgar errours.
fe‘nugreek. m. s. [fornum graccum, latin.] a plant.
fennel. m. s. [forniculum, latin.] . a plant of strong scent.
a sav'ry odour blown, more pleas'd my sense
than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats
of eve, or goat, dropping with milk at ev'n.
fe’nnelflow er. m. s. snigella.] a plant.
fe'nn e lgiant. m. s. [ferula..] a plant.
fenny. adj. [from fen. j
1. marshy; boggy ; moorish.
driving in of piles is used for stone or brick houses, and
that only where the ground proves fenny or moorish. moxon.
the hungry crocodile, and hisłing snake,
lurk in the troubl’d stream and fenny brake. prior.
2. inhabiting the marsh.
fillet of a fenny snake,
in the caudron boil and bake.
fe'nny's ton es. m. s. a plant.
fe'nsucked. adj. [son and sack..] sucked out of marshes.
infect her beauty, -
you sensack'd fogs, drawn by the powerful sun. sh. k. lear.
feod. n.s.. [foodum, low latin.] fee; tenure. diff.
fe"odal. a.o. [foodal, french, from food.] held from another.
feod ary. n. j. [from flodum, latin.] one who holds his
estate under the tenure of suit and service to a superiour lord.
- t hanmer.
to feoff. v. a. [fif, for, french ; sofare, low latin.]
to put in possession; to invest with right.
feof fe(e. m. s. [sofatus, latin; fieffe, french..] one put
in possession. -
the late earl of desmond, before his breaking forth into
rebellion, conveyed secretly all his lands to feoffees in trust, in
hope to have cut off her majesty from the escheat of his lands.
- spensor's state of ireland.
fe of fer. m. s. if fotor, low latin.] one who gives pos-
session of any thing. see feoffment.
fe off ment. n.s. [softmentum, latin.] the aet of grant-
ing possession. -
any gift or grant of any honours, castles, lands, or other
immoveable things, to another in fee-simple, that is, to him
and his heirs for ever, by the delivery of seisin of the thing
given: when it is in writing, it is called a deed of soffment;
and in every froßment the giver is called the feoffor, frosator,
and he that receiveth by virtue thereof the feoffee, fossatus.
the proper difference between a feoffor and a donor is that
the feofforgives in fee-fimple, the donor in fee-tail. cowel.
milton.
shakespeare's macbeth.
fera'city, n.s.. [foracitat, lat.] fruitfulness; fertility. dia.
fe rai. adj. [feralis, latin.] funereal; deadly. dic.
feration. m. s. [seriatio, latin.] the act of keeping holi-
day; cesiation from work. -
as though there were any friation in nature, this season is
commonly termed the physicians vacation. brown.
ferine. adj. [ferinus, latin.] wild; savage.
the only difficulty is touching those serine, noxious, and
- untameable beasts; as lions, tygers, wolves, bears. hale.
ferin en ess. m. s. [from ferine.] barbarity; savageness ;
wildness. - -
* a ferine and necessitous kind of life, a conversation with
those that were fallen into a barbarous habit of life, would
assimilate the next generation to barbarism and serinents. hale.
ff'rity. m. s. [feritas, latin.] barbarity; cruelty; wild-
ness; savageness. .
he reduced him from the most abject and stupid fority to
his senses, and to sober reason. isoodward’s nataras hisory.
to ferme'nt. v. a. s.fermento, latin ; fermenter, french..]
'o exalt or rarify by intestine motion of parts.
ye vigorous swains ! while youth forments your blood,
and purer spirits swell the sprightly flood,
now range the hills, the thickest woods beset,
wind the shrill horn, or spread the waving net. poe,
to ferment. v. n. to have the parts put into intestine
motion.
fe’rment. n. s. [ferment, french; formentum, latin.]
1. that which causes intestine motion.
the semen puts females into a fever, upon impregnation;
and all animal humours which poison, are putrefying ferments.
floyer on the humours.
2. intestine motion ; tumult.
subdue and cool the ferment of desire. rogers's sermons,
ferme'ntable. adj. [from ferment.] capable of fermenta-
tl on. *
ferme’ntal. adj. [from ferment.] having the power to cause
fermentation. not used.
cucumbers, being waterish, fill the veins with crude and
windy serosities, that contain little salt or spirit, and debilitate
the vital acidity and formental faculty of the stomach. brown,
fer mentation. m. s. [formentatio, latin.]. a slow motion
of the intestine particles of a mixt body, arising usually from
the operation of some active acid matter, which rarifies, exalts,
and subtilizes the soft and sulphureous particles : as when lea-
ven or yest rarifies, lightens, and ferments bread or wort.
and this motion differs much from that usually called ebulli-
tion or effervescence, which is a violent boiling and struggling
between an acid and an alkali, when mixed together. harris.
the juice of grapes, after formentation, will yield a spiritor
ardens. boyle.
a man, by tumbling his thoughts, and forming them into
expressions, gives them a new kind of fermentation; which
works them into a finer body, and makes them much clearer
than they were before. collier of friendship.
the sap, in fluent dance,
and lively formentation, mounting, spreads -
all this innumerous colour'd scene of things. thomson.
ferme’ntative. adj. [from forment.] causing fermenta-
tion; having the power to cause fermentation.
- aromatical spirits destroy by their fermentative heat. arbuth.
fern. m. s. [peann, saxon.] a plant. -
the leaves are formed of a number of small pinnules, den-
tated on the edges, and set close by one another on slender
ribs. on the back of these pinnules are produced the seeds,
small and extremely numerous. the country people esteem
it a sovereign remedy decocted for the rickets in children. hill.
black was the forest, thick with beech it stood,
horrid with fern, and intricate with thorn ;
few paths of human feet or tracks of beasts were worn. dry.
there are great varieties of fern in different parts of the
world; but they are seldom cultivated in gardens. a filler.
fe'rn.y. adj. [from fern..] overgrown with fern.
the herd suffic'd, did late repair
to formy heaths, and to their forest-lare. drydon,
ferocious. adj. [ferox, latin ; feroce, french.]
1. savage; fierce.
smedley rose in majesty of mud;
shaking the horrors of his ample brows,
and each ferocious feature grim with ooze. pope.
2. ravenous ; rapacious.
the hare, that becometh a prey unto man, unto beasts and
fowls of the air, is fruitful even unto superfetation; but the
lion and ferocious animal hath young ones but seldom, and but
one at a time. brown's wulgar errours.
fero city. m. s. [forecitas, latin; frocite, french, from for
rocious.] savageness; wildness; fierceness. -
an uncommon ferocity in my countenance, with the re-
markable flatness of my nose, and extent of my moh, have
procured me the name of lion. addison's guardian.
untaught, uncultivated, as they were • * r * , 2 . to -
inhospitable, full of ferocity. phillips s briton.
ff'rreous. adj. [ferrets, latin.] irony; of iron. in<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 806</div><p class="text">f. e. r.
f e r
in the body of glass there is no frozens or pagretical na-
ture. brown's wulgar errours.
ferret. n.s. [sured, welsh; foret, french : ferret, dutch;
viverra, latin.]
1. a kind of rat with red eyes and a long snout, used to catch
rabbits. they are said to have been brought hither from
africa. - -
with what an eager earnestness she looked, having threat-
ning not only in her ferret eyes, but while she spoke, her nose
seemed to threaten her chin. sidney.
cicero
looks with such forret and such firy eyes, -
as we have seen him. shakespeare's julius cæsar.
coneys are taken either by sorrets or purse-nets. a sortimer.
2. a kind of narrow woollen tape.
to ferret. v. a. [from the noun..] to drive out of lurking
places, as the ferret drives the coney, -
the archbishop had forreted him out of all his holds, hylin.
fer retter. m. s. [from ferret.] one that hunts another in
his privacies.
ferri ag e. m. s. [from forry..] the fare paid at a ferry.
ferru’g inous, adj. [forrugineux, french; ferrugineus, latin.]
partaking of the particles and qualities of iron.
they are cold, hot, purgative, diuretick, ferruginous, sa-
line, petrofying and bituminous. ray on the creation.
ferrule. m. s. [from ferrum, iron, latin. j. an iron ring
put round any thing to keep it from cracking. *
the fingers ends are strengthened with nails, as we fortify
the ends of our staves or forks with iron hoops or ferrules. ray.
to ferry. v. a. spanan, to pass, saxon; fahr, german, a
passage. skinner imagines that this whole family of words
may be deduced from the latin veho. i do not love latin
originals; but if such must be sought, may not these words
be more naturally derived from ferri, to be carried ?] to
carry over in a boat.
cymocles heard and saw,
he loudly call'd to such as were aboard,
the little bark unto the shore to draw,
and him to ferry over that deep ford. fairy qaon.
to ferry. v. n. to pass over water in a vessel of carriage.
thence hurried back to fire,
they ferry over this lethaean sound
z both to and fro, their sorrow to augment. milt. par. loft.
fox. ! n. s. [from the verb, and boat.]
1. a vessel of carriage; a vessel in which goods or passengers are
carried over water.
by this time was the worthy guyon brought
unto the other side of that wide strand,
where she was rowing, and for passage sought:
him needed not long call, she soon to hand
her ferry brought, fairy queen.
bring them with imagin'd specd
unto the traject, to the common sorry
which trades to venice. shakesp. merchant of penice.
a ferryboat to carry over the king's houshold. 2 sa. xix. 18.
i went down to the river brent in the ordinary forty. addis.
2. the passage over which the ferryboat passes. -
ferry man. m. s. [forry and man.]. one who keeps a ferry;
one who for hire transports goods and passengers over the water.
i past, methought, the melancholy flood,
with that grim forryman, which poets write of,
unto the kingdom of perpetual night. shakosh. rich. iii.
the common forryman of egypt, that wasted over the dead
bodies from memphis, was made by the greeks the ferryman
of hell, and solemn stories raised after him. brown.
the grisly forryman of hell deny'd
af neas entrance, ’till he knew his guide. roscommon.
ferth or forth. common terminations are the same as in
english an army; coming from the saxon word pyre. gilson.
fer tile. adj. [fortile, french; fortilis, latin.]
1. fruitful; abundant; plenteous.
i had hope of france,
as firmly as i hope for fertile england. shakes). henry vi.
i have had a large, a fair, and a pleasant field; so fertile,
that it has given me two harvests in a summer. dryden.
i ask whether in the uncultivated waste of america, a thou-
sand acres yield as many conveniencies of life as ten acres
of equally fertile land do in devonshire locke.
view the wide earth adorn'd with hills and woods,
rich in her herds, and sortile by her floods. blackmore.
2. with of before the thing produced.
the earth is fortile of all kind of grain. camden's remains.
this happy country is extremely fertile, as of those above,
so likewise of its productions under ground. j/oodward.
fe^* til fn ess. m. s. [foom fertile.] - fruitfulness; fecundity.
to ferti'll tat. e. v. a. ifrom sertile.] to secundate; to
fertilize ; to make fruitful or productive. not in use.
a cock will in one day fertilitate the whole raceination or
cluster of eggs, not excluded in many weeks after.
fer ti’ll t y. m. s. [fertilitas, latin.] fecundity; abundance;
fruitfulness; plenteousness.
brown.
* i will go root away
the noisome weeds, that without profit sick -
the soil's fertility from wholesome flowers. sjo. rico. ii.
paradise itself exceeded in beauty and fortility; and thes.
places had but a resemblance thereof. raleigh's history
the quickness of the imagination is seen in the invo.
the fertility in the fancy, and the accuracy in the expression.
to inundations egypt, through which the nile o
the indies owe their extraordinary fertility, and those o
crops they produce after these waters are withdrawn. #.
to f. rrtili zf. v. a. [fortiliser, french..] to make fro.
ful; to make plenteous; to make productive; to fecundate.
rain-water carries along with it a sort of terrestrial mater
that fertilizes the land, as being proper for the formation.
vegetables. j/oodward’s natura/ history.
fertily, adv. [from fertile.] fruitfully; p'entecusly; plen-
tifully ; abundantly.
fervency. m. s. [forwens, latin.]
i. heat of mind; ardour ; eagerness.
your diver -
did hang a sal:fish on his hook, which he
with fervency drew up. shakespeare's ant. and cleopatra.
2. pious ardour; flame of devotion; zeal.
we have on all sides lost much of our first frvency towards
god. hooker, dedication.
there must be zeal and fervency in him which proposeth
for the rest those suits and supplications, which they by their
joyful acclamations must ratify. hozier,
when you pray, let it be with attention, with fervency
and with perseverance. //ake’s preparation for dili.
fervent. adj. [servens, latin; fervent, french.]
1. hot ; boiling.
* the fountains
bubbling wave did ever freshly wade
ne ever would through fervent summer fade. spensor.
from the phlegmatick humour, the proper allay of front
blood, will flow a future quietude and serenitude. %tton.
2. hot in temper; vehement.
they that are more fervent to dispute, be not always the
most able to determine. h22.eer.
3. ardent in piety; warm in zeal; flaming with devotion.
... this man being fervent in the spirit, taught diligently the
things of the lord. acis, xviii. 25.
so spake the fervent angel; but his zeal
none seconded, as out of season judg’d,
or singular and rash. milton's paradio zoo.
let all enquiries into the mysterious points of theology's
carricq on with fervent petitions to god, that he would dis-
pose their minds to direct all their skill to the promotion of a
good life. south's sermons,
fervently. adv. [from frvent.]
1. eagerly; vehemently.
they all that charge did fervently appl
with greedy malice i. ... y?
2. with pious ardour; with holy zeal.
epaphras saluteth you, labouring servently for you in prayers.
col. iv. 12.
he cares not how or what he suffers, so he suffer well, and
be the friend of christ; nor where nor when he suffers, so he
may do it frequently, fervently, and acceptably. taylor.
fe’rvid. adj. o/. i.j ptably !)
1. hot ; burning ; boiling.
2. vehement; eager; zealous.
feryi'dity. m. s. [from fervid.]
1. heat.
2. zeal; passion; ardour. djo.
fervidness. m. s. [from fervid.] ardour of mind; zeal;
passion.
as to the healing of malchus's ear, in the account of the
meek lamb of god, it was a kind of injury done to him by
the servidness of st. peter, who knew not yet what spirit he
was of. bentley’s seronzmt.
fe rula. m. s. [forule, french : from forula, giant fennel,
latin.]. an instrument of correction with which young scho.
lars are beaten on the hand; so named because anciently the
stalks of fennel were used for this purpose.
these differ as much as the rod and ferula. shaw's gramm.
to ferule. v. a. to chastise with the ferula.
ferv ou r. m. s. [forwar, latin ; serveur, french.]
i. heat; warmth.
were it an undeniable truth that an effectual for pro-
ceeded from this star, yet would not the same determine the
opinion. . . . brown’s pugar erreurs.
like bright aurora, whose refulgent ray
foretells the fervour of ensuing day,
and warns the shepherd with his flocks retreat
fairy &amp;een.
:
to leafy shadows, from the threatned heat. // all r.
these silver drops, like morning dew, -
foretell the fervour of the day;
so from one cloud soft show’rs we view,
and blasting lightnings burst away. pope.
- 8 2. heat
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 807</div><p class="text">2. heat of mind; zeal. -
odious it must needs have been to abolish that which all
had held for the space of many ages, without reason so great
as might in the eyes of impartial men appear sufficient to clear
them from all blame of rash proceedings, if in fervour of zeal
they had removed such things. hooker.
- haply despair hath seiz'd her;
or, wing'd with fervour of her love, she's flown
to her desir’d posthumus. shakespeare's cymbeline.
3. ardour of piety. -
there will be at loretto, in a few ages more, jewels of
the greatest value in europe, if the dovotion of its princes
continues in its present fervour. addison on italy.
e'scue. m. s. [verse, dutch ; fosu, french.] a small wire by
which those who teach to read point out the letters.
teach him an alphabet upon his fingers, making the points
of his fingers of his left hand both on the infide to signify some
letter, when any of them is pointed at by the fore-finger of
the right hand, or by any kind of fescue. holder.
teach them how manly passions ought to move;
for such as cannot think, can never love;
and since they needs will judge the poet's art,
point ’em with fescues to each shining part. dryden.
essels. m. s. a kind of base grain.
disdain not fesols or poor vech to sow,
or care to make egyptian lentils thrive. may's virgil.
fesse. m. s. [in heraldry.]
the fosse is so called of the latin word fascia, a band or
girdle possessing the third part of the escutcheon over the
middle : if there be above one, you must call them bars; if
with the field there be odd pieces, as seven or nine, then you
must name the field, and say so many bars; if even, as six,
eight, or ten, you must say barwise, or barry of six, eight,
or ten, as the king of hungary bears argent and gules barry
of eight. peacham on blazoning,
7 a fe's ter. v. n. {so in bavarian, a swelling corrupted,
junius.] to rankle; to corrupt; to grow virulent.
i might, even in my lady's presence, discover the sore
which had deeply f/iered within me. sidney.
inward corruption and infected sin,
not purg’d, not heal’d, behind remained still,
and fosiering fore did rankle yet within.
how should our fostered fores be cured hooker.
i have some wounds upon me, and they smart
to hear themselves remember'd.
—well might they foster 'gainst ingratitude, -
and tent themselves with death. shakespeare's coriolanus.
- mind that their souls
may make a peaceful and a sweet retire
from off these fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies
must lie and foster. shakespeare's henry v.
there was imagination, that between a knight whom the
duke had taken into some good degree of favour, and felton,
there had been ancient quarrels .* well healed, which
might perhaps be fostering in his breast, and by a certain in-
flammation produce this effect. //otton.
pasfion and unkindness may give a wound that shall bleed
and smart; but it is treachery that makes it fester. south.
fe'stinate. adj. [fossinatus, latin.] hasty; hurried. a
word not in use. -
advise the duke, where you are going, to a most fossinate
preparation: we are bound to the like. shakesp. king lear.
festinately... adv. [from fossinate.] hastily; speedily; with
speed. not in use. - -
take this key; give enlargement to the swain, and bring
him festinately hither. shakesp. love's labour loft.
festination. m. s. [fossinatio, latin.j. hafle; hurry;
fe'stival. adj. [fossivus, latin.] pertaining to feasts;
owous, o
j '. appeared at great tables, and fostival entertainments,
that he might manifest his divine charity to men. atterbury.
fe'stival. n. s. time of feast; anniversary-day of civil or
religious joy.
so tedious is this day,
as is the night before some fosłival,
to an impatient child that hath new robes, -
and may not wear them. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
th’ invited fisters with their graces blest
their fosiivals. - sandys.
the morning trumpets fossival proclaim’d, -
- through each high street. milton’s agonisłes.
follow, ye nymphs and shepherds all, *
come celebrate this fosiival,
and merrily sing and sport, and play; -
'tis oriana's nuptial day. granville.
by sacrifice of the tongues they purged away whatever they
had spoken amiss during the fiftival. broome on the odyssey.
the fiftival of our lord's resurreotion we have celebrated,
and may now consider the chief consequence of his resurree-
, tion, a judgment to come. atterbury's sermons.
festive. adj. [fossivus, latin.] joyous; gay; befitting a
feast.
vol. i.
fairy queen.
the glad circle round them yield their souls
... to fossive mirth and wit that knows no gall.
festivity. m. s. [fo/livitas, latin; from fossive.]
1. festival; time of rejoicing.
the daughter of jephtha came to be worshipped as a deity,
and had an annual fossivity observed unto her honour. brown.
there happening a great and "...s. such as the
sheep-shearings used to be, david condesonds to beg of a rich
man some small repast. - south.
2. gaiety; joyfulness; temper of behaviour befitting a feast.
to some persons there is no better instrument to cause the
remembrance, and to endear the affedion to the article, than
the recommending it by fiftivity and joy of a holyday. taylor.
ff's roos. m. s. [softon, french.j an ornament of od
work in the form of a wreath or garland of flowers, or leaves
twisted together, thickest at the middle, and suspended by
the two extremes, whence it hangs down perpendicularly.
arris.
fostucing off. [fouca, latin.] straw-colour between
green and yellow.
thereins may be discovered a little inse&amp;t of a f/fucine or
pale green, resembling a locust or grashopper. brown.
fistu cous, adj. [fouca, latin.] "formed of straw.
we speak of straws, or fosfucous divisions, lightly drawn over
with oil. rown's wulgar errours.
to fet. v. a. to fetch; to go and bring. not in use.
get home with thy fewel, make ready to fit,
the sooner the easier carriage to get. % husbandry,
but for he was unable them to set,
a little boy did on him still attend, fairy queen.
and they set forth urijah out of egypt to jehoiakim, who
slew him with the sword. er. xxvi. 23.
fet. n. s. [i suppose from fait, french, a part or portion?
a piece. not in use, -
the bottom clear,
now laid with many a fit
of seed-pearl, ere she bath'd her there
was known as black as jet. drayton.
to fetch. v. a. preter.fathed; anciently fet, unless it rather
came from to set. [reccan, fettan, saxon.]
1. to go and bring.
they have devis’d a mean
how he her chamber-window will ascend,
and with a corded ...so her down. shakespeare.
we will take men to fetch victuals for the people. judges.
go to the flock, and fetch me from thence two kid goats.
gen. xxvii. 9.
thomson.
the seat of empire, where the irish come,
and the unwilling scotch, to fetch their doom. wallor.
draw forth the monsters of th’ abyss profound,
or fetch th’ aerial eagle to the ground. pope.
2. to derive; to draw.
on, you noblest english,
whose blood is fetchi from fathers of war-proof.
3. to strike at a distance.
the conditions of weapons, and their improvements, are
the fetching afar off; for that outruns the danger, as it is seen
in ordnance and muskets. - bacon's essays.
4. to bring to any state by some powerful operation.
in smells we see their great and sudden effect in fetching
men again, when they swoon.
at rome any of those arts immediately thrives, under the
encouragement of the prince, and may be fetched up to its per-
fection in ten or a dozen years, which is the work of an age
or two in other countries. addison on italy.
5. to draw within any confinement or prohibition.
general terms may sufficiently convey to the people what
our intentions are, and yet not fetch us within the compass of
the ordinance. - - sanderson.
6. to produce by some kind of force.
these ways, if there were any secret excellence among
them, would fetch it out, and give it fair opportunities to ado
vance itself by. milton on education.
an human soul without education is like marble in the
quarry, which shews none of its beauties 'till the skill of the
polisher fetches out the colours. addison's speciator.
7. to perform : it is applied to motion or cause.
i’ll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
the pangs of barr'd affections; though the king
hath charg'd you should not speak together. shak. cymbel.
when evening grey doth rise, i fetch my round
over the mount. milton.
to come to that place they must fetch a compass three miles
on the right hand through a forest. knolles's history.
8. to perform with suddenness or violence.
note a wild and wanton herd,
or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud. shakesp.
the fox fetched a hundred and a hundred leaps at a deliciois
cluster of grapes. o l’estrange.
talk to her of an unfortunate young lady that lost her beauty
by the small-pox, often a deep figh. addison,
9 9. to
shakesp.
bacon's natural history. .<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 808</div><p class="text">9. to reach; to arrive at ; to come to. -
... mean time flew our ships, and streight we fetcht
the syrens isle; a spleenless wind so stretcht
her wings to waft us, and so urg'd our keel.
if earth, industrious of herself, fetch day
travelling east; and with her part averse
from the sun's beam, meet night; her other part
still luminous by his ray. milton's paradise lost.
the hare laid himself down, and took a nap ; for, says he,
i can fetch up the tortoise when i please. l’estrange.
10. tobbtain as its price. -
during such a state, filver in the coin will never fetch as
much as the silver in bullion. locke.
to fetch. v. n. to move with a quick return,
like a shifted wind unto a sail, - -
it makes the course of thoughts to fetch about. shakespeare.
ferch. m. s. [from the verb.] a stratagem by which any
thing is indireetly performed; by which one thing seems in-
tended and another is done; a trick; an artifice.
an envious neighbour is easy to find,
his cumbersome fetches are seldom behind ;
his fetch is to flatter, to get what he can ;
his purpose once gotten, a pin for thee them.
- it is a fetch of wit:
you laying these slight sullies on my son,
as 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working.
but sidrophel, as full of tricks
as rota men of politicks,
streight cast about to over-reach . -
th'unwary conqu'ror with a fetch. hudibras.
with this fetch he laughs at the trick he hath plaid me. still.
chapman.
tuffer.
shah. hamid.
the fox had a fetchin't. i’estrange.
from these instances and fetches
- thou mak’st of horses, clocks and watches,
quoth mat, thou seem'st to mean -
that alma is a mere machine. prior.
fe'rcher. m. s. [from fetch..] one that fetches any thing.
fetid. adj. [fetidus, latin; fetide, french..] 'stinking;
rancid; having a smell strong and offensive.
most putrefactions are of an odious smell; for they smell
either fetid or mouldy. bacon's natural history.
in the most severe orders of the church of rome, those who
pradise abstinence, feel after it fetid hot eructations. arbuth.
plague, fiercest child of nemesis divine,
descends from ethiopia's poison'd woods,
from stifled cairo's filth and fetid fields. thomson's summer.
fe1 1dness. n.s.. [from fetid.] the quality of stinking.
fetlock, n. s. [feet and lock.] a tuft of hair that grows
behind the pastern joint of many horses: horses of a low size
have scarce any such tuft. farrier's dic7.
their wounded steeds
fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage
yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters. sh. h. v.
white were the fetlocks of his feet before,
and on his front a snowy star he bore. dryden's virgil.
fe"ror._n. s. [footor, latin.] a stink; a stench; a strong
and offensive smell.
the fetor may discover itself by sweat and humour. brown.
when the symptoms are attended with a fetor of any kind,
such a disease will be cured by acescent substances, and none
better than whey. arbuthnot on diet.
fetter. m. s. it is commonly used in the plural fetters.
[from feet; peccene, saxon.] chains for the feet; chains by
which walking is hindered. -
doctrine unto fools is as fetters on the feet, and like ma-
nacles on the right hand. ecclus, xxi. 1g.
drawing after me the chains and fetters whereunto i have
been tied, i have by other mens errours failed. raleigh.
passion's too fierce to be in fetters bound,
and nature flies him like enchanted ground. dryden.
the wretch in double fetters bound,
your potent mercy may release. prior.
pleasure arose in those very parts of his leg that just before
had been so much pained by the fetter. addison.
i thought her pride
had broke your fetters, and assur'd your freedom. a. phill.
to fetter. v. a. [from the noun..] to bind; to enchain;
to shackle; to tie. it is properly used of the feet, but is ap-
plied to other restraints.
neither her great worthiness nor his own suffering for her,
could fetter his fickleness. sidney.
my consciences thou art fitter'd
more than my shanks and wrists. shakesp. cymbeline.
fetter strong madness in a silken thread;
sharm ach with air, and agony with words. shakespeare.
doth a master chide his servant because he doth not come,
yet knows that the servant is chained and fettered, so as he
cannot move 2 bramhall against hobber.
a chain which man to fetter man has made; o
by artifice impos'd, by fear obey'd. prior.
to fettle. v., n. [a cant word from feel.] to do trifling
business; to ply the hands without labour.
when your master is most busy in company, come in and
pretend to fettle about the room; and if he chides, say you
thought he rung the bell. swift's direct. to the footman.
e’tus. n. s. [factus, latin.] any animal in embrio ; any
thing yet in the womb : any thing unborn.
that paradox of hippocrates some learned physicians have
of late revived, that the fetus respires in the womb. boyle.
feud. n. s. speahb, enmity, saxon.] quarrel; contention;
opposition ; war.
though men would find sach mortalfeuds
in sharing of their publick goods. hudibrar.
in former ages it was a policy of france to raise and cherish
intestine feuds and discords in great britain. addison.
scythia mourns
our guilty wars, and earth's remotest regions
... lie half unpeopled by the feuds of rome. addison's cais.
feu'dal. adj. [feudalis, low latin.]. pertaining to fees,
feus, or tenures by which lands are held of a superiour lord.
feu'dal. m. s. a dependance; something held by tenure; a
fee; a feu. -
wales, that was not always the feudal territory of england,
having been governed by a prince of their own, had laws
utterly strange to the laws of england. hale.
feu'datory.. n.s.. [from feudal.] one who holds not in chief,
but by some conditional tenure from a superiour.
the duke of parma was tempted to be true to that enter-
prize, by no less promise than to be made a feudatory, or be-
neficiary king of england, under the seignory in chief of the
pope, and the protection of spain. bacon.
fe'ver. m. s. [fievre, french; febris, latin.] a disease in
which the body is violently heated, and the pulse quickened,
or in which heat and cold prevail by turns. it is sometimes
continual, sometimes intermittent.
think'st thou the firy fever will go out
with titles blown from adulation ?
will it give place to flexure and low bending shak. h. v.
duncan is in his grave;
after life's fitful fever he sleeps well. shakes. macbeth.
should not a ling’ring fever be remov’d,
because it long has rag'd within my blood? dryden.
he had never dreamed in his life, 'till he had the fever he
was then newly recovered of. locke.
to fe’ve r. v. a. [from the noun..] to put into a fever.
the white hand of a lady fever thee!
shake to look on't. shakespeare's ant. and cleopatra.
her blood all fever'd, with a furious leap,
she sprung from bed distracted in her mind. dryden.
fooveret. n.j. [from fever.] a slight fever; febricula.
a light feveret, or an old quartan ague, is not a sufficient
excuse for non-appearance. ayliffe's parergon.
fe’verfew. n. s. [febris and fugo, latin.]. a plant.
common feverfew is the sort used in medicine, and is found
wild in many parts of england. miller.
feverish. adj. [from fever.]
1. diseased with a fever.
to other climates beasts and birds retire,
and feverish nature, burns in her own fire. creech.
when an animal that gives suck turns feverish, that is, its
juices more alkaline, the milk turns from its native genuine
whiteness to yellow. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. tending to a fever. - -
a feverish disorder disabled me. swift to pope.
3. uncertain; inconstant; now hot, now cold. -
we toss and turn about our feverish will,
when all our ease must come by lying still;
for all the happiness mankind can gain,
is not in pleasure, but in rest from pain.
4. hot ; burning.
and now four days the sun had seen our woes,
four nights the moon beheld th’ incessant fire;
it seem'd as if the stars more sickly rose,
and farther from the severish north retire. dryd. ann. mir.’
feverishness. n.s. [from feverish..] a slight disorder of the
feverish kind.
feverous, adj. [fievreux-se, french; from fever.]
1. troubled with a fever or ague.
thou mad'st thine enemies shake, as if the world -
were feverous, and did tremble. shakspeare's coriolanus.
2. having the nature of a fever.
all fev’rous kinds,
convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs.
3. having a tendency to produce fevers.
it hath been noted by the ancients, that southern winds,
blowing much, without rain, do cause a feverous disposition of
the year; but with rain not. bacon's natural history.
dryd. ind. emp.
milton's par. loft.
fe"very, adj. [from fever.] diseased with a fever.
o rome, thy head
is drown'd in sleep, and all thy body sev’ry. b. johns. catil:
fe uillage. m. s. [french..] a bunch or row of leaves.
of homer's head i inclose the outline, that you may deter-
mine whether you would have it so large, or reduced to make
room for feuillage or laurel round the cval. jervas to pope.
* fetjilleazoa&amp;t.
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 809</div><p class="text">f i b
f i c
3 to:
to:
it.
feuillemort. n. s. [french.] the colour of a faded ,
leaf, corrupted commonly to philemot.
feuterer. m. s. a dogkeeper: perhaps the cleaner of the
kennel. - - - -
few, adj. [peo, peopa, saxon ; fua, danish.]
1. not many; not in a great number.”
we are left but few of many. jer.
so much the thirst of honour fires the blood;
so many would be great, so few be good;
for who would virtue for herself regard, -
or wed without the portion of reward ; , , dryd, juvenal.
on winter seas we fewer storms behold,
than foul diseases that infect the fold. dryden's virg. geor.
men have fewer or more simple ideas from without, accord-
ing as the objects they converse with afford greater or less va-
riety. locke.
the fewer still you name, you wound the more ;
bond is but one, but harpax is a score. pope's hor.
party is the madness of many, for the gain of a few. swift.
the imagination of a poet is a thing so nice and delicate,
that it is no easy matter to find out images capable of giving
pleasure to one of the few, who, in any age, have come up
to that chara&amp;ter. berkley to pope.
2. sometimes elliptically; not many words.
to answer both allegations at once, the very substance of
that they contain is in few but this. hooker.
so having said, he thus to eve in few :
say, woman, what is this which thou hast done milton.
thus jupiter in few unfolds the charge. dryden's afn.
the firm resolve i here in few disclose. pope's odyssey.
fe'wel. n.s.. [feu, french..] combustible matter ; materials
for keeping fire: as firewood, coal.
if a spark of error have thus far prevailed, falling even
where the wood was green, and farthest off from any inclina-
tion unto furious attempts, must not the peril thereof be
greater in men, whose minds are as dry fewel, apt beforehand
unto tumults, seditions and broils : hooker, dedication,
others may give the fewel or the fire;
but they the breath, that makes the flame, inspire. denham.
a known quantity of fewel, all kindled at once, will cause
water to boil, which being lighted gradually will never be
able to do it. bentley's sermons.
to fe‘wel. v. a. [from the noun.] to feed with fewel.
never, alas ! the dreadful name,
that fewel, the infernal flame. cowley.
fe"wness. m. s...[from few.],
1. paucity; smallness of number.
these, by reason of their fewnes, i could not distinguish
from the numbers with whom they are embodied. dryden.
2. paucity of words; brevity; conciseness.
fewnes, and truth, 'tis thus, shakes. meas for measure.
to f.e.y. v. a. [veghen, dutch..] to cleanse a ditch of mud.
such muddy deep ditches and pits in the field,
that all a dry summer no water will yield,
byfying and casting that mud upon heaps,
commodities many the husbandman reaps. tuffer.
fib. m. s. [a cant word among children.] a lie ; a falsehood.
estroy his fib or sophistry; in vain, -
the creature's at his dirty work again.
i so often lie,
scarce harvey's self has told more fibs than i. pope.
to fib. v. n. [from the noun..] to lie; to tell lyes; to speak
falsely. -
if you have any mark, whereby one may know when you
fib, and when you speak truth, you had best tell it me. arbuth.
fi’eber. m. s. [from fib.] a teller of fibs. -
fi'bre. n.s.. [fibre, fr. fibra, latin.]
1. a small thread or string; the first constituent parts of
bodies.
now sliding streams the thirsty plants renew,
and feed their fibres with reviving dew. pope.
2. afibre, in physick, is an animal thread, of which some are soft,
flexible, and a little elastick; and these are either hollow,
like small pipes, or spongious and full of little cells, as the
nervous and fleshy fibres; others are more solid, flexible, and
with a strong elasticity or spring, as the membranous and
cartilaginous fibres ; and a third sort are hard and flexible, as
the fibres of the bones. some so very small as not to be
easily perceived; and others so big as to be plainly seen ; and
most of them appear to be composed of still smaller fibres :
these fibres first constitute the substance of the bones, carti-
lages, ligaments, membranes, nerves, veins, arteries and
muscles. - quincy.
my heart finks in me while i hear him speak,
and every slacken'd fibre drops its hold,
like nature letting down the springs of life:
the name of father awes me still. dryd. spanish friar.
f1'bril. n.s. [fibrille, french.]. a small fibre or string. '
the muscles consist of a number of fibres, and each fibre
of an incredible number of little fibrils bound together, and
divided into little cells. cheyne's phil. princ.
pope's epillo.
fiorous. adj. [foreux, french ; from fibre..] composed of
fibres or stamina.
the difference between bodies fibrius and bodies viscous is
plain ; for all wool and tow, and cotton and silk, have a
greediness of moisture. baton's natural hylory.
i saw petreus' arms employ'd around -
a well-grown oak, to root it from the ground;
this way and that he wrench'd the fibrous bands, .
the trunk was like a sapling in his hands. dryden.
... the fibrous and solid parts of plants pass unaltered through
the intestines. arbuthnot on aliments.
fibul.a. n.s. [latin.] the outer and lesser bone of the
leg, much imaller than the tibia: it lies on the outside of the
leg; and its upper end, which is not so high as the knee, .
receives the lateral knob of the upper end of the tibia into a
small finus, which it has in its inner side. its lower end is
received into the small sinus of the tibia, and then it extends .
into a large process, which forms the outer ankle. quincy.
fl'ckle. adj. [picol, saxon.]
1. changeable ; unconstant; irresolute; wavering; unsteady;
mutable ; changeful; without steady adherence.
- remember where we are,
in france amongst a fickle wavering hation. shak. hon. vi.
a slave, whose easy borrow'd pride
dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows. shak. k. lear.
- or likest hovering dreams,
the fickle pensioners of morpheus' train. milton.
they know how fickle common lovers are ;
their oaths and vows are cautiously believ'd ;
for few there are but have been once deceiv'd. dryden.
we in vain the fickle sex pursue, -
who change the constant lover for the new. prior.
2. not fixed; subject to vicishtude.
- he would be loth
us to abolish; left the adversary r
triumph, and say, fickle their state, whom god
most favours | milton's paradise loft.
f1'ckleness. n. s. [from fickle..] inconstancy; uncertainty ;
unsteadiness.
neither her great worthiness, nor his own suffering for her,
could fetter his fickleness; but, before his marriage-day, he had
taken to wife that baccha of whom she complained. sidney.
beware of fraud, beware of fickien's,
in choice and change of thy dear loved dame. fairy queen.
i am a soldier and unapt to weep, ,
or to exclaim on fortune's ficklens. shakesp. henry vi.
instability of temper ought to be checked, when it disposes
men to wander from one scheme of government to another,
since such a fickleness cannot but be attended with fatal conse-
quences. - . . addison's freeholder.
whether out of ficklenes; or design i can't tell, i found
that what she liked one day she disliked another. addison.
f1'ckly, adv. [from fickle..] without certainty or stability.
do not now,
like a young wasteful heir, mortgage the hopes
of godlike majesty on bankrupt terms,
to raise a present pow'r that's fickly held
by the frail tenure of the people's will. southern.
fico, n. s. [italian.] an act of contempt done with the
fingers, expressing a fig for you.
having once recovered his fortress, he then gives the fico to
his adversaries. carew's survey of cornwall."
f1'ctile. adj. [fieïilis, latin.] moulded into form; manu-
factured by the potter.
the cause of fragility is an impotency to be extended ; and .
therefore stone is more fragil than metal, and so fille earth is
more fragil than crude earth. bacon's natural history.
f1'ction. n. s. [fictio, latin ; fieïion, french.]
i. the act of feigning or inventing. . -
if the presence of god in the image, by a mere soon of
the mind, be a sufficient ground to worship that image, is not
god's real presence in every creature a far better ground to
worship it - stillingsleet.
fiction is of the effence of poetry, as well as of painting :
there is a resemblance in one of human bodies, things, and
actions, which are not real; and in the cther of a true story
by a fie?ion. dryden's dafoesnay.
2. #: feigned or invented. j - of snoy
if through mine ears pierce any consolations,
by wise discourse, sweet tunes, or poets fiołions;
if ought i cease these hideous exclamations,
while that my soul, she, she lives in aflictions. silogy.
so also was the fietion of those golden apples kept by a
dragon, taken from the serpent, which tempted evah. raleigh.
3. a falsehood; a lye.
f1'ctious. adj. [ficius, latin.] fictitious ; imaginary; in-
vented. a word coined by prior. - -
with fancy'd rules and arbitrary laws
matter and motion man restrains,
and studied lines and fiaious circles draws. prior.
fictitious, adj. [ficiitius, latin.]
- 1. counterfeit;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 810</div><p class="text">f i do
f. i. e.
1. counterfeit; false ; not genuine.
draw to: so,
that all who view the piece may know -- -
he needs no trappings of fictitious fame. dryden.
2. feigned ; imaginary. -
the human persons are as fiaitious as the airy ones; and
belinda resembles you in nothing but in beauty. pope.
3. not real; not true; allegorical; made by prosopupaeia.
milton, sensible of this defect in the subject of his poem,
brought into it two characters of a shadowy and fielitious na-
ture in the persons of sin and death, by which means he has
interwovenin his fable a very beautiful allegory. addis. spei.
fict i"riously. adv. [from fielitious.] falsely ; counterfeitly.
these pieces are fictitiously set down, and have no copy in
nature, brown's vulgar errours.
fid. n.s.. [fitta, italian.] a pointed iron with which seamen
untwist their cords. skinner.
fi’ddle, n.s. [ribele, saxon; vedel, dutch; fidel, german ;
fidicula, latin; fisill, erse.]
1. a stringed instrument of musick; a violin.
in trials of musical skill the judges did not crown the fiddle,
but the performer. stillingfleet.
the adventure of the bear and fiddle
is sung; but breaks off in the middle. hudibras.
she tried the fiddle all over, by drawing the bow over every
part of the strings; but could not, for her heart, find where-
about the tune lay. addison's guardiah.
7% f1'ddl.e. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to play upon a fiddle.
themistocles being desired at a feast to touch a lute, he
said he could not fiddle, but he could make a small town a
great city. bacon's essays.
others import yet nobler arts from france,
teach kings to fiddle, and make senates dance. pope.
2. to trifle; to shift the hands often, and do nothing, like a
fellow that plays upon a fiddle. -
a cunning fellow observed, that old lewis had stole away
part of the map, and saw him fiddling and turning the map,
trying to join the two pieces together. arbuthnot.
good cooks cannot abide what they justly call fiddling work,
where abundance of time is spent, and little done. swift.
fi’ddlef addle. n.s. [a cant word.] trifles.
she said that her grandfather had a horse shot at edgehill,
and their uncle was at the siege of buda; with abundance of
fiddlesaddle of the same nature. spectator.
fi’ddlef addl.e. adj. trifling; giving trouble, or making a
bustle about nothing. -
she was a troublesome fiddlesaddle old woman, and so cere-
monious that there was no bearing of her. arbuthnot.
fi'ddler. n. s. [from fiddle.] a musician; one that plays upon
the fiddle. - -
let no sawcy fiddler presume to intrude, *
unless he is sent for to vary our bliss. ben. johnson.
nero put the fiddlers to death, for being more skilful in the
trade than he was. taylor's rule of living holy,
these will appear such chits in story,
*twill turn all politicks to jests,
to be repeated like john dory,
o
when fiddlers sing at feasts. dryden.
when miss delights in her spinnet, *- : -
a fiddler may a fortune get. swift.
f1'ddlestick. m. s. [fiddle and sick.] the bow and hair
which a fiddler draws over the strings of a fiddle.
his grisly beard was long and thick,
with which he strung his fiddlestick. hudibras.
fi’ddlest ring. m. s. [fiddle and string.] the string of a
fiddle ; that which makes the noise.
a fiddle/lring, moistened with water will sink a note in a
little time, and consequently must be relaxed or lengthened
one sixteenth. arbuthnot on air.
fide'lity. n. s. [fidelitas, latin; fidelite, french.]
1. honesty; veracity.
the church, by her publick reading of the book of god,
preached only as a witness; now the principal thing required
in a witness is fidelity. ooker.
2. faithful adherence.
they mistake credulity for fidelity. clarke.
to fidg e. v. n. [a cant word.] to move nimbly and
to f1'do ft. } irregularly. it implies in scotland agitation.
tim, thou'rt the punch to stir up trouble;
you wriggle, fage, and make a rout,
put all your brother puppets out. swift.
fidu’cia l. adj. [fiducia, latin.] confident; undoubting.
faith is cordial, and such as god will accept of, when it
affords fiducial reliance on the promises, and obediential sub-
mission to the commands. hammond's praci. catech.
fidu’ci ary. m. s. [fiduciarius, latin.]
1. one who holds any thing in trust.
2. one who depends on faith without works.
the second obstructive is that of the fiduciary, that faith
is the only instrument of his justification; and excludes good
works from contributing any thing toward it. hammond.
frnu'ciary., adj.
1. confident; steady ; undoubting; untouched with doubt.
that faith, which is required of us, is then perfeot, when
it produces in us a fiduciary assent to whatever the gospel has
revealed. hake's preparation for death.
2. not to be doubted.
elaiana can rely no where upon mere love and fiduciary
obedience, unless at her own home, where she is exemplarily
loyal to herself in a high exact obedience. howel.
fief. h. s. [fief, french..]. a fee; a manor; a possession held
by some tenure of a superiour.
to the next realm she stretch'd her sway,
for painture near adjoining lay,
a plenteous province and alluring prey;
a chamber of dependencies was fram’d,
and the whole fief, in right of poetry, she claim'd. dryden.
as they were honoured by great privileges, so their lands
were in the nature of fiefs, for which the possessors were
obliged to do personal service at sea. arbuthnot on coins.
field. m. s. [pelo, saxon; feld, german; veld, dutch.
1. ground not inhabited ; not built on: -
live with me, and be my love,
and we will all the pleasure prove,
that hills and vallies, dale and field,
and all the craggy mountains yield. raleigh.
by the civil law the corpse of persons deceased were buried
out of the city in the fields. ayliffo's parergon.
2. ground not enclosed.
field lands are not exempted from mildews, nor yet from
smut, where it is more than in inclosed lands. mortimer.
3. cultivated tract of ground.
or great osiris, who first taught the swain
in pharian fields to sow the golden grain. pope's statius.
4. the open country: opposed to house or quarters.
since his majesty went into the field,
i have seen her rise from her bed. shakespeare's macbeth.
5. the ground of battle.
when a man is in the field, a moderate skill in fencing ra-
ther exposes him to the sword of his enemy than secures him
from it. locke.
6. a battle; a campaign; the action of an army while it keeps
the field. --
you maintain several factions;
and whilst a field should be dispatch'd and fought,
you are disputing of your generals. shakesp. henry vi.
what though the field be lost,
all is not lost.
7. a wide expanse.
the god a clearer space for heav'n design'd;
where fields of light and liquid ether flow,
milton's paradis? loft.
purg'd from the pond’rous dregs of earth below. dryden.
ask of yonder argent fields above,
why jove's satellites are less than jove. pope.
8. space; compass; extent.
the ill-natured man gives himself a large field to expatiate
in : he exposes failings in human nature. addison's speciator.
i should enter upon a field too wide, and too much beaten,
if i should display all the advantages of peace.
who can this field of miracles survey,
and not with galen all in rapture say,
behold a god, adore him and obey. blackmore's creation.
9. the ground or blank space on which figures are drawn.
let the field or ground of the picture be clean, light, and
well united with colour. dryden's dufresnoy.
10. [in heraldry.] the surface of a shield.
f1'elded. adj. [from field.] being in field of battle.
now, mars, i pr’ythee, make us quick in work ;
that we with smoking swords may march from hence,
to help our fielded friends. shakespeare's coriolanus.
field-basil. n.s.. [field and basil.] a plant.
fi'el. dbe.d. n.s. ifield and bed.j a bed contrived to be set up
easily in the field.
romeo, good night; l’ll to my trucklebed,
this fieldbed is too cold for me to sleep. shakespeare.
f1'eldfare. m. s. spelb and panan, to wander in the fields ;
turdus pilaris.] a bird,
winter birds, as woodcocks and fieldfares, if they come
early out of the northern countries, with us shew cold win-
ters, bacon's natural history.
f1'eldmarshal. m. s. [field and marshal..] commander of an
army in the field.
f1'eld mouse. n.s.. [field and mouse; nitedala.] a mouse that
burrows in banks, and makes her house with various apart-
ments.
the fieldmouse builds her garner under ground. dryden.
fieldmice are apt to gnaw their roots, and kill them in hard
winters. mortimer's husbandy.
fi'eld officer. n. s. [field and officer.] . an officer whose
command in the field extends to a whole regiment: as the
colonel, lieutenant-colonel, and major.
fu'eldpiece. adj. ifield and piece.] small cannon used in
battles, but not in sieges.
the
smalridge.
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 811</div><p class="text">f i e
f i g
the bassa planting his fieldpieces upon the hills, did from
thence grievously annoy the defendants. knolles.
fiend. m. s. [presio, flonb, saxon, a foe.]
1. an enemy , the great enemy of mankind; satan ; the devil.
tom is followed by the foul fiend. shakespeare’s k. lear.
2. any infernal being.
what now, had i a body again, i could,
coming from heil; what fiends would wish should be,
and hannibal could not have wish'd to see. b. johns. cat.
the hell-hounds, as ungorg'd with flesh and blood,
pursue their prey, and seek their wonted food;
the fiend remounts his courser. dryden's theo. and hon.
o woman woman when to ill thy mind
is bent, all hell contains no fouler fend. pope's odyssey.
fierce. adj. [fter, french; frox, latin.]
1. savage ; ravenous ; easily enraged.
thou huntest me as a fierce lion. job.
2. vehement in rage; eager of mischief.
destruction enters in the treacherous wood,
and vengeful slaughter, fierce for human blood. pope.
tyrants fierce, that unrelenting die. pope.
with that the god, whose earthquakes rock the ground,
fierce to phoeacia crost the vast profound. pope's odyssy.
3. violent; outrageous; vehement.
cursed be their anger, for it was serce; and their wrath,
for it was cruel. gen. xlix. 7.
4. passionate ; angry ; furious.
- this fierce abridgment
hath to it circumstantial branches, which
distinction should be rich in. shakes eare's cymbeline.
a man brings his mind to be positive and jerce for positions
whose evidence he has never examined. locke.
5. strong; forcible ; violent; with celerity.
the ships, though so great, are driven of fierce winds; yet
are they turned about with a very small holm. ja. iii. 2.
f1'ercely. adv. [from force..] violently; furiously.
battle join'd, and both sides fiercely fought. shak. h. vi.
the defendants, forcely affailed by their enemies before,
and beaten with the great ordnance behind, were grievously
distressed. knolles's history of the turks.
the air, if very cold, irritateth the flame, and maketh it
burn more serco, as fire scorcheth in frosty weather. bacon.
fi’er cen iss. m. s. [from force.]
1. ferocity; savageness.
the defect of heat which gives ferceness to our natures,
may contribute to that roughtess of our language. swift.
2. eagerness for blood; fury.
suddenly there came out of a wood a monstrous lion, with
a she-bear not far from him, of little less ferceness. sidney.
3. quickness to attack ; keenness in anger and resentment.
the greeks are strong, and skilful to their strength,
fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant. shakes.
4. violence; outrageous passion.
his pride and brutal fiercents; i abhor;
but scorn your mean suspicions of me more. dryd. aureng.
5. vehemence; hasty force.
fierifa'clas. n.s.. [in law.] a judicial writ, that lies at all
times within the year and day, for him that has recovered in
an action of debt or damages, to the sheriff, to command
him to levy the debt, or the damages of his goods, against
whom the recovery was had. cowel.
f1'erin ess. n.s.. [from fiery.]
1. hot qualities; heat; acrimony.
the ashes, by their heat, their fierings, and their dryness,
belong to the element of earth. boyle.
2. heat of temper; intelle&amp;tual ardour.
the italians, notwithstanding their natural fierings of tem-
per, affest always to appear sober and sedate. addison.
fi’ery. adj. [from fire.]
1. consisting of fire.
scarcely had phoebus in the gloomy east
yet harnessed his fiery footed team,
ne rear'd above the earth his flaming crest,
when the last deadly smoak aloft did steam. fairy queen.
i know, thou’dst rather
follow thine enemy in a fiery gulph
than flatter him in a bower.
2. hot like fire.
hath thy fiery heart so parcht thy entrails, -
that not a tear can fall for rutland’s death shak. h. vi.
3. vehement; ardent; active. -
then fiery expedition be my wing,
jove's mercury, and herald for a king. shakesp. rich. iii.
i drew this gallant head of war,
and cull'd these fiery spirits from the world,
to outlook conquest, and to win renown
ev’n in the jaws of danger and of death. shakesp. k. john.
4. passionate ; outrageous; easily provoked.
you know the fiery quality of the duke;
how unremoveable, and fixt he is
in his own course.
5. unrestrained; fierce.
vol. i.
shakespeare's coriolanus.
shałoffeare's king lear.
then, as i said, the duke, great bolingbroke,
mounted upon a hot and fiery steed,
which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,
with slow but stately pace kept on his course. shak. r. ii.
through elis and the grecian towns he flew;
th' audacious wretch four fiery coursers drew. dryden.
6. heated by fire. _ -
the sword which is made fery doth not only cut, by rea-
son of the sharpness which simply it hath, but also burn by
means of that heat which it hath from fire. hooker.
see from the brake the whirring pheasant springs,
and mounts exulting on triumphant wings: .
short is his joy ; he feels the fiery wound,
flutters in blood, and panting beats the ground. pope.
fife. m. s. [sse, french..] a pipe blown to the drum ; ini-
litary wind-musick.
farewell the plumed troops, and the big war
that make ambition virtue! oh farewell
farewell the neighing stced and the shrill trump, -
the spirit-stirring drum, th’ ear-piercing fift. sha'. othell.
thus the gay victim, with fresh garlands crown'd
pleas'd with the sacred fift's enlivening sound,
through gazing crowds in solemn state proceeds. phillips.
f1'fteen. adj. [fyfeyne, saxon.] five and ten.
i have dreau.ed and slept above some fifteen years and more.
shakespeare's taming of the shrew.
f1'ft fenth. adj. [ripted sa, sax.] the ordinas of fifteen;
the fifth after the tenth ; containing one part in fifteen.
a sifteenth part of silver incorporate with gold, will not be
recovered by any water of separation, except you put a greater
quantity of silver to draw up the les. bacon's natural hory.
london sends but four burgesses to parliament, although it
bear the fifteenth part of the charge of the whole nation in all
publick taxes and levies. graunt's bill of mortality.
fifth. adj. spirta, saxon.] -
1. the ordinal of five; the next to the fourth.
with smiling aspect you serenely move,
in your fifth orb, and rule the realm of love. drydex.
just as i wish'd, the lots were cast on four, • ,
myself the £fth. pope's odyssy.
2. all the ordinals are taken elliptically for the part which they
express: a fjoh, a fifth part ; a third, a third part.
the publick shall have lost four fifths of its annual income
for ever. swift.
fifth ly, adv. [from fifth.] . in the fifth place.
fifthly, living creatures have a more exact figure than
plants. bacon's natural history.
f1'ftieth. adj. [ripteogota, saxon.] the ordinal of fifty.
if this medium be rarer within the sun's body than at its
surface, and rarer there than at the hundred part of an inch
from its body, and rarer there than at the fiftieth part of an
inch from its body, and rarer there than at the orb of saturn,
i see no reason why the increase of density should flop any
where. newton's opt.
f1'fty. adj. [pipzig, saxon.] five tens.
a wither'd hermit, five score winters worn,
might shake off fifty looking in her eye. shakes care.
judas ordained captains over thousands, hundreds, fifties,
and tens. 1 mac. iii. 55.
in the hebrew there is a particle consisting but of one set-
ter, of which there are reckoned up above fifty several signi-
fications. . locke.
fig. m. s. [ficus, latin; fgo, spanish; figue, french.]
1. a tree that bears figs.
the characters are: the flowers, which are always inclosed
in the middle of the fruit, consist of the leaf, and are male
and female in the same fruit: the male flowers are situated
towards the crown of the fruit; and the female, growing
near the stalk are succeeded by small hard seeds: the intire
fruit is, for the most part, turbinated and globular, or of an
oval shape, is fleshy, and of a sweet taste. miller.
full on its crown a fig’s green branches rise,
and shoot a leafy forest to the skies. pope's odyssey.
or lead me through the maze,
embowering endless of the indian fg. thomson's summer.
2. a luscious soft fruit; the fruit of the figtree. ,
it maketh figs better, if a figtree, when it beginneth to
put forth leaves, have his top cut off. bacon's nat. hory.
figs are great subduers of acrimony. arbuthnot on diet.
to fig. v. a. [see fico.] -
1. to insult with fico's or contemptuous motions of the fingers.
when pistol lies, do this, and fg me like
the bragging spaniard. shakspeare's henry iv.
2. to put something useless into one's head. low cant.
away to the sow she goes, and figs her in the crown with
another story. l'e/irange.
f1 gapple. n.s. a fruit. a species of apple.
a fgapple hath no core or kernel, in these resembling a fg,
and differing from other apples. mortimer’s husbandry.
f1 gmarigold. n.s. a plant. it is succulent, and has the ap-
pearance of houseleek: the leaves grow opposite by pairs. mill.
f1'g-gnat, n. s. [culex ficarius.] an insect of the fly kind.
9 d t2<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 812</div><p class="text">f i g
f i g
to fight. v. m. preter, fought; part, pass, fought, speohtan,
saxon.] -
1. to contend in battle; to war; to make war; to battle ; to
contend in arms. it is used both of armies and single com-
batants.
king henry, be thy title right or wrong,
lord clifford vows to fight in thy defence.
fierce fiery warriors sight upon the clouds
in ranks and squadrons, and right form of war. shakesp.
the common question is, if we must now surrender spain,
what have we been fighting for all this while : the answer is
ready : we have been fighting for the ruin of the publick in-
terest, and the advance ment of a private. swift.
for her confederate nations fought, and kings were slain,
shak. hen. vi.
troy was o'erthrown, and a whole empire fell. phillips.
2. to combat; to duel; to contend in single fight.
one shall undertake to fight against another. 2 esdr. xiii.
- the poor wren,
the most diminutive of birds, will fight,
the young ones in her nest, against the owl. shakesp. macb.
to act as a soldier in any case. - -
richard, that robb'd the lion of his heart,
and fought the holy wars in palestine,
by this brave duke came early to his grave. shak. k. john.
greatly unfortunate, he fghts the cause
of honour, virtue, liberty and rome. addison's cato.
it has with before the person opposed ; sometimes agains?.
ye fight with the chaldeans.
the stars in their courses fought against sisera.
to contend.
the hot and cold, the dry and humid fght.
fight. v. a. to war against; to combat against.
himself alone an equal match he boasts,
to fight the phrygian and th’ ausonian hosts.
fight. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. battle.
gabriel, lead forth to battle these my sons
invincible, lead forth my armed saints,
by thousands and by millions rang'd for fght.
2. combat; duel.
herilus in single fight i slew,
whom with three lives feronia did endue ;
and thrice i sent him to the stygian shore,
*till the last ebbing soul return’d no more.
3. something to screen the combatants in ships.
who cycr saw a noble fight,
that never view’d a brave sea-fight !
hang up your bloody colours in the air,
up with your fights and your nettings prepare.
f1 ghter. m. s. [from fight.] warriour; duelist.
i will return again into the house, and desire some conduct
of the lady: i am no fighter. shakespeare's twelfth night.
o, 'tis the coldest youth upon a charge,
the most deliberate fighter /
fi'd hting. participial adj. [from fght.]
1. qualified for war; fit for battle.
e?”.
judges.
sandys.
dryd. æn.
milton.
jdryden's zn.
dryden.
an host of sighting men went out to war by bands. 2 chron.
2. occupied by war; being the scene of war.
in fighting fields, as far the spear i throw -
as flies the arrow from the well-drawn bow. pope's odyss.
f1'gment. n. s. [figmention, latin.] an invention; a fiction;
the idea feigned.
upon the like grounds was raised the figment of briareus,
who, dwelling in a city called hecat nchiria, the fancies of
those times assigned him an hundred hands. brown.
those assertions are in truth the figments of those idle
brains that brought romances into church history. bp. lloyd.
it carried rather an appearance of figment and invention,
in those that handed down the memory of it, than of truth
and reality. //oodward's natural hislory.
f1 gpe cker. m. s. s.s., and peck; feedula, latin.] a bird.
f1 gulate. adj. [from figulus, latin. j made of potters
clay.
fi'gura ble. adj. [from fguro, latin.] capable of being
brought to certain form, and retained in it. thus lead is
figurabic, but not water. |
the dificiences of impressible and not impressible, fgurable
and not sguable, scissible and not scissible, are plebeian no-
tions. t eacon's natural history.
figu r.a.b. lity. m. s. [from sourable.] i he quality of being
capable of a certain and stable form.
f, g ural. adj. [from sgure. }
1. represented by delineation.
- incongruities have been committed by geographers in the
fgural resemblances of several regions. brown.
2. f. gural. numbers. such numbers as do or may represent
some geometrical figure, in relation to which they are always
considered, and are either lineary, superficial, or solid. harris.
f1 g ura's e. adj. [figuratus, latin.]
1. of a certain and determinate form.
plants are all fgurate and determinate, which inanimate
bodies are not ; for look how far the spirit is able to spread
dryden's all for love. ,
and continue itself, so far goeth the shape or figure, and then
is determined. - bacon.
2. resembling any thing of a determinate form: as, figural,
stones retaining the forths of shells in which they were formed
by the deluge. -
3. fig ura’s e counterpoint. [in musick.] that wherein there
is a mixture of discords along with the concords. harris.
4. fio ura’s e dojcant. [in musick.] that wherein discords
are concerned, as well, though not so much, as concords;
and may well be termed the ornament of rhetorical part of
musick, in regard that in this are introduced all the varieties
of points, figures, syncopes, diversities of measures, and what.
ever else is capable of adorning the composition. horri.
figuration. n. s. [sguratus, latin.]
1. determination to a certain form. o
neither doth the wind, as far as it carrieth a voice, with
motion thereof confound any of the delicate and articulate
figurations of the air in variety of words. bacon's nat. jiji,
2. i he act of giving a certain form.
if motion be in a certain order, there followeth vivification
and sguration in living creatures perfect. bacon's nat. hji.
frou rat 1 v e. adj. [/guratif-ve, fr. from fgura, latin.]
1. representing something cite ; typical ; represeitative.
this, they will say, was fgurative, and served by god's
appointment but for a time, to shadow out the true everlast-
ing glory of a more divine sanctity; whereinto christ being
long since entered, it seemeth that all these curious exorna.
tions should rather cease. hocker.
2. changed by rhetorical figures from the primitive meaning;
not literal.
how often have we been railed at for understanding words
in a figurative sense, which cannot be literally understood
without overthrowing the plainest evidence of sense and reason.
stillingfleet.
this is a figurative expression, where the words are us d in
a different sense floin what they signify in their first ordinary
1 intell to on. rogers.
3. full of figures; full of rhetorical exornations; full of change,
from the original sense.
sublime subjects ought to be adorned with the sublimes; and
with the most figurative expressions. dryden's juvenal, prof.
f1 gurative ly. adj. [from fgurative..] by a figure; in a
{onte different from that which words originally imply; not
literally.
the custom of the apostle is figuratively to transfer to him-
self, in the first person, what belongs to others. hammond.
the words are different, but the sense is still the same; for
therein are figuratively intended uziah and ezcchias. brown.
satyr is a kind of poetry in which human vices are repre-
hended, party dramatically, partly simply ; but, for the most
part, soloratively and occultly. dryden's juvenal, dedicat.
figure. m. s. [figura, latin.] -
1. the form of any thing as terminated by the outline.
flowers have all exquisite sgures, and the flower numbers
are chiefly five and four; as in primroses, briar-roses, single
muskroses, single pinks and gilliflowers, which have five
leaves; lilies, fiower-de-luces, borage, buglass, which have
four leaves. bacon's natural h2:ry.
men find green clay that is soft as long as it is in the wa-
tes, so that one may print on it all kind of soures, and give it
what shape one pleases. - eyle.
figures are properly modifications of bodies; for pure space
is not any where terminated, nor can be: whether these be
or be not body in it, it is uniformly continued. locke.
2. shape ; form; semblance. o
he hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age,
doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion. shaocar.
3. person ; external form ; appearance graceful or incesant,
mean or grand.
the blue german shall the tigris drink,
ere 1, forsaking gratitude and truth,
forget the figure of that godlike youth. dryden’s jorg.
i was charmed with the gracefulness of his figure and def-
very, as well as with his discourses, addison's speziator.
a good fgure, or person, in man or woman, gives credit
at first fight to the choice of either. clariff.
4. distinguished appearance; eminence; remarkable character.
- while fortune favour'd, while his arms support
the cause, and rul’d the counsels of the court,
i made some figure there ; nor was my name
qbscure, nor i without my share of fame. dryden's zon.
the speech, i believe, was not so much designed by the
knight to inform the court, as to give him a figure in my eye,
and keep up his credit in the country. 4.idson's spezzutor.
not a woman shall be unexplained that makes a fgure either
as a maid, a wife, or a widow. aidon's gorazoo.
whether or no they have done well to set you up for
making another kind of figure, time will witness. 23...o.
many princes made very ill figures upon the throne, ...h.,
before were the favourites of the people. adjo.'s arcelo...r.
5. magnificence; splendour.
if it be his chief end in it to grow rich, that he may live
7
- in
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 813</div><p class="text">*::: f i g
f i l
in figure and indulgence, and be able to retire from busines,
o to idleness and hurry, his trade, as to him, loses all its inno-
o cency. law.
* 6. a statue ; an image; something formed in resemblance of
t
somewhat else.
several statues, which seemed at a distance of the whitest
marble, were nothing else but so many figures in snow. addison.
7. representations in painting; persons exhibited in colours.
in the principal figures of a picture the painter is to employ
the finews of his art; for in them consists the priocipal beauty
of his work. dryden's dufresnoy.
my favourite books and pictures sell;
kindly throw in a little figure,
and set the price upon the bigger.
8. arrangement; disposition; inodification.
the figure of a syllogism is the proper disposition of the
prior.
i. s middle term with the parts of the question. //atts's logick.
9. a character denoting a number.
* ..., hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets cannot
i. i. think, speak, cast, write, sing, number
his love to anthony. shakespeare's ant. and cleopatra.
he that seekeh to be eminent amongst able men, hath a
great task; but that is ever good for the publick: but he that
plots to be the only figure among cyphers, is the decay of a
whole age. bacon's effoys.
o as in accounts cyphers and figures pass for real sums, so in
---- human affairs words pass for things themselves. south's serm.
3. 10. the horoscope ; the diagram of the aspects of the astrologi-
---&gt; cal houses. o
:* - we do not know what's brought to pass under the profes-
* -a - sion of fortunetelling: she works by charms, by spells, by the
s figure, and daubry beyond our element. shakspeare.
--... he set a figure to discover
** - ' if you were fied to rye or dover. hudibras.
o figure-flingers and star-gazers pretend to foretell the for-
o, to tunes of kingdoms, and have no forefight in what concerns
themselves. - l’estrange.
ors. 11. [in theology.] type; representative.
who was the figure of him that is to come. romans.
12. [in rhetorick.] any mode of speaking in which words are
detorted from their literal and primitive sense. in strict ac-
- - ceptation, the change of a word is a trope, and any affection
-o-, -, - of a sentence a sigure ; but they are confounded even by the
- exacteit writers.
silken terms precise,
three pil'd hyperboles, spruce affectation,
figures pedantical, these summer flies -
have blown me full of maggot ostentation. shakespeare.
here is a strange figure invented against the plain and na-
tural sense of the words ; for by praying to bestow, must be
understood only praying to pray. stillingflect.
they have been taught rhetorick, but never taught tan-
guage; as if the names of the figures that embellished the dis-
course of those, who understood the art of speaking, were the
very art and skill of speaking well. locke.
13. [in grammar.] any deviation from the rules of analogy or
syntax.
to f1 gur e. v. a. [figuro, latin.]
1. to form into any determinate shape.
trees and herbs, in the growing forth of their boughs and
branches, are not figured, and keep no order. bacon.
accept this goblet, rough with figur'd gold. dryd. wirg.
- 2. to show by a corporeal resemblance: as in picture or sta-
... " tuary. - -
- arachne figur’d how jove did abuse
europa like a bull, and on his back
her through the sea did bear ; so lively seen,
that it true sea, and true bull ye would ween. spensir.
now marks the course of roling orbs on high, -
t o'er figur'd worlds now travels with his eye. pope.
…to 3. to cover or adorn with figures, or itnages.
...], i’ll give my jewels for a set of beads, - *
vo. o my gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
o my gay apparel for an almsman's gown, -
. my figur’d goblets for a dish of wood. shakoff. rich. ii.
co- 4. to diversify ; to variegate with adventitious forms or matter.
isl but this effusion of such manly drops,
... --&gt; startle mine eyes, and makes me more amaz'd
o than had i seen the vaulty top of heav'n *
* figur’d quite o'er with burning meteors, shakes). k. john.
also o 5. to represent by a typical or fieurative resemblance. -
is no when sacraments are said to be visible signs of invisible
so-o. * s
;: 0. o . grace, we thereby conceive how grace is indeed the very end
o for which these heavenly mysteries were instituted; and the
y: to
matter whereof they consist is such as signifieth, figureth, and
representeth their end. hooker.
there is a history in all mens lives, -
figuring the nature of the times deceased. shakesp. h. iv.
marriage rings are not of this stuff:
oh! why should ought less precious or less tough
figure our loves 2 jdonne.
an heroic poem should be more sited to the common actions
and passions of human life, and more like a glass of nature,
guring a more practicable virtue to us than was done by the
ancients. - dryden.
the emperor appears as a rising sun, and holds a globe in
his hand to figure out the earth that is enlightened an actuated
by his beams. addison on 41edals.
6. to image in the mind. -
none that feels tensibly the decays of age, and his life
wearing off, can sure to himself those imaginary charms in
riches and praise, that men are apt to do in the warmth of
their blood. temple.
if love, alas! be pain, the pain i bear
no thought can figure, and no tongue declare. prior.
7. to prefigure; to foreshow.
three glorious suns, each one a perfeot sun,
in this the heaven figures some event. shakesp. henry vi.
8. to form figuratively; to use in a sense not literal.
figured and metaphorical expressions do well to illustrate
more abstruse and unfamilias ideas, which the mind is not yet
thoroughly accustomed to. - locke.
9. to note by characters.
each thought was visible that roll'd within,
as thro' a crystal glass the figur’d hours are seen. dryden.
f1 gure-flinger. m. s. [fore and fing.] a pretender to
astrology and prediction.
quacks, figure-fingers, pettifoggers, and republican plot-
ters cannot well live without it. collier of confidence.
f1 gwok r. n. s, [fig and wort ; ficaria.] a plant. a/ill.
fila clous, adj. ifrom slum, latin.] consisting of threads;
composed of threads.
they make cables of the bark of lime trees: it is the stalk
that naketh the filaceous matter commonly, and sometimes
the down that groweth above. bacon's natural hisłory.
fit, ace.r. m. s. [flazarius, low lat. filum.] an officer in the
common pleas, so called because he files those writs whereon
he makes process. there are fourteen of them in their several
divisions and counties: they make out all original process, as
well real as personal and mixt. harris.
f1'l ament. n. s: [silament, french ; flamenta, latin.] a
slender thread; a body slender and long like a thread.
the effluvium passing out in a smaller thread, and more
enlightened filament, it is irreth not the bodies interposed. bro.
the lungs of consumptives have been consumed, nothing
remaining but the ambient membrane, and a number of
withered veins and filaments. harvey on consumptions.
the ever-rolling orb's impulsive ray
on the next threads and filaments does bear,
which form the springy texture of the air
and those still strike the next, 'till to the fight
the quick vibration propagates the light. blackmore.
the dung of horses is nothing but the filaments of the hay,
and as such combustible. arbuthnot on aliments.
fi'lbert. m. s. [this is derived by junius and skinner from
the long beards or husks, as corrupted from full beard or full
of beard. it probably had its name, like many other fruits,
from some one that introduced or cultivated it; and is there-
fore corrupted from filbert or filibert, the name of him who
brought it hither.] a fine hazel nut with a thin shell.
in august cones fruit of all sorts; as plumbs, pears, apri-
cots, barberries, filberts, muskmelons, monkshoods of all co-
lours. bacon's essays.
thou hast a brain, such as it is indeed
on what else should thy worm of fancy feed
yet in a filbert i have often known -
maggots survive, when all the kernel’s gone. dorset.
there is also another kind, called the fibert of constan-
tinople; the leaves and fruit of which are bigger than either
of the former: the best are those of a thin shell. mortimer.
to filch. v. a. [a word of uncertain etymology. the
french word filer, from which some derive it, is of very late
production, and therefore cannot be its original.] to stea);
to take by theft; to pilfer; to pillage ; to rob; to take by
robbery. . it is usually spoken of petty thefts.
he shall find his wealth wonderfully enlarged by keeping his
cattle in inclosures, where they shall always have safe being,
that none are continually filched and stolen. spensor.
the champion robbeth by night,
and prowleth and filcheth by daie. tosor's husbandry.
who steals my purse, steals trash'; 'tis something, nothing;
'twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
but he that filches from me my good name,
robs me of that which not enriches him, -
and makes me poor indeed, shakes eare's othello.
he could discern cities like hives of bees, wherein every bee
did nought else but sting; some like hornets, some like filching
wasps, others as drones. burton on melancholy.
what made thee venture to betray,
and filch the lady's heart away. hudibrak
the pismire was formerly a husbandman, that secretly
filthed away his neighbour's goods. l’e/irange.
fain would they filch that little food away, ,
while unrestrain'd those happy gluttons prey. . dryden.
sq<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 814</div><p class="text">f i l
f i l
so speeds the wily fox, alarm'd by fear,
who lately filch'd the turkey's callow care. gay's trivia.
filcher. n. s. [from filch.]. a thief; a petty robber.
file. n. s. [file, french ; filum, a thread, latin.]
1. a thread. not used. -
but let me resume the file of my narration, which this ob-
ject of books, best agreeable to my course of life, hath a little
interrupted. j/attan.
2. a line on which papers are strung to keep them in order.
all records, where in there was any incinory of the king's
attainder, should be cancelled and taken off the file. bacon.
the petitions being thus prepared, do you continually set
apart an hour in a day to peruse those, and then rank them
into several files, according to the subject matters. bacon.
th' apothecary-train is who'ly blind;
from files a random recipe they take,
aud many deaths of one prescription make. dryden.
3. a catalogue : roi; series. * -
our present musters grow upon the file
to i.vc and twenty thousand men of choice. shak. h. iv.
the valu'd file *
distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle.
4. a line of soldiers ranged one behind another.
those goodly eyes,
that o'er the files and musters of the war
have glow'd like plated mars, now bend, now turn
upon a tawny front. shakespeare's aut. and cleopatra.
so saying, on he led his radiant files,
dazzling the moon. a silton's paradis? loft.
5. [peol, saxon ; vijle, dutch..] an instrument to rub down
prominences.
the rough or coarse-toothed file, if it be large, is called a
rubber, and is to take off the unevenness of your work which
the hammer made in the forging: the battard-toothed file is to
take out of your work the deep cuts, or file-strokes, the rough
le made : the fine-toothed file is to take out the cuts, or file-
itrokes, the battard file made ; and the smooth file is to take
out those cuts, or file-strokes, that the fine sile made. moxon.
a file for the mastocks and for the coulters. 1 sam. xiii. 21.
the smiths and armourers on palfreys ride,
files in their hands and hammers at their side. dryden.
f 11.5 cu tter. m. s. [file and cutter.] a maker of files.
gad-steel is a tough sort of steel ; flecotters use it to make
their chisiels, with which they cut their files. a/oxon.
to file. v. a. [from filum, a thread î
1. to string upon a thread or wire. whence to file a bill is to
offer it in its order to the notice of the judge.
from the day his first bill was filed he began to collea
reports. arbuthnot and pope's mart. scrib.
2. [from feolan, saxon.]. to cut with a file.
shak. alsacb.
they which would file away most from the largeness of that
offer, do in more sparing terms acknowledge little less.
hooker.
let men be careful how they attempt to cure a blemish by
fling or cutting off the head of such an overgrown tooth. ray.
3. to smooth 5 to polish.
his humour is lofty, his discourse peremptory, his tongue
filed, and his eye ambitious. shakesp. love's labour losł.
4. [from eilan, saxon.] to foul ; to fully ; to pollute. this
sense is retained in scotland.
for banquo's issue have i fl'd my mind,
for them the gracious duncan have i murder'd.
his weeds divinely fashioned,
all fil’d and mang!'d.
to fii.e. v. n. [from the noun..] to march in a file, not
abreast, but one behind another.
all ran down without order or ceremony, 'till we drew up
in good order, and filed off. tatler.
did all the grosier atoms at the cell
of chance fic off to form the pondrous ball,
and undetermin'd into order fall blackmore's creation.
f1'lemot. m. s. [corrupted from feucille morte, a dead leaf,
french..] a brown or yellow-brown colour.
the colours you ought to wish for are blue or filemot,
turned up with red. swift.
fi'le r. m. s. [from file.] one who files; one who uses the
file in cutting metals.
filial. adj. [filial-le, french ; filius, latin.]
1. pertaining to a son ; befitting a son.
my mischievous proceeding may be the glory of his filial
piety, the only reward now left for so great a merit. sidney.
from imposition of strict laws, to free
acceptance of large grace; from servile fear
to filial; works of law, to works of faith.
he griev'd, he wept, the fight an image brought
of his own filial love, a sadly pleasing thought. dryden.
2. bearing the charader or relation of a son.
and thus the filial godhead answ'ring spoke. milton.
where the old myrtle her good influence sheds,
sprigs of like leaf erect their filial heads;
and when the parent rose decays and dies,
with a resembling face the daughter buds arise.
shakoff.
milton.
prior.
-
8. to fill up.
chapman’s iliads. -
fili a"r ion. n. s. [from filius, latin.] the relation of a son
to a father ; correlative to paternity.
the relation of paternity and filiation, between the first and
second person, and the relation between the sacred persons of
the trinity, and the denomination thereof, must needs be
eternal, because the terms of relation between whom that
relation ariseth were eternal. hale's origin of mankind.
f1 lings. m. s. [without a singular ; from file.] fragments
rubbed off by the action of the file. -
the filings of iron infused in vinegar, will, with a decodion
of galls, make good ink, without any copperose. brown,
the chippings and filings of those jewels are of more value
than the whole mass of ordinary authors. felton on the class.
to fii.l. v. m. [fyllan, saxon.]
1. to store 'till no more can be admitted.
fill the waterpots with water, and they filled them up to the
brim. john, ii. 7.
i am who fill
infinitude, nor vacuous space.
the celestial quires, when orient light
fxhaling first from darkness they beheld;
birth-day of heav'n and earth; with joy and shout
amilton.
the hollow universal orb they fill’d. azilton.
2. to store abundantly. -
be fruitful, multiply, and in the seas
and lakes and running streams the waters fill. asilo.
3. to satisfy ; to content.
he with his consorted eve
the story heard attentive, and was fill’d
with admiration and deep muse to hear. milton.
nothing but the supreme and absolute infinite can ade-
quately fill and super-abundantly satisfy the infinite desires of
intelligent beings. cheyne's phil. princ.
4. to glut ; to surfeit.
thou art going to lord timon's feast.
—ay, to see meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools. shakoff.
5. 70 fill out. to pour out liquor for drink.
6. to fill out. to extend by something contained.
i only speak of him
whom pomp and greatness sits so loose about,
that he wants majesty to fill them cut. dryden.
7. to fill up. [up is often used without much addition to the
force of the verb. j. to make full.
hope leads from goal to goal,
and opens still, and opens on his soul;
*till lengthen’d on to faith, and unconfin'd,
it pours the bliss that fills up all the mind.
to supply. -
when the several trades and professions are supplied, you
will find most of those that are proper for war absolutely ne-
cessary for filling up the laborious part of life, and carrying on
the underwork of the nation. addison on the jp'ar.
9. to fill up. to occupy by bulk.
there would not be altogether so much water required for
the land as for the sea, to raise them to an equal height; be-
cause mountains and bills would fill up part of that space upon
the land, and so make less water requisite. burnet.
io. to fill up. to engage; to employ.
is it far you ride
—as far, my lord, as will fill up the time
*twixt this and supper. shakes care’s macbeth.
pope.
, to fill. v. n.
1. to give to drink.
in the cup which she hath filled, fill to her double. rev. xviii.
we fill to th’ general joy of the whole table,
and to our dear friend banquo, whom we miss.
2. to grow full.
3. to glut; to satiate.
things that are sweet and fat are more filling, and do swim
and hang more about the mouth of the stomach, and go not
down so speedily. bacon's natural history.
4. to fill up. to grow full.
neither the palus meotis nor the euxine, nor any other
seas, fill up, or by degrees grow shallower. j/zodward.
the first stage of healing, or the discharge of matter, is by
surgeons called digestion; the second, or the filling up with
flesh, incarnation ; and the last, or skinning over, cicatriza-
tion. - - sharp's szrgery.
fill. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. as much as may produce complete satisfaction.
her neck and breasts were ever open bare,
that aye thereof her babes might suck their fill. fairy queen.
but thus inflam'd bespoke the captain,
who scorneth peace shall have his fill of war. fairfax.
when ye were thirsty, did i not cleave the rock, and wa-
ters flowed out to your fill? 2 esd. i. 29.
meanwhile enjoy
your fill, what happiness this happy state
can comprehend, incapable of more. milton's par. loft.
amid’ the tree now got, where plenty hung
tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill, -
i spar'd not. alton's parads: left.
* which
shakoff.
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 815</div><p class="text">f i l
f i m
which made me gently first remove your fears,
that so you might have room to entertain
your fill of joy. denham's sophy.
your barbarity may have its fill of destruction. pope.
2. [more properly thiil.] the place between the shafts of a
carriage.
this mule being put in the fill of a cart, run away with
the cart and timber. mortimer's husbandry.
fi'll er. m. s. [from fill.] -
1. anything that fills up room without use.
'tis a meer filler, to stop a vacancy in the hexameter, and
connect the preface to the work of virgil. dryd. aen. dedic.
a mixture of tender gentle thoughts and suitable expres-
fions, of forced and inextricable conceits, and of needless
fillers up to the rest. pope.
2. one whose employment is to fill vessels of carriage.
they have six diggers to four fillers, so as to keep the fillers
always at work. mortimer's husbandry.
fillet. n.s. [filet, french; filum, latin.]
1. a band tied round the head or other part.
his baleful breath inspiring, as he glides,
now like a chain around her neck he rides;
now like a fillet to her head repairs,
and with his circling volumes folds her hairs. dryden's zn.
she scorn'd the praise of beauty, and the care;
a belt her waist, a fillet binds her hair. pope's iwinds. for.
2. the fleshy part of the thigh; applied commonly to veal.
the youth approach'd the fire, and as it burn’d,
on five sharp broachers rank'd, the roast they turn'd:
these morsels stay’d their stomachs; then the rest
they cut in legs and fillets for the feast. dryden's iliad.
3. meat rolled together, and tied round.
fillet of a fenny snake,
in the cauldron boil and bake.
the mixture thus, by chymick art
united close in every part,
in fillets roll'd, or cut in pieces,
- appear'd like one continu’d species. swift.
4. [in architecture.]. a little member which appears in the or-
naments and mouldings, and is otherwise called listel. harris.
pillars and their fillets of silver. exodus.
to fi’llet. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to bind with a bandage or fillet.
2. to adorn with an astragal. -
he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters
and filletted them.
to fi'llip. v. a. [a word, says skinner, formed from the
sound. this resemblance i am not able to discover, and there-
fore am inclined to imagine it corrupted from fill up, by some
combination of ideas which cannot be recovered.] to strike
with the nail of the finger by a sudden spring or motion.
if i do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. shak. hen. iv.
then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
fillip the stars: then let the mutinous winds
strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun. shakesh. coriol.
we see, that if you fillip a lutestring, it sheweth double or
treble. bacon's natural history.
fi'llip. n.f. [from the verb.] a jerk of the finger let go
from the thumb.
fi'lly. n. s. [filoy, welsh; fille, french.]
1. a young horse or mare. not now used.
geld fillies, but tits, yet a nine days of age,
they die else of gelding, and gelders do rage:
young fillies so likely of bulk and of bone,
shakespeare's macbeth.
keep such to be breeders, let gelding alone. tussor.
a well-wayed horse will convey thee to thy journey’s end,
when an unbacked filly may give thee a fall. suckling.
2. a young mare : opposed to a colt or young horse.
i jest to oberon, and make him smile,
when i a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
neighing in likeness of a filly foal. shakespeare.
i am joined in wedlock, for my fins, to one of those fillies
who are described in the old poet. addison's spectator.
17ilm.. n.s. [eylmepa, saxon.] a thin pellicle or skin.
while the silver needle did work upon the sight of his eye,
to remove the film of the cataract, he never saw any thing
more clear or perfect than that white needle. bacon.
michael from adam's eyes the film remov’d,
which that false fruit that promis'd clearer fight
had bred. milton's paradis. loft,
a stone is held up by the films of the bladder, and so kept
from grating or offending it.' graunt's bills of mortality.
there is not one infidel so ridiculous as to pretend to solve
the phaenomena of fight, fancy, or cogitation, by those fleet-
ing superficial films of bodies. bentley’s sermons.
he from thick films shall purge the visual ray,
and on the fightless eyeballs pour the day. pope's maffiah.
72 film. v. a. [from the noun..] to cover with a pellicle or
thin skin.
it will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
whilst rank corruption, mining all within,
infects unseen. shakespeare's hamlet.
vol. i.
ex. xxxviii. 28. .
****, off. [from film.] composed of thin membranes or
pellicles.
so the false spider, when her nets are spread,
deep ambush'd in her filent den does lie;
and feels, far off, the trembling of her thread,
whose filmy cord should bind the struggling fly. dryden.
the wasps with fruitless toil -
flap filmy pinions off, to extricate
their feet in liquid shackles bound, 'till death
bereave them of their worthless souls; such doom
waits luxury, and lawless love of gain. phillips.
loose to the winds their airy garments flew, -
thin glitt'ring textures of the filmy dew ;
fo in o: richest tineture of the skies,
here light disports in ever-mingling dyes. pope.
to fitter. v. a. [filtro, low latin ; jo. trahere.]
1. to defecate by drawing off liquor by depending threads.
2. to strain; to percolate.
dilute this liquor with fair water, fore it through a paper,
and so evaporate it. grow's asseum.
fi'iter. n.s.. [filtrum, latin.]
1. a twist of thread, of which one end is dipped in the liquor
to be defecated, and the other hangs below the bottom of the
vessel, so that the liquor drips from it.
2. a strainer; a searce.
that the water, passing through the veins of the earth,
should be rendered fresh and potable, which it cannot be by
any percolations we can make, but the saline particles will
pass through a tenfold filter. ray on the creation.
filth. n.s. spilo, saxon.]
1. dirt: nastiness; any thing that soils or fouls.
wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
filth's favour but themselves. shakespeare's king lear.
neither may you trust waters that taste sweet; for they are
commonly found in rising grounds of great cities, which must
needs take in a great deal of filth. bacon's natural hi/ory.
how perfect then is man from head to foot
defi’d with filth, and rotten at the root. sandys,
though perhaps among the rout
he wildly flings his filth about ;
he still has gratitude and sap'ence,
to spare the folks that give him ha'pence. swift.
2. corruption; grossness; pollution.
such do likewise exceedingly dispose us to piety and reli-
gion, by purifying our souls from the dross and filth of sensual
delights. tillotson.
f1'lthly, adv. [from filthy.j., nastily; foully; grossly.
it stuck filthily in the camel's stomach that bulls, bears, and
the like, should be armed, and that a creature of his size
should be left defenceless. l'estrange.
f1'lthiness. m. s. [from filthy.]
1. nastiness; foulness; dirtiness. -
men of virtue suppressed it, lest their shining should disco-
ver the others filthines. sidney.
2. corruption; pollution.
they held this land, and with their filthings;
polluted this same gentle soil long time,
that their own mother loath'd their beastliness,
and 'gan abhor her brood's unkindly crime,
all were they born of her own native slime.
spenser's fairy queen,
they never duly improved the utmost of such a power, but
gave themselves up to all the filthines, and licentiousness of life
imaginable. south's sermons.
filthy. adj. [from filth.]
1. nasty; foul; dirty.
fair is foul, and foul is fair;
hover through the fog and filthy air.
2. gross ; polluted.
as all stories are not proper subjects for an epick poem or
a tragedy, so neither are they for a noble picture: the subjects
both of the one and of the other, ought to have nothing of
immoral, low, or filthy in them. dryden's dufresnoy.
to fit.trate. v. a. [from filter.] to strain; to perco-
late; to filter.
the extract obtained by the former operation, burnt to
ashes, and those ashes boiled in water and filtrated, yield a
fiery salt. arbuthnot on aliments.
filtration. m. s. . [from filtrate.] a method by which
liquors are procured fine and clear. the filtration in use is
{training a liquor through paper, which, by the smallness of
its pores, admits only the finer parts through, and keeps the
rest behind. 2uincy.
we took then common nitre, and having, by the usual way
of solution, filtration, and coagulation, reduced it into cry-
stals, we put four ounces of this purified nitre into a strong
new crucible. boyle.
f1'mble hemp. n.s. [corrupted from female.]
the light summer hemp, that bears no seed, which is
called fimble hemp. mortimer.
good flax and good hemp, for to have of her own,
in may a good housewife will see it be sown;
9 e and
shakesp. macbeth.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 816</div><p class="text">f i n
f i n
and afterwards trim it, to serve at a need,
the smble to spin, and the carle for her seed. tassor.
fin. m. j. [fin, saxon; vin, dutch.j. the wing of a fish ;
the iimo by which he balances his body, and moves in the
water.
- he that depends
upon your favours, swims with fins of lead,
and hews down oaks with rushes.
their fins consist of a number of gristly bones, long and
slender, like pins and needles. more against atheisin.
thus at half-ebb a rowling sea
returns, and wins upon the shore;
the watry herd, affrighted at the roar,
rest on their fins awhile, and stay,
then backward take their wond'ring way. dryden.
still at his oar th’ industrious libys plies;
but as he plies, each busy arm shrinks in,
and by degrees is fashion'd to a fin. addison's ovid.
fin-foo"red. adj. [fin and foot.] palmipedous; having feet
with membranes between the toes.
it is described like fishpedes, or birds which have their feet
or claws divided ; whereas it is palmipedous or fin-footed, like
swans and geese, according to the method of nature in lati-
rostrous or flat-billed birds; which being generally swimmers,
the organ is wisely contrived unto the action, and they are
framed with fins or oars upon their feet. brown.
f1'nable. adj. [from fine.] that admits a fine; that which
deserves a fine.
this is the order for writs of covenant that be finable. bacon.
he sent letters to the council, wherein he acknowledged
himself favoured in bringing his cause finable. hayward.
fi’nal. adj. [final, french ; finalis, latin.]
1. ultimate; last.
and over them triumphant death his dart
shook; but delay'd to strike, though oft invok'd
with vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
2. conclusive; decisive.
there be many examples where sea-fights have been final
to the war. bacon.
henry spent his reign in establishing himself, and had nei-
ther leisure nor opportunity to undertake the final conquest of
ireland. - o davies on ireland.
3. mortal; destructive.
at last resolv'd to work his final smart,
he lifted up his hand, but back again did start.
- spenser's fairy queen.
milton.
4. respecting the end or motive.
some things in such sort are allowed, that they be also re-
quired as necessary unto salvation, by way of direet, imme-
diate, and proper necessity final; so that, without performance
of them, they cannot by ordinary course be saved, nor by any
means be excluded from life, observing them. hooker.
by its gravity air raises the water in pumps, siphons, and
other engines; and performs all those feats which former phi-
losophers, through ignorance of the efficient cause, attributed
to a final, namely, nature's abhorrence of a vacuity, ray.
your answering in the final cause, makes me believe you
are at a loss for the efficient. collier on thought.
f1'nally. adv. [from final.]
1. ultimately; lastly ; in conclusion.
sight bereav'd
may chance to number thee with those
whom patience finally must crown.
2. completely ; without recovery.
not any house of noble english in ireland was utterly de-
stroyed, or finally rooted out by the hand of justice, but the
house of desmond only. davies on ireland.
doubtlessly many men are finally lost, who yet have no
mens sins to answer for but their own, south.
finance. m. s. [french..] revenue; income; profit. it
is seldom used in the fingular.
this sort of finance hath been increased. bacon.
the residue of these ordinary finances be casual or uncer-
tain; as be the escheats and forfeitures. bacon."
his pretence for making war upon his neighbours was their
pyracies, though he practised the same trade when he was
straitened in his finances at the siege of byzantium. arbuthnot.
financier. m. s. [french..] one who collects or farms the
publick revenue; one who understands the publick revenue.
f1'nary. m. s. [from to fine.] in the iron works, the second
forge at the iron mills. dic7.
finch. n. s. spinc, saxon.] a small bird of which we have
three kinds, the goldfinch, chaffinch, and bullfinch.
to find. v. a. [finban, saxon; vinden, dutch.]
1. to obtain by searching or seeking.
ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find.
matt. vii. 7.
whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou
found of all thy houshold stuff? gen. xxxi. 37.
- she disappear'd, and left me dark; i wak'd
to find her, or for ever to deplore
her loss.
milton's agonisies.
milton.
shakespeare's othello, .
a bird that flies about,
and beats itself against the cage,
finding at last no passage out,
it fits and sings. cowl
2. to obtain something lost.
when he hath found his sheep, he layeth it on his shoul-
ders rejoicing. luke, xv. 5.
in my school days, when i had lost one shaft,
i shot his fellow of the self-same flight
the self-same way, with more advised watch,
to find the other forth; by vent'ring both,
i oft found both. shakespeare's merchant of pania.
3. to obtain something desired.
thus i embolden'd spake, and freedom used
permisfive, and acceptance found. milton.
our voluntary service he requires,
not our necessitated ; such with him
finds no acceptance, nor can find. milton.
4. to meet with ; to fall upon.
there watchful at the gate they find
suspicion with her eyes behind. dodsley's misall.
in woods and forests thou art found. cowly.
the bad must miss, the good unsought shall find. pope.
5. to know by experience.
how oft will he
of thy chang'd faith complain
and his fortunes find to be
so airy and so vain
the torrid zone is now found habitable.
6. to come to ; to attain. -
the sun that barren shines,
whose virtue on itself works no effe&amp;t,
but in the fruitful earth; there first receiv'd
his beams, unactive else, their vigor find.
7. to discover by study, or attention.
the fox that first this cause of grief did find,
'gan first thus plain his case with words unkind.
hubberd’s tale.
cowley.
cowly.
milton.
physicians
with sharpen'd fight some remedies may find. dryden.
thy maid l ah, find some nobler theme,
whereon thy doubts to place. cowley.
8. to discover what is hidden.
a curse on him who found the oar. cowley.
9. to hit on by chance; to perceive by accident.
they build on sands, which if unmov'd they find,
'tis but because there was no wind. cowley.
10. to gain by any mental endeavour.
i by conversing cannot these erect
from prone, nor in their ways complacence find. milton.
if we for happiness could leisure find,
and wand'ring time into a method bind,
we should not then the great mens favour need. cowley.
we oft review, each finding like a friend
something to blame, and something to commend. pope.
11. to remark; to observe; to perceive.
thus far to try thee, adam, i was pleased
and find thee knowing not of beast alone,
which thou hast rightly nam’d, but of thyself. milton.
beauty or wit in all i find. cowley.
12. to detect; to deprehend ; to catch.
when first found in a lie, talk to him of it as a strange
monstrous matter, and so shame him out of it. locke.
13. to reach; to attain.
they are glad when they can find the grave.
they also know,
and reason not contemptibly; with these
job, iii. 22.
find pastime, and bear rule. milton.
in solitude
what happiness, who can enjoy alone,
or all enjoying, what contentment find? a siltan.
he did the utmost bounds of knowledge find,
yet found them not so large as was his mind. cowley.
14. to meet.
a clear conscience and heroick mind,
in ills their business and their glory find. cowley.
15. to settle ; to fix anything in one's own opinion.
some men
the marks of old and catholick would find. cowley.
16. to determine by judicial verdict.
they would enforce them to find as they would dire&amp;t; and
if they did not, cc.nvent, imprison, and fine them. bacon.
his peers, upon this evidence,
have found him guilty of high treason. shakesp. hen. viii.
17. to supply; to furnish: as, he finds me in money arid in
vicuals.
a war with spain is like to be lucrative, if we go roundly
on at first; the war in continuance will find itself. baccr.
still govern thou my song,
urania, and fit audience find, though few. a siltzz.
18. [in law.] to approve: as, to find a bill.
19. to determine: as, to find for the plaintiff.
2c. to
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 817</div><p class="text">f i n
f i n
20. to finp himself. to be ; to fare with regard to ease or
pain, nealth or sickness.
fray, fir, how dye find yours of 2 says the doclor. l'esir.
21. to §§ out. to unriddle, to solve.
the finding out of parables is a wearisome labour of the
mind. ecclus, xiii. 26.
22. to find out. to discover something hidden.
can'st thou by searching find out god can'st thou find out
the almighty unto perfection ? job, ii. 7.
there are agents in nature able to make the particles of
bodies stick together by very strong attractions, and it is the
business of experimental philosophy to find them out. newton.
what hinders then, but that thou find her out,
and hurry her away by manly force addison’s cato.
23. to find out. to obtain the knowledge of. -
the principal part of painting is to find out and thoroughly
to understand what nature has made most beautiful. dryden.
24. to find out. to invent; to excogitate.
a man of tyre, skilful to work in gold, and to find out
every device which shall be put to him. 2 chron. ii. 14.
25. the particle out is added often without any other use than
that it adds some force or emphasis to the verb.
while she proudly march'd about,
greater conquests to find out,
she beat out susan by the by. cowley.
it is agreeable to compare the face of a great man with the
character, and to try if we can find out in his looks and fea-
tures either the haughty, cruel, or merciful temper. addison.
he was afraid of being insulted with greek; for which rea-
son he desired a friend to find him out a clergyman rather of
plain sense than much learning. addison's speciator.
26. to find, is a word of very licentious and capricious use,
not easily limited or explained; its first idea is the consequence
of search; the second, equally frequent, is mere occursion.
f1's der. n. s. (from find.]
1. one that meets or falls upon any thing. -
we will bring the device to the bar, and crown thee for a
nder of madmen. shakespeare's twelfth night.
2. one that picks up any thing lost.
some lewd squeaking cryer, -
- may gall the finder's conscience, if they meet, donne.
o yes! if any happy eye
this roving wanton shall descry,
let the finder surely know
mine is the wag; ’tis i that owe
the winged wand’rer. crashaw.
findfa'ult. n. s. [find and fault.] - a censurer; a caviller.
we are the makers of manners, kate ; and the liberty that
follows our places, stops the mouth of all findsaults. shakes.
f1'ndy. adj. [3&lt;finoix, saxon.] plump; weighty; firm;
solid. not used. thus the proverb,
a cold may and a windy,
makes the barn fat and findy;
means that it stores the barn with plump and firm grain. jun.
fine, adj. [finne, french ; fjn, dutch and eise; perhaps from
finitus, completed, latin.]
1. not coarse.
not any skill'd in loops of fingering fine,
with this so curious net-work might compare. spensor.
he was arrayed in purple and fine linen. luke.
2. refined; pure ; free from dross.
two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold. ezra.
3- subtile; thin ; tenuous: as, the fine spirits evaporate.
when the eye standeth in the finer medium, and the ob-
ject in the grosser things shew greater; but contrariwise,
when the eye is placed in the grosser medium and the object
in the finer. bacon,
4. refined ; subtilely excogitated. -
in substance he promised himself money, honour, friends,
and peace in the end ; but those things were too fine to be for-
tunate, and succeed in all parts. bacon.
whether the scheme has not been pursued so far as to draw
it into practice, or whether it be too fine to be capable of
it, i will not determine. temple.
5. keen; thin ; smoothly sharp.
great affairs are commonly too rough and stubborn to be .
wrought upon by the finer edges or points of wit: bacon.
6. clear; pellucid ; transparent : as, the wine is fine.
let the wine without mixture or stum be all fine,
or call up the master. johnson.
7. nice; exquisite; delicate. -
are they not senicless then, that think the soul -
nought but a fine perfection of the sense. davies.
the irons of planes are set fine or rank: they are set fine
when they stand so shallow below the sole of the plane, that
in working they take off a thin shaving. moxon's mech. exer.
8. artful; dexterous. -- - -
the wisdom of all these latter times, in princes affairs, is
rather fine deliveries, and shiftings of dangers and mischiefs,
than solid and grounded courses to keep them aloof. bacon.
9. fraudulent; fly ; knavishly subtle, -
- -
-
through his fine handling, and his cleanly play,
he all those royal signs had stol'n away. ho, too.
10. elegant ; beautiful in thought or language.
to call the trumpet by the name of the metal was fine. dryd.
11. applied to person, it means beautiful with dignity.
12. accomplished; elegant of manners.
he was not only the fines gentleman of his time, but one
of the fing/l scholars. felton on the classicks.
13. showy 5 splendid.
it is with a fine genius as with a fine fashion; all those are
displeased at it who are not able to follow it. pope.
the satirical part of mankind will needs believe, that it is
not impossible to be very fine and very filthy. swift.
14. [ironically..] something that will serve the purpose; some-
thing worth contemptuous notice.
that same knave, ford, her husband, hath the fins mad
devil of jealousy in him, master brook, that ever governed
frenzy. shakespeare's merry ioves of //indsor.
they taught us, indeed, to cloath, to dwell in houses,
to feast, to sleep on down, to be profuse : -
a fine exchange for liberty. phillips's briton,
fine. m. s. s.sffin, cimbr.] - -
1. a mulct ; a pecuniary punishment.
the killing of an irishman was not punished by our law,
as manslaughter, which is felony and capital; but by a fine or
pecuniary punishment, called an ericke. davies on ireland.
2. penalty. -
ev’n this ill night your breathing shall expire,
paying the fine of rated treachery. shakesp. king john.
3. forfeit money paid for any exemption or liberty.
the spirit of wantonness is sure'scared out of him: if the
devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and recovery, he will
never, in the way of waste, attempt us again. shakesp.
beside fines set upon plays, games, balls and feasting, they
have many customs which contribute to their simplicity. addis.
how vain that second life in others breath,
th” estate which wits inherit after death !
fase, health, and life for this they must resign,
unsure the tenure, but how vast the she 1 pope.
4. [from fois, latin , fin, ensin, french. the end; concil.
fion, it is seldom used but adverbially, in fine. to con-
clude; to sum up all; to tell all at once,
in fue, whatsoever he was, he was nothing but what it
pleased zelmane, the powers of his spirit depending of her. sid.
his resolution, in fine, is, that in the church a number of
things are strictly observed, whereof no law of scripture
maketh mention one way or other. hooker.
still the fine's the crown;
whate'er the course, the end is the renown. shakespeare.
your daughter, ere she seems as won,
desires this ring ; appoints him an encounter;
in fine, delivers me to fill the time, -
herself most chastely absent. shak. all's well that end, well.
the blesfings of fortune are the lowest: the next are the
bodily advantages of strength and health; but the superlative
bleslings, in fins, are those of the mind. l'e/irange.
in fine, he wears no limbs about him sound,
with fores and sicknesses beleaguer'd round. dryden's juv.
in song, let there be a perfect relation betwixt the parts and
the whole, that they may be entirely of a piece. dryden.
to fine. v. a. [from fine, the adjective.]
1. to refine; to purify.
the fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold. prov.
there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold, where
they fine it. job, xxviii. 1,
2. to embellish; to decorate. now not in use.
hugh capet also, who usurp'd the crown,
to fine his title with some shews of truth, -
convey'd himself as heir to th’ lady lingare. shakes. h. v.
3. to make less coarse.
it fines the grass, but makes it short, though thick. mortim.
4. to make transparent. -
it is good also for fuel, not to omit the shavings of it for
the fining of wine. mortimer’s husbandy.
5. [from the substantive.] to punish with pecuniary penalty.
to fine men one third of their fortune, without any crime
committed, seems very hard. locke.
to fine. v. n. to pay a fine.
what poet ever fin'd for sheriff or who
by rhymes and verse did ever lord mayor grow oldham.
to finedra’w. v. a. [fine and draw.] to sow up a rent
with so much nicety that it is not perceived.
fine dra’w er. m. s. [from finedraw.] one whose business is
to sow up rents. -
fin efi’nger ed. adj. [fine and finger.] nice; artful; ex-
uisite.
q the most finefinger'd workman on the ground,
arachne by his means was vanquished. spensor,
f1'nely. adv. [from fine.]
1. beautifully ; elegantly ; more than justly. -
plutarch says very finely, that a man should not allow h;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 818</div><p class="text">f 1 n
f i n
self to hate even his enemies; because if you indulge this pas-
fion on some occasions, it will rise of itself in others. addison.
the walls are painted, and represent the labours of her-
cules: many of them look very finely, though a great past of
the work has been cracked. . addison on italy.
2. keenly; sharply; with a thin edge or point. -
get you black lead, sharpened finely. peacham on drawing.
3. not coarsely ; not meanly; gaily.
he was alone, save that he had two persons of honour, on
either hand one, finely attired in white. bacon's new atlantis.
4. in small parts; subtilly 5, not grossly; .
saltpetre was but grossly beaten; for it should not be finely
powdered. - boyle.
5. [ironically..] wretchedly; in such a manner as to deserve
contemptuous notice.
let saws be made to obey, and not to be obeyed, and you
will find that kingdom finely governed in a short time. south.
for him she loves :
• she nam’d not me; that may be torrismond,
whom she has thrice in private seen this day:
then i am finely caught in my own snare. dryd. sp. fryar.
f1's en ess. n.s.. [from fine.]
1. elegance ; beauty ; delicacy. . - - -
everything was full of a choice finings, that, if it wanted
any thing in majesty, it supplied, with increase in pleasure;
and if at the first it struck not admiration, it ravished with
delight. sidney.
as the french language has more finemes; and smoothness
at this time, so it had more compass, spirit, and force in mon-
taigne's days. - temple.
the softness of her sex, and the finemes of her genius, con-
spire to give her a very distinguishing character. prior.
2. show; splendour; gaiety of appearance.
the fienes of cloaths destroys the ease: it often helps men
to pain, but can never rid them of any : the body may lan-
guish under the most splendid cover. decay of piety.
3. subtility ; artsulness; ingenuity:
those, with the fixeness of their souls,
by reason guide his execution. shakesp. troil. and crossida.
4. purity ; freedom from dross or base mixtures.
our works are, indeed, nought else
but the protractive tryals of great jove,
to find perfisive constancy in men ;
the finemes of which metal is not found
in fortune's love. shakespeare's troilus and cressida.
i am doubtful whether men have sufficiently refined metals ;
as whether iron, brass, and tin be refined to the height: but
when they come to such a finens, as serveth the ordinary use,
they try no farther. bacon's natural history.
the ancients were careful to coin their money in due
weight and fineness, only in times of exigence they have dimi-
nished both the weight and finemes. arbuthnot on coins.
f1'nery. n.s.. [from fine.] show ; splendour of appearance ;
gaiety of colours.
dress up your houses and your images,
and put on all the city's finery,
to consecrate this day a festival. southern.
the capacities of a lady are sometimes apt to fall short in
cultivating cleanliness and finery together. swift.
don't chuse your place of study by the finery of the prospects,
or the most various scenes of sensible things. o //atts.
they want to grow rich in their trades, and to maintain
their families in some such figure and degree of finery, as a
reasonable christian life has no occasion for. law.
finesse. m. s. [french..] artifice; stratagem: an unneces-
sary word which is creeping into the language.
a circumstance not much to be stood upon, in case it were
not upon some finess. hayward.
fi ner. m. s. [from fine.] . one who purifies metals.
take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come
forth a vessel for the finer. prov. xxv. 4.
finger. m. s. spingen, saxon; from fangen, to hold.]
1. the flexible member of the hand by which men catch and
hold.
the fingers and thumb in each hand consist of fifteen bones,
being three to each finger. $ouincy.
you seem to understand me,
by each at once her choppy finger laying -
upon her skinny lips. shakespeare's macbeth.
diogenes, who is never said,
for aught that ever i could read,
to whine, put finger i' th' eye and sob,
because h’ had ne'er another tub. hudibras.
the hand is divided into four fingers bending forward, and
one opposite to them bending backwards, and of greater
strength than any of them fingly, which we call the thumb,
to join with them severally or united; whereby it is fitted to
lay hold of objects of any size or quantity. -
a hand of a vast extension, and a prodigious number of
fingers playing upon all the organ pipes of the world, and
making every one sound a particular note. keil against burnet,
there
ray. '
poor peg sewed, spun, and knit for a livelihood, 'till her
finger ends were sore. arbuthnot's his of jeon bull.
2. a small measure of extension; the breadth of a finger.
go now, go trust the wind’s uncertain breath,
remov’d four fingers from approaching death;
or seven at most, when thickest is the board. dryd.juv.
one of these bows with a little arrow did pierce through a
piece of steel three fingers thick. wilkins's math. mag.
3. the hand; the instrument of work; manufacture; art.
fool, that forgets her stubborn look
this softness from thy finger took. j7 a...r.
to f1 nger. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to touch lightly; to toy with.
go, get you gone, and let the papers lie;
you would be fingering them to anger me. shakoffeare.
one that is covetous is not so highly pleased with the meer
sight and fingering of money, as with the thoughts of his.
being considered as a wealthy man.
2. to touch unseasonably or thievishly. -
his ambition would needs te fingering the scepter, and
hoisting him into his father's throne. south's scrino.i.
3. to touch an instrument of musick.
she hath broke the lute;
i did but tell her she mistook her frets,
and bow'd her hand to teach her fingering. shakespeare.
4. to perform any work exquisitely with the fingers.
not any skill’d in loops of fingering fine,
with this so curious net-work might compare. spensor.
fing fr-fern. m. s. [finger and fern; asplenum, lat.] a plant.
finger-ston b. m. s. [finger and stone; telenics, latin.) a
fossil resembling an arrow. *
forasato. n: s [from fangle.] a trifle: a burlesque
word.
we agree in nothing but to wrangle,
about the slightest finglefangle.
f1'n1cal. adj. [from fine.]
superfluous elegance.
a whorson, glassgazing, superserviceable, finical rogue.
shakespeare's king lear.
i cannot hear a finical fop romancing, how the king took
him aside at such a time ; what the queen said to him at ail-
other. l’estrange.
f1'nically, adv. [from finical.] foppishly.
f1'n1cal ness. m. s. [from finical.] superfluous nicety; fop-
pery.
to fi’nish. v. a. [finir, french; finia, latin.]
1. to bring to the end purposed; to complete.
for which of you, intending to build a tower, fitteth not
down first and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to
finish it luke, xiv. 28.
as he had begun, so he would also finish in you the same
grace. 2 cor. viii. 6.
2. to make perfeot.
a poet uses episodes; but episodes, taken separately, fins,
nothing. broome on the odyssey.
3. to perfect; to polish to the excellency intended. --w
though here you all perfeotion should not find,
yet is it all th’ eternal will design'd;
it is a finish'd work, and perfect in his kind. blackmore.
i would make what bears your name as finished as my last
work ought to be; that is, more finished than the rest. pope.
4. to end; to put an end to. o
f1'nisher. m. s. [from finish.]
i. performer ; accomplisher.
he that of greatest works is finisher,
oft does them by the weakest minister.
2. one that puts an end; ender.
this was the condition of those times; the world against
athanasius, and athanasius against it: half an hundred of years
spent in doubtful trials which of the two, in the end, would
prevail; the fide which had all, or else that part which had
no friend but god and death, the one a defender of his inno-
grew's cosmol. sac.
- - hadjiras.
nice; foppish ; pretending to
shakespeare.
cency, the other a finisher of all his troubles. hocker.
3. one that completes or perfects.
the author and finisher of our faith. hebrews.
o prophet of glad tidings! finisher
of utmost hope milton's paradis? loo.
floor. adj. [finitus, latin.] limited ; bounded; termi-
inated. - -
servius conceives no more thereby than a finite number for
indefinite. - brown's vulgar errotirs.
. finite of any magnitude holds not any proportion to infi-
in 1(e. locke.
that supposed infinite duration will, by the very supposi-
tion, be limited at two extremes, though never so remote
asunder, and consequently must needs be finite. bentley.
f1'niteless, adj. [from finite.]. without bounds; unlimited.
it is ridiculous unto reason, and finiteles, as their desires.
brown's pulgar erraurs.
f1'nitely. adv. [from faite.] within certain limits; to a
certain degree.
they
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 819</div><p class="text">*::, . f i r
f i r.
ho
l o --
they are creatures fill, and that sets them at an infinite
* * distance from god; whereas all their excellencies can make
o, them but finitely distant from us. - stillingfleet.
... o. fi'nit en ess. n. s. [from finite.] limitation; confinement
o * within certain boundaries.
i ought now to unbay the current of my passion, and love
without other boundary than what is set by the finitenes of
my natural powers. norris.
f1'n11 ude. m. s. [from finite.] limitation ; confinement
within certain boundaries. this is hardly an authorised word.
finitude, applied to natural or created things, imports the
o, proportions of the several degrees of affections, or properties
o of these things to one another; infinitude, the unboundedness
o of these degrees of affections, or properties. cheyne.
to. f1'nless. adj. [from fin.] wanting fins.
he angers me
o with telling of the moldwarp and the ant,
o, and of a dragon and a finles, fish. shakes. henry iv.
o f1'nlike. adj. [fin and like..] formed in imitation of fins.
o in shipping such as this, the irish kern
and untaught indian, on the stream did glide ;
ere sharp-keel'd boats to stem the flood did learn,
o or finlike oars did spread from either side. dryd ann. mr.
wo f1'nned. adj. [from fin.] having broad edges spread out on
either side.
they plow up the turf with a broad finned plough. a sortim.
f1'nn.y. adj. [from fin.] furnished with fins; formed for
the element of water.
- high o'er the main in wat'ry pomp he rides,
his azure car and finny coursers guides;
a to proteus his name. dryden's pirgil.
o, new herds of beasts he sends the plains to share;
new colonies of birds to people air ;
and to their oozy beds the finny fish repair. dryd. ovid.
while black with storms the ruffled ocean rolls,
...and from the fisher's art defends herfinny sholes. blackmore.
with hairy springes we the birds betray;
slight lines of hair suprize the finny prey. pope.
f1'n to ed. adj. [fin and toe.] palmipedous; having a mem-
brane between the toes.
such creatures as are whole footed, or fintoed, viz. some
*-*t birds and quadrupeds, are naturally dire&amp;led to go into the
so water and swim there. ray on the creation.
ro-o- f1'nochio. m. s. a species of fennel. a plant.
old. f1'pple. n.s.. [from fibula, latin.] a stopper.
o o you must know, that in recorders, which go with a gentle
breath, the concave of the pipe, were it not for the fipple that
o stratneth the air, much more than the simple concave, would
o yield no sound. bacon's natural history.
o fir. m. s. [/yrr, welsh ; runs), saxon; for, danish.) the
, -, - tree of which deal-boards are made.
** it is ever green: the leaves are single, and for the most part
* * produced on every side of the branches: the male flowers, or
::::: *- catkins, are placed at remote distances from the fruit on the
3- same tree. the feeds are propagated on cones, which are
tro squamose. a/iller.
*---- he covered the floor of the house with planks of fir. 1 kings.
; the spiring fir and stately box. pope.
s: fire. m. s. iron, saxon; fewr, german.]
o: . . . 1. the igneous element.
to- the force of fire ascended first on high
and took its dwelling in the vaulted sky;
ti.en air succeeds, in lightness next to fire.
2. any thing burning.
a little fire is quickly trodden out,
-: which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench. shaks. h.vi.
where two raging fires meet together,
- - - they do consume the thing that feeds their fury. shakoff.
- so contraries on aftna's top conspire;
here hoary frosts, and by them breaks out fire.
3. a conflagration of towns or countries.
there is another liberality to the citizens, who had suf-
~ * fered damage by a great fire. arbuthnot on coins.
though safe thou think's thy treasure lies, -
conceal’d in chests from human eyes,
a fire may come, and it may be
dryden.
cowley.
-
s
* t- bury'd, my friend, as far from thee. granville.
o 4. flame ; light; lustre.
j.--- stars, hide your fires /
let not night see my black and deep desires shakesp. mach.
5. torture by burning.
did shadrach's zeal my glowing breast inspire,
to weary tortures, and rejoice in fire * prior.
- 6. the punishment of the damned.
o who among us shall dwell with the devouring fre? who
5 to among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings : , isa. xxxiii.
* . 7. anything provoking ; any thing that inflames the passions.
---- what fire is in my ears can this be true?
st stand i condemn'd for pride and scorn so much shakesh.
. . . . . 8. ardour of temper; violence of passion.
… - he had fire in his temper, and a german bluntness; and,
upon provocations, might strain a phrase. atterbury.
vol. i.
9. liveliness of imagination ; vigour of fancy; intelle&amp;ual ac-
tivity; force of expression ; spirit of sentiment. -
nor can the snow that age does shed
upon thy rev'rend head,
quench or allay the noble fire within,
but all that youth can be thou art. cowley.
they have no notion of life and fire in fancy and in words,
and any thing that is just in grammar and in measure is good
oratory and poetry to them. * felton on the classicks.
he brings, to make us from our ground retire,
the reasoner's weapons and the poet's fire. blackmore.
exact racine, and corneille's noble fire,
taught us that france had something to admire. pope.
the bold longinus all the nine inspire,
and warm the critick with a poet's fire.
oh may some spark of your celestial fire,
the last, the meanest of your sons inspire. pope.
lo. the passion of love.
love various hearts does variously inspire,
it stirs in gentle bosoms gentle fire,
like that of incense on the altar laid ;
but raging flames tempestuous souls invade;
a fire which every windy passion blows,
pope.
with pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows. dryden.
the fire of love in youthful blood,
like what is kindled in brush-wood,
but for a moment burns. shadwell.
the god of love retires ;
dim are his torches, and extinet his fires. pope.
new charms shall still increase desire,
and time's swift wing shall fan the fire. moore's fables.
i 1. eruption or imposthumation: as, st. anthony's fire.
12. to set fire on, or set on fire. to kindle; to inflame.
hermosilla courageously set upon the horsemen, and set fire
also upon the stables where the turks horses stood. knolles.
he that set a fire on a plane tree to spite his neighbour, and
the plane-tree set fire on his neighbour's house, is bound to pay
all the loss, because it did all rise from his own ill intention.
taylor's ride of living jiay.
13. to set a fire. to inflame. -
so inflam’d by my desire,
it may set her heart a fire.
fi’re arms. m. s. [sre and arms.]
cificacy to fire; guns.
ammunition to supply their few frearms. clarendon.
before the use of frcaross there was infinitely more scope
for personal valour than in the modern battles. pope.
f1 recal:... n.s. if, e and ball.] grenado; ball filled with
combustibles, and bursting where it is thrown.
judge of those infolent boasts of conscience, which, like
so many fireballs, or mouth grenadces, are thrown at our
church. south's sermons.
the same great man hath sworn to make us swallow his
coin in fireballs. swift.
firebr us h. m. s. [fire and brush.] the brush which hangs
by the fire to sweep the hearth.
when you are ordered to stir top the fire, clean away the
ashes from betwixt the bars with the firebrish. swift.
f1'redrake. m. s. [fire and drake.] a fiery serpent: 1 ip-
pose the prester.
by the hising of the snake,
the rustling of the firedrase,
i charge thee thou this place forsake, -
nor of queen mab be prattling. drayton's nymphid.
f1'r ene wadj. [fore and new..] new from the forge; new
from the melting-house.
armado is a most illustrious wight,
a man of frenew words, fashion’s own knight. shafts.
some excellent jests, frenew from the mint. shakespeare,
upon the wedding-day i put myself, according to custom,
in another suit frenew, with silver buttons to it. addison.
fi’re pan. m. s. [fire and pan.]. vessel of metal to carry fire.
his frepans, and all the vessels thereof, thou shalt make of
brass. ex. xxvii. 3.
pour of it upon a firepan well herted, as they do rose-
water and vinegar. bacon’s natural hi/?:ry.
f1 rer. m. s. [from fire.]. an incendiary.
others burned moussel, and the rest marched as a guard for
defence of these frers. carew's survey of cornwall.
fire's ide. m. s. [fire and side.] the hearth; the chimney.
- my judgment is, that they ought all to be despised, and
carew.
arms which owe their
ought to serve but for winter task by the froside. bacon.
love no more is made
by the firsde, but in the cooler shade. carew.
by his fireside he starts the hare,
and turns her in his wicker chair. prior.
what art thou asking of them, after all only to fit quietly
at thy own fireside.
f1 restick. n.j. [fre and stics.]. a lighted stick or braud.
children, when they play with frosticks, move and while
them round so fast, that the motion will cozen their eyes, and
represent an intine circle of fire to them. digly on bodies.
9 f f1 rewok k.
aroutloot's ho. of john bull.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 820</div><p class="text">f i r.
f1'rework. n.f. [fire and work.] shows of fire; pyrotech-
nical performances. f
the king would have me present the princess with some de-
lightful ostentation, or pageant, or antick, or firework.
shakespeare.
we represent also ordnance, and new mixtures of gun:
powder, wildfires burning in water and unquenchable ; and
also fireworks of all variety. bacon's new atlantis.
the ancients were imperfeot in the doctrine of meteors,
by their ignorance of gunpowder and fireworks. brown.
in fireworks give him leave to vent his spite ;
those are the only serpents he can write. dryden.
our companion proposed a subject for a firework, which he
thought would be very amusing. addison's guardian.
their fireworks are made up in paper. tatler.
to fire. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to set on fire; to kindle. -
they spoiled many parts of the city, and fired the houses
of those whom they esteemed not to be their friends; but the
rage of the fire was at first hindered, and then appeased by
the fall of a sudden shower of rain. hayward.
the breathless body, thus bewail'd, they lay,
and fire the pile.
a second paris, diff'ring but in name,
shall fire his country with a second flame.
2. to inflame the passions; to animate.
yet, if desire of fame, and thirst of pow'r,
a beauteous princess, with a crown in dow'r,
so fire your mind, in arms aslert your right.
3. to drive by fire.
he that parts us, shall bring a brand from heav'n
and fire us hence shakespeare's king lear.
to fire. v. n.
1. to take fire; to be kindled.
2. to be inflamed with passion.
3. to discharge any firearms.
the fainting dutch remotely fire,
and the fam'd eugene's iron troops retire.
fire brand. m. s. [fire and brand.]
1. a piece of wood kindled.
i have eased my father-in-law of a firebrand, to set my own
house in a flaine. l’estrange.
2. an incendiary; one who inflames factions; one who causes
mischief.
troy must not be, nor goodly ilion stand;
our firebrand brother, paris, burns us all. shakespeare.
he sent surrey with a competent power against the rebels,
who fought with the principal band of them, and defeated
them, and took alive john chamber, their firebrand. bacon.
f1'recross. n.s.. [fire and cross.] a token in scotland for the
nation to take arms: the ends thereof burnt black, and in
some parts smeared with blood. it is carried from one place
to another. upon refusal to send it forward, or to rise, the
last person who has it shoots the other dead.
he sent his heralds through all parts of the realm, and com-
manded the firecross to be carried; namely, two firebrands set
in fashion of a cross, and pitched upon the point of a spear.
haywood.
fi’re lock. m. s. [fire and lock.]. a soldier's gun ; a gun dis-
charged by stiiking steel with flint.
prime all your firclocks, fasten well the stake. gay.
f1're man. m. s. [fire and man.] -
1. one who is employed to extinguish burning houses.
the fireman sweats beneath his crooked arms;
a leathern casque his vent’rous head defends,
boldly he climbs where thickest smoke ascends. gay.
2. a man of violent passions.
i had last night the fate to drink a bottle with two of these
firemen. tatler.
f1 repan. m. s. [fire and pan.]
1. a pan for holding fire. -
2. [in a gun.] the receptacle for the priming powder.
f1's eship. m. s. [fire and ship.] a ship filled with combustible
matter to fire the vessels of the enemy.
our men bravely quitted themselves of the firship, by
cutting the spritsail tackle. j/iseman's surgery.
fi'restrove ... n.s. [fire and shovel.] the instrument with
which the hot coals are thrown up in kitchens.
culinary utensils and irons often feel the force of fire; as
tongs, fireshovels, prongs, and irons. brown.
the neighbours are coming out with forks and fireshovels,
and spits, and other domestick weapons. dryd. span. fryar.
f1 restos e. n.s. [fire and /lone.]
the fire/fone, or pyrites, is a compound metallick fossil,
composed of vitriol, sulphur, and an unmetallick earth, but
in very different proportions in the several masses. the most
common sort, which is used in medicine, is a greenish shape-
less kind found in our clay-pits, out of which the green vitriol
or copperas is procured. it has its name of pyrites, or fire-
stone, from its giving fire on being struck against a steel much
more freely than a flint will do; and all the sparks burn a
..longer time, and grow larger as they fall, the inflammable
dryden.
dryden's an.
dryden.
smith.
matter struck from off the stone burning itself out before the
spark becomes extinguished. hill's mat. mod.
fire/lone, if broke small, and laid on cold lands, must be
of advantage. mortimer's husbandy.
f1'rewood. n.s.. [fire and wood.] wood to burn; fewel.
f1'ring. m. s. [from fire.] . fewel.
they burn the cakes, firing being there scarce. mortimer.
to f1r k. v. a. [from ferio, latin.] to whip; to beat; to
correct; to chastise.
, besides, it is not only foppish,
but vile, idolatrous and popish,
for one man out of his own skin
to firk and whip another's fin. hudibrar.
f1'rkin. m. s. [from peoben, saxon, the fourth part of a vessel.]
1. a vessel containing nine gallons.
strutt's servants get such a haunt about that shop, that it
will cost us many a firkin of strong beer to bring them back
again. arbuthnot's history of john bull.
2. a small vessel.
you heard of that wonder of the lightning and thunder,
which made the lye so much the louder;
now list to another, that miracle’s brother,
which was done with a frkin of powder.
firm. adj. [firmus, latin.]
1. strong; not easily pierced or shaken; hard, opposed to soft.
the flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm
in themselves, and they cannot be moved. job, xli. 23.
love's artillery then checks
the breastworks of the firmes' sex. cleaveland.
there is nothing to be left void in a firm building; even
the cavities ought to be filled with rubbish. dryden.
that body, whose parts are most firm in themselves, and
are by their peculiar shapes capable of the greatest contaets, is
the most firm; and that which has parts very small, and ca-
pable of the least contaet, will be most soft. woodward.
2. constant; steady; resolute; fixed; unshaken.
we hold firm to the works of god, and to the sense which
denham.
is god's lamp. bacon's natural history.
he straight obeys;
and firm believes. milton's paradise loft.
the great encouragement is the assurance of a future re-
ward, the firm persuasion whereof is enough to raise us above
any thing in this world. tillotson.
the man that's resolute and just,
firm to his principles and trust,
nor hopes nor fears can blind. jwalsh.
3. solid; not giving way; not fluid.
god caused the wind to blow to dry up the abundant slime
and mud of the earth, and make the land more firm. raleigh.
the muddy and limous matter brought down by the nilus,
settled by degrees into a firm land. brown's vulgar errours.
it on %. land
thaws not, but rather heap and ruin seems
of ancient pile: all else deep snow and ice.
sinking waters, the firm land to drain,
fill'd the capacious deep and form'd the main. roscommon.
to firm. v. a. [firmo, latin.]
i. to settle; to confirm; to establish; to fix.
of the death of the emperor they advertised solyman,
anio, letters with all their hands and seals. knolles.
'tis ratify’d above by every god,
and jove has firm'd it with an awful nod.
the pow'rs, said he,
to you, and your's, and mine, propitious be,
and firm our purpose with their augury. dryden's aen.
o thou, who freest me from my doubtful state,
long lost and wilder'd in the maze of fate
be present still: oh goddess, in our aid
proceed, and firm those omens thou hast made. pope's stat.
2. to fix without wandering.
he on his card and compass firms his eye,
the masters of his long experiment. fairy queen.
firmament. n.s.. [firmamentum, latin.] the sky; the
heavens.
even to the heavens their shouting shrill
doth reach, and all the firmament doth fill.
i am constant as the northern star,
of whose true, fixt, and resting quality,
there is no fellow in the firmament. shakesh. jul. casar.
the almighty, whose hieroglyphical characters are the
unnumbered stars, sun and moon, written on these large
volumes of the firmament. raleigh's history of the jp'orld.
the firmament expanse of liquid, pure,
transparent, elemental air, diffus'd
in circuit to the uttermost convex
of this great round. milton's paradise loft.
the steeds climb up the first ascent with pain;
and when the middle firmament they gain,
if downward from the heavens my head i bow,
and see the earth and ocean hang below,
ev’n i am seiz'd with horror. addison's ovid.
what an immensurable space is the firmament, wherein a
- great
milton.
dryd. albion.
spensor.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 821</div><p class="text">f i r.
f i s
|
s
*-
--
o
o
great number of stars are seen with our naked eye, and many
more discovered with our glasses' derham's a/?ro-theology.
firmame’ntal. adj. [from firmament.] celestial ; of the
upper regions.
an hollow crystal pyramid he takes,
in firmamental waters dipt above. dryden's ain. asirab.
fi'rmly. adv. [from firm.]
1. strongly ; impenetrably; immoveably.
thou shalt come of force,
though thou art firmlier fasten’d than a rock. milt. agorist.
how very hard particles, which touch only in a few points,
can stick together so firmly, without something which causes
them to be attracted towards one another, is difficult to con-
ceive. newton's opt.
2. steadily; constantly. -
himself to be the man the fates require;
i firmly judge, and what i judge desire. dryden’s aem.
the common people of lucca are firmly persuaded, that
one lucquese can beat five florentines. addison on italy.
fi'rmness. n. s. [from firm.]
1. hardness; compactness; solidity.
it would become by degrees of greater consistency and
firmness, so as to resemble an habitable earth. burnet.
2. durability; stability.
both the easiness and firmnes; of union might be conjec-
tured, for that both people are of the same language.
hayward.
3. certainty; soundness.
in persons already possessed with notions of religion, the
understanding cannot be brought to change them, but by great
examination of the truth and firmnes of the one, and the
flaws and weakness of the other. south's sermons.
4. steadiness; constancy; resolution.
that thou should'st my firmnes; doubt
to god, or thee, because we have a foe
may tempt us, i expected not to hear. milt. par. loft.
nor can th’ egyptian patriarch blame my muse,
which for his firmnes does his heat excuse. roscommon.
__ this armed job with firmnes; and fortitude. atterbury.
first. adj. [finro, saxon.]
1. the ordinal of one; that which is in order before any
other.
- thy air,
thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
—a third is like the former. shakoffeare's macbeth.
in the fix hundredth and first year, in the first month, the
first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the
earth. gen. viii. 13.
2. earliest in time : opposed to last. -
the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service.
heb. ix. i.
man's first disobedience. - milton.
who first, who last
rous’d from the slumber. milton.
arms and the man i fing, the first who bore
his course to latium from the trojan shore. aen.
i find, quoth mat, reproof is vain -
who first offend, will first complain. prior.
3. highest in dignity.
three presidents, of whom daniel was first. dan.
first with the dogs, and king among the squires. speci.
*tis little will, the scourge of france,
no godhead, but the first of men. prior.
4. great; excellent.
my first son,
where will you go? take good cominius
with thee. shakespeare's coriolanus.
first. adv.
1. before any thing else; earliest.
he, not unmindful of his usual art,
first in dissembled fire attempts to part ;
then roaring beasts and running streams he tries. . dryden.
thy praise, and thine was then the publick voice,
first recommended guiscard to my choice. dryden.
heav'n, sure, has kept this spot of earth uncurst,
to shew how all things were created first. prior.
2. before any other confideration.
first, metals are more durable than plants; secondly, they
are more solid and hard; thirdly, they are wholly subterra-
neous; whereas plants are part above earth, and part under the
earth. bacon's natural history.
3. it has often at before it, and means at the beginning.
at first the filent venom slid with ease,
and seiz'd her cooler senses by degrees. dryden's an.
excepting fish and inse&amp;ts, there are very few or no crea-
tures that can provide for themselves at first, without the
affistance of parents. bentley’s sermons.
4. first or loft. at one time or other.
- but sure a general doom on man is past,
and all are fools and lovers first or last. dryden.
f1 r st-begot. } n, f: [from first and begot.]. the eldest
of children.
f1 r st-begott en.
his soft-logot, we know; and fore have felt,
when his fierce thunder drove us to the deep. milton.
first-bok n. m. s. [firs; and born.) eldest; the first by the
order of nativity.
lait, with one midnight stroke, all the fift born.
of egypt must lie deal.
hail, holy light, offspring of heav'n soft-born 1 adilson.
the first-born has not a sole or peculiar right, by any law
of god and nature; the younger children having an equal
title with him. locke.
first fruits. n.s. [fift and fruits.] -
i. what the season easiest produces or matures of any kind.
a sweaty reaper from his tillage brought
softuits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf. milton.
the blooming hopes of my then very young patron have
been confirmed by most noble first-fruits, aid his life is going
on towards a plentiful harvest of all accumulated virtues. ;
2. the profits of any thing which are soonest gained.
although the king loved to employ and advance bishops,
because, having rich bishopricks, they carried their reward
upon themselves; yet he did use to raise them by steps, that
he might not lose the profit of the softuits, which by that
course of gradation was multiplied. bacon's henry vii.
3. the earliest effect of any thing.
see, father, what fr//-fruits on earth are sprung,
from thy implanted grace in man a silton's par. loso,
f1'rstling. adj. [from fift.] that which is first produced
or brought forth.
all the firstling males that come of thy herd, and of thy
flock, thou shalt sanetify unto the lord thy god. deut.
f1'rstling. m. s. [from firs'.]
1. the first produce or offspring.
•. a shepherd next,
more meek, came with the firstlings of his flock,
choicest and best. milton's paradise lo/?.
the tender fostlings of my woolly breed,
shall on his holy altar often bleed. dryden's wirg.
the firstlings of the flock are doom'd to die. pope.
2. the thing thought or done before another.
our play
leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of these broils,
'ginning i' th' middle. shakes. troil, and cres. prologue.
the flighty purpose works o'erlook,
unless the deed go with it: from this moment,
the very firstlings of my heart shall be
the fr/ilings of my hand. shakespeare’s macbeth.
fiscal. m. s. [from fiscus, a treasury, latin.] exchequer;
i evenue.
war, as it is entertained by diet, so can it not be long
maintained by the ordinary jo. receipt. bacon.
fish. n. s. spire, saxon; visch, dutch.]
i. an animal that inhabits the water. fish is used collectively
for the race of fishes.
the beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
are their males subjects. shakesp. comedy of errours.
and now the fish ignoble fates escape,
since venus ow'd her safety to their shape. creech.
there are fishes, that have wings, that are not strangers to
the airy region; and there are some birds that are inhabitants
of the water, whose blood is cold as fishes; and their flesh is
so like in taste, that the scrupulous are allowed them on fish-
days. locke.
2. the flesh of fish opposed to that of terrestrial animals, by
way of eminence called flesh.
i fight when i cannot chuse, and i eat no fish. sh. k. lear.
we mortify ourselves with the dict of fish, and think we
fare coarsely if we abstain from the flesh of other animals.
brown's vulgar errours.
to fis h. v. h.
1. to be employed in catching fishes.
2. to endeavour at any thing by artifice.
while others fish, with craft, for great opinion,
i, with great truth, catch meer simplicity. shakespeare.
to fish. v. a. to search water in quest of fish, or anything
else.
some have fished the very jakes for papers left there by men
of wit. swift.
oft, as he fish'd her nether realms for wit,
the goddess favour’d him, and favours yet. pope's dunciad.
fish-hook. n.s.. [fish and hook.] a hook baited, with which
fish are caught. -
a sharp point, bended upward and backward, like a fish-
hook. grew's museum.
fish-pond. m. s. [fish and pond..] a small pool for fish.
fish-ponds are no small improvement of watry boggy lands.
mortimer's hussandy.
fish-ponds were made where former forests grew,
and hills were levell'd to extend the view. prior.
. after the great value the romans put upon fishes, it will not
appear incredible that c. hirrius should sell his fish-ponds for
arbuthnot.
quadragies h. s. 32,291 l. 13 s. 4d.
fi's her.
milo's paradis. loft. -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
- 2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 822</div><p class="text">f i s
f i t
f1's hing. m. s. [from fish.j. commodity of taking fish.
fr's her... n.s.. [from fish.) one who is employed in catching
fish.
in our fight the three were taken up
by fishermen of corinth, as we thought:
at length another seiz'd on us, - - -
. and would have reft the fishers of their prey,
had not they been very slow of sail. shakesp. com. of err.
we know that town is but with fishers fraught,
where theseus govern'd and where plato taught. sandys.
left he should suspect it, draw it from him, .
as fishers do the bait, to make him follow it.
a soldier now he with his coat appears; .
a fisher now, his trembling angle bears; pope.
f1's her boa.t. n. s. [s/her and boat.] a boat employed in
catching fish. -
denham.
f1's herman. m. s. [fifter and man.] one whose employment
and livelihood is to catch fish.
- how fearful
and dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low !
the fishermen that walk upon the beach -
appear like mice. shakespeare's king lear.
at length two monsters of unequal size,
hard by the shore, a fisherman espies.
do scales and fins bear price to this excess
you might have bought the fisherman for less. dryd. juv.
f1's her tow n. m. s. [s/her and town.] a town inhabited by
fishermen.
others of them, in that time, burned that f/hertown
mousehole. carew's survey of cornwal.
lime in dorsetshire, a little fishertown. clarendon.
f1's hery. m. s. [from fisher.] the business of catching fish.
we shali have plenty of mackerel this season: our fishery
will not be disturbed by privateers. addison's speciator.
i 1's hful. adj. [from fish.j. abounding with fish ; stored with
fish.
//,aller.
thus mean in state, and calm in sprite,
my fishful pond is my delight. carew's survey of cornwal.
it is walled and guarded with the ocean, most commodious
for traffick to all parts of the world, and watered with plea-
sant, fishful, and navigable rivers. camden's remains.
7% f1's hify. v. a. [from fish.] to turn to fish: a cant word.
here comes romeo. -
—without his roe, like a dried herring:
o flesh, flesh, how art thou fishifted/ shakespeare.
there also would be planted a good town, having both a
good haven and a plentiful fishing. spenser on ireland.
f1's hkettle. m. s. [s/h and kettle..] a caldron made long
for the fish to be boiled without bending.
it is probable that the way of embalming amongst the egyp-
tians was by boiling the body in a long caldron like a fish-
kettle, in some kind of liquid balsam. grew's museum.
fi's hm eal. m. s. issh and meal.] diet of fish ; abstemious
diet.
thin drink doth overcool their blood, and making many
fishmeals, they fall into a kind of male greenfickness. sharp.
fish mosc er. m. s. [from fish.] a dealer in fish; a seller of
fish.
i fear to play the f/monger; and yet so large a commodity
may not pass in silence. carew's survey of cornwal.
the surgeon left the fishmonger to.determine the controversy
between him and the pike. l'e//range.
f1's hy, adj. [from fish.]
1. consisting of fish.
2. inhabited by fish.
my absent mates -
bait the barb’d steel, and from the fishy flood
appease th' afflictive fierce desire of food. pope's odyssy.
3. having the qualities or form of fish.
few eyes have escaped the picture of mermaids, that is,
according to horace, a monster with a woman’s head above,
and fishy extremity below. brown's vulgar errours.
fissile. adj. [ssilis, latin.] having the grain in a certain
dire&amp;t on, so as to be cleft.
this crystal is a pellucid fsile stone, clear as water or crystal
of the rock, and without colour; enduring a red heat without
losing its transparency, and in a very strong heat calcining
without fusion. - newton's opt.
fo y. m. s. [from fissile.] the quality of admitting to be
c! owen. . -
fi'ssur e. m. s. issura, latin; fsire, french..] a cleft; a
narrow chaim where a breach has been made. -
the stone was distinguished into strata or layers; those
strata were divided by parallel fissures, that were inclosed in
the stone. i //oodward’s natural history.
see
the gaping fsures to receive the rain. thomson's autumn.
to f1'ssu re. v. a. [from the noun..] to cleave; to make a
fissure.
- by a fall or blow the skull may be fissured or fractured. isoft.
fist. m. s. [fire, saxon.] the hand clenched with the fin-
gets doubled down, in order to give a blow, or keep hold,
she quick and proud, and who did pas despise,
. up with her fift, and took him on the face;
another time, quoth she, become more wise;
thus pas did kiss her hand with little grace. sidney.
and being down, the villain fore did beat
and bruise with clownish f/is his manly face. fairy queen.
anger causeth paleness in some; in others trembling,
swelling, and bending the f/2. bacon,
and the same hand into a £4 may close,
which instantly a palm expanded shows. denham.
tyrrheus, the foster-father of the beast,
then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fift. dryden's an.
to fist. v. a.
1. to strike with the fist.
i saw him spurning and fifting her most unmercifully. dryd.
2. to gripe with the fist.
we have been down together in my sleep,
unbuckling helms, fifting each other's throat,
and wak'd half dead with nothing. shakesp. coriolanus.
fi'st inut. n. s. a pistachio nut.
f.'s ricu ffs. n.s.. [fift and cuff..] battle with the fist; blows
with the fist. -
naked men belabouring one another with snagged sticks,
or dully falling together by the ears at fisticuffs. - amore.
she would seize upon john's commons; for which they
were sure to go to fisticuffs. arbuthnot's history of john bull.
y invention and judgment are perpetually at fifticuff, 'till
they have quite disabled each other. swift.
fi'stula. m. s. [latin; foule, french.]
1. a sinuous ulcer callous within; any finuous ulcer. -
that fistula which is recent is the easiest of cure: those of
a long continuance are accompanied with ulcerations of the
gland and caries in the bone. jwiseman's surgery.
2. fist ula lachrimalis. a disorder of the canals leading from
the eye to the nose, which obstructs the natural progress of
the tears, and makes them trickle down the cheek; but this
is only the first and mildest stage of the disease: in the next
there is matter discharged with the tears from the puncia lachri-
malia, and sometimes from an orifice broke through the skin
between the nose and angle of the eye. the last and worst
degree of it is when the matter of the eye, by its long conti-
nuance, has not only corroded the neighbouring soft parts,
but also affected the subjacent bone. sharp's surgery.
f1's tular. adj. [from fistula.] hollow like a pipe.
f1's tulous. adj. [from f/lula; fistuleux, french..] having the
nature of a fistula; callous or sinuous like a fistula.
how these sinuous ulcers become fiftulous, i have shewn
you. wiseman's surgery.
fit. n.s.. [from fight, skinner, every fit of a disease being a
struggle of nature ; from viit, in flemish, frequent, junius.]
i. a paroxysm or exacerbation of any intermittent distemper.
small stones and gravel collect and become very large in
the kidneys, in which case a fit of the stone in that part is the
curt. sharp's surgery.
2. any short return after intermission; interval.
sometimes 'tis grateful to the rich to try
a short vicissitude, and fit of poverty. dryden's horace.
men that are habitually wicked may now and then, by fits
and starts, feel certain motions of repentance. l’estrange.
by fits my swelling grief appears,
in rising fighs and falling tears. addison on italy.
thus o'er the dying lamp th’ unsteady flame
hangs quivering on a point, leaps off by fits,
and falls again as loth to quit its hold. addison's cata.
religion is not the business of some fits only and intervals
of our life, to be taken up at certain days and hours, but a
system of precepts to be regarded in all our condu&amp;t. rogers.
all fits of pleasure we balanced by an equal degree of pain
or languor: 'tis like spending this year part of the next year’s
rewollut”. swift.
3. any violent affection of mind or body.
. . the life did flit away out of her nest,
and all his senses were with deadly fit opprest.
spenser's fairy queen.
an ambitious man puts it in the power of every malicious
tongue to throw him into a fit of melancholy. addison.
4. disorder; distemperature.
for your husband,
he's noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
the fits o' th' season. shakespeare's macleth.
5. it is used, without an epithet of discrimination, for the hys-
terical disorders of women, and the convulsions of children;
and by the vulgar for the epilepsy.
mrs. bull was so much enraged, that she fell downright
into a fit. - o arbuthnot's history of john b.i.
6. it was anciently used for any recommencement after inter-
mission. the parts of a song, or cantos of a poem, were called
fits.
fir, adj. [witten, flemish, junius.]
1. qualified ; proper: with for before the noun, and to before
the verb. -
men of valour, fit to go out for war and battle.
* *
*
i corzz.
7 . he
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 823</div><p class="text">f i t
f i x.
f1 tch ew.
he lends him vain goliah's sacred sword,
the fittes help just fortune could afford. cowley's davideia.
this fury fit for her intent she chose,
one who delights in wars and human woes. dryden's aen.
it is a wrong use of my understanding to make it the rule
and measure of another man's ; a use which it is neither fit
for, nor capable of. locke.
2, convenient; meet; proper ; right.
since we have said it were good not to use men of ambi-
tious natures, except it be upon necessity, it is fit we speak in
what cases they are so. bacon.
see how thou could'st judge of fit and meet. milton.
it is fit for a man to know his own abilities and weaknesses,
and not think himself obliged to imitate all that he thinks fit
to praise. boyle.
if our forefathers thought fit to be grave and serious, i hope
their posterity may laugh without offence. addison.
to fit. v. a. [vitten, flemish, junius.]
1. to accommodate to any thing; to suit one thing to another.
the carpenter marketh it out with a line: he fitteth it with
planes. . is xliv. 13.
would fate permit
to my desires i might my fortune fit,
troy i would raise. denham.
2. to accommodate a person with any thing: as, the tailor fits
his customer.
a trussmaker fitted the child with a pair of boddice, stiffened
on the lame side. joseman's surgery.
3. to be adapted to ; to suit anything.
she shall be our messenger to this paultry knight : trust me
i thought on her; she'll fit it. shakespeare.
as much of the stone as was contiguous to the marcasite,
fitted the marcasite so close as if it had been formerly liquid. boyle.
4. to fit out. to furnish; to equip; to supply with necessa-
ries or decoration.
a play, which if you dare but twice fit out,
you'll all be slander'd, and be thought devout. dryden.
the english fleet could not be paid and manned, and fitted
out, unless we encouraged trade and navigation. addis. freeh.
5. to fit up. to furnish; to make proper for the use or re-
ception of any.
he has fitted up his farm.
to fit. v. n. to be proper; to be becoming.
how cvil fits it me to have such a son; and how much doth
pope to swift.
thy kindness upbraid my wickedness. sidney.
norfts it to prolong the feast,
timeless, indecent, but retire to rest. pope's odyssey.
fitch. m. s. [a colloquial corruption of vetch..] a small kind
of wild pea.
now is the season
for sowing of fitches, of beans, and of peason.
tussor.
#:" f: [fissau, french ; fiffe, dutch..] a stinking
little beast, that robs the henroost and warren.
skinner calls him the slinking ferret; but he is much larger,
at least as some provinces distinguish them, in which the pole-
cat is termed a fitchat, and the sinking ferret a stoat.
'tis such another fitchews marry, a perfum'd one:
what do you mean by this haunting of me? shakespeare.
the fitchat, the fulimart, and the like creatures, live upon
the face and within the bowels of the earth. j/alton's angler.
f1'tft. l. adj. [fit and full.] varied by paroxysms; disordered
by change of maladies.
duncan is in his grave;
after life's fitful fever he sleeps well.
f1'tly. adv. [from fit.]
1. properly; justly reasonably.
even so most fitly
as you malign our senators, shakespeare's coriolanus.
where a man cannot fitly play his own part, if he have not
a friend, he may quit the stage. bacon.
i cannot fitlier compare marriage than to a lottery; for, in
both, he that ventures may succeed, and may miss; and if
he draw a prize, he hath a rich return of his venture: but
in both lotteries there lie pretty store of blanks for every
prize. boyle.
the whole of our duty may be expressed most fitly by de-
parting from evil. tillotson.
2. commodiously ; meetly.
to take a latitude,
sun or stars are fitlift view'd
at their brightest; but to conclude
of longitudes, what other way have we
but to mark when, and where the dark eclipses be. donne.
an animal, in order to be moveable, must be flexible; and
therefore is fitly made of separate and small solid parts, replete
with proper fluids. arbuthnot on aliments.
f1'tness. n. s. [from fit..] .
1. propriety; meetness; justness; reasonableness.
in things the fitnes; whereof is not of itself apparent, nor
easy to be made sufficiently manifest unto all, yet the judg-
ment of antiquity, concurring with that which is received,
may induce them to think it not unfit. hooker.
vol. i.
shakesp. macbeth.
the queen being absent, 'tis a needsul fitnes; - -
that we adjourn this court. shakespeare's henry viis.
- wer’t my fitnes; -
to let these hands obey my boiling blood,
they're apt enough to dislocate and tear r
thy flesh and bones. shakespeare's king lear.
2. convenience; commodity; the state of being fit.
- - - nortime nor place
did then cohere, and yet you would make both:
they've made themselves, and that their fitnes; now
jdoes unmake you. shakespeare's macbeth.
f1't ment. n.s.. [from fit..] something adapted to a particular
purpose. not used.
poor beseeming: 'twas a fitment for .
the purpose i then follow'd. shakespeare's cymbeline.
fi’tter. n. s. [from fit.]
1. the person or thing that confers fitness for any thing. -
sowing the sandy gravelly land in devonshire and cornwal
with french furze-seed, they reckon a great improver of their
land, and a fitter of it for corn. mortimer’s husbandry.
2, [from fetta, italian; fetzen, german.] a small piece: as, to
cut into fitters. skinner. - -
fitz. m. s [norman, from fils, a son, fr.] a son. only
used in law and genealogy: as fitzherbert, the son of herbert;
fitzthomas, the son of thomas; fitzroy, the son of the king.
it is commonly used of illegitimate children.
five. adj. [rip, saxon.] four and one; half of ten.
and five of them were wise, and five were foolish. matt.
no person, no incident, but must be of use to carry on the
main design: all things else are like six fingers to the hand,
when nature, which is superfluous in nothing, can do her work
with five. - dryden's dufresnoy.
%. herds, five bleating flocks, his pan. fill’d. o:
our british youth lose their figure by that time they are
five and twenty. addison.
fi’ve leave d grass. n.s. cinquefoil; a species of clover.
fives. m. s.
1. a kind of play with a bowl.
2. a disease of horses. - --
his horse sped with spavins, rayed with the yellows, past
cure of the fives, and stark spoiled with the staggers. shakesp.
to fix. v. a. [fixer, french ; fixus, latin.]
1. to make fast, firm, or stable.
hell heard th’ unsufferable noise, hell saw -
heav'n ruining from heav'n, and would have fled
affrighted, but that fate had fix’d too deep
her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.
2. to settle; to establish invariably. .
brightest seraph 1 tell
in which of all these orbs hath man
his fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none; - -
but all these shining orbs his choice to dwell milton.
one loves{..." laws, and the other arbitrary power. temple.
when custom hath fixed his eating to certain stated periods,
his stomach will expect victuals at the usual hour. locke.
3. to direct without variation. -
why are thine eyes fixt to the sullen earth,
gazing at that which seems to dim thy fight! shak. h. vi.
thus while the trojan prince employs his eyes,
fix'd on the walls with wonder and surprize. dryden's aem.
4. to deprive of volatility. -
we pronounce concerning gold, that it is fixed. locke.
5. to pierce; to transfix. a sense purely latin.
while from the raging sword he vainly flies,
a bow of steel shall fix his trembling thighs.
6. to withhold from motion.
to fix. v. n.
1. to settle the opinion; to determine the resolution.
if we would be happy, we must fix upon some foundation
that can never deceive us. l’estrange.
he made himself their prey,
to impose on their belief and troy betray;
fix'd on his aim, and obstinately bent
to die undaunted, or to circumvent.
here hope began to dawn; resolv'd to try,
she fix’d on this her utmost remedy, -
death was behind; but hard it was to die. dryden.
in most bodies, not propagated by seed, it is the colour we
must fix on, and are most led by. locke.
2. to rest; to cease to wander. -
your kindness banishes your fear,
resolv'd to fix for ever here.
3. to lose volatility, so as to be malleable.
in the midst of molten lead, when it beginneth to congeal,
make a little dent, and put quicksilver, wrapped in a piece of
linen, in that hole, and the quicksilver will fix and run no
more, and endure the hammer. bacon's natural history.
fixation. m. s. [french.]
1. stability; firmness; steadiness.
your fixation in matters of religion will not be more neces.
sary for your soul's than your kingdom's peace. king charles,
2. residence in a certain place,
9 g to
milton.
sandys.
dryden's aen.
waller.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 824</div><p class="text">f l a
f l a
to light, created in the first day, god gave no proper place
or fixation. raleigh's history of the world.
3. confinement; forbearance of excursion.
they are subject to errors from a narrowness of soul, a fix-
ation and confinement of thought to a few objects. jwatts.
4, want of volatility; destruction of velatility.
upon the compound body three things are chiefly to be ob-
served; the colour, the fragility or pliantness, and the volati-
lity or fixation, compared with the simple bodies. bacon.
it is more difficult to make gold of other metals less pon-
derous and less materiate, than to make silver of lead or quick-
silver, both which are more ponderous than filver; so that they
need rather a degree of fixation than any condensation. bacon.
5. reduction from fluidity to firmness.
salt dissolved, upon a fixation returns to its affeoted cubes.
glanville's scepsis.
f1's edly. adv. [from fixed.]
1. certainly; firmly ; in a manner settled and established.
if we pretend that the distinetion of species, or sorts, is
fixedly established by the real and secret constitutions of things.
locke.
2. stedfastly.
omnipotency, omnisciency, and infinite goodness enlarge
the spirit while it fixtly looks on them. burnet.
f1'ye dness. m. s. [from fixed.]
1. stability; firmness.
2. want or loss of volatility.
fixedness, or a power to remain in the fire unconsumed, is
an idea that always accompanies our complex idea signified
by the word gold. locke,
3. solidity; coherence of parts.
fluid or solid comprehend all the middle degrees between
extreme fixedness and coherency, and the most rapid intestine
motion of the particles of bodies. bentley.
4. steadiness; settled opinion or resolution.
. a fixednes in religion will not give my conscience leave to
consent to innovations. king charles.
fixiodity. m. s. [from fixed.] coherence of parts, opposed to
volatility. a word of boyle.
bodies mingled by the fire are differing as to fixidity and
volatility, and yet are so combined by the first operation of the
fire, that itself does scarce afterwards separate them. boyle.
fixity. m. s. [fixite, french.] coherence of parts, opposed
to volatility.
and are not the sun and fixed stars great earths vehemently
hot, whose heat is conserved by the greatness of the bodies,
and the mutual action and reaction between them, and the
light which they emit, and whose parts are kept from fuming
away, not only by their fixity, but also by the vast weight and
density of the atmospheres incumbent upon them : newt. opt.
f1'xur e. m. s. [from fix.]
1. position.
the fixure of her eye hath motion in't,
- as we were mock’d with art. shakesp. winter's tale.
2. stable pressure. -
the firm fixure of thy foot would give an excellent motion
to thy gait. shakesp. merry wives of windsor,
3. firmness; stable state.
- frights, changes, horrours,
divert and crack, rend and deracinate
the unity and married calm of states
quite from their fixure. shakespeare's troil, and cressida.
f1'zgig. m. s. a kind of dart or harpoon with which seamen
strike fish.
canft thou with fizgigs pierce him to the quick,
or in his skull thy barbed trident stick. sandys's job.
fla’bby. adj. [flaccidus, latin.] soft; not firm; easily
shaking or yielding to the touch.
paleness, a weak pulse, palpitations of the heart, flabby and
black flesh, are symptoms of weak fibres. arbuthnot.
pulls out the rags contriv'd to prop
her flabby dugs, and down they drop. swift.
fla’bile. adj. [jiabilis, latin.] blown about by the wind;
... subject to be blown. dicf.
fla’ccid. adj. [flaccidus, latin.] weak; limber; not stiff;
lax; not tense.
the bowing and inclining the head is found in the great
flower of the sun: the cause i take to be is, that the part
against which the sun beateth waxeth more faint and flaccid in
the stalk, and thereby less able to support the flower. bacon.
they whose muscles are weak "#. are unapt to pro-
nounce the letter r. older's elements of speech.
the surgeon ought to vary the diet as he finds the fibres
are too faccid and produce funguses, or as they harden and
produce callosities. arbuthnot on diet.
flacci'dity.. n.f. [from flaccid.] laxity; limberness; want
of tension; want of stiffness.
• there is neither fluxion nor pain, but flaccidity joined with
insensibility. wiseman's surgery.
t. flag. v. n. [flaggeren, dutch ; pleoxan, saxon, to fly.]
1. to hang loose without stiffness or tension.
beds of cotton wool hung up between two trees, not far
e
-
• men, wives and children lie together.
from the ground; in the which, flagging down in the middle,
the jades - abbot.
that drag the tragick melancholy night,
who with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
clip dead men's graves. shakespeare'; henry vi
it keeps those slender aerial bodies separated and stretch.
out, o: o o reason of their flexibleness and
weight, would flag or curl. boyle's spring a -
§ like a s: meteor sunk the s.” 'pring of the air.
the promise of a storm; the shifting gales
forsake by fits, and fill the flagging sails.
2. to grow spiritless or dejected.
- my flagging soul flies under her own pitch,
like fowl in air too damp, and lags along
as if she were a body in a body:
my senses too are dull and stupify'd,
their edge rebated; sure some ill approaches. dryd, d.sc.
3. to grow feeble ; to lose vigour. -
juice in language is somewhat less than blood; for if the
words be but becoming and fignifying, and the sense gentle,
there is juice: but where that wanteth, the language is thin,
flagging, poor, starved, scarce covering the bone, and shews
like stones in a sack: some men, to avoid redundancy, run
into that ; and while they strive to hinder ill blood or juice,
* lose their good. ben. johnson's discoveries.
is stomach will expect victuals at the usual hour, either
fretting itself into a troublesome excess, or flagging into a
downright want of appetite. locke.
fame, when it is once at a stand, naturally flags and lan-
guishes. addison's speciator.
if on sublimer wings of love and praise,
my love above the starry vault i raise,
lur’d by some vain conceit of pride or lust,
i flag, i drop, and flutter in the dust. arbuthnot.
he sees a spirit hath been raised against him, and he only
watches 'till it begins to flag; he goes about watching when
to devour us. swift.
the pleasures of the town begin to flag and grow languid,
giving way daily to cruel inroads from the spleen. swift.
to f lag. v. a.
1. to let fall into feebleness; to suffer to droop.
take heed, my dear, youth flies apace;
as well as cupid, time is blind :
soon must those glories of thy face
the fate of vulgar beauty find:
the thousand loves, that arm thy potent eye,
must drop their quivers, flag their wings, and die. prior.
2. [from flag, a species of stone..] to lay with broad stone.
the sides and floor are alslagged with excellent marble.sandys.
a white stone used for flagging floors. woodward on fossils.
flag. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. a water plant with a bladed leaf and yellow flower, so called
from its motion in the wind.
she took an ark of bulrushes, and laid it in the flags by the
drydeno
river's brink. ex. ii. 3.
can bulrushes but by the river grow
can flags there flourish where no waters flow. sandys.
there be divers fishes that cast their spawn on flags or stones.
jwalton's angler.
cut flag roots, and the roots of other weeds. mortimer.
2. the colours or ensign of a ship or land-forces, by which
o are made at sea, or regiments are distinguished in the
€10.
these flags of france that are advanced here,
before the eye and prospe&amp;t of your town, - -
have hither march'd to your endamagement. shok. k. john.
he hangs out as many flags as he descryeth vessels; square,
if ships; if gallies, pendants. sandys's travels.
democracies are less subject to sedition than where there are
stirps of nobles: for if mens eyes are upon the persons, it is
for the business sake as fittest, and not for flag; or pedigree.
bacon.
let him be girt
with all the grisly legions that troop
under the sooty flag of acheron,
harpies and hydras, or all the monstrous forms
*twixt africa and inde, i’ll find him out,
and force him to restore his purchase back,
or drag him by the curls to a foul death. milton.
the french and spaniard, when your fiags appear,
forget their hatred, and consent to fear. waller.
the interpretation of that article about the flag is a ground
at pleasure for opening a war. temple.
in either's fing the golden serpents bear, -
eregling crests alike, like volumes rear,
and mingle friendly hissings in the air. dryden's aurengz.
then they, whose mothers, frantick with their fear,
in woods and wilds the flags of bacchus bear,
and lead his dances with dishevell'd hair. dryden’s aem.
3. a species of stone used for smooth pavements. [jiache, old
french.] -
• part
...g
o:
slot
id
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 825</div><p class="text">j
flag-broom.. n. s. [from flag and broom.]
flag-wor m. n.s. [flag and worm. ) a grub bred
f la
f two flags striated, but deeper on one side than the
a: o flag &gt; p woodward on fossils.
flagstone will not split, as slate does, being found formed
into flags, or thin plates, which are no other than so many
{trata. i/oodward on fossils.
a broom for
sweeping flags or pavements, commonly made of birch-twigs,
or of the leaves of the dwarf palm, imported from spain.
flag-office r. n.s.. [flag and officer.] a commander of a
squadron. -
her grandfather was a flag-officer. . . addison's spediator.
flag-ship. n.s.. [flag and ship.] the ship in which the com-
mander of a fleet is. - - -
in watry
places among flags or sedge.
he will in the three hot months bite at a fag-worm, or a
green gentle. //alton's angler.
flagration. n.s. [sagro,
flagstaff. m. s. [ji.g. and joff. j . the staff on which the
with equal poize let steddy justice sway,
and flagrant crimes with certain vengeance pay;
but, 'till the proofs are clear, the stroke delay.
latin..] burning.
smith.
dict.
&amp;
flag is fixed.
t he duke, less numerous, but in courage more,
on wings of all the winds to combat flies.
his murdering guns a loud defiance roar,
and bloody crosses on his flagstaff rise. dryd, ann. mirai.
foo; of [follum, latin; firgo, german." ii. i.i.
ment with which
the thresher. -
qur soldiers, like the night owl'
qr like a lazy thresher with a fail,
fell gently down as if they struck their friends. sh. h. vi.
when in one night, ere glimpse of morn,
grain is beaten out of the ear; the tool of
s lazy flight,
his shadowy flail hath thresh'd the corn,
that ten day-labourers could not end.
in this pile shall reign a mighty prince,
born for a scourge of wit, and fail of sense. dryden.
the dextrous handling of the flail, or the plough, and egio
good workmen with these tools, did not hinder gideon's and
cincinnatus's skill in arms and government. locke.
the thresher, duck, could o'er the queen prevail;
the proverb says, no fence against a flail. swift.
flake.. n.f. [foccus, latin.]
i. o thing that appears loosely held together, like a flock of
wu(\l,
crimson circles, like red fakes in the element, when the
weather is hottest.
... and from his wide devouring oven sent
a flake of fire, that flushing in his beard,
him all amaz'd, and almost made affear'd. fairy 9teen,
the earth is sometimes covered with snow two or to: feet
deep, made up only of little flakes or pieces of ice. burnet.
small drops of a misling rain, descending through a freezing
air, do each of them shoot into one of those figured icicles;
which, being ruffled by the wind, in their fail are broken, and
clustered together into small parcels, which we call fakes of
snow. • grew's cosmolog.
upon throwing in a stone the water boils for a considerable
flagelet. n.s.. [flageolet, french.] a small flute; a small
instrument of wind musick. w
play us a lesson on your flagelet. mare's divine dialogues.
flagellation. n.s.. [from flagella, latin.] the use of the
foourge. - - -
- by bridewell all descend, -
as morning pray’r and flagellation end. garth's dispens.
fla'gginess. n. s. [from flaggy.] laxity; limberness; want
of tension. - -----
fla'gcy. adj. [from flag.]
1. weak; lax; limber ; not stiff; not tense.
his flaggy wings, when forth he did display,
were like two sails, in which the hollow wind
is gather'd full, and worketh speedy way. fairy queen.
that basking in the sun thy bees may lye,
and resting there, their flaggy pinions dry. dryden's wirgil.
2. weak in taste; insipid.
graft an apple-cion upon the stock of a colewort, and it
will bear a great flaggy apple. bacon's natural history.
flagi(tious. adj. [from flagitius, latin.]
1. wicked ; villainous ; atrocious.
no villany or flagirious action was ever yet committed, but,
upon a due enquiry into the causes of it, it will be found that
alye was first or last the principal engine to effect it. south.
there's no working upon a flagitious and perverse nature by
milton.
sidney.
kindness and discipline. l'estrange. time, and at the same time are seen little flakes of scurf rising
first, those flagitious times, - up. zddison on italy.
pregnant with unknown crimes, - 2. a stratum ; layer; film; lamina.
conspire to violate the nuptial bed. roscommon. the fakes of his tough flesh so firmly bound,
perjury is a crime of so flagitious a nature, we cannot be as not to be divorced by a wound.
sandys.
too careful in avoiding every approach towards it. addison. the teeth cut away great fakes of the metal, 'till it received
but if in noble minds some dregs remain, the perfeot form the teeth would make. moxon.
not yet purg’d off, of spleen and sour disdain, to flak.e. v. a. [from the noun..] to form in flakes or bo-
discharge that rage on more provoking crimes, dies loosely connected. o
nor fear a dearth in these flagitious times. pope. from the bleak pole no winds inclement blow,
2. guilty of crimes. mold the round hail, or flake the fleecy snow. pope's odys.
he dies, sad outcast of each church and state, to flak.e. v. n. to break into laminae; to part in loose
and, harder still, flagitious yet not great. pope. bodies.
flag"tious ness. n.j. [from flagitious.] wickedness; vil-
lanv.
flagon. n.s.. [f]acced, welsh; flaxe, saxon; faste, danish ;
fiacon, freiich , fiasco, italian ; flasco, spanish..] a vesiel of
drink with a narrow mouth.
flake, adj. [from flake.]
1. loosely hanging together.
the silent hour steals on, -
and flaky darkness breaks within the east. shakoff. rich. iii.
the trumpet roars, long flaky flames expire,
a mad rogue ! he pour’d a flagon of rhenish on my head with sparks that seem to set the world on fire. pope.
once, shakespeare's hamlet. hence, when the snows in winter cease to weep,
more had sent him by a suitor in chancery two silver and undissolv'd their flaky texture keep,
agons. bacon's apophth. the banks with ease their humble streams contain,
did they coin pispots, bowls, and flagons which swell in summer, and those banks disdain. blackm,
int' officers of horse and dragoons : hudibras.
his trusty fagon, full of potent juice,
was hanging by, worn thin with age and use. roscommon.
one fagon walks the round, that none should think
they either change, or stint him of his drink. dryd, juv.
fla'grancy, n.s.. [flagrantia, latin.] burning; heat; fire.
lust causeth a fiagrancy in the eyes, as the fight and the
touch are the things desired, and therefore the spirits resort to
those parts. bacon's natural history.
flagrant, adj. [flagrans, latin.]
1. ardent; burning; eager. it is always used figuratively.
a thing which filleth the mind with comfort and heavenly
2. lying in layers or strata; broken into laminae.
flam. os. [a cant word of no certain etymology.] a false.
y
hoed ; a lye ; an illusory pretext.
a flam more senseless than the rog’ry
of old aruspicy and aug’ry. hudibras.
*till these men can prove the things, ordered by our church,
to be either intrinsically unlawful or indecent, all pretences or
pleas of conscience to the contrary are nothing but cant and
cheat, flam and delusion. - south.
what are most of the histories of the world but lyes?
lyes immortalized and consigned over as a perpetual abuse
and flam upon posterity. south,
delight, stirreth up flagrant desires and affections, correspon- to flam. v. a. [from the noun..] to deceive with a lye.
dent unto that which the words contain.
2. glowing ; flushed.
see sapho, at her toilet’s greasy task,
then issuing flagrant to an evening mask:
so morning insects, that in muck begun,
shine, buz, and fly-blow in the setting sun.
3. red ; imprinted red. *
their common loves, a lewd abandon'd pack,
the beadle's lash still flagrant on their back.
pope,
4. notorious; flaming into notice.
when fraud is great, it furnishes weapons to defend itself;
hooker.
prior.
merely cant.
for so our ignorance was flamm’d,
to damn ourselves to avoid being damn'd. hudibrar.
god is not to be flammed off with lyes, who knows ex-
actly what thou can'st do, and what not. south.
flambeau. n.s. [french..] a lighted torch.
the king seized a flambeau with zeal to destroy. dryden.
as the attendants carried each of them a flambeau in their
hands, the sultan, after having ordered all the lights to be put
out, gave the word to enter the house, find out the criminals
and put him to death. . addison's guardian.
and at worst, if the crimes be so flagrant that a man is laid flame. n.s.. [flamma, latin ; flamme, french.]
aside out of perfect shame, he retires loaded with the spoils of 1. light emitted from fire.
the nation. -
swift,
is not fame a vapour, fume, or exhalation heated red hot,
that
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 826</div><p class="text">f l a
f l a
that is, so hot as to shine? for bodies do not flame without
emitting a copious fume, and this fume burns in the flame.
newton's opt.
what fame, what lightning e'er
so quick an active force did bear !
2. fire.
cowley,
jove, prometheus' theft allow; r
the fame; he once stole from thee, grant him now. cowley.
. ardour of temper or imagination ; brightness of fancy; vi-
gour of thought.
of all our elder plays,
this and philaster have the loudest fame;
great are their faults, and glorious is their flame:
in both our english genius is exprest,
lofty and bold, but negligently drest.
4. ardour of inclination.
smit with the love of kindred arts we came,
and met congeneal, mingling fame with fame. pope.
5. passion of love. -
my heart's on fame, and does like fire
//aller.
to her aspire. cowley.
come arm'd in flames; for i would prove
all the extremities of love. cowley.
no warning of th’ approaching fame;
swiftly like sudden death it came :
i lov'd the moment i beheld. granville.
to flam e. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to shine as fire; to burn with emission of light.
can you think to blow out the intended fire your city is
ready to flame in, with such weak breath as this shakesp.
he fell faming through th' ethereal sky : -
to bottomless perdition. milton.
hell all around
as one great furnace fam'd. milton.
2. to shine like flame.
behold it like an ample curtain spread,
now streak'd and glowing with the morning red;
anon at noon in faming yellow bright,
and chusing sable for the peaceful night.
3. to break out in violence of passion.
flamecolour ed. adj. [fame and colour.] of a bright yel-
low colour.
'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in flamecoloured
stockings. shakespeare's twelfth night.
august shall bear the form of a young man of a fierce and
cholerick aspect, in a flamecoloured garment. peacham.
flamen. m. s. (latin.] a priest; one that officiates in
solemn offices. .
then first the famen tasted living food;
, next his grim idol smear'd with human blood. pope.
flam mation. m. s. [flammatio, latin.] the aet of setting
on flame. - -
white or crystalline arsenick, being artificial, and sublimed
with salt, will not endure fammation. brown's pulgar err.
flammab1*11ty. n.s.. [famma, latin.] the quality of ad-
mitting to be set on fire, so as to blaze.
in the sulphur of bodies torrified, that is, the oily, fat and
unetuous parts, consist the principles of flammability. brown.
fla'mmeous. adj. [famimicus, latin.] consisting of flame;
resembling flame.
this famineous light is not over all the body. brown.
flammi'ferous. adj. [flammifer, lat..] bringing flame. dic.
flammi'vomous. adj. [flamma and voma, latin.j vomiting
out flame. dic7.
fla'my. adj. [from flame.]
1. inflamed; burning; blazing.
my thoughts imprison'd in my secret woes,
with famy breaths do issue oft in sound.
2. having the nature of flame.
the vital spirits of living creatures are a substance com-
pounded of an airy and famy matter ; and though air and
flame, being free, will not well mingle, yet bound in by a
body they will. bacon's natural history.
flank. m. s. [fianc, french, according to menage, from
xxyov ; more probably from latus, latin.]
1. that part of the side of a quadruped near the hinder thigh.
the belly shall be eminent by shadowing the fiank.
- peacham.
prior.
sidney.
2. [in men.] the lateral part of the lower belly.
he said, and pois'd in air, the jav’lin sent:
through paris' shield the forceful weapon went,
his corslet pierces, and his garment rends,
and glancing downward near his flank descends. pope.
3. the side of any army or fleet.
great ordnance and small shot thundered and showered
upon our men from the rampier in front, and from the gallies
that lay at sea in flank. bacon's i/ar with spain.
gray was appointed to stand on the left side, in such sort
as he might take the sank of the enemy. hayward.
to right and left the front
divided, and to either flank retir’d. milton's par. loft.
4. [in fortification.] that part of the bastion which reaches
from the curtain to the face, and defends the opposite face,
the flank and the curtain. barris.
to flank. v. a.
1. to attack the side of a battalion or fleet.
*...* be posted so as to overlook or command any pass on the
1cle.
with fates averse against their king's command,
arm'd on the right, and on the left they sland,
and fiank the passage. dryden's aem.
3. to secure on the side.
by the rich scent we found our perfum’d prey,
which, finnk'd with rocks, did close in covert say. dryden.
fla'nker. m. s. [from flank.] a fortification jutting out so
as to command the fide of a body marching to the affault."
the turks, discouraged with the loss of their fellows, and
fore beaten by the spaniards out of their flankers, were enforced
to retire. knolles's history of the turks.
like storms of bail the stones fell down from high,
cast from the bulwarks, flankers, ports, and towers. fairf. -
to flanker. v. a. [fanquer, french.] to defend by late:al
fortifications.
fla'nnel. n.s.. [gwlanen, welsh; from gwlan, wool, davies.]
a soft nappy stuff of wool.
i cannot answer the welch fannel.
flap. m. s. sloeppe, saxon.] -
i. f." thing that hangs broad and loose, fastened only by one
106. *
there is a peculiar provision for the windpipe, that is, a
cartilaginous flap upon the opening of the larinx, which hath
an open cavity for the admission of the air. brown.
some surgeons make a crucial incision, upon the supposi-
tion that the wound will more easily heal by turning down the
flaps. sharp's surgery.
2. the motion of anything broad and loose.
3. [a disease in horses.]
when a horse has the fiaps, you may perceive his lips swell-.
ed on both sides of his mouth ; and that which is in the
blisters is like the white of an egg: cut some slashes with a
knife, and rub it once with salt, and it will cure. farr, dia.
to flap. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to beat with a flap, as flies are beaten.
a hare, hard put to it by an eagle, took sanetuary in a
ditch with a beetle : the eagle fapt off the former, and de-
voured the other. l'eorange.
yet let me flap this bug with gilded wings,
this painted child of dirt, that stinks and stings. pope.
2. to move with a flap or noise made by the stroke of anything
broad.
- with fruitless toil
flap filmy pinions oft, to extricate
their feet in liquid shackles bound. phillips.
three times, all in the dead of night,
a bell was heard to ring;
and shrieking at her window thrice
the raven flapp'd his wing. tickel,
to flap. v. n.
1. to ply the wings with noise.
'tis common for a duck to run fiapping and fluttering away,
as if maimed, to carry people from her young. l’estrange.
the dire slapping on the shield of turnus, and flûtering
about his head, disheartened him in the duel. dryden's an.
2. to fall with flaps, or broad parts depending.
when suffocating mists obscure the morn,
let thy worst wig, long us'd to storms, be worn; ,
this knows the powder'd footman, and with care
beneath his fiapping hat secures his hair. gay's trivia.
fla'pdragon. n.s. (from a dragon supposed to breathe fire.]
1. a play in which they catch raisins out of burning brandy,
and, extinguishing them by closing the mouth, eat them.
2. the thing eaten at flapdragon.
he plays at quoits well, and eats conger and fennel, and
drinks candles ends for flapdragons, and rides the wild mare
with the boys. shakespeare's henry iv.
to fla'pdragon. v. a. [from the noun..] to swallow ; to
devour. low cant.
... but to make an end of the ship; to see how the sea flap-
dragoned it. shakespeare's winter’s tale-
flatear en. adj. [fap and ear.] having loose and broad
cal's.
a whoreson, beetleheaded, flapeared knave. shakespeare.
to flare. v. a. [from federin, to flutter, dutch, skinner;
perhaps accidentally changed from glare.]
1. to glitter with transient lustre.
doctrine and life, colours and light, in one
when they combine and mingle, bring
a strong regard and awe; but speech alone
doth vanish like a flaring thing,
and in the ear, not conscience, ring. herbert.
2. to glitter offensively.
when the sun begins to fling
his faring beams, me, goddess, bring
to arched walks of twilight groves. o a filton.
3. to
shakespeare.
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 827</div><p class="text">f l a
f i, a
3. to be in too much light.
i cannot stay
faring in sunshine all the day.
4. to flutter with a splendid show.
she shall be loose enrob'd,
with ribbands pendant faring 'bout her head.
flash. m. s. [????, afinshev.
1. a sudden, quick, transitory blaze.
when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open
the breast of heav'n, i did present inyself -
ev’n in the aim and very flash of it. shakesp. jul. caesar.
we see a flash of a piece is seen sooner than the noise is
heard. bacon’s natural history.
one with a flash begins, and ends in sinoak;
the other out of smoak brings glorious light.
and as aegeon, when with heaven he strove,
defy'd the forky lightning from afar, -
at fifty mouths his flaming breath expires,
and fiash for fiash returns, and fires for fires.
2. sudden burst of wit or merriment.
where be your gibes now your gambols your songs:
your fashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table in
a roar * shakespeare's hamlet.
wicked men prefer the light flashes of a wanton mirth,
which for a while suspend reflection, and hide the sinner from
*
shakes care.
~!
roscommon.
dryd. æn.
himself, to such discourses as awaken conscience. rogers.
3. a short transient state.
the persians and macedonians had it for a fash. bacon.
4. a body of water driven by violence.
to f1. as h. v. n. -
1. to glitter with a quick and transient flame.
this salt powdered, and put into a crucible, was, by the
injection of well kindled charcoal, made to flash divers times
almost like melted nitre. boyle.
2. to burst out into any kind of violence.
by day and night he wrongs me; ev'ry hour
he fashes into one gross crime or other, -
that sets us all at odds. shakespeare's king lear.
3. to break out into wit, merriment, or bright thought.
they flash out sometimes into an irregular greatness of
thought. felton on the clafficks.
to flash. v. a. to strike up large bodies of water from the
surface.
with his raging arms he rudely fas'd
the waves about, and all his armour swept,
that all the blood and filth away was wash'd. fairy queen.
if the sea-water be flashed with a stick or oar, the same
casteth a shining colour, and the drops resemble sparkles of
fire. carew's survey of cornwal.
fla's her. m. s. [from flash.] a man of more appearance of
wit than reality. jdiff.
fla's hily. adv. [from flashy.] with empty show; without
real power of wit or solidity of thought.
fla's hy. adj. [from fash.]
1. empty; not solid; showy without substance.
flashy wits cannot fathom the whole extent of a large dis-
course. digby on the soul, dedicat.
when they list, their lean and slashy songs
grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw.
this mean conceit, this darling mystery,
which thou think’st nothing, fiend thou shalt not buy;
nor will i change for all the flashy wit. dryden's pers.
2. [from factidus, skinner.] insipid ; without force or spirit.
distilled books are, like common distilled waters, fashy
things. bacon's essays.
the tastes that most offend in fruits, herbs and roots, are
bitter, harsh, sour, waterish or flashy. bacon's nat. history.
flask. m. s. [fasue, french.) -
1. a bottle; a veilel. -
then for the bourdeaux you may freely ask;
milton.
but the champaigne is to each man his fask. king.
2. a powder-horn.
powder in a skilless soldier's flask
is set on fire. shakoff care.
fla's ket. m. s. [from fask.] a vessel in which viands are
served.
another plac'd - *** -
the silver stands, with golden flaskets grad’d. pope's ods.
flat. adj. [plat, french.] - -
1. horizontally level without inclination.
thou all-shaking thunder,
strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world.
virtue could see to do what virtue would
by her own radiant light, though fun and moon
were in the fat sea sunk. milton.
the houses are fat roofed to walk upon, so that every
bomb that fell on them would take effect. allison on italy.
2. smooth ; without protuberances. -.
in the dawning of the next day we might plainly discern
it was a land fat to our fight, and full of boscage. bacon.
3. not elevated; fallen; not erect.
vol. i. -
shak. k. lear.
-*-
prior.
cease t'admire, and beauty's plumes
fall flat, and shrink into a trivial toy,
at every sudden slighting quite abasht.
4. level with the ground.
in them is plain, st taught, and easiest learnt,
what makes a nation happy, and keeps it so,
what ruins kingdoms, and lays cities fat. milt. par. reg.
that christ-church stands above ground, and that the
church of westminster lies not sat upon it, is your lord'hip's
commendation. - south.
5. lying prostrate ; lying along.
i he wood born people fall before her
and worship her as goddess of the wood.
. . . that lamentable wound,
which laid that wretched prince flat on the ground. daniel,
6. [in painting.] wanting relief; wanting prominence of the
figures. -
7. tasteless; insipid ; dead.
he, like a puling cuckold, would drink up -
the lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece. sh. trail. and cres.
taste so divine ! that what of sweet before
hath touch'd my sease, fat seems to this and harsh. milton.
the miry fields, -
rejoicing in rich mold, most ample fruit .
of beauteous form produce ; pleasing to sight,
but to the tongue inelegant and fat.
8. dull; unanimated; frigid.
short speeches fly abroad like darts, and are thought to be
shot out of secret intentions ; but as for large discourses, they
are fat things, and not so much noted.
some short excursions of a broken vow
he made indeed, but fat insipid stuff. dryd. don selasian.
9. depresled; spiritless; dejected.
i feel my genial spirits droop,
my hopes all fat, nature within me seems
in all her functions weary of herself. milton's agonisies.
10. unpleasing; tasteless.
how weary, stale. flat and unprofitable
seem to me all the uses of this world ! shakes. hamlet.
to one firmly persuaded of the reality of heavenly happi-
ness, and earnestly desirous of obtaining it, all earthly satis-
factions must needs look little, and grow flat and unfavoury.
atterbury's sermons.
filton's pir. loft.
fa
*
y “. 3
fairy on.
phillips.
bacon.
11. peremptory; absolute ; downright.
his horse with flat tiring taught him, that discrete stays
make speedy journeys. sidney.
it is a fat wrong to punish the thought or purpose of any
before it be enacted ; for true justice punisheth nothing but
the evil act or wicked word. spenser's state of ireland.
as it is in the nature of all men to love liberty, so they
become flat libertines, and fall to all licentiousness. spenser.
you start away,
and lend no ear unto my purposes;
those prisoners you shall keep :
i will, that's fat. shakspeare's henry iv.
thus repuls'd, our final hope
is fat despair: we must exasperate
th' almighty victor to spend all his rage,
and that must end us. amilton's paradis. loft.
if thou fin in wine or wantonness,
boast not thereof, nor make thy shame thy glory;
frailty gets pardon by submissiveness:
but he that boasts, shuts that out of his story:
he makes fat war with god, and doth defy
herbert.
with his meer clod of earth the spacious sky.
you had broke and robb'd his house,
and stole his talismanique louse ;
and all his new-found old inventions,
with fat felonious intentions. hudibras.
12. not shrill; not acute; not sharp in sound.
if you stop the holes of a hawk's bell it will make no
ring, but a flat noise or rattle. bacon's natural history.
the upper end of the windpipe is endued with several car-
tilages and muscles to contract or dilate it, as we would have
our voice flat or sharp. ray on the creation.
flat. m. s.
1. a level; an extended plane. -
the strings of a lute, viol, or virginals, give a far greater
found, by reason of the knot, board and concave underneath,
than if there were nothing but only the fat of a board to let
in the upper air into the lower. bacon.
because the air receiveth great tineture from the earth, ex-
pose flesh or fish, both upon a stake of wood some height above
the earth, and upon the sat of the earth. boczo.
it comes near an artificial miracle to make divers distinct
eminences appear a fat by force of shadows, and yet the sha-
dows themselves not to appear. 17%:ton’s archite:orc.
he has cut the side cf the rock into a sat for a garden; and
by laying on it the waste earth, that he has found in several
of the neighbouring parts, furnished out a kind of luxury for
a hermit. addison on italy.
, 9 h 2. even<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 828</div><p class="text">f l a
f l a
2. even ground; not mountainous.
now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
'till of this fat a mountain you have made,
to o'ertop old pelion, or the skyish head
of blue olympus. shakespeare's hamlet.
the way is ready and not long,
beyond a row of myrtles, on a fat, -
fast by a mountain. milton's paradise left.
3. a smooth low ground exposed to inundations. -
the ocean, overpeering of his list,
eats not the flats with more impetuous haste,
than young laertes, in a riotous head,
o'erbears your officers. shakespeare's hamlet.
all the infections, that the sun sucks up
from bogs, sens, fats, on prospero fall. shakoff. tempest.
half my pow'rs this night,
passing these fats, are taken by the tide;
these lincoln washes have devoured them. shak. k. john.
4. shallow; strand; place in the sea where the water is not deep
enough for ships.
i should not see the sandy hour-glass run,
but i should think of shallows and of fats. shakespeare.
the difficulty is very great to bring them in or out through
so many fats and sands, if wind and weather be not very
favourable. raleigh's essays.
having newly left these grammatick flats and shallows:
where they stuck unreasonably, they are now turmoiled with
their unballasted wits in fathomless and unquiet deeps of
controversy. milton on education.
full in the prince's passage hills of sand,
and dang'rous fats, in secret ambush lay,
where the false tides skim o'er the cover'd land,
and seamen with dissembled depths betray. dryden.
must we now have an ocean of mere flats and shallows, to
the utter ruin of navigation : bently.
5. the broad side of a blade,
a darted mandate came
from that great will which moves this mighty frame,
bid me to thee, my royal charge, repair,
to guard thee from the diemons of the air;
my flaming sword above 'em to display,
ali keen and ground upon the edge of day,
the fat to sweep the visions from thy mind,
the edge to cut 'em through that stay behind.
6. depression of thought or language.
milton's paradise lost is admirable ; but am i therefore
bound to maintain, that there are no flats amongst his eleva-
tions, when 'tis evident he creeps along sometimes for above
an hundred lines together dryden.
7. a surface without relief, or prominences.
are there then such ravishing charms in a dull unvaried
fat, to make a sufficient compensation for the chief things of
the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the last-
ing hills. bentley's sermons.
7% fila t. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to level; to depress; to make broad and smooth.
the ancients say, if you take two twigs of several fruit-
trees, and flat them on the sides, and bind them close, and
fit them in the ground, they will come up in one stock. bacon.
with horrid shapes she does her sons expose,
distends their swelling lips, and flats their nose.
2. to make vapid.
an orange, lemon and apple, wrapt in a linen cloth, being
buried for a fortnight four foot deep within the earth, though
in a moist place and rainy time, were become a little harder
than they were ; otherwise fresh in their colour, but their juice
somewhat fatted. bacon's natural history.
to flat. v. n.
1. to grow flat: opposed to swell.
i burnt it the second time, and observed the skin shrink,
and the swelling to fat yet more than at first. temple.
2. to render unanimated or evanid.
nor are constant forms of prayer more likely to flat and
hinder the spirit of prayer and devotion, than unpremeditated
and confused variety to distract and lose it. k. charles.
flat los g. adv. [flat and long. j with the flat downwards ;
not edgewise.
what a blow was there given :
—an it had not fallen slatlong.
fla’tly. adv. [from flat.]
1. horizontally ; without inclination.
. without prominence or elevation.
. without spirit; dully; frigidly.
. peremptorily ; downright.
he in these wars had flatly refused his aid.
thereupon they flatly disavouch
to yield him more obedience, or support.
unjust, thou say'st,
flatly unjust, to bind with laws the free. milt. par. loft.
not any interpreters allow it to be spoken of such as fiatly
deny the being of god; but of them that believing his exist-
ence, seclude him from direeting the world. bentley.
dryden.
creech.
shakespeare's tempest.
:
sidney.
daniel.
fla’r ness. n.f. [from fat..]
1. evenness; level extension.
2. want of relief or prominence.
it appears so very plain and uniform, that one would think
the coiner looked on the flatness of a figure, as one of the
greatest beauties in sculpture. addison on medals.
3. deadness; insipidity; vapidness.
deadness or fatness in cyder is often occasioned by the too
free admission of air into the vessel. mortimer's husbandy.
4. dejection of fortune.
the emperor of russia was my father:
oh, that he were alive, and here beholding
his daughter's trial that he did but see
the fatness of my misery shakespeare's winter’s tale.
5. dejection of mind; want of life; want of spirit.
how fast does obscurity, flatness, and impertinency flow in
upon our meditations f 'tis a difficult task to talk to the pur-
pose, and to put life and perspicuity into our discourses. collier,
6. dulness; insipidity; frigidity.
some of homer's translators have swelled into fustain, and
others sunk into fatness. pope's preface to homer.
7. the contrary to shrillness or acuteness of sound.
take two saucers, and strike the edge of the one against
the bottom of the other within a pale of water, and you shall
find the sound groweth more flat, even while part of the saucer
is above the water; but that flatness of sound is joined with a
harshness. bacon's natural history.
to flat ten. v. a. [satir, french ; from flat.]
1. to make even or level, without prominence or elevation.
2. to beat down to the ground.
if they should lie in it, and beat it down, or fatten it, it
will rise again. martimer's husbandy.
3. to make vapid.
4. to deject; to depress; to dispirit.
to flatten. v. n.
1. to grow even or level.
2. to grow dull and insipid.
here joys that endure for ever, fresh and in vigour, are op-
posed to satisfactions that are attended with satiety and surfeits,
and fatten in the very tasting. l’estrange.
flatter. m. s. [from fat..] the workman or instrument by
which bodies are flattened.
to fla tter. v. a. [fater, french.j
i. to footh with praises; to plcase with blandishments; to gra-
tify with servile obsequiousness; to gain by false compliments.
when i tell him he hates flatterers,
he says he does; being then most flattered. shał, jul. cos.
his nature is too noble for the world;
he would not flatter neptune for his trident,
or jove for’s power to thunder: his heart's his mouth;
what his breast forges that his tongue must vent.
shakespeare.
he that flattereth his neighbour, spreadeth a net #:
feet. - prov. xxix. 5.
he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be
found hateful. ps. xxxvi. 2.
after this way of flattering their willing benefactors out of
part, they contrived another of forcing their unwilling neigh-
bours out of all their possessions. decay of piety.
averse alike to flatter or offend. pope.
i scorn to flatter you or any man. newton's ded. to mill.
2. to praise falsely.
flatter'd crimes of a licentious age,
provoke our censure. 1%ung.
3. to please ; to sooth. this sense is purely gallick.
a consort of voices supporting themselves by their different
parts make a harmony, pleasingly fills the ears and flatters
them. dryden's dufresnoy.
4. to raise false hopes. - y ofresnoy
he always vacant, always amiable,
hopes thee, of fatt'ring gales
unmindful. milton.
flatterer. n.s.. [from flatter.] one who flatters; a fawner;
a wheedler; one who endeavours to gain favour by pleasing
falsities. o
when i tell him he hates flatterers,
he says he does; being then most flattered. shał, jul. cas:
some praises proceed merely of flattery; and if he be an
ordinary flatterer, he will have certain common attributes,
which may serve every man: if he be a cunning fatterer,
he will follow the arch flatterer, which is a man's self. but
if he be an impudent flatterer, look wherein a man is con-
scious to himself that he is most defective, and is most out of
countenance in himself, that will the fatterer entitle him to
perforce. bacon's essays.
if we from wealth to poverty descend,
want gives to know the flatt’rer from the friend. dryden.
after treating her like a goddess, the husband uses her like a
woman : what is still worse, the most abject flatterers degene-
rate into the greatest tyrants. addison's guardian.
the publick should know this; yet whoever goes about to
inform them, shall be censured for a flatterer. swift.
flattery.
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 829</div><p class="text">f l a
f l a
flattery. m. s.
artful obsequiousness; adulation.
minds, by nature great, are conscious of their greatness,
- juice, though the vessel were whole without any flaw, and
and hold on to borrow aught from flattery. rou. had not the bunghole open. 'o. koz.
simple pride for fatt'ry makes demands. pope. we found it exceeding difficult to keep out the air from
see how they began alms of fattery / -
they languish, o ! support them with 4 lye.
flatness.
these are from three inches over to fix or seven, and of a
fattish shape.
flatulency. n.s. [from flatulent.]
1. windiness; fulness of wind; turgescence by wind confined.
vegetable substances contain a great deal of air, which ex-
pands itself, producing all the disorders of slatulency. arbuthn.
2. emptiness; vanity; levity; airiness.
jwoodward on f.offils.
whether most of them are not the genuine derivations of
the hypothesis they claim to, may be determined by any that
considers the natural flatulency of that airy scheme of notions:
glanville.
flatulent. adj. [flatulenius, slatus,
1. turgid with air; windy.
pease are mild and demulcent; but being full of aerial par-
ticles, are flatulent, when dissolved by digestion. arbuthnot,
fatulent tumours are such as easily yield to the pressure of
the finger; but readily return, by their elasticity, to a tumid
state again. quincy.
2. empty; vain; big without substance or reality; puffy.
to talk of knowledge, from those few indistine. represen-
tations which are made to our grosser faculties, is a fatulent
vanity. glanville's scepsis.
how many of these flatulent writers have sunk in theiro.
putation, after seven or eight editions of their works. dryden.
**tu9sity. m. s. [fatuosite, french; from siatus, latin.]
windiness; fulness of air.
the cause is fatuosity; for wind stirred, moveth to expel;
and all purgers have in them a raw spirit or wind, which is the
principal cause of tension in the stomach and belly. bacon.
flatuous. adj. [from status, latin.] windy; full of wind.
rhubarb in the stomach, in a small quantity, doth digest
and overcome, being not fatuous nor loathsome’; and so seiid-
eth it to the mesentery veins, and, being opening, it helpeth
down urine. bacon's natural history.
flatus. n.s. [latin.] wind gathered in any cavities of
the body, caused by indigestion and a gross internal perspira-
tion ; which is therefore discussed by warm aromaticks. &amp;tincy.
fla twise. adj. [fat and wise: so it should be written, not
fatways.] with the flat downwards; not the edge.
its posture in the earth was fatwise, and parallel to the site
of the stratum in which it was reposited. isoodward on fossils.
to flaunt. v. n.
1. to make a fluttering show in apparel.
with ivy canopy’d, and interwove
with faunting honeysuckle. milton.
these courtiers of applause deny themselves things conve-
nient to flaunt it out, being frequently enough fain to immo-
latin.]
late their own desires to their vanity. boyle.
here, attir'd beyond our purse, we go,
for useless ornament and slaunting show :
we take on trust, in purple robes to shine,
and poor, are yet ambitious to be fine. dryden's juvenal.
you sot, you loiter about alehouses, or flaunt about the
streets in your new-gilt chariot, never minding me nor your
numerous family. arbuthnot's history of john bull,
2. to be hung with something loose and flying. this seems
not to be proper: the words faunt and flutter might with more
propriety have changed their places.
ortune in men has some small diff'rence made ;
one faunts in rags, one flutters in brocade. pope's effy.
flaunt. n.s. anything loose and airy.
how would he look to see his work so noble,
wildly bound up, what would he say ! or how
should i in these my borrow'd faunts behold
the sternness of his presence shakesp. winter's tale.
flavour. n s.
1. power of pleasing the taste.
they have a certain favour, at their first appearance, from
several accidental circumstances, which they may lose, if not
taken early. addison's spectator.
2. sweetness to the smell; odour; fragrance.
myrtle, orange, and the blushing rose, .
with bending heaps, so nigh their bloom disclose,
each secms to smell the flavour which the other blows. dry.
flavorous. adj. [from favour.]
i. delightful to the palate. - -
sweet grapes degen'rate there, and fruits declin'd
from their firstflav’rous taste, renounce their kind. dryden.
2. fragrant; odorous.
flaw, n.f. [spx40, to break; floh, saxon, a fragment.]
1. a crack or breach in any thing.
this heart shall break into a thousand saws,
or ere i weep. shakespeare's king lear.
[from flatter; faterie, french.] false praise;
* - young.
flattish. adj. [from flat.j somewhat flat; approaching to
- wool, new-shorn, being laid casually upon a vessel of ver-
juice, after some time had drunk "p a great part of the ver-
getting in at any imperceptible hole or flaw.
a saw is in thy ill-bak'd vessel found:
'tis hollow, and returns a jarring sound.
as if great atlas, from his height,
should fink beneath his heavenly weight;
and with a mighty saw the flaming wall, as once it shall,
should gape immense, and rushing down, o'erwhelm this
nether ball. dryden.
whether the nymph shall break diana's law,
qr some frail china jar receive a faw. pope.
. he that would keep his house in repair, must attend every
little breach or faw, and supply it immediately, else time
alone will bring all to ruin. swift.
2. a fault; defect; something that weakens or invalidates.
yet certain though it be, it hath flaws; for that the scri-
veners and brokers do value unsound mem to serve their
turn.
boyle.
dryden's pers: -
own
bacon's essays.
traditions were a proof alone, -
could we be certain such they were, so known :
hot since some flaws in long descents may be,
they make not truth, but probability. dryden.
and laid her dowry out in law,
to null her jointure with a flaw. hudibras.
their judgment has found a saw in what the generality
of mankind admires. addison's speciator.
so many flaws had this vow in its first con eption. alterb.
3. a sudden gust; a violent blast. [from so, latin.] obsolete.
being incens'd, he's flint;
as humourous as winter, and as sudden
assaws congealed in the spring of day. shakesp. hen. iv.
oh, that that earth, which kept the world is awe,
should patch a wall, t'expel the winter's saw. shak. ham.
as a huge fish, laid
near to the cold wood-gathering shore, is with a north saw
shoots back; so, sent against the ground, [fraid,
was foil’d eurialus. chapman’s iliad. .
bursting their brazen dungeon, arm'd with ice,
and snow, and hail, and stormy gust, and saw,
boreas, and caecias, and argestes loud,
and thrascias rend the woods, and seas upturn. milton.
i heard the rack,
as earth and sky would mingle; but myself
was distant ; and these flaws, though mortals fear them,
as dangerous to the pillar'd frame of heav'n,
or to the earth's dark basis underneath,
are to the main inconsiderable. milton's paradis. loft.
4. a tumult; a tempestuous uproar.
and this fell tempest shall not cease to rage,
until the golden circuit on my head
do calm the fury of this madbrain’d flaw. shak. hen. vi,
the fort's revolted to the emperor,
the gates are open'd, the portcullis drawn, o
and deluges of armies from the town
came pouring in : i heard the mighty saw ;
when first it broke, the crowding ensigns saw
which choak'd the passage. dryden's aurengzele,
5. a sudden commotion of mind.
oh these flaws and starts,
impostors to true fear, would become
a woman's story at a winter's fire. shakespeare's macbeth,
to flaw. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to break ; to crack; to damage with fissure.
but his flaw'd heart,
alack, too weak the conflict to support,
*twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
burst smilingly. shakespeare's king lear.
the cup was flawed with such a multitude of little cracks,
that it looks like a white, not like a crystalline cup. boyle.
the brazen cauldrons with the frosts are flaw'd,
the garment stiff with ice, at hearths is thaw'd. dryden.
2. to break; to violate. out of use.
france hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'd
our merchants goods. shakspeare's henry viii.
fla'wless. adj. [from flaw.] without cracks; without de-
fects.
a star of the first magnitude, which the more high, more
vast, and more flawles shines only bright enough to make
itself conspicuous. boyle on colours.
flawn, n.s. splena, saxon; fan, french; viaoye, dutch.]
a sort of custard; a pie baked in a dish. dic.
fill oven full of fawns, ginny pass not for sleep,
to-morrow thy father his wake-day will keep. . tuffer.
to fla'wt er. v. a. to scrape or pare a skin. ainsworth,
fla'w y. adj. [from flaw.] full of flaws.
flax. m. s. [eleax, plex, saxon 3 vlas, dutch.]
1. the fibrous plant of which the finest thread is made.
2. the fibres of flax cleansed and combed for the spinner. i’ll<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 830</div><p class="text">f l e
f l e
i'll fetch some fax, and whites of ‘go’" . .
t’apply tols o no face. shakspeare's king lear.
thes, on the rock a scanty measure place
of vital fax, and turn'd the wheel apace, * -
and turning sung. - dryde's ovid.
flaocomb. n.f. [fax and comb.] the instrumen with which
the fibres of flox are cleansed from the brittle parts.
foxpress er. m. s. [fax and droft.] he that prepares flax
for the spinner.
fla's en. adj. [from fax.]
1. made of flax.
the matron, at her nightly task,
with pensive labour draws the flaxen thread. thoms. isoter:
the best materials for making ligatures are the faxen thread
that shoemakers use. sharp's surgery.
2. fair, long and flowing, as if made of flax.
i bought a fine faxen long wig.
fla’zw e e d. m. s. a plant. -
7, flay. v. a. sad flaa, islandick; fae, danish; &amp;laen, dut.]
1. to strip of the skin.
i must have been eaten with wild beasts, or have fallen into
the hands of the spaniards, and been fayed alive. raleigh.
while the old levitical hierarchy continued, it was part of
addison.
the ministerial office to flay the sacrifices. south.
then give command the sacrifice to haste ;
let the flay'd victims in the plains be cast :
and facied vows, and mystick song, apply'd -
to grisly pluto and his gloomy bride. pope's odyssey.
2. to take off the skin or surface of any thing.
they faytheir skin from off them, break their bones, and
chop them in pieces. alsac.
neither should that odious custom be allowed of cutting
scraws, which is flaying off the green surface of the ground,
to cover their cabins. swift.
flayer. m. s. [from say..] he that strips off the skin of any
thing.
fo: n. s. [rlea, saxon ; vkye, dutch ; floach, scottish. a
small red infect remarkable for its agility in leaping, which
sucks the blood of larger animals.
while wormwood hath seed, get a handsu! or twain,
to save against march to make fied to refrain :
where chamber is sweeped, and wormwood is strown,
no sea for his life dire abide to be known. tosor.
a valiant fica that dares eat his breakfast on the lip of a
lion. shakespeare's henry v.
flas breed principally of straw or mats, where there hath
been a little moisture. bacon's natural history.
7% flfa. v. a. [from the noun...] to clean from fleas.
flea ban e. m. s. s fea and lame.] a plant.
it hath undivided leaves, which, for the most part, are glu-
tinous, and have a strong scent: the cup of the flower is for
the most part scaly, and of a cylindrical form: the flower is
composed of many florets, which are succeeded by seeds with
a downy substance adhering to them. aziller.
lea b11 e. -
| łoc. : m. s. [sica and lite.]
1. red marks caused by fleas.
the attend nee of a cancer is commonly a breaking out all
over the body, like a fleabiting. //?seman's surgery.
2. a small hurt or pain like that caused by the hing of a flea.
- a gout, a cholick, a cutting off an arm or leg, or fearing
the flesh, are but seabites to the pairs of the soul. harvey.
the same expence that breaks one man's back, is not a fica-
biting to another. l'e/orange.
flea bitten. adj. [sea and lite.]
1. stung by fleas.
2. mean ; worthless.
fleabitten synod, an assembly brew’d
of clerks and elders ana, like the rude
chaos of presbyt'ry, where laymen guide,
with the tame woolpack clergy by their side. cleaveland.
f leak. v. a. [from foccus, latin.
lock, thread, or twist.
the businesses of men depend upon these little long fieaks
, or threads of hemp and flax. more's antidote agains atheism.
fleam. m. s. [corrupted from ox:33ropov, the instrument died
in phlebotomy..] an instrument used to bleed cattle, which
is placed on the vein, and then driven by a blow.
fle &amp; wort. n.s. [sica and wort.] a plant. asaller.
§ 2 i leck. v. a. s.sieck, german, a spot, skinner: perhaps it
is derived frcm fedk, or foe, an old word for a grate, hurdle,
or any thing made of parts laid transverse, from the islandick
fake.] to spot; to streake 3 to stipe ; to dapple; to varie-
gate.
let it not see the dawning flock the skies,
see flake...] a small
nor the grey morning from the ocean rise. sandys.
fleck'd in her face, and with disorder'd hair,
her garments ruffled, and her bosom bare. dryden’s juv.
-- both food with white, the true arcadian strain. dryden.
fo ****, v. a. strom fock.] to spot; to mark with
itrokes or touches of different colours; to mark with red
whelkes.
the grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning nigh
check’ring the eastern clouds with streaks of ii. t,
and darkness fecker'd, like a drunkard, reels”
from forth day's path, and titan's burning wheels. so,
fled. the pieterite and participle, not properly off, off.
the wings, but of flee, to run away. *}” to use
truth is fled far away, and leasing is hard at hand
in vain for life he to the altar fied; -
ambition and revenge have certain speed.
eft.
prior.
fledge. adj. [federen, to fly, dutch..] full-f -
to fly ; qualified to so o nest. " feathered, able
we did find
the shells of fledge souls left behind. -
his locks behind, horter,
illustrious on his shoulders, fledge with wings,
lay waving round. milton's parads: los
to fledge. v. a. [from the adjective. is ...
wings; to supply with feathers. j j to furnis with
the birds were not as yet fiedged enough to shift for them-
selyes. - l'eraig': fall:
the speedy growth of birds that are hatched in nests mi
fed by the old ones 'till they be fledged, and come o to
full bigness in about a fortnight, seems to me an argument of
rovidence. ray on to co,
p the sandals of celestial mous." on the croatin.
fledg’d with ambrosial plumes, and rich with gold
surround her feet. pools,
to flef. v. m. pret. fed. [this word is now almost o:
sally written fy, though properly to fy, peoyon, few, is to
move with wings, and fice, plean, to rom citoy. they are now
confounded.] i o run from danger; to have recours. .
shelter. -
behold, this city is near to fee unto. gen. xix, ze
macduff is fied to england. software.
were men so dull they could not see o
that lyce painted ; should they fee
j.ike simple birds into a net,
so grosly woven and ill set //olor,
none of us fall into those circumstances of danger, want,
or pain, that can have hopes of relief but from god alone;
none in all the world to fee to, but him. tilso.
fleece. m. s. [flyr. flor, saxon ; vloft, dutch..] as much
wool as is shorn from one sheep.
giving account of the annual increase
both of their lambs and of their woolly force. ha.t.,
so many days my ewes have been with young,
so many months ere i shall sheer the floor. slass. ho vi.
i am shepherd to another mon,
and do not sheer the fleeces that i graze. shaft. a you oil.
sailors have used every night to hang forces of wool on the
sides of their ships, towards the water; and they have crushed
fresh water out of them in the morning. bacon'; mat, hors,
the sheep will prove much to the advantage of the woollen
manufacture, by the fineness of the feece. swift.
to ft. eece. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to clip the fleece off a sheep.
2. to strip; to pull; to plunder, as a sheep is robbed of his
wool.
courts of justice have a small pension, so that they are
tempted to take bribes, and to force the people. , alison.
fleeced. adj. [from fleece..] having fleeces of wool.
as when two rams, stirr'd with ambitious pride,
fight for the rule of the rich fleeted flock,
their horned fronts so fierce on either file
do meet, that with the terror of the shock . .
astonied both stand senseless as a block. foy qom,
fleecy. adj. [from fierce..] woolly; covered with wool.
not all the feedy wealth
that doth enrich those downs, is worth a thought
to that my errand.
o - from eastern point
f libra, to the fiercy star, that bears -
andromeda far ...'. sea. milo's parai's lo
let her glad valleys smile with wavy corn;
milio.
let fleecy flocks her rising hills adorn. prior,
the good shepherd tends his forcy case,
seeks freshest pasture, and the purest at ; po
explores the lost, the wand'ring sheep directs. scot-
to fleer. v. n. [elearbian, to trifle, saxon; ordan, sco.
tish. skinner thinks it formed from loor.] -
1. to mock ; to gibe; to jest with insolence and contempo.
you speak to casca, and to such a man. lius coso,
that is no ficering tell-tale. shałospeare's jousto
dares the slave
come hither, cover'd with an antick face,
to fleer and scorn at our solemnity! soo
do i, like the female tribe,
think it well to seer and gibe
2. to leer; to grin with an air of civility. .
how popular and courteous; how they go
every man they meet burton
fire r. n.f. [from the verb.]
ron arijo
o
saft,
n and for o
on jolio"
1. mocko
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 831</div><p class="text">f l e
1. mockery expressed either in words or looks,
- encave yourself,
and mark the seers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
that dwell in every region of his face. " shakesp. othella.
2. a deceitful grin of civility.
he shall generally spy such false lines, and such a sly trea-
cherous ficer upon the face of deceivers, that he shall be sure
to have a cast of their eye to warn him, before they give him
a cast of their nature to betray him. south.
fle er er. m. s. [from feer.] a mocker; a fawner. dicl.
fleet. fleot. flot. are all derived from the saxon pleoz,
which signifies a bay or gulph. gibson's camden.
fleet. n.s. iploca, saxon.] a company of ships; a navy.
our pray'rs are heard; our master's fleet shall go
as far as winds can bear, or waters flow. prior.
fleet. m. s. [elect, saxon, an estuary, or arm of the sea..] a
creek; an inlet of water. a provincial word, foom which
the fleet-prison and fleet-street are named.
they have a very good way in essex of draining of lands
that have land-floods or fleets running through them, which
make a kind of a small creek. martimer's husbandry.
fleet. adj. [fiotur, islandick.]
1. swift of pace ; quick; nimble; active,
upon that shore he spied atin stand;
there by his master left, when late he far’d
in phaedria's feet bark. fairy queen.
i take him for the better dog:
thou art a fool: if echo were as fleet, -
i would esteem him worth a dozen such. shakespeare.
he had in his stables one of the fleetest horses in england. clar.
his fear was greater than his haste;
for fear, though fleeter than the wind,
believes 'tis always left behind. hudibras.
so fierce they drove, their coursers were so fleet,
that the turf trembled underneath their seet. dryden.
he told us, that the welkin would be clear
when swallows feet soar high and sport in air. gay.
2. [in the husbandry of some provinces.] light ; superficially
fruitful.
mail cope-ground is a cold, stiff, wet clay, unless where it
is very feet for pasture. martimer.
3. skimming the surface. cant word.
those lands must be plowed fleet.
to fleet. v. n. [plozan, saxon.]
1. to fly swiftly ; to vanish.
how all the other passions fleet to air,
martimer's husbandry.
as doubtful thoughts, and rash embrac'd despair | shakesp.
a wolf, who, hang'd for human slaughter,
ev’n from the gallows did his fell soul feet. shakespeare.
2. to be in a transient state; the same with fit.
our understanding, to make a complete notion, must add
something else to this secting and unremarkable superficies,
that may bring it to our acquaintance. digly on bodies.
o feeting joys
of paradise, dear-bought with lasting woes | milton.
while i listen to thy voice, - -
chloris i feel my life decay:
that powerful noise
calls my fleeting soul away.
as empty clouds by rising winds are tost,
- their fleeting forms scarce sooner found than lost.
to fleet. v. a. -
1. to skim the water. -
who swelling sails in caspian sea doth cross,
and in frail wood an adrian gulph doth fleet,
doth not, i ween, so many evils meet.
2. to live merrily, or pass time away lightly.
many young gentlemen flock to him every day, and feet
the time carelesly as they did in the golden age. shakespeare.
3. [in the country..] to skim milk; to take off the cream :
whence the word fleeting dish.
waller.
prior.
fairy queen.
fle'eting dish. n. s. i from feet and dish.] a skimming
bowl.
fle'etly.; adv. [from feet.] swiftly ; nimbly; with swift
pace.
fle'etness. n.s.. [from fleet.] swiftness of course; nimble-
ness; celerity; velocity; speed; quickness.
flesh. n s. [floec, ploerc, saxon; vleesch, dutch; fool, erse.]
1. the body distinguished from the soul.
as if this fish, which walls about our life,
were brass impregnable. shakespeare's richard ii.
a disease that's in my fish,
which i must needs call mine. shakespeare's king lear.
and thou, my soul, which turn'st with curious eye
to view the beams of thine own form divine,
know, that thou can's know nothing perfectly,
while thou art clouded with this fesh of mine. davies.
2. the muscles distinguished from the skin, bones, tendons.
a spirit hath not flesh and bones. new testament.
3. animal food distinguished from vegetable.
flesh should be forborne as long as he is in coats, or at least
'till he is two or three years old. locke.
vol. i,
*/, without being qualified with acids, is too alkalescent
a diet. arbuthnot on aliments,
acidity in the infant may be cured by a fish diet in the
nurse. arbuthnot on aliments,
4. the body of beasts or birds used in food, distinct from fishes.
there is another indictment upon thee, for suffering fish
to be eaten in thy house, contrary to the law. shakesp. h. 1 v.
we mortify ourselves with fish; and think we fare coarsely,
if we abstain from the flesh of other animals. brown.
5. animal nature.
the end of all flesh is come before me.
6. carnality; corporal appetites.
name not religion; for thou lov'st the fles. shakesp.
fasting serves to mortify the fish, and subdue the lists
thereof. smalridge's sermons.
7. a carnal state; worldly disposition : in theology.
they that are in the fish cannot please god. rom. viii. 8.
the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the
fesh. gal. v. 16.
8. near relation : a scriptural use.
let not our hand be upon him; for he is our flesh, gen.
when thou seest the naked, cover him; and hide not thy-
self from thine own flesh. isa. lviii. 7.
9. the outward or literal sense. the orientals termed the im-
mediate or literal signification of any precept or type the flesh,
and the remote or typical meaning the spirit. this is frequent
in st. paul.
ye judge after the flesh.
to fles h. v. a.
1. to initiate : from the sportsman's practice of feeding his
hawks and dogs with the first game that they take, or train-
ing them to pursuit by giving them the fesh of animals.
full bravely hast thou fasht
thy maiden sword. shakespeare's henry iv.
every puny swordsman will think him a good tame quarry
to enter and flesh himself upon. government of the tongus,
2. to harden ; to establish in any practice, as dogs by cf.cn
feeding on any thing.
these princes finding them so fleshed in cruelty, as not to be
reclaimed, secretly undertook the matter alone. sidney.
the women ran all away, saving only one, who was so
foshed in malice, that neither during nor after the fight she
gave any truce to her cruelty. sidney,
3. to glut ; to satiate.
harry from curb’d licence plucks
the muzzle of restraint; and the wild do
shall fesh his tooth on every innocent. shakes). henry iv.
he hath perverted a young gentlewoman, and this night he
foshes his will in the spoil of her honour. shakespeare.
the kindred of him hath been flesh’d upon us;
and he is bred out of that bloody strain,
that hunted us in our familiar paths. shakes). henry v.
fle'shbroath. m. s. [fish and broath.] broath made by de-
cocting flesh.
her leg being emaciated, i advised bathing it with flesh-
broath, wherein had been decocted emollient herbs. wiseman.
fle's h.colour. m. s. [flesh and colour.] the colour of flesh.
a complication of ideas together makes up the single com-
plex idea, which he calls man, whereof white or softcolour in
england is one. locke.
a loose earth of a pale fleshcolour, that is, white with a
blush of red, is found in a mountain in cumberland. woodw.
fle's hfly. n.s.. [flesh and fly.] a fly that feeds upon flesh,
gen. vi. 13.
john, viii. 15.
and deposites her eggs in it.
- i would no more endure
this wooden slavery, than i would suffer
the fleshfly blow my mouth. shakespeare's tempes.
it is a wonderful thing in flesofties, that a fly-maggot in five
days space after it is hatched, arrives at its full growth and
perfect magnitude. ray on the creation.
fle'shhook. n.s.. [ses, and hook.] a hook to draw flesh from
the caldron.
all that the fleshhook brought up the priest took. i sa. ii. 12.
fle’s hless. adj. [from flesh..] without flesh. -
fle's hliness. m. s. [from fishly..] carnal passions or appetites.
when strong passions or weak fleshlings;
would from the right way seek to draw him wide,
he would, through temperance and stedfastness,
teach him the weak to strengthen, and the strong suppress.
spenser.
corrupt manners in living, breed false judgment in doc-
trine: sin and fleshlines, bring forth sects and heresies. ascham,
fle's hly. adj. [from flesh.] - -
1. corporeal. -
nothing resembles death so much as sleep;
yet then our minds themselves from slumber keep,
when from their fishly bondage they are free. denham,
. 2. carnal; lascivious.
belial, the dissolutest spirit that fell,
the sensualest; and, after asmodai,
the fleshlies incubus. paradise regain'd,
. animal ; not vegetable.
3 2 o: 'tis
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 832</div><p class="text">f l e
f l i
'tis then for nought that mother earth provides
the stores of all she shows, *: o hides,
if men with fleshly morsels must be fed,
and chaw § o, teeth the breathing bread. dryden,
4. human ; not celestial; not spiritual.
else, never could the force of fishly arm
ne molten metal in his flesh embrue. fairy queen.
th' eternal lord in fleshly shrine ..
enwombed was, from wretched adam's line, -
to purge away the guilt of sinful crime. fairy queen.
much ostentation, vain of fleshly arm,
and of frail arms, much instrument of war . • *
before mine eyes thou'st set. milton's paradise regain'd.
fle’s hmeat. n.s.. [flesh and meat..] animal food; the flesh
of animals prepared for food. s
the most convenient diet is that of fleshmeats. floyer.
in this prodigious plenty of cattle and dearth of human
creatures, fleshmeat is monstrously dear. swift.
fleshmeat n.s. (from fash.j eagerness gained by a suc-
cessful initiation. -
- he got praises of the king,
for him attempting who was self-subdued;
and in the fleshment of this dread exploit, » , or:
drew on me here again. shakespeare's king lear.
fle's hmonger. n.s.. [from fesh.] one who deals in flesh; a
pimp.
was the duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and a coward, as you
then reported him so *so measure for measure.
fle'shpot. n.s.. [flesh and pot..] a vessel in which flesh is
cooked; thence plenty of flesh.
if he takes away the fesopots, he can also alter the ap-
petite. taylor's rule for living holy.
fee's hquake.. n.s. [fesh and quake..] a trenor of the body ;
a word formed by johnson in imitation of earthquake.
they may, blood-shaken then,
feel such a fishquake to possess their powers,
as they shall cry like ours:
in sound of peace or wars,
no harp e'er hit the fiars.
fle's hy. adj. [from josh.]
1. plump; full of flesh; fat; musculous. - 11
all ethiopes are fleshy and plump, and have great lips; a
which betoken moisture retained, and not drawn out. bacon.
we say it is a fleshy stile when there is much periphrases and
circuit of words, and when with more than enough it grows
fat and corpulent. ben. johnson's discoveries:
the sole of his foot is flat and broad, being very fleshy, and
covered only with a thick skin; but very fit to travel in sandy
places. - ray.
2. pulpous; plump : with regard to fruits. -
those fruits that are so fossy, as they cannot make drink
by expression, yet may make drink by mixture of water. bacon.
florcaer. n.f. [from feche, an arrow, french..] a manu-
facturer of bows and arrows.
it is commended by our fetchers for bows, next unto yew.
- mortimer’s husbandry.
flet. participle passive of to feet. skimmed; deprived of the
cream.
they drink set milk, which they just warm.
flew. the preterite of fly, not of fice. -
the people few upon the spoil. i sa. xiv. 32.
o'er the world of waters hermes few,
*till now the distant island rose in view. pope's odyssey.
flew. n.s. the large chaps of a deep-mouthed hound.
hammer.
ben. johnson's new inn.
mortimer,
fle'w ed. adj. [stom few..] chapped ; mouthed.
my hounds are bred out of the spartan kind,
softw'd, so sanded, and their heads are hung
with ears that sweep away the morning dew. shakespeare.
flexa.nimous, adj. [ftexanimus, latin.] having power to
change the disposition of the mind. dic.
that flexanimous and golden-tongued orator. - howel.
flexibi'lity. m. s... [flexibilite, french ; from flexible.]
1. the quality of admitting to be bent; pliancy. .. -
do not the rays which differ in resrangibility differ also in
sexibility? and are they not, by their different inflexions, se-
parated from one another, so as after separation to make the
colours ? newton's opt.
corpuscles of the same set agree in every thing ; but those
that are of diverse kinds differ in specifick gravity, in hard-
ness, and in fiexibility, as in bigness and figure. woodward.
2. easiness to be persuaded ; ductility of mind ; compliance;
facility.
rove rather to err by too much flexibility than too much
perverseness, by meekness than by self-love. hammond.
flexible. adj. [flexibilis, latin; fiexible, french.]
3. possible to be bent; not brittle; easy to be bent; pliant;
not stiff. -
when splitting winds
make flexible the knees of knotted oaks. sh. troil. and cress.
take a stock-gillyflower, tie it upon a stick, put them both
into a glass full of quicksilver, so that the flower be covered:
after four or five days you shall find the flower fresh, and the
stalk harder and less flexible than it was. - bacon.
2. not rigid ; not inexorable; complying; obsequious.
phocyon was a man of great severity, and no ways flexible
‘. will of the people. bacon.
3.
uctile ; manageable.
under whose care soever a child is put to be taught, during
the tender and flexible years of his life, it should be one who
thinks latin and language the least part of education. locke.
4. that may be accommodated to various forms and purposes.
this was a principle more flexible to their purpose. rogers.
fle xiblen ess. m. s. [from flexible.]
1. possibility to be bent; not brittleness; easiness to be bent;
not stiffness; pliantness; pliancy.
i will rather chuse to wear a crown of thorns, than to ex-
change that of gold for one of lead, whose embased flexiblenes;
shall be forced to bend. king charles.
keep those slender aerial bodies separated and stretched out,
which otherwise, by reason of their flexiblenes, and weight,
would flag or curl. boyle's spring of the air.
2. facility ; obsequiousness; compliance.
3. ductility; manageableness.
the flexibleness of the former part of a man's age, not yet
grown up to be headstrong, makes it more governable. lase.
flexile. adj. [flexisis, latin.j pliant; easily bent; obse-
quious to any power or impulse.
every flexile wave
obeys the blast, th’aerial tumult swells. thomson's summer.
floxion, n.s.. [flexio, latin.]
1. the aet of bending.
2. a double; a bending; part bent; joint.
of a finuous pipe that may have some four flexions, trial
would be made. bacon's natural history.
3. a turn towards any part or quarter.
pity causeth sometimes tears, and a flexion or cast of the eye
aside. bacon's natural history.
flexor. m. s. [latin.] the general name of the muscles
which act in contracting the joints.
flatterers, who have the fiexor muscles so strong that they
are always bowing and cringing, might in some measure be
corrected by being tied down upon a tree by the back. arbuth.
flexuous. adj. [sexuosus, latin.]
1. winding ; full of turns and meanders; tortuous.
in regard of the soul, the numerous and crooked narrow
cranies, and the restrained flexuous rivulets of corporeal things,
are all contemptible. digby on the soul.
2. bending ; not strait; variable; not steady. -
the trembling of a candle discovers a wind, that otherwise
we do not feel; and the flexuous burning of flames doth shew
the air beginneth to be unquiet. bacon's natural history.
fle xure. m. s. [flexura, latin.]
1. the form or direction in which anything is bent.
contrary is the flexure of the joints of our arms and legs
to that of quadrupeds: our knees bend forward, whereas the
same joint of their hind legs bends backward. ray.
2. the act of bending.
the elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy;
his legs are for necessity, not flexure. shak. troil, and cross.
3. the part bent; the joint.
his mighty strength lies in his able loins,
and where the flexure of his navel joins. sandys.
4. obsequious or servile cringe. not used. -
think'st thou the fiery fever will go out -
with titles blown from adulation ?
will it give place to flexure and low bends? shak. hen. v.
to flicker. v. a. [figheren, dutch ; fliccenian, saxon.]
to flutter; to play the wings; to have a fluttering motion.
the wreath of radiant fire,
on flickering phoebus' front. shakespeare's king lear.
'twas ebbing darkness, past the mid’ of night,
and phospher, on the confines of the light,
promis'd the sun, ere day began to spring;
the tuneful lark already stretch'd her wing,
and flicoring on her nest, made short essays to fing. dryden.
at all her stretch her little wings she spread,
and with her feather'd arms embrac'd the dead;
then fickering to his pallid lips, she strove
to print a kiss, the last essay of love.
fli'e.r. m. s. [from fly.]
i. one that runs away; a fugitive; a runaway.
the gates are ope, now prove good seconds;
'tis for the followers fortune widens them,
not for the fiers. shakespeare's coriolanus.
now the fiers from and forsakers of their places, carry the
parliamentary power along with them. king charles.
2. that part of a machine which, by being put into a more
rapid motion than the other parts, equalizes and regulates the
motion of the rest; as in a jack.
the flier, tho’t had leaden feet,
turn’d so quick, you scarce could see’t. swift.
flight. n.s.. [from so fly.]
1. the aet of flying or running from danger.
dryden.
and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 833</div><p class="text">f l i
f l i
and now, too late, he wishes for the fight,
that strength he wasted in ignoble fight.
he thinks by slight his mistress must be won,
and claims the prize because he best did run. dryd, ind. emp.
as eager of the chace, the maid
beyond the forest's verdant limits stray’d;
pan saw and lov’d, and, burning with desire,
denham.
pursu'd her fight; her fight increas'd his fire. pope.
2. the act of using wings; volation.
for he so swift and nimble was of flight,
that from this lower tract he dar'd to fly
- up to the clouds and thence with pinions light
* to mount aloft unto the crystal sky. spenser's muiapotmos.
the fury sprang above the stygian flood ;
and on her wicker wings, sublime through night,
she to the latian palace took her fight. dryden's 4on.
winds that tempests brew,
when through arabian groves they take their fight,
made wanton with rich odours, lose their spite. dryden.
3. removal from place to place by means of wings.
ere the bat hath flown
his cloyster'd fight. shakespeare’s macbeth.
the fowls shall take their flight away together. 2 esd. v. 9.
fowls, by winter forc'd, forsake the floods,
and wing their hasty flight to happier lands. dryden's 42n.
4. a flock of birds flying together.
flights of angels wing thee to thy rest. shakesp. hamlet.
they take great pride in the feathers of birds, and this
they took from their ancestors of the mountains, who were
invited into it by the infinite fights of birds that came up to
the high grounds. bacon's new atlantis.
- i can at will, doubt not,
command a table in this wilderness;
and call swift fights of angels ministrant,
- array'd in glory, on my cup to attend. milton's par. loft.
5. the birds produced in the same season : as, the harvest flight
of pigeons,
6. a volley ; a shower; as much shot as is discharged at once.
at the first fight of arrows sent,
full threescore scots they slew. chevy chase.
above an hundred arrows discharged on my left hand,
pricked me iike so many needles; and besides they shot ano-
ther fight into the air, as we do bombs. swift.
7. the space past by flying.
8. heat of imagination ; fally of the soul.
old pindar's fights by him are reacht,
when on that gale his wings are stretcht. denham.
he shewed all the stretch of fancy at once; and if he has
- . failed in some of his fights, it was but because he attempted
every thing. pope.
strange graces still, and stranger flights she had ;
was just not ugly, and was just not mad. pope.
trust me, dear! good humour can prevail,
when airs and fights, and screams and scolding fail. pope.
9. excursion on the wing.
if there were any certain height where the fights of ambi-
tion end, one might imagine that the interest of france were
but to conserve its present greatness. temple.
it is not only the utmost pitch of impiety, but the highest
fight of folly, to deride these things. tillotson.
10. the power of flying.
in my school-days, when i had lost one shaft,
i shot his fellow of the self-same fight
the self-same way.
fli'ghty. adj. [from fight.]
1. fleeting; swift.
time, thou anticipat'st my dread exploits:
the flighty purpose never is o'ertook,
unless the deed go with it.
2. wild; full of imagination.
fli'msy. adj. [of this word i know not any original, and
suspect it to have crept into our language from the cant of
manufacturers.]
1. weak; feeble; without strength of texture.
2. mean ; spiritless; without force.
proud of a vast extent of flimsy lines.
to flinch. v. n. [corrupted from sting. skinner.]
1. to shrink from any suffering or undertaking; to withdraw
from any pain or danger.
every martyr could keep one eye steadily fixed upon im-
mortality, and look death and danger out of countenance
with the other; nor did they finch from duty, for fear of
martyrdom. south's sermons.
a child, by a constant course of kindness, may be accus-
tomed to bear very rough usage without finching or com-
plaining. locke.
oh ingratitude, that john bull, whom i have honoured
with my friendship, should finch at last, and pretend that he
can disburse no more money. arbuthnot's john bull.
2. in shakespeare it signifies to fail.
if i break time, or finch in property
of what i spoke, unpitied let me die.
shakespeare.
shakespeare's macbeth.
pope.
shakespeare.
fli'ncher. n.s.. [from the verb.] he who shrinks or fails in
any matter.
to fling... preter. flung; part. foung or fong. v. a. [from fligo;
latin, skinner: according to others from sying; so to fling is
oset flying.]
o cast from the hand; to throw.
the matrons flung their gloves,
ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchiefs
upon him. shakespeare's coriolanus.
'tis fate that fings the dice; and as she flings,
of kings makes peasants, and of peasants kings. dryden.
2. to dart ; to cast with violence.
how much unlike that hector who return'd
clad in achilles' spoils; when he, among .*
a thousand ships, like jove, his lightning flung. denham.
3. to scatter. -
ev'ry beam new transient colours sings,
colours that change whene'er they wave their wings. pope.
4. to drive by violence. -
a heap of rocks, falling, would expel the waters out of
their places with such a violence as to fing them among the
highest clouds. burnet's theory of the earth.
5. to move forcibly. - • *
the knight seeing his habitation reduced to so small com-
pass, ordered all the apartments to be foung open. -
addison's spediator.
t
i.
6. to cast: in an ill sense.
. i know thy gen’rous temper: -
fling but the appearance of dishonour on it,
it strait takes fire. addison's cato;
7. to force into another condition, properly into a worse.
squalid fortune, into baseness fiong,
doth scorn the pride of wonted ornaments.
8. to fling away. to eject ; to dismiss. \
cromwell, i charge thee, fing away ambition;
by that fin fell the angels. shakespeare's henry viii.
9. to fling down. to demolish ; to ruin.
these are so far from raising mountains, that they over-
turn and sing down some of those which were before stand-
ing. j/oodward’s natural history.
10. to fling off. to baffle in the chace; to defeat of a prey.
these men are too well acquainted with the chace to be
flung off by any false steps or doubles. addison's spectator.
o flin g. v. n. -
1. to flounce ; to wince ; to fly into violent and irregulaf
motions.
spenser.
the angry beast
began to kick, and fing, and wince, -
as if h’ had been beside his sense. - - hudibras.
their consciences are galled by it, and this makes them
wince and fling as if they had some mettle. tillojon.
2. to fling out. to grow unruly or outrageous: from the
act of any angry horse that throws out his legs.
duncan's horses, -
turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, fung out,
contending 'gainst obedience. shakespeare.
fling. m. s. [from the verb.] -
1. a throw ; a cast.
2. a gibe ; a sneer; a contemptuous remark.
no little scribbler is of wit so bare,
but has his fing at the poor wedded pair.
i, who love to have a sing
both at senate-house and king,
thought no method more commodious
than to show their vices odious.
fli'nger. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. he who throws.
2. he who jeers. -
flint. m.s. [fline, saxon.] . . . " . . -
1. a semi-pellucid stone, composed of crystal debased, of a
blackish grey, of one similar and equal substance, free from
veins, and naturally invested with a whitish crust. it is some-
times smooth and equal, more frequently rough: its size is
various. it is well known to strike fire with steel. it is use-
ful in glassmaking. hill on fossils.
searching the window for a flint, i found
this paper. - shakespeare's julius caesar.
love melts the rigour which the rocks have bred;
a flint will break upon a featherbed. cleaveland.
there is the same force and the same refreshing virtue in
fire kindled by a spark from a flint, as if it were kindled by a
beam from the sun. - south's sermons.
take this, and lay your flint edg’d weapon by. dryden.
i’ll fetch quick fuel from the neighb’ring wood,
addison.
swift,
and strike the sparkling flint, and dress the food. prior,
2. any thing eminently or proverbially hard.
your tears, a heart of flint -
might tender make. spenser.
throw my heart
against the flint and hardness of my fault. sh. ant, andcleop.
fli'nty. adj. [from flint.]
1. made of flint; strong. -
- tyrant
o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 834</div><p class="text">f l i
f l o --
tyrant custom
hath made the fity and steel couch of war -
my thrice-driven bed of down. shakesp. othello.
3 pointed flinty rock, all bare and black,
grew gibbous from behind the mountain's back.
2. full of stones. a
the gathering up of flints in finly ground, and laying them
on heaps, is no good husbandry. bacon's natural history.
3. hard of heart; cruel; savage; inexorable.
- gratitude,
through flinty tartar's bosom, would peep forth,
and answer thanks. shakespeare's all's well that ends well.
flipp. n. s. [a cant word.] a liquor much used in ships, made
by mixing beer with spirits and sugar.
the tarpawlin and swabber is lolling at madagascar, with
some drunken sunburnt whore, over a can of flip. dennis.
f11 ppant. adj. [a word of no great authority, probably de-
rived from fip-flap.]
1. nimble; moveable. it is used only of the aet of speech.
an excellentanatomist promised to dissect a woman's tongue,
and examine whether there may not be in it certain juices,
dryden.
which render it so wonderfully voluble or flippant. addison.
2. pert; petulant; waggish.
away with flippant epilogues. thomson.
fli'ppantly. adv. [from the adjective..] in a flowing prating
way.
to fort. v. a. [skinner thinks it formed from the sound.]
1. to throw anything with a quick elastick motion.
dick the scavenger
flirts from his cart the mud in walpole's face. swift.
2. to move with quickness.
permit some happier man
to kiss your hand, or firt your fan. dorset.
‘i2 fli r.t. v. n.
1. to jeer; to gibe at one.
2. to run about perpetually ; to be unsteady and fluttering.
flirt. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a quick elastick motion.
in unfurling the fan are several little firts and vibrations,
as also gradual and deliberate openings. addison's spectator.
before you pass th’ imaginary fights
while the spread fan o’ershades your closing eyes,
then give one flirt, and all the vision flies.
2. a sudden trick.
have licence to play,
at the hedge a flirt,
for a sheet or a shift. ben. johnson's gypsies.
3. a pert young hussey.
scurvy knave, i am none of his firt gills; i am none of
his skains mates. shakesp. romeo and julict.
several young firts about town had a design to cast us out
of the fashionable world. addison's guardian.
flirt a’t 10 n. m. s. [from firt.] a quick sprightly motion.
a cant word among women.
a muslin flounce, made very full, would give a very agree-
able firtation air. pope.
to flit. v. m. [from to feet; or from fitter, danish, to re-
move.]
1. to fly away.
likest it seemeth, in my simple wit,
unto the fair sunshine in summer's day,
that when a dreadful storm away is fit, -
through the broad world doth spread his goodly ray. spens.
2. to remove; to migrate. in scotland it is still used for re-
moving from one place to another at quarter-day, or the usual
term. -
pope.
his grudging ghost did strive
with the frail flesh; at last it fitted is, -
whither the souls do die of men that live amiss. fairy qu.
so hardly he the sitted life does win,
unto her native prison to return. fairy queen.
it became a received opinion, that the souls of men, de-
parting this life, did fit out of one body into some other. hook.
3. to flutter; to rove on the wing:
he made a glancing shot, and miss'd the dove;
yet miss’d so narrow, that he cut the cord
which fasten’d, by the foot, the fitting bird. dryd. æn.
fear the just gods, and think of scylla's fate
chang'd to a bird, and sent to fit in air.
4. to be flux or unstable. -
himself uphigh he lifted from the ground,
and with strong flight did forcibly divide
the yielding air, which nigh too feeble found
her fitting parts, and element unsound. fairy queen.
he stopt at once the passage of his wind,
and the free soul to fitting air resign'd. dryden’s aem.
flit. adj. [from fect.] swift ; nimble; quick. not in use.
and in his hand two darts exceeding fit,
and deadly sharp, he held; whose heads were dight,
in poison and in blood, of malice and despight. fairy qu.
flitch. m. s. splicce, saxon; flyoke, danish ; frche, foche,
french. skinner.] the side of a hog salted and cured.
pope.
but heretofore 'twas thought a sumptuous feast,
on birthdays, festivals, or days of state,
a salt dry fitch of bacon to prepare ;
if they had fresh meat, 'twas delicious fare. dryden's juv'.
while he from out the chimney took
a fitch of bacon off the hook,
cut out large slices to be fry’d. swift.
he sometimes accompanies the present with a fitch of bacon.
addison.
fli’t termouse. n.f. [voffertilio ; from fit and mous...] the
bat; the winged mouse.
flitting. m. s. [flic, saxon, scandal.] an offence; a fault;
a failure ; a desert.
thou tellest my fittings, put my tears into thy bottle. psal.
flix. m. s. [corrupted from flax.] down ; fur; soft hair.
with his loll'd tongue he faintly licks his prey;
his warm breath blows her flix up as she lies:
she trembling creeps upon the ground away.
and looks back to him with beseeching eyes.
fli'xwood. n. s. a plant.
to float. v. n. [slotter, french.]
1. to swim on the surface of the water.
when the sea was calm, all boats alike
shew'd mastership in foating. shakespeare's coriolanus.
the ask no more now floats, but seems on ground,
fast on the top of some high mountain fix’d. milton.
that men, being drowned and sunk, do float the ninth day,
when their gall breaketh, are popular affirmations. brown.
three blust'ring nights, born by the southern blast,
i floated; and discover'd land at last. dryden's aen.
his rosy wreath was dropt not long before,
born by the tide of wine, and floating on the floor. dryden.
on frothy billows thousands float the stream,
in cumb’rous mail. phillips.
carp are very apt to float away with fresh water. mortimer.
2. to move without labour in a fluid.
what divine monsters, o ye gods, were these
that float in air, and fly upon the seas dryd. ind. emp,
swift they descend, with wing to wing conjoin'd,
stretch their broad plumes, and float upon the wind. pope.
3. to pass with a light irregular course: perhaps mistaken for
feet or fict.
floating visions make not deep impressions enough to leave
dryden,
in the mind clear, distinet, lasting ideas. locke.
to flo ar. v. a. to cover with water.
- proud pastolus floats the fruitful lands, -
and leaves a rich manure of golden sands. dryden’s aon.
venice looks, at a distance, like a great town half floated
by a deluge. addison on italy.
now smoaks with show’rs the misty mountain-ground,
and floated fields lie undistinguish'd round. pope's statius.
the vast parterres a thousand hands shall make :
lo! cobham comes, and floats them with a lake.
float. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the act of flowing; the flux; the contrary to the ebb. a
sense now out of use.
our trust in the almighty is, that with us contentions are
now at their highest float. hooker, preface.
there is some disposition of bodies to rotation, particularly
from east to west; of which kind we conceive the main
float and refloat of the sea is, which is by consent of the uni-
verse, as part of the diurnal motion. bacon’s nat. hisł.
2. any body so contrived or formed as to swim upon the wa-
ter.
they took it for a ship, and, as it came nearer, for a boat ;
pope.
but it proved a float of weeds and rushes. l’estrange.
a passage for the weary people make;
with osier foats the standing water strow,
of massy stones make bridges, if it flow. dryden's pirgil.
3. the cork or
a fish.
you will find this to be a very choice bait, sometimes cast-
ing a little of it into the place where your float swims. j/alton.
4. a cant word for a level. -
banks are measured by the float or floor, which is eighteen
foot square and one deep. mortimer's hussandy.
flo'at y. adj. buoyant and swimming on the surface.
the hindrance to stay well is the extreme length of a ship,
especially if she be featy, and want sharpness of way forwards.
raleigh's essays.
quill by which the angler discovers the bite of
flock. m. s. [flocc, saxon.] -
1. a company ; usually a company of birds or beasts.
she that hath a heart of that fine frame,
to pay this debt of love but to a brother,
how will she love when the rich golden shaft.
hath kill'd the fock of all affections else
that live in her. shakoff. twelfth night,
2. a company of sheep, distinguished from herds, which are of
oxci1,
the cattle in the ficles, and meadows green,
those rare and softary ; these in flocks
pasturing at once, and in broad herds upsprung. amilton.
- france
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 835</div><p class="text">f l o
france has a sheep by her, to shew that the riches of the
country consisted chiefly in flocks and pasturage.
3. a body of men.
the heathen that had fled out of judea came to nicanor
by flocks. 2 a4ae. xiv. 14.
4. [from foccus.] a lock of wool.
a house well furnish'd shall be thine to keep;
and, for a flock bed, i can sheer my sheep. dryden.
to flock. v. m. [from the noun..] to gather in crowds or
large numbers.
many young gentlemen fock to him every day, and fleet
the time carelesly. shakoff. as you like it.
addison.
upon the return of the ambassadors, the poor of all sorts
ocked together to the great master's house. knollo's hisory.
others ran focking out of their houses to the general sup-
plication.
stilpo, when the people focked about him, and that one
said, the people conje wondering about you, as if it were to
see some forange beast ; no, saith he, it is to see a man which
diogenes sought with his lanthorn at noon-day. bacon.
seeing the spirits swelling the nerves cause the arm's mo-
tion, upon its resistance they flock from other parts of the
body to overcome it. digly on bodies.
the wits of the town came thither;
'twas strange to see how they fock'd together;
each strongly confident of his own way,
thought to gain the laurel that day. suckling.
friends daily fock, dryden's zn.
the trojan youth about the captive fact,
to wonder, or to pity, or to mock. denham.
people do not fock to courts so much for their majesties
service, as for making their fortunes. l’estrange.
to flog. v. a. [from stagrum, latin.] to lash; to whip;
to chastise.
the schoolmaster's joy is to flag. -
flong, particip. passive, from to fing, used by spensor.
flood. m. s. [elob, saxon; flot, french.]
1. a body of water; the sea; a river.
what need the bridge much broader than the food? shak.
his dominion shall be also from the one sea to the other, and
from the food unto the world's end. psalm lxxii. 8.
or thence from niger flood unto atlas mount, .
the kingdoms of almanzor, fez, and sus. milton.
- all dwellings else
flood overwhelm’d, and them with all their pomp
deep under water roll'd ; sea cover'd sea,
sea without shore. - milton's paradis, loft.
arcadia's flow'ry plains and pleasing foods. dryden's wirg.
2: a deluge; an inundation.
you see this confluence; this great flood of visiters. shak.
by sudden foods, and fall of waters,
buckingham's army is dispers'd and scatter'd. shak. r. iii.
3. flow; flux ; not ebb ; not reflux ; the swelling of a river by
rain or inland flood."
we seek to know the moving of each sphere,
and the strange cause o' th' ebbs and foods of nile. davies.
4. the general deluge. -
when went there by an age since the great flood,
but it was fam'd with more than with one man shakesp.
it is commonly opinioned that the earth was thinly inha-
bited before the food. brown's wulgar errours.
5. catamenia. -
those that have the good fortune of miscarrying, or being
delivered, escape by means of their floods, revelling the hu-
mours from their lungs. harvey on consumptions.
to flood. v. a. [from the noun..] to deluge; to cover with
water s,
where meadows are flooded late in spring, roll them with a
large barley-roller. - mortimer's husbandry.
flood gate. n.s. [food and gate.] gate or shutter by which
the watercourse is closed or opened at pleasure.
as if the opening of her mouth had opened some great
floodgate of sorrow, whereof her heart could not abide the vi-
swift.
olent issue, she sunk to the ground. sidney.
yet there the steel staid not; but inly bate
deep in his flesh, and opened wide a red floodgate. spensor.
his youth, and want of experience in maritime service,
had somewhat been shrewdly touched, even before the sluices
and floodgates of popular liberty were yet set open. j7%tton.
the rain descended for forty days, the cataracts %.
gates of heaven being opened. burnet's theory.
flook. n.s.. [tfug, a plow, german.]
1. the broad part of the anchor which takes hold of the ground.
2. a flounder; a flat river fish.
floor. m. s. [flon, plore, saxon.]
1. the pavement: a pavement is always of stone, the floor of
wood or stone; the part om which one treads.
his stepmother, making all her gestures counterfeit affliction,
lay almost groveling upon the floor of her chamber. sidney.
he rent that iron door
where entered in, his foot could find no floor,
fairy queen,
but all a deep descent as dark as hell.
vol. i. -
2 mac. iii. 18.
. to flou nce. v. a.
look how the floor of heav'n
i thick inlay'd with patens of bright gold: .
there's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st,
but in his motion like an angel sings,
still quiring to the young ey'd cherubims.
the ground lay strewed with pikes so thick as a for is
usually strewed with rushes, hayward.
he winnoweth barley to-night in the threshing floor. rush.
2. a story; a flight of rooms.
he that building stays at one
floor, or the second, hath erected none.
to floo r.
a floor. -
hewn stone and timber to floor the houses. 2 chron, xxxiv.
flo'oring. m. s. [from for.] bottom ; pavement.
the flooring is a kind of red plaster made of boi-k, ground
to powder, and afterwards worked into mortar, addison.
74 fior. v. 4. [from flap.] . to clap the wings with no,
to play with any noisy motion of a broad body.
a blackbird was frighted almost to death with a huge flop-
ing kite that she saw over her head. l'eoran'.
flo ral, adj. [sioralis, latin.] relating to flora, or to fiewis.
let one great day
to celebrated sports and foral play
be set aside. prior.
flo'rence. n.s. [from the city florence..] a kind of cloth.
- - dici.
flo'ren. m. s. so named, says camdo, because made by flo-
rentines.) a gold coin of edward iii, in volue six shilliogs.
floor et. n.s.. [fieurette, french.) a snall imperfect flower.
fio'r1d. adj. [floridus, latin. j -
1. productive of flowers; covered with flowers.
2. bright in colour; flushed with red.
our beauty is in colour inferiour to many flowers; and
when it is most florid and gay, three fits of an ague can change
it into yellowness and leanness. taylor’s rul, of living holy.
the qualities of blood in a healthy state are to be sioril,
when let out of the vessel, the red part congealing strongly
and soon. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. embellished; splendid; brilliant with del oration.
the frid, clevated, and figurative way is for the passions;
for love and hatred, fear and anger, are begotten in the soul,
by shewing their objects out of their true proportion. drydon.
how did, pray, the fori l youth offend,
whose speech you took, and gave it to a friend ?
floodity. n.s.. [from forid.] freshness of colour.
there is a foridity in the face from the good digestion of
the red part of the blood. floyer on the humours,
flo r1dnfss. n. s. [from florid.]
1. freshness of colour.
2. embellishment; ambitious elegance,
though a philosopher need not delight readers with his
• foridness, yet he may take a care that he disgust them not by
flatness. boyle.
flor (ef rous. adj. [for for, latin.] produclive of flower.
flq rin. m. s. [french..] a coin first made by the floren-
tines. . that of germany is in value 2 s. 4d. that of spain
4:46, halfpenny; that of palermo and sicily 2 s. 6d. that
of holland 2 s. -
a florin
os.
shaoffeare.
johnson's catiline.
v. a. [from the noun..] to cover the bottom with
pope.
in the imperial chamber the proetors have half
taxed and allowed them for every substantial recess.
flo'rist. m. s. [fleurisle, french..] a cultivater of flowers.
some botanists or floriffs at the least. dunciad.
and while they break -
on the charm'd eye, th’ exulting forff marks
with secret pride the wonders of his hand. thomson.
flo rulent. adj. [foris, latin.] flowery; blossoming.
flo'sculous. adj. [fosculus, latin.] composed of flowers;
having the nature or form of flowers.
the outward part is a thick and carnous covering, and the
second a dry and fiosculous coat. brown's sugar errours.
to flot e. v. a. [see to feet.] to skim.
such cheeses, good cisley, ye footed too nigh. tisor.
floorsos. m. s. [from fate.] goods that swim without an
owner on the sea.
flo'tten. part. [from fate.] skimmed.
to flounce. v. n. [plansen, dutch, to plunge.]
1. to move with violence in the water or mire 5 to struggle or
dash in the water. .
with his broad fins and forky tail he laves
the rising surge, and founces in the waves. adjon’s cod.
2. to move with weight and tumult.
six founcing flanders inares
skinner.
are e'en as good as any two of theirs. prior.
3. to move with passionate agitation.
when i’m dulier than a post,
nor can the plainest word pronounce, -
you neither fume, nor fret, nor science. wift.
to deck with flounces.
she was founc. and furbelowed from head to foot; every
ribbon was crinkled, and every part of eer garments in curl.
adijon's speciator.
9 k tirey
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 836</div><p class="text">f l o
ion of founcing the pettico. so
very deep, that it looks like an entire coat of luteftring. pope.
flooscons [from the verb.] oy thing sewed to the gar-
ment, and hanging loose, so *.* swell and shake.
nay, oft in dreams invention we bestow,
they have got into the fash
tonge afounce, or add a furbelow. pope.
*:::::::::: made very full, would be very ago.
pope.
ble. -
four. n.f. [synder, danish; fluke, scottish.j the name
of a small flat fish. - -
like the founder, out of the frying-pan into the fire. camd.
fowill both thrive and breedin any pond. mortimer.
t, flounder. v. n. [from founct.] to struggle with violent
and irregular motions: as a horse in the mire.
down goes at once the horseman and the horse ;
that courser stumbles on the fallen steed,
and found'ring throws the rider o'er his head. dryden.
the more inform'd, the less he understood,
and deeper sunk by found'ring in the mud. dryden.
he plung'd for sense, but found no bottom there;
then writ and founder'd on, in melo despair. pope.
7, flo urish. v. n. [fore, foresco, latin.]
1. to be in vigour; not to fade. --
the righteous shall figurish like the palm-tree; ps, xcii.
where'er you tread, the blushing flow’rs shall rise,
and all things flourish where you turn your eyes.
2. to be in a prosperous state.
if i could find example
of thousands, that had struck anointed kings,
and sourish'd aster, i’d not do’t: but since
nor brass, nor stone, nor parchment, bears not one,
let villany itself forswear't; shakesp. iwinter's tale.
harry, that prophesied thou should'st be king,
doth comfort thee in sleep; live thou and flourish. shakoff.
he was the patron of my manhood, when i flourished in the
opinion of the world, though with small advantage to my for-
tune. dryden's dedicat, to lord clifford.
bad men as frequently prosper and flourish, and that by the
means of their wickedness. nelson.
3. to use florid language; to speak with ambitious copiousness
and elegance.
whilst cicero ads the part of a rhetorician, he dilates and
fourishes, and gives example instead of rule. baker.
they dilate sometimes, and flourish long upon little inci-
dents, and they skip over and but lightly touch the drier part
of their theme. watts's logick.
4. to describe various figures by intersecting lines; to play in
wanton and irregular motions.
impetuous spread
the stream and smoaking, flourish'd o'er his head.
5. to boast; to brag.
a. [in musick.] to play some prelude without any settled
rule.
to flourish. v. a.
1. to adorn with vegetable beauty.
with shadowy verdure flourish’d high,
a sudden youth the groves enjoy.
2. to adorn with figures of needle work.
. to work with a needle into figures.
all that i shall say will be but like bottoms of thread close
wound up, which, with a good needle, perhaps may be flou-
rished into large works. bacon's war with spain.
4. to move any thing in quick circles or vibrations by way of
show or triumph.
and all the powers of hell in full applause
flourish'd their snakes, and toss'd their flaming brands.
crashaw.
against the post their wicker shields they crush,
flourish the sword, and at the plastron push. dryden's juv.
5. to adorn with embellishments of language 3 to grace with
eloquence ostentatiously diffusive.
the labours of hercules, though flourished with much fa-
bulous matter; yet notably set forth the consent of all nations
and ages in the approbation of the extirpating and debellating
giants, monsters and tyrants. bacon.
pope.
pope.
fenton.
as they are likely to over-flourish their own case, so their
flattery is hardest to be discovered.
6. to adorn; to embellish; to grace.
to bring you thus together, 'tis no sin,
s.. the i. of your title to him
oth flourish the deceit. shakesp. measu -
flo'urish. o [from the verb.] sp 'sure for measure.
1, bravery; beauty; ambitious splendour.
l call'd thee then vain flourish of my fortune;
i call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen,
the presentation of but what i was. shakesp. richard iii.
the flourish of his sober youth,
was the pride of naked truth. crashaw.
2. ah ofteatatious embellishment; ambitious copiousness; far-
fetched elegance. - &gt;
collier.
.
*-*.
of . this is a flourish: there follow excellent parables. bacon.
- we can excuse the duty of our knowledge, if we only
bestow the furio of poetry thereon, or those
- - - - co
conceits which popularly set forth the emion: :
ture. - - brown's pulgar emir.
the ap rehension is so deeply rivetted into my mind rf,
such rhetorical flourishes cannot at all loosen or brùshi o
* - roa • *
more's divine dialogue: -
villanies have not the same countenance,
- when
great interests, plausible colours, and there are
ourishes of wit and
rhetorick interposed between the sight and the object l'eff, -
the so much repeated ornament and flour; -
mer speeches was ao; the truest *::: o . o:
least believed by them. ... tho
studious to please the genius of the time.”
with periods, points, and tropes he slurs hi. c
he lards with flourishes his long harangue;
'tis fine, say'st thou ; what, to be prais'd and h
3. figures formed by lines curiously or wantonly d
a child with delight looks upon emblems finely di.
painted, and takes some pleasure in beholding § o o
raders and flourishes of a bible curiously printed. i 2-
they were intended only for ludicrous ornaments .#
ture, like the flourishes about a great letter that signify not! hi-
but are made only to delight the eye. more .
flourisher. n.f. [from flourish.] one that i. ; #.
in prosperity. prime of
they count him of the green-hair’d eld, the
his flow'r;
for not our greatest flourisher can equal him in pow;
hman', ii,
to flout. o. a. [fuyten, dutch; a...of *
mock; to insult; to treat with moskery and contem; q
you must flout my insufficiency. shift.
a o: norweyan banners flout the sky, part.
nd fan our people cold. shakeshear.'
c he o us when he begg'd our *
ertainly he flouted us downright. shakes, chrilan,
she railed at her, that she should be so it: o:
rimes :
mes;
ang? dryd.
sawn.
y may, or in
one she knew would flout her. shak
phillida flouts me. o:
to flout. v. n.
tempt; to sneer.
though nature hath given us wit to flout at fortune, hath
not fortune sent in this fool to cut off this argument? soft.
with talents well endu’d
to be scurrilous and rude;
when you pertly raise your snout,
to practise mockery; to behave with con-
fleer and gibe, and laugh and fieut. saft,
flout. n.s.. [from the verb.] a mock; an insult; a word or
act of contempt.
he would ask of those that had been at the other's table,
tell truly, was there never a flout or dry blow given? bao,
she opened it, and read it out,
with many a smile and leering flout,
their doors are barr'd against a bitters:
snarl, if you please; but you shall snars without. dja.
how many flouts and jeers must i expose myself to by this
repentance how shall i answer such an old acquaintance
when he invites me to an intemperate cup calamy's strm.
flog ter. m. s. [from flout.j. one who jeers.
to flow. v. n. [flopan, saxon.]
1. to run or spread as water.
the god am i, whose yellow water fow:
around these fields, and fattens as it goes.
fields of light and liquid ether flow,
purg'd from the pond’rous dregs of earth below. drydo.
endless tearsso down in streams. swift.
2. to run : opposed to standing waters. -
with offer floats the standing water strow;
of massy stones make bridges, if it flow. dryden,
3. to rise; not to ebb. . . o 1 - 1 - so
this river hath thrice flow'd, no ebb between. shaft.
4. to melt. - a -
oh that thou woulds rent the heavens, that the ""
might flow down at thy presence. i. six, i.
5. to proceed ; to issue. - &gt;
* - i’ll use that tongue i have: if wit flow from t , t.
i shall do good. - shaoffeare's so o
the knowledge drawn from experience is quite o:
kind from that which flows fom speculation's discoso. -
6. to glide smoothly without asperity: *, */* per &amp;n
this discourse of cyprian, and the flowo of o:
it, shew him to have been of a great wit o' so
quence. - hair:till to pro*
. to write smoothly; to speak volubly. -
7 virgil is sweet #o in his hexamsters' djo.
. . . did sweeter sounds adorn my flowing tongue prior,
than ever man pronounc'd, or ango "8"
hudira,
dryden's an.
8. to abound; to be crowded. chomson.
the dry streets flow'd with men. *:
9. to be copious; to be full.
- then shall our names,..., §4. ho: w.
be in their flowing cups freshly remember'. “those
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 837</div><p class="text">f l o
* f l o-
there ev'ry eye with slumb’rous chains she bound,
and dash'd the flowing goblet to the ground. pope's odyssey.
ro. to hang loose and waving.
he was cloathed in a flowing mantle of green silk, inter-
woven with flowers. speciator.
to flow. v. a. to overflow ; to deluge.
watering hops is scarce practicable, unless you have a
stream at hand to fow the ground. mortimer's husbandry.
flow. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the rise of water ; not the ebb.
some, from the diurnal and annual motion of the earth,
endeavour to solve the fiews and motions of these seas, illus-
trating the same by water in a bowl, that rises or falls accord-
ing to the motion of the vessel. brown's pulgar errours.
the ebb of tides, and their mysterious flow,
we as arts elements shall understand. dryden's ain. mirab.
2. a sudden plenty or abundance.
the noble power of suffering bravely is as far above that
of enterprising greatly, as an unblemished conscience and in-
flexible resolution are above an accidental flow of spirits, or a
sudden tide of blood. pope.
3. a stream of diction; volubility of tongue.
teaching is not a flow of words, nor the draining of an
hour-glass ; but an effectual procuring that a man know some-
thing which he knew not before, or to know it better. south.
flower. m. s. [feur, french; fos, fores, latin.]
1. the part of a plant which contains the seeds.
such are reckoned perfect flowers which have petala, a
stamen, apex and stylus ; and whatever flower wants either of
these is reckoned imperfect. perfect fowers are divided into
. fimple ones, which are not composed of other smaller, and
which usually have but one single stile; and compounded,
which consist of many flosculi, all making but one flower.
simple flowers are monopetalous, which have the body of the
flower all of one entire leaf though sometimes cut or divided
a little way into many seeming petala, or leaves; as in borage,
buglos: or polypetalous, which have distinet petala, and those
falling off singly, and not all together, as the seeming petala
of monopetalous flowers always do; but those are further di-
vided into uniform, and difform flowers : the former have their
right and left hand parts, and the forward and backward parts
all alike; but the difform have no such regularity, as in the
flowers of sage and deadnettle. a monopetalous difform fower
is likewise further divided into, first, semi-fistular, whose up-
per part resembles a pipe cut off obliquely, as in the arilo-
istochia: 2d, labiate; and this either with one lip only, as in
the acanthum and scordium, or with two lips, as in the far
greater part of the labiate flowers: and here the upper lip is
isometimes turned upwards, and so turns the convex part
downwards, as in the chamaecisius; but most commonly the
upper lip is convex above, and turns the hollow part down to
its fellow below, and represents a kind of helmet, or monks-
hood; and from thence these are frequently called galleate,
cucullate, and galericulate flowers ; and in this form are the
flowers of the lamium, and most verticillate plants. some-
times the lamium is intire, and sometimes jagged or divided.
3d, corniculate; that is, such hollow flowers as have on their
upper part a kind of spur, or little horn, as the linaria, del-
phinum, &amp;c. and the carniculum, or calcar, is always imper-
vious at the tip or point. compounded flowers are, first,
discous, or discoidal; that is, whose flosculi are set so close,
thick, and even, as to make the surface of the flower plain
and flat, which, because of its round form, will be like a
discus; which disk is sometimes radiated, when there is a
row of petala standing round in the disk, like the points of a
ftar, as in the matricaria, chamaemelum, &amp;c. and sometimes
naked, having no such radiating leaves round the limb of
its disk, as in the tanacetum: 2d, planifolious, which is com-
posed of plain flowers, set together in circular rows round the
centre, and whose face is usually indented, notched, and jag-
ged, as the hieracia. 3d, fistular, which is compounded of
iong hollow little flowers, like pipes, all divided into large
jags at the ends. imperfect flowers, because they want the
petala, are called stamineous, apetalous, and capillaceous ;
and those which hang pendulous by fine threads, like the juli,
are by tournefort called amentaceous, and we call them cats-
tail. " the term campaniformis is used for such as are in the
shape of a bell, and infundibuliformis for such as are in the
form of a funnel. miller.
good men’s lives
expire before the flowers in their caps,
dying or ere they ficken. shakespeare's macbeth.
with flow'r inwoven tresses torn,
the nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.
milton.
beauteous flow’rs why do we spread
upon the monuments of the dead. cowley.
though the same sun with all-diffusive rays
blush in the rose, and in the diamond blaze,
we praise the stronger effort of his power,
and always set the gem above the flower. pope.
i
if the blossom of the plant be of most importance, we call
it a flower; such are daisies, tulips, and carnations. i/atts.
2. an ornament; an embellishment. -
the nomination of persons to those places being so prime
and inseparable a flower of his crown, he would reserve to
himself. * - clarendon.
this discourse of cyprian, and the excellent flowers of rhe-
torick in it, shew him to have been a sweet and powerful
orator. hakewill on providence.
truth needs no flow’rs of speech. pope.
3. the prime; the flourishing part.
alas! young man, your days can ne'er be long:
in sow'r of age you perish for a song. pope's horace impr.
4. the edible part of corn; the meal.
the bread i would have in flower, so as it might be baked
still to serve their necessary want. spensor on ireland.
i can make my audit up, that all
from me do back receive the slow'r of all,
and leave me but the bran. shakos care's coriolanus.
the flowers of grains, mixed with w.ter, will make a sort
of glue. ar!:/thnot on aliments.
but by thy care twelve urns of wine be fill’d,
next these in worth, and firm those urns be seal’d ;
be twice ten measures of the choicest four -
prepar’d, ere yet descends the evening hour. pope's odyssey.
5. the most excellent or valuable part of any thing; quin-
tessence.
the choice and flower of all things profitable the psalms
do more briefly contain, and more movingly express, by rea-
son of their poetical form. phooker.
thou hast slain
the flower of europe for his chivalry. shakesp. henry vi.
the french monarchy is exhausted of its bravest subjects:
the flower of the nation is consumed in its wars. addison.
6. that which is most distinguished for anything valuable.
he is not the flower of courtesy, but, i warrant him, as
gentle as a lamb. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
flow er de luce. n.s. a bulbous iris.
miller specifies thirty-four species of this plant; and among
them the peisian flower de luce is greatly esteemed for the sweet-
ness and beauty of its variegated flowers, which are in per-
fection in february, or the beginning of march.
crop'd are the flower de luces in your arms;
of england's coat one half is cut away. shakesp. henry vi.
the iris is the flower de luce. peacham.
to flow er. v. n. [sieurir, french ; or from the noun.]
1. to be in flower ; to be in blossom ; to bloon; to put forth
flowers.
so forth they marched in this goodly sort,
to take the solace of the open air, -
and in fresh flowering fields themselves to sport. fairy qu.
sacred fill, whose head full high,
is, as it were, for endless memory
of that dear lord, who oft thereon was found,
for ever with a flow'ring garland crown'd. fairy queen,
then herbs of every leaf, that sudden flower'd, -
op'ning their various colours. milton's paradise loft.
mark well the flow'ring almonds in the wood,
if od’rous blooms the bearing branches load. dryd. georg.
to leafless shrubs the flow'ring palms succeed,
and od’rous myrtle to the noisome weed. pope's mosiah.
2. to be in the prime; to flourish.
whilome in youth, when flower'd my youthful spring,
like swallow swift, i wandered here and there;
for heat of heedless lust me did so sting,
that i of doubted danger had no fear. spenser.
this cause detain'd me all my flow'ring youth,
within a loathsome dungeon there to pine. shak. hen. vi.
3. to froth ; to ferment; to mantle, as new bottled beer.
those above water were the best, and that beer did flower
a little ; whereas that under water did not, though it were
fresh. bacon's natural history.
an extreme clarification doth spread the spirits so smooth
that they become dull, and the drink dead, which ought to
have a little flowering. bacon's natural history.
4. to come as cream from the surface.
if you can accept of these few observations, which have
flowered off, and are, as it were, the burnishing of many stu-
dious and contemplative years, i here give you them to dispose
of. milton on education.
to flow er. v. a. [from the noun..] to adorn with fictitious
or imitated flowers.
flow erage. m. s. [from flower.] store of flowers. dic7.
flow eret. n.s. [.
fleuret, french..] a flower ; a small flower.
sometimes her head she fondly would aguie
with gaudy garlands, or fresh flow'rets dight,
about her neck, or rings of rushes plight. fairy &amp;cen.
that same dew, which sometime on the buds
was wont to swell, like round and orient pearls,
stood now within the pretty flow'ret's eyes, -
like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. so
- q
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 838</div><p class="text">f l u
f l u
so to the sylvan lodge -
they came, that like #. arbour snil'd,
with flow'rets deck'd, and fragrant smells. milt. par: loft.
then laughs the childish year with flow'rets crown'd,
and lavishly perfumes the fields around;
but no substantial nourishment receives,
infirm the stalks, unsolid are the leaves.
flower gardes. m. s. [slower and garden.]
which flowers are principally cultivated.
observing that this manure produced flowers in the field,
i made my gardener try those shells in my flowergarden, and i
never saw better carnations or flowers. mortimer's husbandry.
flow er in ess. n. s. [from flowery.]
1. the state of abounding in flowels.
2. floridness of speech.
flow er ing bush. m. s. a plant. -
flow ery. adj. [from flower.] full of flowers; adorned with
flowers real or fictitious.
my mother circe, with the syrens three,
amid'st the flow'ry kirtl’d naiades.
day's harbinger
comes dancing from the east, and leads with her
the slow'ry may, who from her green lap throws
the yellow cowslip and the pale primrose. milton.
o'er his fair limbs a flow'ry vest he threw. pope's odyssey.
to her the shady grove, the flow'ry field,
the streams and fountains, no delight could yield. , pope.
flow is gly. adv. [from flow.] with volubility; with abun-
dance.
flowk. n.s.. [suke, scott.] a flounder; the name of a fish.
amongst these the £owk, sole, and plaice follow the tide up
into the fresh waters. carew's survey of cornwal.
flowk worr. m. s. the name of a plant.
flow n. participie of fly, or flee, they being confounded ; pro-
perly of fy.
1. gone away.
dryden's fables.
a garden in
milton.
for those, -
appointed to fit there, had left their charge, -
plown to the upper world. milton's paradis. loft.
where, my deluded sense ! was reason flown p
where the high majesty of david's throne :
2. puffed ; inflated; elate.
and when night
darkens the streets, then wander forth the sons
of belial, flown with insolence and wine.
is this a bridal or a friendly feast :
or from your deeds i rightly may divine,
unseemly flown with insolence or wine. pope.
flu'ctuant. adj. [fuciuans, latin.] wavering ; uncertain.
to be longing for this thing to-day, and for that thing to-
morrow ; to change likings for loathings, and to stand wish-
ing and hankering at a venture, how is it possible for any man
to be at rest in this fuciuant wandering humour and opinion?
l'e/irange.
prior.
milton.
t, flu'ctuate. v. n. [fuciuo, latin.]
1. to roll to and again as water in agitation.
the fivouating fields of liquid air,
with all the curious meteors hov'ring there,
and the wide regions of the land, proclaim
the pow'r divine, that rais'd the mighty frame. blackmore.
2. to float backward and forward, as with the motion of water.
3. to move with uncertain and hasty motion.
the tempter
new part puts on ; and, as to passion mov’d,
fluctuates disturb’d. milton's paradise loft.
4. to be in an uncertain state; to feel sudden vicissitudes.
as the greatest part of my estate has been hitherto of an
unsteady and volatile nature, either tost upon seas, or fuc-
tuating in funds, it is now fixed and settled in substantial acres
and tenements. addison's speciator.
5. to be irresolute; to be undetermined.
flucru aorio n. m. s. [fuctuatio, latin ; fuciuation, french;
from fucuate.]
1. the alternate motion of the water.
flussuations are but motions subservient, which winds, storms,
shores, shelves, and every interjacency irregulates. brown.
they were caused by the impulses and fuciuation of water
in the bowels of the earth. //oodward's natural history.
2. uncertainty; indetermination.
it will not hinder it from making a proselyte of a person,
that loves fluctuation of judgment little enough to be willing
to be eased of it by anything but errour. boyle.
flu e. m. s. [a word of which i know not the etymology, un-
less it be derived from few of fly.]
1. a small pipe or chimney to convey air, heat, or smoke.
2. soft down or fur, such as may fly in the wind.
flu e'llin. m. s. the herb speedwell.
flu'en cy. n.s.. [from fluent.]
1. the quality of flowing; smoothness; freedom from harsh-
ness or asperity.
fluency of numbers, and most expresfive figures for the
poet, mospla for the serious, and pleasantries for admire's of
points of wit. garth’s prosace to ovid.
2. readiness; copiousness ; volubility. o
qur publick liturgy must be cashiered, the better to please
those men who gloried in their extemporary vein and fuency.
- aing coars.
we reason with such fiuency and fire,
the beaux we baffle, and the learned tire. 7ickel.
the common fluency of speech in inary men, and most wo–.
men, is owing to a scarcity of matter, and a scarcity of words;
for whoever is a master of language, and hath a mind full of
ideas, will be apt, in speaking, to hesitate upon the choice of
both. swift's thoughts on various subjecis.
3. affluence; abundance. this sense is obsolete.
those who grow old in fluency and ease,
behold him tost on seas. sandys's paraphras on job.
god riches and renown to men imparts,
even all they wish; and yet their narrow hearts
cannot so great a fluency receive,
but their fruition to a stranger leave.
flu'ent. adj. [fluens, latin.]
1. liquid.
it is not malleable; but yet is not fluid, but stupified. bacon.
2. flowing ; in motion; in flux.
motion being a fluent thing, and one part of its duration
being independent upon another, it doth not follow that be-
cause any thing moves this moment, it must do so the next. .
ray on the creation.
sa'īd;;.
3. ready; copious ; voluble.
those have some natural dispositions, which have better
grace in youth than in age, such as is a fluent and luxurious
speech. bacon.
i shall lay before you all that's within me,
and with most fluent utterance. denham's sophy.
flu'ent. m. s. stream; running water.
confiding in their hands, that sed’lous strive
to cut th’ outrageous fluent ; in this distress,
ev’n in the fight of death. phillips.
flu'ently. adv. [from fluent.] with ready flow; volubly;
readily; without obstruction or difficulty.
fluid. adj. [fluidus, latin; fuide, french.] having parts
easily separable; not solid.
or serve they as a flow'ry verge to bind
the fluid skirts of that same wat'ry cloud,
lest it again dissolve, and show'r the earth
if particles slip easily, and are of a fit size to be agitated by
heat, and the heat is big enough to keep them in agitation,
the body is fluid; and if it be apt to stick to things, it is
humid. newton's cpt.
flu'id. n.s. -
1. anything not solid.
2. [in physick.] any animal juice : as the blood.
consider how luxury hath introduced new diseases, and
with them, not improbably, altered the whole course of the
fuids. arbuthnot and pope's mart. scritlerus.
flu'id it y. m. s. [fluidite, fr. from fluid..] the quality in bo-
dies opposite to stability; want of coherence between the parts.
heat promotes fluidity very much, by diminishing the tena-
city of bodies: it makes many bodies fluid, which are not fluid
in cold, and increases the fluidity of tenacious liquids; as of
oil, balsam and honey; and theieby decreases their resistance.
newton's opt.
a disease opposite to this spiffitude is too great fuidity. arb.
flu'idness. n. s. [from fluid...] that quality in bodies oppo-
site to stability. -
what if we should say that fuidnes; and stability depends
so much upon the texture of the parts, that, by the change of
that texture, the same parts may be made to constitute either a
fluid or a dry body, and that permanently too
flu'mmer.y. m. s. a kind of food made by coagulation of
wheatflower or oatmeal.
milk and flammery are very fit for children. locke.
flung. participle and preterite of fing. thrown; cast.
several statues the romans themselves foung into the river.
when they would revenge themselves. addison on italy.
flu or. m. s. [latin.]
i. a fluid state. - -
the particles of fluids which do not cohere too strongly.
and are of such a smallness as renders them most susceptible of
those agitations which keep liquors in a fluor, are most easily
separated and rarified into vapours. newton's opt.
2. catamenia.
flu'rry. n.s.
1. a gust or storm of wind; a hasty blast.
the boat was overset by a sudden furry from the north.
swift.
2. hurry; a violent commotion.
to flush. v. n. [fuysen, dutch, to flow ; flus, or flux, fr.]
1. to flow with violence.
the pulse of the heart he attributes to an ebullition and
sudden expansion of the blood in the ventricles, after the man-
milton.
boyle.
o
. t.
que
frot
3. to
incr
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 839</div><p class="text">f l u
f l y
*
ner of the milk, which, being heated to such a degree, doth
fuddenly, and all at once, flush up and run over the vessel. ray.
it fushes violently out of the cock for about a quart, and
then stops. martimer’s husbandry.
2. to come in haste.
if the place but affords
any store of lucky birds,
as i make 'em to flush,
each owl out of his bush. ben. johnson's owls.
3. to glow in the skin; to produce a colour in the face by a
sudden afflux of blood. it is properly used of a sudden or
transient heat of countenance; not of a settled complexion.
ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
had left the fushing in her gauled eyes,
she married. shakespeare's hamlet.
thus eve with count'nance blithe her story told,
but in her cheek distemperfushing glow’d. milton.
what can be more fignificant than the sudden flushing and
confusion of a blush collier of the aspect.
what means that lovely fruit? what means, alas !
that blood, which flushes guilty in your face dryden.
at once, array'd
in all the colours of the flushing year,
the garden glows.
4. to shine suddenly. obsolete. -
a flake of fire that flushing in his beard,
him all amaz'd. '
to flush. v. a.
1. to colour; to redden : properly to redden suddenly.
the glowing dames of zama's royal court,
have faces flush'd with more exalted charms.
some court, or secret corner seek,
nor fish with shame the passing virgin's cheek. gay's triv.
2. to elate ; to elevate ; to give the appearance of sudden joy.
a prosperous people, fushed with great victories and suc-
cesses, are rarely known to confine their joys within the
bounds of moderation and innocence. * atterbury's sermons.
flush. adj.
1. fresh ; full of vigour.
he took my father grosly, full of bread,
with all his crimes broad blown, and flush as may;
and how his audit stands, who knows, save heav'n 2 shak.
i love to wear cloths that are flush,
not prefacing old rags with plush. o'
2. affluent ; abounding. a cant word. -
lord strut was not very flush in ready, either to go to law
or clear old debts ; neither could he find good bail. arbuthnot.
flush. m. s. - -
1. aflux; sudden impulse; violent flow. this is commonly
corrupted toso. as, a flash of water.
never had any man such a loss, cries a widower, in the
fush of his extravagancies for a dead wife. l’estrange.
the pulse of the arteries is not only caused by the pulsation
of the heart, driving the blood through them in manner of a
wave or flush, but by the coats of the arteries themselves. ray.
success may give him a present flush of joy; but when the
fhort transport is over, the apprehension of losing succeeds to
the care of acquiring. rogers's sermons,
2. cards all of a sort.
to flu'ster. v. a. [from to flush.] to make hot and rosy
with drinking; to make half drunk.
three lads of cyprus, noble swelling spirits,
have i to-night fluffer'd with flowing cups,
and they watch too. shakespeare's othello.
flute, n.s.. [ftufte, flute, french ; fluyte, dutch.]
1. a musical pipe; a pipe with stops for the fingers.
th’ oars were silver,
. which to the tune of flutes kept stroke. shak. ant, and cleo.
the soft complaining flute - -
in dying notes discovers
the woes of hopeless lovers, -
whose dirge is whisper'd by the warbling lute. dryden.
2. a channel or furrow in a pillar, like the concave of a flute split.
to flute. v. a. to cut columns into hollows.
to flutter. v. n. [flozeman, saxon; flotter, french.]
1. to take short flights with great agitation of the wings.
as an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
and spreadeth abroad her wings, so the lord alone did lead
thomson's spring.
spensor.
addis. cato.
cleaveland.
hirn. deut. xxxii. 11.
think you've an angel by the wings; *.
one that gladly will be nigh, - -
to wait upon each morning-sigh; o
! to flutter in the balmy air
of your well-perfumed pray’r. crashaw.
| hey fed, and, futt'ring, by degrees withdrew. dryden.
2. to move about with great show and bustle without conse-
quence.
excess muddies the best wit, and only makes it flutter and
footh high. grew.
no rag, no scrap of all the beau or wit,
that once so flutter'd, and that once so writ. pope's dunc.
3. to be moved with quick vibrations or undulations.
. vol. i. -
ye spirits! to your charge repair;
the flutt'ring fan be zephyretta's care,
they the tall mast above the vessel rear,
or teach the flutt'ring sail to float in air. pope', odyssey.
4. to be in agitation; to move irregularly; to be in a floof
uncertainty.
the relation being brought him what a glorious victory
woo got, and how long she fluttered upon the wings of doubt".
ful success, he was not surprised. howel's wocal fores.
it is impossible that men should certainly discover the agree-
ment or disagreement of ideas, whilst their thoughts flutter
about, or stick only in sounds of doubtful fignification. l.f.
esteem we these, my friends ! event and chance,
produc’d by atoms from their flutt'ring dance 1 prior.
his thoughts are very fluttering and wandering, and cannot
be fixed attentively to a few ideas successively. jwatts.
to flu"tter. v. a. -
i. to drive in disorder, like a flock of birds suddenly roused.
like an eagle in a dovecoat, i
flutter'd your volscians in corioli.
2. to hurry the mind.
3. to disorder the position of anything.
flutter. n.s. [from the verb.]
i. vibration ; undulation; quick and irregular motion,
an infinite variety of motions are to be made use of in the
futter of a fan : there is the angry flutter, the modest flutter,
and the timorous flutter. addison's spectator.
2. hurry; tumult; disorder of mind.
3. confusion; irregular position.
{{{wa tick: adj issuviaticus, latin.] belonging to rivers.
flux. m. s. [fluxus, latin; flux, french.]
1. the act of flowing ; passage.
the simple and primary motion of fire is a flux, in a direct
line from the centre of the fuel to its circumference, digby.
by the perpetual flux of the liquids, a great part of them is
thrown out of the body. arbuthnot.
2. the state of passing away and giving place to others.
whether the heat of the sun in animals whose parts are suc-
coffive, and in a continual flux, can produce a deep and perfect
gloss of blackness. - brown's vulgar errours.
what the stated rate of interest should be, in the constant
change of affairs, and fux of money, is hard to determine.
locke.
in the constituent matter of one body, turning naturally to
another like body, the stock or fund can never be exhausted,
nor the flux and alteration sensible. j%odward.
languages, like our bodies, are in a perpetual flux, and
stand in need of recruits to supply those words that are con-
pope,
shakesp. coriolanus,
tinually falling. felton on the classicks.
3. any flow or issue of matter. - *
quinces stop fluxes of blood. arbuthnot on diet.
4. dysentery; disease in which the bowels are excoriated and
bleed; bloody flux.
eat eastern spice, secure
from burning fuxes and hot calenture. hallifax.
5. excrement; that which falls from bodies.
civet is the very uncleanly flux of a cat. shakespeare.
6. concourse; confluence.
left and abandon'd of his velvet friends;
'tis right, quoth he , thus misery doth part
the flux of company. . shakesp. as you like it.
7. the state of being melted.
8. that which mingled with a body makes it melt.
flux, adj. [fuxus, latin.] unconstant; not durable; main-
tained by a constant succession of parts.
to flux. v. a. * , a
1. to melt. -
2. to salivate ; to evacuate by spitting. -
he might fashionably and genteelly have been duelled or
fluxed into another world. * -- south.
fluxi'lity. m. s. [fuxus, latin.] easiness of separation of
parts; possibility of liquefaction. . . .
experiments seem to teach, that the supposed aversation of
nature to a vacuum is but accidental, or in consequence, partly
of the weight and fluidity, or at least/uxility of the bodies here
below. * …, " . boyle,
fluoxion. n.s.. [fluxio, latin.]
1. the act of flowing.
2. the matter that flows.
the fluxion increased, and abscesses were raised. #iftman.
3. [in mathematicks.] the arithmetick or analysis of infinitely
small variable quantities; or it is the method of finding an
infinite small or infinitely small quantity, which, being taken
an infinite number of times, becomes equal to a quantity given.
i o - - harris.
a penetration into the abstruse difficulties and depths of
modern algebra and fluxions, are not worth the labour of those
who design the learned professions as the business of life. watts.
to fly. pret. few or fied; part. fed or fown. v. n. [fleozoan,
saxon. to fly is properly to use wings, and gives flew and
flown. to % is to escape, or to go away, flean, saxon, and
makes fled. they are now confounded.]
9 l 1. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 840</div><p class="text">f l y
f o a
i
. . "
1. to move through the air with wings.
) ere the bat hath flown
* *
- - - - - - - - - - -- ’s macbeth.
his cloister'd flight. , shaksheart';
#. ††, above the earth in the open firmament
of heaven. -- - - gen. i. 20.
this men's hastiness the warier sort of you do not oom-
mend: ye wish t
flown o’io, abroad before the
had been grown. , “ . . .
2. to pass through the air. . . .
§. is born into trouble, as the sparks fly upward, job, v.
pass away, with the idea of swiftness or escape.
ev’n a romance, a tune, a rhime,
help thee to pass the tedious time, .
which else would on thy hand remain; -
. . though flown, it ne'er looks back again. prior.
4. to pass swiftly.
. . the scouts with fying speed
return, and through the city spread the news. dryden.
farth tolls back beneath the flying steed. pope.
5. to move with rapidity.
as striplings whip the top for sport,
on the smooth pavement of an empty court,
the wooden engine flies and whirls about.
6. to part with violence,
feathers of the cause
... " hooker.
*
3. to
dryden.
glad to catch this good occasion,
most thoroughly to be winnow'd, where my chaff
and corn shall fly asunder. shakespeare's henry viii.
he bassas heads, to save his own, made fy;
and now, the sultan to preserve, must die. j/aller.
7. to break; to shiver; to burst asunder with a sudden ex-
plosion.
- behold, a frothy substance rise; -
be cautious, or your bottle flies. swift.
8. [elean, saxon; fiehen, german.] to run away 5 to attempt
escape. [in this sense the verb is properly to flee, when fied
is formed; but the following examples shew that they are
confounded: they are confounded oftener in the picient than
in the preter tense.]
which when the valiant elf perceiv'd, he leapt,
as lion fierce, upon the flying prey. spensor.
ye shall flee, as ye fied from before the earthquake.
- zech. xiv. 5.
abiathar escaped, and fied after david. , 1 sa. xxii. 20.
- what wonder if the kindly beams he shed,
reviv'd the drooping arts again; -
if f once ais'd ter head, * -
and of own on tv, that from rebellion fed. dryden.
. he oft desir'd to fly from of ei's th one,
and live in shades with her and love alone, prior,
- i'll fly from shepherds, flocks, and flow'ry plains;
from shepherds, flocks, and plains i may remove,
forsake mankind, and all the world but love. pope.
9. to fly at. to spring with violence upon; to fall on sud-
denly. - - a " - -
a servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,
cppos'd against the aet, bending his sword
to his great master; who, thereat enrag’d,
flew on him, and amongst them fell'd him dead. shakoff.
though the dogs have never seen the dog-killer, yet they
will come forth, and bark and so, at him. bacon's nat. hisi.
no honour, no fortune, can keep a man from being mile-
rable, when an enraged conscience shall fly at him, and take
him by the throat. . . . - * * * south's sermons.
this is an age that flies at all learning, and enquires espe-
cially into faults. * - - south.
10. to fly in the face. to insult. -
. this would discourage any man from doing you good, when
you will either neglect him, or fly in his face; and he must ex-
pect only danger to himself. ... swift's drapier's letters.
i 1. to fly in the face. . to act in defiance. -
fly in nature's face:
“ —but how, if nature fly in my face first
-then nature's the aggressor. dryden's spanish fryar.
12. to fly off. to revolt. . . . * * ,
.” deny to speak with me? they're fick, they're weary,
they have travell'd all the night" mean fetches;
the images of revolt and flying off. shakesp. king lear.
- the traytor syphax - i -
" flow off at once with his numidian horse. addison's cato.
13. to fly out. to burst into passion.
* - how easy is a noble spirit discern'd, -
from harsh and sulphurous matter thatflies out -
in contumelics, makes a noise, and stinks. ben. johns. catil.
passion is apt to ruffle, and pride will fly out into contumely
and neglect. collier of friendship.
14. to fly out. to break out into licence. - -
you use me like a courser spurr'd and rein'd:
if i fly out, my fierceness you command. dryden.
papists, when unopposed, fly out into all the pageantries of
worship; but when they are hard pressed by arguments, lie
close intrenched behind the council of trent, dryden.
hey had held themselves longer in, and not
15. ta fly out. to start violently from any dire&amp;io
...all bodies, moved circularly, have a perpetual o
to recede from the centre, and every moment wo two:
right lines, if they were not restrained. i.s. out in
16. to let fly. to discharge. * serhions,
the noisy culverin, o'ercharg’d, lets fly
and bursts, unaiming, in the rended no.”
17. to be light and unencumbered: as, a flying cam
to fly. v. a. -
1. to shun ; to avoid; to decline.
love like a shadow flies, when substance love s
pursuing that which flies, and flying what... "...";
§ o jove, i think flying pursues. shato,
foundations fly the wretched; such i mean
where they should be relieved. » shak
if you fty physick in health altogether, it will be too o
for your body when you shall need it. bacon'; o
to: :*:: shall i run, or which ways, |aft,
he sight of this so horrid spectacle. moh, -
2. to ...: association with. p millin', agonjic,
sleep flies the wretch ; or when with cares opprest
and his toss'd limbs are weary'd into rest, y
then dreams invade. dryden' sea?
- nature fies him like enchanted ground. *:::::
3. to quit by flight. - j4th,
dedalus, to fly the cretan shore,
his heavy limbs on jointed pinions bore,
the first who sail’d in air.
4. to attack by a bird of prey.
if a man can tame this monster, and with her fly other
ravening fowl, and kill them, it is somewhat worth. j bacon
5. it is probable that few was originally the preterite of;
when it signified volation, and fied when it signified o
flown should be confined likewise to volation; but tho
tinetions are now confounded. i know not any book except
the scriptures in which fly and fice are carefully kept separate,
fly. m. s. [pleoge, saxon.]
1. a small winged insect of many species.
as flies to wanton boys, are we to th’ gods;
they kill us for their sport. shakespeare's king lear,
my country neighbours begin to think of being in general,
before they come to think of the fly in their sheep, or the taro
in their corn. * * * * lock.
to prevent the fy, some propose to sow ashes with the
seed, mortimer's husbandy,
- to heedless flies the window proves
a constant death. , thomson's summer.
2. that part of a machine which, being put into a quick mo:
tion, regulates and equalises the motion of the rest. -,
if we suppose a man tied in the place of the weight, it
were easy, by a single hair fastened unto the fly or balance of
the jack, to draw him up from the ground. . . wilkins,
3. that part of a vane which points how the wind blows,
to fly'blow. v. a. [fy and blow.] to taint with fits; to
fill with maggots. - - -
i am unwilling to believe that he designs to play tricks,
and to flyblow my words, to make others dislate them.
stillingfleet.
granvil,
p.
dryden's en,
like a follown cake of tallow;
or, on parchment, ink turniyelow. soft
so morning insects, that in muck begun, -
shine, buz, and flyblow in the setting sun. poe,
fly'boa.t. n.f. [fy and boat.]. a kind of vessel nimble and
... light for sailing. . . .
flyearch er. m. s. [sy and catch..] ore that hunties. .
there was more need of brutus in lomitian's "o"
mend, than of horace, to laugh at a flycatcher... do.
... the swallow was a flycatcher as well as the spider. l’eir.
flyer. n.s...[from sy.j - * |
1. qne that flies or runs away. this is written most sequently
fier. * - * wo
- they hit one another with darts, as the otho do o:
their hands, which they never throw counter, but * o to
of the fier. - - sandy; juro.
he grieves so many britons should be lost; , , ,
taking more pains, when he beheld them. yield, fair
to save the fiers than to win the field. j *
2. one that uses wings. - - o -
3. the fly of a jack. fight
4. [in archite&amp;ture.] stairs made of an oblong square f* o
whose fore and back sides are parallel to each other, and '.
their ends: the second of these flyers stands posals o:
the first, the third behind the second, and so * said to .
from one another. . mos
to fly'fish. v. n. [s; and fift to angle with hock o
with a fly, either natural or artificial. ... o |
i shall next give you some other drawn o
- so *
* -. ". --- . . . ra- hos
fqal. m. s. [rola, saxon.] the offspring of; ...
beast of barben. the custon now is to use colt for o: -
horse, and foal for a young mare; but there "****
... nally any such distinetion. . . . . also
i -
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 841</div><p class="text">f o c
also flew his fleed,
and with his winged heels did tread the wind, , ,
as he had been a foal of pegasus's kind. fairy queen.
- twenty she-asses and ten foals. gen. xxxii. 15.
72 foal. v. a. [from the noun..] to bring forth. used of
mares, -
give my horse to timon: it seals me straight
ten able horses. shakespeare's timon.
such colts as are . -
of generous race, straight, when they first are foal’d,
walk proudly. . . . asay’s georgicks.
to foal. v. n. to be disburthened of the foetus. used of
beasts of burthen. ” -
about september take your mares into the house, where
keep them ’till they foal. alsortimer's husbandry.
fo’albit.
fo’al foot. { n. s. plants.
foam. m. s. [ram, saxon.] the white substance which agita-
tion of fermentation gathers on the top of liquors; froth;
spume.
the foam upon the water.
whitening down their mossy tinetur'd stream
descends the billowy foam. thomson's spring.
to foa m. v. n. [from the noun.] -
1. to froth ; to gather foam.
what a beard of the general's cut will do among foaming
bottles and ale-wash'd wits, is wonderful. shakoff. henry v.
caesar fell down in the market-place, and fam'd at mouth,
and was specchless. shakespeare's julius caesar.
to pallas high the faming bowl he crown'd,
and sprink!’d large libations on the ground. pope's odosy.
upon a foaming horse -
there follow'd strait a man of royal port.
2. to be in rage; to be violently agitated.
he famith, and gnasheth with his teeth. mar. ix. 18.
fo’amy. adj. [from foam.] covered with foam ; frothy.
more white than neptune's foamy face,
hos. x. 7.
rowe.
when struggling rocks he would embrace. sidney,
behold how high the foamy billows ride!
the winds and waves are on the juster side. dryden.
fob. m. s. s fuppe, fussacke, german.] a small pocket.
wilso {} at holding forth. hudibras.
when were the dice with more profusion thrown *
the well-fill'd fo, not empty'd now alone. dryd, juv.
he put his hand into his sob, and presented me in his name
with a tobacco-stopper. addison's spectator.
two pockets he called his fals; they were two large slits
and distant from the vertex by a fourth part of the parameter,
or latus reeum. harris.
3. focus of an ellipsis. a point towards each end of the
longer axis; from whence two right lines being drawn to any
point in the circumference, shall be together cqual to that
longer axis. - harris.
4. focus of the hyperbola. a point in the principal axis,
within the opposite hyperbolas; from which if any two right
lines are drawn, meeting in either of the opposite hyperbois,
the difference will be equal to the principal axis. j)i&amp;#.
fot) der. m. s. (poore, poten, saxon.] dry food flored up
for cattle against winter. : : - --
air, - knolley's history of the yorks.
being not to be raised without wintering, they will help to
force men into improvement of land by a necessity of solor,
*:: emple.
of grass and solder thou defiaud's the hams,
and of their mothers dugs the starving lambs. dryd. pirgil.
- to fo'dder. v. a. [from the noub.]. to seed with dry food.
natural earth is taken from just under the turf of the best
pasture ground, in a place that has been well folderro on.
- * -- - evelyn's kalendar.
- from winter keep, -
well fodder'd in the stalls, thy tender sheep. dryd. pirgil.
a farm of fifty pound hath commonly three barns, with as
many cowyards to fodder cattle in. martimer's hussandy.
straw will do well enough to fodder with. . mortimer.
food derer. m. s. [from fodder.] he who fodders cattle.
foe. m. s. [rah, saxon; fue, scottish.)
1. an enemy in war.
ere he had established his throne,
he fought great battles with his savage fone,
in which he them defeated ever more.
“never but one more was either like
to meet so great a foe.
2. a persecutor; an enemy in common life.
- god's benison go with you, and with those
that would make good of bad, and friends of foes, shałoff.
forc’d by thy worth, thy for in death become,
thy fiend has lodg'd thee in a costly tomb. dryden's fab.
thy defects to know; - - * -
make use of ev'ry friend, and ev'ry foe.
3. an opponent; an illwisher. - - * .
he that considers and enquires into the reason of things, is
counted a foe to received doctrines. . . . if atts on the mind.
foeman. m. s... [from see and man.] "enemy in war; antago-
fairy queen.
a4ilton.
o
pope.
squeezed close by the pressure of his belly. ... swift. mist. an obsolete word. "... o
orphans around his bed the lawyer sees, o here haunts that fiend, and does his daily spoil; ' '
and takes the plaintiff’s and defendant's fees; " . . . . . therefore henceforth be at your keeping well,
his fellow pick-purse, watching for a job, o - and ever ready for your feman fell. fairy queen.
fancies his fingers in the cully's sob. . swift. . . . what valiant socman, like to autumn's corn, -
to fob. v. a. [suppen, german.] o * * have we mow’d down in top of all their pride? sh. h. vi.
1. to cheat; to trick; to defraud. - . . .
i think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself foll'd in it.
. shakespeare's othello.
shall there be a gallows standing in england when thou art
king, and resolution thus fobb’d as it is with the rusty curb of
old father antick the law. shakespeare's henry iv.
he goes pressing forward, 'till he was fobbed again with
another story. l’eirange.
2. to fob off. to shift off; to put aside with an artifice ; to
delude by a trick.
- you must not think
to so off our disgraces with a tale. . . shakesp. coriolanus,
for they, poor knaves, were glad to cheat,
to get their wives and children meat; ** *
but these will not be fobb'd off so,
they must have wealth and power too.
by a ravenna vintner once betray'd,
so much for wine and water mix’d i paid; . .
but when i thought the purchas'd liquor mine, ...,
the rascal foll'd me off with only wine. addison.
being a great lover of country-sports, i absolutely deter-
mined not to be a minister of state, nor to %. a
garter. - addison's freeholder.
focal. adj. [from focus.] belonging to the focus. see fo-
cu.s. - -
schelhammer demandeth whether the convexity or conca-
vity of the drum colle&amp;ts rays into a focal point, or scatters
them. - derham's physico-theology.
foscil. n. s. [facile, french.] the greater or less bone between
the knee and ankle, or elbow and wrist. o
the fracture was of both the facil; of the left leg. wism.
focillation. m. s. [focillo, lat...] comfort; support. dic.
focus. n.s. [latin.] . . . .
1. [in opticks.] the focus of a glass is the point of convergence
or concourse, where the rays meet and cross the axis after their
refraction by the glass. -
the point from which rays diverge, or to which they con-
verge, may be called their focus.. . . . . . newton's optics.
2, focus of a parabola. a point in the axis within the figure,
... " hirai.
harris. .
fo etu.s. m. s. [latin.] the child in the womb after it is
perfectly formed : but before, it is called embryo. . . oting,
. a factus, in the mother’s womb, differs not much from the
state of a vegetable. - - locke.
fog... n.s.. [fog, danish, a storm.] a thick mist; a moist
dense vapour near the surface of the land of water.
* - infect her beauty,
you fensuck'd fogs drawn by the pow'rful san,
to fall and blast her pride. shakes care’s king lear.
lesler mists and fogs than those which covered greece with
so long darkness, present great alterations in the sun and moon.
- - raleigh's history of the horld.
fly, fly, prophane fogs / far hence fly away;
taint not the pure streams of the springing day
with your dull influence: it is for you -
to fit and scoule upon might's heavy brow. crashaw,
, fogs we frequently observe after sun-setting, even in our
hottest months. . . . .” isoodward's natural history.
fog. n.s.. [fogagium, low latin. gramen in forgsia regis scatur
pro fogagio. loges forest. scotica..] aftergrass; grass which
grows in autumn after the hay is mown.
foggily. adv. [from foggy.] mistily ; darkly; cloudily.
fo"gginess. n.j. [from foggy.] the state of being dark or
misty; cloudiness; missiness.
foog gy. adj. .."; - - - -
1. misty; cloudy; dank; full of moist vapours.
alas!, while we are wrapt in foggy mist
of our self-love, so passions do deceive,
we think they hurt, when most they do assist. sidney,
o and phoebus flying so, most shameful fight,
his blushing face in foggy cloud implys
and hid:s for .# •e,” spensor.
* "whence have they this mettle?
is not their climate foggy, raw and dull shakoff. henry v.
as cleere phoebus, when some foggy cloud
his brightnesse from the world a while doth shrowd,
; : doth by degrees beginne to shew his light. brown.
let not air be subject to any foggy noisomeness, from sens
or marshes near adjoining. - j%tton's archite:fure.
about
-
- *
... their cattle, starving for want of fodder, corrupted the
o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 842</div><p class="text">f o i
f o l
about michaelmas, the weather fair, and by no means
foggy, retire your rarest plants. evelyn's kalendar.
2. cloudy in understanding; dull. interie&amp;ti
foh. intorjati. [from fah, saxon, an enemy..] an interjestion
of abhorrence: as if one should at fight of any thing hated
cry out a foe /
y § {{. affect many proposed matches
of her own clime, complection and degree,
whereto we see in all things nature tends,
f/, / one may smell in such a will most rank,
foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural. shakoff. othello.
foible, n.s. [french..] a weak side; a blind fide; a
failing.
he knew the filles of human nature. friend's his of phys.
the witty men sometimes have sense enough to know their
own foible, and therefore they craftily shun the attacks of ar-
gument. watts's logick.
to foil. v. a. [affoler, to wound, old french.]
1. to put to the worst 5 to defeat, though without a complete
victory.
amazement seiz'd
the rebel thrones; but greater rage to see
. thus fail'd their mightiest. milton.
leader of those armies bright,
which but th' omnipotent none could have soil'd/ milion.
yet these subject not: i to thee disclose
what inward thence i feel, not therefore soil'd,
who meet with various objects, from the sense
variously representing ; yet still free,
approve the best, and follow what i approve. milton.
strange, that your fingers should the pencil foil,
without the help of colours or of oil | waller.
he had been foiled in the cure, and had left it to nature.
- - j/seman's surgery.
in their conflicts with fin they have been so often failed, that
they now despair of ever getting the day. calamy's sermons.
virtue, disdain, despair, i oft have try’d ; .
and, foil'd, have with new arms my foe defy'd. dryden.
but i, the consort of the thunderer, -
have wag'd a long and unsuccessful war;
with various arts and arms in vain have toil'd,
and by a mortal man at length am foil’d. dryden's zn.
2. [pouiller, french.j. to blunt; to dull.
- when light-wing'd toys
of feather'd cupid soil, with wanton dulness,
my speculative and offic'd instruments.
. to defeat; to puzzle.
whilst i am following one character, i am cross'd in my
way by another, and put up such a variety of odd creatures in
both sexes, that they foil the scent of one another, and puzzle
the chace. addison.
foil. {{ [from the verb.] * . .
1. a defeat; a miscarriage; an advantage gained without a
complete conquest. -
we of thy cunning had no diffidence;
qne sudden foil shall never breed distrust. shakoff. hen. vi.
whosoever overthroweth his mate in such sort, as that either
his back, or the one shoulder, and contrary heel do touch the
ground, shall be accounted to give the fall: if he be endan-
gered, and make a narrow escape, it is call’d a foil. carew.
so after many a foil the tempter proud,
renewing fresh assaults, amidst his pride,
shakespeare.
fell whence he stood to see his victor fall. milton.
when age shall level me to impotence,
and sweating pleasure leave me on the foil. southern.
death never won a flake with greater toil,
nor e'er was fate so near a foil. dryden.
2. [feuille, french.j leaf; gilding.
a stately palace, built of squared brick,
which cunningly was without mortar laid,
whose walls were high, but nothing strong nor thick,
and golden foil all over them display'd fairy queen.
fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
nor in the glistering foil
set off to th’ world, nor in broad rumour lies. milton.
3. something of another colour near which jewels are set to
raise their lustre. o
... as she a black silk cap on him begun
to set for foil of his milk-white to serve. sidney.
like bright metal on a fullen ground,
my reformation glittering o'er my fault, n.
shall shew more goodly, and attract more eyes,
toon that which hath no foil to set it off. shakesp. hen. iv.
the sullen passage of thy weary steps
esteem a foil, wherein thou art to set
the precious jewel of thy home. shakespeare.
* the property of alf true diamonds to unio the foil
closely to itself, ana thereby better augment its lustre: the
joi's a mixture of mastich and burnt ivory. grew's museum.
hector has a foil to set him off: we oppose the incontinence
of paris to the “mperance of hector. broome on the odyssey.
4. [from fouiller, f rench.] a blunt sword used in fencing.
he that plays the king shall be welcome, ...
have tribute of me: the adventurous too
and target. - sha;jo.#. fil
foiler. m. s. [from foil.] one who ha. gjo
over another. advants.
to foin. v. n. [findre, fr. skinner.] t - -
os
and every way did seek into his life ; lows,
ne plate, ne mail, could ward so migh
but yielded passage to his cruel knife. ghty ".
he cares not what mischief he doth, if hi *y &amp;gton,
- if h
he will fin like any devil; he will spare oo out:
woman,
nor child. sh o
then both, no moment lost, at :*.henry iv.
against each other, arm'd with sword and lance:
they lash, they fin, they pass, they strivet, bo
their corslets, and the thinness parts explore re
£9;n." so [from the verb..] a thrust, a ...”
§o adv. .."...] in a pushing manner
oison. m. s. [foiron, saxon.) plenty . -
now out ao. r j y; abundance. a word
pay justly thy tithes, whatsoever thou be
that god may in blesfing send oison to the: t
be wilful to kill, and unskilful to fior.” user,
and look for no foison, i tell thee before.”
djin,
nature should bring forth, tsir,
of its own kind, all foison, all abundance,
to feed my innocent people. shakeskar', temps,
as those that feed grow full, as blossom.
that from the feedness the site fallow *
to teeming foison; so her plenteous womb
expresseth his full tilth and husbandry. shak, massrm
to foiss. v.a. [fauffer, french.] to inst by n. tas,
left negligence or partiality might admit of fift ois
and corruption, an archdeacon was *ppointed to take account
of their doings. - - - - carew's survey of cornwal.
forge law, and fift it into some by-place
- of some old rotten roll. - dryden's don seloftian,
fo’istiness. n. s. [from fifty.] fustiness; mouldines,
press snuttard, and say it in cellar up sweet,
left foistines; make it for table unmeet. tussor,
f9 issy. adj. [see fusty.] mouldy; fusly.
fold. m. s. [falab, fals, saxon.]
1. the ground in which sheep are confined.
his eyes he open'd, and beheld a field
part arable and tilth; whereon were sheaves
new reap'd ; the other part, sheepwalks and fall, miln,
in thy book record their groans,
. were thy sheep, and in their ancient sold
a1n. -
2. the place where sheep are housed.
time drives the flocks from field to fold,
when rivers rage and rocks grow cola;
and philomel becometh dumb,
and all complain of cares to come. raligh,
3. the flock of sheep. -
and this you see i scarcely drag along,
who yeaping on the rocks has left her young, -
the hope and promise of my failing fold. dyin'...}rgil.
4. a limit; a boundary.
secure from meeting, they're distinetly roll'd;
nor leave their seats, and pass the dreadful fill. crush,
5. [from filb, saxon.j. a double; a complication; an invo-
lution ; one part added to another; one part doubled upon
another. -
she in this trice of time
commits a thing so monstrous, to dismantle -
so many folds of favour ! shajar's king lear,
the ancient egyptian mummies were shrowded in a num-
ber of folds of lifien, besmeared with gums. -
• bacon's natural hijio,
not with indented wave, the serpent then
prone on the ground, as since; but on his rear
circular base of rising folds, that tower'd * is l.
fold above fold, a surging maze milton ; parads: #.
let the draperies be nobly spread upon the body, on :
the fold be large: the parts should be often traves. by t t
flowing of the folds. * - dodo's duff:fff;
with fear and wonder seiz'd, the crowd o
the gloves of death, with seven distinguish'd #. æn
of tough bull hides. " ...”...so
the inward coat of a lion's stomach has o thnol.
a human, but in other things not much different. # o in
6. from the foregoing fignification is derived the so." s fi!?
composition. § signifies the same quantity added: 45,
----- - o - e ated.
fold, twice the quantity; twentyfold, twenty o: fruit;
milton,
but other fell into good ground, and brougho".
some an hundred fold, :;foll, some thirtyfold. mall
at last appear -
hell bounds high reaching to the horrid roof, brass
and thrice three fold the gates: three fold, wo }. loft.
three iron, three of adamantine rock. milt, this
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 843</div><p class="text">f o l
-----
their martyr'd blood and ashes sow
o'er all th’italian fields, where still doth sway
the triple tyrant; that from these may grow
a hundred fold. milton.
to folp. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to shut sheep in the fold.
the star that bids the shepherd fold,
now the top of heav'n doth hold. milton.
we see that the folding of sheep helps ground, as well by
their warmth as by their compost. bacon's natural history.
. she in pens his flocks will fold,
and then produce her dairy store,
with wine to drive away the cold,
and unbought dainties of the poor. dryden's horace.
2. [palpan, saxon.] to double; to complicate.
as a vesture shalt o them up.
- heb. i. 12.
yet a little sleep, a
ittle slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep. prov. vi. 1 o.
they be folden together as thorns. nah. i. io.
i have seen her rise from her bed, unlock her closet, take
forth paper, fold it, write upon’t, read it, seal it, and again
return to bed. shakespeare.
conscious of its own impotence, it folds its arms in despair,
and sits cursing in a corner. collier of envy.
both furl their sails, and strip them for the fight;
their folded sheets dismiss the useless air. dryd. ann, mir.
3. to inclose ; to include; to shut.
we will descend and fold him in our arms. shak. rich. ii.
witness my son, now in the shade of death,
whose bright outshining beams thy cloudy wrath
hath in eternal darkness folded up. shakesp. richard iii.
the fires i' th' lowest hellfold in the people's shak. coriol.
to fold. v. n. to close over another of the same kind; to
join with another of the same kind.
the two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two
leaves of the other door were folding. 1 kings, vi. 34.
folia'ceous. adj. [foliaceus, from folium, latin.] con-
sisting of laminae or leaves.
a piece of another, consisting of an outer crust, of a rudd
talky spar, and a blue talky foliaceous spar. woodward on faff.
fo'lia ge. n.s.. [folium, ... solo french..] leaves;
e
tufts of leaves ; the apparel of leaves to a plant.
the great columns are finely engraven with fruits and f-
liage, that run twisting about them from the very top to the
bottom. addison on italy.
when swelling buds their od’rous foliage shed,
and gently harden into fruit, the wise
spare not the little offsprings, if they grow
redundant. phillips.
to fo'liat e. v. a. [foliatus, folium, latin.] to beat into
jaminas or leaves.
gold foliated, or any metal foliated, cleaveth. bacon.
if gold be foliated, and held between your eyes and the
light, the light looks of a greenish blue. newton's opt.
foll ation. m. s. [foliatio, folium, latin.]
1. the act of beating into thin leaves.
2. foliation is one of the parts of the flower, being the col-
lection of those fugacious coloured leaves called petala, which
constitute the compass of the flower; and sometimes guard
the fruit which succeeds the foliation, as in apples and pears,
and sometimes stand within it, as in cherries and apricots; for
these, being tender and pulpous, and coming forth in the
spring, would be injured by the weather, if they were not
lodged up within their flowers. £uincy.
folia ture. m. s. [from folium, latin.] the state of being
hammered into leaves. dici.
folio. m. s. [in folio, latin.] a large book of which the
pages are formed by a sheet of paper once doubled.
plumbinus and plumeo made less progress in knowlege,
though they had read over more folios. watts on the mind.
fooliomcrt. adj. [folium mortuum, latin.] . a dark yellow ;
the colour of a leaf faded : vulgarly called philomot.
a flinty pebble was of a dark-green colour, and the exte-
riour cortex of a foliomert colour. woodward on fossils.
folk. m. s. [rolc, saxon; volk, dutch: it is properly a noun
collective, and has no plural but by modern corruption.]
1. people, in familiar language. -
never troubling him, either with asking questions, or find-
ing fault with his melancholy, but rather fitting to his dolor
doorous discourses of their own and other folks misfortune. sid.
dorilaus having married his sister, had his marriage in short
time blest, for so are folk wont to say, how unhappy soever the
children after grow, with a son. sidney.
when with greatest art he spoke,
you'd think he talk’d like other folk;
for all a rhetorician’s rules
teach nothing but to name his tools. hudibras.
2. nations; mankind.
thou shalt judge the folk righteously, and govern the na-
tions upon earth. - psalm, lvii. 4.
3. any kind of people as discriminated from others.
ol. i.
the river thrice hath flow'd, no ebb between :
and the old folk, time's doting chronicles, -
say it did so a little time before. shakes,
anger is a kind of baseness; as it appears well in th
ness of children, women, old folks, and sick folks. c weak-
- - b - -
4. it is now used only in familiar or bu lesque sanguage. acozz
old good man dobson of the green;
remembers he the tree has seen,
and goes with folks to shew the fight. swi
he walk’d and wore a o: cloak; wift.
he din’d and supp'd at charge of other folk. swift.
folkmote. n.s. [from folk and mote.]
those hills were appointed for two special uses, and built
by two several nations: the one is that which you call folk-
oil. by the saxons, and signifies in the saxon a meetin
of folk. e??/e7o a -
foot licle. n. s. [folliculus, latin.] spenser on ireland
1. a cavity in any body with strong coats. -
although there be no eminent and circular follicle, no round
bag or vesicle, which long containeth this humour; yet is
there a manifest receptacle of choler from the liver into the
guts. brown's vulgar errours:
2. follicle is a term in botany signifying the seed-vessels, capsula
seminalis, or case, which some fruits and seeds have or
them ; as that of the alkengi, pedicularis, &amp;c. quincy,
to fot.low. v. a. [folgan, saxon; volgen, dutch..]
1. to go after ; not before, or side by side.
h i . o o, go before you like a man, than follow
im like a dwarf. shakespeare's merry wives a indsor.
him all his # o of windsor
follow'd in bright procession, to behold
creation, and the wonders of his might, milton.
what could s do,
but follow strait, invisibly thus led milton.
2. to pursue as an enemy; to chase.
where ranks fell thickest was indeed the place
to seek sebastian, through a track of death
i follow'd him by groans of dying foes. dryden,
3. to accompany; not to forsake. . .
yet doubt not but in valley and in plain
god is as here, and will be found alike
present, and of his presence many a sign
still following thee, still compassing thee round -
with goodness and paternal love, his face
express, and of his steps the track divine. 14ilton.
up he rode,
follow'd with acclamation and the sound
symphonious of ten thousand harps that tun'd
angelic harmonies. milton.
4. to attend as a dependant.
and the three eldest sons of jesse went and followed saul to
the battle. i sa. xvii. 13.
let not the muse then flatter lawless sway,
nor follow fortune where she leads the way. pope,
5. to go after.
not yielding over to old age his country delights, he was at
that time following a merlin. sidney.
some pious tears the pitying hero paid,
and follow’d with his eyes the fleeting shade. dryden's zn.
we follow fate, which does too fast pursue. dryden,
6. to succeed in order of time.
such follow him as shall be register'd,
part good, part bad, of bad the longer scroll. milton.
signs following signs, lead on the mighty year. pope.
7. to be consequential, as effects to causes.
i laugh, when those who at the spear are bold
and vent’rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
what yet they know must follow, to indure
exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain. milton,
8. to imitate; to copy.
where rome keepeth that which is ancienter and better,
others, whom we much more affect, leaving it for newer, and
changing it for worse, we had rather follow the perfettions of
them whom we like not, than in defects resemble them whom
we love. hooker.
ill patterns are sure to be followed more than good rules.
locke on education.
9. to obey; to observe, as a guide or direetion.
if all who do not follow oral tradition as their only rule of
faith are out of the church, then all who follow the council
of trent are no christians, tillotson.
most men admire
virtue, who follow not her lore. paradise regain'd.
fair virtue should i follow thee,
i should be naked and alone,
for thou art not in company,
and scarce art to be found in one, evelyn.
io. to persue as an object of desire.
follow peace with all men. hebrews.
follow not that which is evil. - john.
11. to confirm by new endeavours; to keep up indefatigably.
9 m they<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 844</div><p class="text">f o l
f o n
they bound themselves to his laws and obedience; and in
case it had been followed upon them, as it should have been,
spenser.
they should have been reduced to perpetual civility.
12. to attend to ; to be busied with.
he that undertaketh and followeth other mens business for
gain, shall fall into suits. ecclus, xxix. 9.
to follow. v. n.
i
. to come after another.
jer. xlii. 16.
ben. johnson.
the famine shall follow close after you.
welcome all that lead or follow
to the oracle of apollo.
2. to attend servilely.
such smiling rogues as these sooth every passion,
that in the nature of their lords rebels:
as knowing nought, like dogs, but following. shak. k. lear.
3. to be posteriour in time.
4. to be consequential, as effect to cause.
if the neglect or abuse of liberty to examine what would
really and truly make for his happiness mislead him, the mis-
carriages that follow on it must be imputed to his own elec-
tion. - locke.
to tempt them to do what is neither for their own nor the
good of those under their care, great mischiefs cannot but
follow. locke.
5. to be consequential, as inference to premises.
6.
though there are or have been sometimes dwarfs, and some-
times giants in the world; yet it does not follow that there
must be such in every age, nor in every country. temple.
dangerous doctrine must necessarily follow, from making
all political power to be nothing else but adam's paternal
power. - locke.
o continue endeavours; to persevere.
. ... then shall we know, if “f* on to know the lord. hos.
follow er. m. s. [from follow.
i.
2.
4.
5.
6.
ollowers to do good to all men.
g
7.
one who comes after another; not before him, or side by
side.
little gallant, you were wont to be a follower; but now you
are a leader; whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye
your master's heels
shakespeare's merry i/ives of jwindsor.
no stop, no stay, but clouds of sand arise,
spurn’d and cast backward on the follower's eyes. dryden.
one who observes a guide or leader.
the understanding that should be eyes to the blind faculty
of the will, is blind itself; and so brings all the inconve.
niencies that attend a blind follower, under the conduct of a
blind guide.
south's sermons.
an attendant or dependant.
no follower, but a friend. pope.
an associate; a companion.
how accompanied, can'st thou tell that ?
—with poins, and other his continual followers. sh. h. iv.
one under the command of another.
i hold it no wisdom to leave unto the irish chiefs too much
command over their kindred, but rather withdraw their fol-
lowers from them as much as may be, and gather them under
the command of law.
spenser's state of ireland.
and forc’d af neas, when his ships were lost,
to leave his followers on a foreign coast. dryden’s an.
a scholar; an imitator; a copyer.
beye followers of me, even as i am of christ. 1 cor. xi. 1.
the true profession of christianity inviolably engages all its
spratt's sermons.
every one's idea of identity will not be the same that pytha-
goras and thousands of his followers have. locke.
the church of smyrna professed they worthily loved the
martyrs, as the disciples and followers of our lord; and be-
** of their exceeding great affection to their king and
their master. nelson.
the studious head or gen’rous mind,
follower of god, or friend of human kind,
poet or patriot, rose but to restore
the faith and moral nature gave before.
one of the same faction or party.
pope's ezsays.
foo!x. m. s. [solic, french.j
2. criminal weakness; depravity of mind.
3.
want of understanding; weakness of intelle&amp;t.
this is folly childhood's guide,
this is childhood at her fid. iławkesworth.
think'st thou, that duty should have dread to speak,
when pow'r to flattery bows to plainness honour
is bound, when majesty to fly falls. , shakes). king lear.
aet of negligence or passion unbecoming gravity or deep
wisdom. in this sense it has a plural.
love is blind, and lovers cannot see
the potty follies that themselves commit;
for if they could, cupid himself would blush
fo o: thus transformed to a boy.
y. hum’rous vein, thy pleasing
liosio’i. asing folly,
w ** such to trifle with more grace and ease,
hom folly pleases, cowho follies please. pope's horace.
shakes, €are.
prior.
78 fome’nt. v. a. ismentor, latin, f,
1. to cherish with ::/ &gt; ; fomenter, french.
- every kind that lives,
fomented by his virtual power, and was no. -
2. to bathe with warm lotions. milton,
he fomented the head with opiates to procure slee
solution of opium in water to foment the forehead. o,
3. to o to support; to cherish, r
they love their givings, and foment thei -
o their children. f deeds no les, than
and 3.
uthnot.
r
blame then thyself, as reason's law requires, j%ion.
since nature gave, and thou foments! my fires drd
- jdeh,
they are troubled with those ill humours
themselves infused and foolented in them. l
fox enta tion, n. s. [samentation, french; from foment otke.
i. a fomentation is partial bathing, called also stuping o
applying hot flannels to any part, dipped in medicito * is
tions, whereby the steams breathe into the pasts, and .
obstructed humours. - 3. . cus,
fomentation calleth forth the humour by vapours; i.
in regard of the way made by the poultis, draweth o }.
humours out: for it is a gentle fomentation, and hath o e
mixture of some stupefactive. bacon's naturis, :
2. the lotion prepared to foment the parts. *istory,
the medicines were prepared by the physicians, and the
lotions or fomentations by the nurses. arbuthin chin;
fowk nter, n. s. [from foment.) one that fomen’s; no.
courager; a supporter.
these fatal distempers, as they did much hurt to the bod
politick at home, being like humours stirred in mo
without evacuation, so did they produce disadvantageous
effects abroad; and better had it been, that the raiser and
fomenters of them had never sprung up. howel.
fon. n.s. [scott. a word now obsolete.] a fool; anio.
sicker i hold him for a greater fon,
that loves the thing he cannot purchase. soesor's pos,
fond. n: s [son, scottish. a word of which i have found
no satisfactory etymology. to some is in chaucer to doat, to
be foolish.j
1. foolish ; silly; indiscreet; imprudent; injudicious.
that the grecians or gentiles ever did think it a fond or
unlikely way to seek men's conversion by sermons, we have
, which they
not heard. hooker.
he was beaten out of all love of learning by a fond school-
master. aftham,
tell these sad women,
'tis fond to wail inevitable strokes,
as 'tis to laugh at them.
grant i may never prove so fond
to trust man on his oath or bond.
i am weaker than a woman's tear,
tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance.
*nd thoughts may fall into some idle brain;
but one belief of all, is ever wise. davies,
thou see'st
how subtly to detain thee i devise,
jnviting thee to hear while i relate;
æonds were it not in hope of thy reply.
so fond are mortal inen,
fall’n into wrath divine,
as their own ruin on themselves to invite. milton's 4onski.
'twas not revenge for griev'd apollo's wrong
those ass's ears on midas' temples hung;
but fond repentance of his happy wish. waller.
but reason with your fond religion fights;
for many gods are many infinites. dryden's tra. love,
this is fond, because it is the way to cheatthyself. tilloft.
2. trifling; valued by folly.
not with fond shekles of the tested gold,
or stones, whose rate are either rich or poor
as fancy values them. shakespeare's mods for mas.
3. foolishly tender; injudiciously indulgent.
shakoffeare's coriolinus,
shakspeare'; timon,
shakstart,
milt, par, loft,
i'm a foolish fond wife. addison.
like venus i'll shine, dis
befond and be fine. alison.
4. pleased in too great a degree; foolishly delighted: with
of. -
orm. is in itself a real good, if we may believe o
who was perhaps too fond of it. do 4th,
i, fond of my well-chosen seat, prior
my pictures, medals, books complete. d! o
some are so fond to know a great deal at once, ano" i.
talk of things with freedom and boldness before o
roughly understand them. - hoto. *
to fon d. v. a. [from the noun..] to treat w* *
to for.: indulgence; to caress; to cocker.
i o: unjust your jealousy appear,
t does my pity, not my anger move : y -
i’ll fond . o i. o child of love. dryden's auro
when amidst the fervour of the feast, st
the tyrian hugs, and fond, thce on her breat, and
o,
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 845</div><p class="text">f o o
a -
---
and with sweet kisses in her arms constrains, -
thou may’t infuse thy venom in her veins. dryden's zn.
they are allowed to kiss the child at meeting and parting ;
but a professor, who always stands by, will not suffer them to
use any fondling expressions. swift.
to fond. v. n. to be fond of; to be in love with 5 to doat
oil,
how will this fadge 2 my master loves her dearly;
and i, poor monster, fond as much on him;
and she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.
fo'ndler. m. s...[from fond..] one who fondles.
fo'ndling.. n.s.. [from fondle.]. a person or thing much fondled
or carefled ; something regarded with great affection.
partiality in a parent is commonly unlucky; for fondlings
are in danger to be made fools, and the children that are least
cockered make the best and wisest men. l’e/irange.
the bent of our own minds may favour any opinion or
action, that may shew it to be a fondling of our own. locke.
any body would have guessed miss to have been bred up
under a cruel stepdane, and john to be the fondling of a ten-
der mother. arbuthnot's hislory of john bull.
bred a fondling and an heiress,
dress'd like any lady may’ress;
cocker'd by the servants round,
was too good to touch the ground. swift.
fo'ndly, adv. [from fond.]
1. foolishly ; weakly ; imprudently ; injudiciously.
most shallowly did you these arms commence,
fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence. shak. h. iv.
sorrow and grief of heart
makes him speak fondly, like a frantick man. shakesp. r. ii.
ficinus fondly adviseth, for the prolongation of life, that a
vein be opened in the arm of some who esome young man,
and the blood to be sucked. bacon's natural history.
the military mound
the british files transcend, in evil hour
for their proud foes, that fondly brav'd their fate. phillips.
some valuing those of their own side or mind,
still make themselves the measure of mankind:
fondly we think we nerit honour then,
when we but praise ourselves in other men. pope.
under those sacred leaves, secure
from common lightning of the skies,
he fondly thought he might endure.
the flashes of ardelia's eyes. swift.
2. with great or extreme tenderness.
ev’n before the fatal engine clos'd,
a wretched sylph too fondly interpos'd :
fate urg'd the sheers, and cut the sylph in twain. pope.
fondly or severely kind. savage.
fo'ndness. n.s.. [from fond.]
1. foolishness; weakness; want of sense ; want of judgment.
fondness it were for any, being free,
to covet fetters, though they golden be. spenser's sonnets.
2. foolish tenderness.
my heart had still some foolish fondness for thee;
but hence ’tis gone : i give it to the winds. addis. cato.
hopeless mother
whose fondness could compare her mortal offspring
to those which fair latona bore to jove. prior.
3. tender pasion. - -
your jealousy perverts my meaning still ;
my very hate is construed into fondness. a. phill. diff. moth.
corinna, with that youthful air,
is thirty and a bit to spare:
her fondness for a certain earl -
began when i was but a girl. swift.
4. unreasonable liking.
they err that either through indulgence to others, or fondness
to any sin in themselves, substitute for repentance any thing
that is less than a sincere resolution of new obedience, attended
with faithful endeavour, and meet fruits of this change.
hammond's fundamentals.
fox.e. n.s. plural of foe. obsolete.
a barbarous troup of clownish fome. spessor.
font. n.s. [fons, latin; fonte, french..]. a stone vessel in
which the water for holy baptism is contained in the church.
the presenting of infants at the holy font is by their god-
fathers. hooker.
i have no name, no title;
no, not that name was given me at the font. shakesh. r. ii.
fo's tanel. n.s. [fontanelle, french..] an issue; a discharge
opened in the body. - -
a person plethorick, subject to hot defluxions, was advised
to a fontanel in her arm. wiseman of inflammation.
fontange. n.s. [from the name of the firit wearer.]. a
knot of ribbonds on the top of the head-dress. out of use.
these old-fashioned fontanges rose an eli above the head;
they were pointed like sleeples, and had long loose pieces of
crape, which were fringed, and hung down their backs. addis.
food. m. s. [faban, sax. voeden, dut. to feed; feed, scott.]
i. victuals; provision for the mouth. -
shakespeare.
r-- on my knees i beg,
that you’ll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food, shakoff.
much food is in the tillage of the poor. prov. xiii. 23.
under my lowly roof thou hast vouchsif'd
to enter, and these earthly fruits to taste;
*ad not of angels, yet accepted so,
as that more willingly thou could'st not seem
at heav'n's high feasts to have fed. milton's paradise loft.
they give us food, which may with nectar vie,
and wax that does the absent sun supply. jwiller.
2. anything that nourishes. -
give me some musick: musick, moody food
of us that trade in love. shakesp. anthony and cleopatra.
-- o dear son edgar,
the food of thy abused father's wrath,
might i but live to see thee in my touch,
i'd say, i had eyes again. shakesh. king lear.
fo *ul. adj. [fooa and full.] fruitful; full of food; plen-
co us.
there tityus was to see, who took his birth
from heav'n, his nursing from the foodful earth. dryden.
foody, adj. [from food.] eatable; fit for food.
to vessels, wine she drew;
and into well sew'd sacks pour'd foody meal. chapman.
fool. m. s. [sol, welsh; fol, islandick; fol, french.]
1. one to whom nature has denied reason; a natural; an idiot.
do'it thou call me fool, boy
-all thy other titles thou hast given away that thou wast
born with. shakesp. king lear.
the fool multitude, that chuse by show,
not learning more than the fond eye doth teach,
which pry not to the interior. shakesp. merchant of venice.
. it may be asked, whether the eldest son, being a fol, shall
inherit paternal power before the younger, a wise man. locłe.
he thanks his stars he was not born a fool. pope,
2. [in scripture.] a wicked man.
the fool hath said in his heart there is no god. ps. xiv. 1.
3. a term of indignity and reproach.
to be thought knowing, you must first put the fool upon all
mankind. dryden's juvenal, preface.
4. one who counterfeits folly; a buffoon; a jester.
where's my knave, my fool! go you, and call my fool
hither. shakesh. king lear.
i scorn, although their drudge, to be their fool or jester.
amilton.
if this disguise sit not naturally on so grave a person, yet it
may become him better than that fool's coat. denham.
5. 73 play the fool. to play pranks like a hired jester; to
jeft ; to make sport.
i returning where i left his armour, found another instead
thereof, and armed myself therein to play the fool. sidney.
6. to play the fool. to act like one void of common under-
standing.
well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits
of the wise fit in the clouds and mock us. shakesp. henry iv.
is it worth the name of freedom to be at liberty to play the
fool, and draw shame and misery upon a man's self? locke.
7. to make a fool of . to disappoint; to defeat.
*twere as good a decd as to drink when a man's a-hungry,
to challenge him to the field, and then to break promise with
him, and make a fool of him. shakesp. twelfth night.
to fool. v. n. [from the noun..] to trifle; to toy; to play;
to idle; to sport.
i, in this kind of merry fooling, am nothing to you; so you
may continue and laugh at nothing still. shakesp. tempest.
fool not ; for all may have,
if they dare try, a glorious life, a grave. herbert.
if you have the luck to be court-fools, those that have either
wit or honesty, you may fool withal, and spare not. denham.
it must be an industrious youth that provides against age ;
and he that fools away the one, must either beg or starve in
the other. l’estrange.
he must be happy that knows the true measures of fooling.
l’estrange.
is this a time for fooling 2
to fool. v. a.
1. to treat with contempt; to disappoint; to frustrate; to de-
feat.
and shall it in more shame be further spoken, -
that you are fold, discarded, and shook off? shak, h. iv.
. him over-weaning
to over-reach; but with the serpent meeting,
fool'd and beguil’d. milton’s paradise loft.
if men loved to be deceived and fooled about their spiritual
estate, they cannot take a surer course than by taking their
neighbour's word for that, which can be known only from
their own heart. south's sermons.
when i confider life, ’tis all a cheat;
for fool'd with hope, men favour the deceit.
i'm tir'd with waiting for this chemick gold.
which fools us young, and beggors us when old. dryden.
i would advise this blinded set of men not to give credit so
those,
dryden's spanish fryar.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 846</div><p class="text">f o o
f o o
been so often fooled and imposed
o: by whom they have been so %. freeholder.
to infatuate : to make foolish.
2. to o: you that stir o: o on.
- ir father, fool me not so muc -
#o. , f shakespeare's king lear.
when i am read, thou feign’s a weak applause,
as if thou wert my o; o o: a cause:
is but thy judgment fools; the other way
*. o; #. is: thy spite betray. ben. johnson.
it were an handsome plot,
but full of difficulties, and uncertain ;
and he's so fool'd with downright honesty, *
he'll ne'er believe it. denham's sophy.
a long and eternal adieu to all unlawful pleasures 3, i will
no longer be fooled or imposed upon by them. calamy's serm.
a boor of holland, whose cares of growing still richer and
richer, perhaps fool him so far as to make him enjoy less in his
riches than others in poverty. temple.
3. to cheat: as, to fool one of his money.
foolborn, adj. [fool and born.] foolish from the birth.
reply not to me with a foolborn jest. shakesp. henry iv.
foo' lery. off [from fool.]
1. habitual folly. - - - - -
foolery, fir, does walk about the orb like the sun; it shines
every where: i would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as
oft with your master as with my mistress. shak. twelfth night.
2. an act of folly; trifling practice. - - -
it is meer foolery to multiply distinet particulars in treating
of things, where the difference lies only in words. watts.
3. object of folly. - -
that pythagoras, plato, or orpheus believed in any of
these fooleries, it cannot be suspected. raleigh's history.
{../ are transported with fooleries, which, if we understood,
we should despise. .., l’estrange.
foolhappy... adj. [fool and happy..] lucky without contri-
vance or judgment.
as when a ship, that flies fair under sail,
an hidden rock escaped unawares,
that lay in wait her wreck for to bewail;
the mariner, yet half amazed, stares
at perils past, and yet in doubt ne dares
to joy at his foolhappy oversight. fairy queen.
foolha'rdin ess. n.s.. [from foolhardy..] mad rashness; cou-
rage without sense.
there is a difference betwixt daring and foolhardinos, lu-
can and statius often ventured them too far, our virgil never.
dryden's dufresnoy.
a false glozing parasite would call his foolhardings; vaiour,
and then he may go on boldly, because blindly. south.
foolha'rdise. n.s.. [fool and hardiffe, french.j foolhardi-
ness; adventurousness without judgment. obsolete.
more huge in strength than wise in works he was,
and reason with foolhards over-ran;
stern melancholy did his courage pass,
and was, for terror more, all arm’d in shining brass.
fairy queen.
foolha'rdy., adj. [fool and hardy..] daring without judg-
ment; madly adventurous; foolishly bold.
qne mother, when as her foolhardy child
did come too near, and with his tasons play,
half dead through fear, her little babe revil’a. fairy queen.
some would be so foolhardy as to presume to be more or the
cabinet council of god almighty than the angels. howel.
if any yet be so foolhardy,
to expose themselves to vain jeopardy;
if they come wounded off, and lame,
no honour’s got by such a maim. hudibras.
foo'ltrap. m. s. [fool and trap.] a snare to catch fools in:
as a flytrap.
betts, at the first, were fooltraps, where the wise
like spiders lay in ambush for the flies. dryden.
foo'lish, adj. [from fool.]
i. void of understanding; weak of intelle&amp;.
thou foolish woman, sees thou not our mourning? 2 esdr.
pray do not mock me;
i am a very foolish fond old man:
i fear i am not in my perfeoł mind. shakesp. king lear.
he, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon,
was the best deserving a fair lady. shakesp. merchant of penice.
2. imprudent; indiscreet.
we are come off
like romans; neither foolish in our stands,
nor cowardly in retire. shakespeare's coriolanus.
3. ridiculous; contemptible.
it is a foolish thing to make a long prologue, and to be short
in the story itself. 2 mac. ii. 32.
what could the head perform alone,
if all their friendly aids were gone?
a foolish figure he must make ;
po nothing else but sleep and ake. prior.
he allows himself in foolish hatreds and resentments against
particular persons, without confi
body as himself.
4. [in scripture.] wicked; finful. law,
foo'lishly. adv. [from foolish.] weakl
standing. in scripture, wickedly.
although we boast our winter sun looks b
and foolishly are glad to see it at its height;
yet so much sooner comes the longanj. -
foo lishness. n.s. [from fools.] 5 and gloomy might. soft.
1. folly; want of understanding.
2. fja practice; actual deviation from the right
foolishnes, being properly a man's deviation from right
son, in point of practice, must needs consist in his o i.
upon such an end as is unsuitable to his condition, or o
upon means unsuitable to the compassing of his end. p : ing
charm'd by their eyes, their manner. i outh,
dering that he is to loveeve,
y; without under-
right,
3c
and shape my foolishnes; to their desire. quire, pr;
footstones. n.s. a plant. i.
foot. m. s. plural feet. [fox, saxon; volt, dutch. iller,
scottish.] ; ful,
1. the part upon which we stand.
the queen that bore thee,
oft'ner upon her knees than on her feet,
died ev'ry day she liv'd. shakoshtar's mida,
his affection to the church was so notorious, that he neo.
deserted it ’till both it and he were overrun and trod under
00t. cl
..”in by which anything is supported in the nature o:
as, the foot of a table.
3. the lower part ; the base.
yond’ towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
must kiss their own feet. shakesp. troilus and croftli,
fretting, by little and little, washes away and eats out both
the tops and sides and feet of mountains. hakwill.
4. the end; the lower part.
what dismal cries are those
-nothing; a trifling sum of misery,
new added to the foot of thy account:
thy wife is seiz'd by force, and born away. dryd. cleomon,
5. the act of walking.
antiochus departed, weening in his pride to make the land
navigable, and the sea passable by foot. , m.v.,.
6. on †. walking; without carriage.
israel journeyed about fix hundred thousand onfict. ex. xii.
7. a posture of action.
the centurions and their charges billeted already in the en-
tertainment, and to be on foot at an hour's warning. shaloft,
8. infantry; footmen in arms. in this sense it has no plura.
lusias gathered three score thousand choice men offs, and
five thousand horsemen. moi, 28.
himself with all his foot entered the town, his horse ting
quartered about it. clarendin.
thrice horse and foot about the fires are led,
and thrice with loud laments they wail the dead. dryden.
9. state; character; condition.
see on what foot we stand; a scanty shore, y
the sea behind, our enemies before. dyla', fr.
in specifying the word ireland, it would seem to insinuate
that we are not upon the same foot with our follow sod; in
england. swift's drapiro lair.
what colour of excuse can be for the contempt with which
we treat this part of our species, the negroes, that we should
not put them upon the common foot of humanity, o:
should only set an insignificant fine upon the man who o;
them * -
io. scheme; plan; settlement. - ittle hope
there is no wellwisher to his country without alit o
that in time the kingdom may be on a betterfol. it so
i ask, whether upon the foot of our constitution, o o ma
in the reign of the late king james, a king of eng * o
be deposed ? - ittl jo
11. a state of incipient existence; first motion. little ""
in the following phrase. *... f. sank
if such a . were at any time sit on foot, it o
easy to imagine how it should at first gain o sm.
much more difficult how it should come to be unior #.
agated.
1. i. seems to have been once proverbially used for the ko,
the square, par. - :
wo. it . for this easy borrowing upon o
necessities would draw upon them a most * o o os
that they would be forced to sell their means, j ... esof,
goods, far under foot. - - - go pist of
13. a certain number of syllables constituting * *
a verse. - - ioints
feet, in our english versifying, wo o:
be sure signs that the verse is either born deform". 'soft,
or lame. ashan' so
did'st thou hear these verses : 'them
– o yes, i heard them all, and more too i. o:
had in them more feet than the verse: would o oft.
and sidney's verse halts ill on roman feet. 14, motion;
f.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 847</div><p class="text">f o o
o,
'-
**
14. motion; action.
while other jests are something rank on foot,
her father hath commanded her to slip -
away with slender to marry. shakoff. mer. isives of i/inds.
in the government of the -
the ends on foot, with the secret nature of
they relate, must make a distina remar
in some cases very difficult,
15. step.
this man's son would, every foot and a
of his companions into the orchard.
16. a measure containing twelve inches:
length of a man's foot.
when it signifies measure,
the plural.
an orange, lemon, and apple, wrapt in a linen cloth,
being buried for a fortnight's space four foot deep within the
earth, came forth no ways mouldy ot iotic il. bacon.
to foot. v. n. [from the noun.] -
'1. to dance; to tread wantonly; to trip.
lonely the vale and full of horror stood,
brown with the shade of a religious wood;
the moon was up, and shot a gleamy light ;
he saw a quire of ladies in a round,
that featly footing seem'd to skim the ground.
2. to walk; not ride; not fly.
- by this the dreadful beast drew nigh to land,
half flying, and half footing in his haste. fairy queen.
take heed, have open eye; for thieves do soot by night. sh.
the man set the boy upon the ass, and footed it himself.
most things to which
k of their congruity,
and in some unattainable. grew.
non, be taking some
l'estrange.
supposed to be the
it has often, but vitiously, foot in
dryden.
- l’estrange.
if you are for a merry jaunt, i'll try, for once, who can
foot it fartheft. dryden's spanish fryar.
with them a man sometimes cannot be a penitent, unless
he also turns vagabond, and foot; it to jerusalem; or wanders
over this or that part of the world, to visit the shrine of such
or such a pretended saint. south.
73 foot. v. a.
1. to spurn ; to kick.
you, that did void your rheum upon my beard, and foot me
as you spurn a stranger cur over your threshold. shakespeare.
2. to settle ; to begin to fix.
what confed'racy have you with the traitors
late footed in the kingdom shakesp. king lear,
3. to tread. - - -
- saint withold footed thrice the wold :
he met the night-mare, and her name told ;
bid her alight, and her troth plight,
abd aroynt thee, witch, aroynt thee right. shak. k. lear.
there haply by the ruddy damsel seen,
..or shepherd boy, they featly foot the green.
4. to hold with the foot. not in use.
we are the earth, and they,
like moles within us, heave and cast about 3.
and till they foot and clutch their prey,
they never cool, much less give out.
foo'tball. m. s. [foot and hall.j
1. a ball commonly made of a blown bladder, cased with lea-
ther, driven by the foot.
am i so round with you as you with me,
that like a football you do spurn me thus shakoshcare.
such a winter-piece should be beautified with all manner
of works and exercises of winter; as footballs, felling of
wood, and sliding upon the ice. peachain.
as when a sort of justy shepherds try
their force at football, care of victory
makes them salute so rudely, breast to breast,
that their encounter seems too rough for jest.
one rolls along a football to his foes,
one with a broken truncheon deals his blows.
2. the sport or practice of kicking the football.
he was sensible the common football was a very imperfeoł
imitation of that exercise. arbuthnot and pope's mart. scriol.
f99 roy. n.s. [foot and loy..] a low menial; an attendant
in livery.
o was it discretion, lords, to let this man,
this honest man, wait like a lowsy footboy
at chamber-door shakspeare's henry viii.
though i had no body to assist but a footboy, yet i, made
shift to try a pretty number of things. boyle, on colours.
whenever he imagines advantages will redound to one of
, his footboys by oppression of me, he never disputes it. swift.
foo's bridge. n, f: [foot and bridge..] a bridge on which
passengers walk; a narrow bridge.
palemon's shepherd, fearing the footbridge was not strong
$nough, loaded it so long, 'till he broke that which would have
born a bigger burden. sidney.
footcloaoh. m. s. [foot and coath.] . a sumpter cloath.
three times to-day my footcloth horse did stumble,
and started when he look d upon the tower,
asloth to bear me to the slaughterhouse. shaft. rich. iii.
o adj. [from foot.] shaped in the foot.
ol. i. -
. tickel.
herbert.
e
//aller.
dryden.
world the number and variety of
snouted and tailed like a boar, and/or dike a goat. grero.
**ght. n.s.. [soot and fight.j a fight made on foot, in
opposition to that on horseback.
so began our footfight in such sort,
, tered to blood of both sides.
foot hold. *s [soot and held.j. space to hold the
space on which one may tread surely.
all fell to work at the roots of the tree, and left it so little
fathold, that the first blast laid it flat upon the ground. l’e/fr.
he's at the top: he has nothing above him to aspire to, nor
any foothold left him to come down by. l’estrange.
footing. m. s... [from foot.]
i. ground for the foot. - -
i'll read you matter deep and dangerous;
as full of peril and adventorous spirit
as to o'erwalk a current, roaring loud,
on the unsteadfast footing of a spear. shaft. henry iv.
as noah's pigeon, which return’d no more,
did shew she footing found, for all the flood. davies.
in ascents, every step gained is a footing and help to the
11cxt. holder’s elements of speech.
that we were well en-
sidney.
foot;
2. support; root.
set cloven stakes; and, wond’rous to behold,
their sharpen'd ends in earth their footing place,
and the dry poles produce a living race. dryden's pirgil.
3. basis; foundation.
all those sublime thou
the mind stirs not one j
hection have offered.
ghts take their rise and footing here:
of beyond those ideas which sense or
rejo - - locke.
the reasoning faculties of the soul would not know how
to move, for want of a foundation and footing in most men,
who cannot trace truth to its fountain and original. locke.
4. place ; possession. - -*
whether they unetuous exhalations are,
fil'd by the sun, or seeming so alone;
or each some more remote and slippery star,
which loses footing when to mortals shown.
5. tread ; walk.”
as he forward moved his footing old,
so backward still was turned his wrinkled face.
i would outnight you did no body come:
but hark, i hear the footing of a mas. s. merch.
break off, break off; i feel the different sound
of some chaste footing near about this ground.
6. dance.
make holyday: your ryestraw hats put on,
and these fresh nymphs encounter every one
in country footing. shakespeare's tempoff.
7. steps; road; track. -
he grew strong among the irish; and in his footing his son
continuing, hath increased his said name. spenser on ireland.
like running weeds, that have no certain root ; or like
jooting up and down, impossible to be traced. baco, h. wii.
8. entrance; beginning; establishment. -
ever since our nation had any footing in this land, the state
dryden.
spensor.
of wen.
amilton.
of england did desire to perfect tie conquest. davies.
the defeat of colonel bellafis gave them their first footing
in yorkshire. clarendon.
no useful arts have yet found footing here;
but all untaught and savage does appear. dryd, ind. emp.
9. state ; condition; settlement.
gaul was on the same footing with egypt, as to taxes. a.b.
foo tlicker. m. s. [foot and lic.] "a slave; an humble
fawner ; one who licks the foot.
do that good mischief which may make this island
thine own for ever; and i, thy caliban,
for ay thy footlicker. shakespeare's tompos.
foot man. n. j. [foot and man.]
i. a soldier that marches and fights on foot.
the numbers levied by her lieutenant did consist of footmen
three millions, of horsemen one million. raleigh's history.
2. a low menial servant in livery.
he was carried in a rich chariot, litterwise, with two horses
at either end, and two footmen on each fide. bacon.
like footmen running before coaches,
to tell the inn what lord approaches. prior."
3. one who practises to walk or run.
foo'tmanship. m. s. [from footman.] the art or faculty of
a runner.
the irish archers espying this, suddenly broke up, and
committed the safety of their lives to their nimble footmanship. -
- hayward.
yet, says the fox, i have baffled more of them with my
wiles and shifts than ever you did with your footmanship. l'est.
foot pace. n.s.. [foot and pace.]
i. part of a pair of stairs, whereon, after four or five steps,
you arrive to a broad place, where you make two or three
paces before you ascend another step, thereby to ease the legs
in ascending the rest of the stairs. 03:27.
2. a pace no faster than a slow walk... -
foo"tpad. n. s. [foot and pad.] a highwayman that robs on
foot, not on horseback. -
9 n foo"tpath.
-
!
f||<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 848</div><p class="text">f o p
f o r
footpath. n.f. [foot and path..] a narrow way which will
not admit horses or carriages.
know'st thou the way to dover ? x-
—both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. shac. k. lear.
foo rpost. n.s. [foot and post.] a post or mellenger that
travels on foot. -
for carrying such letters, every thoroughfare weekly ap-
ointeth a footos, whose dispatch is well near as speedy as the
i. footp:/?, p carew's survey of cornwal.
footstall. n.s.. [foot and stall.] a woman's stirrup.
foo"rst ep. n.s.. [foot and slep.]
1. trace; track; impression left by the foot.
clear-fighted reason wisdom's judgment leads,
and sense, her vassal, in her footsteps treads. denham.
a man shall never want crooked paths to walk in, if he
thinks that he is in the right way, where ever he has the foot-
slops of others to follow. locke.
2. token ; mark; notice given. -
let us turn our thoughts to the frame of our system, if
there we may trace any visible footsteps of divine wisdom and
beneficence. bentley's sermons.
3. example. -
foots tool. n.s. [foot and sool.] stool on which he that fits
places his feet.
thus have we swept suspicion from our seat,
and made our footsiool of security. shakesh. henry vi.
they whose sacred office ’tis to bring
kings to obey their god, and men their king,
by these mysterious links to fix and tye
men to the footsol of the deity. denham's sophy.
let ecchoing anthems make his praises known
on earth, his footsiool, as in heav'n his throne. roscommon.
by the phrase of worshipping his footsoal, no more is meant
than worshipping god at his footsical. - stillingfleet.
fop. m. s. [a word probably made by chance, and therefore
without etymology..] a simpleton; a coxcomb : a man of
small understanding and much oftentation ; a pretender ; a
man fond of show, dress, and flutter ; an impertinent.
a whole tribe off ps,
got 'tween asleep and wake, shakesp. king lear.
when such a positive abandon'd sop,
among his numerous absurdities,
stumbles upon some tolerable line,
i fret to see them in such company. roscommon.
the leopard's beauty, without the fox's wit, is no better
than a fop in a gay coat. l’estrange.
in a dull stream, which moving slow,
you hardly see the current flow ;
when a small breeze obstructs the course,
it whirls about for want of force,
and in its narrow circle gathers
nothing but chaff, and straws, and feathers:
the current of a female mind
stops thus, and turns with ev'ry wind;
thus whirling round, together draws
fools, fops, and rakes, for chaff and straws. swift.
fo'pdoodle. n. s. [fop and doodle.] a fool; an insignificant
wretch.
where sturdy butchers broke your noddle,
and handled you like a fopdoodle. hudibras.
fo'ppery. m. s. [from fp.]
1. folly; impertinence.
let not the sound of shallow foppery enter
my sober house. shakesp. merchant of wenice.
i was three or four times in the thought they were not fai-
ries; and yet the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise
of my powers, drove the grossness of the fppery into a re-
ceived belief, in despight of the teeth of all rhime and reason,
that they were fairies. shakesp. merry hoves of windsor.
this is the excellent foppery of the world, that when we
are sick in fortune, often the surfeits of our own behaviour,
we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon and stars,
as if we were villains on necessity. shakoff. king lear.
2. affectation of show or importance; showy folly.
3. foolery; vain or idle practice; idle affectation.
they thought the people were better let alone in their fop-
peries, than to be suffered to break loose from that subjection
which your superstition kept them in. stillingfleet.
but though we fetch from italy and france o
qursopperies of tune, and mode of dance,
our sturdy britons scorn to borrow sense. . granville.
i wish i could say quaint fopperies were wholly absent from
graver subjects. swift.
foppish, adj. [from foo.
i. foolish ; §§ *so
fools ne'er had less grace in a year;
for wise men are grown foppish,
t. know not how their wits to wear,
heir manners are so apish. shakes). k.
2. vain in show ; foolishly soudou. ; vain of so lear,
with him the present still some virtues have ;
he vain are sprightly, and the stupid grave;
the slothful negligent, the foppish neat;
the lewd are airy, and the fly discreet. g
the romans grew extremely expensive and sopis, .
the emperor aurelian forbid men that variety o to. 9 that
their shoes, allowing it still to women. . oll
you would know who is rude and ill-natured who o
and foppish, who lives too high, and who is in i. o
fo'ppishly. adv. [from foppish.] vainly; ofession dio,
fo'pp1shness. n. s. [from foppish.] vanity; show, o
tatious vanity. y us osten.
f. m. s. [from fop.] a petty fop; an under-site
thy works in chloe's toilet gain a part,
and, with his tailor, share the foppling's heast. tod
for. prep. [fon, saxon; voor, dutch..] otl,
i. because of.
that which we for our unworthiness are afraid to cry, out
prayer is, that god for the worthiness of his son wo".
withstanding vouchsafe to grant. -
edward and richard,
with fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
are at our backs. shakes.
speak, good cominius; off. henryvi,
leave nothing out for length. shaft
for as much as the question cannot be scanned, unlo.
time of abraham's journey be considered of, i will search.
a tradition concerning his travels. raleigh's hjoy.
an astrologer faith, if it were not fir two things that ite
constant, no individual would last one moment. bacon,
for as much as it is a fundamental law in the turkish em.
pire, that they may, without any other provocation, make |
war upon christendom for the propagation of their laws; |
so the christians may at all times, as they think good, be
upon the prevention. bacon's iwar with spain,
the governour, fallying out, took great flore of viciual
and warlike provision, which the turks had for haffe left be.
hind them. kicks'. history,
their offer he willingly accepted, knowing that he was not
able to keep that place three days, for lack cf victuals.
knoll,
hor.
quit, quit, for shame; this will not move,
this cannot take her:
if of herself she will not love,
nothing can make her. song,
care not for frowns or smiles. denham's solo, pol
the hypocrite or carnal man hopes, and is the wicked:
for hoping. hammond's prasī. catch.
let no man, for his own poverty, become more opposing
in his bargains; but quietly recommend his estate to god, and
leave the success to him. taylor,
persons who have lost most of their grinders, having been
compelled to use three or four only in chewing, wore them so
low that the inward nerve lay bare, and they would no on: |
for pain make use of them. ray on the craio,
i but revenge my fate; disdain'd, betrayol,
, and suff'ring death for this ungrateful maid. drydo,
sole on the barren sands, the suff'ring chief
roar'd out for anguish, and indulg'd his gies, drydin,
for his song absence church and state did groan, -
madness the pulpit, faction seiz'd the throno, p!"
nor with a superstitious fear is aw’d '; virgil
for what befals at home, or what .# *
i, my own judge, condemn'd myself boo"; ,
for po, . my crime no more. dryden's auring.
matrons of renown,
when tyrant nero burnt th’ imperial town,
shriek'd for the downfal in a doleful cry, ie. droit,
for which their guiltless lords were doom d to die. *.
children, discountenanced by their paren's for *; o
find a refuge in the caresses of foolish flattoo: scri i.
a sound mind in a sound body is a short but o:
of a happy state in this world: he that has these two
- ill be but
more to wish for, and he that wants eitheros" will loft,
little the better for any thing else. lis,
the middle &amp; #. #. remarkable for tempo. aij,
my open'd thought to joyous prosp;| raise, prior,
and for thy mercy let me sing thy praise. ink;
which best or worst, you could not think; prior,
and die you must, for want of drink. . to repress
it is a most infamous scandal upon the * soft
them for treating foreigners with contempo somethio
we can only give them that liberty "9" fr. … of sal'
which they ... many years exercised for nothing, ".
ing and sciibbling against us.
your sermons will be less valuable, so
2. with respect to ; with regard to. -
rather our state's defective for requito, o; corso"
than we to stretch it out. shakoff car.
a paltry ring
that she did give me, whose poesy was,
for all the world, like cutlers poetry so
upon a knife; love me and leave no " fr
. . c. #,
r want of tim” soft
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 849</div><p class="text">f o r *
f o r
o
*
--
-
.*
o
for all the world,
as thou art at this hour, was richard then. shakesp. h. iv.
it was young counsel for the persons, and violent counsel
or the matters. bacon's effy.
authority followeth old men, and favour and popularity
youth ; but for the moral part, perhaps, youth will have the
re-eminence, as age hath for the politick. bacon's essays.
comets are rather gazed upon than wisely observed in their
effects; that is, what kind of comet for magnitude or colour,
produceth what kind of effects. bacon's essays.
for me, if there be such a thing as i. - //aller.
he saith these honours consisted in preserving their memo-
ries, and praising their virtues ; but for any matter of worship
towards them, he utterly denies it. stillingfleet.
our laws were for their matter foreign. hales.
now for the government, it is absolute monarchy; there
being no other laws in china but the king's command. temple.
for me, no other happiness i own,
than to have born no issue to the throne. dryd. tyr. love.
for me, my stormy voyage at an end,
i to the port of death securely tend. dryden’s afn.
after death, we sprights have just such natures
we had, for all the world, when human creatures. dryden.
such little wasps, and yet so full of spite ;
for bulk mere infects, yet in mischief strong. tate's juv.
hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in
general ; but for particulars and circumstances, he continually
lops them. pope's preface to the iliad.
lo, some are ve!!om, and the rest as good,
for all his lordship knows, but they are wood. pope.
. in this sense it has often as before it.
as for maramaldus the general, they had no just cause to
mislike him, being an old captain of great experience. knolles.
4. in the character of: -
if a man can be fully assured of any thing for a truth, with-
out having examined, what is there that he may not embrace
for truth : locke.
she thinks you favour'd :
but let her go, for an ungrateful woman. a. phillips.
say, is it fitting in this very field,
this fiftd, where from my youth i’ve been a carter,
i, in this field, should die for a deserter : gay.
5. with resemblance of.
i bear for certain, and do speak the truth,
the geistle york is up. shakoff. henry iv.
now, now for sure, deliverance is at hand,
"the kingdom. shall to israel be restor'd. milton.
the hartling fleed was seiz'd with sudden fright,
and, bounding, o'er the pommel cast the knight:
forward he flew, and pitching on his head,
he quiver'd with his feet, and lay for dead. dryden.
6. considered as ; in the place of.
our present lot appears
for happy, though but ill; for ill, not worst, -
if we procure not to ourselves more woe, milton.
the council-table and star-chamber held for honourable that
which pleased, and for just that which profited. clarendon.
7. in advantage of: for the sake of. - - -
anant is a wise creature for itself; but it is a shrewd thing
in an orchard. - - - bacon.
her fused not to die for those that killed him, and shed his
blood for some of those that spilt it. boyle.
shall i think the work! woos. one,
nd men are born for kings, as beasts for mon,
so o: to be devour'd : dryd. span. fryar.
read all the prefaces of dryden, .
for those our criticks much confide in ;
though meerly writ at first for filling, -
to raise the volume's price a shilling. swift.
8. conducive to ; beneficial to. -
it is for the general good of human society, and conse-
quently of particular persons, to be true and just ; and it is
for mens health to be temperate. - tillotson.
it can never be for the interest of a believer to do me a mis-
chief, because he is sure, upon the balanco of accounts, to
find himself a loser by it. - addison's spectator.
. with intention of going to a certain place.
we sailed from peru, for china and japan. bacon.
as she was brought for england, she was cast away near
harwich haven. - - howard.
we failed directly for genoa, and had a fair wind. addison.
1c. in comparative respect.
for tusks with indian elephants he strove,
and jove's own thunder from his mouth he drove. drydon.
11. with appropriation to. - -
shadow will serve for summer: prick him; for we have a
number of shadows to fill up the muster-book.
shakespeare's henry iv.
12. after o an expression of desire.
o for a muse of fire, that would ascend
the brightest heaven of invention ! shak. h. w. prologue.
13. in account of ; in solution of.
thus much for the beginning and progress of the deluge.
- burnet's theory of the earth,
14. inducing to as a motive.
there is a natural, immutable, and eternal reason for that
which we call virtue, and against that which we call vice. till.
15. in expectation of. -
he must be back again by one and twenty, to marry and
propagate : the father cannot stay any longer for the portion,
nor the mother for a new set of babies to play with. locke.
16. noting power or possibility.
for a holy person to be humble, for one whom all men
esteem a faint, to fear lest himself become a devil, is as hard
as for a prince to submit himself to be guided by tutors. taylor.
17. noting dependence.
the colours of outward objects, brought into a darkened
room, depend for their visibility upon the dimness of the light
they are beheld by. boyle on colours.
18. in prevention of ; for fear of.
corn being had down, any way ye allow,
should wither as needeth for burning in mow. tissor.
and, for the time shall not seem tedious,
i'll tell thee what befel me on a day, -
in this self place. shakesp. henry vi.
there must be no alleys with hedges at the hither end, for
letting your prospect upon this fair hedge from the green: nor
at the farther end, for letting your prospect from the hedge
through the arches upon the heath. bacon's essays.
she wrapped him close for catching cold. lovelace.
19. in remedy of.
sometimes hot, sometimes cold things are good for the
toothach. garretson.
20. in exchange of.
he made considerable progress in the study of the law, be-
fore he quitted that profession for this of poetry. dryden.
21. in the place of ; instead of.
to make him copious is to alter his character ; and to
translate him line for line is impossible. dryden.
we take a falling meteor for a star. cowley.
22. in supply of ; to serve in the place of. -
most of our ingenious young men take up some cried-up
english poet for their model, adore him, and imitate him, as
they think, without knowing wherein he is defective. dryden.
23. through a certain duration.
some please for once, some will for ever please. rostom.
those who sleep without dreaming, can never be convinced
that their thoughts are for four hours busy, without their
knowing it. locke.
the administration of this bank is for life, and partly in the
hands of the chief citizens. addison's remarks on italy.
since, hir'd for life, thy servile muse must sing
successive conquests, and a glorious king ;
and bring him laurels, whatsoe'er they cost. prior.
the youth transported, asks without delay
to guide the sun's bright chariot for a day.
24. in search of; in quest of.
philosophers have run so far back for arguments of com-
fort against pain, as to doubt whether there were any such
thing; and yet, for all that, when any great evil has been upon
them, they would cry out as loud as other men. tillotson.
25. according to.
chymists have not been able, for aught is vulgarly known,
by fire alone to separate true sulphur from antimony. boyle.
26. noting a state of fitness or readiness.
nay, if you be an undertaker, i am for you. shakespeare.
if he be brave, he's ready for the stroke. dryden.
27. in hope of; for the sake of; noting the final cause.
how quickly nature
falls to revolt, when gold becomes her object !
for this the foolish, over-careful fathers,
have broke their sleeps with thought, their brains with care,
their bones with industry: for this, engross'd
the canker'd heaps of strong atchieved gold :
for this they have been thoughtful to invest
their sons with arts and martial exercises. shakesh. h. iv.
the kingdom of god was first rent by ill counsel; upon
which counsel there are set, for our instruction, two *:::::
alcoh!.
garth's ovid.
whether some hero's fate, .
in words worth dying for, he celebrate. cowley.
for he writes not for money, nor for praise, -
nor to be call’d a wit, nor to wear bays. denham.
there we shall see, a fight worthy dying for, that blessed
saviour, who so highly deserves of us. - boyle.
he is not disposed to be a fool, and to be miserable for com-
pan tillotson.
even death's become to me no dreadful name;
in fighting fields, where our acquaintance grew,
i saw him, and contemn'd him first for you. dryd. aureng.
for this, 'tis needful to prevent her * *-
and fill withio the proud phoenician's heart. poyd.”3.
some pray for riches; riches they obtain ;
but watch'd by robbers, for their wealth are slain. pos.
- t<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 850</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
. let them, who truly would appear my friends,
employ their swords like mine for noble ends. dryd. auren.
28. of tendency to ; towards. -
, the kettle to the top was hoist;
but with the upside down, to show
its inclination for below. -
29. in favour of ; on the part of; on the side of. - -
ye suppose the laws for which ye strive are found in scrip-
ture; but those not against which we strive. hooker, preface.
it becomes me not to draw my pen in the defence of a bad
cause, when i have so often drawn it for a good one. dryden.
jove was for venus; but he fear'd his wife. ... dryden.
he for the world was made, not us alone. cowley.
they must be void of all zeal for god's honour, who do
swift.
not with fighs and tears intercede with him. smalridge.
aristotle is for poetical justice. dennis.
felton.
they are ail for rank and foul feeding.
30. noting accommodation or adaptation.
fortune, if there be such a thing as she,
spies that i bear so well her tyranny, !
that she thinks nothing else so fit for me. donne.
a few rules of logick are thought sufficient, in this case, for
those who pretend to the highest improvement. locke.
it is for wicked men to dread god; but a virtuous man
may have undisturbed thoughts, even of the justice of god.
tillotson.
his country has good havens, both for the adriatick and
mediterranean. addison on italy.
persia is commodiously situated for trade both by sea and
land. arbuthnot on coins.
scholars are frugal of their words, and not willing to let
any go for ornament, if they will not serve for use. felton.
1. with intention of.
and by that justice hast remov’d the cause
of those rude tempests, which, for rapine sent
too oft, alas, involv'd the innocent. waller.
here huntsmen with delight may read
how to chuse dogs for scent or speed. //aller.
god hath made some things for as long a duration as they
are capable of. tillotson's sermons.
for this, from trivia's temple and her wood,
are coursers driv'n, who shed their masters blood. dryden.
such examples should be set before them, as patterns for
their daily imitation. - locke.
the next question usually is, what is it for * locke.
achilles is for revenging himself upon agamemnon, by
means of hector. broome's piew of epick poem.
32. becoming ; belonging to.
it were not for your quiet, nor your good,
nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom,
to let you know my thoughts. shakespeare's othells.
- th' offers he doth make,
were not for him to give, nor them to take. daniel.
it were more for his honour to raise his siege, than to spend
so many good men in the winning of it by force. ronalles.
jesis for dutchmen and english boys. cowley.
is it for you to ravage seas and land,
unauthoriz'd by my supreme command ' dryd. jorg. æn.
his fire already signs him for the skies,
and marks the seat amidst the deities. dryden's zn.
it is a reasonable account for any man to give, why he does
not live as the greatest part of the world do, that he has no
mind to die as they do, and perish with them. tillason.
33. notwithstanding.
this, for anything we know to the contrary, might be the
self-same form which philojudaeus expresseth. hooker.
god's desertion shall, for ought he knows, the next minute
supervene. decay of piety.
probability supposes that a thing may or may not be so,
for anything yet certainly determined on either side. south.
. for any thing that legally appears to the contrary, it may
be a contrivance to fright us.
if such vast males of matter had been situated nearer to the
fun, or to each other, as they might as easily have been, for
any mechanical or fortuitous agent, they must necessarily have
caused a considerable disorder in the whole system. bentley.
34. to the use of; to be used in.
the oak for nothing ill,
the osier good for twigs, the poplar for the mill. spensor.
your understandings are not bright enough for the exercise
of the highest acts of reason. o tillotson.
35. in consequence of.
for love they force through thickets of the wood,
they climb the fleepy hills and stem the flood,
36. in recompence of ; in return of.
now, for so many glorious actions done,
for peace at home, and for the publick wealth,
i mean to crown a bow; for cajar's health;
besides, in gratitude for such high matters,
know i have vow'd two hundred gladiators. dryden’s pers:
first the wily wizard must be caught;
for unconstrain'd, he nothing tells for naught. dryd, virg.
dryden.
swift's drapier's letters.
37. in proportion to.
he is not very tall, yet for his years oe's tall s.
as he could see clear, for those times th offort,
slition; so he would be blinded, now and o ough supe.
policy. ba o by human
exalted socrates' divinely bravel co. * henry vii,
injur'd he fell, and dying he forgave;
too noble for revenge.
38. by means o by interposition of. tnal,
moral consideration can no way move t -
were it not for the will. y #o: o site,
of some calamity we can have no relief o oil.
alone; and what would men do in such a case if o god
for god? 2 o:
9. in regard of; in preservation of. i can 4 losin,
*::::::::::::::::::::::::, so
i bid the rascal knock upon your gate;
but could not get him for my heart.
i cannot for my heart leave a room, before i have
examined the papers pasted upon the walls.
40. for all. notwithstanding.
neither doubt you, because i wear a woman's app, !
will be the more womanish ; since i assure you o
apparel, there is nothing i desire more than ns to o:
myself a man in this enterprize. y §.
for all the carefulness of the christians the english bio.
was undermined by the enemy, and upon the fourth of s
tember part thereof was blown up. knolles'; hji p-
but as noah's pigeon, which return’d no more ory,
did shew she footing found for all the flood. y
they resolute, for all this, do proceed
unto that judgment. danid
if we apprehend the greatest things in the world of i.
emperor of china or japan, we are well enough contented
%r all that, to let them govern at home. sing.
though that very ingenious person has anticipated pit i
what i should say, yet you will, for all that, exped that i
should give you a fuller account. boyle on colours.
she might have passed over such businesses; but my rabble is
not to be mumbled up in filence, for all her pertness. dryden.
for all his exact plot, down was he cast from all his great-
ness, and forced to end his days in a mean condition. south.
41. for to. in the language used two centuries ago, for was
commonly used before to, the sign of the infinitive mood, to
note the final cause. as, i come for to see you, for i love to
sce you : in the same sense with the french pour. thus its
used in the translation of the bible. but this distinction was
by the best writers sometimes forgotten; and for, by wrong use,
appearing superfluous, is now always omitted.
who shall let me now
dryden', juv
shahjort,
thoroughly
addison's sofl.
davies.
on this vile body for to wreak my wrong? fairy qor,
a large posterity -
up to your happy palaces may mount,
of blessed saints for to increase the count, sponsor,
these things may serve for to represent how just cause of
fear this kingdom may have towards spain. bacon.
for. conj.
1. the word by which the reason is introduced of something
advanced before.
heav'n doth with us as we with torches deal,
not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
as if we had them not. shakes). mosure for mosere.
old husbandmen i at sabinum know,
who for another year dig, plough, and sow;
for never any man was yet so old,
but hop'd his life one winter more would hold. denham.
tell me what kind of thing is wit?
for the first matter loves variety less. ” - cowl;
thus does he foolishly who, for fear of any thing in this
world, ventures to displease god; for in so doing he runs
away from men, and fills into the hands of the living.9%
tilso
2. because; on this account that. it is in this sons: poo".
followed by that, and without it is elliptical. this sense is
almost obsolete.
i doubt not but great troops would be ready to run; yet
for that the worst men are most ready to remove, i would .
them chosen by discretion of wise men. sponsor on ireland.
jealous souls will not be answer'd so:
they are not ever jealous for a cause, '; ool.
but jealous for they’re jealous. saiso uloo.
heaven defend your good souls, that you think
i will your serious and great business scant; ', ohill
for she is with me. sha§ear's othell.
nor swell'd his breast with uncouth pride,
o heav'n on him above his i. laid;
3ut, for his great creator would the fame, -
his aft increas: ; so fire augmenteth flame: fo
many excrescences of trees grow chiefly who the .
dead or faded ; for that the natural sap of the to j.
into some preternatural substance. bacon's * o:
:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 851</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
!.
--
-
-
-
-"
---
**
-
3. for as much. in regard that ; in consideration of
for as much as in publick prayer we are not only to con-
sider what is needful, in respect of god; but there is also in
men that which we must regard: we somewhat incline to
length, left overquick dispatch should give occasion to deem,
that the thing itself is but little accounted of. hooker.
for as much as the thirst is intolerable, the patient may be
indulged the free use of spaw water. arbuthnot on diet,
4. for why. because ; for this reason that.
solyman had three hundred fieldpieces; for why, solyman
purposing to draw the emperor into battic, had brought no
pieces of battery with him. knolles.
to fo'r.a.g.e. v. n. [from foris, abroad, latin.]
1. to wander far ; to rove at a distance. not in use.
forage, and run
to meet displeasure farther from the doors, -
and grapple with him, ere he come so nigh. shak. k. john.
2. to wander in search of spoil, generally of provisions.
as in a stormy night,
wolves, urged by their raging appetite,
forage for prey. - denham.
there was a brood of young larks in the corn, and the dam
went abroad to forage for them. l’estrange.
nor dare they stray
when rain is promis'd or a stormy day;
but near the city walls their wat'ring take,
nor forage far, but short excursions make. dryden's wirgil.
3. to ravage ; to feed on spoil.
his most mighty father on a hill
stood smiling, to behold his lion's whelp -
forage in blood of french nobility. shakesp. henry v.
to fo'r.a.g.e. v. a. to plunder; to strip; to spois.
they will both strengthen all the country round, and also
be as continual holds for her majesty, if the people should re-
volt; for without such it is easy to forage and over-run the
whole land, - spensor on ireland.
the victorious philistines were worsted by the captivated
ark, which foraged their country more than 'a conqoering
army. south.
fo’rage. m. s. [fourage, german and french ; from foris,
latin.
i. s: of provisions; the act of feeding abroad.
one way a band select from forage drives -
a herd of beeves, fair oxen, and fair kine, * ,
from a fat meadow ground ; or fleecy flock,
ewes and their bleating lambs, over the plains
their booty. milton's parads:
2. provisions sought abroad.
some o'er the publick magazines preside,
3. provisions in general.
provided forage, our spent arms renew’d. dryd. fablea
for a minous, adj. [from foramen, latin.] full of holes;
perforated in many places ; porous.
soft and foraminous bodies, in the first creation of the sound,
will deaden it; but in the passage of the sound they will ad-
mit it better than harder bodies. bacon's natural hisory.
to for bear. v. m. pret. i forbore, anciently forbare; part.
forborn. [ponbaenan, saxon. for has in composition the power
of privation ; as, forbear: or depravation; as, forswear, and
other powers not easily explained.]
1. to cease from any thing ; to intermit,
who can forbear to admire and adore him who weighed
the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance. cheyne.
2. to pause ; to delay. -
i pray you, tarry : pause a day or two,
before you hazard; for in chufing wrong,
i lose your company; therefore forbear a while. shakesp.
3. to omit voluntarily ; not to do; to abstain.
he friare to go forth.
at this he started, and forbore to swear;
not out of conscience of the sin, but fear. dryden's juv.
the wolf, the lion, and the bear,
when they their prey in pieces tear, :
to quarrel with themselves forbear. denham.
4. to restrain any violence of temper; to be patient.
by long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue
breaketh the bone. prov. xxv. 15.
to fo'r b e ar. v. a.
1. to decline; to avoid voluntarily. -
forbear his presence, until time hath qualified the heat of his
1 sa. xxiii. 13.
displeasure. shakesp. king lear.
so angry bulls the combat do forbear,
when from the wood a lion does appear. jwaller.
2. to abstain from ; to shun to do ; to omit.
if it passed only by the house of peers, it should be looked
upon as invalid and void, and execution should be thereupon
forborn or suspended. - clarendon.
there is not any one action whatsoever which a man ought
to do, or to forbear, but the scripture will give him a clear
precept or prohibition for it. south.
3. to spare ; to treat with clcmency.
vol. i.
b with all lowlines, and meekness, with long suffering, for-
earing one another in love, eph. iv. 2.
4. to withold.
forbeer thee from meddling with god, who is with me
that he destroy thee not. 2 chro. xxxv.2.
foo'arance. m. s. [from forbear.]
1. the care of avoiding or thunning any thing; negation of
practice.
true nobleness would
learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong. , shakespeare.
this may convince us how vastly greater pleasure is con-
sequent upon the forbearance of fin, than can possibly accom-
pany the commission of it. south.
liberty is the power a man has to do, or forbear doing, any
particular action, according as its doing or forbearance has the
actual preference in the mind. locke.
2. intermission of something.
3. command of temper.
have a continent forbearance, ’till the speed of his rage
goes flower. shakesp. king lear.
4. lenity; delay of punishment; mildness.
nor do i take notice of this instance of severity in our own
country to justify such a proceeding, but only to display the
mildness and forbearance made use of under the reign of his
present majesty. addison's freeholder.
he applies to our gratitude by obligations of kindness and
beneficence, of long suffering and forbearance. rogers.
for be'arer. m. s. [from forbear.j an intermitter; inter-
ceptor of any thing.
the west as a father all goodness doth bring,
the east a forbearer, no manner of thing. tuffer.
to fo'rbid. v. a. pret. i forbade; part. forbidden or forbid.
sponbeoban, saxon ; verbieden, dutch..]
1. to prohibit; to interdict any thing.
a witch, a quean, an old cozening quean; have i not for-
bid her my house i shaftoff. a4erry wives of windsor.
t is
the pracice and the purpose of the king,
from whose obedience i forbid my soul.
by tasting of that fruit forbid,
where they fought knowledge, they did error find. davier.
the voice of reason, in all the dictates of natural morality,
ought carefully to be attended to, by a strict observance of
what it commands, but especially of what it forbids. south.
all hatred of persons, by very many christian principles,
we are most solemnly and indispensably forbid. spratt.
the chaste and holy race
are all forbidden this polluted place.
shakespeare.
dryden's aen.
… 2. to command to forbear any thing.
and some are sent new forage to provide. dryden's .v. she with so sweet a rigour forbad him, that he durst not
rebel. sidney.
they have determined to consume all those things that
* god hath forbidden them to eat by his laws, judith, xi. 12.
'o. 3. to oppose; to hinder.
. the moisture being forbidden to come up in the plant, stay-
o, eth longer in the root, and so dilateth it. bacon's nat. history.
* the plaister alone would pen the humour, and so exasperate
it as well as forbid new humour. bacon's natural history.
\ , thy throne is darkness in th’ abyss of light
a blaze of glory that forbids the fight !
o teach me to believe thee thus conceal’d, -
and search no farther than thyself reveal’d. dryden.
4. to accurse; to blast. now obsolete. to bid is in old lan-
guage to pray; to forbid therefore is to curse.
sleep shall neither night nor day.
hang upon his penthouse lid; ;
he shall live a man forbid. shakosheare's macbeth.
to fo'rbid. v. n. to utter a prohibition. **
now the good gods forbid, * o
that our renowned rome ... . . . . -
should now eat up her own | shakoffeare's coriolanus.
forbi’ddance. m. s. [from forbid.] prohibition; edict against
any thing. . . . . . . .
how hast thou yielded to transgress
the strici forbiddance 1 how to violate
the sacred fruit forbidden milton's paradis: lost,
fo'rbiddenly. adv. [from forbid.] in an unlawful manner.
with all confidence he swears, as he had seen’t,
that you have touch'd his queen forbiddenly. shakespeare.
fo'rbidder. m. s. [from forbid.] one that prohibits; one
that enacts a prohibition.
this was a bold accusation of god, making the fountain
of good the contriver of cvil, and the forbidder of the crime an
abettor of the fact prohibited. brown.
other care, perhaps,
may have diverted from continual watch
our great forbidder / aftion's paradis. lost.
fo'rbidding. participial adj. [from forbid.] raising abhor-
rence; repelling approach ; causing aversion. -
tragedy was made forbidding and horrible. a. hill.
force. n.f. [force, french fortis, latin.]
1. strength; vigour; might active power.
9 o he
&gt; *-
-
-
* --- - -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 852</div><p class="text">f o r.
f o r
. tain his part but in the force of his will.
he never could maintain so. a such ad, about nothing.
a ship, which hath struck tail, doth run
by force of that force which before it won. jdonne.
2. violence. - *
thus got the house of lancaster the crown, q
which now they hold by force, and not by right. shakoff.
" " the shepherd paris lore the spartan bride
by force away, and then by force enjoy'd ; ... 27.
but i by free consent. dryden.
. virtue; efficacy. - -
3 "ß it i. that the very majesty and holiness of the
place where god is worshipped, hath, in regard of us, great
virtue, sorce and efficacy , for that it serveth as a sensible help
to stir up devotion. - hooker.
no definitions, no suppositions cf any sect, are of force
enough to destroy constant cxperience. locke.
4. validness; power of law.
a testament is of force after men are dead.
not long inforce this charter flood;
wanting that seas, it must be seard in blood. denham.
5. armament ; warlike preparation. often forces in the plural.
o thou ! whose captain i account myself, -
łook on my forces with a gracious eye. shakes). rich. iii.
the secret of the power of spain consisteth in a veteran
*y-, compounded of miscellany forces of all nations. bacon.
a greater force than that which here we find, -
ne'er pref'd the ocean, nor employ'd the wind. ivaller.
those victorious forces of the rebels were not able to sus-
tain your arms. dryden.
6. pestiny; necessity; fatal compulsion.
73 force. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to compel; to constrain. -
pangors are light, if they once seem light; and more
dangers have deceived men than forced them. bacon.
! have been forced to use the cant words of whig and
tory. swift's examiner.
the agions and operations did force them upon dividing
the single idea. broome's wiew of epick poem.
2. to overpower by strength.
o that tortune
had brought me to the field where thou art fam'd
to have wrought such wonders with an ass's jaw,
! sold have fired thee soon with other arms.
with fates averse, the rout in arms resort,
to force their monarch and insult the court. dryden’s afn.
3. to impel; to press; to draw or push by main strength.
thou shalt not destroy the trees by forcing an ax against
them. deut. xx. 19.
stooping, the spear descended on his chine,
just where the bone distinguish’d either loin :
it stuck so fast, so deeply bury'd lay,
that scarce the victor forc'd the steel away.
4. to enforce; to urge.
three bluff'ring nights, born by the southern blast,
i floated, and discover'd and at last :
high on a mounting wave my head i bore,
wong my strength, and gath'ring to the shore. dryd. zn.
ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere,
! come to pluck your berries harsh and crude,
and with forc’d fingers rude
shotter your leaves before the mellowing year. milton.
5. to drive by violence or power.
this way of flattering their willing benefaaors out of part,
contrived another of forcing their unwilling neighbours out of
all their possesions. decay of piety.
to free the ports, and ope the punique land
to trojan guests; lesi, ignorant of fate,
the queen "3"sorce them from her town and state. dryd.
6. to gain by violence or power.
my heart is your's; but, oh! you left it here
abandon'd to those tyrants hope and fear :
if they fore’d from neon. kind look or word,
heb. ix. 17.
a silton.
dryden’s afn.
could you not that, nor that small part afford dryden.
7. to storm; to take of ens. by violence.
- troy wall'd so high,
atrides might as well have forc'd the sky. //aller.
heav'n from all ages wisely did provide
this wolth, and for the brovost nation hide;
who with four hundred foot, and forty horse,
dare boldly 89 a new-found world to force. dryd. ind. emp.
• to ravish ; to viejo by force. “ - -
force her.—i like it in ot.
9. to constrain; to distort;
ease.
dryden.
* to obtain naturally or with
qur general taste in england is for epigram, turns of wit,
and forced conceits. addison's speciator.
10. to man; to strengthen by soldiers; to garrison.
2 t-. here let them lye,
till famine and to *gue eat them up:
were they *sore'd with those that should be our’s,
we might ho met them dareful, beard to beard. shakso.
if you find that *} of number of soldiers
into oroonoque, and that the passages be jo sent
be well advised how you land. ..}so to
it. 72 force out. to extort. - * 4.
the heat of the dispute had forced
fions that seemed to make his doctrin bin real
it did. - -
to force. v. n. to lay stress "poil. this word i o
food in the following passage. ave only
that morning that he was to join battle w
*imprer put on his backpiece before, and his
hind; the which **ing espied by some o: o: te.
taken among them for an ill token, and the y, was
not to fight that day; to whom th: 3. answe
of such fooleries; but if i have any skill in o: not
footh i have none, it doth prognosticate that i shall i. in
copy from a duke to a king. camden', r.
forcedly. adv. [from force..] violently; constrainess."
naturally. - - y; un-
this foundation of the earth "pon the waters doth most
aptly agree to that structure of t. abyss and antediluvian
earth; but very improperly and forcedly to the present form of
the earth and the waters. wrnet's thor
fo rce ful. adj. [force and full.] violent; frong; so
with great might; impetuoss,
why, what need we
qommune with you of this, but rather follow
our forceful infligation : soft. winter
f o the fleed he threw so r’s tak,
his forceful spear, which, hifling as it flew,
cit from luthe
f expres.
* run higher t xpres
ith harold, hi,
pierc'd through the yielding planks. dryden'. an,
were it by chance, or forcosul destiny,
which forms in caus's fist whate'er shall be,
affifted by a friend, one moonless night,
this palamon from prison took his flight. dryden,
- he pois'd in air, the jav'lin sent, -
through paris’ shield the forceful weapon went. pope,
fo'rcefully. adv. [from !...?"; violently; impetuously.
force less. adj. [from force.j having it: force; weak;
feeble ; impotent. -
forceps, m. s. [latin.] -
forceps properly signifies a pair of tongs; but is used for
an instrument in chirurgery, to extract any thing out of
wounds, and the like occasions, &amp;ing.
forcer. n.s. [from force.] - - - - -
i. that which forces, drives, or constrains.
2. the embolus of a pump working by pulsion, in contradisint-
tion to a sucker, which agıs by attraction.
the usual means for the ascent of water is either by suckers
or forcers. - jwilkins' dadalus,
o'rc (ble. adj. [from force.]
i. strong; mighty : opposed to weak. - -
that punishment, which hath been sometimes frtill to
bridle sin, may grow afterwards too weak and feeble, huiar.
who therefore can invent
with what more forcible we may offend
our yet unwounded enemies?
2. violent; impetuous. -
jersey, belov’d by all; for all must feel
the influence of a form and mind, -
where comely grace and conflat virtue dwell,
like ming'd streams, more forcible when join'd:
jersey shall at thy altars stand, - -
shall there receive the azure band, prior.
- efficacious; active, powerful. -
3 sweet smells are o forcible in dry substances, o
broken ; and so likewise in oranges, the ripping of o
giveth out their smell more. bacon's natural hijio,
4. provalent; of great influence. %h
how forcible are right words : . . ." t s :
god hath assured us, that there is no io. o
tation so forcible which our humble prayers and desires may
milo,
not frustrate and break asunder. raleigh's history,
5. done by force; suffered by force. -
he swifter far, y
me overtook, his mother all dismay’d,
and in embraces forcible and soul milton,
ingend'ring with me. -
#. abdication of king james, the advocates o:
look upon to have been forcible and unjust, and conth ift.
void. -
6. valid; binding; obligatorv. - -
forcibleness. . s: o %il. force; violence.
forcibly. adv. [from forcible.]
1. strongly ; powerfully. crk
th: &amp;# joach considerations as *::: o
very sortibly upon two of the most swaying a *.
pations in the mind, our hopes and our fears.
2. impetuously; with great strength. -
3. by violence; by force.
he himself with greedy great desire
into the castle enter'd forcibly.
o
* 3ueen.
fairy *:::
i.
.
.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 853</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
o
...: -
o
fore. adj. [fore, saxon.]
the taking and carrying away of women forcio, and
against their will, except female wards and bond women, was
made capital. bacon's henry vii.
. this doctrine brings us down to the level of horse and mule,
whose mouths are forcibly holden with bit and bridle. hamm.
fo'rc1pated. adj. [from forceps...] formed like a pair of
incers to open and inclose.
the locusts have antennae, or long horns before, with a
long falcation or forcipated tail behind. brown.
when they have seized their prey, they will so tenaciously
hold it with their forcipated mouth, that they will not part
there with, even when taken out of the waters. derham.
ford. m. s. [fono, saxon, from panan, to pass.]
1. a shallow part of a river where it may be passed without
swimming.
her men the paths rode through made by her sword;
they pass the stream, when she had found theford. fairfax.
2. it sometimes signifies the stream, the current, without any
consideration of passage or shallowness.
medusa with gorgonian terror guards
the ford, and of itself the water flies
all taste of living wight. milton's paradis. loft.
rise, wretched widow ! rise; nor undeplor’d
permit my ghost to pass the stygian ford:
but rise, prepar'd in black to mourn thy perish'd lord. dry.
to for d. v. a. [from the noun..] to pass without swim-
ming.
adam's shin-bones must have contained a thousand fathom,
and much more, if he had forded the ocean. raleigh's hist.
fording his current where thou find'st it low. denham.
fo'rdable. adj. [from ford..] passable without swimming.
pliny placeth the schenitae upon the euphrates, where the
same beginneth to be fordable. raleigh's history.
a countryman founded a river up and down, to try where
it was most fordable; and where the water ran too smooth, he
found it deepest ; and, on the contrary, shallowest where it
made most noise. l'e/irange.
1. anterior; that which is before ; not behind.
though there is an orb or spherical area of the sound, yet
they move strongest and go farthest in the fore lines from the
first local impresion. bacon.
2. that which comes first in a progressive motion. -
resistance in fluids arises from their greater pressing on the
fore than hind part of the bodies moving in them. cheyne.
fo r.e. adv.
1. anteriorly; in the part which appears first to those that meet
it.
each of thcm will bear six demiculverins and four sakers,
needing no other addition than a slight spar deck fore and aft,
which is a slight deck throughout. raleigh's essays.
2. fore is a word much used in composition to mark priority of
time, of which some examples shall be given. a vitious or-
thography has confounded for and fore in composition.
to for ea dv1's e. v. m. [fore and advise.] to counsel early 5
to counsel before the time of a&amp;ion, or the event.
thus to have said,
as you were freadvis'd, had touch'd his spirit, -
and tried his inclination. shakespeare's coriolanus.
t, for eappo'int. v. n. [fore and appoint..] to order before-
hand. -
t. for fa(rm. v. a. [fore and arm.] to provide for attack
or resistance before the time of need.
a man should fix and forearm his mind with this persuasion,
that, during his passion, whatsoever is offered to his imagina-
tion tends only to deceive. - south.
he firearms his care
with rules to push his fortune, or to bear. dryden's zn.
to for e bo'd e. v. n. [fore and bode.]
1. to prognosticate ; to foreteil.
an ancient augur, skill'd in future fate,
with these foreboding words restrains their hate. dryden,
2. to foreknow ; to be prescient of ; to feel a secret sense of
something future. - - -
fate makes you deaf, while i in vain implore:
my heart forbados i ne'er shall see you more.
my soil forbaded i should find the bow'r *
of some fell monster, fierce with barb'rous pow'r. pope.
for e bo der. m. s. [from forebode.]
1. a prognosticator; a foothsayer. -
your raven has a reputation in the world for a bird of omen,
and a kind of small prophet: a crow that had observed the
raven's manner and way of delivering his predictions, sets up
for a foreboder. l'estrange.
2. a foreknower.
fort by', prep. [fore and by..] . near; hard by ; fast by.
not far away he hence doth won
forely a fountain, where 1 late him left.
to for ed a'st. v. a. [fore and caff.]
1. to scheme; to plan before execution. -
he shall forecas; his devices against the strongholds. dan. xi.
2. to adjust ; to contrive antecedently.
dryden.
fairy queen.
the feast was serv'd : the time so well forecast,
that just when the dessert and fruits were placid,
the fiend's alarm began. dryden's theod, and honoria.
3. to foresee; to provide against. o -
it is wisdom to consider the end of things before we em-
bark, and to forecast consequences. l’estrange.
*...*** v. n. to form schemes; to contrive before-
and, -
and whatso heavens in their secret doom
ordained have, how can frail fleshy wight ... "
porecast, but it must needs to issue com: spenser.
when broad awake, she finds in troublous fit,
z forecasting how his foe he might annoy. fairy queen.
fo'recast. n: s [from the verb..] contrivance beforehand;
scheme ; plan; antecedent policy. -
alas ! that warwick had no more forecaff,
but while he thought to seal the single ten, -
the king was slily finger'd from the deck! shak. hon. vi.
he makes this difference to arise from the forecast and pre-
determination of the gods. - addison on medals.
the last, scarce ripen'd into perfeot man,
aw helpless him from whom their life began:
mem'ry and forecast just returns engage;
that pointed back to youth, this on to age. pope.
foreca's er. m. s. [from forecas.] one who contrives ee-
forehand. - - - -
foocasri e. m. s. [fore and castle.] in a ship, is that part
where the foremast fiands, and is divided from the rest of the
floor by a bulk-head : that part of the forecastle which is aloft,
and not in the hold, is called the prow. harris.
the commodity of the new cook-room the merchants have
found to be so great, as that, in all their ships, the cook-rooms
are built in their forecastles, contrary to that which had been
anciently used. raleigh's essays.
for echooes, part. [fore and chosen.] pre-elected.
for egor d. part. ifre and cite.j quoted before, or above.
reaves is of opinion, that the alteration mentioned on
that forecited passage is continued. arbuthnot on coins.
to fokkclo's e. v. a. [fore and clos..]
1. to shut up ; to preclude; to prevent. -
the embargo with spain foreclosed this trade. carew.
2. to foreclose a mortgage, is to cut off the power of re-
demption. -
force. m. s. [fore and deck.] the anterior part of the
ip. - - : . . *
i to the soredeck went, and thence did look . . • *
for rocky scylla. “ - chapman's odyssey.
toros. v. a. [fore and design.] to plan before-
3i) (l. - - - -
all the steps of the gowth and vegetation both of animals
and plants, have been foreseen and foredesigned by the wise
author of nature. cheyne's phil. princ.
to for edo'. v. a. [from for and do, not fore.]
1. to ruin; to destroy. a word obsolete. opposed to making
happy. - -
beseeching him, if either salves or oils,
a soredone wight from door of death might raise,
he would at her request prolong her nephew's days. fa. &amp;#.
that drew on men god’s hatred and his wrath,
and many souls in dolours had foredone.
. this doth betoken,
the corse they follow did with desperate hand
faredo its own life. shakspeare’s hamlet.
this is the night -
that either makes me, or foredoes me quite. shałespeare.
2. to overdo ; to weary; to harrass.
whilst the heavy plowman snoars,
all with weary task foredone. shakespeare,
to for edo'o m. v. a. [fore aud doom.] to predestinate; to
determine beforehand. -
through various hazards and events we move
to latium, and the realms soredoom'd by jove. dryd. æn.
the willing metal will obey thy hand,
following with ease: if favour’d by thy fate,
pairy queen.
thou art foredoom'd to view the stygian state. dryden.
fate soredoom'd, and all things tend
by course of time to their appointed end. dryden,
here britain's statesmen oft the fall soredom
of foreign tyrants, and of nymphs at home. pope.
for ee'nd... n.s.. [fore and end..] the anteriour part.
i have liv'd at honest freedom ; paid
more pious debts to heaven than in all
the fore-end of my time. shakespeare's cymbeline.
in the fore-end of it, which was towards him, grew a small
green branch of palm. - bacon's new atlantis.
for efather. m. s. [fore and father.] ancestor; one who
in any degree of ascending genealogy precedes another.
the custom of the people of god, and the decrees of our
forefathers, are to be kept, touching those things whereof the
scripture hath neither one way or other given us charge.
ih:or.
if it be a generous desire in men to know from wboc:
l, 13 ii<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 854</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
their own forefathers have come, it cannot be displeasing to
understand the place of our first ancestor. raleigh's history.
conceit is still deriv'd - -
from some forefather grief; mine is not so. shak. rich. ii.
shall i not be distraught,
and madly play with my forefathers joints?
our great forefathers * . . .
had left him nought to conquer but his country. addison.
when a man sees the prodigious pains our forefathers have
been at in these barbarous buildings, one cannot but fancy
what miracles of architecture they would have left us, had
they been instructed in the right way, addison on italy.
blest peer his great forefathers ev'ry grace
refle&amp;ting, and reflected in his race. pope.
7, forefe’nd. v. a. [it is doubtful whether from fore or for
and defend. if from fore, it implies antecedent provision; as
forearm; if from for, prohibitory security; as forbid. of the
two following examples one favours for, and the other fore.]
1. to prohibit; to avert.
i would not kill thy unprepared spirit;
shakespeare.
no, heav'ns forfend i would not kill thy soul. shakesp.
perhaps a fever, which the gods forfend,
may bring your youth to some untimely end. dryden.
2. to provide for; to secure.
down with the nose,
down with it flat: take the bridge quite away
of him, that, his particular to foresend,
smells from the gen'ral weal. shakesp. timon of athens.
for ef1'nger. n.s.. [fore and finger.] the finger next to the
thumb; the index.
an agate-stone
on the forefinger of an alderman. shak. romeo and juliet.
polymnia shall be drawn, as it were, acting her speech with
her forefinger. peacham on drawing.
some wear this on the middlefinger, as the ancient gauls
and britons; and some upon the forefinger. brown.
fo'refoot. n.s. plur. forefeet. [fore and foot.] the anterior
foot of a quadruped : in contempt, a hand.
give me thy fist, thy forefoot to me give... shak. hen. v.
he ran fiercely, and smote at heliodorus with his for feet.
2 mac.iii. 25.
i continue my line from thence to the heel; then making
the breast with the eminency thereof, bring out his near fore-
fact, which i finish. peacham on drawing.
i? for ego'. v. a. [for and go.]
1. to quit; to give up ; to resign.
is it her nature, or is it her will,
to be so cruel to an humbled foe 2
if nature, then she may it mend with skill;
if will, then she at will may will forego. spensor.
having all before absolutely in his power, it remaineth so
still, he having already neither foregiven nor forgone any
thing thereby unto them, but having received something from
them. spenser's state of ireland.
he is a great adventurer, said he,
that hath his sword through hard assay foregone;
and now hath vowed, 'till he avenged be
of that despite, never to wearen none. fairy queen,
special reason oftentimes causeth the will to preser one good
thing before another; to leave one for another's sake, to fore-
go meaner for the attainment of higher degrees. hooker.
must i then leave you ? must i needs forgo
so good, so noble, and so true a master? shakespeare.
let us not forgo
that for a trifle which was bought with blood. shakoff.
how can i live without thee! how forego
thy sweet converse, and love so dearly join'd,
to live again in these wild woods forlorn milton.
this argument might prevail with you to forego a little of
your repose for the publick benefit. dryd, juv. dedic.
what they have enjoyed with great pleasure at one time,
has proved insipid or nauseous at another; and therefore they
fee nothing in it, for which they should forgo a present enjoy.
ment. ocke.
2. to go before; to be past. [from fore and go.]
by our remembrances of days foregone,
such were our faults: o ! then we thought them not. shak.
it is to be understood of cain, that many years forgone,
and when his people were increased, he built the city of
enoch. raleigh's history of the world.
reflect upon the two foregoing objections. boyle on colour.
this for going remark gives the reason why imitation pleases.
dryden's dufreshoy.
i was seated in my elbow-chair, where i had indulged the
foregoing speculations. addison,
in the foregoing part of this work i promised proofs.
jwoodward.
3. to lose.
this is the very ecstasy of love,
whose violent property for goes itself,
, , and leads the will to desp'rate undertakings. shai. hamlet.
fo'regoer. n.s. [from forego..] ancestor; progenitor.
fo'reground. m. s. [fore and ground.]
fo’re hand, adj.
for fha'nde d. m. s. [foom fore and hand.]
1. early ; timely.
2. formed in the foreparts.
fo rehead. m. s. [fore and head.]
1. that part of the face which reaches from the eyes upward
4. [in law.] a foreign plea, placitum forios”; *
fo’reign.e.r. m. s. [from foreig
-- honours best thrive,
when rather from our acts we them derive
than our foregoers. shakoff. all's well to oth well
or expanse of a pic - the part of the o
xpanse of a picture which seems to lie bes. the fi eld
all agree that white can subsist on the foregro o
picture: the question therefore is to know, if i. of the
be placed upon that which is backward, the light ...
s &amp; ulti-
versal, and the figures supposed in an open field.
fo'rehand. a. s. [fore and hand.] dodo.
1. the part of a hoise which is before the rider,
2. the chief part.
not in use.
the great achilles whom opinion crowns
the sinew and the forehand of our host.
a thing done sooner than is re.
you'll say she did embrace he as a husband.”
and so extenuate the forehand fin. 2
shakoffear,
ular.
softart.
if by thus doing you have not secured your time by an eas
and frchanded care, yet te sure, by a timely diligence
s-ovvy
- to re-
deem the time.
&gt; - -
taylor's rule of living hoj,
he's a substantial true-bred beast, bravely soro.
but the cleanness of his shapes too. mark
dryden,
to the hair.
the breast of hecuba,
when she did suckle hector, look’d not lovelier
than hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
at grecian swords contending. shałoneare's cron,
some angel copy'd, while i slept, each grace,
and molded ev'ry feature from my face:
such majesty does from her forehead rise,
her cheeks such blushes cast, such rays her eyes, dyson,
2. impudence; confidence; assurance; audaciousness; audacity,
the forehead is the part on which shame visibly operates,
a man of confidence presseth forward upon every appear.
ance of advantage; where his force is too feeble, he prevails
by dint of impudence : these men of forehead are magnificent
in promises, and infallible in their prescriptions, callier.
i would fain know to what branch of the legislature they
can have the forehead to apply. swift'. presbyterian phi,
for ehold ing.. n.s.. [fore and hold.] predictions; ominous
accounts ; superstitious prognostications.
how are superstitious men hagged out of their wits with the
fancy of omens, foreholdings, and old wives tales! l'e.
foreign. adj. [forain, fr. frano, spanish; fromfori, lit]
1. not of this country; not domestick.
your son, that with a fearful soul
leads discontented steps in foreign soil, -
this fair alliance quickly shall call home. shakoff. rios.
the learned correspondence you hold inforeign parts, mit.
the positions are so far from being new, that they as:
commonly to be met with in both ancient and modern, domes.
tick and foreign writers. afterbury,
the parties and divisions amongst us may sever, ways
bring destruction upon our country, at the same time that our
united force would secure us against all the steps: of a
foreign enemy. allson ; freeholder.
2. alien remote; not allied; not belonging; withoutreat”
it is often used with to ; but more properly with f".
i must dissemble, - a -
and speak a language foreign to my heart. also o:
fame is a good so wholly joreign to our natuo. ". :
have no faculty in the soul adapted to it, nor oyo" o:
body to relish it, placed out of the possibility of o: :
this design is not foreign from some people's thoughts, oft.
3. excluded ; not admitted; held at a distano.
they will not stick to say you envied him;
and fearing he would rise, he was so o hi
kept him a foreign man still ; which so grie". i. viii,
that he ran mad and died. ... pki
out of the proper court of justice.
5. extraneous; adventitious in general.
there are who, fondly studious of increase,
rich foreign mold in their ill-natur'd land hillips,
induce. n.] a man that comes "
another country; not a native; a stranger.
joy is such a foreigner,
s houghts, i know
o mere a stranger to my thoughts, ham' &amp;#.
- - denham's of
not how to entertain him. - throne,
to this false foreigner you give you' rol "dodo' £n,
and wrong a friend, a kinsman, and a son. se of in punch;
water is the only native of england o * nutmegs. *
but the lemons, the brandy, the sugar, ano; follo.
all foreigners. - also pear in 3
nor could the majesty of the english o p swift.
greater lustre, either to foreigners or subje" foreigns.”
-
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 855</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
fo'reignness. n.s.. [from foreign.] remoteness; want of re-
lation to something.
, let not the foreignness of the subject hinder you from en-
deavouring to let me right. - locke.
to for eimagine. v. a. [fore and imagine.] to conceive or
fancy before proof. .
we are within compass of a foreimagined possibility in that
behalf. camden's remains.
to fore ju'dge. v. a. [fore and judge.] to judge beforehand;
to be prepossessed ; to prejudge.
to for eknow. v. a. [fore and know..] to have prescience
of; to foresee.
we foreknow that the sun will rise and set, that all men
born in the world shall die again; that after winter the spring
- shall come; after the spring, summer and harvest; yet is not
our foreknowledge the cause of any of those. raleigh.
he foreknew john should not suffer a violent death, but go
into his grave in peace. brown's vulgar errours.
calchas the sacred seer, who had in view
things present and the past, and things to come foreknew.
dryden's iliad.
who would the miseries of man foreknow?
not knowing, we but share our part of woe. . dryden.
foreknow able. adj. [from foreknow..] possible to be known
before they happen.
it is certainly foreknowable what they will do in such and
such circumstances. more's divine dialogues.
foreknowle dg e. n.s.. [fore and knowledge.] prescience;
knowledge of that which has not yet happened.
our being in christ by eternal foreknowledge, saveth us not
without our actual and real adoption into the fellowship of
his saints in this present world. hooker.
i told him you was asleep: he seems to have a foreknowledge
of that too, and therefore chuses to speak with you. shakesp.
if i foreknew,
foreknowledge had no influence on their fault, -
which had no less prov’d certain unforeknown. milton.
. i hope the foreknowledge you had of my esteem for you, s
the reason that you do not dislike my letters. pope.
fo’reland. m. s. [fore and land.] a promontory ; hoadland;
high land jutting, into the sea; a cape.
as when a ship, by skilful steersman wrought,
nigh river's mouth, or foreland, where the wind
veers oft, as oft so steers, and inifts her tails.
to for ela. y. v. a. [fore and lay.]
1. to lay wait for ; to intrap by ambush.
a serpent shoots his sting at unaware;’
an ambush'd thief forelays a traveler :
the man lies murder d, while the thief and snake,
one gains the thickets, and one thrids the brake.
2. to contrive antecedently.
to fo'relift. v. a. [fore and lift.] to raise aloft any ante-
rior part.
so dreadfully he towards him did pass,
forelifting up aloft his speckled breast;
and often bounding on the bruised grass,
as for great joy of his new comen guest. spenser.
fo's elock. n.s.. [fore and lock.] the hair that grows from
the forepart of the head.
tell her the joyous time will not be staid,
milton.
dryden.
unless she do him by the forelock take. spenser.
- hyacinthine locks
round from his parted forelock manly hung,
clustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad. milton.
zealand duty are not slow,
but on occasion's forelock watchful wait. milt. par. reg.
time is painted with a lock before, and bald behind, signi-
fying thereby that we must take time by the forelock; for,
when it is once past, there is no recalling it. swift.
for eman. n.s. [fore and man.] the first or chief person.
he is a very sensible man, shoots flying, and has been
several times foreman of the petty jury. addison's speciator.
for ementio ed. adj. [fore and mentioned j metioned or
recited before. it is observable that many participles are
compounded with fore, whose verbs have no such composi-
tion.
dacier, in the life of aurelius, has not taken notice of the
forementioned figure on the pillar. addison on italy.
for e.most. adj. [from fore.]
1. first in place.
all three were set among the foremos! ranks of fame, for great
minds to attempt, and great force to perform what tho did
attempt. sidney.
our women in the foremos! ranks appear;
march to the fight, and meet your mistress there. dryden.
the bold sempronius,
that still broke foremos through the crowd of patriots,
as with a hurricane of zeal transported,
and virtuous even to madness addison's cato.
2. first in dignity. -
these ride foremost in the field,
as they the foremosi rank of honour held. jdryden.
vol. i.
for ena'med. adj. [fore and name.] nominated before.
and such are sure ones,
as curius and the forenamed lentulus. ben, jobos. catil.
fo'renoon. n. s. [fore and noon..] the time of day reckoned
from the middle point, between the dawn and the meridian,
to the meridian: opposed to afte noon. -
the manner was, that the forenoon they should run at tilt,
the afternoon in a broad field in manner of a battle, ’till either
the strangers or the country knights won the field. sidney.
curio, at the funeral of his father, built a temporary the-
atre, consisting of two parts turning on hinges, according to
the position of the sun, for the conveniency of forenzon's and
afternoon’s diversion. arbuthnot on coins.
for enotice. m. s. [fore and notice.j information of an event
before it happens.
so strange a revolution never happens in poetry, but either
heaven or earth gives some forenotice of it. ryner's tragedies.
for eon sick, adj. i forensis, latin.] belonging to courts of
judicature.
person is a forensick term, appropriating actions and their
merit; and so belongs only to intelligent agents, capable of a
law, and happiness and misery. this personality extends it-
self beyond present existence to what is past, only by consci-
ousness. locke.
he forum was a publick place in rome, where lawyers
and orators made their speeches before the proper judges in
matters of property, or in criminal cases: thence all forts of
disputations in courts of justice, where several persons make
their distinct speeches, may come under the name of forensick
disputes. watts on the mind.
to for eor da’. n. v. a. [fore and ordain..] to predestinate;
to predetermine ; to preordain.
the church can discharge, in manner convenient, a work
of so great importance, by foreordaining some short colle&amp;
wherein briefly to mention thanks. booker.
fo're part. m. s. [fore and part.] -
1. the part first in time. -
had it been to raised, it would deprive us of the sun's light
all the forepart of the day. kaleigh's history.
2. to place anteriour in place.
the ribs have no cavity in them, and towards the forepart
or breast are broad and thin, to bend and give way without
danger of fracture. ray on the creation.
for epa'st, adj. [fore and poff.] past before a certain time.
now cease, ye damsels, your desight for to: *-
enough it is that all the day is your’s. speoser's othaio,
my forefaft proofs, howe'er the matter fail,
shall tax my fears of little vanity,
having vainly fear'd too little. shakespears.
such is the treaty which he negotiates with us, an offer and
tender of a reconciliation, an act of oblivion, of all forepoff
sins, and of a new covenant. hammond on fundamentals.
for eposs e'ss ed. adj. [fore and possess.j. preoccupied ; pre-
possessed ; pre-engaged. - - -
the testimony either of the ancient fathers, or of other
classical divines, may be clearly and abundantly answered,
to the satisfaction of any rational man, not extremely fore-
possessed with prejudice. sanderson.
for erank. m. s. [fore and rank.] first rank; front. -
yet leave our cousin catharine here with us ;
she is our capital demand, compris'd -
within the forerank of our articles. shakes. henry v.
forerecited. adj. [fore and recite.] mentioned or enume-
rated before.
bid him recount
the frerecited practices, whereof
we annot feel too little, hear too much. shak. hen. viii.
to for eru'n. v. a. [fore and run, ) :
1. to come before as an earnest of something following; to in-
troduce as an harbinger.
against ill chances men are ever merry;
but heaviness foreruns the good event. shakesp. henry iv.
the sun
was set, and twilight from the east came on,
forerunning night. milton's paradise loft.
she bios me hope: oh heav’ns, she pities me ! -
and pity still foreruns approaching love,
as lightning does the thunder. dryden’s spanish fryar.
2. to precede; to have the start of.
i heard it to be a maxim at dublin to follow, if not for:-
run, all that is or will be practised in london. graint.
for eru'nner. n. s. [from forerun.]
1. an harbinger ; a messenger sent before to give notice of the
approach of those that follow. -
the six strangers seek for you, madam, to take their leave;
and there is a forerunner come from a seventh, the prince of
* morocco. soalasp. merchant of venice.
a cock was sacrificed as the forerunner of day and the fun,
thereby acknowledging the light of life to be derived frossl
the divine bounty, the daughter of providence. stillingsleet.
my elder brothers, my for runner, some; - -
rough draughts of nature, ill design'd, and lame:
9 p blown<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 856</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
lown off, like blossoms, never made to bear; . . . ;
* icome o last labour'd care. dryd, aurengz.
2. a prognostick; a sign foreshowing anything.
o eve 1 some further ...; awaits us o ws
which heav'n, by these mute signs in nature, shews
forerunners of ho milton's paradis. loft.
loss of fight is the misery of life, and usually the forerunner
of death. - - south.
the keeping insensible perspiration up in due measure is the
cause as well as sign of health, and the least deviation from
that due quantity, the certain forerunner of a disease. arbuthnot.
already opera prepares the way, &gt; -
the sure forerunner of her gentle sway. ... pope's dunciad.
to for esa y. v. a. [fore and say..] to predict; to prophesy;
to foretell.
let ordinance
come as the gods foresay it.
to fores; e. v. a. [fore and see.]
shakespeare's cymbeline.
1. to see beforehand; to see what has not yet happened; to
have prescience ; to foreknow.
the first of them could things to come foresce;
the next, could of things present best advise; -
the third, things past could keep in memory. fairy 9ileen.
if there be any thing foreseen that is not usual, be armed
for it by any hearty though a short prayer, and an earnest re-
solution beforehand, and then watch when it comes. taylor.
at his forescen approach, already quake
the caspian kingdoms and meotian lake:
their seers behold the tempest from afar,
and threat’ning oracles denounce the war. dryden’s aem.
2. to provide for: with to. out of use. -
a king against a storm must foresee to a convenient stock
of treasure. bacon.
to for esha'me. v. a. [for and same.] to shame; to bring
reproach upon.
oh bill, foreshaming
those rich-left heirs, that let their fathers lie
without a monument. shakespeare’s cymbeline.
to fo'reshew. v. a. [see for eshow.]
fo reship. n.s. [fore and ship.] the anteriour part of the
ship.
#he shipmen would have cast anchors out of the freship.
acis, xxvii. 30.
to foresho'rten. v. a. [fore and shorten..] to shorten
figures for the sake of shewing those behind.
the greatest parts of the body ought to appear foremos i
and he forbids the foreshortenings, because they make the parts
appear little. dryden's dufresnoy.
to fo'reshow. v. a. [fore and show.]
j. to discover before it happens; to predict; to prognosticate.
christ had called him to be a witness of his death, and re-
furrection from the dead, according to that which the prophets
and moses had foreshowed. hooker.
next, like aurora, spenser rose,
whose purple blush the day foreshows. denham.
you chose to withdraw yourself from publick business,
when the face of heaven grew troubled, and the frequent
{hifting of the wind foreshowed a storm. dryden.
2. to represent before it comes.
what else is the law but the gospel foreshowed 2 what
other the gospel than the law fulfilled; hooker.
foresigh r. n.s. [fore and sight.]
1. prescience; prognostication; foreknowledge. the accent
anciently on the last syllable.
let eve, for i have drench'd her eyes,
here sleep below; while thou to foresight wak's ;
as once thou slept'st, whilst she tais was form'd. milton.
2. provident care of futurity. *
he had a sharp foresight, and working wit,
that never idle was, he once could refl. whit. spensor.
in matters of arms he was both skilful and industrious, and
as well in foresight as resolution present and great. hayward.
difficulties and temptations will more easily be born or
avoided, if with prudent fortsght we arm ourselves against
them. rogers.
fo **toul, adj. [forosoft and fall.] prescient; pro-
w1dent.
peath gave him no such pangs as the forgsghtful care he
had of his filly successor. sidney.
to for esi"gnify. , 2. [fore and sgniff.] to betoken be.
forehand; to foreshow; to typify.
discoveries of christ already present, whose future coming
the psalms did but foresigniff.
yet as being past times noxious, where they light
on man, beaft, plant, wasteful and turbulent,
. they oft fortsgnify, and threaten ill. 44;lton's par. rog.
o reskin. ii. s. [fore and skin..] the prepuce.
their own hand
an hundred of the faithless foe shall slay,
and for a dow'r their hundred foreskins pay,
be michol thy reward. - cowley's david.
hooker.
fo'reskirt. n.f. [fore and skirt.] the pendulous
part of the coat before. or loos:
... a thousand pounds a year for pure resped
no other obligation 2 o, f pea
that promises more thousands: honour's train
is longer than his foreskirt. shakeshear.'
to foresla'ck. v. a. [fore and sack.] o viii.
ness. y idle-
it is a great pity that so good an o ortuni -
and so happy an jo. . o: o
eternal good of the land. seaso. the
to for eslow. v. a. [fore and slow.] rtland.
1. to delay ; to hinder; to impede; to obstrud,
no stream, no wood, no mountain co
their hasty pace. *: -
now the illustrious nymph return'd again, airfax.
bings every grace triumphant in he train:
the wond'ring nereids, though they rais'd no storm
forosoe'd her passage to behold her form. d. don,
2. to neglect; to omit. r)
when the rebels were on blackheath, the king known
well that it flood him upon, by how much the more had
hitherto protracted the time in hot **ountering them, bys,
much the sooner to dispatch with them, that it might o
to have been no coldness in fro/*wing, but wisdom in chus
his time, resolved with speed to affaii them. bacon'; hon. wii
our good purposes fosowed are become our to mento,
upon our death-bed. bp. hall
chremes, how many fishers do you know
that rule their boats and use their nei, aright,
that neither wind, nor time, nor tide for slow p
some such have been: but, ah! by tempests spite
their boats are lost; while we may fit and moan
that few were such, and now these few are none. p. flith,
7. for fs low. v. n. to be dilatory; to loiter.
this may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
for yet is hope of life and victory:
***ho longer, make we hence amain. shak, hon. vi,
to for espe’ak. v. n. [fore and speak.]
i. to gredict; to foresay; to foreihow ; to foretell,
old godfrey of winchester, thinketh noominous for soul.
ing to lie in names. camden's romains,
2. to forbid. [from for and speak.]
thou has foreftofe my being in these wars,
and say'st it is not fit. shakoff. ant, and cleopatra,
forespe'nt. adj. [fore and spent.]
1. wasted; tired; spent. -
after him came spurring hard
a gentleman, almost for spent with speed. shai. hinry iv,
2. forepassed; past. [fore and spent.] -
is not enough thy evil lifeforespent * fairy qun,
you shall find his vanities for spent,
were but the outside of the roman brutus,
covering discretion with a coat of folly. shaft. hon.v.
3. bestowed before. -
- we must receive him
according to the honour of his sender;
and towards himself, his goodness front on us,
we must extend our notice. shutiao,
for espur rer. n, so [fore and sour.] one that rides before,
a day in april never came so sweet, -
to show how costly summer was at hand,
as this sorourrer comes before his lord. -
fo’rest. n. /... [forg/?, french; forgia, italian.]
1. a wild uncultivated trađ of ground intessessed with wood.
by many tribulations we enter into the kingdom of heaves,
because, in a forg/? of many wolves, sheep cannot chuse to
feed in continual danger of life. - hoor.
macbeth shall nover vanquish’d be, until -
great birham-wood to dunanane's high hill
shall come against him. -
w.". will never be : h
ho can impress the fores, bid the tree .* o
unfix his "...s.o. so.
there be airs which the physicians advise their pation. ut
remove unto, which commonly are plain o:
grafing, and not overgrown with heath ; or o: *
as in forg//s. bacon’s attird o:
how the first forg rais’d its shady head, roso o i
- ... . - dy grounds and fruit!"
2. in law.] a certain territory of woody g chase,
pastures, privileged for wild beasts, and fowls of foo, the
and warren, to rest and abide in, in the safe o this:
king for his pleasure. the manner of makings. ersons,
the king sends out his commission, dio. he
for viewing, perambulating, and bounding to po io-
has a mind to afforest: which returned into chanco po
shakes care.
- this
clamation is made, that none shall hunt any wild beasts wi -
- - ints os’
that precinct, without licence; after which he o west
dinances, laws, and officers for the too. of record.
and venison ; and this becomes a forgo by . is strictly
the properties of a fores are these : afross, a takes,
o
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 857</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
o
o
taken, cannot be in the hands of any but the king, who hath for ere’ller. n, f: [from foretell.j prediaer; foreshower.
ower to grant commission to a justice in eyre for the soros i
the courts ; the officers for preserving the vert and venison,
as the justices of the fores?, the warden or keeper, the verders,
the foresters, agistors, regarders, bailiffs, and beadles. the
chief property of a forg/? is the swainmote, which is no less
incident to it than the court of pyepowders to a fair. cowel.
to forest all. v. a. . [fonertailan, saxon.]
1. to anticipate; to take up beforehand.
if thou be master-gunner, spend not all
that thou can'st speak at once; but husband it,
and give men turns of speech: do not forg/fall
by lavishness thine own and others wit,
as if thou mad'st thy will. herbert.
what need a man fore/fall his date of grief,
and run to meet what he would most avoid, milton.
2. to hinder by preoccupation or prevention.
and though good luck prolonged hath thy date,
yet death then would the like mishap forestall. fairy queen.
what's in prayer, but this twofold force
to be fore/falled ere we come to fall,
or pardon'd being down.
but for my tears,
i had forestall'd this dear and deep rebuke,
ere you with grief had spoke. shakespeare's henry iv.
if thou covet death, as utmost end
of misery, so thinking to evade
the penalty pronounc'd, doubt not but god
hath wifelier arm'd his vengeful ire, than so
to be frostall’d. - milton's paradis, loft.
i will "... judgment of the rest. pope.
3. to seize or gain possession of before another; to buy before
another in order to raise the price.
he bold spake, sir knight, if knight thou be,
abandon this forestalled place at erst,
for fear of further harm, i counsel thee. fairy queen.
4. to deprive by something prior : with of. not in use.
via
this nightforsall him of the coming day. shak. cymbeline.
for esta‘ller. m. s. [from forg/fall...] one that anticipates
the market; one that purchases before others to raise the
price. -
commodities, good or bad, the workman must take at his
master’s rate, or sit still and starve; whilst, by this means, this
new sort of ingrossers or forestallers having the feeding and
supplying this numerous body of workmen, set the price upon
the poor landholder. locke.
for est bo'rn. adj. [forest and born.] born in a wild.
this boy is forestborn,
and hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
of desperate studies. - shakesp. as you like it.
fo'rester. n.s.. [forestier, french; from foreft.]
1. an officer of the forest.
forester, my friend, where is the bush,
that we may stand and play the murtherer in 2
—here by, upon the edge of yonder copice.
2. an inhabitant of the wild country.
fo'reswat. adj. [from for and swat, from sweat..] spent
fo’re swart. ; with heat.
miso and mopsa, like a couple of foreswat melters, were
getting the pure filver of their bodies out of the ore of their
garments. sidney.
to for eta'st e. v. a. [fore and taffe.]
1. to have antepast of ; to have prescience of.
2. to taste before another.
perhaps the fact
is not so heinous now, foretosted fruit,
profan'd first by the serpent, by him first
made common, and unhallow'd, ere our taste.
fo'ret aste. n.s. anticipation of:
a pleasure that a man may call as properly his own as his
soul and his conscience, neither liable to accident, nor ex-
posed to injury: it is the foretoffe of heaven, and the earnest
shakespeare.
milton.
of eternity. south.
to for et eoll. v. a. preter. and part. pass foretold. [fore and
tell.]
1. to predict; to prophesy.
what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue : shak. h. vi.
- l found
the new-created world, which fame in heaven
long had foretold. milton.
mercia's king,
warn’d in a dream, his murder did foretell,
from point to point, as after it befell. dryden.
when great ulysses sought the phrygian shores,
deeds then undone my faithful tongue foretold;
heaven seal’d my words, and you those deeds behold. pope.
2. to foretoken ; to foreshow.
to for ete’ll. v. n. to utter prophecy.
all the prophets from samuel, and those that follow after,
have likewise foretold of these days. afts, iii. 24.
shakespeare's hamlet.
others are proposed, not that the foretold events should be
known ; but that the accomplishment that expounds them
may evince, that the foreteller of them was able to foresee
thee. - boyle on colourt.
to for ethi‘nk. v. a. [fore and think.]
1. to anticipate in the mind; to have prescience of:
the soul of every man
prophetically does forethink thy fall.
i do pray to thee,
thou virtuous dauphin, alter not the doom
forethought by heav'n. shakespeare's king john.
adam could not be ignorant of the punishments due to
neglect and disobedience; and felt, by the proof thereof, in
himself another terror than he had forethought, or cold ima-
gine, raleigh's history of the world.
friday, the fatal day ! when next it came,
her soul forethought the fiend would change his game. dryd.
2. to contrive antecedently.
blelled be that god which hath given you an heart tofore-
think this, and a will to honour him with his own. bp. hall.
to for et h1'nk. v. n. to contrive beforehand.
what's my frenzy will be cali'd my crime:
what then is thine thou cool deliberate villain |
thou wise, forethinking, weighing politician smith,
foker hought. n.s. (foom forethink.]
1. prescience; anticipation.
he that is undone, is equally undone, whether it be by spite-
fulness of fore:hotght, or by the folly of oversight, or evil
counsel. i,’e -
2. provident care. %range
to fore rooke n. v. a. [fore and token.] to foreshow; to
prognosticate as a sign.
the king from ireland hastes; but did no good;
whilst strange prodigious signs foretoken blood. daniel.
for eto ken. n.s.. [from the verb...] prevenient sign; prog-
nostick.
it may prove some ominous foretoken of misfortune. sidney.
they misliked nothing more in king edward the confessor,
than that he was frenchified; and accounted the desire of
foreign language then to be a fretoften of bringing in of fo-
reign powers, which indeed happened. camden's remains.
foretooth. n.s.. [fore and tooth.] the tooth in the ante-
rior part of the mouth ; the incitor.
the foreteeth should be formed broad, and with a thin sharp
edge like chizzles. ray on the creation.
fo're top. m. s. [fore and top.] that part of a woman's head.
dress that is forward, or the top of a periwig.
so may your hats your foretops never press,
untouch'd your ribbons, sacred be your dress. dryden.
for evou"ched. part. [fore and vouch..] affirmed before;
formerly told.
sure her offence
must be of such unnatural degree,
that monsters it ; or your forevouch'd affection
fall’n into taint. shakespeare's king lear.
fo’reward. n. s. [fore and ward.) the van; the front.
they that marched in the foreward were all mighty men.
- 1 mac. ix. 11.
shakesp. henry iv,
to for ewa'rn. v. a. [fore and warn.j
1. to admonish beforehand.
i will forewarn you whom you shall fear: fear him which,
after he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell. lu. xii. 5
2. to inform previously of any future event.
divine interpreter, by favour sent
down from the empyrean, to forewarn
us timely of what might else have been our loss
unknown. milton's paradis? loft.
3. to caution against any thing beforehand.
well i will arm me, being thus forewarn'd. shak. h. vi.
thy pride,
and wand'ring vanity, when least was safe,
rejected my forewarning, and disdain’d
not to be trusted. milton's paradis. loft.
tho' phoebus had firewarned him of singing wars yet the
search of nature was free. dryd. virg. ded.
young choraebus, who by love was led
to win renown and fair cassandra's bed,
had lately brought his troops to priam's aid;
forewarn'd in vain by the prophetick maid. dryden's an.
to for ewaste. v. a. [fore and was’s...] to desolate; to de-
stroy. out of use.
vespasian, with great spoil and rage,
forewashed all, until gemissa gent
persuaded him to cease. fairy queen.
high time 'gan it wez for una fair, -
to think of those her captive parents dear, -
and their forewasted kingdom to repair. fairy queen.
to for ew e(ary. v. a. [for and weary.] to dispirit with
labour.
by your toil
and labour long, through which ye hither came,
yes
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 858</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
ye both frewearied be: therefore a while '..., g
freadyaures, and to your bowers rootlo. fairy queen.
t. forews's h. v.a...[fore and wish-l to desire beforehand.
* the wiser sort ceased not to do so o lay, to pro-
- * * * . ." e good commonly forewished might in time come
. o the g - yf knolles's history of the turks.
fo., is part. [for and worn, from wear.] worn out;
bv. time or use. . . -
o wo. the fight was enough to read the words, and the
ink was already foreworn, and in many place. blotted. sidney.
fo'rfeit. n.s. {forfait, french; forfed, welsh.) " * -
1. something lost by the commission of a crime ; something
... paid for expiation of a crime; a fine; a mulet.
--- thy slanders i forgive, and there withal
• remi thy other forfeits. shakoff. measure for measure.
** th’ execution leave to high disposal,
and let another hand, not thine, exact
‘. . thy penal forfeit from thyself. milton's agonistes.
... thy life, melantius ! i am come to take,
** -of which foul treason does a forfeit make. waller.
2. a person obnoxious to punishment; one whose life is for-
feited by his offence. now obsolete.
your brother is a forfeit of the law, -
...and you but waste your words. shak. meas for measure.
claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no
greater forfeit to the law than angelo, who hath sentenced
him. shakesp. measure for measure.
7, fo'rfeit. v. a. [from the noun..] to lose by some breach
of condition; to lose by some offence.
if then a man, on light conditions, gain
a great estate to him, and his, for ever;
' ' if wilfully he forfeit it again,
who doth bemoan his heir, or blame the giver ? davies.
men displeased god, and consequently forfeited all right to
happiness. boyle.
a father cannot alien the power he has over his child : he
may perhaps to some degrees forfeit it, but cannot *; it.
- - ocke.
fo'rfeit. participial adj. [from the verb.] liable to penal
seizure; alienated by a crime; lost either as to the right or
. possession, by breach of conditions.
- - - - all the souls that are, were forfeit once;
and he that might the 'vantage best have took,
found out the remedy. shakesp. measure for measure.
. . beg that thou may’st have leave to hang thyself;
"and yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
thou hast not left the value of a cord. shakes care.
this now fenceless world,
forfeit to death. asilion.
• straight all his hopes exhal’d in empty smoke,
and his long toils were forfeit for a look. dryden's wirgil.
methought with wond'ious ease he swallow'd down
his forfeit honour, to betray the town. dryd. ind. emp.
ow the murd’rer paid his forfeit breath;
-what lands so distant from that scene of death,
but trembling heard the fame ! pope's odyssy.
fo'rfe itable. adj. [from forfeit.j possessed on conditions,
by the breach of which any thing may be lost.
fo'rfeiture. m. s. [forfaiture, french ; from forfeit.]
1. the act of forfeiting; the punishment discharged by loss of
something possessed.
2. the thing forfeited; a mulet; a finc.
the court is as well a chancery to save and debar for-
feitures, as a court of common law to decide rights; and there
would be work enough in germany and italy, if imperial
forfeitures should go for good titles. bacon's isar with spain.
ancient privileges and acts of grace indulged by former
kings, must not, without high reason, be revoked by their
successors; nor forfeitures be exacted violently, nor penal
laws urged rigorously. taylor’s rule of living holy.
he fairly abdicates his throne, -
he has th; incurr'd. swift.
foo gave. the preterite of forgive.
forge. m. s. [forge, french.]
1. the place where iron is beaten into form. in common lan-
guage we use forge for large work, and snithy for small ; but
in books the distinetion is not kept. -
now behold,
in the quick forge and working-house of thought,
how london doth pour out her citizens. "
shakspeare's henry v.
in other part stood one, who at the forge
labouring, two maily clods of iron and brass
had melted. milton's paradis? loss.
th' o'er-labour'd cyclop from his task retires,
th’ afolian forge exhausted of its fires. pope's statius,
2. any place where any thing is made or shaped.
from 99 other forge hath proceeded a strange conceit, that
... god with any set form of common prayer is super-
it ious. hooker.
3. manufacture of metalline bodies; the aa of working.
in the greater o the forge was easy, the matter being
ductile and sequacious and obedient to the -
ficer, and apt to be drawn; formed, and *:::: of the art.
to forge. v. a. [forger, old french.] • baton,
1. to form by the hammer ; to beat into shape.
- the queen of martials,
and mars himself conducted them;
forg'd of gold,
must needs have golden furniture, cha
tyger with tyger, bear with bear you'll e
in leagues offensive and defensive join'd;
but lawless man the anvil dares profane,
and forge that steel by which a man is slain
which earth at first for plough-shares did ord
nor yet the smith had learn'd to form a sword, o -
2. to make by any means. fijiv,
- he was a kind of nothing, titleless,
*till he oft. himself a name i' th' fire
of burning rome. shakes car,” or
c o heart's his mouth : jocar's crillo,
what his breast forges, that his tongue musive -
those names ... schools forgod, and put *::::
of scholars, could never get admittance into commons. o
obtain the licence of publick approbation. id
3. to counterfeit; to falsify. f.
- were i king, -
i should cut off the nobles for their lands:
for my more having would be but as sauce
to make me hunger more, that i should forge
quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
destroying them for wealth. shaoffeare's madah,
for ger. m. s. [from forge.]
1. one who makes or forms.
2. one who counterfeits any thing; a falsifier.
` as in stealing, if there were no receivers there would be no
thieves ; so in slander, if there were fewer spreaders there
would be fewer forgers of libels. government of the tongue.
no forger of lies willingly and wittingly furnishes out the
means of his own detection. i/off on the resurreaion,
fo'rgery. m. s. [from forge.] the crime of falsification.
has your king married the lady gray?
and now, to sooth your forgery and his,
sends me a paper to persuade me patience. shakoff. hin. vi.
nothing could have been easier than for the jews, the ent-
mies of jesus christ, to have disproved these facts, had they
been false, to have shewn their falshood, and to have convicted
them of forgery. stephens'; sermo.
a forgery, in setting a false name to a writing, which may
prejudice another's fortune, the law punishes with the loss of
ears; but has inflicted no adequate penalty for doing the same
thing in print, though books sold under a false name are so
many forgeries. . - swift.
2. smith's work; fabrication ; the act of the forge.
he ran on embattled armies clad in iron,
and weaponless himself,
made arms ridiculous, useless the forgery
of brazen shield and spear, the hammer'd cuirass,
chalybean temper’d steel, and frock of mail -
adamantean proof. milton's agonio.
to forget. v. a. preter. forgot; part, forgotten, or so
spon; can, saxon; vergeten, dutch.]
1. to jose memory of; to let go from the remembrance.
that is not forgot
which ne’er i did remember ; to my knowledge, • ?
i never in my life did look on him. shaos. richard ii.
when i am forgotten, as i shall be, -
and sleep in dull cold marble, where no moto iii
of me must more be heard. sha'is). ho
forget not thy friend in thy mind, and to *. o t
of him in thy riches. eds. so s
no sooner was our deliverance complete", "" z.
our danger and our duty. atterbury.
- both which being
man's iliad,
- - - - toc.
alive, ridiculous; and dead, forgot. p;
2. not to attend; to neglect.
- - jr-
can a woman forget her sucking child? yea, they myf
o isa. xlix. 5.
get ; yet will i not forget thee.
if we might forget ourselves, or forget
regard our reason, and live by humour an lawful to do
or at any time, or at any place, it would be o so place.
the same in every thing, at every time, * y lot",
ano,
god; if we mightd.
3 fancy in any to
the mass of mean forgotten things.
for getfu l. adj. [from forget.]
1. not retaining the memory of.
2. causing oblivion ; oblivious. st
but when a thousand rolling years aro po"
so long their punishments and penance at d
whole droves of minds are by the dro"; 8%
compell'd to drink the deep '. o,
in large forgetful draughts to steep the td. ft.
of off. their irksome year?' dry
3. inattentive; negligent ; neglectful; careless.
- - o, xiii.”
be not forgetful to entertain strangers. he th:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 859</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
*.
o ... . the queen is comfortless, and we forgetful . . .
- in our long absence. shakoff. honry viii.
o have you not love enough to bear with me, -
when that rash humour, which my mother gave me,
or, makos me forgetful ? shakesh. julius caesar.
* - 1, in fact, a real interest have,
so which to my own advantage i would save;
o and, with the usual courtier’s trick, intend
to serve myself, forgetsul of my friend. - prior.
o, for getfulness. n.s.. [from forgetful.]
o 1. oblivion; cessation to remember; loss of memory.
o gentle sleep !
-- * * nature's soft nurse, how have i frighted thee,
--- that thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down,
and steep my senses inforgetfulnes, 1 shakes). henry iv.
all birds and beasts lie hush'd; sleep steals away
the wild desires of men and toils of day;
- - and brings, descending through the silent air, -
… . . • a sweet forgetfulness of human care. pope's statius.
2. negligence; neglect; inattention. -
the church of england is grievously charged with forgetful-
s
nes of her duty. płocker.
-- fo'rgetive. adj. [from forge.] that may forge or produce.
a word, i believe, peculiar to shakespeare.
---. good sherrie sack ascends me into the brain, dries me'
there all the foolish, dull vapours, makes it apprehensive,
quick, forgetive, full of nimble shapes, which, delivered to
----- the voice, becomes excellent wit. shakespeare.
forg etter. m. / [from forget.]
1. one that forgets.
2. a careless person.
--- to forgi've. v. a. spongipan, saxon.]
; : : 1. to pardon a person ; not to punish.
-- - then heaven forgive him too ! shakespeare's macbeth.
i do beseech your grace for charity;
if ever any malice in your heart
* ... were hid against me, now forgive me frankly.
" - —sir thomas lovell, i as free forgive you,
----- * as i would be forgiven: i forgive all. shakesp. henry viii.
- slowly provok'd, she easily forgives. prior.
2. to pardon a crime.
o the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their ini-
o quity. - - - - if xxxiii. 24.
- if prayers' -
could alter high deciecs, i to that place
would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
that on my head all night be visited, -
thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven,
to me committed, and by me expos'd. milton.
3. to remit; not to exact debt or penalty.
the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, loosed
- him, and forgave him the debt. mat. xviii. 27.
for gi’v eness. n.s.. [rong pennifre, saxon.]
1. the act of forgiving. -
to the lord our god belong mercies and forgivenesses. dan.
2. pardon of an offender. * -
--- thou hast promised repentance and forgivenes to them that
**. have finned against thee. prayer of manos.
* exchange forgivens, with me, noble hamlet; -
mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
* - nor thine on me. " . . shakspeare."
o forgivens to the injur’d does belong ; -
but they ne'er pardon who commit the wrong. dryden.
- 3. pardon of an offence. - • .
god has certainly promised forgivens of fin to every one
* who repents. south.
... " 4. tenderness; willingness to pardon. , , , , ,
- here are introduced more heroick principles of meekness,
* forgiveness, bounty and magnanimity, than all the learning of
o the heathens could invent. - spratt.
- * mercy above did hourly plead -
for her resemblance here below ;
o, and mild forgivenes, intercede ! -
. to stop the coining blow. - - - - - dryden.
o 5. remission of a fine, penalty, or debt. .
- forgive r. n.s.. [from forgive..] one who pardons. "
for go"t. - - - - -
part. pass. of forget. not remembered.
for goorten. - - - -
--~~ this song shall not be forgotten. deut. xxxi. 2 r.
o great strafford's worthy of that name, though all -
- of thee could be forgotten, but thy fall. . denham.
the soft ideas of the cheerful more, -
- lightly receiv'd, were easily forgot. prior.
7, forha'il. v. a. [an old word. probably for forhaul, from
for and haul.] to harass 5 tear; torment. - - - -
, - . . . all this long tale -- - -
... nought easeth the care that doth me for hail. sponsor's poso.
fork. a. s. [furca, latin ; forch, welsh; fourche, french.]
i. an instrument divided at the end into two or more points or
- prongs, used on many occasions. r
at midsummer down with the brembles and brakes,
*; vol. i.
and after abroad with thy forks and thy rakes. tussor,
the vicar first, and after him the crew,
with fork, and staves the felon to pursue, -
an coll our dog. : dryden's nun’s priy?,
i dine with forks that have but two prongs. swift.
2. it is sometimes used for the point of an arrow.
the bow is bent and drawn: make from the shaft.
-let it fall rather, though the fork invade -
the region of my heart. shakesp. king lear.
3. a point.
several are amazed at the wisdom of the ancients that re-
presented a thunderbolt with three forks, fince nothing could
have better explained its triple quality of piercing, burning,
and melting. addison on medals.
to fork. v. n. [from the noun..] to shoot into blades, as
corn does out of the ground. -
the corn beginneth to fork. mortimer's husbandry.
fo'rked. adj. [from fork.] opening into two or more parts.
naked he was, for all the world, like a forked radish, with
a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife. shakespeare.
sometimes we see a cloud that’s dragonish,
a forked mountain, or blue promontory. shakespeare.
come, shall we go and kill us venison :
and yet it irks me the poor dappled fools
should, in their own confines, with fried heads,
have their round haunches goar'd. shakesh. a you like it.
he would have spoke;
but hiss for hiss return'd, with forked tongue
to forked tongue. milton's paradise loft.
ye dragons, whose contagious breath
peoples the dark retreats of death,
change your fierce hising into joyful song,
and praise your maker with your forked tongue. roscommon.
for kedly. adv. [from forked..] in a forked form. -
forked ness. m. s. [from forked..] the quality of opening
into two parts or more. - -
fo'rkhead. m. s. [fork and head..] point of an arrow.
it seizing, no way enter might; . .
but back rebounding, left the forkhead keen,
effoons it fled away, and might no where be seen. fa. qu.
fo'rky. adj. [from fork.] forked; furcated; opening into
two parts. • . - -
the smiling infant in his hand shall take
the crested basilisk and speckled snake;
pleas'd the green lustre of the scales survey,
and with their froy tongue and pointless sting shall play.
- - pope's moffah.
for lo're. [the preterite and participle of the saxon ponleonan,
in dutch verloren.] deserted; forsook; forsaken. obsolete.
such as diana by the sandy shore
of swift eurotas, or on cynthus’ green, " " -
where all the nymphs have her forlore. fairy queen.
that wretched world he 'gan for to abhor,
and mortal life 'gan loath, as thing forlor. fairy queen.
thus fell the trees, with noise the desarts roar; -
the beasts their caves, the birds their nests forlore. fairf.
forlo'rn.-adj. [fonlonen, from ponleonan, saxon; ver-
loren, dutch.]
1. deserted ; destitute; forsaken; wretched; helpless; solitary.
make them seek for that they wont to scorn; -
of fortune and of hope at once forlorn. hubberd's tale.
tell me, good hobinol, what gars thee greet
what hath some wolf thy tender lambs worn ?
or is thy bagpipe broke, that sounds fo sweet
or art thou of thy loved lass forlorne - sonsor's pooral.
in every place was heard the lamentation of women and
children; every thing shewed the heaviness of the time, and
seemed as altogether lost and forlorn. kozlo's history.
how can i live without thee! how forcoo
thy sweet converse, and love so dearly join'd,
to live again in these wild woods forlorn? mill. par. loft.
- their wa - . . . . -
lies through the perplex'd paths of this drear wood;
the nodding horrour of whose shady brows,
threats the forlorn and wand'ring passenger. f. asilton.
my only strength and stay from of thee,
whither shall i betake me, where subsist to most par, loft.
like a declining statesman, left forlorn -
to his friends pity and pursuers scorn. - denham,
the good old man, forlorn of human aid,
for vengeance to his heav'nly patron pray'd. dryd. iliad,
philomel laments forlorn. fenton.
as some sad turtle his lost love deplores,
thos, far from delia, to the winds i mourn;
alike unheard, unpity'd, and forlorn. " pope's autumn.
2. taken away. this sense shews that it is the participle of
an active verb, now lost. . . ;--&gt;
when as night hath us of light forlorn,
i wish that day would shortly reascend. - spessor,
what is become of great acrates' son?
or where hath he hung up his mortal blade,
that hath so many haughty conquests won
is all his force forlorn, and all his glory done? fairy queen.
9 q- 3. small;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 860</div><p class="text">f o r
2. il; despicable: in a ludicrous sense. -
3 so ..". 3rlorn, that his dimensions to any thick sight
were invincible. shakesp. henry iv.
forlo'rn. m. s.
1. a lost, de, forsaken man.
henry banish'd
a king become a bani man,
o: #. live in scotland a forlorn. shakes, henry vi.
2. forlorn hope. the soldiers who are sent first to the at-
tack, and are therefore doomed to perish.
criticks in plume,
who lolling on our foremost benches sit, .
and still charge first, the true forlorn of wit. . dryden.
foal ornness. n. s. [from forlorn.] destitution ; misery;
solitude. - -
men displeased god, and consequently forfeited all right
to happiness; even whilst they compleated is...}. of
their condition by the lethartgy of not being sensible of it. boyle.
t, forix'e. v. n. [from fore and lye.] to lye before.
knit with a golden baldric, which forlay
athwart her snowy breast, and did divide . .
her dainty paps, which, like young fruit in may,
now little 'gan to swell; and being ty'd, . .
. through her thin weed, their places only signify'd. fa. 24.
form. n.s.. [forma, latin; forme, french.]
1. the external appearance of any thing ; representation ;
shape. -
nay, women are frail too.
—ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,
which are as easy broke as they make forms. shakespeare.
it stood still; but i could not discern to eform thereof. job.
gold will endure a vehement fire, without any change, and
after it has been divided by corrosive liquors into invisible
parts; yet may presently be precipitated, so as to appear again
in it's.
satter, as wise logicians say,
cannot without 'so subsist; -
and form, say i as well as they,
must fail, if matter brings no grist. swift.
2. being, as modified by a particular shape. -
when noble benefits shall prove
not well dispos'd, the mind grown once corrupt,
they turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
than ever they were fair. shakespeare's henry viii.
here toils and death, and death's half-brother, sleep,
forms terrible to view, their sentry keep ;
with anxious pleasures of a guilty mind,
deep frauds before, and open force behind. dryden's aen.
3. particular model or modification.
. he that will look into many parts of asia and america,
will find men reason there perhaps as acutely as himself, who
yet never heard of a syllogism, nor can reduce any one argu-
ment to those forms. locke.
it lengthens out every act of worship, and produces more
lasting and permanent impressions in the mind, than those
which accompany any transient form of words that are uttered
in the ordinary method of religious worship. addison.
4. beauty; elegance of appearance.
he hath no form nor comeliness. isa. liii. 2.
5. regularity ; method; order.
what he spoke, though it lack'd form a little,
was not like madness. shakespeare's hamlet.
*...* appearance without the essential qualities; empty
ow.
then those whom form of laws
• condemn'd to die, when traitors judg'd their cause. dryden.
they were young heirs sent only for forms from schools,
where they were not suffered to stay three months. swift.
7. ceremony; external rites.
though well we may not pass upon his life,
without the form of justice; yet our pow'r
shall do a court’sy to our wrath, which men
may blame, but not controul. shakesp. king lear.
a long table, and a square table, or seat about the walls,
seem things of form, but are things of substance; for at a long
table, a few at the upper end, in effe&amp;t, sway all the business;
but in the other form, there is more use of the counsellors opi-
nions that sit lower. bacon's essays.
that the parliaments of ireland might want no decent or
honourable form used in england, he caused a particular act
to pass that the lords of ireland should appear in parliament
robes. davies on ireland.
their general used, in all dispatches made by himself, to
observe all decency in their forms. clarendon.
how am i to interpret, fir, this visit *
is it a compliment of form, or love? a. phill. diff. moth.
8. i. method; established practice; ritual and prescribed
inode. -
he who affirmeth speech to be necessary amongst all men,
throughout the world, doth not thereby import that all men
must necessarily speak one kind of language; even so thene-
cessity of polity and regimen in all churches may be held, with-
-
grew's cosmol. sac.
out holding any one certain form to be necessary in them |
all,
nor are constant forms of prayer more likely woker.
hinder the spirit of prayer and devotion, to: o and
|
and confused variety to distract and lose it. stated
nor seek to know king charlo,
their process, or the forms of law below, dryden', æ
h.
9. a long o, defined
if a chair be defined a seat for a single -
belonging to it, then a stool is a seat ; a. . a back
o: * ; and a form is a seat for several #. ".
a dack. ...," to
i was seen . her in the manorhouse, #:
upon the form, and taken following her i not
ic.". ... oil."8" motheriff, so
it will be necessary to see and examine those works whi
have given so great a reputation to the master of o: i.
groot. x
is the seat or bed of a hare. dryden's duffy,
now for a clod like hare inform thy peer;
now bolt and cudgel squirrels leap do move:
now the ambitious lark, with mirrour clear
they catch, while he, fool! to himself makesire son.
have you observ'd a fitting hare, • jianj,
list'ning, and fearful of the storm
of horns and hounds, clap back her car,
afraid to keep or leave .. prior
12. form is the essential, specifical, or distinguishing mois.
tion of the matter of which any thing is composed, so as
thereby to give it such a peculiar manner of existence. harri;
in definitions, whether they be framed larger to augmen,
or stricter to abridge the number of sacraments, we fin. go
expresly mentioned as their true essential form, and elements as
the matter whereunto that form doth adjoin itself. hair,
13. a formal cause ; that which gives j.
they inferred, if the world were a living creature, it had
a soul and spirit, by which they did not intend god, for they
did admit of a deity besides, but only the soul or essential
orm of the universe. bacon's natural history,
to for m. v. a. [formo, latin.] -
1. to make out of materials. -
god formed man of the dust of the ground, gen. ii. 7,
he liquid ore he drain’d
into fit molds prepar'd ; from which he form'd
first his own tools: then, what might else be wrought
futil, or grav’n in metal. milton,
determind to advance into our room
a creature form'd of earth. milton.
she form'd the phantom of well-bodied air. post,
2. to model to a particular shape or state. ,
creature in whom excell'd
whatever can to fight or thought be form'd,
holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet. milith,
let eve, for i have drench'd her eyes,
here sleep below, while thou to forefight wak'st :
as once thou sleep'st, while she to life was form'd milk".
3. to modify ; to scheme; to plan. - - -
lucretius taught him not to form his heroe, to go him
piety or valour for his manners. dryden's an. deditat.
4. to arrange; so combine in any particular manner: *, ht
formed his troops.
5. to adjust; to settle. -
our differences with the romanists are thus formed into *
interest, and become the defign not of fingle person*, but of
corporations and successions. decay of pitt},
6. to contrive; to coin. - - d
the defeat of the design is the routing of opinions for
for promoting it. decay of pit),
he dies too soon;
and fate, if possible, must be delay'd? . .
the thought that labours in my forming brain,
yet crude and immature, demands more tim”
7. to model by education or institution.
let him to this with easy pains be brought,
and seem to labour when he i. oxid
thus form'd for speed, he challenges tho 3. •r
and o: the soon arrow far behind. pryden's pro
formal. adj. [formel, french; formalii, latin.]
1. ceremonious; solemn; precise; exact to affectation.
the justice, ---&gt;
in fair round belly, with good capon lin'd,
wii. eyes severe, and beard of #: cut,
ull of wise saws and modern instances. ##,
and so he plays his part. i siałoff. a you loo
formal in apparel, -
in gait and ...: like a father. $o.
ceremonies be not to be omitted to trang” so to-
tures; but the exalting them above the mean is * #2
dious but doth diminish the credit of him to spea * irst-
2. done according to established rules and methods;
gular; not sudden; not extemporaneous. it he goso
there is not any positive law of mon, whether it be 3 sil
rot,
i.
3.
:
... 2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 861</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
4:::::::::
*:::::
for 3.
1:
won.
or.
!,
cool
o,
• t
o
. -
y:}; o
o
o
s
…'
*** * **!"
s:- *:::
-o
o
zoo.”
o -
o o
o
o: *
o o
o,"
ral or particular, received by formal express consent, as in
councils ; or by secret approbation, as in customs it coneth too
pass, but may be taken away, if occasion serve. hooker.
as there are formal and written leagues, respective to cer-
tain enemies; so there is a natural and tacit confederation
amongst all men against the common enemies of human so-
ciety, so as there needs no intimation or denunciation of the
war; but all these formalities the law of nature supplies, as
in the case of pirates. bacon's holy jwar.
3. regular; methodical.
the formal stars do travel so,
as we their names and courses know ;
and he that on their changes looks, -
would think them govern'd by our books. waller.
4. external; having the appearance but not the essence.
of formal duty, make no more thy boast;
thou disobey'st where it concerns me most. dryd. aureng.
5. depending upon establishment or custom.
still in constraint your suffering sex remains,
or bound in formal or in real chains. pope.
6. having the power of making any thing what it is ; consti-
tuent; essential.
of letters the material part is breath and voice: the formal
is constituted by the motions and figure of the organs of speech
affecting breath with a peculiar sound, by which each letter is
discriminated. holder's elements of speech.
bellarmine agrees in making the formal act of adoration to
be subjection to a superior; but withal he makes the mere ap-
prehension of...excellency to include the formal reason of it:
whereas mere excellency, without superiority, doth not require
any subjection, but only estimation. stillingfleet.
the very life and vital motion, and the formal essence and
nature of man, is wholly owing to the power of god. bentley.
7. retaining its proper and essential characteristick; regular;
proper.
thou shou’dst come like a fury cover'd with snakes,
not like a formal man. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
i will not let him stir,
*till i have us’d th’ approved means i have ;
with wholsome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers,
to make of him a formal man again. shakesp. com. of err.
fo'r malist. n.s.. [formalisie, french; from form.] one who
practises external ceremony; one who prefers appearance to
reality; one who seems what he is not.
it is a ridiculous thing, and fit for a satyr to persons of
judgment, to see what shifts formalists have, and what pro-
spectives to make superficies to seem a body that hath depth
and bulk. bacon.
a grave, stanch, skilfully managed face, set upon a grasp-
ing aspiring mind, having got many a sly formalist the reputa-
tion of a primitive and severe piety. south.
for ma‘lity. n.s.. [formalite, french; from form.]
1. ceremony; established mode of behaviour.
the attire, which the minister of god is by order to use
at times of divine service, is but a matter of mere formality,
yet such as for comeliness sake hath hitherto been judged not
unnecessary. hooker.
formalities of extraordinary zeal and piety are never more
studied and elaborate than in desperate designs. king charles.
many a worthy man sacrifices his peace to formalities of
compliment and good manners. l’estrange.
nor was his attendance on divine offices a matter of forma-
lity and custom, but of conscience. atterbury.
2. solemn order, method, mode, habit, or dress.
if men forswear the deeds and bonds they draw,
though sign'd with all formality of law;
and though the signing and the seal proclaim
the barefac'd perjury, and fix the shame. . . dryden's juv.
the pretender would have infallibly landed in our northern
parts, and found them all sat down in their formalities, as the
gauls did the roman senators. swift.
3. external appearance.
to fix on god the formality of faculties, or affections, is
, the imposture of our fancies, and contradictory to his divi-
nity. glanville's scepsi.
4. essence; the quality by which any thing is what it is.
may not a man vow to a. and b. that he will give a hun-
dred pound to an hospital here the vow is made both to god
and to a. and b. but here a. and b. are only witnesses to
the vow ; but the formality of the vow lies in the promise made
to god. stillingfleet.
to fo'rmal1ze. v. a. s. formaliser, french ; from formal.]
1. to model; to modify. a word not now in use.
the same spirit which anointed the blessed soul of our sa-
viour christ, doth so formalise, unite, and actuate his whole
race, as if both he and they were so many limbs compacted
into one body. . rooker.
2. to affect formality; to be fond of ceremony. --
fo's mally. adv. [from formal.] * * ~ * * * * * * *
1. according to established rules, methods, ceremonies or rites.
formally, according to our law, on of ,
depose him. shakesp. richard ii.
2. ceremoniously; stifly ; precisely. - - -
to be stiff and formally reserved, as if the company did not
deserve our familiarity, is a downright challenge of homage.
- collier on pride.
3. in open appearance; in a visible and apparent state.
you and your followers do stand formally divided against
the authorised guides of the church, and the rest of the people.
hooker.
4. essentially; characteristically, -
this power and dominion is not adequately and formally
the image of god, but only a part of it. south.
the heathens and the christians may agree in material
acts of charity; but that which formally makes this a christian
grace, is the spring from which it flows. smalridge.
for mation. n.s.. [formation, french; from formo, latin.j
1. the act of forming or generating.
the matter discharged forth of vulcano's, and other spiracles,
contributes to the formation of meteors. woodward.
the solids are originally formed of a fluid, from a small
point, as appears by the gradual formation of a foetus. arbuthn.
complicated ideas, growing up under observation, give not
the same confusion, as if they were all offered to the mind at
once, without your observing the original and formation of
them. watts on the mind.
2. the manner in which a thing is formed.
the chorion, a thick membrane obscuring the formation,
the dam doth tear asunder. brown's wulgar errours.
fo'rmative. adj. [from forms, latin.] having the power
of giving form ; plastick.
as we have established our assertion of the seminal pro-
duction of all kinds of animals ; so likewise we affirm, that
the meanest plant cannot be raised without seed, by any for-
mative power residing in the soil. bentley's sermons.
fo'r.m.e.r. m. s. [from form.] he that forms; maker; con-
triver; planner.
the wonderful art and providence of the contriver and
former of our bodies, appears in the multitude of intentions
he must have in the formation of several parts for several
uses. - ray on the creation.
fo'r.m.e.r. adj. [from fonma, saxon, first; whence former, and
formosł, now commonly written foremoff, as if derived from
before. foremos! is generally applied to place, rank, or degree,
and former only to time; for when we say, the last rank of
the procession is like the former; we respect time rather than
place, and mean that which we saw before, rather than that
which had precedence in place.]
1. before another in time,
thy air,
thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first: , ,
—a third is like the former. shakespeare's macbeth.
2. mentioned before another. -
a bad author deserves better usage than a bad critick: a
man may be the former merely through the misfortune of an
ill judgment; but he cannot be the latter without both that
and an ill temper. pope,
3. past: as, this was the custom in former times.
the present point of time is all thou hast,
the future doubtful, and the former past.
fo'rmerly. adv. [from former.] in times past.
the places were all of them formerly the cool retirements
of the romans, where they used to hide themselves among
the woods and mountains, during the excessive heats of their
summer. addison on italy.
as an animal degenerates by diseases, the animal salts, for-
merlybenign, approach towards an alkaline nature. arbuthnot.
fo'rmidable, adj. [formidabilis, latin; formidable, fr.]
terrible; dreadful ; tremenduous; terrifick; to be feared.
i swell my preface into a volume, and make it formidable,
when you see so many pages behind. dryden': aen. dedicat.
they seem'd to fear the formidable fight,
and roll'd their billows on, to speed his flight.
fo'rmidableness...n, s, [from formidable.]
1. the quality of exciting terror or dread.
2. the thing causing dread. -
they rather chuse to be shewed the formidablenes of their
danger, than, by a blind embracing it, to perish. dec. of p.
fo'rmidably. adv. [from formidable.] in a terrible manner.
behold e'en to remoter shores,
a conquering navy proudly spread ; -
the british cannon formidably roars, - dryden.
fo'rmless. adj. [from form.] shapeless; without regularity
of form.
all form is formless, order orderless,
save what is opposite to england's love. shakesh. k. john.
fo'rmulary. m. s... [formulaire, french; from formule.] a
book containing stated and prescribed models or set forms.
fo'r.mulary. adj. ritual; prescribed ; stated.
fo'rmule., n. s. [formule, french; formula, latin.] a set
or prescribed model, or oo is roo .. " -
to fo'rnicate. v. a, [from fornix, latin.) to commit
lewdness. . . . . . . . . . . . * . . . . . .
it is a new way to fornicate at a distance.
harte,
dryden.
brown.
fornica"tics.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 862</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
. . french madam.
fossica’rios. m. s. [fornication, french; formitatio, so
1. concubinage or commerce with on unmarried woman.
bless met what a fry of fornication is a the door. shakesh.
... the law ought to be strict against fornicatio and adulte-
if shore were universal liberty, the increase of man-
ries; for, graunt
-
kind would be but like that of foxes at best.
, in scripture, sometimes idolatry. -
2 f. ji trust in thine own beauty, and playcdst the
harlot, because of thy renowo, and pouredst out thy formica-
tions, on every one that passed by: ezo. xvi.15;
fossica"ror. n.s. [fornicateur, french; from formix, latin.]
one that has commerce with unmarried women. -
a fornicator or adulterer steals the foul as well as dishonours
the body of his neighbour. taylor's rule of living holy.
for nica'r ress. n.s.. [from fornicator.] a woman who with-
out marriage cohabits with a man.
see you the fornicatress be remov’d 5
o - -
let her have needful but not slavish means.
shakespeare.
+
7, forsa ke. v. a. preter, forsook ; part. pass forsook, or for-
saken. [versacken, dutch.]
1. to leave in resentment, neglect, or dislike.
'twas now the time when first saul god forsook,
god saul; the room in s heart wild passions took.
orestes comes in time
to save your honour: pyrrhus cools apace;
prevent his falshood, and forsake him first :
i know you hate him. a. phillips's distres mother.
daughter of jove whose arms in thunder wield
th’ avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield,
cowley.
- forsook by thee, in vain i sought thy aid. pope's odyssey.
2. to leave; to go away from ; to depart from.
... unwilling i forsook your friendly state,
commanded by the gods, and forc’d by fate. dryden's zn.
3. to desert; to fail. . . - • .
truth, mode ity, and shame the world forsook ; -
fraud, avarice, and force their places took. dryd. ovid.
when ev’n the flying sails were seen no more,
forsaken of all fight she jeft the shore.
their purple majesty, t
and all those outward shows which we call greatness,
languish and droop, seem empty and forsaken,
o and draw the wond'ring gazers eyes no more. rowe.
fors a‘k f.r. m. s. [from firsake.j deserter; one that forsakes.
. . . thou did'st deliver us into the hands of lawless enemies,
- most hateful forsakers of god. apocrypha.
fcr soo’s h. adv. sponsoo, saxon.]
1. in truth ; certainly ; very well. it is used almost always in
an ironical or contemptuous sense.
wherefore doth lysander
... deny your love, so sich within his soul,
and tender me, forsooth, affection
a fit man, forsooth, to govern a realm, who had so gocaly
government in his own estate. . . . . hayward.
unlearned persons use such letters as justly express the
power or sound of their speech ; yet forsooth, we say, write
not true english, or true french.
in the east indies a widow, who has any regard to her
character, throws herself into the flames cf her husband's
dryden.
shakespeare.
holder on speech.
funeral pile, to shew, forsooth, that she is faithful to the me--
mory of her deceased lord. addison's freeholder.
she would cry out murder, and disturb the whole neigh-
bourhood; and when john came running down the stairs to
enqoire what the matter was, nothing, forsooth, only her maid
had stuck a pin wrong in her gown. arbuthn. hisł. of j. bull.
some question the genuineness of his books, because, for-
footh, they cannot discover in them that fumen orationis that
cicero speaks of. .. 2 … , baker an learning.
2. it is supposed to have been once a word of honour in address
to women. it is probable that an inferior, being called, shewed
his attention by answering in the word yes, forsooth, which
in time lost its true meaning ; and instead of a mere exclama-
tory interjection, was supposed a compellation. it appears in
shakespeare to have been used likewise to men. . . . . . .
our old english word forsooth has been changed for the
- - - guardian.
to forswear. v. a. pret, forswore: part. forsworn. [ron-
rpaenian, saxon.] . . . . . . . . . . - * * *
i. to renounce upon oath. - - - - -
i firmly vow - -- *
\- -i.
- * - o
never to wooe ber more; but do softwear her, * ,
as one unworthy all the former favours,
that i have fondly flatter'd her withal.
2. to deny upon oath. -
and that self chain about his neck, . .
which he fortswore most monstrously to have. shakespeare.
observe the wretch who hath his faith forsook,
how clear his voice, and how assur’d his look
like innocence, and as serenely bold
as truth, how loudly he forswears thy gold
3. with the reciprocal pronoun as, to forswear himself; to be
pe jured 3 to swear falsely. -
to leave my julia, shall i be forsworn ? - * *
**
-
shoojar. -
* * *
dryd, juv.
to leave fair silvia, shall i beforsworn ?
to wrong my friend, shall i be much forsworn ?
and ev'n that power which gave me first my oth
provokes me to this threefold perjury. s. aes
one says, he never should endure the sight 'akotaro,
of that forsworn, that wrongs both land and laws
i too have sworn, ev’n at the altar sworn daniel,
eternal love and endless faith to theseus.”
and yet am false, forsworn ; the hallow'd his
that heard me swear, is witness to my falshoi. smiłł
to for swo’ar. v. m. to swear falsely; to commit eri mith,
take heed ; for he holds vengeance in his ho jury,
2
to hurl upon their heads that break his law.
—and that same vengeance doth hurl on thee
for false forswearing, and for murder too. sh : -
for swe a'r s * [from forswear.] one *::::::::
fort, n. s. [fort, french.j. a fortified house; a o -
they erected a fort, which they called the fort deter. d
from thence they bolted like beasts of the for st ; all
now to their fort they are about to send
for the loud engines which their isle defend.
he that views a fort to take it,
plants his artillery 'gainst the weakest part. denian', sothy,
my fury does, like jealous forts, pursue roy
with death ev’n strangers who but come to view. d, d
z * * - j4th.
fort e.d. adj. [from fort.] furnished or guarded by forts,
not used now.
your desert speaks loud, and i should wrong
to lock it in the wards of covert bosom; .
when it deserves with characters of brass
a forted residence, gainst the tooth of time
and rasure of oblivion. shakoff. measure for mojo,
, forth. adv. [ecn8, saxon; whence further and furthy.]
i, forward; onward in time.
from that day forth i lov'd that face divine;
from that day forth i cast in careful mind
to seek her out.
2. forward in place or order.
look at the second admonition, and so forth, where they
speak in most unchristian manner. whitgift.
mad pandarus steps forth, with vengeance vow'd
for bitias’ death. dryden's en.
3. abroad; out of doors. -
uncle, i must come forth. shaloftsar'; 0thl.
i have no mind of feasting forth to-night. shakespeare,
attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
will she not forth p - shakoshears.
when winter past, and summer scarce begun,
invites them forth to labour in the sun. dryden's virgil.
4. out away; beyond the boundary of any place.
they will privily relieve their friends that are forth; they
will send the enemy secret advertisements; and they will not
also stick to draw the enemy privily upon them. soft.
*. even that sunshine brew’d a show'r for him,
o that wash'd his father's fortunes forth of france. shaft.
5. out into a publick chara&amp;ter; publick view.
. . . you may set forth the same with farmhouses. peacham.
- but when your troubled country call'd you forth,
. ... your flaming courage, and your matchless worth,
- bacon,
wallr,
fairy queen,
waller.
* . to fierce contention gave a prosp'rous end.
6. throughly ; from beginning to end. out of use. o
- you, cousin, o - --
... whom it concerns to hear this matter frth, -
do with your injuries as seems you belt. shakoff.
7. to a certain degree. obsolete. • so - so . . ."
hence we learn, how far forth we may exped justification
and salvation from the sufferings of christ; no further in
we are wrought on by his renewing grace. " toll oil.
8. on to the end. out of use. * **, }rth:
irepeated the ave maria: the inquisitor bomos so
… i said i was taught no more. * . memoir in siro.
fort h. prep. out of. - -
and here's a prophet, that i brought wido, testart
from forth the streets of pomfret. - shakstart.
some forth their cabbins peop.
and trembling ask what news, and do hear so dino,
as jealous husbands, what they would not know. 2 o
fortheo'ming. adj. [forth and coming.] ready wo
not absconding; not lost. see that he be
carry this mad knave to jail: i charge yo". }, shrew.
forthcoming. shakoff. t.also § e h.w.i.
... weil see your trinkets hereforthcoming all. o o:
for thi'ssuing. adj. [forth and issue..] comi"5*
forward from a covert. .. ield
forshifting thus, she gave him first tow”
a weighty ax, with truest temper steel", po's 0&amp;so
- and double edg’d. - oft with:
for thright. adv. [forth and right.] str
out flexions. not in use. ither frthrig' "
. … he ever going so just with the horse: * ..s. 0
turning, that it seemed as he borrowed the horse's "sao.
lent the horse his mind. the
ait forward;
j.
2.
f.
- 8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 863</div><p class="text">f o r '' o
o:
:
the river not running forthright, but almost continually
winding, as if the lower streams would return to their spring,
or that the river had a delight to play with itself. sidney.
arrived there, they passed in forthright;
for still to all the gate stood open wide. 'airy queen.
thither forthright he rode to rouse the prey. dryden.
for thr1'ght. m. s. - a streight path.
here's a maze trod, indeed,
through forthrights and meanders. shakespeare's tempest.
forthwor h. adv. [forth and with..] immediately; without
delay; at once; strait.
forthwith he runs, with feigned faithful haste,
unto his guest ; who, after troublous sights
and dreams, 'gan now to take more sound repast. spenser.
few things are so restrained to any one end or purpose, that
the same being extinct, they should forthwith utterly become
frustrate. płooker.
neither did the martial men dally or prosecute the service
faintly, but did forthwith quench that fire. davies on ireland.
forthwith began these fury-moving sounds,
the notes of wrath, the musick brought from hell, -
the rattling drums. daniel’s civil war.
the winged heralds, by command
of sov’reign pow'r, throughout the host proclaim
a solemn council forthwith to be held
at pandaemonium. milton's paradise loft.
in his passage thither one put into his hand a note of the
whole conspiracy, desiring him to read it forthwith, and to
remember the giver of it as long as he lived. south.
fortieth. adj. [from forty.] the fourth tenth; next after
the thirty-ninth.
what doth it avail
to be the fortieth man in an entail? donne.
burnet says, scotland is not above a fortieth part in value
to the rest of britain; and, with respect to the profit that eng-
land gains from hence, not the forty thousandth part. swift.
forrifi able. adj. [from fortify.] what may be fortified.
fortification. n. s. [fortification, french; from fortiff.]
1. the science of military architecture.
fortification is an art shewing how to fortify a place with
ramparts, parapets, moats, and other bulwarks; to the end
that a small number of men within may be able to defend
themselves, for a considerable time, against the assaults of a
numerous army without; so that the enemy, in attacking
them, must of necessity suffer great loss. it is either regular
or irregular; and, with respect to time, may be distinguished
into durable and temporary. harris.
the phoenicians, tho' an unwarlike nation, yet understood
the art of fortification. broome on the odyssey.
2. a place built for strength.
the hounds were uncoupled, and the stag thought it better
to trust to the nimbleness of his feet, than to the slender for-
tification of his lodging. sidney.
excellent devices were used to make even their sports pro-
fitable; images, battles, and fortifications being then delivered
to their memory, which, after stronger judgments, might
dispense some advantage. sidney.
3. addition of strength. not much used.
to strengthen the infested parts, give some few advices by
way of fortification and antidote. gov. of tongue.
fortifier. n.s.. [from fortiff.]
1. one who ere&amp;ts works for defence.
the fortifier of pendennis made his advantage of the com-
modity afforded by the ground. carew's survey of cornwal.
2. one who supports or secures; one who upholds.
he was led forth by many armed men, who often had been
the fortifiers of wickedness, to the place of execution. sidney.
to fcs'rtify. v. a. [fortifier, french.]
1. to strengthen against attacks by walls or works.
great dunfinane he strongly fortifies. -
shakespeare's macbeth.
he fortified the city against besieging. ecclus 1.4.
2. to confirm ; to encourage.
it greatly fortified her defires, to see that her mother had the
like desires. sidney.
to fortify the former opinions tostatus adds, that those
which dweli near the falls of water are deaf from their in-
fancy; but this i hold as feigned. raleigh.
3. to fix; to establish in resolution.
but in born worth that fortune can controul,
new-strung and stiffer bent her softer soul:
the heroine assum'd the woman's place,
confirm'd her mind, and fortiff'd her face. dryden.
a young man, before he leaves the shelter of his father's
house, should be fortified with resolution to secure his vir-
tues. locke.
to fo'rtify. v. n. to raise strong places.
- thou us impower'd
to fortify thus far and overlay
with this portentous bridge the dark abyss. milton.
fortila'ge. n.s.. [from fort.] . a little fort; a blockhouse.
yet was the fence thereof but weak and thin
nought fear'd their force that fortilage to win. spenser.
vol. i.
in all straights and narrow passages there should be some
little fortilage, or wooden castle set, which should keep and
command the straight. spenser on ireland."
forytn. m. s. [french..] a little fort raised to defend a
camp, particularly in a siege. hanmer.
thou hast talk’d -
of palisadoes, fortins, parapets. shakesp. henry iv.
footitude. n.s. [fortitude, latin.] f -
1. courage; bravery; magnanimity; greatness of mind; power
of acting or suffering well.
- the king-becoming graces,
devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, - -
i have no relish of them. shakespeare's macbeth.
the better fortitude
cf patience, and heroick martyrdom
unsung. milton's paradise loft.
fortitude is the guard and support of the other virtues; and
without courage, a man will scarce keep steady to his duty,
and fill up the character of a truly worthy man. locke.
they thought it reasonable to do all possible honour to the
memories of martyrs; partly that others might be encouraged
to the same patience and fortitude, and partly that virtue, even
in this world, might not lose its reward. nelson.
2. strength; force. not in use.
he wrongs his fame,
despairing of his own arm's fortitude, , - -
to join with witches and the help of hell! shakes). h. vi.
fo'rtlet. n.s.. [from fort.] a little fort.
fo'rt night. n.s.. [contracted from fourteen nights, peopnetyne
night, saxon. it was the custom of the ancient northern
nations to count time by nights: thus we say, this day seven-
night. so tacitus, nan dierum numerum ut nos, sod notium
computant..] the space of two weeks.
she would give her a lesson for walking so late, that should
make her keep within doors for one fortnight. sidney.
hanging on a deep well, somewhat above the water, for
some fortnights space, is an excellent means of making drink
fresh and quick. bacon's natural history.
about a fortnight before i had finished it, his majesty's de-
claration for liberty of conscience came abroad. dryden.
he often had it in his head, but never, with much appre-
hension, 'till about a fortnight before. swift,
fo'rtress. n.j. [fortresse, french..] a strong hold; a forti-
fied place; a castle of defence.
breaking forth like a sudden tempest, he over-ran all, break-
ing down all the holds and fortresses. spenser on ireland.
the trump of death sounds in their hearing shrill;
their weapon, faith; theirfortress was the grave. fairfax.
god is our fortres, in whose conqu'ring name
let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks. shak. hen. vi.
there is no such way to give defence to absurd doctrines,
as to guard them round about with legions of obscure and
undefined words ; which yet makes these retreats more like
the dens of robbers, or holes of foxes, than the fortresses of
fair warriors. ' locke.
fortuttous. adj. [fortuit, french; fortuitus, lat.] ac-
cidental ; casual ; happening by chance.
a wonder it must be, that there should be any man found so
stupid as to persuade himself that this most beautiful world could
be produced by the fortuitous concourse of atoms. ray. .
if casual concourse did the world composes
and things and acts fortuitous arose,
then any thing might come from any thing;
for how from chance can constant order spring. blackmore.
fortuitously. adv. [from fortuitous.] accidentally; casual.
ly; by chance. -
it is partly evaporated into air, and partly diluted into wa-
ter, and fortuitously shared between all the elements. rogers.
footwo. n: s [from fortuitous.] accident; chance;
it.
fortunate. adj. . [fortunatus, latin. 1 ... lucky; happy;
successful; not subject to miscarriage. used of persons or
actions.
i am most fortunate thus accidentally to encounter you:
you have ended my business, and i will merrily accompany
you home. shakespeare's coriolanus.
he figh'd; and could not but their fate deplore,
so wretched now, so fortunate before. dryd, knight's tale.
no, there is a necessity in fate
why still the brave bold man is fortunate:
he keeps his object ever full in fight,
and that assurance holds him firm and right:
true, 'tis a narrow path that leads to bliss, ---
but right before there is no precipice; - }
fear makes men look aside, and so their footing miss. dry.
roaro. adv. [from fortunate.] happily; success-
ull ys
y bright eliza rul’d britannia's state,
and boldly wise, and fortunately great. prior,
fortunateness. n. s. [from fortunate.] happiness; good
luck; success.
o me, said she, whose greatest fortunateness is more unfor-
tunate than my sister's greatest unfortunateness. sidney.
fo’rtune.
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 864</div><p class="text">f o r
f o r
ortune. n. s. s ortuna, latin ; fortune, french.] -
the power *::::::::::: the lots of life according to
her own humour. … .
foriune, that arrant whore, - -
ne'er turns the key to th’ poor. shakesh. king lear.
. . . though fortune's malice overthrow my state, . . .
my mind exceeds the compass of her wheel. shakoff. h. vi.
2. the good or ill that befals man. . . . . .
- to rejoice, said he to-day; .. •
in you the fortune of great britain lies:
among so brave a people you are they . . . . .
, whom heav'n has chose to fight for such a prize. - dryden.
the adequate meaning of chance, as distinguished from
fortune, in that the latter is understood to befal only rational
agents, but chance to be among inanimate bodies. bentley.
3. *. chance of life; means of living. - -
‘. . his father dying, he was driven to london to seek his
fortune. o -. - swift.
4. success, good or bad; event. -
this terrestrial globe has been surrounded by the fortune
and boldness of many navigators. temple.
no, he shall eat, and die with me, or live; -
o
…
our equal crimes shall equal fortune give. dryd. innocence.
5. estate ; possessions. . . .
if thou do'st •
as this instruas thee, thou do'st make thy way
to noble fortunes. - shakesp. king lear.
. . that eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh
to raise my forto. - shaftsp. king lear.
"... but tell ine, tityrus, what heav'nly power
preserv'd your fortunes in that fatal hour dryd. wing. pass.
** the fate which governs poets, thought it fit
o
. . . he should not raise his fortunes by his wit. dryden.
he was younger son to a gentleman of a good birth, but
small fortune. swift.
6. the portion of a man or woman: generally of a woman.
"... i am thought some heiress rich in lands,
'''fled to escape a cruel guardian's hands;
which may produce a story worth the telling,
of the next sparks that go afortune stealing. prol. to orphan.
the fortune hunters have already cast their eyes upon her,
spectator.
* - -
" and take care to plant themselves in her view,
- when miss delights in her spinnet, - -
a fiddler may a fortune get. swift.
7. futurity; future events. -
you who mens fortunes in their faces read,
• *- to find out mine, look not, alas, on me:
but mark her face, and all the features heed;
for only there is writ my destiny. cowley's misires.
to fo'rtune. v. n. [from the noun..] to befall; to fall
out; to happen ; to come casually to pass.
- it fortuned, as fair it then befell,
behind his back, unweeting, where he stood,
of ancient time there was a springing well,
from which fast trickled forth a silver flood: fairy 3ueen.
it fortuned the same night that a christian, serving a turk
... in the camp, secretly gave the watchmen warning. knoll.s.
- , i'll tell you as we pass along, .
that you will wonder what hath sortin...i.
herefortin'd. curl to slide.
fo'rtuned. adj. supplied by fortune."
not th’ imperious shew
of the full fortun’d caesar ever shall
be brook'd with me, shakesh. ant, and cleopatra.
fo'r' unebook. n.f. [fortune and book.]" a book consulted
to know fortune, or future events.
thou know'st a face, in whose each look
beauty lays 9pe love's fortunebook;
• on whose fair revolutions wait .
... the obsequious motions of love's fate. crashaw.
fortunehu’nter, n. s. [fortune and hunt.] a man whose
employment is to enquire after women with great portions to
enrich himself by marrying them. .
we out, however, distinguish between fortunehunters and
fortunestealers. . . . . speciator.
to fo'rtunetel l. v. n. [fortune and tell.] . . -
!. to pretend to the power of revealing futurity.
" . we are simple men; we do not know what's brought to
pass under the profession offortunetelling. shakespeare.
i'll conjure you, i'll fortinetell you. . shakespeare.
the gypsies were to divide the money got by stealing lin-
- men, or by fortune telling. * -- walton's angler.
2. to reveal futurity. - -
; : , here, while his canting drone-pipe scand
... the mystick figures of her hand,
he tipples palmestry, and dines
on all her fortunetelling lines.
shakespeare.
pope's dunciad.
cleaveland.
***u.neteliser, n.f. [fortune and teller.] one jo
common people by pretending to the knowledge of futurity.
they brought one pinch, a hungry lean-fac’d villain,
- a thread-bare juggler, and a fortuneteller. shakespeare.
~. a welchman being at a sessions-house, and seeing the pri.
-
- - * - - - - -
*
* -
soners hold up hands at the bar, related to some
quaintance that the judges were good fortunetellers:
did but look upon their hand, they could certainly te wh )
they should live or die. bacon'; ap. *
hast thou given credit to vain prediction. fnen . .
or fortunetellers, or gone about to know any secret i.
ss dy
lot * duppa' -
- ; rules or door:
there needs no more than impudefico o #! evotion,
of his 2c-
for if they
superstitious credulity on the other, to the setting to: d
tuneteller. l'e/o
long ago a fortuneteller
exactly said what now befell her. swif
forty. adj. [reopenez, saxon.) four times ten. wift.
on fair ground i could beat forty of them. shuk. cri.
he that upon levity quits his station, in hopes to be fol.
2.5 ttes
tis forty to one loses. l'eir .
roß m. s. [latin.] any publick place. ange.
the forum was a publick place in rome, where law,
and orators made their speeches before their proper o
matters of property, or in criminal cases, to ce. ...
to complain or defend. . watts on the j.
close to the bay great neptune's fane adjoins, -
and near a forum flank'd with marble shine,
where the bold youth, the num'rous fleets to flore
shape the broad fail, or smooth the taper oar. y pope
to fokwa nder. v. a. [for and wander.j towander wi,
and wearily. y
“the better part now of the ling’ring day
they travelled had, when as they far espy’d
…a weary wight forwand'ring by the way. fairy queen,
forward. adv, sponpeano, saxon.] ‘towards ; to:
or place before; onward 3. progressively.
... when fervent sorrow slaked was,
* she up arose, resolving him to find
* alive or dead, and forward forth doth pass. fairy quin,
from smaller things the mind of the hearers may go far-
ward to the knowledge of greater, and climb up from the
lowest to the highest things. - - - hair.
he that is used to go forward, and findeth a flop, flleth of
his own favour, and is not the thing he was. bacon'; essays,
fo'rwar d. adj. [from the adverb.]
1. warm ; earnest; not backward.
they would that we should remember the poor, which i
also was forwarded to do. galii. 10.
2. ardent ; eager; hot; violent.
you'll still be too forward. shakoff. two goni, of worwa.
unskill'd to dart the pointed spear,
or lead the forward youth to noble war. prior,
3. ready ; confident; presumptuous.
old butes’ form he took, anchises squire,
now left to rule ascanius by his fire;
* and thus salutes the boy, too forward for his years. dyko,
4. not reserved ; not over inodest.
. . 'tis a per'lous boy,
bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable; ... it
he's all the mother's from the top to toe. shakoff, rid.iii.
. premature; early ripe. -
5 short smo, ou, has a forward spring. shak, r. iii.
6. quick; ready ; hasty. . . - -
the mind makes not that benefit it should of the informa-
tion it receives from civil or natural historians, in being too
forward or too slow in making observations on the ro
facts recorded in them. . - la .
had they, who would persuade us that these * o:
principles, confidered separately the parts out of which t ‘.
propositions are made, they would not perhaps have o:
forward to believe they were innate. - o
7. antecedent; anterior : opposed to posterior,
let us take the instant by the forward top;
for we are old, and on our quick it decrets
th’ inaudible and noiseless foot of time
steals, ere we can effect them.
8. not behindhand; not inferiour.
my good so -
she is as forward of her breeding, as onter's tait,
she is i' s rear o' our birth. shakoff. |pinter's tak
to fo'rw ard. v. a. [from the adverb.].
1. to hasten; to quicken; to accelerate in grow
ment.
as we house hot country plants,
so we may house our own country plants
and make them come in the cold seasons. -
whenever i shine, - soft.
i forward the grass and i ripen the vine.
2. to patronise; to advance.
forwar der. n. s. [from forward.] he who p
thing. - - ly ;
fo'rwardly. adv. [from the adjective.] eagerly;
quickly. - e set,
#. sudden and surprising turns we *...
should not suffer us too forwardly to admit presump
fo'rwardness. n.s.. [from forward.] 1. eagorno
shaftart,
th or improvc"
as lemons, to save to"
to forward to:
1 */
ban's nal. hy"
romo is an/
hasily;
i.
l
.
r
f.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 865</div><p class="text">f. os
- " *.
f * u
:
-
**
o
s.
s
:
o:-
!zoo
i.
o -
* .
|
|
#.
* .
*...
1. eagerness; ardour; readiness to ad.
absolutely we cannot discommend, we cannot absolutely
approve either willingness to live, or forwardness to die. hook.
is it so strange a matter to find a good thing furthered by ill
men of a finister intent and purpose, whose forwardness is not
therefore a bridle to such as favour the same cause with a bet-
ter and sincere meaning. - - hooker.
the great ones were in forwardness, the people in fury, en-
tertaining this airy phantasm with incredible affection. bacon.
2. quickness; readiness. * - a
he had such a dextrous proclivity, as his teachers were fain
to restrain his forwardness; that his brothers, who were under
the same training, might hold pace with him. j/otton.
3. earliness; early ripeness. -
4. confidence; assurance; want of modesy.
in france it is usual to bring their children into company,
and to cherish in them, from their infancy, a kind of for-
wardness and assurance. " . . . addison on italy.
fo'rwards, adv. straight before; progressively; not backwards.
the rhodian ship passed through the whole roman fleet,
backwards and forwards several times, carrying intelligence
to drepanum. arbuthnot on #.
fosse. m. s. issa, latin ; fis, welch.] a ditch; a moat.
fo'sset. see faucet, - -
fo'sseway. m. s. [soft and way.] one of the great roman
* through england, so called from the ditches on each
side. - -
fossil. adj. [fossilis, latin; fossile, french.] that which is
dug out of the earth. - - * -
. . the fossil shells are many of them of the same kinds with
those that now appear upon the neighbouring shores; and the
rest such as may be presumed to be at the bottom of the adja-
ccnt seas. . . . . . . . . . . j/oodward's natural history.
fossil or rock salt, and sal gemm, differ not in nature from
each other; nor from the common salt of salt springs, or that
of the sea, when pure. ... ." i/oodward's natural history.
it is of a middle nature, between fossil and animal, being
produced from animal excrements, intermixed with vegetable
salts. . - . . . arbuthnot on aliments.
fo'ssil. m. s. - - - - . . .
in this globe are many other bodies, which, because we dis-
cover them by digging into the bowels of the earth, are called
by one common name fossils ; under which are comprehended
metals and minerals. . - - locke.
many fossils are very oddly and elegantly shaped. . . bently.
by the word fossil, used as a denomination of one of three
general divisions of natural productions, we understand bodies
formed usually within the earth, sometimes on its surface, and
sometimes in waters; of a plain and simple structure, in which
there is no visible difference of parts, no distinetion of vessels
and their contents, but every portion of which is similar to
and perfeot as the whole. - - hill’s mat. med.
those bodies which will melt in the fire are called minerals,
the rest fossils, - . . . .” * pemberton.
to foster. v. a. [forenian, saxon.]
1. to nurse ; to feed; to support; to train up. . . . .
some say that ravensf/ler forlorn children. shakespeare.
our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd
with that dear blood, which it hath fostered. shakes). r. ii.
that base wretch, - -
bred but on alms, and foster'd with cold dishes,
with scraps o' th' court.
fostering has always been a stronger alliance than blood.
* - - davies on ireland.
no more let ireland brag her harmless nation
fosters no venom, since that scots plantation. cleaveland.
the son of mulciber,
found in the fire, and foster'd in the plains,
- a shepherd and a king at once he reigns.
2. to pamper ; to encourage. - - | --
a prince of great courage and beauty, but fostered up in
blood by his naughty father. - - sidney.
3. to cherish; to forward. - -
ye fostering breezes, blow; - -
ye softening dews, ye tender showers descend. thomson.
fo'ster age. n.s. [from foster.] the charge of nursing; al-
terage.
so one adjoining to this lake had the charge and fosterage
of this child. - raleigh's history.
fost erb rother. n. s. sporten bnooen, saxon.] one bred
at the same pap; one fed by the same nurse.
fosterchild. n.s. [forzen cilb, saxon.] a child nursed by
a woman not the mother, or bred by a man not the father.
the fosterchildren do love and are beloved of their foster-
fathers. davies on ireland.
the goddess thus beguil'd,
with pleasant stories, her false fosterchild. . addison's ovid.
fosterda’m. m. s. [foster and dam..] a nurse; one that per-
forms the office of a mother by giving food to a young child.
there, by the wolf, were laid the martial twins:
intrepid on her swelling dugs they hung;
~ *
dryden’s aen.
the fosterdam loll'd out her fawning tongue. dryden's an.
o
* shakespeare's cymbeline. - - -
o fosterea'rth. n.s.. [fosler and earth.j earth by which the
plant is nourished, though it did not grow at first in it.
in vain, the nursling grove -
seems fair a while, cherish'd with fosserearth ; , o, .
but when the alien compost is exhaust,
. its native poverty again prevails | phillips,
fo'sterer. n.s.. [from f/ler.] a nurse; one who gives food
in the place of a parent. - * *
in ireland they put their children to fosterers; the rich men
selling, the meaner sort buying the alterage of their children:
in the opinion of the irish fostering has always been a stronger
alliance than blood. . . . davies on ireland.
fost erfather. m. s. sportenraben, saxon.] one who
gives food in the place of the father. - - -
in ireland fosterchildren do love and are beloved by their
fosterfathers, and their sept, more than of their own natural
parents and kindred. - davies on ireland."
the duke of bretagne having been an host and a kind of
parent or fosterfather to the king, in his tenderness of age and
weakness of fortune, did look for aid this time from king
henry. - - bacon's henry vii.
tyrrheus, the fosterfather of the beast, . . . .
then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fist. dryden's aen.
fost ermoorher. m. s. s foster and mother.] a nurse.
foste rnu'rse. . m. s. s foster and nurse. this is an improper
compound, because foster and nurse mean the same.] a
nurse. - - - - - - - - -
ourf/fernurse of nature is repose,
. the which he lacks. jo. king lear.
fo's terson. m. s. [foster and son.] one fed and educated,
though not the son by nature.
mature in years, to ready honours move; , :
q of celestial seed offferson of joves dryden's wirgil.
fouga de. m. s. [french..] in the art of war, a sort of little
mine in the manner of a well, scarce more than ten feet wide
and twelve deep, dug under some work or fortification; and
charged with barrels or sacks of gunpowder to blow it up,
and covered over with earth. - dicf.
fought. the preterite and participle of fight. -
though unknown to me, they sure fought well,
whom rupert led, and who were british born. dryden.
foug hten. [the passive participle of fight. rarely used.]
contested; disputed by arms. -
• on the foughten field i
michael and his angels, prevalent , or
. . encamping, plac'd in guard their watches round
cherubick waving fires. . . milton's parad; * lost.
foul. adj. [fuls, gothick; pul, saxon.] . . . .
1. not clean; filthy; dirty; miry. through most of its sig-
nifications it is opposed to fair. . . -
mio is foul with weeping. "... job, xvi. 16.
t’s monstrous labour when i wash my brain,
and it grows fouler. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
he that can travel in deep and foul ways, ought not to say
that he cannot walk in fair. - tillotson.
the stream is foul with stains
of rushing torrents and descending rains, addison.
2. impure; polluted; full of filth. - - -
- with foul mouth,
and in the witness of his proper ear,
to call him villain. , shakesp. measure for measure.
kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
upon the foul disease. - shakespeare's king lear.
intemperance and sensuality debase mens minds, clog their
spirits, and make them gross, foul, listless and unactive. tillots.
3. wicked ; detestable; abominable.
- jesus rebuked the foul spirit, - - -
he hates foul leasings and vile flattery,
two filthy blots in noble gentery. hubberd's tale.
- this is the grossest and most irrational supposition, as well
as the fouls atheism, that can be imagined. . . . hale.
satire has always shone among the rest,
and is the boldest way, if not the best,
to tell men truly of their foules faults,
to laugh at their vain deeds, and vainer thoughts. dryden,
4. not lawful; not according to the established rules.
by foul play were we heav'd thence,
but blessedly help'd hither.
5. hateful; ugly ; loathsome.
th' other half did woman's shape retain,
most loathsom, filthy, foul, and full of vile disdain.
* - fairy q seen.
-
mar. ix. 25.
shakespeare's temps?.
hast thou forgot
the foul witch sycorax, who with age and envy
was grown into a hoop shakespeare's tempg/?.
foul fights do rather displease, in that they excite the me-
mory of foul things than in the immediate objects; and there-
fore, in pictures, those foul fights do not much offend. bacon.
all things that seem so foul and disagreeable in nature, are
not really so in themselves, but only relatively. 44%; e.
6. disgraceful; shameful.
too well i see and rue the dire event,
*.* -- - - that<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

%
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 866</div><p class="text">- f o r
f o r
fo'rtune. m. s. frtuna, latin; fortune, french.] ..
1. the power # to distribute theiots of life according to
her own humour. . . . hore. - -
forjune, that arrant whore • * * *
nortaris the key to th’ poor. h o: king lear.
. . . . though fortune's malice overthrow my state, -
m .. the compass of her wheel. shaft. h. vi.
2. the good or ill that befals man... .
t - g rejoice, said he, to-day; . .
in you the fortune of great britain lies:
among so brave a people you are they . . . .
whom heav'n has chose to fight for such a prize. dryden.
the adequate meaning of chance, as distinguished from
fortune, in that the latter is understood to befal only rational
agents, but chance to be among inanimate bodies. bently.
}. the chance of life; means of living. - -
his father dying, he was driven to london to seek his
fortune. * … . swift.
4. success, good or bad; event.
this terrestrial globe has been surrounded by the fortune
-
and boldness of many navigators. temple.
- no, he shall eat, and die with me, or live; -
our equal crimes shall equal fortune give. dryd. innocence.
. estate ; possessions. . .
5 p if thou do'st - -
, , as this instructs thee, thou do'st make thy way
" ' to noble fortunes. shakesp. king lear.
... ...that eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh
o to raise my fortunit. - shaftsp. king lear.
* but tell me, tityrus, what heav'nly power
... preserv'd your fortunes in that fatal hour dryd. wirg. pass.
* * the fate which governs poets, thought it fit
he should not raise his fortunes by his wit. dryden.
he was younger son to a gentleman of a good birth, but
small fortune. - swift.
6. the portion of a man or woman: generally of a woman.
* . " i. thought some heiress rich in lands,
- fled to escape a cruel guardian's hands;
which may produce a story worth the telling,
of the next sparks that go afortune stealing. prol. to orphan.
the fortune hunters have already cast their eyes upon her,
spectator.
-
and take care to plant themselves in her view,
- when miss delights in her spinnet,
a fiddler may a fortune get.
7. futurity; future events. -
you who mens fortunes in their faces read,
to find out mine, look not, alas, on me:
- but mark her face, and all the features heed;
for only there is writ my destiny. cowley’s miseres.
to fo'r'ru ne. v. n. [from the noun..] to befall; to fall
out; to happen ; to come casually to pass.
- it fortuned, as fair it then befell,
behind his back, unweeting, where he stood,
of ancient time there was a springing well,
from which fast trickled forth a filver flood. fairy 3ueen.
it fortuned the same night that a christian, serving a turk
... in the camp, secretly gave the watchmen warning. knolles.
|! tell you as we pass along, -
that you will wonder what hath sortin...i.
- herefortin’d curl to slide.
fo'rtuned. adj. supplied by fortune."
not th’ imperious shew
of the full fortun’d caesar ever shall
be brook’d with me, shakosh. ant, and cleopatra.
swift.
shakespeare.
pope's dunciad.
fo'r' unebook. n.f. [fortune and book.]" a book consulted
to know fortune, or future events.
thou know'st a face, in whose each look . . "
beauty lays 9pe love's fortunebook; . . . .
- on whose fair revolutions wait
the obsequious motions of love's fate. crashaw.
fortunehu’nter, n.s.. [fortune and hunt.] a man whose
employment is to enquire after women with great portions to
enrich himself by marrying them. - -
we must, however, distinguish between fortunehunters and
fortunestealers. . . . speciator.
to fo'rtune tel l. v. n. [fortune and tell.] -
3. to pretend to the power of revealing futurity.
" . we are simple men; we do not know what's brought to
pass under the profession offortunetelling. shakespeare.
i'll conjure you, i'll fortunetell you. shakespeare.
the gypsies were to divide the mon y got by stealing lin-
... nen, or by fortune telling. - walton's angler.
2. to reveal futurity.
* ... ...here, while his canting drone-pipe scand
... the mystick figures of her hand,
he tipples palmestry, and dines -
on all her fortunetelling lines. cleaveland.
-
---
forunetelier. n.s. [fortune and teller.] one j
common people by pretending to the knowledge of futurity.
hey brought one pinch, a hungry lean facid villain,
a thread-bare juggler, and a fortuneteller. shakespeare.
-- a welchman being at a sessions-house, and seeing the pri-
-
- - - - -
soners hold up hands at the bar, related to som
quaintance that the judges were good form.
did but look upon their hand, they could certain tel
they should live or die. b...} a. *
hast thou given credit to vain prediaion. o: othegns,
or fortunetellers, or gone about to know any so o:
lot * . duppa's rules for }."
there needs no more than impudence on one sid alion,
superstitious credulity on the other, to the setting u o: d
tuneteller. o o# o:
long ago a fortuneteller :/trango,
exactly said what now befell her. soft
forty. adj. [feopenetz, saxon.] four times ten. ”
on fair ground i could beat forty of them. so cori
he that upon levity quits his station, in hopes to be? rial.
'tis forty to one loses. fo.
forum. m. s. [latin.] any publick place. whang,
the forum was a publick place in rome, where law,
and orators made their speeches before their proper o
matters of property, or in criminal cases, to accio. or ..
to complain or defend. - watts on the i.
close to the bay great neptune's fane adjoins 4,
and near a forum flank'd with marble shine, y
where the bold youth, the num’rous fleets to store
shape the broad sail, or smooth the taper oar. y p;
to forwa nder. v. a. [for and wander.j towander so
and wearily. y
o the better part now of the ling’ring day
they travelled had, when as they far espy’d
…a weary wight forwand'ring by the way. fairy quin
fo'rward. adv. [ronpeano, saxon.] ‘towards 3 to:
or place before ; onward; progressively.
when fervent sorrow slaked was,
" . she up arose, resolving him to find
* alive or dead, and forward forth doth pass. fairy 6 -
from smaller #. the mind of the hearers so
ward, to the knowledge of greater, and climb up from the
lowest to the highest things. - - hocker.
he that is used to go forward, and findeth a stop, falleth of
his own favour, and is not the thing he was, boon'; esoft,
fo'rward. adj. [from the adverb.]
1. warm; earnest; not backward.
they would that we should remember the poor, which i
also was forwarded to do. galii. 10.
2. ardent; eager; hot; violent.
you'll still be too forward. shakoff. two gani, of wran.
unskill'd to dart the pointed spear,
or lead the forward youth to noble war. prior,
3. ready ; confident; presumptuous.
old butes’ form he took, anchises squire,
now left to rule ascanius by his fire;
...and thus salutes the boy, too forward for his years. dyar,
4. not reserved ; not over inodest.
** . . . 'tis a per’lous boy,
bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable;
he's all the mother's from the top to toe. shakoff, rih.iii.
5. premature; early ripe. a
short summer lightly has a forward spring, shak, r. iii.
of his 3c-
for if they
6. quick; ready ; hasty. . . - -
the mind makes not that benefit it should of the informa-
tion it receives from civil or natural historians, in being too
forward or too slow in making observations on the particular
facts recorded in them. . lock.
had they, who would persuade us that there are into
principles, confidered separately the parts out of who o:
propositions are made, they would not perhaps have boo
forward to believe they were innate. - loft,
7. antecedent; anterior : opposed to posterior.
let us take the instant by the forward top;
for we are old, and on our quick it decrees
th’ inaudible and noiseless foot of time
steals, ere we can effect them.
8. not behindhand; not inferiour.
my good camillo,
she is as forward of her breeding, as
she is i' th' rear o' our birth.
to fo'rw ard. v. a. [from the adverb.]. improvc-
1. to hasten; to quicken; to accelerate in growth or imp
inent. save them;
as we house hot country plants, as lemon'. " d them,
so we may house our own country plants to so. hill,
and make them come in the cold seasons. bo’” o
whenever i shine, - soft,
i forward the grass and i ripen the vine.
2. to patronise; to advance.
forwar der. n. s: [from forwar
thing. - ly; hasily;
fo'rwarply. adv. [from the adjective.] eagerly;
quickly. felt
}. sudden and surprising turns we ourselves .
should not suffer us too forwardly to admit presumptio"
fo'rwardness. n. s. [from forward.] i. eagerness;
słastart,
shakoff. h.ontor's salt,
4.) he who promo"
f.
i.
i.
f.
r
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 867</div><p class="text">f o.s
foo u
1. eagerness; ardour; readiness to act.
absolutely we cannot discommend, we cannot absolutely
approve either willingness to live, or forwardness to die. hoof.
is it so trange a matter to find a good thing furthered by ill
men of a finister intent and purpose, whose forwardness is not
therefore a bridle to such as favour the same cause with a bet-
ter and sincere meaning. - - hooker.
the great ones were in forwardness, the people in fury, en-
tertaining this airy phantasm with incredible affection. bacon.
2. quickness; readiness.
he had such a dextrous proclivity, as his teachers were fain
to restrain his forwardness: that his brothers, who were under
the same training, might hold pace with him. wotton.
3. earliness; early ripeness. -
4. confidence; assurance; want of modesy.
in france it is usual to bring their children into company, -
and to cherish in them, from their infancy, a kind of for-
wardness and assurance. " . " . addison on italy.
fo'rwards, adv. straight before; progressively; not backwards.
the rhodian ship passed through the whole roman fleet,
backwards and forwards several times, carrying intelligence
to drepanum. . . arbuthnot on #.
fosse. m. s. [fossa, latin ; fis, welch..] a ditch; a moat.
fo'sse t. see faucet. -
fo'sseway. n.s.. [foss, and way.] one of the great roman
jo, through england, so called from the ditches on each
, 1106. - -
fo'ssil. adj. [fossilis, latin; fossile, french.] that which is
dug out of the earth. - ---
the fossil shells are many of them of the same kinds with
... those that now.appear upon the neighbouring shores; and the
rest such as may be presumed to be at the bottom of the adja-
cent seas. ... . . . . . . . . . . j/oodward's natural history,
fossil or rock salt, and sal gemm, differ not in nature from
each other; nor from the common salt of salt springs, or that
of the sea, when pure. ...'. hoodward's natural history:
it is of a middle nature, between fossil and animal, being
produced from animal excrements, intermixed with vegetable
salts. . . - . . arbuthnot on aliments.
fo'ssil. m. s. - - - - o
in this globe are many other bodies, which, because we dis-
cover them by digging into the bowels of the earth, are called
by one common name fossils; under which are comprehended
metals and minerals. . . locke.
many fossils are very oddly and elegantly shaped. . . bently.
by the word fossil, used as a denomination of one of three
general divisions of natural productions, we understand bodies
formed usually within the earth, sometimes on its surface, and
sometimes in waters; of a plain and simple structure, in which
there is no visible difference of parts, no distinetion of vessels
and their contents, but every portion of which is similar to
and perfeot as the whole. - hill’s mat. med.
those bodies which will melt in the fire are called minerals,
the rest fossils, - . . . . . * pemberton,
to foster. v. a. [forenian, saxon.]
1. to nurse; to feed; to support; to train up.
some say that ravensf/ler forlorn children.
our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd :
with that dear blood, which it hath fostered. shakesp. r. ii.
that base wretch, -
bred but on alms, and foster'd with cold dishes,
with scraps o' th' court.
fostering has always been a stronger alliance than blood.
- - davies on ireland.
no more let ireland brag her harmless nation
-
shakoffeare.
fosters no venom, since that scots plantation. cleaveland.
- the son of mulciber,
found in the fire, and foster'd in the plains,
ashepherd and a king at once he reigns. dryden’s aen.
2. to pamper ; to encourage. - | --
a prince of great courage and beauty, but fostered up in
blood by his naughty father. sidney.
3. to cherish; to forward. -
ye fosiering breezes, blow;
ye softening dews, ye tender showers descend. thomson.
fo'ster age. n.s.. [from foster.] the charge of nursing; al-
terage. .
some one adjoining to this lake had the charge and forage
of this child. raleigh's history.
fosterbro'ther. m. s. [porten bnooen, saxon.] one bred
at the same pap; one fed by the same nurse.
fosterchild. n.s. [forzen cilb, saxon.] a child nursed by
a woman not the mother, or bred by a man not the father.
the fosterchildren do love and are beloved of their foster-
fathers. davies on ireland.
the goddess thus beguil'd,
with pleasant stories, her false fosterchild. . addison's ovid.
fosterda’m. n.s.. [foster and dam..] a nurse; one that per-
forms the office of a mother by giving food to a young child.
there, by the wolf, were laid the martial twins:
intrepid on her swelling dugs they hung;
the fosterdam loll'd out her fawning tongue. dodo's £4.
i
-
--
shakespeare's cymbeline. - - -
fosterfa'rth. n.s...[s/ler and earth.j earth by which the
plant is nourished, though it did not grow at first in it.
in vain, the nursling grove
seems fair a while, cherish'd with fosterearth 3.
but when the alien compost is exhaust, .
• its native poverty again prevails phillips,
fosterer. n.s.. [from solor.] a nurse; one who gives food
in the place of a parent. - ---
in ireland they put their children to fosterers; the rich men -
selling, the meaner sort buying the alterage of their children:
in the opinion of the irish fostering has always been a stronger
alliance than blood. o davies on ireland.
fost erfather. m. s. [rorzenraben, saxon.] one who
gives food in the place of the father. -
in ireland fosterchildren do love and are beloved by their
fosterfathers, and their sept, more than of their own natural
parents and kindred. - davies on ireland."
the duke of bretagne having been an host and a kind of
parent or fosterfather to the king, in his tenderness of age and
weakness of fortune, did look for aid this time from king
henry. - bacon’s henry vii.
tyrrheus, the fosterfather of the beast, .
then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fist. . . dryden's en.
fost ermoorher. n. s. s foster and mother.]. a nurse.
foster nu'rse. m. s. [foster and nurse. this is an improper
o, because foster and nurse mean the same.] a
in urie. - - - - - - - - -
our fosternurse of nature is repose,
the which he lacks. shakespeare's king lear.
fo'sterson. n, so [foster and son.] one fed and educated,
though not the son by nature.
mature in years, to ready honours move; ,
o of celestial seed ofosterson of jovel dryden's wirgil
* - - - . . . yaen s wirgu.
fougade. m. s. [french.j., in the art of war, a sort of little
mine in the manner of a well, scarce more than ten feet wide
and twelve deep, dug under some work or fortification; and
charged with barrels or sacks of gunpowder to blow it up,
-
-
and covered over with earth. dic?.
fought. the preterite and participle of fight. -
though unknown to me, they sure fought well,
whom rupert led, and who were british born. dryden.
fo'u ghten. [the passive participle of fight. rare) -
contested; disputed by †. p fg y use. j
• on the foughten field - :
michael and his angels, prevalent , ot
. . encamping, plac'd in guard their watches round
cherubick waving fires. . milton’s paradis, loft.
foul. adj. [fuls, gothick; pul, saxon.] . . . . .
1. not clean; filthy; dirty; miry. through most of its sig-
nifications it is opposed to fair. . . -
mio is foul with weeping. "... job, xvi. 16.
t’s monstrous labour when i wash my brain, i.
and it grows fouler. shakesp. ant, and cleopatra.
he that can travel in deep and foul ways, ought not to say
that he cannot walk in fair. - tillotson.
the stream is foul with stains
of rushing torrents and descending rains,
2. impure; polluted; full of filth. . . . .
. with foul mouth,
and in the witness of his proper ear,
to call him villain. , shakoff. measure for measure.
kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
upon the foul disease. - shakespeare's king lear.
intemperance and sensuality debase mens minds, clog their
spirits, and make them gross, foul, listless and unactive. tillots.
3. wicked; detestable; abominable.
jesus rebuked the foul spirit, " * - " -
he hates foul leafings and vile flattery,
two filthy blots in noble gentery. . hubberd’s tale.
- this is the grossest and most irrational supposition, as well
as the fouls atheism, that can be imagined. . . . hale.
satire has always shone among the rest,
and is the boldest way, if not the best,
to tell men truly of their fouleft faults,
to laugh at their vain deeds, and vainer thoughts. dryden,
4. not lawful; not according to the established rules.
by foul play were we heav'd thence,
but blessedly help'd hither.
5. hateful; ugly ; loathsome.
th' other half did woman's shape retain,
most loathsom, filthy, foul, and full of vile disdain.
fairy q seen.
addison.
mar. ix. 25.
shakespeare's temps?.
hast thou forgot
the soul witch sycorax, who with age and envy
was grown into a hoop shakespeare's tempsf.
foul fights do rather displease, in that they excite the me-
mory of foul things than in the immediate objects; and there-
fore, in pictures, those foul fights do not much offend. bacon.
all things that seem so foul and disagreeable in nature, are
not really so in themselves, but only relatively. 44%. e.
6, disgraceful; shameful. -
too well i see and rue the dire event,
.." - - - that<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 868</div><p class="text">f o u
f o u
7. coarse; gross.
ith sad overthrow and ful defeat -
i. *. row and f. milton's paradise loft.
who first soucid them to that soul revolt? milt, p.i.9/.
reason half extine,
or impotent, or else approving, sees
the foul disorder. thomson's spring.
wii have no notion of delicacies, if you table with
a: they are all for rank and foul *g and spoil the best
rovisions in cooking. alton on the classicks.
8. full of gross humours, or bad matter; wanting purgation
or mundification. -
you perceive the body 3. .."
how foul it is ; what rank diseases grow,
and {. what danger near the heart of it. shakoff. h. iv.
9. not bright; not serene. -
who's there besides foul weather ?
one minded like the weather, most inquietly. sh. k. lear.
be fair or foul, or rain or shine, * -
the joys i have profess'd, in spite of fate are mine. dryden.
10. with rough force ; with unseasonable violence.
so in this throng bright sacharissa far'd,
oppress'd by those who strove to be her guard;
as ships, though never so obsequious, fall
foul in a tempest on their admiral. waller.
in his fallies their men might fall foul of each other.
clarendon.
the great art of the devil, and the principal deceit of the
heart, is to keep fair with god himself, while men fall fou!
upon his laws. - south.
11. [among seamen.] entangled: as, a rope is foul of the
anchor. -
to foul. v. a. [fulan, saxon.] to daub; to bemire; to
make filthy; to dirty. - -
sweep your walks from autumnal leaves, left the worms draw
them into their holes, and foul your gardens. evelyn.
while traulus all his ordure scatters,
to foul the man he chiefly flatters. swift.
she foul; a smock more in one hour than the kitchen-maid
doth in a week. . swift's directions to servants.
fo'ulf aced. adj. [foul and faced.] having an ugly or hate-
ful visage. -
if black scandal, or fulfac’d reproach,
attend the sequel of your imposition, .
your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
from all the impure blots and stains thereof. shakesp. r.iii.
foully. adv. [from foul.] -
1. filthily; nastily; odiously; hatefully; scandalously; dis-
go; ; shamefully. - *
we in the world's wide mouth
live scandaliz'd, and foully spoken of. shakesp. henry iv.
the letter to the protector was gilded over with many
smooth words; but the other two did fully and foully set forth
his obstinacy, avarice and ambition. playward.
o brother, brother filbert still is true; -
i foully wrong'd him: do, forgive me, do. gay.
2. not lawfully ; not fairly. -
thou play'dst most foully for’t. shakespeare.
foul mo‘uthed. adj. [foul and mouth.j. scurrilous; habi-
tuated to the use of opprobrious terms and epithets.
my lord, he speaks most vilely of you, like a foulmouth'd
man as he is, and said he would cudgel you. shakesp. h. iv.
it was allowed by every body, that so foulmouthed a witness
never appeared in any cause. -- - addison.
my reputation is too well established in the world to re-
ceive any hurt from such afoulmouthed scoundrel as he, arbuth.
now singing shrill, and scolding oft between,
scolds answer foulmouth'd scolds; bad neighbourhood i
wcci). pope.
fo'ulness. m. s. [from foul.]
1. the quality of being foul; filthiness; nastiness.
the ancients were wont to make garments that were not
destroyed but purified by fire; and whereas the spots or foul-
as of other cloaths are washed out, in these they were usually
burnt away. wilkins's math. magic."
2. pollution; impurity.
it is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
no unchaste action, or dishonour’d step,
that hath depriv'd me of your grace and favour. shakesp.
there is not so chaste a nation as this, nor so free from all
pollution or foulness; it is the virgin of the world. bacon.
3. hatefulness ; atrociousness. -
consul, you are too mild:
the fulness of some facts takes thence all mercy. b. johns.
it is the wickedness of a whole life, discharging all its filth
and foulness into this one quality, as into a great fink or com-
mon shore. south.
4. ugliness; deformity. -
he by an affection sprung up from excessive beauty, should
not delight in horrible foulness. sidney,
- wo fallen in love with your foulness, and she'll fall in love
itn my anger. shakesh. as you like it.
-
the fury laid afide
her looks and limbs, and with new methods to d
the foulness of th’ infernal form to hide. }. den’
5. po. . . 'yden's £n,
iety is opposed to hypocrisy and infincer;
ness . foulness of .# ..". false.
devotion, under which any kind of impiety is o: o
guised. hammond's fan e dis-
found. the preterite and participle passive of find
i am sought of them that asked not for me: i im
them that sought me not. - o
authors now find, as once achilles found ls, lxv. 1,
the whole is mortal if a part's unfound. » 1.
to found. v. a. |s. latin; fonder, french j ving,
1. to lay the basis of any building. -
it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock. math, vi,
he hath founded it upon the seas, and established; o:
floods. -
2. to build; to raise. exxiv, i.
these tunes of reason are amphion's lyre,
where with he did the "...'s. davi
they gabian walls, and strong fidenæ rear viti,
nomentum, bola with pometia found, y
and raise colatian tow’rs on rocky ground. 2- or ,
3. to establish; to erect. y g dryden', ei,
this also shall they gain by their delay
in the wide wilderness; there they shall found
their government, and their great senate chuse,
through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws orhino.
he founding, a library, gathered together the aft:
kings and prophets. 2 mac. ii. 1;
4. to give birth or original to: as, he founded an art, i.
founded a family. - -
5. to raise upon, as on a principle or ground.
though some have made use of the opinion of some
schoolmen, that dominion is founded in grace; were it ad.
mitted as the most certain truth, it could never warrant any
such sanguinary method. decay of piaj.
a right to the use of the creatures is founded origially in
damental,
the right a man has to subsist. lock.
power, founded on contract, can descend only to him who
has right by that contract. lotte.
the reputation of the iliad they found upon the ignorince
of his times. - - - - - pope's prsaw to the iliad,
6. to fix firm. . . !--- -
fleance is escap'd. -
—then comes my fit again: i had else been perfeo,
whole as the marble, founded as the rock. shaloft. maldi,
to found. v. a... [funders, latin; fondre, french.j to som
by melting and pouring into moulds; to cast.
a second multitude
with wondrous art founded the massy ore, -
severing each kind, scum'd the bullion dross. mihr.
foundation. n.s.. [fondation, french.]
1. the basis or lower parts of an edifice.
the stateliness of houses, the goodliness of trees, when wo
behold them, delighteth the eye; but that foundation which
beareth up the one, that root which ministreth unto the other
nourishment, is in the bosom of the earth concealed. holo.
that is the way to make the city flat,
to bring the roof to the foundation, -
- - - - shaloft. criolanus,
to bury all.
o jove, i think,
foundations fly the wretched; such, i mean, -
where they should be reliev'd. shakes, carlalanus,
i draw a line along the shore;
i lay the deep foundations of a wall,
and enos, nam'd from me, the city call.
2. the act of fixing the basis. - -
ne'er to these chambers where the mighty rest, toll
since their foundation, came a nobler gues; ised stotl,
3. the principles or ground on which any notion.” ors
if we give way to our passions, we do but go. res
for the present, in order to our future disquiet: " . : in
and conquer them, we lay the foundation of p* #.jo,
our minds. -
that she should be subject to her husband, ho o: .
kind and customs of nations have ordered it"; "' lok.
a foundation in nature for it.
4. original ; rise.
throughout the world, even from t
of, all men have either been taken as
their own houses.
5. a revenue settled and established for any pup
charity. isitio.
ol on a ful saft,
dryden's æn,
in therto
he first fundatio.
lords or lawful k#.o
ose, particula's
he had an opportunity of going to scho
6. establishment; settlement,
founder.n. s. [from found.] -
1. a builder; one who raises an edifice; 9”
the erection of a city. of
e who preside"
fo
f.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 869</div><p class="text">f o u
' f o u
to:
* -
o
o
o:
of famous cities we the founders know;
but rivers, old as seas to which they go,
are nature's bounty: 'tis of more renown
to make a river than to build a town.
nor was proenesse's founder wanting there,
whom same reports the son of mulciber.
2. one who establishes a revenue for any purpose.
the wanting orphans saw with wat'ry eyes
their founders charity in the dust laid low. dryden.
this hath been experimentally proved by the honourable
founder of this lecture in his treatise of the air. bentley.
3. one from whom anything has its original or beginning.
and the rude notions of pedantick schools
: blaspheme the sacred founder of our rules. . . roscommon.
when jove, who saw from high, with just disdain,
the dead inspir'd with vital breath again,
struck to the center with his flaming dart
th’ unhappy founder of the godlike art. * dryden's on.
king james i. the founder of the stuart race, had he not
confined all his views to the peace of his own reign, his son
... had not been involved in such fatal troubles,' addis. freehold.
- nor can the skilful herald trace t
the founder of thy ancient race. swift.
. 4. [fondeur, french.] a caster; one who forms figures by
casting melted matter into moulds.
: founders add a little antimony to their bell-metal, to make
it more sonorous; and so pewterers to their pewter, to make
it sound more clear like silver. grew's museum.
* to fo'under. v. a. [fondre, french.] to cause such a sore-
ness and tenderness in a horse's foot, that he is unable to set it
… to the ground. .
* phoebus' steeds are founder'd, -" -
‘’or night kept chain'd below. shakospeare's tempest.
i have foundered nine score and odd posts; and here, travel-
tainted as i am, have, in my pure and immaculate valour,
taken sir john colevile ef the dale, a most furious knight:
but what of that he saw me and yielded. shakesp. henry iv.
thy stumbling founder'd jade can trot as high
as any other pegasus can fly ;
. so the dull eel moves nimbler in the mud,
than all the swift-finn’d racers of the flood,
brutes find out where their talents lie :
a bear will not attempt to fly;
a founder'd horse will oft debate, -* -
before he tries a five-barr'd gate. swift.
if you find a gentleman fond of your horse, persuade your
* master to sell him, because he is vicious, and foundered into
… the bargain. swift's direaions to the groom.
men of discretion, whom people in power may with little.
ceremony load as heavy as they please, drive them through the
hardest and deepest roads, without danger of foundering or
breaking their backs, and will be sure to find them neither
resty nor vicious. - * - - swift."
#. to fosus der. v. h. [from fond, french, the bottom.]
... i. to sink to the bottom. * – a
new ships, built at those rates, have been ready to founder
dorset.
**
in the seas with every extraordinary storm. - raleigh's essays.
... 2. to fail; to miscarry.
in this point
all his tricks founder; and he brings his physick
after his patient's death. shakesp. henry viii.
* foundery. ...f. [fonderi, fr. from found..] a place where
figures are formed of melted metal ; a castinghouse.
foundiing. n.s. [from found of find.] a child exposed to
chance; a child found without any parent or owner.
'we, like bastards, are laid abroad, even as foundlings, to
to be trained up by grief and sorrow.
i pass the foundling by, a race unknown, .
at doors expos'd, whom matrons make their own,
...and into noble families advance - -
• a nameless issue; the blind work of chance." dryd. juv.
a piece of charity practised by most of the nations about
us, is a provision for foundlings,or for those children wh9 are
exposed to the barbarity of cruel and unnatural parents. addis.
the goddess long had mark'd the child's distress,
and long had sought his suff'rings to redress;
she prays the gods to take the foundling's part, -
to teach his hands some beneficial art. "gay's trivia.
fous press. n.s.. [from founder.] - -
1. a woman that founds, builds, establishes, or begins any
thing.
2. a woman that establishes any charitable revenue.
for of their order she was patroness, -- --
• albe charissa was their chief'st foundress. fairy qileen.
for zeal like hers, her servants were to show;
. she was the first, where need requir'd to go;
- herself the foundres, and attendant too.
o:ain. ; n. s. [sons, latin ; fontaine, french.j
*a well ; a spring. -
he set before him spread .
a table of celestial food divine,
vol. i.
dryden. ; -
ambrosial fruits, fetcht from the tree of life, -
^nd from the fount of life ambrosial drink, moi. por. rar.
2. a small bason ..s. water, in ar. reg,
wallor. ...poofs as clear as founts in july, when
dryden's zn.
we see each grain of gravel. shakes. henry viii.
c - ry v.
* * man drink better from the fountain finely paved with
inarble, than when it swells over the green turff • taylor,
narcious on the grassy verdure fies;
but whilst within the crystal fount he tries .
to quench his heat, he feels new heat arise. 4 addison.
3 *; a spout of water.
*tains i intend to be of two natures: the one that
sprinkleth or spouteth water; the other, fair receipt of water,
without fish, or slime, or mud. bacon.
4. the head or first spring of a river.
'...all actions, of your grace are of a piece, as waters keep
the tenor of ...so your compassion is general, and
has the same effect as well on enemies as friends.” dryden.
5. original; first principle; first cause.
almighty god, the fountain of all goodness. comm. prayer.
you may reduce many thousand bodies to these few general
figures, as unto their principal heads and fountains. peacham.
this one city may well be reckoned not only the seat of
trade and commerce, not only the fountain of habits and
fashions, and good. breeding, but of morally good or bad
manners to all england. spratt's sermons.
fountainless, adj. [from fountain.] having no fountain ;
wanting a spring. .
- so large
the prospect was, that here and there was rôom .
*. for barren desert fountainles, and dry. milton's par:rog.
fount ful. adj. [fount and fill.j fail of springs. *
but *::: the fountful ida's top they scal'd with utmost
afte, -
all fell upon the high-hair'd oaks. chapman's iliads.
to foupe. v. a. to drive with sudden impetuofity. a word
out of use.
we pronounce, by the confession of strangers, as smoothly
and moderately as any of the northern nations, who foupe
their words out of the throat with fat and full spirits." camden,
four. adj. [feopen, saxon.] twice two.
just as i wish'd, the lots were cast on four;
myself the fifth. pope's odyssey.
fourbe. m.s. [french.j. a cheat; a tricking fellow. kot
''' in use,
jove's envoy, through the air,
brings dismal tydings; as if such low care
could reach their thoughts, or their repose disturbs
thou art a false impostor, and a fourt. denham.
four foolp; adj. [four and fold.] four times told.
he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he had no pity.
z - 2 sa. xii. 6.
fourf9'oted. adj. [four and foot.] quadruped; having twice
-
two feet.
augur astylos, whose art in vain i
* from fight dissuaded the fourfooted train, -
now beat the hoof with nessus on the plain.” poon,
four sco're. adj. [four and score.]
1. four times twenty; eighty.
when they were out of reach, they turned and crossed the
ocean to spain, having lost fourscore of their ships, and the
... greater part of their men. bacon's war with spain.
the "chiots were first a free people, being a common-
wealth, maintaining a navy of fours are ships. sandys.
the liturgy had, by the practice of near fourscore years,
obtained great veneration from all sober protestants. claro.
sidney.” 2. it is used elliptically for fourscore years in numbering the age
of man.
at seventeen years many their fortunes seek; .
. but at fourscore it is too late a week. shae. a you like it.
$ome few might be of use in council upon great occasions
'till after threescore and ten; and the two late ministers in
spain were so 'till fours.ore. . . . temple."
foursqua're, adj. [four and square.] quadrangular; having
four sides and angles equal.
the temple of bel was invironed with a wall carried four-
* square, of great height and beauty; and on each squaracer-
tain brazen gates curiously engraven. raleigh', history,
foos. o. [peopeneyn, saxon.j. four and ten; twice
even.
i am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale. shakesp.
fourte’enth. adj. [from fourteen.] the ordinal of fourteo,
the fourth after the tenth.
i have not found any that see the ninth day, few before the
twelfth, and the eyes of some not open before the fourteenth
day. . - - -- * brown's wulgar erraars.
fourt h. adj. ifrom four.] the ordinal of four; the first after
the third.
a third is like the former: filthy bags r
why do you shew me this afourth? start eyes
- what will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom? shak.
3 foovkthi yo" adv. [from fourth.] in the fourth place.
; s -' fourthy,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 870</div><p class="text">f r a
f r a
fourthly, plants have their seed and seminal parts uppermost,
and too. have them lowermost, bacon's nat. hisł.
four wholed. adj. [four and wheel.] running upon twice
-- two wheels. - * *
- scarce twenty fourwheel'd cars, compact and strong,
the massy load could bear, and roll along. pope's odyssey.
fout ra. m.s. so french..] a fig; a scoff: a word
ntempt. not used.
of so !. for the world, and worldlings base. shak. h. iv.
fowl. n.s. [eugel, puhl, saxon ; vogel, dutch..] - a winged
animal; a bird. it is colloquially used of edible birds, but in
books of all the feathered tribes. fowl is used collectively:
as, we dined upon fish and fowl.
the beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
are their males subjects, and at their controuls. shakes).
lucullus entertained pompey in a magnificent house: pom-
pey said, this is a marvellous house for the summer; but me-
thinks very cold for winter. lucullus answered, do you not
think me as wise as divers fowls, to change my habitation in
the winter season. bacon's apophthegms.
this mighty breath -
instructs the fowls of heaven. thomson's spring.
7, fowl. v. n. [from the noun..] to kill birds for food or
anne. . .
fowler. h. f. [from fowl.] . a sportsman who pursues birds.
- the fowler, warn’d -
by those good orhens, with swift early steps - *
treads the crimp earth, ranging through fields and glades,
offensive to the birds. phillips.
with slaught’ring guns th' unweary'd fowler roves,
wheh frosts have whiten’d all the naked groves. pope.
fowling piece. m. s. [fowl and piece..] a gun for birds.
'tis necessary that the countryman be provided with a good
fowlingpiece. - mortimer.
fox, n.s. [fox, saxon ; vos, vosh, dutch..]
1. a wild animal of the canine kind, with sharp ears and a
bushy tail, remarkable for his cunning, living in holes, and
preying upon sowls or small animals. -
the fox barks not when he would steal the lamb. shakes.
- he that trusts to you,
where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
wherefoxes, geese. shakespeare's macbeth.
these retreats are more like the dens of robbers, or holes
of foxes, than the fortresses of fair warriours. locke.
2. by way of reproach, applied to a knave or cunning fellow.
fooxcas e. m. s. [fox and case.] a fox's skin. -
one had better be laughed at for taking a foxcas for a fox,
than be destroyed by taking a live fox for a case. l'esrange.
foxchase. m. s. s fox and chase.] the pursuit of the fox
with hounds. o
see the same man, in vigour, in the gout ;
• ‘alone, in company ; in place or out;
early at business, and at hazard late;
mad at a foxchase, wise at a debate. . pope.
fox evil. n.s.. [fox and evil..] a kind of disease in which the
hair sheds. -
fox fish. m. s. [vaspecula piscis.] a fish.
foxglov es. m. s. [digitalis. j a plant. a sillor.
fox hunter. m. s. [..fox and hunter.] a man whose chief am-
bition is to shew his bravery in hunting foxes. a term of
reproach used of country gentlemen.
the foxhunters went their way, and then out steals the
fox. . . -
john wildfire, foxhunter, broke his neck over a six-bar
gate. - speosator.
foxship. m. s. [from fox.] the character or qualities of a
fox ; cunning ; mischievous art.
had'st thou foxship
to banish him that struck more blows for rome,
than thou hast spoken words. shakespeare's coriolanus.
foxt a11... n.s.. [alopecurus.] a plant. -
fox'r r.a.p. m. s. [fox and trap.] a gin or snare to catch
foxes. -
answer a question, at what hour of the night to set a fox-
trap. - tatler.
fox. m. f. [for, fr.] faith ; allegiance. an obsolete word.
he hasterland subdued, and denmark won, -
and of them both did soy and tribute raise. fairy queen.
to fract. v.a. [fracius, latin.] to break; to violate; to
infringe. found perhaps only in the following passage.
- - his days and times are past, -
and my reliance on his fracied dates
has smit my credit. shakeshcare’s timon.
fraction. m. s. [frađion, fr. frađio, latin.] -
1. the act of breaking; the state of being broken.
the surface of the earth hath been broke, and the parts of
it dislocated; several parcels of nature retain still the evident
marks of fraciion and ruin. burnet's theory of the earth.
2. a broken part of an integral.
the fracions of her faith, orts of her love,
the fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy reliques -
of her o'er-eaten faith, are bound to diomede. shakoff.
l’es:range. ,
neither the motion of the moon,
computed, nor the sun, whereby years
fifteth of whole numbers, but admits of fractions and
parts. rown's so jo
pliny put a round number near the truth, †. §:
frosion, - arbuthnot, o 3.
fra’ction al. adj. [from franon.] belonging ...","."
number; comprising a broken number, "o 'e to a broken
we make a cypher the medium betwe
decreasing numbers, commonly called absol
bers, and negative or frađional numbers.
fracture. m. s. [fraoura, latin.]
1. breach ; separation of continuous parts.
that may do it without any grea
stable and #. parts of nature, o o
laws thereof. - hale's orion o o:
2. the separation of the continuity of a bone ini, o
but thou wilt fin and grief destroy, § uoults.
that so the broken bones may joy,
and tune together in a well-set song,
full of his praises, o
who dead men raises;
whereby months are
are accounted, con-
on increasing and
to or whole num
* **.*.*.*. - -
cooer’; 4rithmii,
fracures well cur'd, make us more frong horset
t - * *- - s' iorioi,
frađures of the scull are dangerous, not in consequence of
the injury done to the cranium itself, but as the to becom
affected. - sharo'; so s
to fra"cture. v. a. [from the noun..] to break. ...”
...” leg was dressed, - and the failured o unio or.
a 1 v. i - - 1st?” --
fragile. coff. [.fragile, french ; fragilis, so
i. brittle; easily snapped or broken.
- to ease them of their griefs,
their pangs of love, and other incident throes,
that nature's fragile vessel doth sustain
in life's uncertain voyage. soare'; timon,
the stalk of ivy is tough, and not fragio. bacon'; n. hji.
s when subtle wits have spun their threads too fine,
'tis weak and fragile, like arachne's line, denham.
a dry stick will be easily broken, when a green one will
maintain a strong resistance; and yet in the moist substance
there is less rest than in what is drier and more fragile, glant.
2. weak; uncertain; easily destroyed.
much oftentation, vain of fleshly arms,
and fragile arms, much instrument of war,
long in preparing, soon to nothing brought,
before mine eyes thou'st set. milton'; paradis rogo.
frag111ty. m. s. [from fragile.] -
i. brittleness; easiness to be broken. - -
to make an induration with toughness, and ks, foot,
decoct bodies in water for two or three days. bacon';n.hi.
2. weakness; uncertainty; easiness to te destroyed.
fear the uncertainty of man's fragility, the common
chance of war, the violence of fortune. knollo's hijio,
3. frailty; liableness to fault. . -
all could not be right, in such a state, in this lower age of
fragility. - - losion,
fka gvient. n. s. [fragmentum, latin.] a part broken
from the whole; an imperfect piece.
o he who late a sceptre did command,
now grasps a floating fragment in his hand. drydon,
cowley, in his unfinished fragment of the davides, has
shewn us this way to improvement. //aft; on th: mind,
if a thin or plated body, which, being of an even thickness,
appears all over of one uniform colour, should be slit into
th-eads, or boken into fragments of the same thickness with
the plate, i see no reason why every thread of foot should
not keep its colour. newton's optico,
some on painted wood *
transfix'd the foghonts, some prepaid the food. po';0.
fragmentary. adj. [from fragment.] composed of frog-
ments. a word not elegant, nor in use, *il ..l.,
she, she is gone; she's gone: when thou know'st this,
what fragmentary rubbish this world is,
thou know'st, and that it is not worth a thought;
he knows it too too much that thinks it nought. n
fragor. m.s. (latin.j a noise; a crack; a crash. "
used. -
pursu'd by hideous fagers, as before sando
the flames descend, they in their breaches roof. o
fra"gran.cf. m. s. [fragrantia, latin.] sweetness of ind;
fragran cy. ; pleasing cent; grateful odour.
eve separate he spies,
veil'd in a cloud of fragrance, where she so is los
half-spy'd. affon's paradio &amp;
- * !eworts and c4"
i am more pleas'd to survey my rows of co than 10
hages springing up in their full fragranty and o: of.
see the tender plants of foreign countries ko . £ator,
cial heats. addison's spot"
not lovelier seem'd narcissus to the eye; garth.
nor, when a flower, could boast mos. m
such was the wine; to quench whose fervent ited
scarce twenty measures from the living stro" to
donor,
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 871</div><p class="text">f r a
o
…
o
to cool one cup suffic'd : the goblet crown'd,
breath'd aromatick fragrancies around. pope's odyssy.
fragrant. adj. [fragrani, latin.j odorous; sweet of
smell. -
-
fragrant the fertile earth
after soft show’rs; and sweet the coming on
of grateful evening mild. milton.
the nymph vouchsaf’d to place
upon her head the various wreath :
the flow’rs, less blooming than her face;
their scent, less fragrant than her breath. prior.
fra'grantly. adv. [from fragrant.] with sweet scent.
as the hops begin to change colour, and smell fragrantly,
you may conclude them ripe. mortimer's husbandry.
frail. n.s.
1. a basket made of rushes. -
2. a rush for weaving baskets. --- ** -
frail. adj. [fragilis, latin.]
1. weak ; easily decaying; subject to casualties; easily de-
stroyed.
i know my body's of so frail a kind,
as force without, fevers within can kill. davies.
when with care we have raised an imaginary treasure of
happiness, we find, at last, that the materials of the structure
are frail and perishing, and the foundation itself is laid in the
sand. . - rogers.
2. weak of resolution ; liable to errour or seduction.
the truly virtuous do not easily credit evil that is told them
of their neighbours; for if others may do amiss, then may
these also speak amiss: man is frail, and prone to evil, and
therefore may soon fail in words. taylor's guide to devotion.
frailness. n.s. [from frail.] weakness; instability.
there is nothing among all the frailnesses and uncertainties
of this sublunary world so tottering and unstable as the virtue
of a coward. - norris.
fra'ilty. n.s.. [from frail.]
1. weakness of resolution; instability of mind; infirmity.
though page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on his
wife's frailty, yet i cannot put off my opinion so easily. shak.
nor should'st thou have trusted that to woman's failty:
fre i to thee, thou to thyself wast cruel. milton's agonises.-
god knows our frailty, pities our weakness, and requires
of us no more than we are able to do. locke.
2. fault proceeding from weakness; fins of infirmity : in this
sense it has a plural. 2. -
love did his reason blind,
• and love's the noblest frailty of the mind. dryd, ind. emp.
- kind wits will those light faults excuse ; * -
those are the common frailties of the muse. dryden.
death, only death, can break the lasting chain; -
and here, ev’n then, shall my cold dust remain;
here all its frailties, all its flames resign,
and wait, 'till 'tis no fin to mix with thine. pope.
that christians are now not only like other men in their
failties and infirmities, might be, in some degree excusable :
but the complaint is, they are like heathens in all the main
and chicf articles of their lives. law.
frai scheur. m. s. [french..] freshness; coolness. a
word foolishly innovated by dryden. - -
hither in summer-ev'nings you repair,
to taste the fraisoheur of the purer air. dryden.
fraise. n.s. [french, the caul of an animal.] a pancake
with bacon in it. -
to frame. v. a. ":
1. to form or fabricate by orderly construction and union of
various parts.
the double gates he findeth locked fast;
the one fair fram'd of burnith'd ivory,
the other aii with silver overcast.
2. to fit one to another. - - - -
they rather cut down their timber to frame it, and to do ne-
spensor.
cessaries to their convenient use, than to fight. ahhot.
hew timber, saw it, frame it, and set it together. a4ert.
3. to make ; to compose. ... .
then chufing out few words most horrible,
thereof did verses frame. spcosor.
fight valiantly to-day; -
and yet i do thee wrong to mind thce of it;
for thou art framid of the firm truth of vaiour. sasoff.
4. to regulate; to adjust. * - - -
let us not deceive ourselves by pretending to this excellent
knowledge of christ jesus our lord, if we do not frame our
lives according to it. tillotson.
5. to form to any rule or method by study or precept.
thou art their soldier, and, being bred in trols,
has not the soft ways but thou wilt frame . . -
- thyself forsooth hereafter theirs. shakesp. coriolanus.
i have been a truant to the law ;
i never yet could framic ny will to it,
and thereforeframe the law unto my will. shakesp. h. vi. -
6. to form and digest by thought. -
the most abstruse ideas are only such as the understanding
5
fremes to itself, by joining together ideas that it had either from
objects of sense, or from its own operations about them, locke.
full of that flame his tender scenes he warms, -
and frames his goddess by your matchless charms." granv.
urge him with truth to frame his sure replies.”
and sure he will; for wisdom never hes. pope's odyssey.
how many excellent reasonings areframed in the mind of a
on of wisdom and study in a length of years. watts.
7. to contrive; to plan. -
9npardonable the presumption and insolence in contriving
... and framing this letter was. ... - clarendon.
8. to settle ; to scheme out. .
y though i cannot make true wars, -- --
i i frame convenient peace. shakesp. coriolanos.
9. to invent; to fabricate, in a bad sense: as, to frame a story
... or lie. ... 1 . . . .”
astronomers, to solve the phaenomena, framed to their con-
ceit eccentricks and epicycles. - -
frame. m. s... [from the verb.] to - * * * * *
i- : fabrick; any thing constiueted of various parts or mem-
crs. - - -
... if the frame of the heavenly arch should dissolve itself, if
celestial spheres should forget their wonted motions, and by
irregular volubility turn themselves any way, as it might
happen. - so ** hooker.
castics made of trees upon frames of timber, with
and arches, were anciently matters of magnificence.
these are thy glorious works, parent of good
almighty thine this universal frame. milt. par. loft.
divine cecilia came,
inventress of the vocal frame.
the gate was adamant; eternal frame,
which, hew'd by mars himself, from indian quarries came,
the labour of a god; and all alon -
tough iron plates were clench'd to make it strong. drydon.
we see this vast frame of the world, and an innumerable
multitude of creatures in it; all which we, who believe a
god, attribute to him as the author. tillotson.
2. anything made so as to inclose or admit something else.
put both the tube and the vessel it leaned on into a conve-
nient wooden frame, to keep them from mischances. boyle.
his picture scarcely would deserve a frame. dryden’s juvenal.
a globe of glass, about eight or ten inches in diameter,
being put into a frame where it may be swiftly turned round . .
its axis, will, in turning, shine, where it rubs against the palm
of one’s hand. - newton's opticks.
3. order ; regularity; adjusted series or disposition.
a woman, that is like a german clock, o, .
still a repairing, ever out of frame,
and never going aright.
your steddy soul preserves her frame;
in good and evil times the same.
4. scheme ; order. -
another party did resolve to change the whole fore of
the government in state as well as church. clarendon.
5. contrivance ; projection. - -
john the bastard,
whose spirits toil in frame of villanies.
6. mechanical construction. -
7. shape ; form ; proportion. . . .
a bear's a savage beast,
whcly d without form, until the dam - --
has lick'd it into shape and frame. - hudoras.
fram er. m. s. [from frame; friemman, saxon.] maker;
former; contriver; schemer. -
the forger of his own fate, the framer of his fortune,
should be improper, if actions were predetermined. hanoid.
there was want of accurateness in experiments in the first
original framer of those medals. . . arbuthnot on coins.
fram pold. m. s. [this word is written by dr. hacket, fram-
ful. i know not its original.] peevish ; boisłerous; rugged;
crossrained. -
her husband alas, the sweet woman leads an ill life with
him : she leads a very frampold life with him.
the framful man could not be pacified. -
- ... hacket's lift of jpilliams.
franchise. n.s. ifranchis, french.]
1. exemption from any onerous duty.
2. privilege; immunity ; right granted.
they granted them markets, and other frazos;s, and
ere&amp;ted corporate towns among them. davies on ireland.
his gracious edict the same franchis yields
to all the wild increase of woods and fields.
3. district ; extent of jurisdiction.
there are other privileges granted unto most of the corpo-
rations, that they shall not be travelled forth of their own.
franchises. - speyer's state of ireland.
to fran chi'se. v. a. [from the noun.j to crifranchise; to
make free ; to keep fice.
i lose no honour
in seeking to augment it but still keep r
my bosom franchis'd, and ailegiance clear. slak. macbeth.
frangiele.
-- ro
bacon.
-----
tourrets
bacon.
dryden.
• * * *
. . . shaocare.
swift.
shaos care.
shaky?eare.
dryden.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 872</div><p class="text">; f r a
fran -
1. liberal; generous; not niggardly.
fra‘ngible. adj. ifrango, latin.] fragile; brittle; easily
broken. - -
though it seem the solidest wood, if wrought before it be
well seasoned, it will shew itself very frangible. boyle.
fra'sion. a. s. [of this word i know not the derivation.] a
paramour ; a boon companion.
first, by her side did fit the bold sansoy,
fit mate for such a mincing minion,
who in her looseness took exceeding joy, -
might not be found a franker franion. ‘fairy queen.
#. adj.. [frant, french.]
the moister sorts of trees yield little moss, for the reason of
the frank putting up of the sap into the boughs. . . jbacon.
‘shey were left destitute, either by narrow provision, or
by their frank hearts and their open hands, and their charity
towards others. spratt's sermons.
'tis the ordinary practice of the world to be frank of civi-
lities that cost them nothing. l'estrange.
2. open; ingenuous; sincere; not reserved.
3: without conditions;, without payment.
thou hast it won; for it is of frank gift,
t
and he will care for all the rest to shift. ... hubberd’s tale.
4. not restrained; licentious. not in use.
might not be found a franker franion. ... spenser.
frank, n.s.. [from the adjective.] -- - -
1. a place to feed hogs in ; a sty: so called from liberality of
food.
where sups he? doth the old boar feed in the old frank
&amp; shakespeare's henry iv.
2. a letter, which pays no postage.
you'll have immediately, by several franks, my epistle to
lord cobham. . . pope to swift.
3. a french coin.
73 frank. v. a. [from.the noun.]
1. to shut up in a frank or sty. hammer.
. . . in the fly of this most bloody boar,
* my son george stanly is frank'd up in hold. . . shakoff.
... 2. to feed high; to fat; to cram. junius and ainsworth.
3. [from the adjective.j. to exempt letters from postage.
my lord orrery writes to you to-morrow ; and you see i-
, send this under his cover, or at least franked by him. . . swift.
gazettes sent gratis down, and frank'd,
, for which thy patron's weekly thank'd. . pope.
frankal moi's ne. m. s. the same which we in latin call
iibera deemosyna, or free alms in english; whence that tenure
is commonly known among our english lawyers by the name
of a tenure infrank aumone, or frankalmoigne, which, accord-
ing to britton, is a tenure by divine service. ... ayliffe's parcrg.
frankincense. n.s.. .[frank and incense ; so called perhaps
from its liberal distribution of odour.]
1. frankincense is a dry refinous substance in pieces or drops,
of a pale yellowish white colour; a strong smell, but not dis-
agreeable, and a bitter, acrid, and resinous taste. it is very
inflammable. the earliest histories inform us, that frankin-
cense was used among the sacred rites and sacrifices, as it con-..
tinues to be in many parts. we are still uncertain as to the
place whence frankincense is brought, and as to the tree which
produces it. , hill..
take unto thee sweet spices, with pure frankincense. exod.
i find in dioscorides record of frankincense gotten in india.
brerewood on languages.
black ebon only will in india grow,
and od’rous frankincense on the saboean bough. dryd. wirg.
cedar and frankincense, an od’rous pile,
flam'd on the hearth, and wide perfum'd the isle. , pope.
* franklin... n.s.. [from frank.] a steward; a bailiff of land.
it signifies originally a little gentleman, and is not improperly
englished a gentleman servant. not in use.
a spacious court they see,
both plain and pleasant to be walked in,
where them does meet afranklin fair and free. fairy queen.
frankly. adv. [from frank.]
1. liberally ; freely; kindly; readily.
oh, were it but my life,
i’d throw it down for your deliverance,
as frankly as a pin.
if ever any malice in your heart
were hid against me, now forgive me frankly. sh. h. viii.
when they had nothing to, pay, he frankly forgave them
both. luke, vii. 42..
by the toughness of the earth the sap cannot get up to
spread so frankly as it should do. . bacon's natural history.
i value my garden more for being full of blackbirds than
cherries, and very frankly give them fruit for their songs. spect.
2. without constraint.
the lords mounted their servants upon their own horses;
and they, with the voluntiers, who frankly lifted themselves,
*onted to a body of two hundred and fifty horse. clarendon.
3. without reserve.
he entered very frankly into those new designs, which were
contrived at court. clarendon
: shakesp. measure for measure.
* frankness. n.s.. [from frank.]
1. plainness of speech ; openness; ingenuousness
when the conde duke had some eclaireime t w;
duke, in which he made all the protestations o the
affection, the other received his protestations . o sincere
tempt; and declared, with a very unnecess, . all con-
, he would have no friendship with him. y franknes, that
tom made love to a woman of sense, and alw larindh.
... her as such during the whole time of courtship. o treated
temper and good breeding hindered him from *i. histol
...disagreeable, as his sincerity, and frankness of j thing
... him converse with her before marriage in the same our made
intended to do afterwards. zio.”
2. 'liberality ; bounteousness. guardian,
3. fo from reserve.
e delivered with the franknes of a friend', tongue
#. o what kalander had told him touching u. o
the ablest men that ever were, have had all an idney,
and frankness of dealing, and a name of certainty and :
w" - - - - ... bat
frankple dge. m. s. [franciplgium, latin: wn.
... liber &amp; pleige, i. e. so :*: ologo #: c.
men. for the ancient custom of england, for o: res fet-
tion of the publick peace, was that every no.
fourteen years of age, religious persons, clerks, knights
their eldest sons excepted, should find security for h; o
to the king, or else be kept in prison:whence it to:
customary for a certain number of neighbours to be to:
for one another, to see each man of their pledge forthcom.
at all times, or to answer the transgression of any one .
ing himself. this was called. frankpledge, and the tion
... thereof was called decenna, because it commonly confifled of
ten housholds; and every particular person, thus mutual
bound, was called decennier. this custom was so strictly ob.
served, that the sheriffs, in every county, did from time to
time take the oaths of young ones as they grew to the age of
fourteen years, and see that they combined in one dozen or
other : this branch of the sheriff's authority was called wifts
franciplegii, view of frankpledge. cowel,
fra'n tick, adj. [corrupted from phrenick, phrenia, lt.
solo;..]
1. mad; deprived of understanding by violent madness; out.
... rageously and turbulently mad.
far off, he wonders what makes them so glad;
of bacchus merry fruit they did invent,
or cybel's frantick rites have made them mad: fairy out.
2. transported by violence of passion; outrageous; turbulent.
esteeming, in the frantick error of their minds, the greatest
... madness in the world to be wisdom, and the highest wisdom
foolishness. . hickr,
to such height their frantich passion grows,
: that what both love, both hazard to destroy. drydin,
she tears her hair, and, frantick in her griefs,
calls out lucia. - ... addison's cali,
3. simply mad.
the lover, frantick,
sees helen’s beauty in a brow of egypt. * shaloshtar,
frantickly. adv. [from frantick.]". madly; distraticily;
outrageously.
fie, fie, how frantickly i square my talk. shakestart.
frantickness. n.s. [from frantick.]". madness; fury of
passion; distraction. -
frate'rnal, adj. [fraternel, french; fraternus, latin.]
brotherly; pertaining to brothers; becoming brothers.
one shall rise
of proud ambitious heart; who, not content
with fair equality, fraternal state,
will arrogate dominion undeserv'd,
over his brethren.
: the admonitions, fraternal or paternal, of h
tians, or of the governors of the church, the
... reprehensions; and upon their unsuccessfulness,
the church, until he reform and return.
w plead it to her, f e!
with all the strength and heats of eloquence , ...,
* fraternal love and #. can inspire. addison's o:
frate rnally, adv. [from fraternal.]. in a brotherly mano
frate'rnity. n.s.. [fraternite, french; fair” latin,
1. the state or quality of a brother. . . tation: bro-
2. body of men united, corporation; society; alo"
to therhood. - - -
'tis a necessary rule in alliances, societies, oft.
a and all manner of civil contracts, to have ** } slot.
- o: humour of those we have to do withal. l'era";
3. men of the same class or character. - -
with what terms of respect knaves and sots will *:
their own fraternity. soto in
fratricide. n: s [fratricide, french; fatriiium,
the murder of a brother. it; cheat;
fraud. n, f, [fraus, latin; fraude, fr.] deceit;
trick; artifice; subtility; stratagem. out
mihan's paradis; loft,
is fellow chris.
n more publick
the censures of
fiammon
... 2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 873</div><p class="text">f r a
f r. e.
ois.
so o
o, is
***
**.
no
o
:
o
-
2.
o--
o:
- our better part remains --
to work in close design, by fraud or guile,
what force effected not. milton.
none need the frauds of sly ulysses fear. drydon.
if success a lover's toil attends, **
who asks if force or fraud obtain'd his ends. pope.
fra upful: adj. [fraud and fill.] treacherous; artful;
trickish ; deceitful; subtle. fill.j * * * &gt;
the welfare of us all -
hangs on the cutting short that fraudsolman. shak. h. vi.
he, full of fraudful arts,
this well-invented tale for truth imparts. dryden's aen.
fra upfully, adv. [from fraudful..] deceitfully; artfully;
subtilly; treacherously ; by stratagem. +
#::::::::::::: r. s. [fraudulentia, latin.] deceitfulness;
fra'udui. ency. $, trickishness; proneness to artifice.
we admire the providence of god in the continuance of
scripture, notwithstanding the endeavours of infidels to abo-
lish, and the fraudulence of hereticks always to deprave the
same. - hooker.
fra'upulent, adj. [frauduleux, fr. fraudulentus, latin.]
1. full of artifice; trickish ; subtle; deceitful.
he with serpent tongue
his fraudulent temptation thus began. milton.
she mix'd the potion, fraudulent of soul;
the potion mantled in the golden bowl."
pope's odyssey.
2. performed by artifice; deceitful; treacherous." p wy
now thou hast aveng’d - -
supplanted adam, * , * -
and fustrated the conquest fraudulent. mik. par. rog.
fra’udulently. adv. [from fraudulent.] - by fraud; by de-
... ceit: by artifice; deceitfully. - * --
he that by fast, word, or sign, either fraudulently or vio-
lently, does hurt to his neighbour, is bound to make resti-
tution. taylor's rule of living holy.
fraught. particip, pass. [from fraight, now written freight.]
1. laden; charged. - - -
- in the narrow seas that part
the french and english, there miscarried
a vessel of our country, richly fraught.
with joy * - ... - - - - - --
and tidings fraught, to hell he now return'd. milt, p. loft.
and now approach'd their fleet from india, fraught-
with all the riches of the rising sun, *
and precious sand from southern climates brought. dryden.
2. filled; stored; thronged. to , " :
- shałesocare.
... the scripture is fraught even with laws of nature. hooker.
by this sad una, fraught with anguish sore, -
arriv'd, where they in earth their blood had spilt. spenser.
i am so fraught with curious business, that i leave out cere-
mony. - shakespeare's winter's tale.
whosoever hath his mind fraught with many thoughts, his
wits and understanding do clarify and break up in the commu-
nicating and discoursing with another, - bacon.
hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire -
unquenchable, the house of woe and pain. milt. par. loft.
'abdallah and belfora were so fraught with all kinds of
knowledge, and possessed with so constant a passion for each
other, that their solitude never lay heavy on them. . addison.
fraught. n.s. [from the participle..] a freight; a cargo.
- yield up, oh love, thy crown and parted throne
to tyrannous hate swell, bosom, with thy fraught; ..."
for ’tis of aspicks tongues. ; : shakespeare's othello.
the bark that all our blesfings brought, o ' ' .
charg’d with thyself and james, a doubly royal fraught.
dryden.
to fraught. v. a. [for freight, by corruption.] "to load ;
... to crowd. - - - 1 - , , , , , ".
--
hence from my sight: ... * * 3
if after this command thou fraught the court . . . .
with thy unworthiness, thou dy'st...”. shakesp. cymbeline.
fra'u ghtage. m. s. [from fraught.]” lading; cargo. 'abad
word. . . . - *
our fraughtage, fir, or to
i have convey'd aboard. shakesp. comedy of errours.
fray. m. s. [effrayer, to fright, french.] - - - -
1. a battle ; a fight. - -- - -
- time tells, that on that ever blessed day, ' ' ' "
when christian swords with persian blood were dy'd,
the furious prince tancredie from that fray
his coward foes chased through forests wide.
after the bloody fray at wakefield fought. shak. h. vi.
he left them to the fates in bloody fray, o "o-
to toil and struggle through the well-fought day. * pope.
2. a duel; a combat. * ::: * -::: 1
since, if we fall before th' appointed:day, or no
nature and death continue long their fray. denham.
the boaster paris oft desir'd the day or or of . ,
with sparta's king to meet in fingle fray. pope's iliad.
3. a broil; a quarrel; a riot of violence. -- “. . . . .
i'll speak between the change of man and boy. , j -
with a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps .
vol. i.
fairfax. -
into a manly stride; and speak of fray,
like a fine bragging youth. shakesp. merchant of wania.
to fray. v. a. soffrayer, french.] -
1. to fright; to terrify. --
* . the panther, knowing that his spotted hide -
doth please all beasts, but that his jooks them fray,
within a bush his dreadful head doth hide, -
to let them, gaze, whilst he on them may prey...spensor.
so diversely themselves in vain they fray, .
whilst some more bold to measure him stand nigh. spenser.
fishes are thought to be frayed with the motion cased by
noise upon the water. bacon's natural history.
these vultures prey only on carcases, on such stu pid minds
* have not life and vigour to fray them away. gov. of tong.
2. [frayer, french.] to rub. ... " ~ -
freak. n.s. [frech, german, saucy, petulant; foec, saxon,
fugitive.]- * - - - - - -
1. a sudden and causeless change of place.
2. a sudden fancy; a humour; a whim; a capricious prank.”
o ! but i fear the fickle freaks, quoth she, -
of fortune, and the odds of arms in field. , fairy &amp;#een.
when that freak has taken possession of a fantastical cad,
...the distemper is incurable: . . . . . . l’estrange.
she is restless and peevish, and sometimes in a freak will
instantly change her habitation. --- spectator.
to vex me more, he took a freak -
*to slit my tongue, and make me speak. swift.
to freak. v. a. [a word, i suppose, scotch, brought into
england by thomson.}. to variegate; to checquer. .
". - ‘there furry nations harbour:
sables of glossy black, and dark embrown'd,
or beauteous, freak'd with many a mingled hue. thomson.
fre'akish. adj. [from freak.] capricious; humoursome.
it may be a question, whether the wife or the womah was
the more freakish of the two for she was still the same uneasy
fop. - -- l’estrange.
fox. adv. [from freakish.] capriciously; humour-
1omely. to 's- - * ---
frk'akishness. n.s.. [from freakish:j capriciousness; hu-
moursomeness; whimsicalness. *
to fream. v. n. [fremere, lat. fremir, french..] to growl
or grunt as a boar, “ . . . - - #.
f o n-s: [fech, a spot, german; whence feckle,
7tec/clo. to ".... " ' " " - -
i % spot raised in the skin by the sun. ” o
ruddy his lips, and fresh and fair his hue;
some sprinkled freckles on his face were seen,
* -
**.*
-
o:
• * : whose dusk set off the whiteness of the skin. . dryden.
2. any small spot or discoloration.---- . . . -
... the cowslips tall her pensioners be; - * : * :
in their gold coats spots you see: - s o o
those be rubies fairy favours; r
• in those freckles live their savours. sh. mids. night's dream.
the farewel frosts and easterly winds now spot your tulips;
therefore cover such with mats, to prevent freckles. evelyn.
fre'ckled.-adj. [from freckle..] spotted; maculated; disco-
loured with small spots.' . - - -
sometimes we'll angle at the brook,
* *
**the freckled trout to take - -
*with filken worms. . . . . . . . drayton's cynthia.
the even mead that erst brought sweetly forth . .
the freckled cowslip, -
wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank, " .. "
. . . conceives by idleness. - shakespeare's henry v.
now thy face charms ev'ry shepherd,
..o. spotted over like a leopard; * . . . .
and, thy freckled neck display'd, so
... onwy breeds in ev'ry maid. - -
fre'ckly, adj. [from freckle.] full of freckles. . .
fred, the same with peace; upon which our forefathers
called their sanctuaries fredsole, i. e. the seats of peace. so
frederic is powerful or wealthy in peace; winfred, victorious
peace; reinfred, sincere peace. . gibson's camden,
free, adj. (eneah, saxon; vry, dutch..] : -
1. at liberty; not a vassal; not enslaved; not a prisoner; not
dependant. * - --
* ... a free nation is that which has never been conquered, or
thereby entered into any conditions of subjection. temple.
free, what, and fetter'd with so many chains dryden.
how can we think any one freer than to have the power to
... do what he will 2 locke.
this wretched body trembles at your pow'r:
thus far could fortune; but she can no more :
o, free to herself my potent mind remains,
nor fears the victor's rage, nor feels his chains.
set an unhappy pris'her free,
who ne'er intended harm to thee.
2. uncompelled; unrestrained. . . . . -
their use of meats was not like unto our ceremonies, that
being a matter of private action in common life; where every
man was free to order that which himself did; but this is a
... publick constitution for the ordering of the church. ho:
9 t do
- swift.
of:
prior.
prior.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 874</div><p class="text">f r e
f r e
. . . is never free of:
de faithful homage, and receive free honours,
all which we pine . now. shakespeare's macbeth.
it was free, and in my choice whether or no i should pub-
lish these discourses; yet the publication being once resolved,
the dedication was not so : south.
. not bound by fate; not necessitated.
3. n freely o stood who stood, and fell who fell
not free, what proof could they have giv'n sincere
of true allegiance, constant faith, or love, *
where only what they needs must do, appeard ; .
not what they would milton's paradise loft.
4. permitted ; allowed. -
- why, fir, i pray, are not the streets as free
for me as for you ? shakesp. taming of the shrew.
defaming as impure what god declares -
pure; and commands to some, leaves free to all. milton.
to gloomy cares my thoughts alone are free,
ill the gay sports with troubled thoughts agree. pope.
5. licentious; unrestrained.
o conspiracy -
sham'st thou to shew thy dang'rous brow by night,
when evils are most free. shakes. julius cæsar,
physicians are too free upon the subject, in the conversation
of their friends. temple.
the criticks have been very free in their censures. felton.
i know there are to whose presumptuous thoughts
those freer beauties, ev’n in them, seem faults. pope.
. open ; ingenuous; frank. .
castalio, i have doubts within my heart;
will you be free and candid to your friend ? otway's orph.
7. acquainted ; conversing without reserve.
'tis not to make me jealous;
to say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
is free of speech, fings, plays, and dances well,
where virtue is, these make more virtuous. shakesp. othello.
being one day very free at a great feast, he suddenly broke
forth into a great slaughter. hakewill on providence,
- free and familiar with misfortune grow,
be us’d to sorrow, and inur'd to woe. prior.
8. liberal; not parsimonious: with of
** glo'ster too, a foe to citizens
o'ercharging your free purses with large fines,
that secks to overthrow religion. shakoff. henry iv.
- no statute in his favour says,
how free or frugal i shall pass my days; --
i, who at sometimes spend as others spare. pope's horace.
alexandrian verses, of twelve syllables, should never be
allowed but when some remarkable beauty or propriety in them
atones for the liberty: mr. dryden has been too free of these
in his latter works. , - - pope.
9. frank; not gained by importunity; not purchased. .
we wanted words to express our thanks: his noble free
offers left us nothing to ask. bacon's new atlantis.
io. clear from distress. - -
who alone suffers, suffers most i' th' mind,
leaving free things and happy shows behind. slak. k. lear.
6
---
-- -
11. guiltless; innocent. - -
make mad the guilty, and appall the free,
confound the ignorant. . . . . . shakespeare's hamlet.
… my hands are guilty, but my heart is free. dryden.
12. exempt: with of anciently ; more properly from."
hese - - -
are such allow'd infirmities, that honesty -
- - - - -- - - shakespeare's winter's tale.
who fears not to do ill, yet fears the name; . .
and free from conscience, is a slave to fame. . . . . denham.
let envy, then, those crimes within you see, -
from which the happy never must be free. . . . dryden.
- their steeds around, , i.
free from the harness, graze the flow'ry ground. dryden.
the will, free from the determination of such desires, is
left to the pursuit of nearer satisfactions. - locke.
#3: invested with franchises; possessing any thing without vas-
salage; admitted to the privileges of any body; with of.
: . . . . he therefore makes all birds of every sect
free of his farm, with promise to respect 'o.
- their several kinds alike, and equally protect. dryden.
... what do'st thou make a-shipboard? to what end
. . at thou of bethlem's noble college free p
c. stark-stating mad, that thou should'st tempt the sea?
*--- - dryden.
14. without expence; by charity, as a freeschool.
to free. v. a. [from the adjective.}o: &gt; ,
i. to set at liberty; to rescue-from slavery or captivity; to
... manumit 5 to loose. . ... " ** * * *
the child was prisoner to the womb, and is .
… by law and process of great nature thence . . . . .
free’d and enfranchis'd, not a party to * * * * * * * *
the anger of the king, nor guilty of, . . . . . .
if any be, the trespass of the queen.” shakesp. jointer's tale.
he recovered the temple, freed the city, and upheld the
laws which were going down.” " 2 mac. ii. 22.
l
can'st thou no other master understand
than him that freed thee by the preo.
- § thy ::::::::::" * dodo,
spread its cold poison through the martial
my jav'lin shall revenge so base a part,
and free the soul that quivers in thy heart. -
2. to rid from ; to clear from any thing ill: with a po,
it is no marvail, that he could think of no ...so
be free’d of these inconveniencies the passions of o way to
ings gave him, than to dissolve them. ...t
hercules larando,
free'd erymanthus from the foaming boar.
our land is from the rage of togo
3. to clear from impediments or obstructions.
the chaste sibylla shall your steps convey
and blood of offer'd victims free the way.”
fierce was the fight; but hast'ning to
by force the furious lover free’d his way. drd
- this master-key - *}4:n,
- frees every lock, and leads us to his person, drd,
4. to banish ; to send away; to rid. not in use. *}ain,
- we may again
give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
free from our feasts and banquets bloody knio. shai,
throng,
- drd.
his prey, 1jdth,
never any sabbath of release off-art,
could free his travels and afflictions deep. daniel
5. to exempt. dolle.
for he that is dead is free’d from fin, rom, vi 7
free boot er. m. s. [free and booty.] a robber;
a pillager.
perkin was not followed by any english of name
consisted mostly of base people and freebooters, 2
coast than to recover a kingdom. bac
the earl of warwick had, as often as he met with o
irish frigates, or such freebooters as sailed under their .
misfion, taken all the seamen. - clarendon
free boot ing.. n.s. robbery; plunder; thead of pillagin -
under it he may cleanly convey any fit pillage. to:
handsomely in his way; and when he goeth abroad in the
night on freebooting, it is his best and surest friend. spesir,
free b9rn. m. s. [free and born.] not a slave; inheriting
liberty. - -
o baseness, to support a tyrant's throne,
and crush your freeborn brethren of the world! drydin.
i shall speak mythoughts like a fretborn subject, such things
perhaps as no dutch commentator could, and i am firi,
. frenchman durst. dryden's £n. didkalin,
shall freeborn men, in humble awe,
submit to servile shame;
who from consent and custom draw. .
the same right to be rul’d by law, * -
which kings pretend to reign : drdin.
freechappel. n.s.. [free and chappel.] such chappels safe
of the king's foundation, and by him exempted from theiuri-
diction of the ordinary. . the king may also license a subject
to found such a chappel, and by his charter exempt it from
the ordinary's visitation, - cowil,
fre'ecost. n.f. [free and coff.] without expence; free from
... charges. . or or . . . . - -
... we must not vouch any man for an exact master in the
rules of our modern policy, but such a one as has brought
himself so far to hate and despise the absurdity of being kind
upon freeceff, as not so much as to tell a friend what it is
o'clock for nothing. - south,
fre'edman. n.s. [free and man.]. a slave manumitted. li-
bertus. -
the freedman jostles, and will be preferr'd;
first come, first serv'd, he cries. dryden's jaw.
fre'edom. n. s. [from free.] - -
1. liberty; exemption from servitude; independence.
the laws themselves they do specially rage at, as most o:
pugnant to their liberty and natural freedom, sponsor on ireland,
o freedom / first delight of human kind
not that which bondmen from their masters find,
… the privilege of doles; nor yet t inscribe
their names in this or t'other roman tribe:
that false enfranchisement with ease is found: , , , ,
slaves are made citizens by turning round. dryden's pos,
2. privileges; franchises; immunities.
by our holy sabbath have i sworn
to have the due and forfeit of my bond:
if you deny it, let the danger light or.
upon your charter, and your city's freedom. shaissart.
3. power of enjoying franchises. become
this prince first gave freedom to servants, so as to to uch
citizens of equal privileges with the rest, which “” o
increased the power of the people. say:
4. exemption from fate, necessity, or predetermination.
' ' .. i else must change
their nature, and revoke the high degree
unchangeable, eternal, which ordain'",
their freedom; they themselves ordain'd their
a plunderer;
his forces
fitter to spoila
--
-
fall. aftw.
in
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 875</div><p class="text">f re
f r e
from whence nothing but death will remove them. .
2. without restraint; heartily; with fuligus.
in every fin, by how much the more free will is in its
choice, by so much is the act the more finful; and where there
is nothing to importune, urge, or provoke the will to any act,
there is so much an higher and perfeder degree of freedom
about that act. south.
. unrestraint. 1.
i will that all the feasts and sabbaths shall be all days of
immunity and freedom for the jews in my realm. i. mac. x.
6. the state of being without any particular evil or inconve-
nience.
the freedom of their state lays them under a greater ne-
ceflity of always chufing and doing the best things. law.
... ease or facility in doing or showing any thing. .
fo. adj. [free and foot.] not restrained in the
march.
we will fetters put upon this fear,
which now goes too freefooted.
freehe arted. adj.
strained.
love must freehearted be, and voluntary;
and not inchanted, or by fate constrain'd. davies.
freehool d. m. s. s free and hold.] that land or tenement
which a man holdeth in fee, fee-tail, or for term of life.
freehold in deed is the real possession of lands or tenements in
fee, fee-tail, or for life. freehold in law is the right that a
man has to such land or tenements before his entry or seisure.
freehold is sometimes taken in opposition to villenage. land,
in the time of the saxons, was called either bockland, that is,
holden by book or writing, or foleland, that is, holden with-
out writing. the former was held by far better conditions,
and by the better sort of tenants, as noblemen and gentlemen,
being such as we now call freehold. the latter was commonly
in the possession of clowns, being that which we now call at
the will of the lord. … cowel.
no alienation of lands holden in chief should be available,
shakesp. hamlet.
[free and heart.] liberal; unre-
touching the freehold or inheritance thereof, but only where it
were made by matter of record. bacon's office of alienation.
there is an unspeakable pleasure in calling any thing one's
own: a freehold, though it be but in ice and snow, will make
the owner pleased in the possession, and stout in the defence of
it. - - -: * : addison's freeholder.
my friends here are very few, and fixed to the freehold,
swift.
... i should be glad to possess a freehold that could not be taken
from me by any law to which i did not give consent. , sigift.
free ho lder. n.s... [from freehold.]. one who has a freehold.
- as extortion, did banish the old english freeholder, who
could not live but under the law; so the law did banish, the
irish lord, who could not live but by extortion... .o. davies.
fre'ely. adv. [from free.j. . . . . . . . . . . .oo , ,
1. at liberty; without vallalage; without slavery; without de-
pendance. ... . . . . . . . ii
woot
if my son were my husband, i would freelier, rejoice in that
absence wherein he won honour, than in the embracements
of his bed, where he would shew most love. shakoff, coriolan.
3. plentifully; lavishly. . . .” - .2 - . . . . . . . . "
i pledge your grace; and if you knew what pains, j . .
i have bestow'd to breed this present peace, !," |
you would drink freely. . . . . . . …, shakoff, henry iv.
a. without scruple; without reserve. - c. “.
let such teach others who themselves excel,...; o; ...
… and censure freely who have written well. ... ; pope.
5. without impediment, . . . . . . . . . -
“to follow rather the goths in rhyming than the greeks in
true versifying, were even to eat acotus with swine, when we
may freely eat wheat-bread among men, so ascham.
‘’the path to peace is virtue; what i show, so
- - - - - - -
thyself may freely on thyself bestow: . ; : * &gt; . .
fortune was never worshipp'd by the wise; -- -
but set aloft by fools, usurps the skies, “ . . dryden's juv.
6. without necessity; without predetermination. ... *-*. -
freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell. milton.
he leaves us to chuse with the liberty of reasonable beings:
they who comply with his grace, comply with it freely; and
they who reject it, do also freely reject it, rogers.
7. frankly; liberally; without cost. … i. of
by nature all things have an equally common use; natur:
... freely and indifferently opens the bosom of the universe to all
mankind. . . . . south.
8. spontaneously; of its own accord. . . . . . ."
freeman. n.s...[free and man.] - a . ."
-1. one not a slave; not a vassal. . . - o
had you rather caesar were living, and die all slaves, than
...that caesar were dead, to live all freemen? shakspeare.
if to break loose from the conduct of reason, and to want
that restraint of examination and judgment which keeps us
from chufing or doing the worse, be liberty, true liberty, mad
... men and fools are only the freemen. . ---
2. one partaking of rights, privileges, or immunities. . . . .
he made us freemen of the continent, --
- whom nature did like captives treat before. . . . pryden.
-
---,
- - -
- locke. -
what this union was is expressed in the preceding verse,
by their both having been made freemen on the same day.
- addison on italy.
***m1's ped. adj. [free and mind.]. unperplexed, without
load of care.
to be freeminded, and cheerfully disposed at hours of meat,
sleep, and exercise, is one of the best precepts of long lasting.
2 bacon.
freen ess. n.s.. [from free.] -
1. the state of quality of being frce.
2. openness; unreservedness; ingenuousness; candour.
the reader may pardon it, if he please, for the freenes of
the confession. 2 psale, *::::
3. generosity; liberality.
i hope it will never be said that the laity, who by the clergy
are taught to be charitable, shall in their corporations exceed
the clergy itself, and their sons, in freeness of giving. spratt.
fre eschool. n.s.. [free and school.] a schoosin which searn-
ing is given without pay. - -
. to give a civil education to the youth of this land in the
time, to come, provision was made by another law, that there
should be one freeschool at least erected in every diocess. davies.
two clergymen stood candidates for a small freeschool; a
gentleman who happened to have a better indersanang than
his neighbours, procured the place for him who was the better
scholar. - swift.
freespooken. adj. [free and spoken.] accustomed to speak
without reserve. . . -
nerva one night supped privately with some fix or seven;
amongst whom there was one that was a dangerous man, and
began to take the like courses as marcellus and regulus had
done: the emperor fell into discourse of the injustice and
tyranny of the former time, and, by name, of the two ac-
cusers; and said, what should we do with them, if we had
them now one of them that was at supper, and was a free-
spoken senator, said, marry, they should sup with us. bacon.
fre'eston e. m. s. [free and sime.] stone commonly used in
building. - ; : - --&gt;
free/lone is so named from its being of such a constitution
as to be wrought and cut freely in any direction. woodward.
i saw her hand; she has a leathern hand, a freeftone-
coloured hand. shakespeare’s as you like it.
the streets are generally paved with brick or freestone, and
always kept very neat, o – 4.dison an italy.
freeth1'nker, n.s.. [free and think.] a libertific ; a con-
... temner of religion. . . . . . . * … -
* atheist is an old-fashioned word: i'm a freethinker, child.
of what use is freedom of thought, if it will not produce
- freedom of action, which is the sole end; how remote soever
in, appearance, of all objections against christianity? and
in therefore the freethinkers consider it as an edifice, wherein all
... the parts have such a mutual dependance on each other, that
if you pull out one fingle nail, the whole fabrick must fall to
the ground. - swift's argument agains; abolishing christianity.
free with. n.s.. [fore and will.] o,
1. the power of directing our own actions without constraint
by necessity or fate. . . . ". . . . . . . . . . . . -
we have a power to suspend the prosecution of this or that
... desire: this seems to me the source of all liberty; in this seems
... to consist that which is improperly called freewill. locke.
2. voluntariness; spontaneity. ----' . -
i make a decree, that all they of the people of israel in my
realm, which are minded of their own freewill to go up to
jerusalem, go with thee. . . . : . . . ezra, vii. 13.
frf ewo"man. n.s.. [free and woman.]. a woman not en-
slaved. - - -
all her ornaments are taken away of a freewoman; she is
become a bondslave, - 1 mac. ii. 11.
to freeze. v. m. preter, froze. [vrieson, dutch.] -
1. to be congealed with cold. : -
the aqueous humour of the eye will not freeze, which is
very admirable, seeing it hath the perspicuity and fluidity of
common water. ray on the creation.
the freezing of water, or the blowing of a plant, return-
ing at equidistant periods in all parts of the earth, would as
well serve men to reckon their years by as the motions of the
sun. - - --" - * * *locke.
2. to be of that degree of cold by which water is congealed.
orpheus with his lute made trees - - -
and mountain tops, that freeze,
bow themselves when he did sing. shakesp. henry viii.
- : thou art allice, thy kindness freezes. shakesp. rich. ill.
7. heav'n froze above severe, the clouds congeal,
dryd.
and thro' the crystal vault appear'd the standing hail.
to freeze. v. a. pret. froze; part, frozen or froze,
1. to congeal with cold.
2. to kill by cold.
‘. . . . . . . when we both lay in the field,
frazen almost to death, how did he lap me. -
ev’n in his garments lo shakespeare's rift. iii.
... myutaster and mistres are almost frozen to death. soft,
- - 3. 19<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

1.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 876</div><p class="text">f. r. e.
f r. e.
3. to chill by the loss of power or motion... • *
i have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
that almost freezes up the heat of life. sh. rom. and juliet.
death came on amain,
and exercis'd below his iron reign : .
then upward to the seat of life he goes; .
sense fled before him, what he touch'd he froze. dryden.
to freight. v. a. preter. freighted; part, fraught; which
being now used as an adjective, jreighted is adopted. [fretter,
french.] -
1.to load a ship or vessel of carriage with goods for trans-
portation. , - . * .
the princes
have to the port of athens sent their ships,
fraught with the ministers and instruments -
- of cruel war. shakoff. troilus and croffida, prologue.
nor is, indeed, that man less mad than these,
who freights a ship to venture on the seas ;
with one frail interposing plank to save
-. from certain death, roll'd on by ev'ry wave. dryden's juv.
- freighted with iron, from my native land -
i steer my voyage. - pope's odyssey.
2. to load as the burthen ; to be the thing with which a vesiel
is freighted.
+,
i would
have sunk the sea within the earth, or ere
* it should the good ship so have swallow'd, and
the freighting souls within her. shakespeare's tempest.
freight. n.s. - -
1. anything with which a ship is loaded.
- he clears the deck, receives the mighty freight;
the leaky vessel groans beneath the weight. dryden's afn.
-2. the money due for transportation of goods. - -
fre'ighter. m. s. [fretteur, french.j he who freights a
vessel. --
fren. m. s. a stranger. . an old word wholly forgotten
* here; but retained in scotland. . \ beattie.
but now from me his madding mind is start,
... and wooes the widow's daughter of the glen;
and now fair rosalind hath bred his smart,
* . so now his friend is changed for a fren. spensor's paso.
french chalk. m. s. - -
*… french chalk is an indurated clay, extremely dense, of a
“...fmooth glossy surface, and soft and unetuous to the touch; of
a greyish white colour, variegated with a dusky green. hill.
french chalk is unctuous to the touch, as steatites is, but
harder, and nearer approaching the consistence of stone. jp'ood.
to fre'nchi f.y. v. a. [from french..] to infect with the
* manner of france; to make a coxcomb. ... **** * *
: they misliked nothing more in king edward the con-
fessor than that he was frenchified; and accounted the desire
of foreign language then to be a foretoken of bringing in
foreign powers, which indeed happened. camden's remains.
--- has he familiarly dislik'd - -
your yellow starch, or said your doublet
was not exactly frenchifted. shakespeare's a you like it.
‘fre'nerick. adj. [frenetique, french ; ©givnriko, ; generally
therefore written phrenetic..] mad; distracted. " . . .”
*... . . . . he himself impotent, . . . . .
. . . by means of his frenetick malady.” daniel's civil isar.
fre'nzy. m. s. [of swirl: ; phrenitis, latin: whence phrenetisy,
phrenetsy, phrenzy, or frenzy..] madness; distraction of mind;
* alienation of understanding; any violent passion approaching
to madness. - - t
- . that knave, ford, hath the finest mad devil of jealousy in
him that ever governed frenzy. shakesp. mer. wives of winds.
- true fortitude is seen in great exploits,
* that justice warrants, and that wisdom guides ;
all else is touring frenzy and distraction. addison's cato.
why such a disposition of the body induceth sleep, another
disturbs all the operations of the soul, and occasions a lethargy
*; or frenzy: this knowledge exceeds our narrow faculties. bent.
fre'oy ence. m. s. [frequence, fr. frequentia, latin.] crowd;
concourse ; assembly. -
- the frequence of degree,
-, * *
* from high to low throughout. shakespeare's timon.
- ... " he; in full frequence bright
.. of angels, thus to gabriel smiling spake. milton.
f rf q9 ency. n. s. [frequentia, latin.] * - . .
1. common occurrence; the condition of being often seen or .
done. - -
should a miracle be indulged to one, others would think
* themselves equally intitled to it; and if indulged to many, it
- : no . * the effect of a miracle; its force and
* , influence would be lost by the frequency of it. atterbury.
2. concourse; full assembly. so cy - im ury
thou cam's ere while into this senate: who
o: so many friends t
osindred thou hasthere, saluted thee? ben. johns. catil.
fre'quent. adj. [ frequent, french ; frequens, £;
1. often done; often seen; often occurriag. ."
* - the frequenter these times are, the better. jduty of man.
- - - 2
an ancient and imperial city falls; . . . ."
the streets are fill'd with frequent funerals
frequent herses shall besiege your gates -
2. used often to practise any thing. - pot,
the christians of the first times
the practice of it. were generally frequent in
* every man thinks he may pretend to any o:
pro-
vided he has been loud and frequent i larin- lo
hearty for the government. frequent in declaring hij;
dryden', aer,
3. full of concourse. swift.
frequent and full.
q u milton,
to freque'nt. v. a. [frequento, latin; /
to visit often ; to be much in ony pla &gt; frequenter, f
they in latter day,
finding in it fit ports for fishers trade,
'gan more the same frequent, and further to
there were synagogues for 'mon to resort o, #.
our himself and the apostles frequented them.’” # awi-
b this fellow here, this thy creature, other,
by night frequents my house. shak &gt;
at that time this land was known and jo
- - t
- remch,
* 3 to resort often to
ships and vessels. -- b
“ . with tears * * * slo.
wat'ring the ground, and with our fighs the air
frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in fign
of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. mih
to serve my friends, the senate i frequent; lion.
and there what i before digested, vent. 3. denham
that he frequented the court of augustus, and was wj.
ceived in it, is most undoubted. d i.
freqye ntable. adj. [from frequent.] conversible; o
sible. a word not now used, but not inelegant, 2
while youth lasted in him, the exercises of that age and
his humour, not yet fully discovered, made him somewhat
the more frequentable and less dangerous. sidney
f reque’ntative. adj: [frequentatis, french; founio,
latin. j a grammatical term applied to verbs signifying o
frequent repetition of an action. -
freque'nter. n.s.. [from frequent.] one who often resorts
to any place. - - - - - -
persons under bad imputations are no great frequenter of
churches. - swift,
fre'qys norly, adv. [frequenter, latin.] osten; commons,
not rarely ; not seldom ; a considerable number of times;
manifold times.”
i could not, without much grief observe how front;
'', both gentlemen and ladies are at a loss for questions and an-
swers. - -- rt of swift,
fresco. m. s. [italian.] ". . . . . . . -
1. coolness; shade; duskiness, like that of the evening or
"morning. . . --- - - - - . . .
hellish sprites *
love more the fresco of the nights. - - prior,
2. a picture not drawn in glaring light, but in dusk.
here thy well-study'd marbles fix our eye;
. a sading fresco here demands a figh.o. . " " post,
fresh. adj. [enerc, saxon; frash, french.] " ' "
1. cool; not vapid with heat." - - - - *
- i'll cull the farthest mead for thy repast;
*the choicest herbs i to thy board will bring," -
and draw thy water from the frosoft spring "poio.
2. not salt. - --- - -
or . they keep themselves unmixt with the salt water; so that,
a very great way within the sea, men may to "p is:
wate; as if they were near the land. allo's dosoft” orld
3. new ; not had before. -
. no borrowed bays his temples did adorn,
but to our crown he did fresh jewels bring.
4. new ; not impaired by time. -
this second source of men, while yet but so".
and while the dread of judgment past remain . .
fresh in their minds, fearing the deity. . . .
with some regard to what is just and fight; -
shall lead their lives. . ." " milton's paradio lo
- that love which first was set, will first deco . : em!
** mine of a fresher date will longer stay. dod. indian to
5. in a state like that of recentness. - -
we will revive those times, an -
preserve and still keepfresh, like flowers inwa"
~ : with such a care -
as roses from their stalks we tear, . -
when we would still preserve them new, willir,
and fresh as on the bush they grew.
: : thou sun, said i, fair light! i.
and thou enlighten’d earth, softoff, and gay!
* think not,”cause men flats ring say,
- y are fresh as april, sweet as may, -
. . . bright as is the morning star, * corto,
o:that you are so. -
6. recent; newly come. &gt;
- amidst the spirits palinurus press'd ;
yet fro/h from life, a new admitted g”
f
- .
. . y.
--- dryden,
d in our memories
denham,
miło,
d '; æn,
drydin fro
r
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 877</div><p class="text">f r. e.
f r e
-
---
o
&amp;
fresh from the fact, as in the present case,
the criminals are seiz'd upon the place;
stiff in denial, as the law appoints,
on engines they diffend their tortur’d joints. dryden.
7. repaired from any loss or diminution.
nor lies she long; but, as her fates ordain,
springs up to life, and fresh to second pain;
is fav'd to-day, to-morrow to be slain, dryden.
8. florid ; vigorous; chearful; unfaded; unimpaired.
this pope is decrepid, and the bell goeth for him: take or-
der that when he is dead there be chosen a pope of fresh years,
between fifty and threescore. bacon's holy war.
two swains,
fresh as the morn, and as the season fair. pope.
9. healthy in countenance; ruddy,
tell me,
hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman,
such war of white and red within her cheeks shakespeare.
it is no rare observation in england to see a fresh cosourcd
lusty young man yoked to a consumptive female, and him
soon after attending her to the grave. harvey on consumptions.
they represent to themselves a thousand poor, tall, inno-
cent, fresh coloured young gentlemen. addison's spectator.
1c. brisk; strong ; vigorous.
as a fresh gale of wind fills the sails of a ship. holder.
11. fasting: opposed to eating or drinking. a low word.
12. sweet: opposed to stale or stinking.
fresh. n.s. water not salt.
he thall drink nought but brine; for i'll not shew him
! where the quick freshes are. shakespeare's tempest.
to fre'shen. v. a. [from fresh.] to make fresh.
prelusive drops let as their moisture flow -
in large effusion o'er the freshen'd world. thomson's spring.
to fre's hen. v. n. to grow fresh.
a freshening breeze the magick power supply'd,
while the wing'd vessel flew along the tide. pope's odyssey.
fre's het. n. s. [from fresh.] a pool of fresh water.
all fish from sea or shore,
freshet or purling brook, or shell or fin. milton.
fre's hly. adv. [from fresh.]
1. coolly.
2. newly; in the former state renewed.
the weeds of heresy being grown unto such ripeness as
that was, do, even in the very cutting down, scatter often-
times those seeds which for a while lie unseen and buried in
the earth ; but afterwards freshly spring up again, no less per-
nicious than at the first. hooker.
then shall our names,
familiar in their mouth as houshold words,
be in their flowing cups freshly remember'd. shak. hen. v.
they are now freshly in difference with them. bacon.
3. with a healthy look; ruddily.
looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled? shakes.
fre's hness. n.s. [from fresh.]
1. newness; vigour; spirit; the contrary to vapidness.
most odorous smell best broken or crushed ; but flowers
pressed or beaten, do lose the freshness and sweetness of their
odour. bacon's natural history.
2. freedom from diminution by time; not staleness.
for the constant freshness of it, it is such a pleasure as can
never cloy or overwork the mind; for surely no man was ever
weary of thinking that he had done well or virtuously. south.
3. freedom from fatigue; newness of strength.
the scots had the advantage both for number and freshnes;
of men. hayward.
4. coolness. -
there are some rooms in italy and spain for freshnes, and
gathering the winds and air in the heats of sumner; but they
be but pennings of the winds, and enlarging them again, and
making them reverberate in circles. - bacon.
say, if she please, she hither may repair,
and breathe thefreshness of the open air. dryden's aureng.
she laid her down to rest,
and to the winds expos'd her glowing breast,
to take the freshness of the morning air. addison on italy.
5. ruddiness ; colour of health. -
the secret venom, circling in her veins,
works through her skin, and bursts in bloating stains;
her checks their freshness lose and wonted grace,
and an unusual peleness spreads her face.
6. freedom from saltness.
freshwater. [a compound word of fresh and water, used as
an adjective..] raw ; unskilled; unacquainted. a low term
borrowed from the sailors, who stigmatise those who come
first to sea as freshwater men or novices. . .
the nobility, as freshwater soldiers which had never seen
but some light skirmishes, in their vain bravery made light
account of the turks. knolles's history of the turks.
fret. n.s. [of this word the etymology is very doubtful:
some derive it from fnetan, to eat; others from pnerpan, to
adorn ; some from £orro; skinner more probably from freno,
vol. i.
granville.
or the french fretiller: perhaps it comes immediately from
the latin fretum.]
i. a frith, or strait of the sea, where the water by confinement
is always rough.
euripus generally signifieth any strait, fret, or channel of
the sea, running between two shores. brown.
2. any agitation of liquors by fermentation, confinement, or
other cause.
of this river the surface is covered with froth and bubbles;
for it runs along upon the fret, and is still breaking against the
stones that oppose its passage. addison on italy.
the blood in a fever, if well governed, like wine upon
the fret, dischargeth itself of heterogeneous mixtures. doom.
3. that top of the musical instrument which causes or regulates
the vibrations of the string.
it requireth good winding of a string before it will make
any note ; and in the tops of lutes, the higher they go, the
less distance is between the frets. bacon's natural history.
the harp
had work, and rested not: the solemn pipe
and dulcimer, all organs of sweet stop,
all sounds on fret by string or golden wire,
temper'd soft tunings, intermix'd with voice
choral or unison. milton's paradis, loft.
they are fitted to answer the most variable harmony: two
or three pipes to all those of a church-organ, or to all the
strings and frets of a lute. grew's cosmolog. sac.
4. work rising in protuberances.
the frets of houses, and all equal figures, please; whereas
unequal figures are but deformities. bacon's natural history.
we take delight in a prospect well laid out, and diversified
with fields and meadows, woods and rivers, in the curious
fret works of rocks and grottos. spediator.
5. agitation of the mind; commotion of the temper; passion.
calmness is great advantage: he that lets
another chafe, may warm him at his fire,
mark all his wand'rings, and enjoy his frets,
as cunning fencers suffer heat to tire, herbert.
the incredulous pheac, having yet
drank but one round, reply'd in sober fret. tate's juv.
you, too weak, the slightest loss to bear,
are on the fret of passion, boil and rage. creech's juv.
yet then did dennis rave in furious fret;
i never answer'd, i was not in debt. - pope.
to fret. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to agitate violently by external impulse or action.
you may as well forbid the mountain pines
to wag their high tops, and to make a noise
when they are fretted with the gusts of heav'n. shakespeare.
2. to wear away by rubbing.
drop them still upon one place,
till they have fretted us a pair of graves
within the earth. shakespeare's rich. ii.
in the banks of rivers, with the washing of the water,
there were divers times fretted out big pieces of gold. abbot.
before i ground the object metal on the pitch, i always
ground the putty on it with the concave copper, 'till it had
done making a noise; because, if the particles of the putty
were not made to stick fast in the pitch, they would, by rols.
ing up and down, grate and fret the object metal, and fill it
full of little holes. newton's optics.
3. to hurt by attrition.
antony
is valiant and dejected; and, by starts,
his fretted fortunes give him hope and fear
of what he has and has not. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
4. to corrode ; to eat away.
it is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without.
lev. xiii. 55.
the painful husband, plowing up his ground,
shall find all fret with rust, both pikes and shields,
and empty helms under his harrow sound. hakewill.
5. to form into raised work.
nor did there want
cornice or freeze, with bossy sculptures grav'n ;
the roof was fretted gold. milton's paradis, loft.
6. to variegate; to diversify.
yon grey lines,
that fret the clouds, are messengers of day. shak. j. cas:
7. to make angry ; to vex. . .
the better part with mary and with ruth
chosen thou hast; and they that over-ween,
and at thy growing virtues fret their spleen,
no anger find in thee, but pity and ruth. milton.
because thou hast fretted me in all these things, behold i
will recompence thy way upon thine head. ezek. xvi. 43.
such an expe&amp;tation, cries one, will never come to pass:
therefore i’ll even give it up, and go and fret myself. collier.
injuries from friends fret and gall more, and the memory of
them is not so easily obliterated. arbuthn. hist, of john bull.
to fret. v. n., ". . . " " '<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 878</div><p class="text">f r i
f r i
1. to be in commotion; to be agitated: ‘. .1.
no benefits whatsoever shall ever alter or allay tha", diabo-
lical rancout, that frets and ferments in some hellish breasts,
to that it will foam out in slander and invective. south.
th' adjoining brook, that purls along
the vocal grove, now fretting o'er a rock,
now scarcely moving through a reedy pool. thoms. summ.
2. to be worn away; to be corroded. -
t. ke a piece of glovers leather that is very thin, and put
your gold therein, with sal armoniack, binding it close, and
then hang it up: the sal armoniack will fret away, and the
gold remain behind. pracham on drawing.
3. to make way by attrition or corrosion. -
these do but indeed scrape off the extuberances, or fret
into the wood, and therefore they are very seldom used to
soft wood. moxon's mech. exer.
it inflamed and swelled very much , many wheol, arose,
and fretted one into another with great excolation. wiseman.
4. to be angry; to be peevish ; to vex himself: .
they trouble themselves with fretting at the ignorance of
such as withstand them in their opinion. hooker.
we are in a fretting n ind at the church of rome, and with
angry disposition enter into cogitation. hooker.
helpless, what may it boot
to frat for anger, or for grief to moan
their wounded theeds
fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage
yerk out their aimed heels at their dead masters. sh. h. v.
be lion-metted, proud, and take no care
who chates, who frets, or where conspirers are. so, macb.
his heart fretteth against the lord. prov. xix. 3.
hudibras fretting *
conquest should be so long a getting,
drew up his force. hudibraj.
he swells with wrath, he makes outrageous moan,
he frets, he sumes, he stares, he stamps the ground. dryden.
how should i fret to mangle ev'ry line, -
in rev'rence to the fins of thirty-nine. pope.
fre"rful. adj. [from fret.] angry ; peevish ; in a state of
vexation. - -
thy knotty and combined locks to part,
and each particular hair to stand on end,
like quilis upon the fretful porcupine.
- where's the king :
—contending with the fretful elements;
bids the wind blow the earth into the sea. shakesh. k. lear.
they are extremely fretful and peevish, never weil at rest;
but always calling for this or that, or changing their posture
of lying or fitting. harvey on consumptions.
are you positive and fretful ?
heedless, ignorant, forgetful ?
fretfully. adv. [from fretful..] peevishly.
fr estful nfss. n.s.. [from fretful..] passion; peevishness.
fretty. adj. [from fret..] adorned with raised work.
friabi'lity. n.s. [from friable.] capacity of being easily
reduced to powder,
hardness, friability, and power to draw iron, are qualitics
to be found in a loadstone. locke.
friable, adj. [friable, french : friabilis, latin.) easily
crumbled ; easily reduced to powder.
a spongy excrescence groweth upon the roots of the laser-
tree, and sometimes on cedar, very white, light, and friable,
which we call agarick. - bacon's natural history.
the liver, of all the viscera, is the most friable, and easily
crumbled or dissolved. arbuthnot on dict.
f.r.i.a.r. ii. s. [a corruption of frere, french.) a religious;
a brother of some regular order. . .
holy franciscon friar / brother ho! sh. rom. andjul.
all the priests and friars in my realm,
shall in procession sing her endless praise. shakes). h. vi.
he's but a friar, but he's big enough to be a pope. dryden.
many jesuits and friars went about, in the disguise of pres-
byterian and independent ministers, to preach up rebellion.
a friar would needs shew his talent in latin. swift.
fri **. adj. [from friar..]. monastick; unskilled in the
wos 1(1.
. their friarlike general would the next day make one holy-
day in the christian calendars, in remembrance of thirty thou-
food hungarian martyrs slain of the turks. knolles.
footy. 6d. [friar and life.] like a friar, or man un-
taught in life.
seek not proud riches, but such as thou may’s get justly,
use foberly, distribute cheerfully, and leave contentedly; yet
- have no abstract nor friary contempt of them. bacon's essays.
friarscowl. n.s. (friar and cowl.] a plant. it agrees
with aruin, from which it differs only in having a flower re-
f sembling a cowl.
****y. n.f. [from friar.] a monastry o -
friary. z |. s: y or convent of friars.
**cornfield did scratch his elbow when he had sweetly
fairy queen.
shakes. iland.
swift.
invented to signify his name, st. francis, with a fri
in a corn field. amden’ of cow
to fr1"bl3l.e. v. n. to trifle. * remain,
though cheats, yet more intelligible
than those that with the stars do foibhl. hud;
fr1'bblfr. m. s. [from the verb.] k. tudibra.
a fribbler is one who professes rapt
dreads her consent. p pture for the *: and
frigoss soon:hol adish made bycutin.
*...* small things in pieces, and dressing them with i.
oh, how would homer praise their dancing do
their stinking cheese, and fricacy of frogs 3 dogs,
he'd raise no fables, sing no flagrant lye,
f of boys with custard so at newberry. king
ric ation. m. s. s fricatio, latin.] the ag , --'g.
thing against o -- 2 - | e act of rubbing one
gentle frication draweth forth the nourishment, -
the parts is.” hungry, and heating them: o:
to be done in the morning. bacon's no.
resinous or unctuous bodies, and such as will film. o
vigorously, and most thereof without frication, as o .
… wax, which will convert the needle almost as ai.
loadstone. - - - ... brown's łukar error,
fr1 corros. m. s. [fricion, fr. frioio, from frica, latin.]
1. the act of rubbing two bodies together. -
do not all bodies which abound with terrestrial parts, a
... " . . . - - - - , and
especially with sulphureous ones, emit light as often as those
parts are sufficiently agitated, whether the agitation to .
- ...; frillion, percussion, putrefaction, o: †.
- o
2. the resistance a machines caused by the motion o:
upon another. . . y
3. medical rubbing with the fleshbrush or cloaths,
fricions make the parts more fleshy and full, as we ses
both in men and in the currying of horses; for that they draw
a greafter quantity of spirits to the parts. . bacon,
fr1'day. m. s. [] fore box, saxon.) the fixth day of the
week, so named of freya, a saxon deity.
an' she were not kin to me, she would be as fair on frid)
as helen is on sunday. shakesp. troilus and crossili.
for venus, like her day, will change her cheer, " .
and seldom shali we see a friday clear. drdin,
friend. m. s. [vriend, dutch , ppeonb, saxon.] this wors,
with its derivatives, is pronounced frend, frendy: the total
negle&amp;ted. - - s
1. one joined to another in mutual benevolence and intimacy:
opposed to foe or enemy.
friends of my soul, you twain
rule in this realm, and the gor'd state sustain. shaloft.
some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not
abide in the day of thy trouble. ealus, vi. 8.
god's benison go with you, and with those
that would make good of bad, and friends of foes. slats.
wonder not to see this soul, extend -
the bounds, and seek some other self, a friend, dryden
2. one without hostile intentions. -
who comes so fast in filence of the night?
—a friend. - -
—what friend? your name shałoff. merchant of pirit.
3. one reconciled to another: this is put by the custom of the
language somewhat irregularly in the plural number.
he's friends with caesar,
in state of heath thou say'sł, and thou say'st free, slats,
my son came then into my mind; and yet my mind
was then scarce friend, with him. shaks), king ltor.
if she repent, and would make me amends,
bid her but send me hers, and we are friend.
4. an attendant, or companion.
the king ordains their entrance, and ascends
his regal seat, surrounded by his friends. dryden's en.
5. favourer; one propitious.
aurora riding upon pegasus, sl - -
she is a friend to poetry and allingenious invent
6. a familiar compellation. --
friend, how cameft thou in hither? mat. xxii. 12'
what supports me, do's thou ask?
the conscience, friend, thave lost mine eyes
in liberty's defence.
to friend. v. a...[from the noun.] to favour;
to countenance : to support. - ! -1.
i know that we so have him well to friend. shais.
when vice makes mercy, mercy's 19 extended, shaits
that, for the fault's love, is th' offender friended. aft.
friended. adj. well disposed ; inclined to love.
not friended by his wish to your high person,
his will is most malignant, and it stretches shatsort.
beyond you to your friends. also
friendless. adj. [from friend.]
i. wanting friends; wanting support;
carew,
neweth her swiftness, and how
ons. pasham.
o'erply'd
milton,
to befriend;
without countenant";
as
- o
destitute; forlorn,
* * 2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 879</div><p class="text">f r i. - f r i
-
o alas! i am a woman, friendles, hopeless. shak, h. viii. • polydore designed ira - - :--l"
s woe to him that is o verified . none so much as hao. o o o, as oo::
upon the friendles; person. south. fr1'ezed. adj. [from frieze.] shagged or napped wo.
* to some new clime, or to thy native sky, - fri'ezelike. adj. [frieze and like.j refermbiing a frieze t
l, oh friendles and forsaken virtue fly. dryden's murongzo. ! have seen the figure of thalia, the comicomus. one-
o, to what new clime, what distant sky, times with an entire headpiece and a little jo tower
- - - - 2
forsaken, friendless, will ye fly - pope. *g round the edges of the face, and sometimes with a
2. fries dless man. the saxon word for him whom we call mask for the face only. &gt; addison on ital
an outlaw, because he was, upon his exclusion from the king's fk1 gat. n: s [frigate, french ; fregata itali...]” - %
- peace and protection, denied all help of friends. 1. a small ship. ships under fifty guns are generally termed
o friendliness. m. s. [from friendly.] frigats. . . - - . c. o r
1. a disposition to friendship. **** they fought for was, in their view, embezzled
o, such a liking and friendliness as hath brought forth the in certain frigats. . 2. * rio *g.
rt, effects. - - sidney. on high-rais’d decks the haughty belgians ride c
- 2. exertion of benevolence. . . . - beneath whose shades ou. humbleftion, go. » dryden
* let all the intervals be employed in prayers, charity, friend- 2. any small vessel on the water. • •
o lines; and neighbourhood, and means of spiritual and corporal . . . behold the water work and play *-
s health... . . . . . . . - taylor's rule of holy living. . . about her little frigat, therein makin. way. fairy queen.
o, fr1 endly. adj. [from friend.] . , , , , frigo fascrios. n, f. frigits and facio, latin.j i he act of
* * 1. having the temper and disposition of a friend; kind; fa- making cold. * * * * * *
o vourable; benevolent. * , , - . 7% fright. v. a. fonigbtan, saxon.] to terrify , , to
o they gave then thanks, desiring them to be friendly still disturb with fear; to shock with fear; to daunt ; to dismay.
unto them. - * * - 244 c. xii. 31. . this was in the old authours more frequently written affright;
thou to mankind i as it is always found in the scripture. •
o - be good, and friendly still, and of return i milton. -- . . . . the herds,
**- - . . . how art thou. . . . . . . . were strongly clam’rous in the frighted fields. shak. h.iv,
to me so friendly grown above the rest . . . such a numerous host * * * *
of brutal kind * milton's paradis. loff, . ford not in filence through the frighted deep,
o let the natiau-star in rising majesty appear, , , with ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
---, and guide the prosp’rous mariner - confusion worse confounded. . . . . milton,
with everlasting beams of friendly fight. prior, - cherubic watch, and of a sword the flame r
- 2. disposed to union; amicable. - wide-waving, all approach far off to fright, --
- - like friendly colours found our hearts unite, ! and guard all passage to the tree of li.e. aailton,
- . . . and each fom each contract new strength and light. pope, nor exile or danger can fright a brave spirit, - -
o, 3. salutary ; homogeneal. - with innocence guarded, - - - -
* -&gt; - not that nepenthe, which the wife of thone _* with virtue rewarded,
in egypt gave to jove-born helena, - i make of my fufferings a merit. . . . dryden’s albion.
o ls of such power to stir up joy as this, * the mind frights itself with any thing reflected on in gross;
o to life so friendly, or so cool to thirst. mision. and at a distance: things thus offered to the mind, carry the
- fr1'end ly. adv. in the manner of friends; with appearance shew of nothing but difficulty. , locke.
- of kindness ; anicably. whence giaring oft with many a broaden'd orb,
o- here between the armies, he fro: the nations. 7%rmson's autumn.
o, let's drink together friendly, and embrace ; fright. * f [from the verb..] a sudden terrogr.
o - that all their eyes may bear those tokens home . you, if your goodness does not plead my cause,
* - of our restored love and amity. shakesp. henry iv, may think i broke all hospitable laws,
frie’s dship. m. s. [wriendschap, dutch.j - to bear you from your palace-yard by might,
ot. 1. the state of minds united by mutual benevolence; amity. and put your noble person in a fright. . . dryden,
there is little friendship in the world, and least of all be- 7% frighten. v. a. to territy; to !hock with dread. ".
oil twcen equals, which was wont to be magnified : that that is, he rugged bear's, or spotted lynx's brood,
is between superior and inferior, whose fortunes may coin- frighten the valleys and infest the wood. prior,
prehend the one the other. bacon. fr's hort l. adj. [from fright.]
: he lived rather in a fair intelligence than any friendship with i. terrible; dreadfj; full of terrour.
**** the favourites. o clarendon. tetchy and wayward was thy infancy,
2. highest degree of intimacy. thy shooldays frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious. shak,
my sons, let your unseemly discord cease, - . . . ; without aid you durit not undertake -
if not in friendship, five at least in peace. dryd. ind. emp. this frightful passage o'er the stygian lake. dryden's aem,
3. favour ; personal kindness. 2. a cant word among women for any thing unpleasing.
his friendships, still to few confin'd, - frightfully. adv. [from #ightful.]
were so the middling kind. swift. 1. dreadfully; horribly. o &amp; o j
. .. raw captains are usually sent only preferred by friendship, this will make 2 prodigious mass of water, and looks fright-
o and not chosen by sufficiency. spenser on ireland. foly to the imagination; 'tis huge and great. burnet,
4. assistance; help. 2. disagreeably ; not beautifully. a woman's word. -
-- gracious, my lord, hard-by here is a hovel: - ! hen to her gloss ; and betty, pray,
... some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest; - t , don't i look frightfully to-day . swift.
. repose you there. shakesp. king lear, fr1'ght fulness, n, f: [from frightful..] the power of it.
5. conformity; affinity; correspondence ; aptness to unite. ' -- possing terrour. . . . - -
** we know those colours which have a friendship with each frigid. adj. [frigidus, latin.] -
to: other, and those which are incompatible, in mixing together 1. cold ; wanting warmth. in this sense it is seldom used but
those colours of which we would make trial. dryd. dufresnoy. in science. - -
- frieze. m. s. (drap de frise, french..] a coarse warm cloth, in the torrid zone the heat would have been intolerable,
… made perhaps first in friesland. and in the frigid zones the cold would have destroyed both
* * - if all the world animals and vegetables. . . . cheyne's phil. princ.
should in a pet of temperance feed on pulse, 2. wanting warmth of affedion. -
drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but frieze, - 3. impotent; without warmth of body,
the all-gi.er would be unthank'd. a4ilton. 4. dull; without fire. of fancy.
o the captive germans of gigantick size, if justice philip's costive head
o arc rank'd in order, and are clad in frieze. dryd. pers. some frigid rhymes disburses,
o - he could no more live without his frieze coat than without they shall like persian tales be read,
o his skin. - addison's guardian. and glad both babes and nurses. swift,
- - see how the double nation lies, frigorry. m. s. [frigiditas, latin.] . . . -
o: like a rich coat with skirts of frieze; i. colines; want of warmth.
as if a man, in making posies, - 2. dulness; want of intellectual fire. - -
should bundle thistles up with roses. swift. driving at thce as at the highest elegancies, which are but
frieze. u n. s. [in archite&amp;ture.] a large flat member wh ch the frigidities of wit. - brown's zalgar errours.
frize. ; separates the architrave from the cornice; of which of the two extremes, one would sooner pardon phrenzy
there are as many kinds as there are orders of columns. harr. than frigidity. o pope.
no jutting frieze, . . 3. want of corporeal warmth. - ‘. . . . .
buttrice, nor coigne of 'vantage, but this bird o the boiling blood of youth hinders that serenity which is
hath made his pendant-bed, and procreant cradle. shaos. necessary to severe intenseness; and the frigidity of decrepit
nor did there want - age is as much its enemy, by reason of its guiling oisture.
&amp; cornice or frieze with bossy sculptures grava 3. y -/- - glanville's scepsis.
* the roof was fretted gold. a4ilton's paradise loft. 4. coldness of affection: /
- fr1 gidly.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 880</div><p class="text">f r. i
f r o
footply. adv. [from frigid.] coldly; dully without af-
row. n. s. [from frigid.] coldness ; dulness; want
sh.
r: adj. [frigorificus, frigus and facio, lat.] causing
cold. a word used in science. - lts which
frigorifick atoms of particles mean those nitrous sa o, lic
float in the air in cold weather, and occasion freezing. &amp;uincy.
t, frill. v. a. [frilleux, french..] to quake or shiver with
cold. used of a hawk: as the hawk frills. j)i&amp;#.
fringe. n.s.. [friggio, italian ; frange, french.] orna-
mental appendages added to dress or furniture. it is in con-
versation used of loose and separate threads. . . -
those offices and dignities were but the facings or fringes
of his greatness. wotton.
the golden fringe ev'n set the ground on flame,
and drew a precious trail. dryden's flower and leaf.
the shadows of all bodies, in this fight, were bordered
with three parallel fringes, or bands of coloured light, where:
of that which was contiguous to the shadow was broadest and
most luminous; and that which was remotest from it was nar-
rowest, and so faint as not easily to be visible. newton's opt.
to fr ing e. v. a. [from the noun...] to adorn with fringes ;
to decorate with ornamental appendages. -
either side of the bank, fringed with most beautiful trees,
resisted the sun's darts. - - - sidney.
of silver wings he took a shining pair,
fringed with gold. • - fairfax.
here, by the sacred bramble ting'd, -
. . my petticoat is doubly fring'd. swift.
fr1'pperer. m. s. [from frippier, french..] one who deals in
old things vamped up. . - - - -
fr1'ppery. n.s.. [fripperie, french; fripperia, italian.]
1. the place where old cloaths are sold.
we know what belongs to a frippery. shałoffrare.
lurana is a frippery of bankrupts, who fly thither from
druina to play their after-game. howel's vocal forg/?.
2. old cloaths; cast dresses; tattered rags. -
poor poet ape, that would be thought our chief,
whose works are e'en the frippery of wit ;
from brocage is become so bold a thief,
as we, the robb'd, leave rage, and pity it. ben. johnson.
the fighting-place now seamens rage supply,
and all the tackling is a frippery. 0.7171e.
ragfair is a place near the tower of london, where old
cloaths and frippery are sold. pope.
to frisk. v. n. [frizzare, italian.]
1. to leap ; to skip. -
put water into a glass, and wet your finger, and draw it
round about the lip of the glass, pressing it somewhat hard ;
and after drawing it some few times about, it will make the
water frisk and sprinkle up in a fine dew. bacon's nat. hist.
the fish fell a frisking in the net. l’estrange.
whether every one hath experimented this troublesome
intrusion of some frisking ideas, which thus importune the
understanding, and hinder it from being better employed, i
know not. locke.
2. to dance in frolick or gaiety.
we are as twinn’d lambs, that did frisk i' th' sun,
and bleat the one at the other: what we chang'd,
was innocence for innocence ; we knew not
the doctrine of ill-doing. shakesp. winter's tale.
about them frisking play'd
all beasts of th’ earth. milton's paradise losi.
a wanton heifer frisked up and down in a meadow, at ease
and pleasure. l’estrange.
watch the quick motions of the frisking tail,
then serve their fury with the rushing male. dryd. wirgil.
so bacchus through the conquer'd indies rode,
and beasts in gambols frisk'd before their honest god.
dryden.
ost to the mountains airy tops advanc'd,
the frisking satyrs on the summits danc'd, addison.
those merry blades,
that frisk it under pindus’ shades. prior.
peg faints at the sound of an organ, and yet will dance and
frisk at the noise of a bagpipe. arbuthn. hist, of john bull.
sly hunters thus, in borneo's isle,
to catch a monkey by a wile,
the mimick animal amuse;
they place before him gloves and shoes;
which when the brute puts aukward on,
all his agility is gone:
in vain to frisk or climb he tries;
the huntsmen seize the grinning prize. swift.
***k. m. s. [from the verb ] a frolick; a fit of wanson
gaiety.
fo *s [from frisk.] a wanton; one not constant or
ettled.
now i will wear this, and now i will wear that ;
now i will wear scannot tell what :
all new fashions be pleasant to me:
4.
now i am a frisker, all men on me look;
what should i do but set cock on the hoop
fr1'skin ess. n. s. (from fris...] g
word.
fr1'sky. adj. [frissue, french; from fris.] gay; ai
low word. ; alry. a
frit. m. s. [among chymists.] ashes or salt b -
together with sand. alt baked ";
les,
frit h. m. s. [fretum, latin.]
1. a strait of the sea where the water being confined is rough
what desp'rate madman then would venture o'er."
the frith, or haul his cables from the sho. dry
batavian fle ryd, j
cets
defraud us of the glittering finny swarms
that heave our friths, and crowd upon our shores.
2. a kind of net. i know not whether this sense be
tained.
the wear is a frith, reaching through the os:
land to low water mark, and having in it a bunt o cod with
an eye-hook; where the fish entering, upon their comingb .
with the ebb, are stopt from issuing out again. c.
friti'll ary. m. s. [fritillaire, french.] a plant. jo.
fritinancy. n.s.. [from fritinnie, latin.] the so. o
an inse&amp;t, as the cricket or cicada.
the note or fritinancy thereof is far more shrill than that of
the locust, and its life short. brown'; pulgar error,
fritter. n.s.. [friture, french.]
1. a small piece cut to be fried.
maids, fritters and pancakes ynow see ye make;
let slut have one pancake for company sake. tiffir
2. a fragment; a small piece. -
sense and putter have i lived to stand in the taunt of one
that makes fritters of english shak. merry wives of windor.
if you strike a solid body that is brittle, as glass or sugar,
it breaketh not only where the immediate force is, but bro.
eth all about into ao and fritters; the motion, upon the
presiure, searching all ways, and breaking where it findeth
the body weakest. baton's natural hsin,
the ancient errant knights
won all their ladies hearts in fights;
and cut whole giants into fritters,
to put them into amorous twitters.
3. a cheesecake ; a wig.
to fr1ott er. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to cut meat into finall pieces to be fried.
2. to break into small particles or fragments.
joy to great chaos let division reign!
my racks and tortures soon shall drive them hence,
break all their nerves, and fritter all their sense. dundal.
how prologues into prefaces decay,
and these to notes are fritter'd quite away. pope'; donial.
frivolous. adj. [frivolus, latin; frivol, fr.] slight;
trifling ; of no moment.
it is frivolous to say we ought not to use bad ceremonies of
the church of rome, and presume all such bad as it pleaseth
themselves to dislike. hooker.
these seem very frivolous and fruitless; for, by the breach of
them, little damage can come to the commonwealth. shinjir,
she tam'd the brinded lioness,
and spotted mountain pard; but set at nought
the frivolous bolt of cupid. -
those things which now seem frivolu, and slight,
will be of serious consequence to you,
when they have made you once ridiculous. rostommon.
all the impeachments in greece and rome agreed in a
notion of being concerned, in point of honour, to condemn
whatever person they impeached, however frivolous the *
aiety; liveliness. a .
iro,
thomson,
now re-
from the
hudibras,
ainsworth,
milton,
ticles, or however weak the proofs. - ;
i will not defend any mistake, and do not think myse
arbuthnot.
obliged to answer every frivolous objection. !-- narrance :
fri'volousness. n.s.. [from frivolios.j want of impose".
triflingness. - a-- ithout
fr 1 volously. adv. [from frivolous.] triflingly; "
weight. - ls like map
ta fr1zle. v. a. [for, fr.] to curlin short curls"
of frieze.
th’ humble shrub . . milton,
and bush, with frizled hair implicit. - hairwill
they frizled and curled their hair with hot irons.
i doff'd my shoe, and swear '; poskrel,
therein i spy'd this yellow frizled hair. gay's
fro. adv. [of sna, saxon.] - sition t
1. backward; regressively. it is only used in o rom,
word to ; to and fro, backward and forward, to an { out
the carthaginians having spoiled all spain, roo having
that were affected to the romans; and the *... co
recovered that country, did cut off all that o: was scarce
thaginians: so betwixt them both, to and fro, ther soft,
a native spaniard left. - is cast
as when a heap of gather'd thorns is a .
now to, now fro, before th’ autumnal blast,
together clung, it rolls around the field.
othe
pope's 0%
2. it
|
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 881</div><p class="text">f r o
f r o
o
o
2. it is a contraction of from : not now used.
they turn round like grindlestones,
which they dig out fro’ the delves,
for their bairns bread, wives and selves. ben. johnson,
frock. ... s. [froc, french.] **
1. a dress; a coat. . - * : • *
that monster, custom, is angel yet in this,
that to the use of actions fair and good,
he likewise gives a frock or livery,
that aptly is put on. . . . shakes?. hamlet.
chalybean temper'd steel, and frock of mail." -
adamantean proof. - milton's agonisłes.
2. a kind of close coat for men.
i strip my body of my shopherd's so. dryden.
3. a kind of gown for children. . * - s - a
frog. m. s. [pno&amp;a, saxon.] " * , . . . . . . .
1. a small animal with four feet, living both by land and water,
and placed by naturalists among mixed animals, as partaking
of beast and fish; famous in homer's poem. there is like:
wise a small green frog that perches on trees, said to be
wenomous. , , , , , , or : * : * * -
poor tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the tod-
pole. - shakesp. king lear.
auster is drawn with a pot or urn, pouring forth water,
with which shall descend frogs. peacham on drawing.
2. the hollow part of the horse's hoof... o. o , ,
fro'gbit. m. s. [frog and bit.] an herb. * ainsworth.
frogfish. m. s. ifrog and fish..] . a kind of fish. misaorth.
froog grass. n. s. [frog and grass.] a kind of herb.
froglettu ce. n.s.. [frog and lettuce.] a plant.
froise. m.s.. [from the french fraiser, as the pancake is crisped
or crimpled in frying.] a kind of food made by frying bacon
inclosed in a pancake.
frolick. adj. ivrolijck, dutch..] gay; full of levity; full
of pranks. -
we fairies, that do run
by the triple hecate's team,
from the presence of the sun,
following darkness like a dream, -
now are frolick. shakespeare's midsum. night's dream,
whether, as some sages sing, -
the frolick wind that breathes the spring, -
zephyr with aurora playing, a
as he met her once a maying ;
there on beds of violets blue,
and fresh-blown roses wash’d in dew,
fill'd her with thee a daughter fair, - -
so buxom, blithe, and debonnair. milton.
who ripe, and frolick of his full-grown age,
roving the celtick and berian fields, . ." -
at last betakes him to this ominous wood. . . milton.
- the gay, the frolick, and the loud. waller.
fro'lick. n. s. [from the adjective..] a wild prank; a flight
of whim and levity. - -
he would be at his frolick once again,
and his pretensions to divinity. roscommon.
alcibiades, having been formerly noted for the like frolicks
and excursions, was immediately accused of this. swift.
while rain depends, the pensive cat gives o'er -
her frolicks, and pursues her tail no more. - swift.
7% frosiick. v. n. [from the noun..] to play wild pranks :
to play tricks of levity and gaiety. - - -
manly spirit and genius plays not tricks with words, nor
frolicks with the caprices of a frothy imagination. glanville.
then to her new love let her go, -
and deck her in golden array ;
be finest at every fine show,
and frolic; it all the long day. . . . -
fro'lickly. adv. [from frolick.] gaily; wildly.
frollicksom e. adj. [from frolick.] full of wild gaiety.
froslicksom eness. n. s. [from frolicosame.] wildness of
gaiety; pranks. - -- "…
fro'licksom ely. adv. [from frolicosome.] with wild gaiety.
from. prep. [rnam, saxon and scottish.]
1. away; noting privation. -
your flighting zulema, this very hour * * *
will take ten thousand subjects from your power. drydon.
in fetters one the barking porter ty'd, -
and took him trembling from his sov’reign's side. drydon.
clarisia drew, with tempting grace, -
a two-edg’d weapon from the shining case. popc.
2. noting reception. - * . .
what time would spare from fleel receives its date. pope.
3. noting procession, descent, or birth. . . * *
- thus the hard and stubborn race of man -
from animated rock and flint began. blackmore's creation.
rowe.
the song began from jove." * . . . dryden.
succeeding kings rise from the happy bed. irene.
4. noting transmission. . . . . . . . . . .
the messengers from our sister and the king." shaftoff.
5. noting abstraction or vacation. - * * * *
vol. i. -- " - - * * * * * - - -
9, noting the place or person from whom a message is bro
- i shall find time -
{. this enormous state, and seek to give - -
osses their remedies. shakespeare's king l
6. with to following ; noting succession, sp - s or.
these motions we must examine from first to last, to find
out what was the form of the earth.”. burnet's the
he bid her from time to time becomforted. addis. .
7. out of; noting emision. • * * * *
- when the most high
eternal father, from his secret cloud . - -
*in otter'd thus his voice. ano, por. lyi.
. . . then pierc'd with pain, she shook her haughty head,
sigh’d from her inward soil, and thus she oil.
8. noting progress from premisses to inferences,
- if an objection be not removed, the conclusion of expe-
hence from the time past to the time present will not les.
and perfect. ... f, or ..., o bacon's war with spain.
on his is evident from that high and refined mosai, ...
o fined forth in some of the ancient heathens. south.
1ght.
. . the king is coming, and i must speak with him from the
bridge.—how now, fluellen, cam'st thou from the bridge ;
- . .”.” o, o on 1 shakespeare's .. -
io. out of : noting extraction., o har, v
from high meonia's rocky shores i came, -
of poor descent; acastes is my name. addison's, ovid.
11. because of. noting the reason or motive of an act or
effect. * * * - -- -
you are good, but from a nobler cause: , ... t .
from your own knowledge, not from nature’s laws. dryden.
david celebrates the glory of god from the confideration
of the greatness of his works.-- tilloison.
we sicken soon from her contagious care; - -
grieve for her sorrows, groan for her despair. prizr.
relaxations from plenitude is cured by spare dict, and from
any cause by that which is contrary to it. arbuthnot on monto,
12. out of. noting the ground or cause of any thing.
by the sacred radiance of the fun,
the mysteries of hecate, and the night;
by all the operations of the orbs, -
from whom we do exist, and cease to be,
- dryd. æn.
. . . . . . . .”
here i disclaim all my paternal care. . shakes. king lear.
they who believe that the praises which arise from valour
are superiour to those which proceed from any other virtues,
have not considered. . . . . dryden's sorg. æn. dedication.
what entertainment can be raised from so pitiful a machine;
we see the success of the battle from the very beginning. dryd.
'tis true from force the strongest title springs,
i therefore hold from that which first made kings. dryden.
13. not near to: noting distance.
his regiment lies half a mile at least ...
south from the mighty power of the king. shak. rico. iii.
14. noting separation or recession. -
to die by thee, were but to die in jest;
from thee to die, were torture more than death. sh. h. vi
hast thou beheld, when from the goal they flat,
the youthful charioteers with heaving heart,
rush to the race, and, panting, scarcely bear
th’ extremes of feverish hope and chilling fear. dryd. włog.
noting exemption or deliverance. -
from jealousy’s tormenting strife,
for ever be thy bosom free’d. -
i5
prior,
16. noting absence.
our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
of diff'rences, which i best thought it fit *
to answer from our home. . . . shakespeare's king laar,
17. noting derivation. -
i lay the deep foundations of a wall
and enos, nam'd from me, the city call.
18. since. noting distance from the past.
the flood was not the cause of mountains, but there were
mountains from the creation. raleigh's hisory of the iszold.
i had, from my childhood, a wart upon one of my fingers.
bacon's natural hylory.
the other had been trained up from his youth in the war
dryden’s afn.
of flanders. clarendon.
the milk of tygers was his infant food, -
taught from his tender years the taste of blood. dryden.
were there, from all eternity, no memorable actions done
'till about that time * tillefson.
19. contrary to. not in use. * * -
any thing so overcone is from the purpose of playing ;
whose end, both at the first and now, was and is to hold, as
’t were, the mirrour up to nature. shako/feare's hamlet.
do not believe, . . . . .
that from the sense of all civility, - -
i thus would play and trifle with your reverence. . . shaoff.
did you draw bonds to forfeit ! sign, to break
or must we read you quite from what we speak, *
and find the truth out the wrong way f donne.
20. noting removal. o * * * -
i - 9 x thrice<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 882</div><p class="text">f r o
f r o
. thrice from the ground she leap'd. ... dryden's £n.
31. from is very frequently joined by an ellipsis with adverbs:
as, from above, from the parts above; from. below, from the
places below; of which some are here exemplified.
22. from above. -
he, which gave them from above such power, for miraculous
confirmation of that which they taught, endued them also
with wisdom from above, to teach that which they so did, con-
firm. hooker.
no sooner were his eyes in slumber bound,
when, from above, a more than mortal sound
- invades his ears.
23. from afar.
light demilances from afar they throw.
24. from beneath. -
with whirlwinds from beneath she toss'd the ship, - -
and bare expos'd the bosom of the deep. dryden's wirgil.
an arm arises of the stygian flood,
which, breaking from beneath with bellowing sound,
whirls the black waves and rattling stones around. dryden.
25. from behind.
see, to their base restor'd, earth, seas, and air,
and joyful ages from behind, in crowding ranks appear. dry.
26. ***'.
their train, proceeding on their way,
from far the town and lofty tow’rs survey.
27. from high. -
then heav'n's imperious queen shot down from high. dry.
28. from thence. here from is superfluous;
in the necessary differences which arise from thence, they
rather break into several divisions than join in any one publick
interest; and from hence have always risen the most dangerous
factions, which have ruined the peace of nations. clarendon.
29. from whence. from is here superfluous.
while future realms his wand'ring thoughts delight,
his daily vision, and his dream by night,
forbidden thebes appears before his eye,
from whence he sees his absent brother fly.
30. f rom where.
from where high ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
brown with o'er-arching shades and pendent woods,
us to these shores our filial duty draws. pope's odyssy.
1. fr on without.
when the plantation grows to strength, then it is time to
plant it with women as well as with men, that it may spread
into generations, and not be pieced from without. bacon.
if native power prevail not, shall i doubt
to seek for needful succour from without. dryden's mon.
32. from is sometimes followed by another preposition, with its
proper case.
33. from amids?.
thou too shalt fall by time or barb'rous foes,
whose circling walls the sev’n fam'd hills enclose;
and thou, whose rival tow’rs invade the skies,
and, from amidst the waves, with equal glory rise. addison.
34. from among. -
dryden’s afn.
dryden’s aen.
dryden's afn.
pope's statius.
here had new begun
my wand'ring, had not he, who was my guide
up hither, from among the trees appear’d,
presence divine ! milton's parad's loft.
35. from beneath.
my worthy wife our arms mislaid,
and from beneath my head my sword convey'd. dryd. æn.
36. from beyond. -
there followed him great multitudes of people from gali-
lee, and from beyond jordan. 44att. iv. 25.
37. from forth.
young aretus, from forth his bridal bow'r,
brought the full laver o'er their hands to pour,
and canisters of consecrated flour. pope's odis),
38. from off.
the sea being constrained to withdraw foom off certain trads
of lands, which lay till then at the bottom of it. hoodward.
knights, unhors'd, may rise from off the plain,
and fight on foot, their honour to regain.
39. from out.
the king with angry threatnings from out a window, where
he was not ashamed the world should behold him a beholder,
o on's his guard and the rest of his soldiers to hasten their
- cats),
and join thy voice unto the angel-quire,
** out his secret altar touch'd with hallow'd fire. milton.
now shake, from out thy fruitful breast, the seeds
of envy, discord, and of cruel deeds. dryden’s aon.
strong god of arms, whose iron sceptre sways
the freezing north and hyperborean seas,
terror is thine; and wild amazement, flung
from out thy chariot, withers evon the strong.
rom out of. -, *
whatovor such principle there is, it was at the first found
* by discourse, and drawn f
heaven and earth. wn from cu of the very o:
dryden.
sidney.
4o. pryden.
41. from under, -
he, though blind of fight, ; :
despis'd, and thought extinguishi quite
with inward eyes illuminated, y
his fiery virtue mous'd
from under ashes into sudden flame.
- - - - milton'; *** :
42. from within. o 40;
lo,
- from within
the broken bowels, and the bloated skin,
a buzzing noise of bees his ears alarms, dr. o.
from war d. prep. [rnam and pearb, saxon.] "...o.
the o . the word towards. not now in use
as chearfully going towards as pvr -
ward his . going y sia went *-
the horizontal needle is continually varying lo,
and west; and so the dipping or . o o:
up and down, towards or fromward, the zenith. o
fron d1'ferous. adj. [frondifer, lat.] beating leaves ;
front. n. s. [frons, latin; front, french.j * loiwi.
1. the face.
his front yet threatens, and his frowns comm -
t o fland not front to front, but each o, prior,
the other's tail, pursu'd as they pursue. greech's minis
the patriot virtues that diffend thy thought, ills,
spread on thy front, and in thy bosom glow. thomson
2. the face, in a sense of censure or dislike: as; a hio.
front; a fierce front. this is the usual sense,
3. the face as opposed to an enemy.
his forward hand, in ur'd to wounds, makes wi
upon the sharpest fronts of the most fierce.
4. the part or place opposed to the face.
the access of the town was only by a neck of land: our
men had shot that thundered upon them from the rampier in
front, and from the gallies that lay at sea in flank.
5. the van of an army.
*twixt host and host but narrow space was left,
a dreadful interval and front to front
presented, stood in terrible array, milo paral; loff,
6. the forepart of any thing, as of a building. :
both these sides are not only returns, but parts of the so,
and uniform without, though severally partitioned within, and
are on both sides of a great and stately tower, in the midst of
o bacon's ejjī,
'alladius adviseth the front of his edifice should so root
the south, that in its first angle it receive the rising rays of the
winter sun, and decline a little from the winter setting
thereof. brown's vulgar errori,
- the prince approach'd the door,
possess'd the porch, and on the front above
he fix’d the fatal bough. dryden's e.
one sees the front of a palace covered with painted polis
of different orders. addish on lia,
7. the most conspicuous part or particular.
to fr on t. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to oppose directly, or face to face; to encounter,
you four shall front them in the narrow lane; we willwik
lower: if they 'scape from your encounter, then they sighton
l! s. , shaft. henry iv.
can you, when you have push'd out of your gates the voy
defender of them, think to front his revenges with easygons,
shaft. crisland.
some are either to be won to the state in a fast and to
manner, or fronted with some other of the same party too
oppose them, and so divide the reputation. bacon's eiji,
i shall front thee, like some staring ghost, -
with all my wrongs about me. dryin' don sebastian,
2. to stand opposed or overagainst any place of thing. h
the square will be one of the most beautiful in italy when
this statue is erected, and a townhouse built at 0% end to front
y from;
daniil,
bacon,
the church that stands at the other. adijon an italy,
to fr on t. v. n. to stand foremost.
i front but in that file,
where others tell steps with me. shałos). hemy viii,
fro'ntal. n.s.. [frontale, latin; frontal, french.] ayo.
ternal form of medicine to be applied to the forehead, gon*
- icks.
rally composed amongst the ancients of coolers and o
on the temples of no
we may apply intercipients up joman's surgo.
frontales may also be applied. - atl
the torpedo, alive, stupifies at a distano but o o
produceth no such effect; which had they "...".
- - - ...tal in phrenso
might have supplied opium, and served as runtil *...”
ght supplied opium, is: jalgar erroo
in botany, thos”.
- should
froostbox. m. s. [front and box.] tho..." the plays
from which there is a direct view to the "g"
how vain are all these glories, all " ..."
unless good sense preserve what beauty go"
fro's tated. adj. [from frons, latin.]
rated leaf of a flower grows broader a
perhaps terminates in a right line: use
pated, which is, when the leaves of **
nd broader, and **
d in opposition to cur
wer end in a pool.
qing.
ins,
that
!
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 883</div><p class="text">f r o
that men may say, when we the frontbox grace,
behold the first in virtue, as in face.
fro’nted. adj. [from front.] formed with a front.
part fronted brigades form. milton.
fro'ntier. m. s. [frontiere, french..] the marches; the
limit; the utorost verge of any territory; the border: proper-
ly that which terminates not at the sea, but fronts another
country. .
draw all the inhabitants of those borders away, or plant
garrisons upon all those frontiers about him. spenser on ireland.
i upon my frontiers here keep residence,
that little which is left so to defend. milton.
fro’ntier, adj. bordering ; conterminous;
a place there lies on gallia's utmost bounds,
where rising seas insult the frontier grounds. addison.
fro'ntispiece. m. s. [frontifficium, id quod in fronte conspi-
citur ; frontispice, french.] that part of any building or
other body that directly meets the eye.
with frontispiece of diamond and gold
embellish'd, thick with sparkling orient gems
the portal shone, milton's paradis. loft.
ho is it has informed us that a rational soul can inhabit
no tonement, unless it has just such a sort of frontiffere? locke.
the frontispiece of the townhouse has pillars of a beautiful
black marble, streaked with white, addison on italy.
fro'ntless. adj. [from front.] not blushing; wanting shame;
void of diffids ince.
thee, foniles; man, we follow'd from afar,
thy instruments of death and tools of war. dryden's iliad.
for vice, though frontos; and of harden'd face,
is daunted at the fight of awful grace. dryden.
- strike a blush through frontles, flattery. pope.
fro’ntlet. m. s. [from fromis, latin; fronteau, french..] a
bandage worn upon the forehead.
how now, daughter, what makes that frontlet on 2 you are
too much of late i' th' frown. shakesp. king lear.
they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. deut. vi. 8.
to the forehead frontlets were applied, to restrain and inter-
cept the influx. jwiseman's surgery.
frontroso m. m. s. [front and room.] an apartment in the
forepart of the house.
if your shop stands in an eminent street, the frontrooms are
commonly more airy than the backrooms; and it will be in-
convenient to make the frontroom shallow. moxon.
fror.e. adj. [bevrore", dutch, frozen.] frozen. this word
is not used since the time of amilton.
- - the parching air
burns froze, and cold performs th’ effe&amp;t of fire. milton.
rorn.e. adj. [hevroxen, frozen, dutch..] frozen; congealed
with cold. obsolete. -
o, my heart-blood is well nigh fronne i feel, -
and my galage grown fast to my heel. spensor's pastorals.
frost. m. s. [rnoro, saxon.]
1. the last offect of cold ; the power or act of congelation.
this is the state of ran : to-day he puts forth
the tender leaves of hopes, to-morrow blossoms,
and bears his blushing honours thick upon him;
the third day comes a frosi, a killing fros,
pope.
and when he thinks, good easy man, full surely -
his greatness is a ripening, nips his root,
and then he falls. - shakesp. henry viii.
when the frost seizes upon wine, only the more waterish
parts are congealed: there is a mighty spirit which can retreat
into itself, and within its own compass lie secure from the
freezing impression. south.
2. the appearance of plants and trees sparkling with congelation
of dev.
behold the groves that shine with filver fross,
their beauty wither'd, and their verdure lost. pope's i/inter.
froost bitt e. n. adj. [frost and bitten..] nipped or withered
by the irost.
the leaves are too much frostbitten. martimer.
fro's ted. adj. [from fros...] laid on in inequalities like those
of the hoar frost upon plants.
the rich brocaded silk unfold, -
where rising flow’rs grow stiff with frosted gold. gay.
fro'stily. adv. [from frosty.]
1. with frost; with excessive cold.
2. without warmth of affection.
courtling, i rather thou should's utterly
dispraise my work, than praise it frostily. ben. johnson.
froost is ess. n. s. [from frosy.]. cold freezing cold.
f roosts art. m. s. [fry; and nail.] a nail with a prominent
head driven into the horse's shoes, that it may pierce the
icc.
the claws are strait only to take hold, for better progres-
fion; as a horse that is shod with frosnails. grow's cosmol.
fr9's twork. m. s. [froß and work.] work in which the sub-
ftance is laid on with inequalities, like the dew congealed upon
shrubs. -
by nature shap'd to various figures, those
the fruitful rain, and these the hail compose;
f r. o.
- the snowy fleece and curious frosive- these,
produce the dew, and those the gentle breeze.
froosty. adj. [from fres.]
i. having the power of congelation; excessive cold,
for all my blood in rome's great quartel shed,
for all the fro/ly nights that i have watch'd,
be pitiful to my condemned sons. soft. titus andron.
the air, if very cold, irritateth the flame, and maketh it
burn more fiercely; as fire scorcheth in fro/y weather. e.g.
a gnat, half starved with cold and fiunger, we int out one
fro/ly morning to a bee-hive. l’estrange
2. chill in affection; without warmth of kindnes, or ourse.
what "soft pilo rogue is this; thos). henry iv.
3. hoary; grey-haired; resembling frost.
where is loyalty
if it be banish’d from the frosy head, -
where shall it find a harbour in the earth? shao. h. vi
froth. n.s.. [froe, danish and scottish.] • * + - 7, a -
1. spume ; foam; the bubbles caused in liquors by agitation.
his hideous tail then hurled he about,
and therewith all enwrapt the nimble thighs
of his froth foamy steed. fai
§. expireth from under the sea, as it §:
resounding of the water, so it causeth some light motions of
bubbles, and white circles of froth. bacon's natural history.
surging waves against a solid rock,
though all to shivers dash'd, th’ assault renew;
vain batt'ry, and in froth or bubbles end.
milton's parads: regained.
the useless froth swims on the surface, but the pearl lies
covered with a mass of waters. glanville.
the scatter'd ocean flies;
black sands, discolour'd froth, and mingled mud arise. dry.
they were the froth my raging folly mov’d
when it boil’d up ; i knew not then i lov’d,
yet then lov’d most. dryden's aurengzebe.
if now the colours of natural bodies are to be mingled, let
water, a little thickened with soap, be agitated to raise a footh;
and after that froth has stood a little, there will appear, to one
that shall view it intently, various colours every where in the
surfaces of the bubbles; but to one that shall go so far off that
he cannot distinguish the colours from one another, the whole
froth will grow white, with a perfect whiteness. newton.
a painter, having finished the picture of a horse, excepting
the loose frath about his mouth and his bridle; and after many
unsuccessful essays, despairing to do that to his satisfaction, in
a great rage threw a spunge at it, all besmeared with the co-
lours, which fortunately hitting upon the right place, by one
bold stroke of chance most exactly supplied the want of skill
in the artist. bently's sermons.
2. any empty or senseless show of wit or eloquence.
3. any thing not hard, solid, or substantial.
who eateth his veal, pig and lamb being footh,
shall twice in a week go to bed without broth. tor.
to froth. v. n. [from the noun...] to foam; to throw cut
spume ; to generate spume.
he frets within, froths treason at his mouth, -
and churns it through his teeth. dryden's don soasian.
excess muddies the best wit, and only makes it flutter and
footh high.
froot hily. adv. [from frothy.]
1. with foam ; with spurne.
2. in an empty trifling manner.
froot hy. adj. [from froth.]
1. full of foam, froth, or spume.
the sap of trees is of differing natures; some watery and
clear, as vines, beeches, pears; some thick, as apples; some
gummy, as cherries; and some frothy, as elms.
behold a frothy substance rise;
be cautious, or your bottle flies. swift.
2. soft; not solid; wasting,
their bodies are so solid and hard as you need not fear that
bathing should make them frothy. bacon’s natural history.
3. vain; empty; trifling.
what's a voluptuous dinner, and the frothy vanity of dis-
course that commonly attends these pompous entertainments :
what is it but a mortification to a man of sense and virtue
- l'esłrange.
though the principles of religion were never so clear and
evident, yet they may be made ridiculous by vain and frothy
men; as the gravest and wisest person in the world may be
abused by being put in a fool's coat. tillotson.
frounce. m. s. a word used by falconers for a diff, mper,
in which white spittle gathers about the hawk's bill. skinner.
to frounce. v. a. [from the noun...] to frizzle or curl the
hair about the face. this word was at first probably used in
contempt.
some frounce their curled hair in courtly guise,
some prank their ruffs, and others timely dight
their gay attire. fairy queen.
some warlike sign must be used; either a slovenly buskin,
or an overstating founced head. aftham's schoolmaster.
blackmore,
grow.
bacon.
thus,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 884</div><p class="text">f r o , f r u
thus, night, oft see me in thy pale career, 3. void of heat of appetite.
*till civil suited morn appear ; even here, where frozen chastity retires,
not trick'd and frounc'd as she was wont, - love finds an altar for forbidden fires.
with the attick boy to hunt. milton. f. r. s. fellow of the royal society. po,
froouzy. adj. [a cant word.] - - who virta profess,
1. foetid; musty. f shine in the dignity of f. r. s. p
petticoats in frouzy heaps. swift. ero adj. [fruitifer, latin.] bearing so, o,
2. dim ; cloudy. - to fruct ify. v. a. [fruciiffer, french..] to oft
when first diana leaves her bed, - - ful; to fertilise. suit-
vapours and steams her looks disgrace; the legal levies the sovereign raises are a
the sun exhales, which fall down in sweet o, vapours which
a frouzy dirty-colour'd red ower -
sits { o § wrinkled face. swift. the easo. . . howel", p.s.o.
froward. adj. [enampeanb, saxon.] peevish ; ungovern- where e'er she looks, behold some sudden birth orgi,
able; angry; perverse: the contrary to toward. adorns the trees, and fruclifies the earth. gran:
the froward pain of mine own heart made me delight to to fru’ct ify. v. n. to bear fuit. htille,
punish him, whom i esteemed the chiefest let in the way. sidney. it watereth the heart, to the end it ma fruijff; maketh
she's not froward, but modest as the dove: the virtuous, in trouble, full of magnania it, . ...
she is not hot, but temperate as the morn. shakespeare. and serveth as a most approved remedy against all doleful i
whose ways are crooked, and they froward in their paths. heavy accidents which befol men in this present life. #.
prov. ii. 15. i’hus would there nothing frucliff, either near or o
time moveth so round, that a froward retention of custom them, the sun being horizontal to the poles. i. tr
is as turbulent a thing as innovation. bacon's essays. fructifica tion, n.s. [from fruijff.] the ad of .
'tis with froward men, and froward factions too, as 'tis or of bearing fruit; fecundation 3. fertility. “3
with froward children; they'll be sooner quieted by fear than that the lap doth powerfully rise in the spring, to put the
by any sense of duty. l’estrange. plant in a capacity of fructification, he that'hath beheld how
motions occasion sleep, as we find by the common use and many gallons of water may be drawn from a birch-tree, hath
experience of rocking froward children in cradles. temple. , slender reason to doubt. brown's wolgar e.
froow ardly. adv. [from froward.]. peevishly ; perversely. fru crgogs, adj. [fructueux, french; from fruijff.] fiji.
i hid me and was wroth, and he went frowardly in the way ful; fertile; impregnating with fertility.
of his heart. is. lvii. 17. apples of price, and plenteous sheaves of corn
froow ardness. n.s.. [from froward.] peevishness; perverse- qft interac'd occur; and both imbibe
ness. - fitting congenial juice, so rich the soil,
how many frowardness of ours does he smother how so much does fructuous moisture o'erabounds poss,
many indignities does he pass by ? how many affronts does he frugal. adi. [frugalis, latin ; frugal, french.] thrist,
put up at our hands? south. iparing ; parimonious; not prodigal; not profuse; not lavish,
we'll mutually forget reasoning, i oft admire,
the warmth of youth and frowardness of age. addis. cata. how nature wife and frugal could commit
fro'w er. m. s. [i know not the etymology.] a cleaving tool. such disproportions, with superfluous hand
a frower of iron for cleaving of lath, so many nobler bodies to create,
with roll for a sawpit, good husbandry hath. tissor. greater so manifold to this one use. milon,
to frown. v. a. [frogner, old french, to wrinkle. skin- and wing'd purveyors his sharp hunger sed
mer.] . to express displeasure by contracting the face to with frugal scraps of flesh and maslin bread. hart,
wrinkles; to look stern. if through mists he shoots his sullen beams,
say, that she frowns ; i'll say, she looks as clear frugal of light, in loose and straggling streams,
as morning roses newly wash’d with dew. shakoffeare. suspect a drisling day. dryden's virgil.
they chuse their magistrate; fru'gally. adv. [from frugal.] parsimoniously; spiring);
and such a one as he, who puts his shall, thriftily. -
his popular shall, against a graver bench mean time young pasmond his marriage press'd,
than ever frown'd. shakesh. coriolanus. and frugally resolv’d, the charge to shun,
how now, daughter, what makes that frontlet on ; you to join his brother’s bridal with his own. drin,
are too much of late i' th' frown. frugality. m. s. [frugalite, french; frugalitar, latin.]
thou wast a pretty fellow, when thou hadst no need to thrift ; parsimony good husbandry.
care for her frowning. shaksp. king lear. as for the general sort of men, frugality may be the cause
heroes in animated marble frown. pope. of drinking water; for that is no small saving, to pay nothing
the wood, - for one's drink. 4.sh.
whose shady horrors on a rising brow frugality and bounty too,
wav'd high, and frown'd upon the stream below. pope. those diff'ring virtues, meet in you. will.
frqw.n. m. s. [from the verb.] a wrinkled look; a look of in this frugality of your praises, some things i cannotoni.
displeasure. dryden's falls, didization,
patiently endure that frown of fortune, and by some notable the boundaries of virtues are indivisible lines: it is impo-
exploit win again her favour. knolles's history of the turks. fible to march up close to the frontiers of frugao, witho
in his half-clos'd eyes entering the territories of parsimony. ar utinot's john bul
stern vengeance yet and hostile terror stand; frug1(ferous. adj. isrugisor, latin.] bearing sus: ains.
his front yet threatens, and his frowns command. . prior. fruit. n.s.. [frucius, latin; frvyth, welsh; suit, french.]
frow ningly. adv. [from frown.j sternly; with a look of 1. the product of a tree or plant in which the so to *
displeasure. tained.
what, look'd he frowningly? - the strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
a count'nance more in sorrow than in anger. shak. ham. and wholsome berries thrive and ripen best, v
foo'wy., adj. musly; mossy. this word is now not used; neighbour’d by fruit of baser quality. shais). holy w.
but instead of it frowzy. 2. that part of a plint which is taken for food.
..but if they with thy gotes should yede, by tasting of that fruit forbid, -
they soon might be corrupted; where they sought knowledge, they did error find, divisi,
or like not of the frowy fede, see how the rising fruits the gardens crown, e.
or with the weeds be glutted. spensor's pastorals. imbibe the sun, and make his light their own. blackmort,
fr 92en. part. pass of freeze. 3. production. - s.
1. congealed with cold. the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness and righteous to
what was the waste of war, what fierce alarms and truth. fols, wo
4. the offspring of the womb ; the young of any animal.
"shook asia's crown with european arms; te
- - - - - ul
can't thou their reck’nings keep the time "f."
ev’n such have heard, if any such there be,
whose earth is bounded by the frozen sea. dryden's zn. when their sworn bellies shall enlarge the fo sunes.
fierce boreas, with his offspring, issues forth 5. advantage gained by any enterprise or conduct. ', ories:
t” invade the frozen waggon of the north. dryd. ovid. what is become of all the king of sweden's o
a cheerful blaze arose, and by the fire where are the fruits of them at this day? or of wo
they warm'd their frozen feet, and dry'd their wet attire. will they be to posterity ? • * selves o
--- - - dryden's flower and leof. another fruit, foom considering things on themso tho
2. chill in affection. be, that each man will pursue his thoughts." that m an
against whom was the fine frozen knight, frozen in despair; which will be most agreeable to the nature of the thing, o
but his *"our naturally representing ice, and all his furniture to his apprehension of what it suggests to hio. int-
lively answering thereto. - sidney. 6. the effect or consequence of any action: sing: so
be not ever frozen, coy; she blushed when the confidered the effo of granto o
one beam of love will soon destroy was pale when she remembered the fruits of denying: ; :
and incit that ice to floods of joy. carew .
they shall “s of the fruit of their own way. fruitage.
d
}:
;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 885</div><p class="text">f r u.
f. r us
***
- * *
- a
s
fru'itage. m. s. [fruitage, french.j fruit colle&amp;tively; va-
rious fruits. -
in heav'n the trees o
qf life ambrosial fruitage bear, and vines
yield neetar. milton's paradis? loft,
greedily they pluck'd
the fruitage, fair to fight, like that which grew
near that bituminous lake where sodom flar d, milton.
what is more ordinary with them than the taking in flow-
ers and fruitage for the garnishing of their work? more,
fru'ith earer. m. s. [fruit and bearer.] that which pro-
duces fruit. - s
trees, especially fruitbearers, are often infected with the
measles. - mortimer's husbandy.
fruitbearng. adj. [fruit and bear.] having the quality of
producing fruit. -
by this way graft trees of different kinds one on another,
as fruitbearing trees on those that bear not. mortimer.
fruiterer. m. s. ifruitier, french..] one who trades in
fruit.
i did fight with one sampson stockfish, a fruiterer, behind
gray’s-inn. shakesp. henry iv.
walnuts the fruit'rer's hand in autumn stain;
blue plumbs and juicy pears augment his gain. gay.
fru itery. m. s. [fruiterie, french.]
1. fruit collectively taken.
oft, notwithstanding all thy care
to help thy plants, on the small fruitery
exempt from ills, an oriental blast
disastrous flies. -
2. a fruit-loft; a repository for fruit.
fru it ful. adj. [fruit and full.]
1. fertile; abundantly productive; liberal of vegetable product.
- if she continued cruel, he could no more sustain his life
than the earth remain fruitful in the sun's continual absence.
sidney,
- phillips.
the earth,
though in comparison of heav'n, so small,
nor gift'ring, may of solid good contain
- more plenty than the sun that barren shines,
whose virtue on itself works no cffect,
but in the fruitful earth. - milton.
2. actually bearing fruit. * * *
adonis' gardens,
that one day bloom'd, and fruitful were the next. shakoff.
3. prolifick; childbearing; not barren.
hear, nature, hear; dear goddess, hear a father |
suspend thy purpose, if thou did'st intend
to make this creature fruitful: -
into her womb convey sterility. shakespeare's king lear.
male he created thee, but thy consort
female for race; then bless'd o and said,
be fruitful, multiply, and fill the earth ;
§ {...,' o: dominion hold. milton.
i have copied nature, making the youths amorous and the
damsels fruitful. gay's preface to the j/hat d'ye call it.
4. plenteous; abounding in any thing. -
while you, my lord, the rural shades admire,
and from britannia's publick posts retire,
me into foreign realms my fate conveys, -
through nations fruitful of immortal lays. addison.
fru’itfully. adv. [from fruitful.]
1. in such a manner as to be prolifick. -
how sacred seeds of sea, and air, and earth,
and purer fire through universal night,
and empty space did fruitfully unite.
2. plenteously; abundantly. . . - - -
you have many opportunities to cut him off: if your will
want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. shakoff.
fruitfulness. n.s.. [from fruitful..] ...
1. fertility; fecundity; plentiful production,
neither can we ascribe the same fruitfulness to any part of
the earth, nor the same virtue to any plant thereon growing,
that they had before the flood. raleigh's history.
roscommon.
2. the quality of being prolifick, or bearing many children.
the goddess, present at the match she made,
. so bless'd the bed, such fruitfulness convey'd,
that ere ten moons had sharpen'd either horn, -
to crown their bliss, a lovely boy was born. dryd. ovid.
3. exuberant abundance. - - l
the remedy of fruitfulness is easy, but no labour will help
the contrary: i will like and praise some things in a young
of that wherewith his life is preserved, or with performance
. . of such actions as advance him most deservedly in estima-
tion. - ** hooker.
i am driv'n, by breath of her renown, -
either to seek shipwreck, or to arrive -
where i may have fruition of her love. shakoff. henry vi,
god riches and renown to men imparts, -
ev’n all they wish; and yet their narrow hearts
cannot so great a fluency receive, -
but their fruition to a stranger leave. sandys's paraphrase.
wit once, like beauty, without art or dress,
naked and unadorn'd, could find success;
till by fruition, novelty destroy'd,
the nymph must find new chasm to be enjoy'd. granv.
. afliction generally disables a man from pursuing those vices
!" which the guilt of men consists: if the affi... . on his
body, his appetites are weakened, and capacity of fruition
destroyed. - rogers's sermons.
fru'itive. adj. [from the noun.]. enjoying; possessing;
having the power of enjoyment. a word not legitimate.
to whet our longings for fruitive or experimental know-
ledge, it is reserved among the prerogatives of being in heaven,
to know how happy we shall be, when there. boyle.
fru'itless. adj. [from fruit.]
i. barren of fruit; not bearing fruit.
the spaniards of mexico, for the first forty years, could
not make our kind of wheat bear seed; but it grew up as
high as the trees, and was fruitles. raleigh's hisłory.
2. vaio; productive of no advantage; idle; unprofitable.
o! let me not, quoth he, return again
back to the world, whose joys so fruitles; are;
, but let me here for ay in peace remaio,
or straightway on that last song voyage fare. . . -
spenser's fairy 9teen.
, serpent' we might have spar'd our oft. fo
fruitls to me, though fruit be here to excess. al/ilton.
the other is for entirely waving all searches into antiquity,
in relation to this controversy, as being either needless of
fruitles.
3. having no offspring,
upon my head they plac'd a fruitles, crown,
and put a barren scepter in my gripe; -
no son of mine succeeding. shakespeare's macbeth.
fox. *** [from fruitles...] vainly; idly; unpro-
tably.
o, this fruit curiosity fruitles, enquireth, and confidence
blindly determineth. brown's pulgar errours.
walking they talk'd, and fruitle/ly divin'd
what friend the priestess by those words design'd. dryden.
fru’it-time. h. f. [fruit and time.] the autumn ; the time
for gathering fruit.
f******ep. m. s. [fruit and tree..] a tree of that kind whose
principal value arises from the fruit produced by it.
lady, by yonder blessed moon i vow, …
that tips with filver all these fruittree tops. shakespeare.
they possessed houses full of all goods, wells digged, vine-
yards and oliveyards, and fruittrees in abundance. no. ix. 25.
all with a border of rich fruittrees crown'd,
whose loaded branches hide the lofy mound. //aller.
frumenta’cious. adj. [from frumentum, latin.] made of
grain. * dic7.
frumenty. m. s. [frumentum, corn, latin.] food made of
wheat boiled in milk.
to frump. v. a. to mock; to browbeat. somer. ains.
to frush. v. a. [froissor, french..] to break, bruise, or
crush. hanmer,
i like thy armour well;
i'll frush it, and unlock the rivets all,
but i’ll be master of it. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
frush. m. s. [from the verb.] a sort of tender horn’that
grows in the middle of the sole, and at some distance from
the toe: it divides into two branches, running towards the
heel, in the form of a fork. farrier's dici.
frustra neous, adj. [frustra, latin.] vain; useless; un-
profitable; without advantage.
their attempts being so frustraneous, and the demonstra-
tions to the contrary so perspicuous, it is a marvel that any
man should be zealously affected in a cause that has neither
truth nor any honest usefulness in it. amore,
he timely withdraws his frustraneous baffled kindnesses, and
sees the folly of endeavouring to stroke a tyger into a lamb,
or to court an ethiopian out of his colour. south.
writer, which yet, if he continues in, i cannot but justly hate to fru'strate. v. a. [frustror, latin; frusirer, fr.]
him for. ben. johnson's discoveries.
fru it groves. n. s. [fruit and groves.] shades, or close
plantations of fruit trees.
- the faithful slave,
whom to my nuptial train icarius gave,
to tend the fruitgroves *
pope's odyssey.
fruition. m. s. [fruor, latin.] enjoyment; possession;
leasure given by possession or use. - - - -
p m. ao, o to rest satisfied either with fruition
vol. l.
1. to defeat; to disappoint; to baulk.
it is an axiom of nature, that natural desire cannot utterly
be frustrate. phooker.
i survive,
to mock the expectations of the world;
to frustrate prophecies, and to raze out * * *
rotten opinion. - shakesh. henry iv,
stern look'd the fiend, as frustrate of his will;
not half suffic'd, and greedy yet to kill. dryden.
9 y not
jwaterland.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 886</div><p class="text">f r y
f u g
..i.
not more almighty to resist our might,
than wise of..." our plots and wiles.
- l! ; to nullify. -
2. too, o parliament sikh gave all his lands to the queen,
did cut off and frustrate all such conveyances. sponsor.
now thou hast aveng'd
nted adam ; and by vanquishing !
ao. hast regain’d lost paradise, ar-r
and frustrated the conquest fraudulent. - assion.
the peculiar strength of the motive may of itself perhaps
contribute to frustrate the efficacy of it, rendering it liable to
be suspected by him to whom it is addiessed. atterbury.
frusso rat e. participial adj. [from the verb.] -
1. vain; ineffectual ; useless ; unprofitable.
he is drown'd
whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks,
our frustrate search on land. shakespeare's temps?.
milton.
the ruler of the province of judea being by julian busied .
in the re-edifying of this temple, flaming balls of fire issuing
near the foundation, and oft consuming the workmen; made
the enterprize frustrate. raleigh's history.
- all at once employ their thronging darts;
but out of order thrown, in air they join, • -
and multitude makes frustrate the design. dryden's ovid.
2. null; void. - -
fo things are so restrained to any one end or purpose, that,
the same being extinct, they should forthwith utterly become
frustrate, - - hooker.
frustration. m. s. [frustratio, latin; from fru rate.] dis-
appointment ; defeat. • - -
". flates notoriously irreligious, a secret and irresistible
power countermands their deepest projects, splits their coun-
fels, and smites their most refined policies with fru/iration and
a curse. - south.
fru's rrative. adj. [from frostrate.] fallacious; disappoint-
ing. ainsworth.
fru’s rratory. adj. [from forate.] that which makes
any procedure void ; that which vacates any former process.
#. restrains this to a fro/?ratory appeal. ayliff.
frustru.m. n.f. [latin.] a piece cut off from a regular
figure. a term of science.
fry. m. s. [from fro, foam, danish. skinner.]
'1. the swarm of little fishes just produced from the spawn.
they come to us, but as love draws;
he swallows us, and never chows:
by him, as by chain'd shot, whole ranks do die; -
he is the tyrant pike, and we the fry. donne.
forthwith the sounds and seas, each creek and bay,
with fry innumerable swarm, and shoals
of fish, that with their fins and shining scales
glide under the green wave in sculls, that oft
bank the mid-sea. milton's paradis loft.
the angler had the hap to draw up a very little fish from
among the foy. l'estrange.
so close behind some promontory lie
the huge leviathans, t'attend their prey;
and give no chace, but swallow in the fry,
which through their gaping jaws mistake the way. dryd.
2. any swarm of animals; or young people in contempt.
out of the fly of these rakcheli horseboys, growing up in
knavery and villany, are their kern continually supplied and
maintained. spenser on ireland.
them before the fly of children young,
their wanton sports and childish mirth did play,
and to the maidens founding timbrels sung, fairy queen.
draw me no constellations there,
nor dog, nor goat, nor bull, nor bear;
nor any of that monstrous fry
of animals that stock the sky. oldham.
the young fry must be held at a distance, and kept under
the discipline of contempt. collier ou pride.
fry. m. s. a kind of fieve.
he dresseth the dust from malt, by running it through a
fan or fry. mortimer’s hussandry.
to fry. v. a. [frigo, lat. frio, welsh; frijck, erse.] to
dress food by roasting it in a pan on the fire.
. to fry. v. n.
1. to be roasted in a pan on the fire. -
2. to suffer the aetion of fire.
so when with crackling flames a cauldron fries,
the bubbling waters from the bottom rise;
above the brims they force their fiery way,
black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day. dryd. æn.
3. to melt with heat.
spices and gums about them melting sy,
and, phenix like, in that rich nest they die. jvaller.
4. to be agitated like liquor in the pan on the fire.
oil of sweet almonds, newly drawn with sugar, and a little
spice, spread upon bread toasted, is an excellent nourisher;
but then, to keep the oil from frying in the stomach, drink
mild beer after it. bacon's natural history.
where no ford he finds, no water fries
nor billows with unequal murmurs roaf '
but smoothly slide along, and swell the sh
that course he steer'd. dr…..”
; y. m. s. [from the verb.]. a dish of thines goo,
'ryingpan. a. s. [fry and pan.] i he vess; i.
is roasted on o!” pan.] i he “sol in which meat
if i *. by sea, i may chance to fall from the
isito the fire. ". 7. ro
we understand by out of the sooft,
things go from bad to worse. . to:
a freeman of london has the privilege of o
whole street with the twanking of a brass kitle. o 3.
o
addison's o
to fup. v.a. to put off; to delay by false o
cheat. it is generally written sob. see fob.
a hundred mark is a long lone for a poor
bear 7 and i have borne, and borne, and o:
full'd off and fubb'd off from this day to that day, that it: m
shame to be thought on. shakoffeare', ho
fur. m. s. a plump chubby boy. y iv,
fusca te d. adj. [fucatus, latin.]
1. painted ; disguised with paint.
2. disguised by false show.
fucu.s. m. s. [latin.j., paint for the face. no, now in us:
women chat “.
of fucus this, and fucus that. to
os. who paint s. debauchery should lo.
pulled off, and the coarseness underneath discovered. collier
oar,
fyin:son
lves; 10
disoril,
to fu’ddle. v. a. [of unknown etymology.] to make
drunk. -
. the table floating round,
and pavement faithless to the fiddled feet. thomson,
to fu’ddi.f. v. n. to drink to excess.
men will be whoring and fuddling on still. l'estrang,
fo n: s [from feu, fire, french..] the matter or lim.
of fire.
this shall be with burning and fuel of fire, ls, ix. 5.
this spark will prove a raging fire,
if wind and fuel be brought to feed it with. sai, h. vi,
mov’d by my charms, with them your love may cease,
and as the fuel sinks, the flame decrease. prior,
7% fu'el. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to feed fire with combustible matter.
and yet she cannot waste by this,
nor long endure this torturing wrong;
for more corruption needful is,
to fuel such a fever long. -
never, alas ! the dreadful name
that fuels the internal flame. cowls,
the fuel’d chimney blazes wide. thomson's autuno.
2. to store with firing.
some are plainly ceconomical, as that the seat be well
watered, and well fuelled. isotton's architeiurt.
fueillemorte. n.s. [french.] corruptly pronounced
and written philomat. . .
fueillemorie colour signifies the colour of withered leavesin
autumn. wolatil
f uga'cious. adj. [ figax, fugacis, latin.] volatile.
fo so es. latin.] volatility; the qui.
lity of flying away. -
fuga city. n.s. ifugax, latin.]
1. volatility; quality of flying away. - |
spirits and falts, which, by their figatio, colour, so y
taste, and divers experiments that i purposely made to o:
mine them, were like the salt and spirit of usine and foot, bok,
dort,
2. uncertainty; instability.
fug h. interj. [perhaps siom ov.] an expression of abhor-
rence. commonly foh. - is counts"
a very filthy fellow: how odiously he smells of o in
garlick! figh, how he stinks of spain! doyd. dojo.
fugitive. adj. [fugitis, french ; fugitivus, latin.]
1. not tenable; not to be held or detained. . . . still in
our idea of infinity is a growing and solo idea, #.
a boundless progression, that can stop no where. way"
happiness, object of that waking dream,
which we call life, mistaking: fugitive thos”
of my pursuing verse, ideal shade, prir,
notional good, by fancy only made.
2. unsteady; unstable; not durable.
. wolatile; apt to fly away. f
3 the io fugitive parts, the . f o:
the more sturdy vegetables, fall off for wantoft . i
beneath: those only which are more tenacio o: t #7.
to subsist without such recruit. i}%zdward; nat: o
. flving ; running from danger. ... ut
4. fly o yet § partin blood thy sword is ..".
the fugitive parthians follow. shais). at ado
the trojan chief - aso
thrice figitive about troy wall.
5. flying from duty; falling off. cis
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 887</div><p class="text">f u l
f u l
oo
can a figitive daughter enjoy herself, while her parents are
in tears : clarissa.
6. wandering ; runnagate; vagabond.
the most malicious surmise was countenanced by a libellous
pamphlet of a fugitive physician. - - - j%tton.
fu'giriv e. m. s. [from the adjective.] -
1. one who runs from his station or dutv. - -
unmarried men are best friends, best masters, best servants,
but not always best subjects; for they are light to run away,
and almost all fgitives are of that condition. bacon.
back to thy punishment,
false figitives and to thy speed add wings,
lest with a whip of scorpions i pursue
thy ling ring. milton's paradis, loft.
we understand by some fugitives that he hath commanded
the generals to return with victory, or expect
. a shameful death. denham's sophy.
2. one who takes shelter under another power from punishment.
too many, being men of good inheritance, are fled beyond
the seas, where they live under princes which are her majesty's
professed enemies; and converse and are confederates with
other traytors and fugitives there abiding. spensor on ireland.
your royal highness is too great and too just, either to
want or to receive the homage of rebellious fugitives. dryden.
3. one hard to be caught or detained.
what muse but his can nature's beauties hit,
or catch that airy fugitive, call'd wit. harte.
fugitive ness. n.s.. [from figitive.]
1. volatility; fugacity. 2 -
that divers salts, emerging upon the analysis of many con-
cretes, are very volatile, is plain from the fugitivenes of salt
and of hartshorn ascending in distillation. boyle.
2. instability; uncertainty. .
fugue. m. s. [french ; from figa, latin.] in musick, some
point consisting of four, five, six, or any other number of
notes begun by some one single part, and then seconded by a
third, fourth, fifth and sixth part, if the composition consists
of so many ; repeating the same, or such like notes, so that
the several parts follow, or come in one after another in the
same manner, the leading parts still flying before those that
follow. - harris.
the reports and fugues have an agreement with the figures
in rhetorick of repetition and traduction. bacon's nat. hisł.
the skilful organist plies his grave and fancied descant in
lofty fugues. - milton on education.
- his volant touch -
instinet through all proportions, low and high,
fled, and pursu'd transverse the resonant fugue. milton.
long has a race of heroes fill'd the stage,
that rant by note, and through the gamut rage;
in songs and airs express their martial fire, -
combat in trills, and in a fugue expire. addison.
fu’lci men t. n.s.. [fulcimen, fulcimentum, latin.] that on
which a body rests, which acts or is acted upon at each end, as
a balance or a lever.
the power that equiponderates with any weight, must
have the same proportion unto it as there is betwixt their
several distances from the center or fulciment. jwilkins.
to fulf1'l. v. a. [full and fill.]
1. to fill till there is no room for more. this sense is now not
used.
six gates i' th' city, with massy staples,
and corresponsive and fulfilling bolts,
sparre up the sons of troy. shak. troil. and crossida, prol.
2. to answer any prophecy or promise by performance.
they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets
which are read every sabbath-day, they have fulfilled them in
condemning him. afts, xiii. 27.
the fury bath'd them in each other's blood;
then, having fix’d the fight, exulting flies,
and bears fulfill'd her promise to the skies. dryden's an.
3. to answer any purpose or design. . ...
here nature seems fulfill'd in all her ends. milt. par. loft.
4. to answer any desire by compliance or gratification.
if on my wounded breast thou drop'st a tear,
think for whose sake my breast that wound did bear;
and faithfully my last desires fulfil, - -
as i perform my cruel father's will. - dryden's ovid.
5. to answer any law by obedience. . . . " -
love worketh no ill to his neighbour, therefore love is the
fulfilling of the law. rom. xiii. io.
this i my glory account
my exaltation, and my whole delight,
that thou in me well-pleas'd declar'st thy will
fulfill d, which to fulfi is all my bliss. milton’s par. loft.
fulf raught. adj. [full and fraught.] . fully stored.
- thy fall hath left a kind of blot
to mark the fulfraught man, the best endu'd,
with some suspicion.
quisitely bright.
shakspeare's henry v.
fu’lgency. n.s. [fugens, latin.] splendour; glitter. dici.
fu lg ent. adj. [fugens, latin.] shining ; dazzling; ex-
. as from a cloud his figent head, -
and shape flar-bright, appeard. milton's paradio loft,
the illumination is not so bright and fulgent as to epee
9. extinguish all perceptibility of reason. more's divine dio,
food. 44ff. [fulgidus, latin.] shining; glittering; daz-
ziing. ". -
fulgi di ty... n.s. [from fulgid.] splendour; dazzling glitter.
- - - - 12.e.
fu'lgogr. n.s. [fulgor, latin.] splendour; dazzling bright-
ness like that of lightning.
glow-worms alive project a lustre in the dark; which
fulgour, notwithstanding, ceaseth after death. brown.
when i set my eyes on this fide of things, there shines from
them such an intellectual fulgour, that methinks the very glory
of the deity becomes visible through them. . more.
fu 1guration. m. s. [fuguratio, latin.] i head of lightens
ing. - - - - -
fu'iham. m. s. a cant word for false dice. hanmer.
let vultures gripe thy guts, for gourd and fulham's hold,
and high and low beguile the rich and poor. shakespeare.
foo. adj. [fuligineux-se, fr. fuliginosus, lat.] sooty;
moky. - * - - - -
burrage hath an excellent spirit to repress the fuliginous va-
pours of dusky melancholy, and so cure madness. bacon.
whereas history should be the torch of truth, he makes her
in divers places a fuligimous link of lies. howel.
fu’l hmart. n. s. [this word, of which skinner observes that
he found it only in this passage, seems to mean the same with
stoat.] a kind of stinking serret. - -
the fighat, the fulimart, and the ferret, live upon the face,
and within the bowels of the earth. //alton's angler,
full, adj. soulle, saxon; vol, dutch..]
1...replete ; without vacuity; having no space void.
better is an handful with quietness than both the hands full
with travel and vexation of spirit. eccl. iv. 6.
valley full of chariots. o isaiah.
the trees of the lord are full of sap. - psalms.
where all must full or not coherent be. . . . pope.
2. abounding in any quality good or bad.
with pretence from strephon her to guard,
he met her full, but full of warefulness. sidney.
- you should tread a course -
pretty and full of view. shakespeare's cymbeline.
followers, who make themselves as trumpets of the com-
mendation of those they follow, are full of inconvenience;
they taint business through want of secrecy, and export honour
from a man, and make him a return in envy... . bacon.
that must be our cure, - - - -
to be no more; sad cure; for who would lose, . . . .:
though full of pain, this intellectual being,
those thoughts that wander through eternity ? ay!ton.
gay religion's full of pomp and gold. azilton.
in that sweet season, as in bed 1 lay,
i turn'd my weary side, but still in vain, .
though full of youtuful health and void of pain. drydon.
he is full of wants which he cannot supply, and compassed
about with infirmities which he cannot remove. tilloison.
from yon bright heaven our author fetch'd his fire,
and paints the passions that your eyes inspire;
full of that flame, his tender scenes he warns,
and frames his goddess by your matchiefs charms. granv,
3. stored with any thing; well supplied with anything. ..
full of days was he ,
two ages past, he liv'd the third to see. tickel.
4. plump; saginated ; fat.
a gentleman of a full body having broken his skin by a
fall, the wound inflamed. //istman's surgery.
5. saturated; sated. -
i am full of the burnt offerings of rams. isa, i. 1 1.
the alteration of scenes feeds and relieves the eye, before
it be full of the same object. bacon.
6. crouded with regard to the imagination or memory.
every one is full of the miracles done by cold baths on de-
caved and weak constitutions. locke.
7. that which fills or makes full; large; great in effect.
water digesteth a full meal sooner than any liquor. arbuthn.
8. complete; such as that nothing further is desired or wanted.
that day had seen the full accomplishment -
of all his travels. daniel's civil war.
what remains, ye gods,
but up and enter now into full bliss milton.
being tried at that time only with a promise, he gave full
credit to that promise, and still gave evidence of his fidelity
as fast as occasions were offered. hammond's praci. catechism,
the resurreștion of jesus from the dead hath given the
world full assurance of another life. tiloson,
9. complete without abatement; at the utmost degree.
at the end of two full years pharaoh dreamed. geness,
after hard riding plunge the horses into water, and allow
them to drink as they please; but gallop them full speed, to
warm the water in their bellies. swift's direct, to the groom.
io. containing the whole matter; expressing much.
where
7 t
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 888</div><p class="text">f u l
f u l
where my expressions are not so full as his, either our lan-
guage or my art were defe&amp;tive ; but where mine arc fuller
than his, they are but the impressions which the often reading
of him have left upon my thoughts. denham.
should a man go about with never so set study to describe
such a natural form of the year before the deluge as that which
is at present established, he could scarcely do it jo so few
words, so fit and proper, so full and express. woodward.
11. strong; not faint ; not attenuated.
i did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart;
but the empty vessel makes the greatest sound. shakesp.
barrels placed under the floor of a chamber, make all noises
in the same o and resounding. bacon's nat. history.
dryden taught to join
the varying verse, the full resounding line. pope.
12. mature; perfeot.
in the sultanry of the mamalukes, slaves reigned over fa-
milies of free men; and much like were the case, if you sup-
pose a nation, where the custom were that after full age the
sons should expulse their fathers out of their possessions. bacon.
so law appears imperfeot, and but given
with purpose to resign them in full time
up to a better covenant. milton.
these thoughts
full counsel must mature. milton.
13. [applied to the moon.) complete in its orb.
towards the full moon, as he was coming home one morn-
ing, he felt his legs faulter. wiseman's surgery.
14. not continuous, or a full stop.
therewith he ended, making a full point of a hearty sign. sid.
15. spread to view in all dimensions.
*till about the end of the third century, i do not remem-
ber to have seen the head of a roman emperor drawn with a
full face: they always appear in profile. addison on medals.
full. n.s.. [from the adjective.]
1. complete measure; freedom from deficiency.
- when we return,
we'll see those things affected to the full. shak. henry vi.
he liked the pomp and absolute authority of a general well,
and preserved the dignity of it to the full. clarendon.
. the picture of ptolemy philopater is given by authors to
the full. dryden.
sicilian tortures and the brazen bull,
are emblems, rather than express the full
of what he feels, dryden's pers.
if where the rules not far enough extend,
some lucky licence answer to the full
th’ intent propos'd, that licence is a rule. pope.
2. the highest state or degree.
the swan's down feather,
that stands upon the swell at full of tide,
neither way inclines. shakesp. ant, and gleopatra.
3. the whole; the total.
the king hath won, and hath sent out
a speedy pow'r to encounter you, my lord:
this is the news at full. shakespeare's henry iv.
but what at full i know, thou know'st no part;
i knowing all my peril, thou no art. shakespeare.
4. the state of being satiated.
when i had fed them to the full. jer. v. 7.
5. [applied to the moon.] the time in which the moon makes
a perfeot orb.
brains in rabbits, woodcocks, and calves, are fullest in the
full of the moon. bacon's natural history.
fui. l. adv. -
1. without abatement or diminution.
- he full
resplendent all his father manifest
express'd. * milton.
in the unity of place they are full as scrupulous; which
many of their criticks limit to that very spot of ground where
the play is supposed to begin. dryden's dramatick posy.
a modest blush he wears, not form'd by art;
free from deceit his face, and full as free his heart. dryden.
... the most judicious writer is sometimes mistaken after all
his care; but the hasty critick, who judges on a view, is full
as liable to be deceived. dryden's aurengz. projace.
since you may
jo ". if i should not lay,
e pawn i protier shall be foll as good. dryd, virg.
2. with the o effect. f g y pirg,
'tis the pencil, thrown luckily full upon the horse's mouth
to express the foam, which the painter, with all his skill, could
not perform without it. dryden's dufresnoy.
from harmony, from heavenly harmony,
this universal frame began:
from harmony to harmony,
through all the compass of the notes it ran,
the diapason clos ll i - ---
3. exacily. p ing full in man dryden.
full in the centre of the sacred wood,
an arm ariseth of the stygian flood. addison on italy.
full nineteen sailors did the ship conve
a shole of nineteen dolphins round her pla .
4. directly. y.
he met her full, but full of warefulness -
- he then confronts the bull, - sidro,
and on his ample forehead aiming full
the deadly stroke descending piero the skull. d
at length resolv’d, he throws with all his or ryden,
full at the temples of the warrior horse. ce
5. it is placed before adverbs and adjedives
strengthen their signification. »
tell me why on your shield, so goodly scord
bear ye the picture of that lady's head y
full lively is the semblant, though the su
y i was set at work § bstance dead, sons
among my maids; full little, god knows,
either for such men or such business.
full well ye reject the commandment,
adam was all in tears, and to his guide
lamenting turn’d full sad. milton' :/.
you full little think that you must be the o
discourse yourself. more's divine dial ille
full little thought of him the gentle knight. ;
full well the god his sister's envy knew, jutn,
and what her aims and what her arts pursue, dryd.
there is a perquisite full as honest, by which you have .
best part of a bottle of wine for yourself. swi :
full is much used in composition to intimate anythin .
rived at its highest state, or utmost degree. §
full-blown. adj. [full and blown.]
1. spread to the utmost extent, as a perfeoł blossom.
my glories are past danger; they're fill blown.
things, that are blasted, are but in the bud. dinh. sophy,
my full-blown youth already fades apace;
of our short being 'tis the shortest space! dryden's juv.
2. stretched by the wi:id to the utmost extent.
he who with bold cratinus is inspir’d,
with zeal and equal indignation fir’d;
who at enormous villany turns pale,
and steers against it with a full-blown sail. dryd prs.
full-boottom ed. adj. [full and bottom.] having a large
bottom.
i was obliged to fit at home in my morning-gown, having
pawned a new suit of cloaths and a full-boilamed wig for a film
of money. - guardian,
full-ea'red. adj. [full and ear.] having the heads full of
grain.
as flames roll’d by the winds conspiring force,
o'er full-ear'd corn, or torrents raging course. denham.
full-eyed. adj. [full and eye.] having large prominent
eyes.
full-fed. adj. [full and fed..] saed ; fat; saginated.
all as a partridge plump, full-fed and fair,
she form'd this image of well-bodied air. pope's durial.
full-la'den. adj. [fill and laden.] laden 'till these can be
no more added. -
it were unfit that so excellent a reward as the gospel pro-
mises should stoop down, like fruit upon a full-laden bogii,
to be plucked by every idle and wanton hand. tilton,
full-spread. adj. [full and spread.] spread to the utmost
cxtent.
how easy 'tis, when destiny proves kind,
with full-spread sails to run before the wind;
but those that 'gainst #ff gales laveering go,
4dds. ovi.
dryden'; æn,
to intend or
1 - looking
shakoff, henry viii,
ar. vii. 9,
must be at once resolv’d and skilful too, doin.
full-su'mmed. adj. [foil and simmed.] complete in all its
parts.
the cedar stretched forth his branches, and the king of birds
nested within his leaves, thick feathered, and wo
wings fastening his talons east and west but noy tht so
is become half naked. howel's lo
to full. v. a. [full, latin.] to cleanse cloth from its ol
or grease. id for fulling of
fu'llage. n.s.. [from full.] the money paid for fulling
cleansing cloth. is to cleans:
fu'ller. m. s. [fullo, latin.] one whose trade is to cital
cloth. ff
- the clothiers have put o s
the spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers. shaloft. #: |
his raiment became shining, exceeding white o, i. 3.
as no fuller on earth can whiten them, amar, lx.
fu llers earth. n.s. - - ly soft and
fullers earth is a marl of a close texture, extre" brows!
unetuous to the touch: when dry it is of o k, as
colour, in all degrees, from very pale to almost o: is
generally has a greenish cast in it. the fiosoft media.
dug in our own island. hill’; o: yet
the fullers earth of england very much exceco o
discovered abroad in goodness; which is one go” tea -
- &gt; i. in the woollen o'
o surpass all other nations in #aaard on fo
\t.
fu’llers thisile, or ward, n.s. [ditol “p |al fu'llers
2.
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 889</div><p class="text">f u l
-
*
fu'iikky; n.s.. [from fuller.] the place where the trade of
a fuller is exercised. - -
fu'lliso mall. m. s. [full and mill.] a mill where the water
raises hammers which beat the cloth 'till it be cleansed. -&gt;
by large hammers, like those used for paper and failing-
mills, they beat their hemp. %;.
u’l. y. adv. [from full.] -
1. without vacuity. -
2. completely; without lack; without more to be desired.
there are many graces for which we may not cease
hourly to sue, graces which are in bestowing always, but ne-
wer come to be fully had in this present life; and therefore,
when all things here have an end, endless thanks must have
their beginning in a state which bringeth the full and final sa-
tissaction of all such perpetual desires. hooker.
he fully possessed the entire revelation he had received from
god, and had thoroughly digested it. locke.
* the goddess cry’d -
it is enough, i’m fully satisfy'd. addison's ovid.
fu’lminant. adj. [filminant, er. fulminans, latin.] thun-
dering; making a fioile like thunder.
to fu'lminate. v. n. [fulmino, lat. fulminer, french.] ,
1. to thunder.
i cannot filminate nor tonitruate words
*to puzzle intellects; my ninth lap affords
no lycophronian buskins,
2. to make a loud noise or crack. - -
whilst it was in fusion we cast into it a live coal, which
presently kindled it, and made it boil and flash for a pretty
while : after which we cast in another glowing coal, which
made it fulminate afresh. - boyle.
in damps one is called the suffocating, and the other the ful-
iminating damp. i/oodward's natural history.
3. to illue out ecclesiastical censures.
73 fulminat e. v. a. to throw out as an object of ter-
i ous.
as excommunication is not greatly regarded here in eng-
land, as now fulminated; so this constitution is out of use
among us in a great me sure. ayliffe's parergon.
fullmina rio n. m. s. [fulminatio, latin; fulmination, french,
from fulminate.] -
1. the aet of thundering.
2. denunciations of censure.
the fulminations from the vatican were turned into ridicule.
- - ayliffe's parergon.
fu'lminatoky. . adj. [filmineus, latin; from fulminate.]
thundering; striking horror.
fulness. n.s.. [from fall.]
i. the state of being filled so as to have no part vacant.
your heave-offering shall be reckoned the fulness of the
wine-press. - numb. xviii. 27.
let the sea roar and the solos; thereof. jdeut.
to the houses i wished nothing more than safety, fulness,
and freedom. king charles.
2. the state of abounding in any quality good or bad.
3. completeness; such as leaves nothing to be desired.
your enjoyments are so complete, i turn wishes into gra-
tulations, and congratulating their fulness only wish their con-
tinuance. south.
4. completeness from the coalition of many parts.
the king set forwards to london, receiving the acclama:
tions and applauses of the people as he went ; which indeed
were true and unfeigned, as might well appear in the very
demonstrations and fuins of the cry. bacon's henry vii.
5. comple eness; freedom from deficiency.
in thy presence is fulness of joy. psalms.
he is the half part of a blessed man,
i.cft to be finished by such as she ;
and she a fair divided excellence,
whose films of perfection lies in him. shakoff. k. john.
6. repletion ; faticty. -
i need not instance in the habitual intemperance of rich
tables, nor the evil accidents and effects of fulnes, pride and
lust, wantonness and softness. taylor's rule of living holy.
7. plenty; wealth. -
to lapse in sults;
js forer than to lic for need ; and falshood - -
is worse in king; than beggars. shakoff care's cymleine,
8. struggling perturbation; swelling in the mind. .. -
a principal fruit of friendship is the ease and discharge of
the sing of the heart, which passions of all kinds do cause
and induce. bacon's essays.
9. largeness; extent. -
there wanted the finds of a plot, and variety of charac-
ters to form it as it ought; and perhaps something might have
been added to the beauty of the style. . dryden.
10. force of found, such as fills the ear; vigour.
this sort of pastoral derives almost its whole beauty from a
natural ease of thought and smoothness of verse; whereas that
of most other kinds consists in the strength and fulness of ;
ope.
tho. randolph.
fu'lsome. adj. [from pulle, saxon, foul.]
vol. i. -
i. no. offensive.
e that brings ful one objects to my view
with ...s. my ao, #. &gt;
and all goes down like oxymes of squills.
now half the youth of europe are in arms,
how fulsome must it be to stay behind, -
and die of rank diseases here at home otway, orphan,
2. rank; gross? to the smell. -
white satyrion is of a dainty smell, if the plant puts forth
white flowers only, and those not thin or dry, they are com-
monly of rank and fusome smell. - bacon.
roscommon,
3. lustful. . . - -
he stuck them up before the fulsome ewes. shakespeare.
4. tending to obscenity. -
a certain epigram, which is ascribed to the emperor, is more
folsome than any passage i have met with in our poet. dryden,
fox. adv, [from fulsome.] nauseously; rankly, ob-
cenely. - -
fu'lsomeness. n. f. sfrom fulsome.
1. nauseousness. s: [ fulsome.]
2. ratik smell.
3. obscenity. - -
. no decency is considered, nofujomenos isomitted, no venom
is wanting, as far as dulness can iupply it. dryden.
fu'mado, n.s.. [fumus, latin.] a smoked fish.
fish that serve for the hotter countries, they used at first to
fume, by hanging them up on long sticks one by one, drying
them with the smoke of a soft and continual fire, from which
they purchased the name offumadoes. carew.
fu mage. m. s. [from fumus, latin..] hearthmoney. didi.
fu'matory. m. s. [. s. lat. fumeterre, fr.] an herb.
her fallow leas
the darnel, hemlock, and rank fumatory,
doth root upon. shakes. henry v.
to fu'mble. v. n. [sommelen, dutch..] .
1. to attempt any thing aukwardly or ungainly.
our mechanick theists will have their atoms never once to
have fumbled in these their motions, nor to have produced any
inept system. cudworth,
2. to puzzle; to strain in perplexity.
am not i a friend to help you out 2 you would have been
formbling half an hour for this excuse. dryden's spanish fryar.
3. to play childishly.
i saw him fumble with the sheets, and play with flowers,
and smile upon his finger's end. shakesp. henry v.
to fu'mble. v. a. to manage aukwardly.
as many farewels as be stars in heav'n,
with distinet breath and consign'd kisses to them, .
he fumbles up all in one loose adieu. shakespeare:
his greasy bald-pate choir -
came fumbling o'er the beads, in such an agon
they told 'em false for fear. dryden's spanish fryar.
fu'mbler, n, f: [from fumble.]. one who acts aukwardly.
fu'mblingly. adv. [...so) in an aukward manner.
fume. n.s.. [fumee, french ; fumus, latin.]
1. smoke.
thus fighting fires a while themselves consume; *
but streight, like turks, forc'd on to win or die,
they first lay tender bridges of their fume, .
and o'er the breach in unetuous vapours fly. - dryden,
2. vapour; any volatile parts flying away.
love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of fighs;
being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers eyes. shakespeare.
it were good to try the taking of fumes by pipes, as they do
in tobacco, of other things, to dry and comfort. bacon.
in winter, when the heat without is less, breath becomes
so far condensed as to be visible, flowing out of the mouth in
form of a fume, or crasser vapour; and may, by proper ves-
fels, set in a ftrong freezing mixture, be colle&amp;ted in a con-
siderable quantity. woodward's natural history.
3. exhalation from the stomach.
the fumes of drink discompose and stupify the brains of a
man overcharged with it. south.
plung’d in sloth we lie, and shore supine,
as fill'd with fumes of undigested wine. dryden's pers.
pow'r, like new wine, does your weak brain surprize,
and its mad fumes in hot discourses rise;
but time these yielding vapours will remove: -
meanwhile i'll taste the sober joys of love. dryden's auren.
4. rage; heat of mind; passion. -
the fumes of his passion do really intoxicate and confound
his judging and discerning faculty. south.
5. any thing unsubstantial.
when duncan is asleep, his two chamberlains
will i with wine and wassel so convince,
that memory, the warder of the brain,
shall be a fume. shakespeare's macbeth.
6. idle conceit ; vain imagination.
plato's great year would have some effect, not in renewing
the state of like individuals; for that is the fume of those, that
conceive the celestial bodies have more accurate influences upon
these things below, than they have, but in gross. bacon.
9 z. - - te<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 890</div><p class="text">f u m
f u n
:
to lay aside all that may seem to have ashew of fume: and
fancies, and to speak solids, a war with spoo is a mighty
work. - bacon's isar with spain.
to fume. v. n. [sumer, french : famo, latin.]
1. to smoke. - *
their pray'rs pass'd
dimensionless through heav'nly doors ; then clad
with incense, where the golden o
, their great intertessor ; came in fight
#. # father's throne. , milton's paradis. loft.
from thence the fuming trail began to spread,
and lambent glories danc'd about her head. dryd. æn.
strait hover round the fair her airy band;
some, as she fipp'd, the filming liquor fana'd. pope.
2. to vapour; to yield exhalations, as by heat.
tie up the libertine in a field of feasts, - -
keep his brain filming. shakoff. ant. and cleopatra.
- silenus lay,
whose constant cups lay filming to his brain,
and always boil in each extended vein. roscommon.
3. to pass away in vapours.
- we have -
no anger in our eyes, no storm, no lightning:
our hate is spent and fum'd away in vapour, - - -
before our hands be at work. ben. johnson's citiline.
their parts are kept from faming away by their fixity, and
also by the vast weight and density of the atmospheros incum-
bent upon them. . . cheyne's phil. princ.
the first fresh dawn then wak'd the gladden'd race
of uncorrupted man, nor blush'd to see -
the sluggard sleep beneath its sacred beam ;
for their light slumbers gentle fam'daway. thomson's spring.
4. to be in a rage; to be hot with anger.
when he knew his rival free’d and gone,
he swells with wrath ; he makes outrageous moan :
he frets, he fumes, he stares, he stamps the ground.
the hollow tow'r with clamours rings around. dryden.
to fume. v. a.
1. to smoke; to dry in the smoke.
those that serve for hot countries they used at first to fume,
by hanging them upon long sticks one by one, and drying
them with the smoke of a soft fire. - carew.
2. to perfume with odours in the fire.
she film'd the temples with an od’rous flame,
and oft before the sacred altars came, }
to pray for him who was an empty name. dryder.
the fuming of the holes with brimstone, garlick, or other
unsavory things, will drive moles out of the ground. aortin.
3. to disperse in vapours.
o the heat will fume away most of the scent. martimer.
fum et. n.s. the dung of the deer. e
fuaiette. n.s.. [french..] a word introduced by cooks,
and the pupils of cooks, for the stink of meat.
a haunch of ven’son made her sweat,
... unless it had the right fumette. - swift.
fumid. adj. [fumidus, latin.] smoky : vaporous.
a crass and fumid exhalation is caused from the combat of
the sulphur and iron with the acid and nitrous spirits of aqua-
fortis. brown's /ulgar errours.
fum1 dity. m. s. [from famid.] smokiness; tendency to
smoke. di:".
to fumigate. v. n. [from fumus, latin; fumiger, fr.]
1. to smoke to perfume by smoke or vapour.
would'st thou preserve thy famish’d family,
with fragrant thyme the city fumigate,
and break the waxen walls to save the state. dryden's pīrg.
2. to medicate or heal by vapours.
fumigation. m. s. [fumigatio, latin; fumigation, french;
from fumigate.]
1. scents raised by fire.
fumigations, often repeated, are very beneficial. arbuthnot.
my fumigation is to venus, just
the souls of roses, and red coral's dust:
and, last, to make my fumigation good,
'tis mixt with sparrows brains and pigeons blood. dryden.
2. the application of medicines to the body in fumes.
fu'mingly. adv. [from fume.] angrily; in a rage.
... that which we move for our better learning and instruction
sake, turneth unto anger and choler in them: they grow alto-
gether out of quietness with it; they answer filmingly, that
they are ashamed to defile their pens with making answer to
such idle questions. hooker.
fu'miter. n.s. a plant.
why, he was met even now,
as mad as the vext sea ; singing aloud,
, crown'd with rankfumiter and furrow.weeds. shakesheare.
§o adj. [fumeux-se, french; from fame.] producing
fu'my. fumes.
from dice and wine the youth retird to rest
and puff'd the fumy god #. out his breast : &gt;
ev’n then he dreamt of drink and lucky play ;
more lucky had it o 'till the day. dryden's zn.
z-
fun. m. s. [a low cant word.
licksome delight.
don't mind me, though, for all m -
you bards may find us bloi, o jokes,
fu'nction. n.s.. [functio, latin.] * mr.
1. discharge ; performance.
there is hardly a greater difference bet -
than there is between a representing :::::::::: things
tion of his publick calling, and the same person o .
life. mmon
2. employment; office. - swift,
the ministry is not now bound to any on, ,
none is secluded from that fundion of o o
calling. - so, or
you have paid the heav'ns your finion, and o
the very debt of your calling. shakesp. measure for prisoner
] sport; high metriment; so,
iidw
... nor was it any policy, or obstinacy, or partialit #:
tion either to the men or their function, which 3.d *
". this double function of the goddess gives a §:
light and beauty to the ode which horace has address: :
her. addison 0n liai,
joi...o.o.
racter. o - holy fundiion and chi.
3. single act of any office.
without difference those funions cannot, in orderly son
be executed. - - ho.
they have several offices and prayers against fire o
pests, and especially for the dead, in which junion, o us:
sacerdotal garments. - sion.
4. trade; occupation. §joi.
follow your funesion ; go, and batten on coldbits, shai;
5. office of any particular part of the body. -
the bodies of men, and other animals, are excellently well
fitted for life and motion; and the several parts of them well
adapted to their particular fundions. bently's sermo,
6. power; faculty: either animal or intelle&amp;ual.
tears in his eyes, distraction in his asped,
a broken voice, and his whole fundiion suitin
with forms to his conceit, shaishare's hanli,
nature seems
in all her finesions weary of herself:
my race cf glory run, and race of shame;
and i shall shortly be with them that rest. milor,
whatever warms the heart, or fills the head,
as the mind opens, and its fundion; spread,
imagination plies her dang'rous art,
and pours it all upon the peccant part. po,
though every human constitution is morbid, yet are their
diseases consistent with the common fundion; of life, arius.
fund. m. s. [fond, french ; funda, a bag, latin.]
1. stock; capital; that by which any expence is supported,
he touches the passions more delicately than ovid, and per-
forms all this out of his own fund, without diving into th:
allerius,
arts and sciences for a supply. dolio,
part must be left, a fund when foes invade, -
and part employ'd to roll the watry tide. drydo.
in preaching, no men succeed better than those who trust
entirely to the stock or fund of their own reason, advanco
indeed, but not overlaid by commerce with books. saft,
2. stock or bank of money.
as my estate has been hitherto either toft upon so
fluctuating in funds, it is now fixed in substantial acres. ali's
fundament. n.s. (fundamentum, latin.) the back p."
of the body. r
fu ndamenta i. adj. [fundamentali, lat, so so
serving for the foundation; that upon which the left is built;
essential; important ; not merely accidental. s
until this can be agreed upon, one main and so.
cause of the most grievous war is not like ".
the earth. &amp;alogo llso
you that will be less fearful o discreet,
that love the fundamental part of state, !.
more than ...s. the charge of 't. shaft. o:
others, when they were brought to allow the to: f]
thought the succession should go to the next o o:
the fundamental laws of the kingdom, as if the lo e i.
actually dead. t swift's la hild-
gaia some general and fundamental trut” both in so
sophy, in religion, and in human life.
such we find they are, as can controul -
the servile actions of our wav'ring soul, |||
can fight, can alter, or can chain the wo
their is ill built on life, that fundamoto."
yet some there were among the sound." few,
of those who less presum’d, and betto knew,
who dust assert the juster o o: po,
and here restor'd wit’s fundamentallo" . t 3s.
fundam e/ntal. m. s. is: proposition; o
essential part which is the groundwork of o
we propose the question, whether those w
prior,
d the so
damo"
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 891</div><p class="text">f u r -
damental of faith may deny christ damnably in respea of su-
perstructures and consequences that arise so them. south.
it is a very just reproach, that ther. should be so much vio-
lence and hatred in religious matters among men who agree in
all fundamentals, and only differ in some ceremonies, or mere
speculative points. swift.
fundame'ntally. adv. [from fundamental.] essentially ;
originally. - - -
as virtue is seated fondamentally in the intelled, so perspec-
tively in the fancy; so that virtue is the force of reason, in
the conduct of our actions and passions to a good end. grew.
religion is not only useful to civil society, but fundamen-
tally necessary to its very birth and constitution. bentley.
the unlimited power placed fundamentally in the body of a
people, the legislators endeavour to deposite in such hands as
would preserve the people. swift.
futneral. m. f [funus, latin; funerailles, french,)
1. the solemnization of a burial; the payment of the last ho-
nours to the dead; obsequies.
here, under leave of brutus, and the rest, -
come i to speak in caesar's funeral. shak. julius cæsar.
all things that we ordained festiva &gt; -
turn from their office to black funeral.
he that had cast out many unburied, had none t
him, nor any solemn funerals, nor sepulchre with his fathers.
2 mac. v. io.
shakespeare.
no widow at his fineral shall weep.
2. the pomp or procession with which the dead are carried.
the long fun'rals blacken all the way. pope.
you are sometimes desirous to see a funeral pass by in the
ftreet. swift's directions to the chambermaid,
3. burial; interment.
may he find his funeral
i' th' sands, when he before his day shall fall. denham,
fu'neral, adj. . used at the ceremony of interring the dead.
our instruments to melancholy bells,
our wedding chear to a sad funeral feast. shakespeare.
s "let such honours
and funeral rites, as to his birth and virtues
are due, be first perform'd. denham's sophy.
thy hand o'er towns the sun'ral torch displays,
and forms a thousand ills ten thousand ways. dryden.
fume’real. adj. [funerea, latin.]. suiting a funeral; dark;
dismal.
so
inhabitant of deep disastrous night,
homeward with pious speed repass the main, -
to the pale shade funereal rites ordain, pope's odyssey.
fungo'sity, n.s.. [from fungus.] unsolid excrescence, fo.
fu ng9us. adj. [from fungus.] excrescent; spongy; want-
ing firmness. -
it is often employed to keep down the fungous lips that
spread upon the bone; but it is much more painful than the
escharotick medicines. sharp's surgery.
fungus. n.f. [latin.] strictly a mushroom: a word used to
express such excrescences of flesh as grow out upon the lips
of wounds, or any other excrescence from trees or plants not
naturally belonging to them ; as the agarick from the larch-
tree, and auriculae judae from elder. &amp;#incy,
the surgeon ought to vary the diet as the fibres lengthen
too much, are too fluid, and produce /*s. or as they
harden and produce callosities. rbuthnot on diet.
this eminence is composed of little points, or granula,
called fungus, or proud flesh. - sharp.
fu'nicle. n.s.. [funiculus, latin.] a small cord; a small
ligature; a fibre. - -
fun i'cular. adj. [foniculaire, fr. from funicle.] confisting
of a small cord or fibre.
funk. m. s. a stink. a low word. -
funnel; n.s.. [infundibulum, latin ; whence fundible, fundle,
funnel.] - - - -
1. an inverted hollow cone with a pipe descending from it,
through which liquors are poured into vessels with narrow
mouths; a tundish. - - - -
if you pour a glut of water upon a bottle, it receives little
of it; but with a funnel, and by degrees, you shall fill many
of them. ben. johnson's discoveries.
some the long funnel's curious mouth extend,
through which ingested meats with ease descend. blackm.
the outward ear or auricula is made hollow, and con-
tracted by degrees, to draw the sound inward, to take in as
much as may be of it, as we use a funnel to pour liquor into
any vessel. ray on the crcation.
2. a pipe or passage of communication.
towards the middle are two large funnel, bored through
the roof of the grotto, to let in light or fresh air. addison.
fur. m. s. [furrore, french.] -
1. skin with soft hair with which garments are lined for warmth,
or covered for ornament. -
december must be expressed with a horrid and fearful coun-
tenance; as also at his back a bundle of holly, holding in fur
mittens the sign of capricorn. peacoam on drawing.
but if his soul hath wing'd the destin’d flight, ' , . "
o mourn for ,
sandys. .
'tis but dressing up a bird of prey in his cap and furs to
make a judge of him. - 4'1/irange.
and lordly gout wrapt up in fur, o
and wheezing asthma, loth to stir. swift.
2. soft hair of beasts found in cold countries,
vides coats suitable to the weather; hair in general.
this night, wherein the cut drawn bear would couch,
the lion and the belly pinched ...if "" " ". -
keep their fur dry, unbonnetted he runs, - -
and bids what will take all. shakoff. king lear.
| such animals as feed upon flesh qualify it, the one by swal-
!owing the hair or fur of the best. they prey upon, the other
by devouring some part of the feathers of the birds they gorge *
themselves with. . . . . . - ray on the creation.
3. any moisture exhaled to such a degree as that the remainder
sticks on the part. * -
methinks i am not right in ev'ry part;
i feel a kind of trembling at my heart:
my pulse unequal, and my breath is strong; -
besides a filthy fur upon my tongue. dryden's pers;
to fur. v. a. [from the noun.] -
*: to line or cover with skins that have soft hair.
. how mad a fight it was to see dametas, like rich tissue
furred with lambskins - - - - sidney.
through tatter'd cloaths small vices do appear; -
robes and furr'd gowns hide all: , shakoff. king lear.
you are for dreams and flumbers, brother priest;
you fur your gloves with reasons. shakesp. froil, and cross.
2. to cover with soft matter, - -
to make lampblack, take a torch and hold it under the bot-
tom of a latten eason; and, as it groweth to be furred and
black within, strike it with a feather into some shell. peacham.
the fitters, mourning for their brother's loss,
where nature pro-
their bodies hid in bark, and furr'd with moss. drydew.
their frying blood compels to irrigate
their dry furr'd tongues. phillips,
a dungeon wide and horrible; the wass
on all sides furr'd with mouldy damps, and hung
with clots of ropy gore. - addison.
fur. adv. [it is now commonly written far.] at a distance.
the white lovely dove -
poth on her wings her utmost swiftness prove,
finding the gripe of faulcon fierce not fur. sidney.
fur-wrough t. adj. [fur and wrought.] made of fur,
silent along the mazv margin stry,
and with the fur-wrought fly delude the prey. ... gay's paso.
fu ra’cious. adj. [furax, latin.] thievish; inclined to stol.
dic7.
fura'city. m. s. [from furax,
thievishness. -
fure elow. n.s.. . a piece of stuff plaited and puckered to-
gether, either below or above, on the petticoats or gowns of
women. this, like a great many other words, is the child
latin.] disposition to theft;
- -
of mere caprice. trev. dic.
nay, oft in dreams invention we bestow -
to change a flounce, or add a furbelow. pope,
to fu'rpelow. v. a. [from the noun...] to adorn with
mental appendages of dress.
when arguments too fiercely glare,
you calm them with a milder air;
to break their points, you turn their force, -
and furbelow the plain discourse. prior.
she was flounced andfurbelowed; every ribbon was crinkled,
and every part of her garments in curl. addison.
to fu rbis.h. v. a. [fourbir, french..] to burnish; to po-
lish ; to rub to brightness.
it may enter mowbray's waxen coat,
and furbish new the name of john o' gaunt.
shakespeare’s richard ii.
furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines. jer. xlvi. 4.
some others who furbish up and reprint his old errouns, hold
that the sufferings of the damned are not to be in a strict
sense, eternal; but that, after a certain period of time, there
shall be a general gaol. delivery of the souls in prison, and that
not for a farther execution, but a final release, south.
as after numa's peaceful reign,
the martial ancus did the sceptre wield;
furbish'd the rusty sword again,
resum'd the long-forgotten shield,
and led the latins to the dusly field.
inferior ministers, for mars repair
his broken axle tree, and blunted war;
and send him forth again, with furbish'd arms. dryden.
fu’s bisho r. m. s. [fourbisseur, french; from furbish.] one
who polishes any thing. - -
fu rcation. m. s. [furca, latin.] forkiness; the state of
shooting two ways like the blades of a fork.
when stags grow old they grow less branched, and first
lose their brow-antlers, or lowest furcations next the head.
brown's wulgar errours.
furfur. m. s. [latin.] husk or chaff, scurff or dandriff,
that grows upon the skin, with some likeness to bran. &amp;uincy.
furfura'ceous.
qril 3-
dryden,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 892</div><p class="text">f u r
furfura'ceous. adj. [furfuraceus, latin.] husky; branny;
scaly. -
furious. adj. [furieux, french ; furiosas, latin.]
1. mad; phrenetick. - -
no man did ever think the hurtful actions of furious men
and innocents to be punishable. - hooker.
2. raging; violent; transported by passion beyond reason.
who can be wise, amaz'd, temp'rate and furious,
loyal and neutral in a moment? no man. shakesp. macb.
to be furious,
is to be frighted out of fear; and in that mood, r
the dove will peck the estridge. shakesp. ant, and cleopat.
noise, other than the sound of dance or song,
torment, and loud lament, and furious rage. milton,
3. violent; impetuously agitated.
with clamour thence the rapid currents drive,
towards the retreating sea their furious tide: milton.
fu'riously. adv. [from furious...] madly ; violently ; vehe-
mently. -
which when his brother saw, fraught with great grief
and wrath, he to him leapt furiously, fairy queen.
they observe countenance to attend the practice; and this
carries them on furiously to that which of themselves they are
inclined. - south.
she heard not half, so furiously she flies;
fear gave her wings. dryden.
fu'riousness. n. s. [from furious...] frenzy; madness; trans-
port of passion. --
to fun l. v. a. [fresler, french..] to draw up ; to contract.
when fortune sends a stormy wind,
then shew a brave and present mind;
and when with too indulgent gales
she swells too much, then furl thy sails, creech.
fu'rlon g. [n. s. fanlang, saxon.] a measure of length; the
eighth part of a mile.
if a man stand in the middle of a field and speak aloud, he
shall be heard a furlong in round, and that in articulate sounds. .
bacon's natural history.
coming within a few furlongs of the temple, they passed
through a very thick grove. addison's freeholder.
fu'rlou gh. n. s. [verloof, dutch..] a temporary dismission
from military service; a licence given to a soldier to be absent.
brutus and cato might discharge their souls,
and give them furlo's for another world;
but we, like sentries, are oblig'd to stand
in starless nights, and wait th' appointed hour. dryden.
fu'rmenty. n.f. [more properly frumenty, or frumety, of fru-
mentum, latin.j food made by boiling wheat in milk.
remember, wife, therefore, though i do it not,
the seed-cake, the pasties, and farmenty pot. taser.
fu'rnace. m. s. [furnus, latin.] an inclosed fireplace.
heat not %. for your foe so hot
that it may singe yourself. shakoff. henry viii.
the fining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold. ‘ prov.
... we have also furnaces of great diversities, that keep great
diversity of heats. bacon's new atlantis.
the kings of spain have ereaed divers surnaces and forges,
for the trying and fining of their gold. abbot.
whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, shall the same
hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery surnace. dan.
a dungeon horrible, on all sides around,
as one great furnace, flam'd. a silton's paradis. lo/?.
to furnacf. v. a... [from the noun..] to throw out as sparks
from a furnace. a bad word.
- he furnaces
the thick fighs from him. shakespeare's cymbeline.
to furnish. v. a. [furnir, french.]
1. to supply with what is necessary to a certain purpose.
she hath direeted -
how i shall take her from her father's house;
what gold and jewels she is furniss'd with.
his training such,
that he may furnish and instruct great teachers,
and never seek for aid out of himself. shak. henry viii.
thou shalt fornish him liberally out of thy flock. deut. xv.
come, thou stranger, and furnish a table, and feed me of
that thou has ready. ecclus, xxix. 26.
: auria, having driven the turks from corone, both by
sea o land, furnished the city with corn, wine, victual, and
powd.cr. knolles's history.
i shall not need to heap up instances ; every one's §:
and conversation will sufficient sh him, if
be better stored. y furnish him, if he wo
2. to give; to supply.
these simple ideas, the materials of all our knowledge, are
- suggested and furnished to the mind only by these two ways
o and reflection. - eo.
t is not the state, but a compact among private persons th *
hath furnished out these several onio p per }}.
3. to fit up; to fit with appendages. -
- whereof i. deeper,
'. poethese are but furnishings. shalosaar,
plato entertained some of his friends at one, ... in
5
shakespeare.
i. moveables; goods put in a house for use of
the chamber a bed or touch neatlv and &amp;
genes came in, and got up o joso. dic.
saying, i trample upon the pride of pia.” p. trampled it,
swered, but with greater pride, diogenes. * tilly in
!. were led into another great it. so* 44t.
inscriptions. . * 2ooa with of
4. to equip; to fit out for any undertaking: 4ddison on itaff,
will your lordship lend me a thousaj founds to fi
imt - * !. urns,
ideas, forms, and intelle&amp;s, slaloft. henry iv.
have furnish'd out three diff'rent seas. -
doubtless the man jesus christ is furnised with po.
powers to all the angels in heaven, bed. is st o
superior work. - ...o. in
5. to decorate ; to supply with ornamental household i wind,
the wounded arm would furnish all their so tuit,
and bleed for ever scarlet in the looms ". 1.
fu'rnish er. m. s. [fournisiur, french, i. ... also,
who supplies or fits ...is 2 ; rom furnish] 0.
fu rn, tur e. m. s. [furniture, french; from furnish)
ornament.
sumptuousso,
south.
ture 5
also,
no man can transport his large retinue; his
and his rich furniture into another wood.’
there are many noble palaces in venice; tho, , .
not very rich, if we except the pool.” their firs:
2. appendages.
by a general conflagration mankind shall be
the form and all the furniture of the earth.
3. equipage; embellishments; decorations.
young clarion, with vauntful luffyhed,
after his guise did cast abroad to fare," "
and thereto 'gan his furnitures prepare.
the duke is ... see to: to: be read §oft,
o: fit it with such furniture as suits y,
the greatness of his person. shakstore'. how vri
the ground must be of a mixt bo o
or the horse's furniture must be of very sensible cos . .
fu'rrier. m. s. [from fur.] a dealet info. • loya,
fu'rrow. m. s. [runh, saxon.]
i. a small trench made by the plow for the reception cf seed,
wheat must be sowed above sh row before michaelmas,
mortime
then ploughs for seed the fruitful furrows wo-
and oxen labour'd first beneath the yoke. dryden's ovid,
2. any long trench or hoslow; as a wrinkle,
my lord it is, though time has plow'd that fict
with many furrows since i saw it first;
yet i'm too well acquainted with the ground quite to for.
get it. dryd, and lee's ouiju.
fu rrow-weed, m. s. [furrow and weed.j. a weed that grows
in furrowed land.
crown'd with rank fumiter, andfurrow-weed, soft,
to fu'rrow. v. a. [from the noun; enlan, saxon.]
i. to cut in furrows. -
while the plowman near at hand,
whistles o'er the furrow'd land. milon,
2. to divide in long hollows. -
no briny tear has surrow'd her smooth cheek. so,
the billows fall, while neptune lays his mace
on the rough sea, and smooths its furrow'd face. doln,
3. to make by cutting,
there go the ships that surrow out their way;
yea, there of whales enormous fights we see. wotton.
fu'rry. adj. [from fur.]
i. covered with fur; dressed in fur.
from volga's banks th’ imperious czar -
leads forth his furry troops to war. follon to lord gavir.
2. consisting of fur.
stretch out thy lazy limbs, awake, awake,
destroyed, wish
tilloft,
and winter from thy furry mantle shake, drydon,
not arm'd with horns of arbitrary might, -
or claws to seize their furry spoils in fight. drydo,
fu'rther. adj. [from forth, not from far, as is commonly
imagined; forth, furthor, furths, corrupted from so
fortheft, forssen, saxon. forther is used by sir thomas moo
see forth and farther, of which the examples are "*
referred to this word.] -
i. at a greater distance.
2. beyond this.
what further need have we of witnesses.
satan had journey'd on, pensive and slow; .
but further way found none, so thick intwin'd,
as one continu’d brake, the undergrowth ,
of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplex'd sits
all path of man or beast that pass'd that way, milots,
their earnest eyes they fix'd, imagining
for one forbidden tree a multitude miloff
now ris'n, to work them further woe or shame. *
i may meet
some wand'ring spirit, from him to draw milton,
what further would be learn'd, o
3. further has in some fort the force of a substant""
phrase no further, for nothing further. let
mt. xxvi, 65,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 893</div><p class="text">f u r
f u s
s
* -
let this appease
thy doubt, since human reach no further knows. milton.
fu'rther, adv. [from forth.] to a greater distance.
and the angel of the lord went further, and stood in a
narrow place. numb. xxii. 2.
to further. v. a. [from the adverb; pononian, saxon.]
to put onward ; to forward; to promote; to countenance;
to assist ; to help.
things thus set in order, in quiet and rest,
shall further thy harvest, and pleasure thee best. tuffer.
could their fond superstition have furthered so great at-
tempts, without the mixture of a true persuasion concerning
the irresistible force of divine power. hooker.
grant not, o lord, the desires of the wicked; further not
his wicked device. ps. cxl. 8.
this binds thee then to further my design,
as i am bound by vow to further thine. dryden.
fu'rther an ce. n.s.. [from further.] promotion; advance-
ment, help.
the gauls learned them first, and used them only for the
wrtherance of their trade and private business. spenser.
our diligence must search out all helps and furtherances of
direction, which scriptures, councils, fathers, histories, the
laws and practices of all churches afford. hooker.
for gain and work, and success in his affairs, he seeketh
furtherance of him that hath no manner of power. hooker.
cannot my body, nor blood-sacrifice,
intreat you to your wonted furtherance p shak. henry vi.
if men were minded to live righteously, to believe a god
would be no hindrance or prejudice to any such design, but
very much for the advancement and furtherance of it. tillotson.
fu'rther er. m. s. [from further.] promoter; advancer.
that earnest favourer and furtherer of god's true religion,
that faithful servitor to his prince and country. astham.
fu'rther mor.e. adv. [further and more.] moreover; besides.
this ring i do accept most thankfully,
and so, i pray you, tell him : furthermore,
i pray you, shew my youth old shylock's house. shakesh.
fu’rtive. adj. [furthwe, fr. furtivus, latin.] stolen; gotten
by theft.
y or do they, as your schemes, i think, have shown,
dartfurtive beams and glory not their own,
all servants to that source of light, the sun ? prior.
fu'runcle. n. s. [furoncle, fr. furunculus, latin.] a bile ;
an angry pustule. - -
a furuncle is in its beginning round, hard, and inflamed ;
and as it increaseth, it riseth up with an acute head, and some-
times a pustule; and then it is more inflamed and painful,
when it arrives at its state, which is about the eighth or ninth
day. wiseman's surgery.
fuoy. n.f. [furor, latin; fureur, french.]
1. madness.
2. rage; passion of anger; tumult of mind approaching to
madness.
i do oppose my patience to his fury; and am arm'd
to suffer with a quietness of spirit
the very tyranny and rage of his. shakesp. mer. of venice.
he hath given me to know the natures of living creatures,
and the furies of wild beasts. hosa. vii. 29.
3. enthusiasm; exaltation of fancy. - - -
taking up the lute, her wit began to be with a divine fury
inspired ; and her voice would, in so beloved an occasion,
second her wit. sidney.
a sybil, that had number'd in the world
the sun to course two hundred compasses,
in her prophetick fury sew'd the work. shakesp. othello.
greater than human kind she seem'd to look,
and with an accent more than mortal spoke :
her staring eyes with sparkling fury roll,
when all the god came rushing on her soul. dryden's en;
4. [from furia, latin.] one of the deities of vengeance, and
thence a stormy, turbulent, violent, raging woman.
the fight of any of the house of york,
is as a fury to torment my soul. shakesp. henry vi.
it was the most proper place for a fury to make her exit;
and i believe every reader's imagination is pleased, when he
sees the angry goddess thus sinking in a tempest, and .#.
herself into hell, amidst such a scene of horror and confusion.
addison on italy.
furz. n.s. spins, saxon ; genisła spinosa, lat.] gorse; goss.
‘i he whole plant is very thorny; the flowers, which are of
the pea-bloom kind, are disposed in short thick spikes, which
are succeeded by short compressed pods, in each of which are
contained three or four kidney-shaped seeds. miller.
carry out gravel to fill up a hole,
both timber and furzin, the turf and the cole. tuffer.
for fewel, there groweth great store of furze, of which the
fhrubby sort is called tame, and the better grown french.
carew's survey of cornwal.
we may know,
and when to reap the grain, and when to sow,
or when to fell the furzer. dryden's wirg.
vol. i.
o: *dj [from furze.] overgrown with furze; full of
c.
wide through the furzy field their rout they take
their bleeding bosoms force the thorny i. 2 gay.
fuscation. n.s. (fusus, latin.] the aet of darkening or
obscuring. diff
**!'se. v. a. [fund, fusum, latin. to melt. -
fusion; to # by is. 3. j to melt; to put in o
7ofuse. v. n. to be melted; to be capable of being liquified
by heat.
o: n: s [fuseau, french.j
i • e cone round which i -
clock or watch. s wound the cord or chain of a
the reason of the motion of the balance is b -
of the next wheel, and that by the motion of .*.*.
that by the motion of the fuses, and that by the motion &amp;f the
spring: the whole frame of the watch carsies. reasonableness
§ it, . passive impression of the intellectual idea that on
€ artist, hale's origin a -
2. a firelock [from fusil, fr.]; a small meat #.”;
is more properly written foil.
fusee of a bomb or granado shell, is that which makes the
whole powder or composition in the shell take fire, to do the
designed execution. 'tis usually a wooden pipe or tap filled
with wildfire, or some such matter; and is intended to burn
no longer than is the time of the motion of the bomb from
the mouth of the mortar to the place where it is to fall, which
time anderson makes twenty-seven seconds. 'ho.
fu'see. track of a buck. ainsworth.
fu'sible. adj. [from fuse.] capable of being melted; capable
of being made liquid by heat.
colours afforded by metalline bodies, either colliquate with
or otherwise penetrate into other bodies, especially foll on .
a boyle.
fusibi'lity. m. s. [from fifths.] capacity of being mao.
quality of growing liquid by heat.
the ancients observing in that material a kind of metallical
o o: at least a fissibility, seem to have resolved it into al
in odi cr use. * j7%tton's arch;
the bodies of most use, that are sought for o:
depths of the earth, are the metals, which are distinguished
... other bodies by their weight, fiftility, and maneable.
theis.
fusil. adj. [sustle, french; fosis, latin.] locke.
1. capable of being melted ; liquifiable by heat.
some, less skilful, fancy these scapi that occur in most of
the larger gothick buildings of england are artificias, and
will have it, that they are a kind of fissil marble. #o
2. running by the force of heat. se
the liquid ore he drain’d
into fit molds prepar'd ; from which he form'd
first his own tools: then, what might else be wrought
fusile, or grav’n in metal. a4ilton's paradise loff.
perpetual flames, -v
9. o and ashes, and the stubborn flint,
revailing, turn into a fusil sea. ...]”.;.
fu's, l. n.s.. [fusil, e.so p.i.
1. a firelock ; a small neat musquet.
2. [in heraldry ; from fusus, latin.] something like a spindle.
fusili must be made long, and small in the middle, in the
ancient coat of montague, argent three fusil; in fesse gules.
peacham on blazoning.
fu’s ill er. m. s. [ from fusil.] a soldier armed with a funi,
a musketeer.
fu'sion. n.s.. [fusio, latin; fusion, french.
i. the act # e. fusion, j
2. the state of being melted, or of running with heat.
metals in fusion do not flame for want of a copious fume,
except spelter, which fumes copiously, and thereby flames.
newton's optics.
fuss. n.s. [a low cant word..] a tumult; a bustle.
end as it befits your station;
come to use and application;
nor with senates keep a fus;:
i submit, and answer thus. swift.
fust. n. s. [fusie, french.j
1. the trunk or body of a column.
2. ofo, french..] a strong smell, as that of a mouldy
barrel.
to jor. v. n. [from the noun..] to grow mouldy; to snell
ill.
fu'stian. n.s. [futaine, french; from suffe, a tree, because
cotton grows on trees.]
1. a kind of cloth made of linen and cotton, and perhaps now
of cotton only.
is supper ready, the house trimm'd, the serving-men in
their new fustian and their white stockings shakespeare.
2. a high swelling kind of writing made up of heterogeneous
parts, or of words and ideas ill associated ; bombast.
nor will you raise in me combustion,
by dint of high heroick fusian, hudibras.
what suffian have i heard these gentlemen find cut in mr.
io a cowley's<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 894</div><p class="text">f u t
f y
cowley's odes in general, i will o: that nothing can ap-
pear more beautiful to me than the rength of those images
which they condemn. - - dryden.
fussian is thoughts and words ill sorted, and without the
least relation to each other. dryden.
chance thoughts, when govern’d by the close, -
oft rise to fusian, or descend to prose. smith.
fu’sri an. adj. [from the noun.] -
1. made of fustian.
2. swelling; unnaturally pompous; ridiculously tumid. used
of stile.
when men argue, th’ greatest part
o' th' contest falls on terms of art,
until the fusian stuff be spent,
and then they fall to th’ argument. hudibras.
virgil, if he could have seen the first verses of the sylvae,
would have thought statius mad in his fusian description of
the statue on the brazen horse. dryden's dufresnoy.
fu'stic. n.s. a sort of wood brought from the west indies,
used in dying of cloth. dicf.
to fu'stigate. v. a. [fusligo, latin.] to beat with a stick;
to cane. dic7.
fustila'rian. n.s.. [from fusly..] a low fellow ; a flinkard;
a scoundrel. a word used by shakespeare only.
away, you scullion, you rampallian, you fusilarian : i’ll
tickle your catastrophe. shakesp. henry iv.
fu'stiness. n.s.. [from fusly..] mouldiness; flink.
fu’sty. adj. [from fuso.] ill smelling ; mouldy.
hector shall have a great catch, if he knock out either of
your brains: he were as good crack a fusly nut with no kernel.
shakesp. troilus and cressida.
the fusly plebeians hate thine honours. shak. coriolanus.
the large achilles, at this fusly stuff,
from his deep chest laughs out a loud applause. shakesp.
futile. adj. [futile, french ; futilis, latin.]
1. talkative; loquacious.
one futile person, that maketh it his glory to tell, will do
more hurt than many that know it their duty to conceal. bacon.
2. trifling; worthless ; of no weight.
futu'lity. m. s. [futilite, french ; from futile.]
1. talkativeness; loguacity.
this fable does not strike so much at the futility of women,
as at the incontinent levity of a prying humour. l’estrange.
2. triflingness; want of weight; want of solidity.
trifling futility appears in their signs of the zodiack, and
their mutual relations and aspects. bentley.
fu’ttocks. n.s.. [corrupted from foot hooks. skinner.] the
lower timbers that hold the ship together.
future., adj. [futurus, latin; futur, french..] that
which will be hereafter ; to come : as, the future state.
glory they sung to the most high good will
to future men, and in their dwellings peace. milton.
he sows the teeth at pallas's command,
and flings the future people from his hand. addison's ovid.
fu"tu re. m. s. [from the adjective.] time to come ; some-
what to happen hereafter.
thy letters have transported me beyond
this ign'rant present time; and i feel now
the future in the instant. shakeshe &gt;
. the mind, once jaded by an attempt o mathak
either is disabled for the future, or else checks at . its power,
undertaking ever after. any vigorous
fu'rookly adv. [from future.] . in time to come. *.
this prescience of god, as it is prescience, is n
of any thing futurely succeeding; neither ho
to 2
the cause
knowledge impose any necessity, or bind. od's so.
futuri rion, n. s. [from future.] the flate of bei ralph,
the condition of being to come to pass hereafter ing to be;
is it imaginable, that the great means of t
demption should rest only in the number of possibiliti
hang so o o respect of its futurition, as to o:
. . :* poise, whether ever there should be such a thing
e world's re.
futu'rity. n.s.. [from future.] south,
1. time to come; events to come.
not my service past, nor present sorrows,
nor purpos'd merit in futurity,
can ransom me. shakoffear'; oll,
i will contrive some way to make it kn -
i had your lordship for . own ** that
2. event to come. wift,
all futurities are naked before that all-seein
of which is no more hindred by distance of §: . #.
of an angel can be determined by distance of place. s:
to: #. amphiarus, lay hid from thee, -
ough skill'd in fate and dark futurity. * n. -
3. the state of being to be ; ...s. j pop'. sui.
it may be well reckoned among the bare possibilities, which
never conmence into a futurity; it requiring such, f,
sedate and intent mind, as it may be, is no where found in.
among the platonical ideas. glanvill’; soft
to fuzz. v. n. [without etymology.] to fly out in soft
particles.
fu'zzball. n. s. [fuzz and ball.] a kind of fungus, which,
when pressed, bursts and scatters dust in the eyes.
fy: interj. [fy, french and flemish; pi, greek; wh, lat]
a word of blame and disapprobation.
and fy on fortune, mine avowed foe,
whose wrathful wreaks themselves do now allay. sponsor,
fy, my lord, sy! a soldier, and afraid! what need we
fear who knows it, when none can call our power to at.
count 2 shakespeare's matliff.
a bawd, fir, fy upon him shakesp. measure for major.
but sy, my wand'ring muse, how thou do's stray!
expectance calls thee now another way. millin,
nay, sy, what mean you in this open place
unhand me, or, i swear, i’ll scratch your face:
let go, for shame; you make me mad for spite:
my mouth's my own; and if you kiss, i'll bite. dyla,
fy, madam, he cried, we must be past all these *:
allr.

<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div>

alphasectend
