
<p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o a k
has in english a long sound ; as, drone, groan, stone,
alone, cloke, broke, coal, droll; or short, got, knot,
/hot, prong, long. it is usually denoted long by a
servile a subjoined; as, moan, or by e at the end of
the syllable; as, bone: when these vowels are not
appended, it is generally short, except before ll; as, droll,
scroll, and even then sometimes short; as, loll.
1. o is used as an interjection of wishing or exclamation.
o that we, who have resisted all the designs of his love,
would now try to defeat that of his anger decay of piety.
o! were he present, that his eyes and hands -
might see, and urge, the death which he commands. dryd.
2. o is used with no great elegance by shakespeare for a circle
or oval.
can this cockpit hold
the vasty field of france f or may we cram
within this wooden o, the very casks
that did affright the air at agincourt shakesp.
oaf. n.s.. [this word is variously written; auff, of, and
aph; it seems a corruption of ouph, a demon or fairy; in
german alf, from which elf; and means properly the same
with chargeling; a foolish child left by malevolent ouphs or
fairies, in the place of one more witty, which they fleal
away.]
i. a argoing, a foolish child left by the fairies.
these, when a child haps to be got,
which after proves an idiot,
when folk perceives it thriveth not,
the fault therein to smother :
some filly doating brainless calf,
that understands things by the half, }
says that the fairy left this oaf,
and took away the other.
2. a dolt ; a blockhead; an idiot.
oaf is h. adj. [from oaf.] stupid; dull ; doltish.
oa'f1s hn ess. n.s.. [from oasish...] stupidity; dulness.
ca k. n. s. [ac, aec, saxon ; which, says skinner, to shew
how easy it is to play the fool, under a shew of literature
and deep researches, i will, for the diversion of my reader,
derive from oixos, a house; the oak being the best timber for
building. skinner seems to have had junius in his thoughts,
who on this very word has shewn his usual fondness for greek
etymology, by a derivation more ridiculous than that by which
sinner has ridiculed him. ac or oak, says the grave critick,
signified among the saxons, like robur among the latins, not
only an oak but strength, and may be well enough derived,
non incommode deduci pote//, from 2xxii, strength; by taking the
three first letters and then sinking the x, as is not uncom-
mon ; quercus.]
the oak-tree hath male flowers, or katkins, which consist
of a great number of small slender threads. the embryos,
which are produced at remote distances from these on the same
tree, do afterwards become acorns, which are produced in
hard scaly cups: the leaves are sinuated. the species are
five. miller.
he return'd with his brows bound with oak. shakesp.
he lay along
under an oak, whose antique root peeps out
upon the brook that brawls along this wood. shakes).
no tice beareth so many bastard fruits as the oak : for be-
sides the acorns, it beareth galls, oak apples, oak nuts, which
are inflammable, and oak berries, sticking close to the body of
the tree without stalk. bacon's natural history.
the monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
shoots rising up and spreads by slow degrees:
‘three centuries he grows, and three he stays
drayton's nymphid.
supreme in state ; and in three more decays. dryden.
an oak growing from a plant to a great tree, and then
lopped, is still the same oak. locke.
a light earthy, stony, and sparry matter, incrusted and
affixed to oak leaves. jwoodward on fossi's.
let india boast her plants, nor envy we
the weeping amber and the balmy tree,
while by our oaks the precious loads are born,
and realms commanded which those trees adorn, pope.
vol. ii. -
o.
o a t
oak evergreen. m. s. silex.] -
the fruit is an acorn like the common oak. the wood of
this tree is accounted very good for many sorts of tools and
utensils; and affords the most durable charcoal in the wold.
- a liter.
oaka'pple. n.s. soak and apple..] a kind of spongy excre-
scence on the oak. -
another, kind of excrescence is an exudation of plants
joined with putrefaction, as in oakapples, which are found
chiefly upon the leaves of oaks. bacon's nat. hisł.
oa'ken. adj. [from oak..] made of oak ; gathered from oak.
no nation doth equal england for oaken timber where with
to build ships. bacon's advice to williers.
by lot from jove i am the pow'r
of this fair wood, and live in oaken bow'r. milton.
clad in white velvet all their troop they led, -
with each an oaken chaplet on his head. dryden.
an oaken garland to be worn on festivals, was the recom-
pense of one who had covered a citizen in battle. addison.
he snatched a good tough oaken cudgel and began to bran-
dish it. arbuthnot's j. bull.
oa'ken pin. n.s. an apple.
oakenpin, so called from its hardness, is a lasting fruit,
yields excellent liquor, and is near the nature of the west-
bury apple, though not in form. al's timer.
oa. kum. m. s. [a word probably formed by some corruption.]
cords untwisted and reduced to hen.p, with which, iningled
with pitch, leaks are stopped.
they make their oakum, wherewith they chalk the seams
of the ships, of old seer and weather beaten ropes, when they
are over spent and grown so rotten as they serve for no ober
use but to make rotten oakum, which moulders and washes
away with every sea as the ships labour and are tossed.
raleigh.
some drive old oakum thro’ each seam and rift;
their left hand does the calking-iron guide;
the rattling mallet with the right they lift. dryden.
oar. m. s. [ane, saxon; perhaps by allusion to the common
expression of plowing the water, from the same root with ear,
to plow, aro, lat..] a long pole with a broad end, by which
vessels are driven in the water, the resistance made by water
to the oar pushing on the vessel.
th’ cars were silver,
which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
the water which they beat, to follow faster,
as amorous of their strokes. shakesp. jul. casar.
so tow'rds a ship the oar-finn'd gallies ply,
which wanting sea to ride, or wind to fly, *
stands but to fall reveng’d. denham's poems.
in shipping such as this, the irish kern -
and untaught indian, on the stream did glide,
e'er sharp-keel'd boats to stem the flood did learn,
or fin-like cars did spread from either side. dry 1 m.
its progressive motion may be effected by the help of several
oars, which in the outward ends of them shall be like the fins
of a fish to contract and dilate. //i/kins.
to oar. v. n. [from the noun..] to row. -
he more undaunted on the ruin rode,
and car'd with labouring arms along the flood. pope.
to oar. v. a. to impel by rowing.
his bold head
'bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
himself with his good arms in lusty strokes
to th’ shore, shaos care's tomposs.
oa'r y. adj. [from oar.] having the form or use of oars.
the swan with arched neck,
between her white wings mantling, proudly rows
her state with cary feet. alsom.
his hair transforms to down, his fingers meet,
in skinny films, and shape his cary feet. 4.d.s.n.
oa's r. m. s. a kiln. not in use.
empty the binn into a hog bag, and carry them immedi-
ately to the oaft or kiln, to be died. a sortioner.
oat ca’k e. m. s. [oat and cake. j cake made of the meal of
oats.
17 k. take<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o b d
o b e
take a blue stone they make haver or oatcakes upon, and
lay it upon the cross bars of iron. peacham.
oa’re n. adj. [from oat.] made of oats; bearing oats.
when shepherds pipe on eaten straws,
and merry larks are ploughmens clocks. shakesp.
oath. n.f. [aith, gothick; as, saxon. the distance be-
tween the noun oath, and the verb swear, is very observable,
as it may shew that our oldest dialect is formed from different
languages.) an affirmation, negation, or promise, corrobo-
rated by the atteslation of the divine being.
read over julia's heart, thy first best love, , ,
for whose dear sake thou then did'st rend thy faith
into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths
descended into perjury to love me.
all the oath-rites said,
i then ascended her adorned bed. chapman.
we have consultations, which inventions shall be published,
which not: and take an oath of secrecy for the concealing of
those which we think fit to keep secret. bacon.
those called to any office of trust, are bound by an oath
to the faithful discharge of it : but an oath is an appeal to
god, and therefore can have no influence, except upon those
shakespeare.
who believe that he is. swift.
oa'thable. adj. [from oath. a word not used.] capable of
having an oath administered. -
you're not oathable,
altho' i know you'll swear -
into strong shudders th’ immortal gods. shakespeare.
oathbr ea'king, n.s. [oath and break.] perjury; the viola-
tion of an oath.
his oathbreaking he mended thus,
by now forswearing that he is forsworn. shak. hen. iv.
cat malt. n.s.. [oat and malt.] malt made of oats.
in kent they brew with one half oatmalt, and the other
half barleymalt. mortimer.
oatmeal. n. s. soat and meal.] flower made by grinding
oats.
oatmeal and butter, outwardly applied, dry the scab on the
head. arbuthnot on aliments.
our neighbours tell me oft, in joking talk,
of ashes, leather, oatmeal, bran, and chalk. gay.
oa"r meal. m. s. spanicum.] an herb. ains.
oats. m. s. [azen, saxon.] a grain, which in england is
generally given to horses, but in scotland supports the people.
it is of the grass leaved tribe; the flowers have no petals,
and are disposed in a loose panicle: the grain is eatable. the
meal makes tolerable good bread. miller.
the oats have eaten the horses. shakespeare.
it is bare mechanism, no otherwise produced than the turn-
ing of a wild oatbeard, by the infinuation of the particles of
moisture. locke.
for your lean cattle, fodder them with barley straw first,
and the oat straw last. mortimer's husbandry.
his horse's allowance of oats and beans, was greater than
the journey required. swift.
oa’rt histle. n. s. [oat and thisłle.] an herb. ains.
obambulation. m. s. [obambulatio, from abambulo, latin.]
the aet of walking about. dic7.
to obdu'ce. v. a. [obduco, latin.] to draw over as a cover-
ing.
§o animal exhibits its face in the native colour of its skin
but man; all others are covered with feathers, hair, or a cor-
tex that is obduced over the cutis. hale.
obdu’ction. n.s.. [from obducio, clauco, latin.] the act of
covering, or laying a cover.
obdu'racy. m. s. [from obdurate.] inflexible wickedness; im-
penitence; hardness of heart.
thou think'st me as far in the devil's book, as thou and
falstaff, for obduracy and persistency. shakesp. henry iv.
god may, by a mighty grace, hinder the absolute comple-
tion of fin in final obduracy. - south.
obdu’rate. adj. [obduratus, latin.]
1. hard of heart; inflexibly obstinate in ill; hardned; impeni-
tent,
oh! let me teach thee for thy father's fake,
that gave thee life, when well he might have slain thee;
be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears. shakespeare.
if when you make your pray'rs,
god should be so obdurate as yourselves,
how would it fare with your departed souls shakesp.
women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless. shakesp.
to convince the proud what signs avail,
or wonders move th' obdurate to relent;
they harden'd more, by what might more reclaim. milt.
obdurate as you are, oh! hear at least
my dying prayers, and grant my last request. dryden.
2. hardned; firm ; stubborn: always with some degree of evil.
sometimes the very custom of evil makes the heart obdurate
against whatsoever instructions to the contrary. hooker.
a pleasing sorcery could charm
pain for a while, or anguish, and excite
fallacious hope, or arm th’ claurate breast
with stubborn patience, as with triple steel. milton.
no such thought ever strikes his marble, obdurate heart, but
it presently flies off and rebounds from it. it is impossible for
a man to be thorough-paced in ingratitude, till he has shook
off all fetters of pity and compassion. south.
3. harsh ; rugged.
they joined the most obdurate consonants without one in-
tervening vowel. swift.
op du'rately, adv. [from obdurate.] stubbornly; inflexibly;
impenitently. -
obdu'raten ess. n.s.. [from obdurate.] stubbornness; inflexi-
bility; impenitence.
ordu ration. n.s.. [from obdurate.] hardness of heart; sub-
bornness. -
what occasion it had given them to think, to their greater
obduration in evil, that through a froward and wanton desire
of innovation, we did constrainedly those things, for which
conscience was pretended ? hocker.
this barren season is always the reward of obstinate obdura-
tion. hammond.
obdu’red. adj. [obduratus, latin j hardned; inflexible;
impenitent. -
this saw his hapless foes, but stood obdur'd,
and to rebellious fight rallied their pow'rs
insensate. milton's paradis. loft.
obe d1 ence. n. s. sobedience, fr. obedientia, latin.] obsequi-
ousness; submission to authority; compliance with command
or prohibition.
if you violently proceed against him, it would shake in
pieces the heart of his obedience. shakesp. k. lear.
thy husband
craves no other tribute at thy hands,
but love, fair looks, and true chedience. shakesp.
his servants ye are, to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness. rom. vi. 16.
it was both a strange commission, and a strange obedience to
a commission, for men so furiously assailed, to hold their
hands. bacon's war with spain.
in vain thou bidst me to forbear,
obedience were rebellion here.
nor can this be,
but by fulfilling that which thou didst want,
obedience to the law of god, impos'd
on penalty of death. milton's parads, loft.
we must beg the grace and assistance of god's spirit to en-
able us to forsake our sins, and to walk in obedience to him.
duty of man.
the eledience of men is to imitate the obedience of angels,
and rational beings on earth, are to live unto god, as rational
beings in heaven live unto him. law.
obe dient: adj. [obediens, latin.] submissive to authority;
compliant with command or prohibition; obsequious.
to this end did i write, that i might know the proof of
you, whether ye be obedient in all things. 2 cor. ii. 9.
to this her mother's plot
she, seemingly obedient, likewise hath
made promise. shakesp. merry wives of ipindsor,
religion hath a good influence upon the people, to make
them obedient to government, and peaceable one towards an-
cowley.
other. tillotson.
the chief his orders gives; th’ obedient band,
with due observance, wait the chief's command. pope.
obe die'ntial. adj. [obedientiel, fr. from obedient.] accord-
ing to the rule of obedience.
faith is such as god will accept of, when it affords fiducial
reliance on the promises, and obediential submission to the com-
mand. - hammond.
faith is then perfeoł, when it produces in us a fiduciary
assent to whatever the gospel has revealed, and an obediential
submission to the commands. isake's prep. for death.
obe diently. adv. [from obedient.] with obedience.
we should behave ourselves reverently and obediently to-
wards the divine majesty, and justly and charitably towards
men. tillotson.
obe is ance. m. s. sobeisance, fr. this word is formed by cor-
ruption from abaisance, an act of reverence..] a bow; a cour-
tesy; an act of reverence made by inclination of the body or
knee. -
bartholomew my page,
see drest in all suits like a lady;
then call him madam, do him all obeisance. shakesp.
bathsheba bowed and did obeisance unto the king: 1 k. i. 16.
the lords and ladies paid
their homage, with a low obeisance made;
and seem'd to venerate the sacred shade. dryden.
ob'elisk, n.s. sobeliscus, latin.]
1. a magnificent high piece of solid marble, or other fine stone,
having usually four faces, and lessening upwards by degrees.
till it ends in a point like a pyramid. harris.
between the statues obelisks were plac'd,
and the learn'd walls with hieroglyphicks grac'd. pope.
2. a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o b j
o b l
2. a mark of censure in the margin of a book, in the form of a
dagger [+]. -
he published the translation of the septuagint, having com-
pared it with the hebrew, and noted by alterisks what was
defective, and by obelis's-what redundant. grew.
ozequita’tion. m. s. [from obequito, latin.] the act of
riding about.
oberration. n.s.. [from oberro, latin.] the act of wandering
about.
obese. adj. [obesus, latin.] fat; loaden with flesh.
obe’s eness. un. s. [from obese.] morbid fatness; incum-
obe’s ity. ; brance of flesh.
on these many diseases depend; as on the straitness of the
chest, a phthisis; on the largeness of the vesins, an atrophy;
on their smallness, closity. grew's cosmol.
to ope'y. v. a. [obeir, french ; obedio, latin.]
1. to pay submission to ; to comply with, from reverence to
authority.
the will of heav'n
be done in this and all things! i obey. shakesp. hen. viii.
i am asham’d, that women are so simple
to seek for rule, supremacy, and sway,
when they are bound to serve, love, and obey. shakesp.
let not fin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey
it in the lufts thereof. rom. vi. 12.
the ancient britons yet a sceptred king obeyed. drayton.
was she thy god, that her thou didst obey,
before his voice milton's paradse loft.
africk and india shall his pow'r oby,
he shall extend his propagated sway - }
beyond the solar year, without the starry way. dryden.
2. it had formerly sometimes to before the person obeyed, which
addison has mentioned as one of milton's latinisms; but it is
frequent in old writers; when we borrowed the french word
we borrowed the syntax, obeir au roi.
he commanded the trumpets to sound; to which the two
brave knights obeying, they performed their courses, breaking
their staves. sidney.
the flit bark, obeying to her mind,
forth launched quickly, as she did desire. spensor.
his servants ye are, to whom ye obey.
nor did they not perceive the evil plight
in which they were, or the fierce pains not feel,
yet to their general's voice they soon obey'd.
o'bject. n.s. soliet, fr. objecium, latin.]
1. that about which any power or faculty is employed.
pardon
the flat unrais’d spirit, that hath dar'd,
on this unworthy scaffold to bring forth -
so great an object. shakespeare's henry v.
they are her farthest reaching instrument,
yet they no beams unto their oljecis send ;
but all the rays are from their objecis sent,
and in the eyes with pointed angles end. davies.
the object of true faith is, either god himself, or the word
of god: god who is believed in, and the word of god as the
rule of faith, or matter to be believed. hammond.
the aet of faith is applicated to the objeff according to the
nature of it; to what is already past, as past ; to what is to
come, as still to come; to that which is present, as it is still
present. - . feason.
those things in ourselves, are the only proper cljeffs of our
zeal, which, in others, are the unquestionable subjects of our
rom. vi. 16.
milton.
praises. - - spratt.
truth is the object of our understanding, as good is of the
will. dryden's dufresnoy.
as you have no mistress to serve, so let your own soul be
the object of your daily care and attendance. law.
2. something presented to the senses to raise any affection or
emotion in the mind.
dishonour not your eye
by throwing it on any other oljeff.
why else this double object in our fight,
of flight pursu'd in the air, and o'er the ground. milton,
this passenger felt some degree of concern, at the fight of
so moving an alieci, and therefore withdrew. atterbury.
3. [in grammar.] anything influenced by somewhat else.
the accusative after a verb transitive, or a sentence in room
- thereof, is called, by grammarians, the object of the verb. clarke.
osjectolass. n.s. glass remotest from the eye. . . .
an objeciglass of a telescope i once mended, by grinding it
on pitch with putty, and leaning easily on it in the grind-
ing, left the putty should scratch it. .. newton's opt.
t, csaject. v. a. soljecier, fr. objicio, oljecium, latin.]
1. to oppose; to present in opposition. -
flowers growing scattered in divers beds, will shew more
shiftar.
so as that they be object to view at once. bacon.
pallas to their eyes
the mist objecird, and condens'd the skies, pope.
2. to propose as a charge criminal; or a reason adverse: with
to or against. - -
o wo: it not some kind of blemish to be like unto infidels
8
and heathens, it would not so usually be objened; men would
not think it any advantage in the cause of religion to be at le
therewith justly to charge their adversaries. hockor.
the book requireth due examination, and giveth liberty to
obje? any crime against such as are to be ordered. ishitgiffe.
men in all deliberations find ease to be of the negative side,
and affect a credit to objeci and foretel difficulties: for when
propositions are denied, there is an end of them; but if they
be allowed, it requireth a new work; which false point of
wisdom is the bane of business. bacon.
the old truth was, object ingratitude, and ye cliest all
crimes: and is it not as old a truth, is it not a higher truth,
object rebellion, and ye clject all crimes. holyday.
this the adversaries of faith have too much reason to obj:37
against too many of its professors; but against the faith itself
nothing at all. spratt's sormons.
it was objected agains a late painter, that he drew many
gracesul pictures, but few of them were like. dryden.
others olje: the poverty of the nation, and difficulties in
furnishing greater supplies. addison's state of the isar.
there was but this fingle fault that erasmus, though an
enemy, could objec to him. atterbury.
orje’ction. n. s. [objection, fr. obje.7io, latin.]
1. the act of presenting any thing in opposition.
2. criminal charge.
speak on, sir,
i dare your worst objections.
3. adverse argument. -
there is ever between all eftates a secret war. i know well
this speech is the objection and not the decision; and that it is
after refuted. bacon's isar with spain.
whosoever makes such objeffions against an hypothesis, hath
a right to be heard, let his temper and genius be what it will.
burnet's theory of the earth.
shaksh. henry viii.
4. fault found.
i have shewn your verses to some, who have made that al-
jection to them. j/alo's letter.
o'bjective. adj. [objeois, fr. cljacius, latin.]
1. belonging to the object; contained in the object.
certainty, according to the schools, is distinguished into
objeffive and subjective. objeciive certainty is when the pro-
position is certainly true in itself; and subjective, when we are
certain of the truth of it. the one is in things, the other in
our minds. - watts's logick.
2. made an object; proposed as an object ; refiding in objects.
if this one small piece of nature still affords new matter for
our discovery; when should we be able to search out the vast
treasuries of objective knowledge that lies within the compass of
the universe 2 hale's origin of mankind.
o'bjectively. adv. [from objeclive.]
1. in manner of an object.
this may fitly be called a determinate idea, when, such as
it is at any time objectively in the mind, it is annexed, and
without variation determined to an articulate sound, which is
to be steadily the sign of that same object of the mind. locke.
2. in the flate of an object.
the basilisk should be destroyed, in regard he first receiveth
the rays of his antipathy and venomous emission, which objec-
tively move his sense. - brown.
o'bject 1 v eness. m. s. [from objective.] the state of being an
object.
". there such a motion or objecivenes of external bodies,
which produceth light the faculty of light is fitted to re-
ceive that impression or objeciveness, and that objectivenes, fitted
to that faculty. hale's origin of mankind.
objeoctor. n.s.. [from object.] one who offers objections; one
who raises difficulties.
but these objeclors must the cause upbraid,
that has not mortal man, immortal made. blackmore.
let the objeciors consider, that these irregularities must have
come from the laws of mechanism. bentley.
obit. [a corruption of obiit, or obivit.] funeral obsequies. ains.
to obju'rgate. v. a. [objurgo, latin.] to chide; to re-
prove. -
objurga"tion. m. s. [objurgatio, lat.] reproof; reprehen-
sion.
if there be no true liberty, but all things come to pass by
inevitable necessity, then what are ali interrogations and objur-
gations, and reprehensions and expostulations ! bramhall.
on ju'roatory. adj. [objurgatorius, latin.] reprehensory;
culpatory; chiding.
oblast e. adj. [oblatus, latin.] flatted at the poles.
a spheroid.
by gravitation bodies on this globe will press towards its
center, though not exactly thither, by reason of the cblate
spheroidical figure of the earth, arising from its diurnal rotation
about its axis. chyne's phil. prin.
oblation. m. s. [oblation, fr. oblatus, lat. j . an offering; a
sacrifice; any thing offered as an act of worship or reverence.
she looked upon the picture before her, and straight fighed,
and straight tears followed, as if the idol of duty ought to be
honoured with such oblations. sidny.
many
used of
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o b l
o b l
many conceive in the oblation of jephtha's daughter, not a
natural, but a civil kind of death, and a separation from the
world.” brown.
the will gives worth to the oblation, as to god's accept-
ance, sets the poorest giver upon the same level with the
richest. south.
the kind oblation of a falling tear. dryden.
behold the coward, and the brave, -
all make oblations at this shrine. swift.
oblectation. m. s. [olle&amp;iatio, lat.] delight; pleasure.
to o'bligate. v. a. [obligo, latin.] to bind by contract
or duty.
obligation. m. s. [obligatio, from obligo, latin ; obligation,
french.]
1. the binding power of any oath, vow, duty; contract.
- your father lost a father ; ,
that father his ; and the survivor bound \
in filial obligation, for some term,
to do obsequious sorrow. shakespeare's hamlet.
there was no means for him as a christian, to satisfy all
obligations both to god and man, but to offer himself for a
mediater of an accord and peace. bacon's henry vii.
nothing can be more reasonable than that such creatures
should be under the obligation of accepting such evidence, as in
itself is sufficient for their conviction. jwilkins.
the better to satisfy this obligation, you have early culti-
vated the genius you have to arms. dryden.
no ties can bind, that from constraint arise,
where either's forc'd, all obligation dies. granville.
2. an act which binds any man to some performance.
the heir of an obliged person is not bound to make resti-
tution, if the obligation passed only by a personal act ; but if
it passed from his person to his estate, then the estate passes with
all its burthen. taylor's rule of holy living.
3. favour by which one is bound to gratitude.
where is the obligation of any man's making me a present
of what he does not care for himself? l'e/irange.
so quick a sense did the israelites cntertain of the merits of
gideon, and the obligation he had laid upon them, that they
tender him the regal and hereditary government of that
people. south.
o’bligatory. adj. [obligatione, fr. from obligate.] imposing
an obligation; binding; coercive : with to or on.
and concerning the lawfulness, not only permissively, but
whether it be not obligatory to christian princes and states.
- bacon.
as long as the law is obligatory, so long our obedience is
due. taylor's rule of holy living.
a people long used to hardships, look upon themselves as
creatures at mercy, and that all impositions laid on them by a
stronger hand, are legal and obligatory. swift.
if this patent is obligatory on them, it is contrary to acts of
parliament, and therefore void. swift.
70 obli'ge. v. a. [obliger, fr. obliga, latin.]
1. to bind; to impose obligation ; to compel to something.
all these have moved me, and some of them obliged me to
commend these my labours to your grace's patronage. jwhite.
the church hath been thought fit to be called catholick,
in reference to the universal obedience which it prescribeth ;
both in regard of the persons, obiging men of all conditions,
and in relation to the precepts, requiring the performance of
all the evangclical commands. * - pearson.
religion obliges men to the practice of those virtues which
conduce to the preservation of our health. tillotson.
the law must oblige in all precepts, or in none. if it oblige
in all, all are to be obeyed; if it oblige in none, it has no
longer the authority of a law. rogers.
2. to indebt ; to lay obligations of gratitude.
he that depends upon another, must
oblige his honour with a boundless trust. jwaller.
since love obliges not, i from this hour
assume the right of man's despotic power. dryden.
vain wretched creature, how art thou misled,
to think thy wit these godlike notions bred
these truths are not the product of thy mind,
but dropt from heav'n, and of a nobler kind:
reveal’d religion first inform'd thy fight,
and reason saw not, till faith spring the light.
thus man by his own strength to heaven would soar,
and wou'd not be obliged to god for more. dryden.
when int’rest calls off all her sneaking train,
when all th’ ablig'd desert, and all the vain,
she waits or to the scaffold or the cell. pope.
to those hills we are obliged for all our metals, and with
them for all the conveniencies and comforts of life. bentley.
3. to please; to gratify. - -
a great man gets more by cll ging his inferiour, than by
disdaining him; as a man has a greater advantage by sowing
and dressing his ground, than he can have by trampling upon
it. - south.
some natures are so sour and so ungrateful, that they are
never to be obliged. l'e/irange.
happy the people, who preserve their honour -
by the same duties that oblige their prince ald. cat3.
obli'gee. m. s. [from oblige.] the person bound by a legal or
written contract.
obli'gement. n. s. [...bigement, french.] obligation.
i will not resist, whatever it is, either of divine or human
obligement, that you lay upon me. milton's education.
let this fair princess but one minute stay
a look from her will your obligements pay. dryden.
obli'ger. m. s. he who binds by contract.
obliging. part. adj. [obligeant, #. ; from oblige.] civil ;
complaisant ; respectful; engaging.
nothing could be more obliging and respe&amp;tful than the lion's
letter was, in appearance; but there was death in the true in-
tent. l’estrange.
monseigneur strozzi has many curiosities, and is very
obliging to a stranger who desires the fight of them. addison.
obiging creatures make me see
all that disgrac'd my betters, met in me. - pope.
so obliging that he ne'er oblig'd. pope.
obligingly. adv. [from alliging.j. civilly; complaisintly.
eugenius informs me very obligingly, that he never thought
he should have disliked any passage in my paper. addison.
i see her taste each nauseous draught,
and so ab igingly am caught; -
i bless the hand from whence they came,
nor dare distort my face for shame.
obli'ging ness. n. s. [from all ging.]
1. obligation ; force.
they look into them not to weigh the obligingnes, but to
quarrel the difficulty of the injunctions: not to direct prac-
tice, but excuse prevarications. decay of piety.
2. civility; complaisance.
obliquation. n. s. soloiquatio, from obliquo, lat..] decli-
nation from straightness or perpendicularity; obliquity.
the change made by the obliquation of the eyes, is least in
colours of the densest than in thin substances. newt. opt.
oblique, adj. [abique, fr. obliquus, latin.]
1. not direct; not perpendicular; not paralles.
one by his view
mought deem him born with ill-dispos'd skies,
when oblique saturn sat in the house of th’ agonies. spens.
if sound be stopped and repercussed, it cometh about on the
other side in an oblique line. bacon's nat. hist.
may they not pity us, condemn'd to bear
the various heav'n of an obliquer sphere;
while by fix’d laws, and with a just return,
they feel twelve hours that shade, for twelve that burn.
prior.
bavaria's stars must be accus’d which shone,
prior. {
swift's miscell.
that fatal day the mighty work was done,
with rays oblique upon the gallic sun.
it has a direction oblique to that of the former motion.
cheyne's phil. prin.
criticks form a general chara&amp;ter from the observation of
particular errors, taken in their own oblique or imperfect
views; which is as unjust, as to make a judgment of the
beauty of a man's body, from the shade it casts in such and
such a position. - broome on the odyssey.
2. not dire&amp;t; indirect; by a side glance.
has he given the lie
in circle, or oblique, or semicircle, -
or direet paralles; you must challenge him. shakesp.
3: [in grammar.] any case in nouns except the nominative.
or: "quely. adv. [from oblique.]
1. not direetly; not perpendicularly.
of meridian altitude, it hath but twenty-three degrees, so
that it plays but obliquely upon us, and as the sun doth about
the twenty-third of january. brown.
declining from the noun of day,
the sun obliquely shoots his burning ray. pope.
2. not in the immediate or direct meaning.
they haply might admit the truths obliquely levelled, which
bashfulness persuaded not to enquire for. fell.
his discourse tends obliquely to the detracting from others,
ot the extolling of himself. addison's speciator.
go. }*.s. [obliquite, fr. from oblique.]
1. deviation from physical reetitude; deviation from parallelism
or perpendicularity.
which else to several spheres thou must ascribe,
mov’d contrary with thwart obliquities. milton.
2. deviation from moral rectitude.
there is in reetitude, beauty; as contrariwise in obliquity,
deformity. afzaker.
count rhodophill cut out for government and high affairs,
and balancing all matters in the scale of his high understand-
ing, hath rectified all obliquities. harvel.
for a rational creature to conform himself to the will of
god in all things, carries in it a rational rectitude or good-
ness ; and to disobey or oppose his will in any thing, imports a
moral obliquity. - o scut”.
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
i - t.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o b n
o b s
o
&amp;
o
o
o
to obliterate. v. a. [oblitero, oh and hiera, latin.]
1. to efface any thing written.
2. to wear out; to destroy; to efface.
wars and desolations obliterate many ancient monuments.
hale's origin of mankind.
let men consider themselves as ensnared in that unhappy
contract, which has rendered them part of the devil's posses-
sion, and contrive how they may obliterate that reproach, and
disentangle their mortgaged souls. decay of piety.
these simple ideas, the understanding can no more refuse
to have, or alter, or blot them out, than a mirrour can re-
fuse, alter, or obliterate the images, which the objects set be-
fore it produce. locke.
obliteration. m. s. [obliteratio, latin.] effacement; ex-
tinction.
considering the casualties of wars, transmigrations, espe-
cially that of the general flood, there might probably be an
obliteration of all those monuments of antiquity that ages pre-
cedent at some time have yielded. hale's origin of mankind.
obli'vion. m. s. [oblivio, latin.] -
1. forgetfulness; cessation of remembrance.
water drops have worn the stones of troy,
and blind oblivion swallow'd cities up,
and mighty states chara&amp;terless are grated
to dusty nothing. shakesp. troil. and cressida.
thou shouldst have heard many things of worthy memory,
which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienced
to thy grave. - shakesp. taming of the shrew.
knowledge is made by oblivion, and to purchase a clear and
warrantable body of truth, we must forget and part with much
we know. - o brown.
can they imagine, that god has therefore forgot their fins,
because they are not willing to remember them : or will they
measure his pardon by their own oblivion. south.
among our crimes oblivion may be set ;
but 'tis our king's perfection to forget.
2. amnesty; general pardon of crimes in a state.
by the aet of oblivion, all offences against the crown, and
all particular trespasses between subject and subject, were par-
doned; remitted, and utterly extinguished. davies.
obli'vious. adj. [obliviosus, latin.] "causing forgetfulness.
raze out the written troubles of the brain,
and with some sweet oblivious antidote
cleanse the stuff'd bosom. shakespeare's macbeth.
the british souls - -
exult to see the crouding ghosts descend
unnumber'd ; well aveng'd, they quit the cares
of mortal life, and drink th’ oblivious lake.
oh born to see what none can see awake i
behold the wonders of th’ oblivious lake. pope.
oblotng. adj. [ablong, fr. oblongus, latin.] longer than
broad; the same with a rectangle parallelogram, whose sides
are unequal. harris.
the best figure of a garden i esteem an oblong upon a de-
scent. temple's miscellanies.
every particle, supposing them globular or not very oblong,
would be above nine million times their own length from any
other particle. bentley.
oflo'ndly. adv. [from oblong.] in an oblong form.
the surface of the temperate climates is larger than it
would have been, had the globe of our earth or of the planets,
been either spherical, or oblongly spheroidical. cheyne.
oblo ngn ess. n. s. [from oblong..] the state of being oblong.
o'bloquy. n. s. sobloquor, latin.]
1. censorious speech; blame; slander ; reproach.
reasonable moderation hath freed us from being deservedly
subject unto that bitter kind of obloquy, whereby as the church
of rome doth, under the colour of love towards those things
which be harmless, maintain extremely most hurtful corrup-
tions; so we peradventure might be upbraided, that under
colour of hatred towards those things that are corrupt, we are
on the other side as extreme, even against most harmless ordi-
dryden.
philips.
in 2. in ccs, phooker.
here new aspersions, with new obloquies,
are laid on old deserts. daniel's civil war.
canst thou with impious obloquy condemn,
the just decree of god, pronounc'd and sworn ? milton.
shall names that made your city the glory of the earth, be
mentioned with obloquy and detraction addison.
every age might perhaps produce one or two true genius,
if they were not sunk under the censure and obloquy of plod-
ding, servile, imitating pedants. swift.
2, cause of reproach ; disgrace. not proper.
my chastity's the jewel of our house,
bequeathed down from many ancestors;
... which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
in me to lose. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
obmute'scence. m. s. [from obmutesco, lat.) loss of speech.
a vehement fear often produceth obmutescence. brown.
obnoxious. adj. [obnoxius, latin.]
1. subject.
: i propound a character of justice in a middle form, between
vol. ii.
t
o
the speculative discourses of philosophers, and the writings of
lawyers, which are tied and obnoxious to their particular laws.
bacon's holy war.
2. liable to punishment. o
all are of noxious, and this faulty land,
like fainting hester, does before you stand, - - -
watching your sceptre. j/aller.
we know ourselves obnoxious to god's severe justice, and
that he is a god of mercy and hateth fin; and that we might
not have the least suspicion of his unwillingness to forgive,
he hath sent his only begotten son into the world, by his dis-
mal sufferings and cursed death, to expiate our offences.
calamy.
thy name, o varus, if the kinder pow'rs
preserve our plains, and shield the mantuan tow’rs,
obnoxious by cremona's neighboring crime,
the wings of swans, and stronger pinion'd rhime
shall raise aloft. - dryden.
3. reprehensible; not of sound reputation. - -
... conceiving it most reasonable to search for primitive truth
c in the primitive writers, and not to suffer his understanding
… to be preposest by the contrived and interested schemes of
modern, and withal obnoxious authors. fell.
4. liable; exposed. -
long hostility had made their friendship weak in itself, and
more obnoxious to jealousies and distrusts. hayward.
but what will not ambition and revenge -
... descend to ? who aspires, must down as low * -
as high he soard; obnoxious first or last, - - - - *
to basest things. milton's par. loft.
beasts lie down, -
to dews obnoxious on the grassy floor. dryden.
they leave the government a trunk naked, defenceless, and
obnoxious to every storm. davenant.
obno'xious n ess. n. s. [foom obnoxious.] subjection; liable-
ness to punishment. -
obno?:19 usly, adv. [from obnoxious.] in a state of subjection;
in the state of one liable to punishment. - -
to obnu'e1late. v. a. [obnubiio, latin.] to cloud; to ob.
scure. - -
o'bole. n. s. [obolus, latin.] in pharmacy, twelve grains,
ainsworth.
o38 option. m. s. sahreptio, latin.] the act of creeping in
with secrecy or by surprise. -
to obko'gate. v. a. sobrogo, latin.] to proclaim a contrary
law for the disolution of the former. dic7.
obsce’ne. adj [alsoene, fr. obscaenus, latin.] -
1. immodest ; not agreeable to chattity of mind; causing lewd
ideas. - .
chemos th’ obscene dread of moab's sons. milton.
words that were once chaste, by frequent use grow obsore,
and uncleaniy. - joatts's logick.
2. cffensive ; disgusting.
a girdle foul with grease binds his obscene attire. dryden.
home as they went, the sad discourse renew'd,
of the relentless dame to death pursu'd, {
• and of the fight o' scene so lately view'd.
3. inauspicious ; ill omened. -
care shuns thy walks, as at the chearful light
the groaning ghosts, and birds obscene take flight. dryd.
it is the sun's fate like your's, to be displeasing to owls and
obscene animals, who cannot bear his lustre. pope's letters.
obsce'n el y. adv. [from ol scene.] in an impure and unchaffe
manner. - *
obsce’n en ess. ! m. s. solscenite, fr. from obscene.) impurity of
opsce'nity. thought or language; unchastity; lewdness;
mr. cowley asserts plainly, that obscenity has no place in
wit. dryden.
those fables were tempered with the italian severity, and
dryden.
free from any note of infamy or obscenenes. dryden.
thou art wickedly devout,
in tiber ducking thrice by break of day,
to wash th' oh cenities of night away. dryden.
no pardon vile obscenity should find,
- tho' wit and art conspire to move your mind. pope.
obsco ration. m. s. [obscuratio, lat.]
1. the act of darkening.
2. a state of teing darkened.
as to the sun and moon, their obscuration or change of
colour happens commonly before the eruption of a fiery moun-
tain. -- - burnet.
obscu’re. adj. [obscur, fr. obscurus, lat.] -
1. dark; unculightened ; gloomy, hindring fight.
whoso curfeth his father or nother, his lamp shall be put
out in obscure darkness. prov. xx. zo.
who shall tempt with wand'ring feet
the dark unbottom'd infinite abyss,
and thro’ the palpable obscure find out
his uncouth way ? milton's parad so lo?.
2. living in the dark. * = -
the obscure bird clamour'd the live-long night. shakes.
3. not easily intelligible; abstruse; difficult. -
17 l i explain
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o b. s.
o b s. o
i explain some of the most obscure passages, and those which
p ./ parlag -
are most necessary to be understood, and this according to the
manner wherein he used to express himself. *
4. not noted; not observable. * , oto -
he says, that he is an obscure person; one, i suppose, that
is in the dark.
to obscu'r e. v. a. [..bscuro, lat.j s o
1. to darken 3 to make dark. . . . . . . . . . . . . . o
they are all couched in a pit hard by herne's oak, with
obscured lights ; which at the very instant of falstaff's and our
dryden.
* , , , , ,
meeting, they will at once display to the night. shakesp.
sudden the thunder blackens all the skies,
and the winds whistle, and the surges roll . . . .
mountains on mountains, and ob cure the pole. pope.
2. to make less visible. . . .
what must i hold a candle to my shames :
they in themselves, good sooth, are too, too light.
why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
and i should be obscur'd shakesp. merchant of venice.
thinking by this retirement to obscure himself from god,
he infringed the omnisciency and essential ubiquity of his
- maker. - brown’s wulgar erreurs.
3. to make less intelligible.
by private consent it hath been used in dangerous times to
obscure writing, and make it hard to be read by others not ac-
quainted with the intrigue. - holder.
there is scarce any duty which has been so obscured by the
writings of learned men, as this. //ake.
4. to make less glorious, beautiful, or illustrious.
think'st thou, vain spirit, thy glories are the same,
and seest not sin obscures thy godlike frame
i know thee now by thy ungrateful pride,
that shows me what thy faded looks did hide.
5. to conceal; to make unknown.
o might i here
in solitude live savage, in some glade
obscur'd, where highest woods, impenetrable
* to sun or starlight, spread their umbrage broad.
, obscu'rel y. adv. [from obscure.]
1. not brightly ; not luminously; darkly.
2. out of fight; privately; without notice; not conspicu-
ously.
'such was the rise of this prodigious fire, *
which in mean buildings first obscurely bred,
from thence did soon to open streets aspire.
• * there live retir’d,
content thyself to be obscurely good. addison's cato,
3. not clearly ; not plainly; darkly to the mind. -
the woman's seed at first obscurely told,
now amplier known, thy saviour and thy lord.
go." }*s [obscuritas, lat. obscurite, fr.]
1. darkness; want of light. -
lo a day of darkness and obscurity, tribulation and an-
guish upon the earth. esther xi. 8.
should cynthia quit thee, venus, and each star,
. it would not form one thought dark as mine are :
i could lend them obscureness now, and say,
out of myself there should be no more day.
2. unnoticed state; privacy.
you are not for obscurity design'd,
but, like the sun, must cheer all human kind.
3. darkness of meaning.
not to mention that obscurenes that attends prophetic rap-
: tures, there are divers things knowable by the bare light of
nature, which yet are so uneasy to be satisfactorily understood
by our imperfeot intelle&amp;ts, that let them be delivered in the
clearest expressions, the notions themselves will yet appear
obscure. " boyle on colours.
that this part of sacred scripture had difficulties in it:
many causes of obscurity did readily occur to me. , locke.
what lies beyond our positive idea towards infinity, lies in
obscurity, and has the undeterminate confusion of a negative
idea, wherein i know i do not comprehend all i would, it be-
ing too large for a finite capacity. locke.
cbsecratio n. m. s. [obsecratio, from obsecro, lat.] intreaty ;
supplication.
that these were comprehended under the sacra, is manifest
from the old form of obsecration. stillingfleet.
obse"quies, n, f: [obsequies, french. i know not whether
this word be not anciently mistaken for exequies, exequiae,
latin: this word, however, is apparently derived from ob-
sequium.]
1. funeral rites; funeral solemnities. - -
there was dorilaus valiantly requiting his friends help,
in a great battle deprived of life, his obsequies being not more
folemnized by the tears of his partakers, than the blood of his
dryden.
milton.
dryden.
• milton.
donne.
*
dryden.
enemies. --- sidney.
fair juliet, that with angels dost remain,
accept this latest favour at my hand; -
that living honour’d thee, and being dead,
with fun'ial absequies adorn thy tomb. . shakespeare.
- - - -
* * * o atterbury.”
. i spare the widows tears, their woeful cries, .
"and howling at their husbands obsequies; - -
how theseus at these fun'rals did affist, - -
and with what gifts the mourning dames dismist. dryden.
his body shall be royally interr'd,
. i will, myself, . . . .
*-
*
-
* be the chief mourner at his obsequies. dryden.
, alas! poor poll, my indian talker dies, o, or
go birds and celebrate his ol/outes. creech.
2. it is found in the singular, perhaps more properly. ,
or tune a song of victory to me, * * *
or to thyself, sing thine own obsequy. crashaw.
him i'll solemnly attend,
with silent closequy and funeral train, -
home to his father's house. milton's agonisłes.
obse’quicu.s. adj. [from obsequium, latin.].
1. obedient; compliant; not resisting. - - - -
adore not so the rising son, that you forget the father, who
raised you to this height; nor be you so obsequious to the father,
that you give just cause to the son to suspect that you negled:
him. - bacon's advice to williers.
at his command th’ up-rooted hills retir'd .
each to his place ; they heard his voice, and went .
obsequious. milton's paradis, loft.
i follow'd her; she what was honour knew,
and with obsequious majesty, approv’d
my pleaded reason. - milton's paradis, loft.
see how th’ obsequious wind and liquid air
. the theban swan does upward bear. cowley.
a genial cherishing heat acts so upon the fit and obsequious
matter, as to organize and fashion it according to the exi-
gencies of its own nature. boyle.
his servants weeping,
obsequious to his orders, bear him hither. addison's cata.
the vote of an assembly, which we cannot reconcile to
public good, has been conceived in a private brain, afterwards
supported by an obsequious party. swi
2. in shakespeare, it seems to signify, funereal ; such as the rites
of funerals require.
your father lost a father;
that father his ; and the survivor bound
in filial obligation, for some term,
to do obsequious sorrow.
obsesquiously. adv. [from alsoquious.]
1. obediently ; with compliance.
they rise, and with respectful awe,
at the word giv'n, obsequiously withdraw. dryden.
we cannot reasonably expect, that any one should readily
and obsequiously quit his own opinion, and embrace ours with
a blind resignation. lockez
2. in shakespeare it signifies, with funeral rites; with reverence
for the dead. - * * * * *
i a while obs, auiously lament - -
the untimely fail of virtuous lancaster. shakesp. r. iii.
obse"quious n ess. m. s. [from obsequious.] obedience ; com-
pliance.
they apply themselves both to his interest and humour,
with all the arts of flattery and obsequiousness, the surest and the
readiest way to advance a man. south.
observable. adj. [from observo, latin, j remarkable; emi-
nent; such as may deserve notice.
they do bury their dead with observable ceremonies. abbot.
these proprieties affixed unto bodies from considerations
deduced from east, west, or those also rvable points of the sphere,
will not be justified from such foundations. rature,
i took a just account of every observable circumstance of the
earth, stone, metal, or other matter, from the surface quite
jown to the bottom of the pit, and entered it carefully into a
journal. //oodward's natural history.
the great and more observable occasions of exercising our
courage, occur but seldom. rogers.
obse'rvably. adv. [from observable.] in a manner worthy of
in ote.
it is prodigious to have thunder in a clear sky, as is of/orv-
ably recorded in some histories. brown's pulgar errours.
obse'r v a.nce. m. s. [closervance, fr. observo, latin.] .
1. respect; ceremonial reverence. -
in the wood, a league without the town,
where i did meet thee once with helena,
shakes?. hamlet.
* - or "
to do observance on the moon of may. shakespeare.
arcite left his bed, resolv'd to pay t
observance to the month of merry may. , dryden.
2. religious rite. -
some represent to themselves the whole of religion as con-
sisting in a few easy observances, and never lay the least restraint
on the business or diversions of this life. rogers.
3. attentive practice. - "a
use all th' observance of civility, -
like one well studied in a sad ostent
to please his grandam. shakes. merchant of venice,
love rigid honesty
and strict observance of impartial laws.
roscommon.
if
4.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o b so
i
**
**
o
:
.
}*
f
o,
*
if the divine laws were proposed to our elservance, with no
other motive than the advantages attending it, they would be
little more than an advice. rogers'; sermons.
4. rule of practice.
there are other strict observances; . .
as, not to see a woman. shakesp. love's labour loft.
5. careful obedience. -
we must attend our creator in all those ordinances which
he has prescribed to the observance of his church. rogers. .
6. observation ; attention. - -
there can be no observation or experience of greater cer-
tainty, as to the increase of mankind, than the strict and vigi-
lant observance of the calculations and registers of the bills of
births and deaths. hale's origin of mankind.
7, obedient regard ; reverential attention. - . . . .
having had such experience of his fidelity and observance
abroad, he found himself engaged in honour to support him.
o wotton,
obse’r v ant. adj. [observans, latin.]
1. attentive; diligent; watchful. -
these writers, which gave themselves to follow and ini-
tate others, were observant se&amp;tators of those masters they ad-
... mired. * raleigh's history of the world.
wandring from clime to clime observant stray'd,
their manners noted, and their states survey'd. pope,
2. obedient ; respectful: with of
we are told how observant alexander was of his master ari-
stotle. - digby on the soul, deaication.
3. respe&amp;tfully attentive: with of. -
she now observant of the parting ray,
eyes the calm sun-set of thy various day. pope.
4. meanly dutiful; submisfive.
how could the most base men attain to honour but by such
an observant slavish course. - - raleigh.
obse'rv ant. n.s. [this word has the accent on the first syl-
lable in shakespeare.] a slavish attendant. not in use.
these kind of knaves in this plainness,
harbour more craft, and more corrupter ends,
than twenty silky ducking observants
that 8retch their duties nicely. shakesp. k. lear.
observation. n.s.. [abservatio, from observo, latin; observa-
tion, fr.] - . .
1. the aet of observing, noting, or remarking. -
these cannot be infused by observation, because they are the
rules by which men take their first apprehensions and observa-
tions of things; as the being of the rule must be before its ap-
plication to the thing direeted by it. south.
the rules of our practice are taken from the conduct of
fuch persons as fall within our observation. rogers,
2. ** gained by observing; note; remark; animadver-
osl.
in matters of human prudence, we shall find the greatest
advantage by making wise observations on our conduct, and of
the events attending it. jwatts's logick.
. obedience; ritual practice. -
he freed and delivered the christian church from the exter-
nal observation and obedience of all such legal precepts, as were
not simply, and formally moral. //hite.
cnservator. m. s. [observateur, fr. from observo, lat.] one
that observes ; a remarker. -
the observator of the bills of mortality, hath given us, the
best account of the number that late plagues have swept away.
hale's origin of mankind.
she may be handsome, yet be chaste, you say,+
good observator, not so fast away. dryden.
observatory. m. s. [observatoire, french..] a place built
for astronomical observations.
another was found near the observatory in greenwich park.
- woodward on fossils.
t, observe. v. a. sobserver, fr. observo, lat.]
1. to watch; to regard attentively. -
remember, that as thine eye observes others, so art thou
observed by angels and by men. - taylor.
2. to find by attention; to note.
it is observed, that many men who have seemed to repent
when they have thought death approaching, have yet, after
it hath pleased god to restore them to health, been as wicked,
perhaps worse, as ever they were: duty of man.
if our idea of infinity be got from the power we observe in
ourselves, of repeating without end our own ideas, it may be
demanded why we do not attribute infinity to other ideas, as
well as these of space and duration. locke.
one may observe them discourse and reason pretty well, of
several other things, before they can tell twenty. locke.
3. to regard or keep religiously. -
a night to be much observed unto the lord, for bringing
them out of egypt. bx. xii. 42.
4. to practice ritually.
in the days of enoch, people cis-rved not circumcision, or
the sabbath. jwhite.
5. to obey; to follow.
to oese'rve. v. n.
- - - - -
1. to be attentive. - - -
qoserving men may form many judgments by the rules of
fimilitude and proportion, where causes and effects are not
entirely the same. . . - watts's logicæ,
2. to make a remark. * --&gt;
*/orvo, that when we have ania&amp;ion against any man, we
must for all that look upon him as our neighbour, and love
him as ourselves, paying him all that justice, peace and cha-
rity, which are due to all persons. . . kettlewell.
wherever i have found her notes to be wholly another's,
which is the case in some hundreds, i have barely quoted the
true proprietor, without observing upon it. pope's letters.
observer, n.f. [from observe.] o
1. one who looks vigilantly on persons and things; close re-
, - . marker. . --
to ,
he reads much ;
he is a great observer; and he looks ** * * *
| quite through the deeds of men, -shakesp. jul. casar.
* , - angelo, , o o
there is a kind of chara&amp;er in thy life, i.
that to th’ observer doth thy history
fully unfold. shakesp. measure for measure,
careful observers may foretel the hour,
by sure prognostics when to dread a show'r, to swift.
2. one who looks on ; the beholder.
if a slow pac’d star had stol’n away, - * --
from the observer's marking, he might stay
three hundred years to see’t again. donne.
company, he thinks, lessens the shame of vice, by sharing
it; and therefore, if he cannot wholly avoid the eye of the
observer, he hopes to distract it at least by a multiplicity of
objects. of - south.
sometimes purulent matter may be discharged from the
glands in the upper part of the wind-pipe, while the lungs
are sound and uninfected, which now and then has imposed
on undistinguishing abservers. or * blackmore.
3. one who keeps any law or custom or pracice,
many nations are superstitious, and diligent observers of old
customs, which they receive by tradition from their parents, .
by recording of their bards and chronicles. . spensor.
the king after the victory, as one that had been bred under
a devout mother, and was in his nature a great observer of reli-
gious forms, caused te deum to be solemnly sung in the pre-
sence of the whole army upon the place. bacon.
. he was so strict an observer of his word, that no considera-
tion whatever could make him break it. . . . prior.
himself often read useful discourses to his servants on the
lord's day, of which he was always a very strict and solemn
observer. * atterbury.
oo: adv. [from observing. j attentively; care-
ully. * * * * - - * * * *
there is some soul of goodness in things evil, .
would men observingly distil it out, shakesp. henry v.
obsession. m. s. [obsessio, lat.] * . . . .
1. the act of besieging. . . . - -
2. the first attack of satan, antecedent to possession.
obsion ional. adj. [obsidionalis, latin.] belonging to a fiege.
- dioł,
o'bsolete, adj. [alsolitus, latin.j. worn out of use; dis.
used ; unfashionable. **
obsolete words may be laudably revived, when they are
more sounding, or more significant than those in practice.
- dryden.
what if there be an old dormant statute or two against him,
are they not now obsolete # -- c swift,
obsole ten ess. m. s. [from obsolete.] state of being worn out
of use; unfashionableness.
oustacle...". s. sobstacle, fr. offaculum, latin.] something
opposed; hindrance ; obstruction. -&gt;
conscience is a blushing shame-sac’d spirit,
that mutinies in a man's bosom ; it fills
one full of obstacles. shakesp. rich. iii.
if all obstacles were cut away, - -
and that my path were even to the crown,
as the ripe reverence and due of birth. shakesp. r. iii.
disparity in age seems a greater obslack to an intimate
friendship than inequality of fortune. for the humours, bu-
finess, and diversions, of young and old, are generally very
different. . t collier on friendship.
some conjectures about the origin of mountains and islands,
i am obliged to look into that they may not remain as obstacles
to the less skilful. woodward's nat. hist.
what more natural and usual oyoacle to those who take voy.
ages, than winds and storms. . . pope.
obst etrica rios. n.s.. [from obstetricor, lat..] the office of
a midwife. -
obstetrick._adj.. [from obstetrix, lat.] midwifish; befit.
ting a midwife doing the midwife's office.
there all the learn'd shall at the labour stand,
, and douglas lend his soft obsletrict hand. pope.
o'bst inacy. m. s. solstination, french ; oftinatio, latin; from
oftinate.] stubbornness; contumacy; pertimacy; persistency.
chusing
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o b s
o b t
chusing rather to use extremities, which might drive men
to desperate obslinacy, than apply moderate remedies. . k. ch.
most writers use their words loosely and uncertainly, and
do not make plain and clear deductions of words one from
another, which were not difficult to do, did they not find it
convenient to shelter their ignorance, or ob/iinacy," under the
obscurity of their terms. docke.
what crops of wit and honesty appear,
from spleen, from obs?inacy, hate or fear. pope.
o'bstina te. adj. [obslinatus, lat..] stubborn; contuma-
cious ; fixed in resolution. absolutely used, it has an ill
sense; but relatively, it is neutral. o • *
the queen is obstinate,
stubborn to justice, apt t'accuse it, and
disdainful to be try’d by’t.
yield, , , , , , ,
except you mean with obs?inate repulse, o
... to slay your sov’reign. * . shakespeare.
i have known great cures done by obstinate resolutions of
drinking no wine. in ** * * . . . . . temple.
her father did not fail to finds ... ." . .
in all she spoke, the greatness of her mind; : . . . .
yet thought she was not obstinate to die, ** *
• nor deem'd the death she promis'd was so nigh. dryden.
- look on simo's mate; - - -
no ass so meek, no ass so obslinate. pope.
o'bstinately, adv. [from obslinate.]” stubbornly; inflexibly ;
with unshaken determination. . . . .
pembroke abhorred the war as obstinately, as he loved hunt-
ing and hawking. clarendon.
o a greek made himself their prey,
to impose on their belief, and troy betray;
fix'd on his aim, and ob/linately bent t
... . to die undaunted, or to circumvent. . dryden.
the man resolv’d, and steady to his trust,
inflexible to ill, and obstinately just,
*
can the rude rabble's influence despise. addison.
my spouse maintains her royal trust, -
... tho' tempted chaste, and obstinately just. pope.
o'bstin at e ness. m. s. [from obstinate.] stubbornness.
obstipation. n. s. [from obslipo, latin.] the act of stop-
ping up any passage. ** *
obstre perous, adj. [obs?reperus, lat.] loud; clamorous ;
noisy; turbulent; vociferous. -
. . these obslreperous scepticks are the bane of divinity, who
... - are so full of the spirit of contradiction, that they raise daily
... new disputes. howel's wocal fore/?.
... these ob/irperous villains shout, and know not for what they
... make a noise. dryden.
the players do not only connive at his obsorperous approba-
tion, but repair at their own cost whatever damages he makes.
- addison's speciator.
obst re'perously. adv. [from obs?reperous.] loudly; cla-
morously; noisily. - -
obst re'pe rous ness. m. s. [from closireperous.] loudness;
clamour; noise ; turbulence.
obstri'ction, n. s. [from obsiricius, latin.] obligation;
bond.
- he hath full right to exempt
whom so it pleases him by choice,
... " from national obstriction.
to obstruct. v. a. sol/druo, lat.]
1. to block up ; to bar.
he them beholding, soon
comes down to see their city, ere the tow’r -
ob/iruci heav'n-tow’rs. milton's paradise lost.
in their passage through the glands in the lungs, they ob-
struc; and swell them with little tumours. blackmore.
fat people are subjeci to weakness in fevers, because the fat,
melted by feverish heat, e!/?ructs the small canals. arbuthnot.
2. to oppose ; to retard; to hinder ; to be in the way of.
- no cloud interpos'd,
or star to obstruct his sight. milton.
obst ru’ct er. n.f. [from obstruc.] one that hinders or op-
poses.
obstru'ction. m. s. [ob/irucio, lat, ob/irucion, fr. from ab-
/lruc.] . . - as a - -
1. hindrance; difficulty.
-stire god by these discoveries did design, - -
that his clear light thro' all the world should shine;
jbut the olytruciion from that discond springs, -
the prince of darkness makes 'twixt christian kings. den.
2. obstacle ; impediment; that which hinders.
all obstrusions in parliament, that is, all freedom in differ-
~ ing in votes, and debating matters with reason and candour,
must be taken away. - king charler.
. . . . in his winter quarters the king expected to meet with all
the obstructions and difficulties his enraged enemies could lay
in his way. " - * * * o clarendon.
. …whenever a popular assembly free from ol/iru fions, and
already possessed of more power than an equal balance will
allow, shall continue to think that they have not enough, i
milton's agonisłes.
shai's. henry viii.
cannot see how the same causes can produce different effe&amp;s
among us, from what they did in greece and rome. swift.
3. [in physick.] . - - -
the blocking up of any canal in the human body, so as to
prevent the flowing of any fluid through it, on account of the
increased bulk of that fluid, in proportion to the diameter of
the vessel. . . ". ' ' ' - ?uincy.
4. in shakespeare it once signifies something heaped together.
aye, but to die, and go we know not where;
to lie in cold obstruction, and to rot; • -- --
. . this sensible warm motion to become. - 1: . -
: a kneaded clod. . shakesp. measure for measure.
obstru’ctive, adj. [obstrucis, fr. from ol/rust.] hindering;
. causing impediment. . - * * *
having thus separated this doctrine of god's predetermin-
ing all events from three other things confounded with it, it
will now be discernible how noxious and obstructive this doc-
, trine is to the superstructing all good life. hammond.
obstru’ctive. m. s. impediment; obstacle.
the second ot/trucive is that of the fiduciary, that faith is
the only instrument of his justification, and excludes good
works from contributing any thing toward it. . . . hammond.
q'ostruent. adj. [objlruins, lat. j hindering; blocking ap.
obstupefa’ction. m. s. soloupefacio, latin.] the act of in-
ducing stupidity, or interruption of the mental powers.
obst upef active. adj. from oistupofacio, latin.] obstruct.
ing the mental powers; stupifying. . . -
... the force of it is obsiupefactive, and no other. abbct.
to obta's n. v. a. sabtenir, fr. obtinez, latin.]
1. to gain; to acquire; to procure. -
may be that i may obtain children by her. gen. xvi. 2.
we have obtained an inheritance. eph. i. 1 1.
the juices of the leaves are obtained by expression. art.
2. to impetrate; to gain by the concession or excited kindness
of another. . . . .
in such our prayers cannot serve us as means to obtain the
thing we desire. hooker.
by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place,
having oltained eternal redemption for us. heb. ix. 12.
if they could not be obtained of the proud tyrant, then to
conclude peace with him: upon any conditions. knolles,
some pray for riches, riches they obtain;
but watch'd by robbers for their wealth are slain. drydew,
the conclusion of the story i forbore, because i could not
obtain from myself to shew absalom unfortunate. dryden.
whatever once is denied them, they are certainly not to
obtain by crying. locke on education.
to obta in. v. n. to .
1. to continue in use.
the theodosian code, several hundred years after jus.
tinian's time, did obtain in the western parts of europe. bacer.
2. to be established; to subsist in nature or practice.
our impious use no longer shall obtain,”
brothers no more, by brothers, shall be slain. dryden.
the situation of the sun and earth, which the theorist sup-
poses, is far from being preferable to this which at present
obtains, that this hath infinitely the advantage of it. jozdw.
where wasting the publick treasure has obtained in a court,
all good order is banished, davenant.
the general laws of fluidity, elasticity, and gravity, obtain
in animal and inauimate tubes. cheyne's phil. prin.
3. to prevail; to succeed. not in use. -
there is due from the judge to the advocate, some com-
mendation where causes are fair pleaded; especially towards
the side which obtaineth not. bacon.
obta ina ble. adj. [from obtain.] -
i. to be procured.
spirits which come over in distillations, miscible with wa-
ter, and wholly combustible, are obtainable from plants by pre-
vious fermentation. * arbuthnot on aliments.
2. to be gained. -
what thinks he of his redemption, and the rate it cost, not
being obtainable unless god's only son would come down from
heaven, and be made man, and pay down his own life for it.
- kettlewell.
obta'1ner. m. s. [from obtain..] he who obtains.
to qbtemperate. v. a. soltemperor, french; ottempero, lat.]
to obey. . dicf.
to obt end. v. a. soltend, lat.]
1. to oppose ; to hold out in opposition. .
2. to pretend; to offer as the reason of any thing.
thou dost with lies the throne invade, -
obtending heav'n for whate'er ills befal. dryder.
obten e bration. a. s. [ab and tenebrae, lat..] darkness; the
state of being darkened ; the act of darkening; cloudiness.
• in cwery negrim or vertigo, there is an obtenebration joined
with a semblance of turning round. bacon's nat. h/?.
obtension. n.s.. [from obtend..] the aet of obtending. -
to ob test. v. a. sootylor, latin.] to beseech; to sup-
plicate. - -
- suppliants demand . - -
a truce, with olive branches in their hand;
*
*** - is or -
--
6 - - - obte/?
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o b 'v'
o c c
o
o
|
ohtoff his clemency, and from the plain
beg leave to draw the bodies of their slain. dryden,
obt estation. m. s. [obt/latia, latin ; from obts?..] supplica-
tion ; entreaty.
obt rectation. m. s. [obtreco, latin.] slander; detraction;
calumny. - - *
to ob trut) e. v. a. [chtrudo, latin.] to thrust into any
place or state by force or imposture; to offer with unreason-
able importunity. - - - - * *
it is their torment, that the thing they shun doth follow
them, truth, as it were, even obtruding itself into their know-
ledge, and not permitting then to be so ignorant as they
would be. - - ... • t hooker.
there may be as great a vanity in retiring and withdraw-
ing men's conceits from the world, as in obtruding them. bac.
some things are easily granted ; the rest ought not to be
obtruded upon me with the point of the sword. king charles.
who can abide, that against their own doctors six books
fhould, by their fatherhoods of trent, be, under pain of a curse,
--
imperiously obtruded upon god and bis church 3 hall.
why shouldst thou then obtrude this diligence :
in vain, where no acceptance it can find? milton.
whatever was not by them thought necessary, must not by
us be obtruded on, or forced into that catalogue. hammond.
a cause of common error is the credulity of men ; that is,
an easy assent to what is obtruded, or believing at first ear what
is delivered by others. brown.
the objecis of our senses obtrude their particular ideas upon
our minds, whether we will or no; and the operations of our
minds will not let us be without some obscure notions of them.
- * locke.
whether thy great forefathers came -
from realms that bear vesputio's name;
for so conjectures would obtrude,
and from thy painted skin conclude. swift.
obtru’der. m. s. s from obtrude..] one that obtrudes.
do justice to the inventors or publishers of the true experi-
ments, as well as upon the obtruders of false ones. boyle.
obtru'sion. n.s.. [from obtrusus, lat.] the act of obtruding.
no man can think it other than the method of slavery, by
savage rudeness and importunate obtrusions of violence, to have
the mist of his errour and passion dispelled. k. charles.
oetru'sive. adj. [from obtrude. j inclined to force one's self,
or anything else, upon others.
not obvious, not obtrusive, but retir’d
the more desirable. milton's paradis, loft.
to obtu'n d. v. a. [obtundo, latin.]. to blunt; to dull; to
quell ; to deaden. y
avicen countermands letting blood in cholerick bodies, be-
cause he esteems the blood a bridle of gall, obtunding its acri-
mony and fierceness. ** harvey on consumptions.
obtura’tion. m. s. [from obturatus, lat.] the act of stop-
ping up any thing with something smeared over it. '
optus a‘ngular. adj. [from obtuse and angle.] having angles
larger than right angles. . - -
obtu'se. adj. [obtusus, latin.]
1. not pointed; not acute. - -
2. not quick; dull; stupid. * , i. s
thy senses then *. - -
obtuse, all taste of pleasures must forego. . . . . " milton.
3. not shrill; obscure : as, an obtuse sound.
obtu's fly. adv. [from obtuse.]
1. without a point.
2. dully; stupidly. so
obtu's en ess. m. s. [from obtuse..] bluntness; dulness:
obtu'sion. m. s [from obtuse.]
1. the aet of dulling.
2. the state of being dulled.
obtusion of the senses, internal and external. harvey.
oeve’ntion. m. s. [obvenia, latin. }. something happening
not constantly and regularly, but uncertainly ; incidental ad-
vantage. -
when the country grows more rich and better inhabited,
the tythes and other obventions, will also be more augmented
and better valued. spenser on ireland.
to obv e(rt. v. a. solverto, lat.] to turn towards.
the laborant with an iron rod stirred the kindled part of the
, nitre, that the fire might be more diffused, and more parts
might be obverted to the air. . boyle.
a man can from no place behold, but there will be amongst
innumerable superficieculae, that look fome one way, and some
another, enough of them obverted to his eye to afford a con-
fused idea of light. boyle on colours.
an erect cone placed in an horizontal plane, at a great dis-
tance from the eye, we judge to be nothing but a flat circle, if
… its base be obverted towards us. watts's logick.
to o'bv iate. v. a. [from obvius, lat. obvier, fr.] to meet
in the way; to prevent by interception. -
to lay down every thing in its full light, so as to obviate
, all exceptions, and remove every difficulty, would carry me
out too far. - -
vol. ii.
** :
otvious. adj. solvius, latin.] - 1
1. \sceting anything; opposed in front to anything. ".
- i to the evil turn " * -
my obvious breast; arming to overcome ow.
o -
by suffering, and earn rest from labour won. milton.
2. open : exposed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
* * whether such room in nature unposest o or
only to shine, yet scarce to contribute e o 'o
each orb a glimpse of light, convey'd so far . . .”.”
down to this habitable, which returns … . . r * *
light back to them, is obvious to dispute. - milton.
3. easily discovered; plain; evident; easily found: swift has
used it harshly for easily inteligible. -- - * *
why was the fight . . . . . . .
to such a tender ball as th’ cye confin'd, . . :
so obvious and so easy to be quiench’d milton.
- entertain'd with solitude, -
where obvious duty ere while appear'd unsought. ... milton.
they are such lights as are only obvious to every man of
sense, who loves poetry and understands it. - dryden.
sy 1. am apt to think many words difficult or obscure, which are
obvious to scholars. - * * * to stafa.
these sentiments, whether they be impressed on the soul, or
arise as obvious reflections of our reason, i cal) natural, because
they have been found in all ages.. . . rogers.
. . all the great lines of our duty are clear and obvious ; the ex-
tent of it understood, the obligation acknowledged, and the
wisdom of complying with it freely confessed. rogers.
o'bylously. adv, [from obvious.] … . . . . . . . . . .
1. evidently ; apparently. . . . . . . . * - -
all purely identical propositions obviously and at first blush,
contain no instruction. - * * * * locke,
2. easily to be found. - - - - * .
... for france, spain, and other foreign countries, the voluthes
of their laws and lawyers have obviously particulars concerning
place and precedence of their magistrates and dignities. selden.
3. naturally. “. . - - - - -
we may then more obviously, yet truly liken the civil state
to bulwarks, and the church to a city. holyday.
o'b'viousness. n. s. [from obvious.] state of being evident or
apparent. - - * * * - - * ..
slight experiments are more easily and cheaply tried; i
: thought their easiness or obviousness fitter to recommend than
depreciate them. * * * * * * * * * * * * boyle.
to opu'mbrate. v. a. [abumbro, lat.] to shade; to cload.
the rays of royal majesty reverberated so strongly upon
villerio, dispelled all those clouds which did hang over and
obumirate him. - howel's vocal forg/?.
obumbration. n. s. [from obumbro, latin.]. the act of
darkening or clouding. - * * * *
occasion. m. s. soccasion, fr. occasio, lat.]" . . .
i. occurrence; casualty; incident. * ,
- . the laws of christ we find rather mentioned by occasion in
the writings of the apostles, than any solemn thing direaly
written to comprehend them in legal sort. - hooker.
2. opportunity; convenience.
me unweeting, and unware of such mishap,
she brought to mischief through occasion,
where this same wicked villain did me light upon. spensor.
because of the money returned in our sacks are we brought
in, that he may seek occasion, fall upon us, and take us for
bondmen. gen. xliii. 18.
use not liberty for an occasion. gal. v. 13.
let me not let pass
occasion which now smiles. miłon's paradise loft.
i'll take th' occasion which he gives to bring
him to his death. waller.
with a mind as great as theirs he came -
to find at home occasion for his fame,
where dark confusions did the nations hide. it aller.
from this admonition they took only occasion to redouble
their fault, and to sleep again. south.
this one has occasion of observing more than once in se-
veral fragments of antiquity, that are still to be seen in rome.
- addison on italy.
3. accidental cause. -
have you ever heard what was the occasion and first begin-
ning of this custom * spenser on ireland.
that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's occa-
son, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will breed
it like a fool. - shakesp. as you like it.
the fair for whom they strove, -
northought, when she beheld the fight from far,
her beauty was th’ occasion of the war. dryden.
concerning ideas lodged in the memory, and upon occasion
revived by the mind, it takes notice of them as of a former
impression. £ocke.
4. reason not cogent, but opportune. -
your own business calls on you,
and you embrace th’ occasion to depart, shakespeare.
# codward's nat. hist. 5. incidental need; casual exigence.
17 m - never'
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o c c
'o c c
never master had
a page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
so tender over his occasions. shakesp. cymbeline.
antony will use his affection where it is : `
he married but his occasion here. shakesp. ant. and cleop.
my occasions have found time to use them toward a supply of .
money. - shakespeare's simon.
they who are desirous of a name in painting, should read
with diligence, and make their observations of such things as
they find for their purpose, and of which they may have occa-
son. dryden's dufresnoy.
syllogism is made use of on occasion to discover a fallacy hid
in a rhetorical flourish. - locke.
the ancient canons were very well fitted for the occasion of
the church in its purer ages. baker on learning.
god hath put us into an imperfeoł state, where we have
perpetual occasion of each other's assistance. swift.
* a prudent chief not always must display
his pow'rs in equal ranks, and fair array,
but with th' occasion and the place comply, **
conceal his force, nay, seem sometimes to fly. pope.
to occa'sion. v. a. soccasionner, fr. from the noun.]
j. to cause casually.
, , who can find it reasonable that the soul should, in its re-
tirement, during sleep, never light on any of those ideas it
borrowed not from sensation, preserve the memory of no ideas
but such, which being occasioned from the body, must needs
be less natural to a spirit. locke.
the good psalmist condemns the foolish thoughts, which a
refle&amp;tion on the prosperous state of his affairs had sometimes
occasioned in him. atterbury.
2. to cause; to produce.
i doubt not, whether the great encrease of that disease may
not have been occasioned by the custom of much wine intro-
duced into our common tables. temple.
a consumption may be occasioned by running fores, or sinu-
ous fistulas, whose secret caves and winding burrows empty
themselves by copious discharges. blackmore.
by its styptic quality it affects the nerves, very often octa-
fioning tremors. arbuthnot on aliments,
3. to influence.
if we enquire what it is that occasions men to make several
combinations of simple ideas into distinet modes, and neglect
others which have as much an aptness to be combined, we
shall find the reason to be the end of language. locke.
occa'sion al. adj. [occasion, l, fr. from occasion.]
1. incidental; casual.
. thus much is sufficient out of scripture, to verify our expli-
cation of the deluge, according to the mosaical history of the
flood, and according to many occasional reflections dispersed in
other places of scripture concerning it. burnet.
2. producing by accident.
the ground or occasional original hereof, was the amaze-
ment and sudden silence the unexpected appearance of wolves
does often put upon travellers. brown's vulgar errours.
3. produced by occasion or incidental exigence.
besides these constant times, there are likewise occasional
times for the performance of this duty. duty of man.
* those letters were not writ to all ;
nor first intended but occasional,
their absent sermons. dryd. hind and panth.
occa'sion ally. adv. [from occasional.] according to inciden-
tal exigence; incidentally.
authority and reason on ber wait,
as one intended first, not after made
occasionally. milton's paradise lost.
i have endeavoured to interweave with the assertions some
of the proofs whereon they depend, and occasionally scatter seve-
ral of the more important observations throughout the work.
woodward's natural history.
occa'sion e.r. m. s. [from occasion.] one that causes, or pro-
motes by design or accident.
she with true lamentations made known to the world, that
her new greatness did no way comfort her in respect of her
brother's loss, whom she studied all means possible to revenge
upon every one of the occasioners. sidney.
some men will load me as if i were a wilful and resolved
eccasioner of my own and my subjects miseries. k. charles.
in case a man dig a pit and leave it open, whereby it hap-
peneth his neighbour's beast to fall thereinto and perish, the
owner of the pit is to make it good, in as much as he was the
occasioner of that loss to his neighbour. sanderson.
occecation n. s. socceratio, from occero, lat.] the act of
blinding or making blind.
those places speak of obduration and occeration, so as if the
blindness that is in the minds, and hardness that is in the
hearts of wicked men, were from god. sanderson.
occid ent. m. s. [from occidens, latin.] the west.
t he envious clouds are bent
- to dim his glory, and to stain the tract
of his bright passage to the occident. shakes. r. ii.
occide ntal. adj. [cecidentalis, latin.] western.
ere twice in murk and occidental damp, * -
moist hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy hamp. shakesh.
if she had not been drained, she might have tiled her palacos
with accidental gold and fiver. - 110-cel.
east and west have been the obvious conceptions of philo-
sophers, magnifying the condition of india above the setting
and occidental climates. brown's polgar erroirs.
occi'duous. adj. [occidens, latin.] western.
occi'pital. .# [occipitalis, lat.] placed in the hinder part
of the head. - - o - - - - -
o'cciput, n.s.[latin.] the hinder part of the head. '
his broad-brim’d hat
hangs o'er his occiput most quaintly,
to make the knave appear more saintly.
occi'sion. n.s.. [from occisio, lat..] the ast of killing.
to occlu'd e. v. a. [occludo, latin.] to shut up.
they take it up, and roll it upon the earths, whereby oc-
cluding the pores they conserve the natural humidity, aid so
prevent corruption.
occlu's e. adj. [occlusus, latin.] shut up; closed.
the appulse is either plenary and occluse, so as to preclude
all passages of breath or voice through the mouth; or elie par-
tial and pervious, so as to give them some passages out of the
mouth. holder on speech.
occlu'sion. n.s.. [from occlusio, latin.] the act of shutting
butler.
brown-
up.
occuit. adj. socculte, fr. occultus, lat..] secret; hidden;
unknown ; undiscoverable.
if his occult guilt
do not itself unkennel in one speech, -
it is a damned ghost that we have seen. shakesp. haml.
an artist will play a lesion on an instrument without mind-
ing a stroke; and our tongues will run divisions in a tune not
missing a note, even when our thoughts are totally engaged
elsewhere: which effects are to be attributed to some secret
act of the soul, which to us is utterly occut, and without the
ken of our intelle&amp;ts. glanville.
. these instincts we call occult qualitics; which is all one
with saying that we do not understand how they work. l'e/fr.
these are manifest qualitics, and their causes only are ecost.
and the aristotelians give the name of occult qualitics not to
manifest qualities, but to such qualities only as they supposed
to lie hid in bodies, and to be the unknown causes of manifest
effects. new-on' opticks.
occult ation. m. s. socculatio, latin.] in astronomy, is
the time that a star or planet is hid from our iigit, when
eclipsed by interposition of the body of the moon, or some
other planet between it and us. harris.
oo:: n: s [from occult..] secretness; state of being
hid.
o'ccupancy. m. s. [from occupani, latin.] the ad of taking
possession.
of moveables, some are things natural; others, things arti-
ficial. property in the first is gained by occupancy, in the latter
by improvement. warburton on literary property.
occupas t. n.s. soccupan, latin.] he that takes poss.ffion of
any thing. -
of beasts and birds the property passeth with the possession,
and goeth to the occupant; but of civil people not so. bacon.
to q'ccupat e. v. a. soccupa, latin.] to possess; to hold; to
take up.
drunken men are taken with a plain destitution in volun-
tary motion; for that the spirits of the wine oppress the spirits
animal, and occupate part of the place where they are, and so
make them weak to move. bacon's nat. hisł.
occura’rion, n.s.. [from occupation, fr. occupatio, lat.]
1. the act of taking possession.
spain hath enlarged the bounds of its crown within this last
sixscore years, much more than the ottomans: i speak not
of matches or unions, but of arms, occupations, invasions.
bacon.
2. employment; business.
such were the distresses of the then infant world; so inces-
fant their occupations about provision for food, that there was
little leisure to commit any thing to writing. //codward.
in your most busy occupations, when you are never so much
taken up with other affairs, yet now and then send up an eja-
culation to the god of your salvation. joake.
3. trade ; calling ; vocation. -
the red pestilence strike all trades h rome,
and occupations perish. shakespeare's coriolanas.
he was of the same craft with them, and wrought, for by
their occupation they were tent-makers. 4-i's xviii. 3.
o'ccupier. n. s. [from occupy.j
1. a possessor; one who takes into his possession.
if the title of occupiers be good in a land unpeopled, why
should it be bad accounted in a country peopled thiniy raz.
2. one who follows any employment.
thy merchandise and the occupiers of thy merchandise, shall
fall into the midst of the seas. - e-4, xxxii. 27-
to qccupy. v. a. soccuper, fr. occupa, lat., -
1. to possess; to keep , to take up.
how
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o c e
o c u
how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say
athen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understandeth not
what thou say est ? - - i cor. xiv. 16.
powder being suddenly fired altogether, upon this high
rarefaction, requireth a greater space than before its body
occupied. brown's pulgar errours.
he must assert infinite generations before that first deluge; ,
and then the earth could not receive them, but the infinite bo-, .
dies of men must occupy an infinite space.
2. to busy ; to employ. - . . . . . . -
an archbishop may have cause to occupy more chaplains than
six. aoi of h. viii.
they occupied themselves about the sabbath, yielding exceed-
ing praise to the lord. - 2 mac. viii. 27..
how can he get wisdom that driveth oxen and is occu- .
pied in their labours, and whose talk is of bullocks
ecc. xxxviii. 25.
he that giveth his mind to the law of the most high, and
is occupied in the meditation thereof, will seek out the wis-
dom of all the ancient, and be occupied in prophesies.
ecclus, xxxix. i.
bently's sermons,
3. to follow as business. * . -
they occupy their business in deep waters. comm. prayer.
mariners were in thee to occupy thy merchandise. ez.xxvii. 9.
4. to use ; to expend. -
all the gold occupied for the work, was twenty and nine
talents. exodus xxxviii. 24.
to occupy, v. n. to follow business.
he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds,
and said unto them, occupy till i come. luke xix. 13.
to occu'r. v. n. [occurro, latin.]
1. to be presented to the memory or attention.
there doth not occur to me any use of this experiment for
profit. - bacon's natural hisłry.
the mind should be always ready to turn itself to the va-
oriety of objects that occur, and allow them as much considera-
tion as shall be thought fit. locke.
the far greater part of the examples that occur to us, are so
many encouragements to vice and disobedience." rogers.
2. to appear here and there.
. in scripture though the word heir occur, yet there is no such
thing as heir in our author's sense. locke.
3. to clash; to strike against; to meet. " -
bodies have a determinate motion according to the degrees
of their external impulse, their inward principle of gravitation,
and the resistance of the bodies they occur with. . . . bently.
4. to obviate; to intercept; to make opposition to. a lati-
nism. -
before i begin that i must occur to one specious objection
against this proposition. - bentley.
occu'rrence. n.s. [occurrence, fr. from occur : this was per-
haps originally occurrents.]
1. incident; accidental event. - - -
in education most time is to be bestowed on that which is
of the greatest consequence in the ordinary course and occur-
rences of that life the young man is designed for. locke.
2. occasional presentation.
voyages detain the mind by the perpetual occurrence and ex-
pectation of something new. ... hatts.
occu'rrent. n. s. [occurrent, fr. occurrens, lat.] "incident;
any thing that happens.
contentions were as yet never able to prevent two evils,
the one a mutual exchange of unseemly and unjust disgraces,
the other a common hazard of both, to be made a prey by
such as study how to work upon all occurrents, with most ad-
vantage in private. hooker's dedication.
he did himself certify all the news and occurrents in every
particular, from calice, to the mayor and aldermen of lon-
don. - bacon's henry vii.
occu’rsion, n.f. [accursom, latin.] clash; mutual blow.
in the resolution of bodies by fire, some of the diffipated
parts may, by their various occursion occasioned by the heat,
stick closely. boyle.
now should those active particles, ever and anon justled by
- the cecursion of other bodies, so orderly keep their cells with-
out alteration of site. glanville's scepsis.
o'cean. m. s. socean, fr. oceanus, latin.] - -
1. the main; the great sea. -
the golden fun salutes the morn. -
and, having gilt the ocean with his beams, n
gallops the zodiack. shakoff. tit. andron.
will all great neptune's ocean wash this blood
clean from my hand shakespeare's macbeth.
2. any immense expanse. • * * ---
time, in general, is to duration, as place to expansion."
they are so much of those boundless oceans of eternity and im-
mensity, as is set out and distinguished from the rest, to denote
the position of finite real beings, in those uniform, infinite
occans of duration and space. - - locke.
cycfan. adj. [this is not usual, though conformable to the
original import of the word.] peitaining to the main or
great sea. - * . -
'q' couplift; adj.[ouplus, lat.j eight fold.
in bulk as huge as that sea-bcast
leviathan, which god of all his works
created hugest that swim th’ ocean fiream.
- * - bounds were set
to darkness, such as bound the ocean wave. . milton.
oce a^nick. adj. [from ocean.] pertaining to the ocean. dici.
oce'lt.a.t.e.d. aff. [ccolatus, lat.] resembling the eye,
the white butterfly lays its offspring on cabbage leaves; a
yery beautiful reddish acellated one. darbam's p hysico-theology,
o chre. m. s. [ochre, ocre, fr. &amp;xpx.] ---
the earths distinguished by the name of ochra, are those
which have rough of naturally dusty surfaces, are but slightly
coherent in their texture, and are composed of fine and soft
argillaceous particles, and are readily diffusible in water. they
are of various colours; such as red, yellow, blue, green, black.
the yellow sort are called achris of iron, and the time...;
copper. - - • – '' hill's 44ateria zi/edica.
o'chrequs, adj.[from ochre.] consisting of ochre..."
in the interstices of the flakes is a grey, chalky, or ochreous
mater. - - - - - joaodward on fossils.
o'chrey. adj. [from ochre.] partaking of ochre.
this is conveyed about by the water; as we find in earthy,
phrey, and other loose matter. . j/oodward.
o'chimy. n.s.. [formed by corruption from alchimy.]. a mixed
-- -
---
* * * * * milton,
base metal. - - -
99tagon. m. s. sold and yovsz.] in geometry, a figure
consisting of eight sides and angles; and this, when all the
sides and angles are equal, is called a regular odiagon, which
may be inscribed in a circle. harris.
oo::cosa. adj. [from octagon.] having eight angles and
10 cs.
oovian. adj, socio and angulus, latin.] having eight
angles. - v (; , • dic.
cora's gularness. m. s. [from coiangular.] the quality of
having eight angles. --- - dic’.
qcrossr. {*. in astrology, is, when a planet is in such an
oct1:1e. aspect or position with respect to another, that
their places are only distant an eighth part of a circle of forty-
five degrees. -- dics.
oct.a’v e. n.s. sociave, fr. colavus, lat.]
1. the eighth day after some peculiar festival. - - -
2. [in musick.] an eighth or an interval of eight sounds.
3. eight days together after a festival. ains.
oct4/0. [lat..] a book is said to be in adjav, when a shot
is folded into eight leaves. * die?.
they accompany the second edition of the original experi-
ments, which were printed first in english in adava, boyle.
octe’nnial. adj. [from oftennium, lat.]
1. happening every eighth year.
2. lasting eight years. - - - -
octo’ber. m. j. [october, latin; ocłabre, fr. j. the tenth
month of the year, or the eighth numbered from march,
oiler is drawn in a garment of yellow and carnation;
upon his head a garland of oak leaves, in his right hand the
sign scorpio, in his left a basket of servises. peacham.
qctoo brical, adj. having eight fides. idic?.
octogos ary. adj, sociogeni, latin.] of eighty years of age.
z - • dics.
octon ary. adj. [ocionarius, latin, j belonging to the num-
ber eight. - ixic7.
octoocular; adj. [oao and oculus.] having eight eyes. . .
most animals are binocular; spiders for the most part offa-
nocular, and some senocular. derham's physico-theology.
o: too falous. adj. sold and tilov, gr.j. having eight
flower leaves. - dio.
o'crostyle...m. s. [3:13 and rs2go, gr.] in the anciental
chite&amp;ture, is the face of a building or ordonnance containing
eight columns. harri.
- diff.
o'cular. adj, socilaire, fr. from oculus, latin.] do
on the eye; known by the eye. -
- prove my love a whore, -
... be sure of it: give me the ocular proof,
"qr thou hadst better have been born a dog. ... shałoszaro.
he that would not believe the menace of god at first, it
may be doubted whether before an ocular example he believed
the curse at first. . - -- brown.
o'cut'arly. adv. [from ocular.] to the observation of the eye.
the same is ocularly confirmed by vives upon austin. bro.
o'culate, adj. [oculatus, lat.] having eyes; knowing by the
eye.
o'col. 1st. n.s.. [from oculus, lat.] one who professes to cure
distempers of the eyes. ' t : ".
if there be a speck in the eye, we take them off; but he
were a strange.oulis, who would pull out the eye. bacon.
i i. .. #. ... go to help one eye and put
out the other, we should have an untoward b -- - rv
o'culus beli. [latin.] rd business. l'e/ir.
the oculus beli of jewellers, probably of pliny, is an acci-
dental variety of the agat kind; having a grey horny ground,
circular delineations, and a spot in the middle, resembling the
eye; whence its name. - hoodward.
4. odd.
"1
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o d d
odd. ad; sadda, swedish.)
1. not even ; not divisible into equal numbers.
this is the third time ; l hope
good luck kes in odd numbers. shakespeare,
what verity there is in that numeral conceit, in the lateral
division of man by even and odd; ascribing the odd unto the
right side, and the even unto the left; and so by parity, or
imparity of letters in mens names, to determine misfortunes.
brown's /ulgar errours.
2. more than a round number; indefinitely exceeding any
number specified.
the account of the profits of ulster, from the fifth year of
edward is id. until the eighth, do amount but to nine hun-
dred and odd pounds. davies an ireland.
sixteen hundred and od 1 years after the earth was made, it
was destroyed in a deluge of water. burnet's theory.
the year, without regard to days, ends with an odd day
and odd hours, odd minutes and odd seconds of minutes; so
that it cannot be measured by any even number of days, hours,
or minutes. holder on time.
3. particular; uncouth ; extraordinary; not like others; not
to be numbered anong any class. in a sense of contempt or
dislike. -
her madness hath the odds? frame of sense,
such a dependency of thing on thing,
as eer i heard in madness. shakesp. masore for masure.
of thee, kind boy, i ask no red and white,
to make up my delight,
no odd becoming graces,
black eyes, or little know not what's in faces. suckling.
when i broke loose from writers who have employed their
wit and parts in propagating of vice, i did not question but
i should be treated as an odd kind of a fellow. speciator.
no fool pythagoras was thought;
he made his list’ning scholars stand,
their mouth still cover'd with their hand:
eise, may be, some odd thinking youth,
might have refus’d to let his ears
attend the music of the spheres. prizr.
this blue colour being made by nothing else than by re-
flexion of a specular superficies, seems so cad a phenomenon
and so difficult to be explained by the vulgar hypothesis of
philosophers, that i could not but think it deserved to be taken
notice of. newton's opticks.
pope. }
what other men dislike is sure to please
of all mankind these dear antipodes. 1%ung.
4. not noted ; not taken into the common account; unheeded.
i left him cooling of the air with sighs,
in an odd angle of the isle. shakespeare's tempes?.
there are yet missing some few odd lads that you remember
not. shakespeare's tempy?.
5. strange; unaccountable ; fantastical.
how strange or odd soe'er i bear myself,
as i, perchance, hereafter shall think meet,
to put an antick disposition on. shakso. hamlet.
it is an odd way of uniting parties to deprive a majority of
part of their ancient right, by conferring it on a faction, who
had never any right at all. swift.
patients have sometimes coveted odd things which have re-
lieved them; as salt and vinegar. arbuthnot on aliments.
with such odd maxims to thy flocks retreat,
nor furnish mirth for ministers of state.
6. uncommon; particular.
the odd man to perform all three perfeotly is, joannes
sturmius. ascham's shoolmasier.
7. unlucky.
the trust othello puts him in,
on some odd time of his infirmity,
will shake this island.
8. unlikely; in appearance improper.
mr. locke's essay would be a very cdd book for a man to
make himself master of, who would get a reputation by cri-
tical writings. æadison's spe&amp;#ator.
o'ddly. adv. [from cald. this word and oddness, should, i
thiak, be written with one d'; but the writers almost all com-
bine against it.]
1. not evenly.
2. strangely; particularly ; irregularly ; unaccountably; un-
couthly; contrarily to custom.
how addy will it found, that i,
must ask my child forgiveness. shakesp. tempoff.
one man is pressed with poverty, and looks somewhat oddy
upon it. - collier on the spleen.
the dreams of sleeping men are made up of the waking
man's ideas, though for the most part oddly put together. locke.
this child was near being excluded out of the species of
man botely by his shape. it is certain a figure a little more
so proud i am no slave,
so impudent i own myself no knave,
so old, my country's ruin makes me grave.
to counterpoise this hero of the mode,
some for renown are singular, and odd;
1%ung.
shakespeare's othello.
oddly turned had cast him, and he had been executed. locłe.
the real essence of substances we know not; and there-
fore are so undetermined in our nominal cssences, which we
make ourselves, that if several men were to be asked concern-
ing some oldly-shaped fetus, whether it were a man or no
one should meet with different answers. locke-
her aukward love indeed was odly fated;
she and her polly were too near related.
as masters in the clare obscure,
with various light your eyes allure:
a flaming yellow here they spread;
idraw off in blue, or chage in red;
yet from these colours oddly mix’d,
your sight upon the whole is fix’d. prizr.
they had seen a great black substance lying on the ground
very oddly-shaped. swift.
fossi's are very oddly and elegantly shaped, according to the
modification of their constituent salts, or the cavities they are
formed in. bentley.
o'ddn ess. n. / [from odd j
1. the state of being not even.
2. sorangeness; particularity; uncouthness; irregularity.
coveting to recommend himself to posterity, cicero begged
it as an alms of the historians, to remember his consulship:
and observe the oddness of the event; all their histories are lost,
*nd the vanity of his request stands recorded in his own
writings. dryden.
a knave is apprehensive of being discovered; and this ha-
bitual concern puts an oddness into his looks. collier.
my wife fell into a violent disorder, and i was a little dis.
jprior.
composed at the oddness of the accident. swift.
opps. n. / [from odd.]
1. inequality; excess of either compared with the other.
between these two cases there are great odds. hocker.
the case is yet not like, but there appeareth great odds be-
tween them. speyer on ireland.
i will lay the odds that ere this year expite,
we bear our civil swords and native fire,
as far as france. shakoff. henry iv.
i chiefly who enjoy
so far the happier lot, enjoying thee
pre-eminent by so much caas.
shail i give him to partake
full happiness with me? or rather not;
hot keep the odds of knowledge in my pow'r
without co-partner * 4milton's paradiso lo?.
cromwel, with odds of number and of fate,
renov'd this bulwark of the church and state. jwaller.
all these, thus unequally furnished with truth, and ad-
vanced in knowledge, i suppose of equal natural parts; all the
odds between them has been the different scope that has been
given to their understandings to range in. locke.
judging is balancing an account, and determining on which
side the odds lie. - locke.
2. more than an even wager; more likely than the con-
trary.
since every man by nature is very prone to think the best of
himself; and of his own condition; it is odd, but he will
find a shrewd temptation. south.
the presbyterian party endeavoured one day to introduce a
jebate about repealing the test clause, when there appeared at
least four to one odds against them. swift.
some bishop bestows upon them some inconfiderable bene-
fice, when 'tis odd; they are already cucumbered with a nu-
merous family. swift's 44; cellanies.
3. advantage; superiority.
and tho’ the sword, some understood,
in force had much the odd, of wood,
'twas nothing so; both sides were balanc'd
so cqual, none knew which was valiant's.
4. quarrel; debate; dispute.
i can't speak
any beginning to this peevish cod.
what is the night 2
almost at odds with the morning, which is which. shaky?.
he flashes into one gross crime or other,
that sets us all at odd.
the fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
were still at odds, being but three;
until the goose came out of door,
and staid the odd; by adding four. shakoff. love's lab. l.2/?.
gods of whatsoe'er degree,
resume not what themselves have given,
or any brother god in heav'n ;
which keeps the peace among the gods,
or they must always be at od). sovift's miscellanies.
ore. m. s. so...] a poem written to be sung to musick, a
lyrick poem; the ode is either of the greater or less kind. the
less is characterised by sweetness and ease; the greater by su-
blimity, rapture, and quickness of transition.
a man haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with
carving rosalind on theirbarks; hangs odes upon hawthorns,
%ilton's paradise left.
hudibras.
shakes. othel.
shakes?, k. lear. ,
7 and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o d o
o f
:
:
and clecies on brambles, all forsooth desying the name of
rosalind. shakespeare's as you like it.
o run, prevent them with thy humble ode,
and lay it lowly at his blessed feet. o milion.
what work anong you scholar gods !
phoebus most write him am’rous odes;
and thou, poor cousin, must compose
his letters in submissive prose. prior.
‘dible. adj. [from cai.] hateful. die?.
dious. adj. sodictor, fr. cdiosus, latin.]
1. hateful ; detestable; abominable.
for ever all goodness will be most charming; for ever all
wickedness will be most odious. spratt.
hatred is the passion of defence, and there is a kind of hos-
tility included in its very effence. but then, if there could
have been hatred in the world, when there was scarce any
thing odious, it would have acted within the compass of its
proper object. south.
let not the trojans, with a feign'd pretence
of proffer'd peace, delude the latian prince:
expel from italy that odious name. dryden.
she breathes the odious fume
of nauseous steams, and poisons all the room. granville.
2. exposed to hate.
another means for raising money, was, by inquiring after
offences of officers in great place, who as by unjust dealing
they became most odious, so by justice in their punishments
the prince acquired both love and applause. hayward.
he had rendered himself odious to the parliament. clarend.
3. causing hate ; invidious.
the seventh from thee,
the only righteous in a world perverse,
and therefore hated, therefore so beset
with foes, for daring single to be just,
and utter odious truth, that god would come
to judge them with his saints. milton's par. loft,
4. a word expressive of disgust: used by women.
green fields, and shady groves, and crystal springs,
and larks, and nightingales, are odious things ;
but smoke, and dust, and noise, and crowds delight.
1 oung.
o'drously. adv. [from odious.]
1. hatefully; abominably.
- had thy love, still odiously pretended,
been as it ought, sincere, it would have taught thee
far other reas'nings. milton's agonisłes.
2. invidiously; so as to cause hate. -
arbitrary power no sober man can fear, either from the
king's disposition or his prastice; or even where you would
odiously lay it, from his ministers. dryden.
o'dious n ess. n.s.. [from odious.]
1. hatefulness.
have a true sense of his sin, of its odiousness, and of its danger.
- wake's preparation for death.
2. the state of being hated.
there was left of the blood royal, an aged gentleman of
approved goodness, who had gotten nothing by his cousin's
power but danger from him, and odiousnes; for him. sidney.
o'dium. m. s. [latin.] invidiousness; quality of provoking
hate.
- the odium and offences which some men's rigour or remis-
ness had contracted upon my government, i was resolved to
have expiated. king charles.
she threw the odium of the fact on me,
and publickly avow’d her love to you. dryden.
projectors, and inventors of new taxes being hateful to the
people, seldom fail of bringing odium upon their master.
davenant.
odont a'lg1ck. adj. [333, and &amp;ayoo.] pertaining to the
tooth-ach.
o'dorats. adi. [odoratus, latin.] scented ; having a strong:
scent, whether foetid or fragrant.
smelling is with a communication of the breath, or vapour
of the object odorate. bacon's natural history.
odor1 ferous. adj. [odorifer, lat.] giving scent; usually,
fweet of scent; fragrant; perfumed.
a bottle of vinegar so buried, came forth more lively and
cdorf, rous, smelling almost like a violet. bacon.
there stood in this roome presses that enclosed
robes odoriferous. chapman.
gentle gales
fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense
native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole -
these balmy spoils. milton's paradise loft.
- smelling bodies send forth effluvias of steams, without sen-
fibly wasting. a grain of musk will send forth odoriferous par-
, ticles for scores of years, without its being spent. locke.
opor 1’e e rous n ess. n. s. [from odoriferous.] sweetness of
scent ; fragrance.
o'dorous. adj. [odorus, latin.] fragrant; perfumed; sweet
of scent. - -
vol. ii. -
such fragrant flowers do give most odoroas smell,
but her sweet odour did them all excel. spenser.
their private roofs on od"rous timber borne,
such as might palaces for kings adorn. j/aller.
we finell, because parts of the odorous body touch the nerves
of our nostrils. cheyne's phil. prin.
o dou r. m. s. sodor, lat. odour, fr. j
i. scent, whether good or bad.
democritus, when he lay a dying, sent for loaves of
new bread, which having opened and poured a little wine into
them, he kept himself alive with the odour till a certain feast
was past. bacon,
infusions in air, for so we may call odours, have the same
diversities with infusions in water; in that the several odours
which are in one flower or other body, issue at several times,
some earlier, some later. bacon.
they refer sapor unto salt, and odour unto sulphur; they
vary much concerning colour. brown's pulgar errouri.
where filver riv'lets play thro' flow'ry meads,
and woodbines give their sweets, and limes their shades,
black kennels absent odours she regrets,
and stops her nose at beds of violets. 1%ung.
2. fragrance; perfume; sweet scent.
me seem'd i smelt a garden of sweet flow’rs,
that dainty odours from them threw around,
for damsels fit to deck their lovers' bow’rs. spenser.
by her intercession with the king she would lay a most sea-
sonable and popular obligation upon the whole nation, and
leave a pleasant odour of her grace and favour to the people
behind her. clarendon.
the levites burned the holy incense in such quantities as
refreshed the whole multitude with its odours, and filled all the
region about them with perfume. add, n.
oe. this combination of vowels does not properly belong to our
language, nor is ever found but in words derived from the
greek, and not yet wholly conformed to our manner of writ-
ing : ae has in such words the sound of e.
oecono'micks. m. s. soixwooixa, ; a conomique, fr. from oeco-
nomy. both it and its derivatives are under economy.] manage-
ment of household affairs. -
a prince's leaving his business wholly to his ministers, is
as dangerous an errour in politicks, as a master's committing
all to his servant, is in oeconomicks. l’estrange.
oecume'nical, adj. [aixaoivods, from oixagsyn.] general;
respecting the whole habitable world. -
this nicene council was not received as an oecumenical
council in any of the eastern patriarchates, excepting only that
of constantinople. stillingfleet.
we must not make a computation of the catholick church
from that part of it which was within the compass of the ro-
man empire, though called oecumenical. lesley.
oepe'ma. m. s. sołowa, from oioio, to swell.] a tumour. it
is now and commonly by surgeons confined to a white, soft,
insensible tumour, proceeding from cold and aqueous humours,
such as happen to hydropick constitutions. quincy.
qedematick. off d pertaini d
oede/matous. : adj. [from oedema..] pertaining to an oedema.
it is primarily generated out of the effusion of melancholick
blood, or secondarily out of the dregs and remainder of a
phlegmonous or oedematick tumour. - harvey.
the great discharge of matter, and the extremity of pain,
wasted her, oedematous swellings arose in her legs, and she lan.
guished and died. wiseman's surgery.
oei'll ad. m. s. [from otil, french.] glance; wink; token
of the eye.
she gave oeiliads and most speaking looks -
to noble edmund. shakesp. king lear.
o’er. contracted from over. see over.
his tears defac'd the surface of the well,
with circle after circle as they fell,
and now the lovely face but half appears,
o'er-run with wrinkles and defac'd with tears. addison.
oesophagus. n.s.. [from birds, wicker, from some similitude
in the structure of this part to the contexture of that ; and
©2 yo to eat..] the gullet; a long, large, and round canal,
that descends from the mouth, lying all along between the
windpipe and the joints of the neck and back, to the fifth
joint of the back, where it turns a little to the right, and
gives way to the descending artery; and both run by one
another, till at the ninth the oesophagus turns again to the left,
pierces the midrift, and is continued to the left orifice of the
stomach. &amp;uincy.
wounds penetrating the oesophagus and aspera arteria, re-
quire to be stitched close, especially those of the oosphagus,
where the sustenance and saliva so continually presseth into it.
hoseman's surgery.
of. prep, sop, saxon.]
1. it is put before the substantive that follows another in con-
struction ; as, of these part were slain; that is, part of those.
i cannot instantly raise up the gross
of full three thousand ducats. shak speare.
17 n * he
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o f
he to his natural endowments of a large invention, a ripe
judgment, and a strong memory, has joined the knowledge
of the liberal arts. - dryden.
all men naturally fly to god in extremity, and the most
atheistical person in the world, when forsaken of all hopes of
any other relief, is forced to acknowledge him. tillots,n.
the rousing of the mind with some degrees of vigour, does
set it free from those idle companions. locke.
the value of land is raised only by a greater plenty of
money. * locke.
they will receive it at last with an ample accumulation of
interest. smallridge.
2. it is put among superlative adjectives.
the most renowned of all are those to whom the name is
given philippinae. abbot's description of the world.
we profess to be animated with the best hopes of any men
in the world. tillotson.
at midnight, the most dismal and unseasonable time of all
other, all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps. tillots.
we are not to describe our shepherds as shepherds at this
day really are, but as they may be conceived then to have
been, when the best of men followed the employment. pope.
peace, of all worldly bleslings, is the most valuable. small.
3. from. -
the captain of the helots, with a blow whose violence
grew of fury, not of strength, or of strength proceeding of
fury, struck palladius upon the fide of the head. sidney.
one that i brought up of a puppey, one that
i sav'd from drowning. shaksp. two gent. of verona.
he borrowed a box of the ear of the englishman, and swore
he would pay him again when he was able. shakesp.
it was called corcyra of corcyra, the daughter of æsopus.
- sandys's travels.
4. concerning ; relating to.
the quarrel is not now of fame and tribute,
or of wrongs done unto confederates,
but for your own republick. ben. johnson.
this cannot be understood of the first disposition of the
waters, as they were before the flood. burnet.
all have this sense of war. smallridge.
5. out of.
yet of this little he had some to spare,
to feed the famish'd and to clothe the bare. dryden.
look once again, and for thy husband lost,
lo all that's left of him, thy husband's ghost. dryden.
6. among.
he is the only person of all others for an epic poem. drya.
of all our heroes thou canst boast alone,
that jove, whene'er he thunders, calls thee son. dryden.
neither can i call to mind any clergyman of my own ac-
quaintance who is wholly exempt from this error. swift.
7. by. this sense was once very frequent, but is not now in
use.
she dying
shall be lamented, pitied, and excus'd
(fevery bearer. shakespeare.
like heav’n in all, like earth in this alone,
that tho' great states by her support do stand,
yet she herself supported is of none,
but by the finger of the almighty's hand. davies.
i was friendly entertained of the english consul. sandys.
lest a more honourable man than those be bidden of him.
nelson's festivals,
3. according to.
the senate
and people of rome, of their accustom'd greatness,
will sharply and severely vindicate
not only any fact, but any practice
'gainst the state. ben. johnson's catiline.
they do of right belong to you, being most of them first
preached amongst you. tillotson's dedication.
tancred, whose delight
was plac'd in his fair daughter's daily sight,
of custom, when his state affairs were done,
would pass his pleasing hours with her alone. dryden.
9. noting power, ability, choice, or spontaneity. with the re-
ciprocal pronoun.
some soils put forth odorate herbs of themselves; as wild
thyme. bacon's natural history.
of himself man is confessedly unequal to his duty. steph.
the venice glasses would crack of themselves. boyle.
of himself is none,
but that eternal infinite and one,
who never did begin, who ne'er can end;
on him all beings, as their source, depend. dryden.
the thirsty cattle, of themselves obtain'd
from water, and their grassy fare disdain'd. dryden.
to assert mankind to have been of himself, and without
a cause, hath this invincible objection against it, that we
plainly see every man to be from another. . tibison.
no particle of matter, nor any combination of particles ;
that is, no bodies can either move of themselves, or of them-
selves alter the direction of their motion. cheyne. .
a free people, as soon as they fall into any acts of civil
society, do of themselves divide into three powers. swift.
howe'er it was civil in angel or elf,
for he ne'er could have filled it so well of himself. swift.
10. noting properties, qualities, or condition. -
he was a man of a decayed fortune, and of no good educa-
tion. clarendon.
the colour of a body may be changed by a liquor which of
itself is of no colour, provided it be saline. bo, e-
the fresh eglantine exhal’d a breath,
whose odours were of pow'r to raise from death. dryden.
a man may suspend the act of his choice from being deter-
mined for or against the thing proposed, till he has examined
whether it be really of a nature, in itself and consequences, to
make him happy or no. lotke.
the value of land is raised, when remaining of the same
fertility it comes to yield more rent. l2.ee.
11. noting extraction.
lunsford was a man of an ancient family in sussex. clor.
mr. rowe was born of an ancient family in jdevonshire,
that for many ages had made a handsome figure in their
country. rowe's life.
12. noting adherence, or belonging.
tubal, a wealthy hebrew of my tribe,
will furnish me. shakesp. merchant of verize.
pray that in towns and temples of our own,
the name of great anchises may be known.
13. noting the matter of any thing.
the chariot was all of cedar, gilt and adorned with crystas,
save that the fore-end had pannels of saphires set in borders of
gold, and the hinder end the like of emeralds of the peru co-
lour. bacon's new atlantis.
the common materials which the ancients made their ships
of, were the wild ash, the evergreen oak, the beech, and the
alder. arbuthnot on coins.
14. noting the motive.
it was not of my own choice i undertook this work.
dryden.
dryden.
our sov’reign lord has ponder'd in his mind
the means to spare the blood of gentle kind;
and of his grace and inborn clemency,
he modifies his first severe decree. drydew.
15. noting form or manner of existence.
as if our lord, even of purpose to prevent this fancy of
extemporal and voluntary prayers, had not left of his own fram-
ing, one which might remain as a part of the church liturgy,
and serve as a pattern whereby to frame all other prayers with
efficacy, yet without superfluity of words. hacker.
16. noting something that has some particular quality.
mother, says the thrush, never had any such a friend as i
have of this swalkow. no, says she, nor ever mother such a
fool as i have of this same thrush. l'eorange-
17. noting faculties of power granted.
if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which
god giveth. 1 peter iv. 11.
18. noting preference, or postponence.
your highness shall repose you at the tower.
—i do not like the tower of any place. shakespeare.
19. noting change of one state to another.
o miserable of happy is this the end
of this new glorious world, and me so late
the glory of that glory, who now become
accurs'd, of blesied ? milton's parads: loft.
20. noting causality.
good nature, by which i mean beneficence and candour, is
the product of right reason; which of necessity will give allow-
ance to the failures of others, by considering that there is no-
thing perfect in mankind. dryden-
21. noting proportion.
how many are there of an hundred, even amongst scholars
themselves. locke.
22. noting kind or species.
to cultivate the advantages of success, is an affair of the
cabinet; and the neglect of this success may be of the most
fatal consequence to a nation. swift.
23. it is put before an indefinite expression of time: as, of late,
in late times; of old, in old time.
of late, divers learned men have adopted the three hyposta-
tical principles. boyle on colours.
in days of old there liv'd, of mighty fame,
a valiant prince, and theseus was his name.
off. adv, [af, dutch.]
1. of this adverb the chief use is to conjoin it with verbs: as,
to come off; to fly off; to take off; which are found under the
verbs.
2. it is generally opposed to on ; as, to lay on ; to take off:
in this case it signifies, disunion; separation; breach of con-
tinuity.
since the wisdom of their choice is rather to have my cap
i that,
drydon.
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o f f
o f f
ga
o
§
o
#:
than my heart, i will practice the infinuating nod, and be off
to them most counterfitly. shakespeare's coriolanus.
where are you, sir john come, off with your boots.
shakespeare.
see
the lurking gold upon the fatal tree;
then rend it off. dryden.
a piece of silver coined for a shilling, that has half the
filver clipped off, is no more a shilling than a piece of wood,
which was once a sealed yard, is still a yard, when one half
of it is broke off. locke.
3. it signifies distance.
west of this forest, scarcely off a mile,
in goodly form comes on the enemy. shakespeare.
about thirty paces off were placed harquebusiers. . knolles.
4. in painting or statuary it signifies projection or relief.
'tis a good piece;
this comes off well and excellent. shakespeare.
5. it signifies evanescence ; absence or departure. -
competitions intermit, and go off and on as it happens,
upon this or that occasion. - l'estrange.
6. it signifies any kind of disappointment; defeat; interrup-
tion; adverse division: as, the affair is off; the match is off.
7. on the opposite side of a question. - - - -
the questions no way touch upon puritanism, either off or
on . sanderson.
8. from ; not toward. -
philoclea, whose delight of hearing and seeing was before a
stay from interrupting her, gave herself to be seen unto her
with such a lightening of beauty upon zelmane, that neither
ihe could look on, nor would look off. sidney.
. off hand; not studied. &gt;
9 %. aars of fancy off hand look well enough. l'estr.
10. to be off. in common talk, signifies to recede from an in-
tended contract or design.
11. to come off. to escape by some accident or subterfuge.
12. to get off. to make escape.
13. to go off. to desert; to abandon. -
14. to go off. applied to guns, to take fire and be discharged;
borrowed from the arrow and bow.
15. holi or ill off. , having good or bad success. . -
16. off, whether alone or in composition, means either literally
or figuratively, disjunction, absence, privation, or distance.
off. interjeci. an expression of abhorrence, or command to
depart.
off, or i fly for ever from thy fight.
off. prep.
1. not on. • - -
i continued feeling again the same pain; and finding it
grow violent i burnt it, and felt no more after the third time ;
was never off my legs, nor kept my chamber a day. temple.
istant from.
2. po tusculum was at a place called grotto ferrate,
about two miles off this town, though most of the modern
writers have fixed it to frescati. - addison on italy.
o'ffal. m. s. [off fall, says skinner, that which falls from the
table : perhaps from offa, latin.]
1. waste meat; that which is not eaten at the table.
he let out the offalo of his meat to interest, and kept a
register of such debtors in his pocket-book. a, buthnot.
2. carrion ; coarse flesh. -
i should have fatted all the region kites
with this so %. h burst shakesp. hamlet.
cram’d, and gorg'd, nigh burst, -
with iod o offal. moon's par. loft.
3- refuse; that which is thrown away as of no value.
to have right to deal in things sacred, was accounted an
argument of a noble and illustrious descent ; god would not
accept the offal of other professions. south.
if a man bemoan his lot,
that after death his mouldring limbs shall rot,
a secret sting remains within his mind ;
the fool is to his own cast offalo kind.
they o: hogs with offal corns.
thing of no esteein.
- aw. ... is rome what rubbish and what offalo shak.
offe'nce. m. s. [offense, fr. offensa, from offenda, lat.]
1. crime; act of wickedness. 21
thither with speed their hasty course they ply'd, , .
where christ the lord for our offences dy’d. fairfax.
thou hast stol'n that, which after some few hours
were thine without offence. shakesp. henry iv.
sgression.
1. *:::::::: law of nature, every man hath not a power to
punish offences against it, i see not how the magistrates of any
community can punish an alien of another country. locke.
3. ". given my opinion against the authority of two great
men, but i hope without offence to their memories; for [loved
them living, and reverence them dead. dryden.
4. displeasure given; cause of disgust; scandal.
smith's phaedr.
dryden.
mortimer.
giving no offence in any thing, that the ministry re not
blamed. - 2 cor. vi. 3.
. he remembered the injury of the children of bean, who
had been a snare and an offince unto the people. 1 a sac. iv.
the pleasures of the touch are greater than those of the
other senses; as in warming upon cold, or refrigeration upon
heat: for as the pains of the touch are greater than the off.nces
of other senses, so likewise are the pleasures. bacon.
by great and scandalous offences, by incorrigible misdemea-
nours, we may incur the censure of the church. pearson.
5. anger ; displeasure conceived. -
earnest in every present humour, and making himself brave
in his liking, he was content to give them just cause of offence
... when they had power to make just revenge. sidney.
6. attack; act of the affailant. -
courtesy that seemed incorporated in his heart, would not
be persuaded to offer any office, but only to stand upon the
best defensive guard. sidn'y.
- i have equal skill in all the weapons of offence. richard.
offenceful. adj. [offence and jull.] injurious ; giving cis-
pleasure.
it seems your most off.ncsul act :
was mutually committed. shakesp. measure for moos.
offenceless. asj. [from a since.) unoffending; innocent.
you are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in
policy than in malice; even so as one would beat his offencelos,
dog to affright an imperious lion. shaksp. othelio.
to qffe'nd. v. a. [offendo, latin.]
i. to make angry; to displease.
if much you note him -
you shall offend him, and extend his passion,
feed and regard him not. shakespeare's macbeth.
three sorts of men my soul hateth, and i am greatly of -
fended at their life. ecclus xxv. 2.
the emperor himself came running to the place in his ar-
mour, severely reproving them of cowardice who had forsaken
the place, and grievously offended with them who had kept such
negligent watch. knolles's history of the 7 urks.
gross sins are plainly seen, and easily avoided by persons
that profess religion. but the indiscreet and dangerous use of
innocent and lawful things, as it does not shock and affod our
consciences, so it is difficult to make people at all sensible of
the danger of it. law.
2. to assail; to attack.
he was fain to defend himself, and withal so to offind him,
that by an unlucky blow the poor philoxenus fell dead at his
feet.
sidney,
3. to transgress; to violate.
many fear
more to offind the law. ballad.
4. to injure.
cheaply you fin, and punish crimes with ease,
not as th' offended, but th' offenders please. dryden.
to offe'n d. v. n.
1. to be criminal ; to transgress the law.
this man that of earthly matter maketh graven images,
knoweth himself to offend above all others. //isd. xiv. 13.
whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all. james ii. 10.
the bishops therefore of the church of england did noways
offend by receiving from the roman church into our divine set-
vice, such materials, circumstances or ceremonies as were
religious and good. - j/hite.
2. to cause anger.
i shall offend, either to detain or give it. shaft. k. lear.
3. to commit transgression: with agains.
our language is extremely imperfect, and in many in-
stances it offends against every part of grammar. swift.
offender. m. s. [from offind.]
1. a criminal ; one who has committed a crime; a transgressor;
a guilty person.
all that watch for iniquity are cut off, that make a man aa
offender for a word. if xxix. 21.
every actual sin, besides the three former, must be consi-
dered with a fourth thing, to wit, a certain stain, or blot,
which it imprints and leaves in the offender. perkins.
so like a fly the poor offender dies;
but like the wasp, the rich escapes and flies. denham.
how shall i lose the fin, yet keep the sense,
and love th' offender, yet detest th' offence pop.
the conscience of the offender shall be sharper than an aven-
ger's sword. clariffa.
he that, without a necessary cause, absents himself from
publick prayers, cuts himself off from the church, which hath
always been thought so unhappy a thing, that it is the greatest
punishment the governors of the church can lay upon the
worst offender. duty of man.
2. one who has done an injury.
all vengeance comes too short,
which can pursue th' offender. , shakesp. king lear.
offendress. n.s.. [foom offender.] a woman that offends.
- - virg nity
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o f f
- o f f
virginity murthers itself, and should be buried in high:
ways out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate offendress against
113t use. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
offe'nsive. adj. [offensif, fr. from offensis, lat.]
1. causing anger; displeasing ; disguiting.
since no man can do ill with a good conscience, the con-
solation which we herein seem to find is but a meer deceitful
pleasing of ourselves in error, which must needs turn to our
greater grief, if that which we do to please god most, be for
the manifold defects thereof offinsive unto him. hooker.
it shall suffice, to touch such customs of the irish as seem
offensive and repugnant to good government. spenser.
2. causing pain; injurious.
it is an excellent opener for the liver, but off nsive to the
ftonach. bacon's nat. history.
the sun was in cancer, in the hottest time of the year, and
the heat was very offensive to me. brown's travels.
some particular acrimony in the stomach sometimes
makes it offinsive, and which custom at last will overcome.
arbuthnot.
3. assailant; not defensive. -
he recounted the benefits and favours that he had done him,
in provoking a mighty and opulent king by an offensive war in
his quarrel. acozz.
we enquire concerning the advantages and disadvantages
betwixt those military offensive cngines used among the an-
cients, and those of these iatter ages. jwilkins.
their avoiding, as much as possible, the defensive part,
where the main stress lies, and keeping themselves chiefly to
the offensive ; perpetually objecting to the catholick scheme,
instead of clearing up the difficulties, which clog their own.
/pater&amp;nd.
offe'nsively. adv. [from offensive.]
1. mischievously; injuriously.
in the least thing done offensively against the good of men,
whose benefit we ought to seek for as our own, we plainly
shew that we do not acknowledge god to be such as indeed
he is. hooker.
2. so as to cause uneasiness or displeasure.
a lady had her sight disordered, so that the images in her
hangings did appear to her, if the room were not extraordi-
narily darkened, embellished with several offensively vivid co-
lours. boyle on colours,
3. by way of attack; not defensively.
offe'nsive n ess. n.s.. [from offensive.]
1. injuriousness; mischief.
2. cause of disgust.
the muscles of the body, being preserved sound and lim-
ber upon the bones, all the motions of the parts might be ex-
plicated with the greatest ease and without any offensivenes.
grew's museum.
to o'ffer. v. a. [offero, lat. offrir, fr.]
1. to present; to exhibit any thing so as that it may be taken
or received.
some ideas forwardly offer themselves to all men's under-
standings; some fort of truths result from any ideas, as soon
as the mind puts them into propositions. locke.
servants placing happiness in strong drink, make court to
my young master, by offering him that which they love. locke.
the heathen women under the mogul, offer themselves to
the flames at the death of their husbands. collier.
2. to sacrifice; to immolate; to present as an act of worship:
often with up, emphatical.
they offered unto the lord of the spoil which they had
brought, seven hundred oxen. 2 chron. xv. 1 1.
an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices. 1 pet. ii. 5.
whole herds of offer'd bulls about the fire,
and bristled boars and woolly sheep expire. dryden.
when a man is called upon to offer up himself to his con-
science, and to resign to justice and truth, he should be so far
from avoiding the lists, that he should rather enter with incli-
nation, and thank god for the honour. collier.
3. to bid, as a price or reward.
nor shouldst thou offer all thy little store,
will rich iolas yield, but offer more.
4. to attempt; to commence.
lysimachus armed about three thousand men, and began
first to offer violence. 2 mac. iv. 40.
5. to propose.
. in that extent wherein the mind wanders in remote specu-
lations, it stirs not one jot beyond those ideas which sense or
dryden.
refle&amp;tion have offered for its contemplation. locke.
our author offers no reason. locke.
to o'ffer. v. n.
1. to be present; to be at hand; to present itself.
th’ occasion offers, and the youth complies. dryden.
2. to make an attempt.
no thought can imagine a greater heart to see and con-
temn danger, where danger would offer to make any wrong-
ful threatning upon him. sidney.
we came close to the shore, and offered to land. bacan.
one offers, and in off'ring makes a stay;
another forward sets, and doth no more. dam. civ. isoar.
i would treat the pope and his cardinals roughly, if they
offered to see my wife without my leave. dryden.
3. with at ; to make an attempt.
i will not offer at that i cannot master. barazz.
i hope they will take it well that i should offer at a new
thing, and could forbear presuming to meddle where any of
the learned pens have ever touched before. grazz.f.
write down and make signs to him to pronounce them, and
guide him by shewing him by the motion of your own lips to
offer at one of those letters; which being the easiest, he wisi
stumble upon one of them. a holder.
the masquerade succeeded so well with him, that he would
be offering at the shepherd's voice and call too. l’estrange.
lt contains the grounds of his doctrine, and offers at some-
what towards the disproof of mine. atterbury.
without offering at any other remedy, we hastily engaged
in a war, which hath cost us sixty millions. swift.
o'ffer. m. s. [offre, fr. from the verb.]
1. proposal of advantage to another.
some nymphs there are, too conscious of their face;
these swell their prospects, and exalt their pride,
when offers are disdain'd, and love deny'd.
2. first advance.
force compels this offir,
and it proceeds from policy, not love.—
-mowbray, you overween to take it so:
this offer comes from mercy, not from fear.
what wouldst beg, laertes,
that shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
3. proposal made.
pope.
shakes?.
shakeft.
th' offers he doth make,
were not for him to give, nor them to take. daniel.
i enjoined all the ladies to tell the company, in case they had
been in the siege, and had the same offer made them as the
good women of that place, what every one of them would
have brought off with her, and have thought most worth the
saving. addison's spediator.
it carries too great an imputation of ignorance, or folly, to
quit and renounce former tenets upon the offer of an argu-
ment which cannot immediately be answered. looke.
the arians, eunomiams and macedonians, were then
formally and solemnly challenged by the catholicks, to refer
the matter in dispute to the concurring judgment of the writers
that lived before the controversy began; but they declined the
offer. waterland.
4. price bid; act of bidding a price. -
when stock is high, they come between,
making by second hand their offers ;
then cunningly retire unseen,
with each a million in his coffers. swift.
5. attempt; endeavour.
many motions, though they be unprofitable to expel that
which hurteth, yet they are offers of nature, and cause motions
by consent; as in groaning, or crying upon pain. bacon.
it is in the power of every one to make some essay, some of.
jor and attempt, so as to shew that the heart is not idle or ifl-
fensible, but that it is full and big, and knows itself to be so,
though it wants strength to bring forth. south's sermons.
one sees in it a kind of offer at modern archite&amp;ure, but
at the same time that the archite&amp;t has shown his dislike of
the gothic manner, one may see that they were not arrived at
the knowledge of the true way. addison on italy.
6. something given by way of acknowledgment.
fair streams that do vouchsafe in your clearness to represent
unto me my blubbered face, let the tribute offer of my tears
procure your stay a while with me, that i may begin yet at
last to find something that pities me. sidney.
o'fferer. m. s. [from offir.]
i. one who makes an offer.
bold offerers
of suite and gifts to thy renowned wise.
2. one who sacrifices, or dedicates in worship.
if the mind of the offerer be good, this is the only thing god
respe&amp;leth. hocker.
when he commanded abraham to sacrifice isaac, the place
of the offering was not left undetermined, and to the efforos
discretion. - south's sermoni.
o'ff ering. m. s. [from offer.] a sacrifice; any thing immo-
lated, or offered in worship.
plucking the entrails of an off, ing forth,
r
chap 77,77.
they could not find a heart within the beast. shakes?.
they are polluted offerings, more abhorr'd
than spotted livers in the sacrifice. shakeshcare.
when thou shalt make his soul an a oring for fin, he shall
see his seed. js, liii. 19.
the gloomy god
stood mute with awe, to see the golden rod;
admir'd the destin'd off ring to his queen,
a venerable gift so rarely secn. drydon.
4. what
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o f f
o f f
*
k
.
.
:
o:
-
so
o:
o'ffice r. m. s. [officier, french. j
what nations now to juno's pow'r will pray, -
or off"rings on my slighted altars lay ? dryden's wirgil.
i'll favour her,
that my awaken'd soul may take her flight,
renew'd in all her strength, and fresh with life,
an offering fit for heaven. addison's cato.
inferior offerings to thy god of vice
are duly paid in fiddles, cards, and dice. 1%ung.
offe'r'tory. n.s.. [s]ertoire, fr.] the act of offering.
he went into st. paul's church, where he made offertory of
his standards, and had orizons and te deum sung. bacon,
the administration of the sacrament he reduced to an imi-
tation, though a distant one, of primitive frequency, to once
a month, and therewith its anciently inseparable appendant,
the offertory. fell.
offe'rture. n.s. (from offer.] offer; proposal of kindness.
a word not in use.
thou hast prevented us with offertures of thy love, even
when we were thine enemies. ring charles.
o'ffice n.s. [office, fr. officium.]
1. a publick charge or employment; magistracy.
you have contriv'd to take
from rome all season'd office, and to wind
yourself into a power tyrannical. shakesp. coriolanus.
methought this staff, mine office-badge in court,
was broke in twain. shakesp. henry vi.
the insolence of office. shakespeare.
is it the magistrate's office, to hear causes or suits at law, and
to decide them kettleworth.
2. agency; peculiar use.
all things that you should use to do me wrong,
deny their office. shakespeare's king lear.
in this experiment the several intervals of the teeth of the
comb do the office of so many prisms, every interval producing
the phenomenon of one prism. newton's opticks.
3. business; particular employment.
the sun was sunk, and after him the star
of hesperus, whose office is to bring
twilight upon the earth. milton's paradis. loft.
4. act of good or ill voluntarily tendered.
wolves and bears
casting their savageness aside, have done
like offices of pity. shakoff. i’inter's tale.
mrs. ford, i see you are obsequious in your love, and i
profess requital to a hair's breadth ; not only in the simple
office of love, but in all the accoustrement, complement, and
ceremony of it. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
i would i could do a good office between you. shakesp.
the wolf took occasion to do the fox a good office. l’asir.
you who your pious offices employ,
to save the reliques of abandon'd troy.
5. act of worship.
dryden's wirgil.
this gate
instructs you how t'adore the heavens, and bows you
to morning's holy office. shakespeare's cymbeline.
6. formulary of devotions.
whosoever hath children or servants, let him take care that
they say their prayers before they begin their work: the lord's
prayer, the ten commandments, and the creed, is a very good of-
fice for them, if they are not fitted for more regular offices. tayl,
7. rooms in a house appropriated to particular business.
what do we but draw anew the model
in fewer offices 2 at least desist
to build at all. shakespeare's henry iv.
let offices stand at distance, with some low galleries to pass
from them to the palace itself. bacon.
8. [officina, lat.) place where business is transacted.
what shall good old york see there,
but empty lodgings and unfurnish’d walls,
unpeopled offices, untroden stones shakesp. rich. ii.
empson and dudley, though they could not but hear of
these scruples in the king's conscience, yet as if the king's soul
and his money were in several offices, that the one was not to
intermeddle with the other, went on with as great rage as
cver, bacon's henry vii.
he had set up a kind of office of address; his general cor-
respondencies by letters. fell.
to o'frice. v. a. [from the noun..] to perform; to dis-
charge ; to do.
i will be gone, altho’
the air of paradise did fan the house,
and angels offic'd all. shakes. all's well that ends well.
1. a man employed by the publick.
'tis an office of great worth,
and you an officer fit for the place.
submit you to the people's voices,
allow their officers, and be content
to suffer lawful censure. shakespeare's coriolanus.
the next morning there came to us the same officer that
came to us at first to conduct us to the stranger's house. bac.
if it should fall into the french hands, all the princes would
vol. ii.
shakespeare.
return to be the several officers of his court. t.”ft.
as a magistrate or great officer he locks himself up from all
approaches. south's sermons.
birds of prey are an emblem of rapacious officers. a supe-
rior power takes away by violence from them, that which by
violence they took away from others. l'e/irange.
since he has appointed officers to hear it, a suit at law in it-
self must needs be innocent. kettleworth.
2. a commander in the army.
if he did not nimbly ply the spade,
his surly officer ne'er fail'd to crack
his knotty cudgel on his tougher back.
i summon'd all my officers in haste,
all came resolv'd to die in my defence. dryden.
the bad disposition he made in landing his men, shews him
not only to be much inferiour to pompey as a sea officer, but to
have had little or no skill in that element. arbuthnot.
3. one who has the power of apprehending criminals, or man
accountable to the law.
the thieves are possest with fear
so strongly, that they dare not meet each other;
each takes his fellow for an officer. shakesp. henry iv.
we charge you
, to go with us unto the officers. shakesh. hinry vi.
o'fficfred adj. [from officer.] commanded; supplied with
commanders.
what could we expect from an army offered by irish papists
and outlaws. addison's freeholder.
off1'cial adj. [official, fr. from office.]
1. conducive ; appropriate with regard to use.
in this animal are the guts, the stomach, and other parts
off ial unto nutrition, which, were its aliment the empty re-
ception of air, their provisions had been superfluous. brown.
2. pertaining to a publick charge.
the tribunes
endue you with the people's voice. remains
that in th' official marks invested, you
anon do meet the senate. shakespeare's coriolanus.
off 1'c1al. m. s.
official is that person to whom the cognizance of causes
is committed by such as have ecclesiastical jurisdiction. ælft.
a poor man found a priest over familiar with his wife, and
because he spake it abroad, and could not prove it, the priest
sued him before the bishop's official for defamation. candon.
offi’cialty. m. s. [afficialite, fr. from official.] the charge
or post of an official.
the office of an officialty to an archdeacon. ayliff.
to offi'ciate. v. a. [from office.] to give, in consequence
of office.
all her number'd stars that seem to rowl
spaces incomprehensible, for such
their distance argues, and their swift return
diurnal, merely to officiate light
... round this opacous earth, this punetual spot.
to offi'ciate. v. n.
1. to discharge an office, commonly in worship.
no minister officiating in the church, can with a good con-
science omit any part of that which is commanded by the
aforesaid law. sandy.n.
who of the bishops or priests that officiates at the altar, in
the places of their sepulchres, ever said we offer to thee peter
or paul ? - stilingficet.
to prove curates no servants, is to rescue them from that
contempt which they will certainly fall into under this notion;
which considering the number of persons officiating this way,
must be very prejudicial to religion. collier.
2. to perform an office for another.
offici'n al. adj. [from officina, a shop.] used in a shop, or
belonging to it: thus officinal plants and drugs are those used
in the shops.
officious, adj. [officieux, fr. offiosus, lat.]
1. kind ; doing good offices.
yet, not to earth are those bright luminaries
dryden,
milton.
officious; but to thee, earth's habitant. milton.
2. importunely forward.
you are too officious
in her behalf that scorns your services. shakespeare.
at taunton they killed in fury an officious and eager com-
misfioner for the subsidy. bacon's henry vii.
cato, perhaps
i’m too officious, but my forward cares
would fain preserve a life of so much value.
offi'ciously. adv. [from officious.]
1. importunately forward.
the most corrupt are most obsequious grown,
and those o scorn'd, officiously they own.
'latt’ring crouds officiously appear,
to give themselves, not you, an happy year.
2. kindly ; with unasked kindness.
let thy goats officiously be nurst,
and led to living streams to quench their thirst.
off 1'ciousness. m. s. [from officious.]
17 o 1. for-
addison.
dryden.
dryden.
dryden.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o g i
o i i, -
1. forwardness of civility, or respect, or endeavour.
monly in an ill sense.
i shew my officiousness by an offering, though i betray my
poverty by the measure. south.
2. service. -
in whom is required understanding as in a man, courage
and vivacity as in a lion, service and ministerial offiousness as
in the ox, and expedition as in the eagle. brown.
o'ff in g. m. s. [from off.] the act of steering to a distance
from the land. -
o'ff's e.t. m. s. [aff and st.] sprout ; shoot of a plant.
they are multiplied not only by the seed, but many also by
the root, producing offets or creeping under ground. ray.
some plants are raised from any part of the root, others by
offsets, and in others the branches set in the ground will take
ioot. locke.
offscou"ring. m. s. [off and scour.] recrement; part rubbed
away in cleaning any thing.
thou hast made us as the officcuring and refuse in the midst
of the people. lan. iii. 45.
being accounted, as st. paul says, the very filth of the
world, and the off-scouring of all things. kettlewell.
o'ffspring. m. s. ioff and spring.]
1. propagation; generation.
all things coveting to be like unto god in being ever, that
which cannot hereunto attain personally, doth seem to conti-
nue itself by offspring and propagation. hooker.
2. the thing propagated or generated; children; descendants.
when the fountain of mankind
did draw corruption, and god's curse, by sin;
this was a charge, that all his heirs did bind,
com-
and all his offspring grew corrupt therein. davies.
to the gods alone
our future offspring, and our wives are known. dryden.
his principal actor is the son of a goddess, not to mention
the offspring of other deities. addison's speciat.r.
3. production of any kind.
tho' both fell before their hour,
time on their offspring hath no pow'r;
nor fire nor fate their bays shall blast,
nor death's dark vail their days o'ercast. denham.
to offu'scate. v. a. [offisco, latin; offistuer, fr. j. to
dim ; to cloud; to darken.
off uscaotion. n.s. [from off-state.] the act of darkening.
oft. adv. [ope, saxon.] often ; frequently; not rarely ; not
seldom.
in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in pri-
sons more frequent, in deaths oft. 2 cor. ii. 23.
it may be a true faith, for so much as it is ; it is one part
of true faith, which is oft mistaken for the whole. hamm.
favours to none, to all she smiles extends,
oft she rejecls, but never once offends. pope.
o'ft en. adv. [from opt, saxon ; in the comparative, oftner;
superlative, oftnest.] oft; frequently ; many times; not
seldom.
the queen that bore thee,
oftner upon her knees than on her feet,
died ev'ry day she liv'd. shakespeare's macbeth.
use a little wine for thy stomach's sake, and thine often in-
firmities. 1 tim. v. 23.
in journeying often, in perils in the wilderness. 2 cor. ii. 26.
a lusty black-brow'd girl, with forehead broad and high,
that often had bewitcht the sea-gods with her eye. d, ay!.
who does not more admire cicero as an author, than as a
consul of rome, and does not oftner talk of the celebrated
writers of our own country in former ages, than of any among
their contemporaries : addison's freeholder.
of tent i'm es. adv. [often and times. from the composition
of this word it is reasonable to believe, that oft was once an
adjective, of which often was the plural ; which seems retained
in the phrase thine often infirmities. see often.] fre-
quently ; many times; often.
is our faith in the blessed trinity a matter needless, to be so
oftentimes mentioned and opened in the principal part of that
duty which we owe to god, our public prayer : hooker.
the difficulty was by what means they could ever arrive to
places oftentimes so remote from the ocean. //oodward.
it is equally necessary that there should be a future state, to
vindicate the justice of god, and solve the present irregulari-
ties of providence, whether the best men be oftentimes only,
or always the most miserable." atterbury.
oftt i'mes. adv. [oft and times.] frequently; often.
ofttimes nothing profits more
than self-esteem, grounded on just and right,
well manag’d. 44ilton's parads: ig/?.
oftimes before i hither did resort,
charm'd with the conversation of a man
who led a rural life. dryden and lee.
oge'e. l. n. s. a sort of moulding in archite&amp;ture, consisting
og1 v e. 5 of a round and a hollow ; almost in the form of an
s, and is the same with what vitruvius calls cima. cima
reversa, is an ogee with the hollow downwards. iiarris.
to o'o i. f. v. a. [cogh, an eye, i atch.) to view with side
glances, as in fondness, or wi.h a design not to be heeded.
from their his a scaffold with a trumpet cheek,
and ogling all their audience, then they speak. dryden.
lf the female tongoe will be in potion, why should it not
be set to go light could they talk of the different aspects and
conjunctions of planets, they necd not be at the pains to com-
ment upon glings and clandefine marriages. addison.
whom is he going yonder himself in his looking glass.
arbuthnot.
ocler. m. s. sooghcler, dutch..] a fly gazer; one who views
with side giances. -
upon the disuse of the neck-piece, the tribe of glors flared
the fair sex in the neck rather than in the face. alison.
jack was a prodigious ogler; he would ogle you the outside
of his eye inward, and the white upward. arbuthnot.
oglio. n.s.. [sion ola, spanish..] a dsh made by mingoing
different kinds of meat; a medley ; a hotchpotch.
these general motives of the common good, i will not so
much as once offer up to your lordship, though they have still
the upper end ; yet, like great oglios, they rather make a shew
than provoke appetite. suckling.
where is there such an oglio or medley of various opinions
in the world again, as those men entertain in their service,
without any scruple as to the diversity of their fests and
opinions : king charles.
he that keeps an open house, should consider that there are
oglios of guests, as well as of dishes, and that the liberty of a
common table is as good as a tacit invitation to all sorts of in-
truders. l'estrange.
o'gr esses. m. s. [in heraldry.] cannon balls of a black co-
lour. ainsworth.
oh. interjeo. an exclamation denoting pain, sorrow, or sur-
prise.
he,
like a full acorn'd boar, a churning cn,
cry’d, ch / and mounted. shakesp. comilesing.
oh me! all the horse have got over the river, what shall
we do // alton's angor.
my eyes conses it,
my every a lion speaks my heart aloud;
but oh, the madness of my high attempt
spc.oks louder yet! dryden's spanis, fryar.
oil. m. s. socil, saxon ; alom, latin.]
1. the joice of olives expressed.
bring pure oil olive beaten for the light.
2. any fat, greasy, unctuous, thin matter.
in most birds there is only one gland ; in which are divers
cells, enging in two or three larger cells, lying under the
nipple of the oil bag. derham's physico theology.
3. the juices of vegetables, whether expressed or drawn by the
still that will not mix with water.
oil with chemists called sulphur, is the second of their hy-
postatical, and of the true five chymical principles. it is an
inflammable, unctuous, subtile substance, which usually rises
aster the spirit. the chemists attribute to this principle all di-
versity of colours. there are two sorts of oil; one, which
will swim upon water, as ol of aniseed and lavender, which
the chemists call essential; and another kind, which probably
is mixt with salts, and will sink in water, as the oil of guai-
acum and cloves. harris.
after this expressed oil, we made trial of a distilled one;
and for that purpose made choice of the common cil or spirit.
ex. xxvii. 25.
boyle.
a curious artist long inur'd to toils
of gentler sort, with combs, and fragrant co,
whether by chance, or by some god inspir’d,
so toucht his curls, his mighty soul was fir’d. 77 tong.
to oil. v. a. [from the noun..] to smear or lubricate with oil.
the men fell a rubbing of armour, which a great while
had lain oiled. potton-
amber will attrađt straws thus cil, d, it will convert the
needles of dials, made either of brass or iron, although they
be much oiled, for in those needles consisting free upon their
center there can be no adhesion. frozon's sugar err.
swift oil, many a spring which harley moves. st. fr.
o'leolog r. m. s. soil and colour.] colour made by grinding
coloured substances in oil.
oikolours, after they are brought to their due temper, may
be preserved long in some degree of softness, kept all the while
under water. boyle.
o. li noss. m. s. [from cily. ] unctuousness; greasiness; qua-
lity approaching to that of oil.
3asil bath fat and succulent leaves; which songs, if drawn
forth by the sun, will make a very great change. bacon.
wine is inflammable, so as it hath a kind of oilings. boc.
smoke from unetuous bodies and such whose oiliness is evi-
dent, he nameth nidor. erco's sugar error re.
chye has the same principles as milk, viscidity from the
caseous parts, an ailiness from the butyraceous parts, and an
acidity from the tartareous. foyer.
the flesh of animals which live upon other animals, is most
antiacid ;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o l d
s:
*
** antiacid; though offensive to the stomach sometimes by rea-
-- son of their oiliness. arbuthnot on aliments:
o o11 man. m. s. [oil and man.] one who trades in oils and
ickles.
o!o. n. s. soil and slop.] a shop where oils and pickles
o are sold. -
o'ly. adj. [from oil.] - - - -
s 1. consisting of oil; containing oil; having the qualities of
il.
o o the cloud, if it were oily or fatty, will not discharge; not
o because it sticketh faster, but because air preyeth upon water
and flame, and fire upon oil. bacon's natural history.
- watry substances are more apt to putrify than oily. bacon.
flame is grosser than gross fire, by reason of the mixture
with it of that viscous oily matter, which, being drawn out of
the wood and candle, serves for fewel. idigby.
, f at ; greaty. -
s 2. f 'ri. . rascal is known as well as paul's :
go call him forth. shakesp. henry iv.
oslyg rain. m. s. a plant. miller.
o osly palm. n.s. a tree. it grows as high as the mainmast
o of a ship. the inhabitants make an oil from the pulp of
o the fruit, and draw a wine from the body of the trees,
o which inebriates; and with the rind of these trees they make
-: mats to lie on. miller.
* t, oint. v. a. [oint, fr.] to anoint; to smear with some-
s thing unctuous. - - - - -
o 'they oint their naked limbs with mother'd oil,
o or from the founts where living sulphurs boil,
: they mix a med'cine to foment their limbs. dryden.
ismarus was not wanting to the war,
direaing ointed arrows from afar ; -
and death with poison arm'd. dryden's zneid.
o'ntment. n.s.. [from oint..] unguent; unctuous matter to
smear any thing. - -
o life and long health that gracious ointment gave,
:- and deadly wounds could heal, and rear again
t
the senseless corpse appointed for the grave. spensor.
o'ker. n.f. [see oc hre.]. a colour.
and kaius taking for his younglings cark,
les greedy eyes to them might challenge lay, -
k busy with oker did their shoulders mark. sidney.
red oker is one of the most heavy colours; yellow goer is
not so, because it is clearer. dryaen's dufresnoy.
o old. adj. [ea'o, saxon; alt, german.]
1. past the middle part of life not young.
to old age since you yourself aspire, -
o let not old age disgrace my high desire. sidney.
o he wooes high and low, young and old. shase”.
wanton as girls, as old wives fabulous. cowley.
- 'tis greatly wise to know, before we're told, a-
the melancholy news that we grow old. 1%ung.
ecayed by time. -
2. p. not old upon thee. deut.
3. of long continuance; begun long ago; -
--- when gardiner was sent over as ambassador into france,
, t with great pomp, he spoke to an old acquaintance of his that
o came to take his leave of him. camden's remains.
- . not new.
o: 4. no. shall eat of the old store. levit.
or
the vine beareth more grapes when it is young; but grapes
that make better wine when it is old for that the juice is bet-
ter concoeted. bacon's natural history.
5. ancient; not modern. - -
the genoese are cunning, industrious, and inured to hard-
ship; which was the character of the old ligurians. addison.
6. of any specified duration. -
|- how oil art thou ? not so young, sir, to loye a woman
so for singing; nor so old to doat on her for any thing. i have
- years on my back forty-eight. shakesp. king lear.
plead you to me, fair dame, i know you not.
in ephesus i am but two hours old,
as strange unto your town as to your talk. shaksp.
he did enfold
-: within an oxe hide, flea'd at nine years old,
… all th’ airie blasts, that were of stormie kinds. chapman.
"… - any man that shall live to see thirty persons descended of
his body alive together, and all above three years old, makes
o, or this feast, which is done at the cost of the state. bacon.
. subsisting before something else.
” "...oy with them to hold,
o thou need'st not make new songs, but fing the old. cowley.
* . the latian king, unless he shall submit,
o: own his old promise, and his new forget,
let him in arms the pow'r of turnus prove. dryden.
o he must live in danger of his house falling about his ears,
o: and will find it cheaper to build it from the ground in a new
o form; which may not be so convenient as the old. swift.
o o practised. -
8. lo. said i unto her that was old in adulteries, will they
now commit whoredoms with her 2 ezek. xxiii. 43.
9. a word to signify in burlesque language, more than enough.
o
o
-- -
here will be old utis; it will be an excellent stratagem. sh;
here's a knocking indeed; if a man were porter of heli
gate, he should have cli turning the key. soakespeare.
io. of old; long ago ; from ancient times.
these things they cance!, as having been instituted in re-
gard of occasions peculiar to the times of old, and as being now
superfluous, hooker.
whether such virtue spent of old now sail'd
more angels to create. asitan's parad's loft.
a land there is, hesperia nam'd of old,
the soil is fruitful, and the men are bold;
now call'd italia, from the leader's name. dryden.
'in days of old there liv'd of mighty fame,
a valiant prince, and theseus was his name. drydon.
oldfa's h19ned. sold and fashion.] formed according to obso-
lete custom.
some are offended that i turned these tales into modern
english ; because they look on chaucer as a dry, oldfashioned
wit, not worth reviving. dryden.
he is one of those of fashioned men of wit and pleasure, that
shews his parts by raillery on marriage. addison.
o'lden. adj. [from old; perhaps the saxon plural.] ancient.
this word is not now in use.
blood hath been shed ere now, i'th' olden time,
ere human statute purg'd the gen'ral weal. shakes).
o'ldn ess. n.s. [from old.] old age; antiquity; not newness;
quality of being old.
this policy and reverence of agcs, makes the world bitter
to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us till our
oldness cannot relish them. shakesp. king lear.
ole a ginous, adj. [okaginus, lat. from oleum, oilagineux, fr.]
oily ; unctuous.
the sap when it first enters the root, is earthy, watery,
poor, and scarce cleaginous. arbuthnot on a inents,
olea'ginous ness. n.s. [from oleaginous...] oliness.
in speaking of the oleaginousness of urinous spirits, i emoloy
the word most rather than all. boyle.
ole ander. m. s. soleandre, fr.] the plant rosebay.
oleaster. m. s. [latin.] wild olive; a species of olive.
it is a native of italy, but will endure the cold of our climate,
and grow to the height of sixteen or eighteen fect. it bloons
in june, and perfumes the circumambient air to a great dis-
tain ce. a filler.
ole’ose. adj. soleosis, lat..] oily.
rain water may be endued with some vegetating or proli-
fick virtue, derived from some saline or clease particles it con-
tains. ray on the (, , , tion.
in falcons is a small quantity of gall, the alous parts of the
chyle being spent most on the fat. floyer on the humows.
to olf act. v. a. (olfactus, latin.] to smell. a burlesque
word. -
there is a machiavilian plot,
tho' every nare olfa: it not. hudibrar.
olfa'cror y. adj. [ofactoire, fr. from officia, lat.] having
the sense of smelling.
effluvias, or invisible particles that come from bodies at a
distance, immediately affect the clfaaory nerves. locke.
3:... {aff. solidus, lat.] stinking; foetid.
in a civet cat a different and offensive odour proceeds partly
from its food, that being especially fish, whereof this humour
may be a garous excretion and olidous separation. brown.
the fixt salt would have been not unlike that of men's
urine; of which olid and despicable liquor i chose to make an
instance, because chemists are not wont to take care for ex-
tracting the fixt salt of it. boyle.
oliga'rch y. m. s. [cayzexia.] a form of government which
places the supreme power in a snall number; aristocracy.
the worst kind of oligarchy, is, when men are governed in-
deed by a few, and yet are not taught to know what those
few be, whom they should obey. sidney.
we have no aristocracies but in contemplation, all oligar-
chies, wherein a few men domineer, do what they list. burt.
after the expedition into sicily, the athenian s chose four
hundred men for administration of affairs, who became a
body of tyrants, and were called an oligarchy, or tyranny of the
few; under which hateful denomination they were soon after
deposed. swift.
o'lio. m. s. sola, span.]. a mixture; a medley. see oglio.
ben johnson, in his sejanus and catiline, has given us
this alo of a play, this unnatural mixture of comedy and tra-
gedy. dryden on dramatick poetry.
i am in a very chaos to think i should so forget myself.
but i have such an olio of affairs, i know not what to do.
congreve's slay of the i/orld.
o'litory. m. s. solitor, latin.] belonging to the kitchen
garden.
gather your olitory seeds. - evelyn's kalendar.
oliva ster, adj. [olivoslre, fr.] darkly brown; tawny.
the countries of the abysenes, barbary, and peru, where
they are tawny, olivosler and pale, are generally more sandy.
bacon's natural hi/ory.
o'live.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o m i
o m n
o'live. n.f. [alive, fr. clea, lat.] a plant producing oil; the
emblem of peace; the fruit of the tree.
the leaves are for the most part oblong and ever-green ;
the flower consists of one leaf, the lower part of which is hol-
lowed, but the upper part is divided into four parts; the ovary,
which is fixed in the center of the flower cup, becomes an
oval, soft, pulpy fruit, abounding with a fat liquor inclosing
an hard rough stone. - - miller.
to thee, heav’ns, in thy nativity,
adjudg’d an olive branch and laurel crown,
as likely to be blest in peace and war. shakesp. hen. vi.
in the purlews of this forest, stands
a sheepcote fenc'd about with olive trees. shakespeare.
the seventh year thou shalt let it rest. in like manner thou
shalt deal with thy vineyard and olive yard. ex. xxiii. 11.
their olive bearing town. dryden's aeneid.
it is laid out into a grove, a vineyard, and an allotment for
olives and herbs. broome.
o'mbre. m. s. [hombre, spanish.] a game of cards played by
three.
he would willingly carry her to the play; but she had ra-
ther go to lady centaure's and play at ombre. tatler.
when ombre calls his hand and heart are free,
and, join'd to two, he fails not to make three. 1%ung.
cme ga. m. s. [o.syz.] the last letter of the alphabet, there-
fore taken in the holy scripture for the last.
i am alpha and omega, the beginning and the ending. rev.
o'me let. m. s. somelette, french..] a kind of pancake made
with eggs.
o'mened, adj. [from omen.] containing prognosticks.
fame may prove,
or omen'd voice, the messenger of jove,
fropitious to the search. pope's odyssey.
o'men. n. / [omen, latin.] a sign good or bad ; a prognos-
tick. -
hammond would steal from his fellows into places of pri-
vacy, there to say his prayers, omens of his future pacifick tem-
per and eminent devotion. fell.
when young kings begin with scorn of justice,
they make an omen to their after reign. dryden.
the speech had omen that the trojan race
should find repose, and this the time and place. dryden.
choose out other smiling hours,
such as have lucky omen; shed
o'er forming laws and empires rising. prior.
ome’ntum, n.s. [latin.]
the cawl, called also reticulum, from its structure, re-
sembling that of a net. when the peritonaeum is cut, as
usual, and the cavity of the abdomen laid open, the omentum
or cawl presents itself first to view. this membrane, which
is like a wide and empty bag, covers the greatest part of the
guts. quincy.
o'mer. m. s. a hebrew measure about three pints and a half
english. bailey.
to o'minate. v. a. sominor, latin.] to foretoken; to shew
prognosticks. -
this ominates sadly, as to our divisions with the romanists.
decay of piety.
omination. m. / [from ominor, lat..] prognostick.
the falling of salt is an authentick presagement of ill luck,
yet the same was not a general prognostick of future evil
among the ancients; but a particular omination concerning the
breach of friendship. brown.
o'm in ous. a.j. [from omen.]
1. exhibiting bad tokens of futurity; foreshewing ill; inau-
spicious.
let me be duke of clarence ;
for glo'ster's dukedom is ominous. shakesp. henry vi.
pomfret, thou bloody prison,
fatal and ominous to noble peers. shakesp. rich. iii.
these accidents the more rarely they happen, the more omi-
nous are they esteemed, because they are never observed but
when sad events do ensue. hayward.
roving the celtic and iberian fields, -
he last betakes him to this ominous wood. milton.
as in the heathen worship of god, a sacrifice without an
heart was accounted ominous ; so in the christian worship of
him, an heart without a sacrifice is worthless, south.
pardon a father’s tears,
and give them to charinus’ memory;
may they not prove as ominous to thee. dryden.
2. exhibiting tokens good or ill.
though he had a good ominous name to have made a peace,
nothing followed. bacon's henry vii.
it brave to him, and ominous does appear,
to be oppos'd at first, and conquer here. cowley.
o'minously. adv. [from ominous.] with good or bad omen.
o'minousness. m. s. [from ominous.] the quality of being
omlilous.
omi'ssion. m. s. [omisus, lat.]
1. neglect to do something; forbearance of something to be
done.
whilst they were held back purely by doubts and scruples,
and want of knowledge without their own faults, their emission
was fit to be connived at. kettlewell.
if he has made no provision for this change, the omission
can never be repaired, the time never redeemed. rogers.
2. neglect of duty, opposed to commission or perpetration of
crimes.
omission to do what is necessary,
seals a commission to a blank of danger. shakespeare.
the most natural division of all offences, is into those of
omission and those of commission. 4adison's freeholder.
to omit. v. a. somitto, lat.]
i. to leave out; not to mention.
these personal comparisons i omit, because i would say
nothing that may favour of a spirit of flattery. bacon.
great cato there, for gravity renown'd,
who can omit the gracchi, who declare
the scipio's worth drydon.
2. to neglect to practise. -
her father omitted nothing in her education, that might
make her the most accomplished woman of her age. addon.
omittan ce. n. f. [from omit.] forbearance. not in use.
he said, mine eyes were black, and my hair black;
and now i am remember'd, scorn’d at me !
i marvel why i answer'd not again;
but that's all one, omittance is no quittance. shakes?.
ooiev, adj. somni/arian, latin.] of all varieties or
in c. s.
these particles could never of themselves, by emnifarious
kinds of motion, whether fortuitous or mechanical, have fallen
into this visible system. bently.
but if thou omnifarious drinks wou'dst brew;
besides the orchard, ev'ry hedge and bush
affords assistance. philips.
omn 1 ferous. adj. [omni, and fero, lat.] all-bearing. dio.
omni'fick, adj. somnis and fadio, lat.] all-creating.
silence, ye troubled waves, and thou deep, peace 1
said then th' omnifick word, your discord end. milton.
oo: adj. [annis and forma, latin.] having every
lape. dicf.
omnig enous, adj. [amnigenus, lat.] consisting of all #.
- die?.
omnipa'r1ty. m. s. somni, and par, lat.] general equality.
their own working heads affect, without commandment
o of the word, to wit, omniparity of churchmen. j/hite.
mn 1 por ence. q m. s. somnipotentia, lat.] almight -
8.; so: j gnty power;
whatever fortune
can give or take, love wants not, or despises;
or by his own omnipotence supplies. denham.
as the soul bears the image of the divine wisdom, so this
part of the body represents the omniotency of god, whilst it is
able to perform such wonderful effects. j/il{ins.
the greatest danger is from the greatest power, and that is
omnipotency. tilletson.
how are thy servants blest, o lord,
how sure is their defence,
eternal wisdom is their guide,
their help, omnipotence. add.
will omnipotence neglect to save, son.
the suffering virtue of the wise and brave. pope.
omni potent. adj. [omnipotens, latin.] almighty; powerful
without limit; all-powerful,
you were also jupiter, a swan, for the love of leda : oh
omnipotent love how near the god drew to the complexion of
a goose? shakesp. merry //sves of jwindoor.
the perfect being must needs be omnipotent; both as off.
existent and as immense: for he that is self-existent, having
the power of being, hath the power of albeing; equal to th:
cause of all being, which is to be omnipotent. grew.
omnipre's ence. m. s. somni, and present, lat.] ubiquity;
unbounded presence. &gt;
he also went
invisible, yet staid, such privilege
hath omnipresence. aston's parads: left.
adam, thou know'st his omniprosence fills ./
land, sea, and air. milton's paradis. loft.
the soul is involved and present to every part : and if my
soul can have its effectual energy upon my body with eas:
with how much more facility can a being of immense exis:
tence and omnipresence, of infinite wisdom and power, govern
a great but finite universe? hale.
omnipre's ent. adj. [omnis and prasons, latin.] ubiquitary;
present in every place. 2.
omniscient master, omnipresent king,
to thee, to thee, my last distress i bring. prior.
3:::::::::::3% somni, and scientia, latin.] boundless
omni'sciency. knowledge; infinite wisdom.
in all this misconstruction of my actions, as i have nojudge
but god above me, so i can have comfort to appeal to his co-
miscience. - king charles.
thinking by retirement to obscure himself from god,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2 adam
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o n
o n
t
* .
*
!--
h
s
l
adam infringed the omnisciency and essential ubiquity of his
maker, who, as he created all things, is beyond and in them
all. brown.
an immense being does strangely fill the soul; and omni-
potency, omniciency, and infinite goodness, enlarge the spirit
while it fixtly looks upon them. burnet.
since thou boast it th' omniscience of a god, -
say in what cranny of sebastian's soul,
unknown to me, so loath'd a crime is lodg’d dryden.
omni'scient. adj. [onnis and scia, latin.] infinitely wise;
knowing without bounds; knowing every thing.
by no means trust to your own judgment alone; for no
man is omniscient. bacon's advice to williers.
what can 'scape the eye
of god all-seeing, or deceive his heart
omniscient * a4ilton's parad's lost.
whatsoever is known, is some way present; and that
which is present, cannot but be known by him who is omni-
scient. - south.
it is one of the natural notions belonging to the supreme
being, to conceive of him that he is omnscient. // ilkins.
omniscient master, omnipresent king,
to thee, to thee, my last distress i bring. prior.
omni'scious. adj. […minis and scio, lat..] all-knowing. not
in use.
i dare not pronounce him omniscious, that being an attribute
individually proper to the godhead, and incommunicable to
any created substance. hakewill on providence.
omni'vorous. adj. [omnis and voro, lat..] all-devouring. dici.
omo‘plate. n.s. [39.9o and tx3.13:..] the shoulder blade. dic.
ompha lo'ptick. m. s. [3,322.3; and on 1,43;..] an optic
glass that is convex on both sides, commonly called a convex
lens. - dici.
on. prep. [aen, dutch; am, german.]
1. it is put before the word, which signifies that which is under,
that by which anything is supported, which any thing strikes
by falling, which any thing covers, or where any thing is
fixed.
he is not lolling on a lewd love bed,
but on his knees at meditation. shakso. richard iii.
what news –
—richmond is on the seas.-
—there let him sink and be the seas on him. shakesp.
distracted terror knew not what was beft ;
on what determination to abide. daniel’s civ. jwar.
. how soon hath time, the suttle thief of youth,
stol’n on his wing my three and twentieth year. milton.
as some to witness truth, heav'n's call obey,
so some on earth must, to confirm it, stay. dryden.
they stooping low,
perch’d on the double tree. dryden.
on me, on me let all thy fury fall,
nor err from me, since i deserve it all. pope.
2. it is put before any thing that is the subject of a&amp;tion.
th’ unhappy husband, husband now no more,
did on his tuneful harp his loss deplore. dryden.
3. noting addition or accumulation.
mischiefs on mischiefs, greater still and more,
the neighb'ring plain with arms is cover'd o'er. dryden.
4. noting a state of progression.
ho maeris whither on thy way so fast :
this leads to town. dryden.
5. it sometimes notes elevation.
chuse next a province for thy vineyard's reign,
on hills above, or in the lowly plain. dryden.
the spacious firmament on high. adison.
6. noting approach or invasion.
their navy ploughs the wat'ry main,
yet soon expect it on your shores again. dryden.
7. noting dependance or reliance. -
on god’s providence and on your bounty, all their present
support and future hopes depend. smallridge.
8. at, noting place. -
on each side her,
stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling
cupids. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
9. it denotes the motive or occasion of any thing,
the same prevalence of genius, the world cannot pardon
our concealing, on the same consideration ; because we nei-
ther have a living varus nor a horace. dryden.
the joy of a monarch for the news of a victory, must not
be expressed like the ecstasy of a harlequin on the receipt of a
letter from his mistress. dryden's dufresnoy.
the best way to be used by a father on any occasion, to
reform any thing he wishes mended in his son. locke.
we abstain on such solemn occasions from things lawful, out
of indignation that we have often gratified ourselves in things
unlawful. smalridge's sermons.
io. it denotes the time at which any thing happens: as, this
happened on the first day. on is used, i think, only before day
or hour, not before denominations of longer time.
in the second month, on the twenty-seventh day, gin,
vol. ii.
i 1. it is put before the objeca of some passion.
compassion on the k g commands me stoop. siaos.
cou'd tears recal him into wretched life, -
their sorrow hurts themselves; on him is josł. dryden.
12. in forms of denunciation it is put before the thing threat-
ned.
hence on thy life; the captive maid is mine,
whom not for price or pray'rs i will resign. dryden.
13. noting imprecation. -
sorrow on thee, and all the pack of you,
that triumph thus upon my misery shakespeare.
14. noting invocation.
h on thee, dear wife, in deserts all alone
e call’d. dryden's wing. georg.
15. noting the state of a thing fired. this so seems fo,
and is perhaps an old corruption of a fire.
—the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
and not in fear of vour nativity. shakesp. henr -
the horses burnt i. they stood in tied in oft o:
by chance breaking loose, ran up and down with their tails and
mains on a light fire. - anzies's hy!. of the turks.
his fancy grows in the progress, and becomics on fire like a
chariot wheel by its own rapidity. pope's prof. to iliad.
16. noting stipulation or condition.
i can be satisfied on more easy terms.
17. noting distinetion or opposition.
the rhodians, on the other side, mindful of their former
honour, valiantly repulsed the enemy. anoles.
18. before it, by corruption, it stands for of:
this tempest,
dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
the sudden breach on’t. shaftspeare's henry viii.
a thriving gamester has but a poor trade on't, who fills his
pockets at the price of his reputation. locke's education.
19. noting the manner of an event.
note,
how much her grace is alter'd on the sudden p
20. on, the same with upon. see upon.
on. adv.
1. forward; in succession.
as he forbore one act, so he might have forborn another
and after that another, and so on, till he had by degree.
weakened, and at length mortified and extinguished the fiabit
dryden.
shakoff.
itself. - south's sermons.
if the tenant fail the landlord, he must fail his creditor, and
he his, and so on. locke.
these smaller particles are again composed of others much
smaller, all which together are equal to all the pores or empty
spaces between them and so on perpetually till you coine to
solid particles, such as have no pores. newton.
2. forward ; in progression. -
. . on indeed they went ; but oh not far;
a fatal stop travers’d their head-long course. daniel.
so saying, on he led his radiant files. 4 filton.
my hasting days fly on with full carcer. 44ilton.
hopping and flying, thus they led him on
to the slow lake. - dryden.
what kindled in the dark the vital flame,
and ere the hcart was form’d, push'd on the red’ning stream.
blackmore on creation.
goto, i did not mean to chide you;
on with your tale.
3. in continuance; without ceasing.
let them sleep, let them sleep on,
till this stormy night be gone,
and th’eternal morrow dawn.
sing on, sing on, for i can ne'er be cloy'd.
you roam about, and never are at rest;
by new desires, that is, new torments still possest:
as in a fev'rish dream you still drink on,
and wonder why your thirst is never gone. dryden.
the peasants defy the sun; they work on in the hottest part
of the day without intermission. locke.
4. not off: as, he is neither on nor off; that is, he is irresolute.
5. upon the body, as part of dress. his cloaths were neither an
nor off; they were disordered. see off.
a long cloak he had on.
stiff in brocade, and pinch'd in stays,
her patches, paint, o: on 3
all day let envy view her face,
and phyllis is but twenty-one.
a painted vest prince voltager had on,
which from a naked pict his grandfire won. blackmore.
6. it notes resolution to advance forward; not backward,
since ’tis decreed, and to this period lead
a thousand ways, the noblest path we'll tread;
and bravely on, till they or we, or all,
a common sacrifice to honour fall. denham.
7. it is through almost all its significations opposed to off, and
means approach, junction, addition, or presence.
on. intejo. . a word of incitement or encouragement to at-
tack; elliptically for go on.
17 p therefore
rowe's jane shore.
crosław.
dryden.
sidney.
prior.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o n e
therefore on, or strip your sword stark-naked; for meddle
you must. shakespeare's twelfth night.
cheerly on, couragious friends,
to reap the harvest of perpetual peace,
by this one bloody trial of sharp war. shakesp. r. iii.
on then, my muse ! and fools and knaves expose,
and, since thou can'st not make a friend, make foes.
toung.
once. adv. [from one.]
1. one time.
trees that bear mast, are fruitful but once in two years ;
the cause is, the expence of sap. bacon.
forthwith from out the ark a raven flies,
and after him the surer messenger,
a dove, sent forth once and again to spy
green trees or ground. milton's paradise lost.
once every morn he march'd, and once at night. cowley.
you came out like some great monarch, to take a town but
once a year, as it were for your diversion, though you had no
need to extend your territories. dryden.
o virgin daughter of eternal night,
give me this once thy labour, to sustain
my right, and execute my just disdain. dryden.
in your tuneful lays,
once more resound the great apollo’s praise. pope.
2. a singie time.
who this heir is, he does not once tell us. locke.
3. the same time.
at once with him they rose:
their rising all at once was as the sound
of thunder heard remote. milton's paradis. loft.
fir’d with this thought, at once he strain'd the breast,
and on the lips a burning kiss impress'd. dryden.
4. at a point of time indivisible.
night came on, not by degrees prepared,
put all at once; at once the winds arise,
the thunders roll. dryden's cimon and iphig.
now that the fixed stars, by reason of their immense dis-
tance, appear like points, unless so far as their light is dilated
by refraction, may appear from hence, that when the moon
asses over them and eclipses them, their light vanishes, not
gradually like that of the planets, but all at once. newton.
5. one time, though no more.
fuscinus, those ill deeds that sully fame,
in blood once tainted, like a current run
from the lewd father to the lewder son. dryden.
6. at the time immediate.
this hath all its force at once, upon the first impression, and
is ever afterwards in a declining state. atterbury.
7. formerly; at a former time.
thereon his arms and once-lov’d portrait lay,
thither our fatal marriage-bed convey. denham.
my soul had once some foolish fondness for thee,
but hence ’tis gone. addison.
8. once seems to be rather a noun than an adverb, when it has
at before it, and when it is joined with an adjective : as, this
once, that once.
one. adj. [an, cene, saxon ; een, dutch ; ein, german; ?y, gr.]
1. less than two; single; denoted by an unite.
the man he knew was one that willingly,
for one good look would hazard all. daniel.
pindarus the poet, and one of the wisest, acknowledged also
sne god the most high, to be the father and creator of all
things. raleigh.
love him by parts in all your num’rous race,
and from those parts form one collected grace;
then when you have refin'd to that degree,
imagine all in one, and think that one is he. dryden.
2. indefinitely: any ; some one.
we shall
present our services to a fine new prince,
one of these days. shakespeare.
i took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
one thing or other. shakespeare's tempest.
3. it is added to any. -
when any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and under-
standeth it not, then' cometh the wicked one and catcheth
away that which was sown in his heart. matt. xiii. 19.
if any one prince made a felicity in this life, and left fair
fame after death, without the love of his subjects, there were
some colour to despise it. suckling.
4. different; diverse : opposed to another.
what a precious comfort to have so many, like brothers,
commanding one another's fortunes. shakespeare.
it is one thing to draw outlines true, the features like, the
proportions exact, the colouring tolerable, and another thing
to make all these graceful. dryden.
suppose the common depth of the sea, taking one place with
another, to be about a quarter of a mile. burnet.
it is one thing to think right, and another thing to know the
right way to lay our thoughts before others with advantage
and clearness. locke.
my legs were closed together by so many wrappers one over
another, that i looked like an egyptian mummy. addison-
there can be no reason why we should prefer any one action
to another, but because we have greater hopes of advantage
from the one than from the other. smallridge.
two bones rubbed hard against one another, or with a file,
produce a fetid smell. arbuthnot on aliments-
at one time they keep their patients so warm, as almost to
stifle them, and all of a sudden the cold regimen is in vogue.
- baker on learning.
5. one of two opposed to the other.
ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether
there hath been any such thing as this. deut. iv. 32.
both the matter of the stone and marchasite, had been at
once fluid bodies, till one of them, probably the marchasite,
first growing hard, the other, as being yet of a more yield-
ing consistence, accommodated itself to the harder's figure.
boyle.
6. not many; the same.
the church is therefore one, though the members may be
many; because they all agree in one faith. there is one lord
and one faith, and that truth once delivered to the saints,
which whosoever shall receive, embrace, and profess, must ne-
cessarily be accounted one in reference to that profession: for
if a company of believers become a church by believing, they
must also become one church by believing one truth. pearson.
7. particularly one.
one day when phaebe fair,
with all her band was following th' chase,
this nymph quite tir'd with heat of scorching air,
sat down to rest. spenser.
one day, in turning some uncultur'd ground,
in hopes a free-stone quarry might be found,
his mattock met resistance, and behold
a casket burst, with diamonds fill'd, and gold. fiarte.
8. some future.
heav'n waxeth old, and all the spheres above
shall one day faint, and their swift motion stay;
and time itself, in time shall cease to move,
but the soul survives and lives for aye. davies.
one. m. s. [there are many uses of the word one, which serve
to denominate it a substantive, though some of them may
seem rather to make it a pronoun relative, and some may per-
haps be confidered as consistent with the nature of an adjec-
tive, the substantive being understood.]
1. a single person.
lf one by one you wedded all the world,
she you kill'd would be unparallel’d. shakespeare.
although the beauties, riches, honours, sciences, virtues,
and perfections of all men were in the present possession of one,
yet somewhat beyond and above all this there would still be
sought and earnestly thirsted for. hacker.
from his lofty steed he flew,
and raising one by one the suppliant crew,
to comfort each. dryden's knight's tale.
if one must be rejected, one succeed,
make him my lord, within whose faithful breast
is fix'd my image, and who loves me best. drydon.
when join'd in one, the good, the fair, the great,
descends to view the muse's humble seat. granville.
2. a single mass or aggregate.
it is one thing only as a heap is one.
3. the first hour.
till 'tis one o'clock, our dance of custom
let us not forget. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
4. the same thing. -
blackmore.
i answer'd not again;
but that's all one. - shakespeare.
to be in the understanding, and not to be understood, is
all one as to say anything is, and is not in the understanding.
locke.
5. a person, indefinitely and loose.
a good acquaintance with method will greatly assist every
one in ranging human affairs. j/atts's logick.
6. a person, by way of eminence.
ferdinand
my father, king of spain, was reckon'd one,
the wisest prince that there had reign'd.
7. a distinet or particular person.
that man should be the teacher is no part of the matter;
for birds will learn one of another. bacon's nat. hisł.
no nations are wholly aliens and strangers the one to the
other. bacon's holy wwar.
the obedience of the one to the call of grace, when the
other, supposed to have sufficient, if not an equal measure,
obeys not, may reasonably be imputed to the humble, malle-
able, melting temper. hammond.
one or other sees a little box which was carried away with
her, and so discovers her to her friends. dryden.
8. persons united.
as i have made ye one, lords, one remain :
so i grow stronger, you more honour gain. shakesp.
shakespeare.
9. con-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o n e
o
o
. concord; agreement; one mind. -
9 co king was well instructed how to carry himself be-
tween ferdinando and philip, resolving to keep them at.”
within themselves. bacon's henry vii.
he is not at one with himself what account to give of it.
tillotson.
10. [on, pom, french. it is used sometimes a general or inde-
finite nominative for any man, any person. for one the
english formerly used men; as, they live obscurely, men know not
bo, or die obscurely, men mark not when. asham. for
which it would now be said, one knows not how, one *not* **
when; or, it is not known how.] any person; any man inde-
finitely. -
it is not so worthy to be brought to heroical effects by for-
tune or necessity, like ulysses and æneas, as by one's own
choice and working. - sidney.
one may be little the wiser for reading this dialogue, since
it neither sets forth what erona is, nor what the cause should
be which threatens her with death. sidney.
one would imagine these to be the expressions of a man
blessed with ease, affluence and power; not of one who had
been just stripped of all those advantages. . . . atterbury,
for provoking of urine, one should begin with the gentlest
first. arbuthnot on aliments.
for some time one was not thought to understand aristotle,
unless he had read him with averroe's comment. baker.
erson of particular character.
11. a p p then must you speak
of one that lov’d not wisely, but too well o
f one not easily jealous; but being wrought
$... in o: : shakespeare's othello.
with lives and fortunes trusting one
who so discreetly us’d his own. waller.
edward i. was one who very well knew how to use a vic-
torv, as well as obtain it. hale.
one who contemned divine and human laws. dryden.
forgive me, if that title i afford
c - har
to on, whom nature meant to be a lord: arte.
12. one has sometimes a plural, either when it stands for per-
sons indefinitely ; as, the great ones of the world: or when it
relates to some thing going before, and is only the representa-
to of the antecedent noun. this relative mode of speech,
whether singular o, is in my ear not very elegant, yet
- d by good authors.
1s #. .#. here; hence with your little ones. shakes).
does the son receive a natural life 2. the subject enjoys a
civil one: that's but the matter, this the form. - holyday.
these successes are more glorious which bring benefit to
the world, than such ruinous ones as are dyed in human blood.
glanville.
he that will overlook the ". reason of a . . is
nd many false ones, error being infinite.
but one, may easily fi y &gt; c tillotson.
the following plain rules and directions, are not the less
useful because they are plain ones. - atterbury.
there are many whose waking thoughts, are wholly en-
ployed on their sleeping ones. addison's spectator.
arbitrary power tends to make a man a bad sovereign, who
might possibly have been a good one, had he been invested with
an authority limited by law. addison's freeholder.
this evil fortune which attends extraordinary men, hath
been imputed to divers causes that need not be set down, when
so obvious an one occurs, that when a great genius appeals,
the dunces are all in conspiracy against him. swift.
i 3- one another, is a mode of speech very frequent; as, they love
one another; that is, one of them loves another: the storm beats
the trees agains; one another; that is, one agains? another.
in democratical governments, war did commonly unite the
minds of men; when they had enemies abroad, they did not
contend with one another at home: davenant.
one berry. 'n. f. [aconitum, lat.] wolf'sbane, or monk's-
bane. -
o'neeyed. adj. [one and eye.] . having only one eye.
a sign post dauber wou'd disdain to paint
the oncey’d heroe on his elephant. dryden.
- the mighty family -
of one-y’d brothers hasten to the shore. addison.
oneirock 'tic al. adi. systpox?sixes, gr. oneirocritique, fr. it
should therefore according to analogy be written onirocritical
and amirocritick.] interpretative of dreams. - - -
if a man has no mind to pass by abruptly from his imagined
to his real circumstances, he may employ himself in that new
kind of observation which my oneiro-ritical correspondent has
directed him to make. - addison's speciator,
ojock, rick. n.s. [&amp;topdxpos, gr.] an interpreter of
s.
". surveyed all ranks and professions, i do not find in
any quarter of the town an oneirocritick, or an interpreter of .
dreams. addison's spectator.
cy. esess. n.f. [from one..] unity; the quality of being one.
our god is one, or rather very onents; and mere unity,
having nothing but itself in itself, and not consisting, as all
things do besides god, of many things. hooker.
the oneness of our lord jesus christ, referring to the seve-
ral hypostases, is the one eternal indivisible divine nature,
and the eternity of the son's generation, and his co-eternity,
and his consubstantiality with the father when he came down
from heaven and was incarnate. hammond.
o'ner ary. adj. [onerarius, lat. oneraise, fr.] fitted for car-
riage or burthens; comprising a burthen.
to o'nerate. v. a. somero, lat..] to load; to burthen.
oneration. m.s.. [from onerate.] the act of loading. diff.
o'nerous. adj. [onereux, fr. onerosus, latin.] burthensome;
oppressive.
a banished person, absent out of necessity, retains all things
enerous to himself, as a punishment for his crime. , ayliffe.
o'nion. m. s. soignon, french; carpe.] a plant.
if the boy have not a woman's gift
to rain a shower of commanded tears,
an onion will do well. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
i an ass, am onion-ey'd. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
this is ev'ry cook's opinion,
no sav'ry dish without an onion :
but lest your kiffing should be spoil'd, -
your onions must be throughly boil’d.
o'nly. adj. [from one, onely, or onelike.]
1. single; one and no more.
of all whom fortune to my sword did bring,
this only man was worth the conquering.
2. this and no other.
the only child of shadeful savernake. drayton.
the logick now in use has long possessed the chair, as the
only art taught in the schools for the direetion of the mind in
the study of the sciences. locke:
3. this above all other: as, he is the only man for musick.
o'nly. adv.
1. simply ; singly; merely; barely.
i propose my thoughts only as conjectures. burnet:
the posterity of the wicked inherit the fruit of their father's
vices; and that not only by a just judgment, but from the na-
tural course of things. tillotson.
all who deserve his love, he makes his own;
and to be lov'd himself, needs only to be known. dryden.
the practice of virtue is attended not only with present quiet
and satisfaction, but with comfortable hope of a future recom-
pence. nelson.
nor must this contrition be exercised by us, only for grosser
evils; but when we live the best. wakf.
2. so and no otherwise.
every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only
evil continually. gen. vi. 5.
3. singly without more: as, only begotten.
o’nomancy. m. s. [8wouz and woolsix.] divination by a name.
destinies were superstitiously, by onomancy, deciphered out
of names, as though the names and natures of men were suit-
able, and fatal necessities concurred herein with voluntary
motion. - camden.
onoma'ntic al. adj. [3,0p.2 and wool;..] predicting by names.
theodatus, when curious to know the success of his wars
against the romans, an onomantical or name-wisard jew,
willed him to shut up a number of swine and give some of them
roman names, others gothish names with several marks, and
there to leave them. camden.
o'nset. n. s. [on and set.]
1. attack; itorm ; assault; first brunt. -
as well the soldier dieth, which standeth still, as he that
gives the bravest onset. sidney.
all breathless, weary, faint,
him spying, with fresh onset he assail'd,
and kindling new his courage, seeming queint,
struck him so hugely, that through great constraint
he made him stoop. spenser.
- swift.
- dryden.
the shout -
of battle now began, and rushing sound
of onset. milton's paradis. loft.
sometimes it gains a point; and presently it finds itself
baffled and beaten off; yet still it renews the onset, attacks the
difficulty afresh ; plants this reasoning and that argument, like
so many intellectual batteries, till at length it forces a way
into the obstinate enclosed truth. south.
without men and provisions it is impossible to secure con-
quests that are made in the first onsets of an invasion. addison.
observe
the first impetuous onsets of his grief; -
use every artifice to keep him stedfast. philips.
2. something added or set on by way of ornamental appendage.
. this sense, says nicholson, is still retained in northumber-
land, where onset means a tuft.
i will with deeds requite thy gentleness;
and for an onset, titus, to advance
thy name and honourable family, -
lavinia will i make my empress. shakoff. tit. *:
2. &amp;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o p a
'o p f.
t. o'nset. v. a. [from the noun..] to set upon; to begin.
not used. -
this for a while was hotly oosited and a reasonable price
offered, but soon cooled again. - - . . . carew.
o'nslau ght. n.s. [on and slay. see slaughter.] attack;
storm; onset. not in use. . . .
they made a halt - - -
to view the ground, and where t'assault, - -
then call'd a council, which was best, , ,
by fiege or onslaught to invest
the enemy; and ’twas agreed
by storm and onslaught to proceed.
- -
affections of being in general; a metaphysician. -
ontology; n.s. sovra and 2.6%;..] the science of the affec-
tions of being in general; metaphysicks. . . -
- - - : --
the modes, accidents and relations that belong to various
beings, are copiously treated of in metaphysicks, or more pro-
perly ontology. - - //atts's lagick.
o'nw ard, adv, sonbyeonb, saxon.] . . . . . . .
1. forward; progressively. . . . . . .
my lord, -
when you went onward on this ended action,
... i look'd upon her with a soldier's eye.
satan was now as hand, and from his seat
the monster moving onward came as fast, -
with horrid strides. milton's parads: loft.
him thro’ the spicy forest onward come
adam discern'd, as in the door he sat
of his cool bow’r. milton's paradis. loft.
not one looks backward, onward still he goes,
yet ne'er looks forward farther than his nose.
2. in a state of advanced progression.
philoxenus came to see how onward the fruits were of his
friends labour. . - sidney.
you are already so far onward of your way, that you have
shakespeare.
-
pope.
forsaken the imitation of ordinary converse. dryden.
3. somewhat farther.
a little onward lend thy guiding hand -
milton.
to these dark steps, a little farther on.
o'ny cha, n.s. it is found in two different senses in scripture.
—the odoriferous snail or shell, and the stone onyx. the
greatest part of commentators explain it by the onyx or odo-
riferous shell. the onyx is fished for in the indies, where
grows the spicanardi, the food of this fish and what makes its
shell so aromatick. calmet.
take sweet spices, onycha, and galbanum. ex. xxx. 34.
o'nyx. m. s. [399%.] the onyx is a semipeliucid gem, of which
there are several species, but the blueish white kind, with
brown and white zones, is the true onyx legitima of the an-
cients. - hill's materia medica.
nor are her rare endowments to be sold,
for glittering sand by ophir shown,
the blue-ey'd saphir, or rich onyx stone. sandys.
the onyx is an accidentas variety of the agat kind: it is of
a dark horny colour, in which is a plate of a bluish white, and
sometimes of red : when on one or both sides the white, there
happens to lie also a plate of a reddish or fresh colour, the
jewellers call the stone a sardonyx. j/oodward on fossils.
ooze. m. s. seither from eaux, waters, french; or par, wet-
ness, saxon.] o
i. soft mud ; mire at the bottom of water; slime.
my son i' th' ooze is bedded. shakesh. tempes?.
some carried up into their grounds the coze or salt water
mud, and found good profit thereby. carew.
old father thames rais'd up his rev'rend head,
deep in his ooze he sought his sedgy bed,
and shrunk his waters back into his urn. dryden.
2. soft flow ; spring. this seems to be the meaning in prior.
from his first fountain and beginning ooze,
down to the sea each brook and torrent flows. prior.
3. the liquor of a tanner's vat.
to ooze. v. n. [from the noun..] to flow by stealth; to run
gently ; to drain away.
when the contracted limbs were cramp'd, even then
a wat'rish humour swell'd and ooz’d agen. dryden.
- the lilly drinks
the latent rill, scarce oozing thro' the grass. thomson.
o'ozy. adj. [from ozze.] miry; muddy , slimy.
from his oozy bed, .
old father thames advanc'd his rev'rend head. pope.
to opa'cate. v. a, [apato, latin.] to shade; to cloud; to
darken ; to obscure. - " -
the same corpuscles upon the unstopping of the glass, did
opacate that part of the air they moved in. boyle.
opa'city. m. s. [pacite, fr. opacitas, lat..] cloudiness; want
of transparency. - -
can any thing escape eyes in whose opticks there is no
opacity o - - brown.
had there not been any night, shadow or opacity, we should
- never have had any determinate conceit of daikness.
- -- glanville.
- horos.'
onto'logist. n. s. [from ontology.] one who considers the
how much any body hath of colour, so much hath it of
ofacily, and by so much the more unit is it to transmit the
species. - roy on the creation.
the least parts of almost all bodies, are in some measure
transparcht; and the opacity of those bodies ariseth from the
multitude of reflexions caused in their internal parts. newton.
opa'cous, adj. [ofacus, latin.] dark; obscure; not tran-"
sparent. - - - - - -
when he perceives that opacous bodies do not hinder the
cye from judging light to have an equal diffusion through the
whole place that it irradiates, he can have no difficulty to .
allow air, that is diaphanous, and more subtile far than they,
and consequently, divisible into lesser atoms; and having effer"
poles, gives less scope to our eyes to miss light. * * digby. -
- upon the firm opaczi's globe -
of this round world, whose first convex divides
the luminous inferior orbs, inclos'd
from chaos, and th’ inroad of darkness old, -
satan alighted. - 41 ton’s parad's loft.
o'fal. m. s. sofalus.) the opal is a very c'esant and singular
kind of stone, it hardly comes within the rank of the posioid
gems, being much more opake, and less hard. it is in the
pebble shape, from the head of a pin to the bigness of a wai.
nut. . it is naturally bright, and shows all its beauty without
the help of the lapidary: in colour it resembles the finest
mother of pearl its basis seeming a bluish or greyish white,
but with a property of reflecting of the colours of the rain.
bow, as turned differently to the light. hill's asat. a fed.
thy mind is a very opal. shakop. twelfth night.
th’ empyreal heav'n, extended wide
in circuit, undetermin'd square or round;
with opal tow’rs, and battlements adorn’d "
of living saphir. asistan's paradis? loo.
we have this stone from germany, and is the same with
the opal of the ancients. jodward on fossil.
opa'q. e. adj. [2, acus, ltd, park; not transparent; cloudy.
the
shot upward still direct, oce no way round
shadow from body of age can fall. alito's por, lo/?.
those disappearing fixt stars were adually extinguished asid
turned into more to sue and gross planet-like bodies.
chyne's poil. prin.
to op e. }: a. [open, saxon ; op, islandick, a hole. ope
to open. § is used only in poetry, when one syllable is more
convenient than two j - - -
1. to unclose ; to unlock; to put into such a state as that the
one. ports may be seen or entered: the contrary to/out.
- the world’s mine oyster, -
which i with sword will open. shaft so. as so. of ironds.
before you fight, ope this letter. shakes. king lear.
they consent to work us harm and woc, -
to ope the gates, and so let in our foe. fairfax.
!! a man open a pit and not cover it, and an ox fall thos,
the owner of the pit shall make it good. ax. xxi. 23.
let us pass through your land, and none shall do you any
hurt; howbeit they would not open unto him. , m. v. 48.
(on thy mouth for the dum.5 in the cause of ii such as so
appointed to desłłustion. prov. xxxi. 8.
adam, now ope thine eyes; and first behold
t h'effects which thy original crime hath wrought
in some to spring from thee. milton's parīs. i3/?.
the draw-bridges at amsterdam part in the middle, and a
vessel, though uner fail, may poss them without the help of
*"y one or shore ; for the mat-head, or break-water of the
ship bearing against the bridge in the middle, opens it. brown.
* our fleet apollo sends,
where tuscan tyber rolls with rapid force,
and where numicus ofte: his holy source. dryder.
when first you ofte your doors, and passing by j
the sad ill-omen'd object meets your eye. g drydon.
my old wounds are often’d at this view, ./
and in my murd’rer's presence bleed anew. drydon.
when the matter is made, the fide must be opened to let it
out. 4, buthnot on aliments.
2. to show; to discover. -
the english did adventure far for to often the north parts of
- america. allot's docription of the is orld.
3. to divide ; to break.
the wall of the cathedral church was opened by an earth-
quake, and shut again by a second. addison on italy.
4. to explain; to disclose. -
. . soing things wisdom openeth by the sacred books of scripture,
some things by the glorious works of nature. hooker.
paul reasoned with them out of the scriptures, oftening and
alleging, that christ must needs have suffered and fien again
from the dead. 44, xvii.
after the earl of lincoln was slain, the king opened him;eif
to some of his council, that he was forry for the earl's death
because by him he might have known the bottom of his o:
ger. - bacon's henry vii.
gramont governour of bayonne, took an exquisite notice of
their persons and behaviour, and opened himself to some of his
7 - train,
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o p e
o p e
o
k
-
--
s:
o
train, that he thought them to be gentlemen of much more
worth than their habits bewrayed. jwotton.
a friend who relates his success, talks himself into a new
pleasure; and by opening his misfortunes, leaves part of them
behind him. collier on friendship.
5. to begin; to make the initial exhibition.
you retained him only for the opening of your cause, and
your main lawyer is yet behind. dryd. ep. to the whigs.
homer open; his poem with the utmost simplicity and mo-
desty; he continually grows upon the reader. note: on odyssey.
to ope.
to o'pen.
1. to unclose itself; not to remain shut ; not to continue closed.
the hundred doors
ope of themselves; a rushing whirlwind roars
within the cave. dryden's aeneid.
unnumber'd treasures ope at once,
from each she nicely culls with curious toil,
and decks the goddess. pope's rape of the lock.
2. to bark. a term of hunting.
if i cry out thus upon no trail, never trust me when i open
again. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
the night restores our actions done by day :
as hounds in sleep will open for their prey.
hark! the dog opens, take thy certain aim ;
the woodcock flutters. gay's rural sports.
ope. adj. [ope is scarcely used but by old authors, and by
o'p en. ! them in the primitive not figurative sense.]
1. unclosed; not shut.
the gates are ope; now prove good seconds;
'tis for the followers fortune widens them ;
not for the fliers. shakespeare's coriolanus.
most sacrilegious murther hath broke ope
the lord's anointed temple, and stole thence
the life o' th' building. shakespeare's macbeth.
then sent sanballat his servant, with an open letter in his
band. neh. vi. 5.
with the same key set ope the door
wherewith you lock'd it fast before.
thro' the gate,
wide open and unguarded, satan pass'd.
they meet the chiefs returning from the fight,
and each with open arms embrac'd her chosenknight. dry.
he, when æneas on the plain appears, -
meets him with open arms and falling tears. dryden.
the bounce broke ope the door. dryden.
the door was ope, they blindly grope the way. dryden.
e. plain; apparent; evident; publick.
- they crucify to themselves the son of god afresh, and put
him to an open shame: - - - heb. vi. 6.
he irefully enrag’d would needs to open arms. drayton.
th'under-work, transparent, shews too plain:
where open acts accuse, th’ excuse is vain.
3. not wearing disguise; clear; artless ; sincere. -
he was so secret therein, as not daring to be open, that to
no creature he ever spake of it. - - sidney:
lord cordes, the hotter he was against the english in time
of war, had the more credit in a negotiation of peace; and be-
sides was held a man open and of good faith. bacon.
the french are always open, familiar, and talkative ; the
italians stiff, ceremonious, and reserved. addison:
this reserved mysterious way of acting towards persons,
who in right of their posts expected a more open treatment, was
u. 71,
dryden.
cleaveland.
milton.
daniel.
imputed to some hidden design; swift.
his generous, open, undesigning heart,
has begg'd his rival to follicit for him. addison's cato.
4. not clouded; clear. -
with dry eyes, and with an open look, ,
she met his glance midway. - dryden's boccace.
then shall thy craggs
on the cast ore another pollio shine;
with aspect open shall ereet his head. pope.
. not hidden; exposed to view. - -
in that little spot of ground that lies between those two
great oceans of eternity, we are to exercise our thoughts, and
jay open the treasures of the divine wisdom and goodness hid in
this part of nature and providence. burnet.
moral principles require reasoning and discourse to discover
the certainty of their truths: they lie not open as natural cha-
racters engraven on the mind. locke.
6. not restrained; not denied ; not precluded.
if demetrius and the craftsmen have a matter against any
man, the law is open and there are deputies; let them implead
one another. aet: xix. 38.
7. not cloudy; not gloomy.
an open and warm winter portendeth a hot and dry summer.
bacon's natural history.
shakesp. k. lear,
8. uncovered.
here is better than the open air.
and when at last in pity, you will die,
i'll watch your birth of immortality;
vol. ii.
then, turtle-like, i'll to my mate repair;
and teach you your first flight in open air. pryden,
9. exposed; without defence.
the service that i truly did his life,
hath left me open to all injuries. shakesp. henry iv.
io. attentive.
thine eyes are open upon all the sons of men, to give every
one according to his ways. jer. xxxii. 19.
the eyes of the lord are upon the righteous, and his ears
are open unto their cry. ps. xxxiv. 15.
o'pener, n.f. [from open.]
1. one that opens; one that unlocks; one that uncloses.
true opener of mine eyes,
much better seems this vision, and more hope.
of peaceful days portends, than those two past.
2. explainer; interpreter.
to us, th’ imagin'd voice of heav'n itself;
the very opener and intelligencer
between the grace, the sanctities of heav'n, -
and our dull workings. shakesp. henry iv.
3. that which separates; disuniter.
there may be such openers of compound bodies, because
there wanted not some experiments in which it appeared.
milton.
- - o -
openeyed. adj. [often and eye.] vigilant; watchful.
while you here do snoring lie,
openeyed conspiracy -
his time doth take. shakespeare's tempest.
penha'n led. adj. [open and hand.] generous; liberal 3
munificent.
good heav'n who renders mercy back for mercy,
with openhanded bounty shall repay you. rowe.
openhea'rted. adj. [open and heart.j generous ; candid :
not meanly subtle.
i know him well; he's free and openhearted. dryden.
of an openhearted generous minister you are not to say that
he was in an intrigue to betray his country; but in an in-
trigue with a lady. arbuthnot.
open hea'rted ness. : [open and heart.] liberality; frank-
ness; sincerity; munificence; generosity.
o'pening. m. s. [from open.]
i. aperture; breach. - -
the fire thus up, makes its way through the cracks and
openings of the earth. woodward’s natural hisłory:
2. discovery at a distance ; faint knowledge; dawn.
god has been pleased to dissipate this confusion and chaos,
and to give us some openings, some dawnings of liberty and
settlement. - south's sermons.
the opening of your glory was like that of light; you shone
to us from afar and disclosed your first beams on distant na-
...tions. dryden.
o'penly. adv. [from open..] . -
1. publickly; not secretly; in fight; not obscurely.
their actions always spoken of with great honour, are now
called openly into j hooker.
prayers are faulty, not whensoever they be openly made, but
when hypocrisy is the cause of open praying. booker.
why should you have put me to deny
this claim which now you wear so openly. shakesp.
- - - i knew the time,
now full, that i no more should live obscure,
but openly begin, as best becomes
the authority which i deriv'd from heav'n. milton.
how grosly and openly do many of us contradict the pre-
cepts of the gospel, by our ungodliness and worldly lusts.
- - tillotson.
we express our thanks by openly owning our parentage, and
paying our common devotions to god on this day's solemnity.
- atterbury,
2. plainly ; apparently; evidently; without disguise.
- darah
too openly does love and hatred show:
a bounteous master, but a deadly foe. , dryden.
openmou'thep. adj. [open and mouth.] greedy; ravenous;
clamorous; vociferous.
up comes a lion openmouthed toward the ass. l’estrange.
o'penness. n.s.. [from open.] -
1. plainness; clearness; freedom from obscurity or ambiguity.
deliver with more openness your answers
to my demands. . shakespeare's cymbeline.
2. plainness; freedom from disguise.
the noble opennes, and freedom of his reflexions, are ex-
pressed in lively colours. felton on the classicks.
these letters all written in the openness of friendship, will
prove what were my real sentiments. pope's letters.
o'pera. n.s.. [italian.]
an opera is a poetical tale or fietion, represented by vocal
and instrumental musick, adorned with scenes, machines, and
dancing. - dryden's preface to albion.
you will hear what plays were acted that week, which is
the finest song in the opera, law.
17 o'ferable.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o p e
o p i
o'perable. adj. [from operor, latin.] to be done; prac-
ticable. not in use. -
being uncapable of operable circumstances, or rightly to
judge the prudentiality of affairs, they only gaze upon the vi-
sible success, and thereafter condemn or cry up the whole pro-
gression. brown's wulgar errours.
o'per ant. adj. [operant, fr.] aelive; having power to pro-
duce any effect. a word not in use, though elegant.
earth, yield me roots
who seeks far better of thee, sauce his palate
with thy most operant poison. shakespeare's timon.
-i must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
my operant powers their funetions leave to do. shakesp.
to operate. v. n. [aperor, latin ; operer, french..] to
act; to have agency; to produce effects: with on before the
subject of operation.
the virtues of private persons operate but on a few ; their
sphere of action is narrow, and their influence is confined to it.
atterbury.
bodies produce ideas in us, manifestly by impulse, the only
way which we can conceive bodies operate in. locke.
it can operate on the guts and stomach, and thereby pro-
duce distinct ideas. locke.
a plain convincing reason operates on the mind, both of a
learned and ignorant hearer as long as they live. swift.
where causes operate freely, with a liberty of indifference to
this or the contrary, the effect will be contingent, and the
certain knowledge of it belongs only to god. watts.
opera"rion. n. s. [operatio, lat, operation, french.]
1. agency; production of effects; influence.
there are in men operations, natural, rational, supernatural,
some politick, some finally ecclesiastical. płooker.
by all the operations of the orbs,
from whom we do exist and cease to be,
here i disclaim all my paternal care. shakesh. k. lear.
all operations by transmission of spirits, and imagination,
work at distance and not at touch. bacon's nat. hisł.
waller's presence had an extraordinary operation to procure
any thing de fired. clarendon.
the tree whose operation brings
knowledge of good and ill, shun to taste. milton.
if the operation of these salts be in convenient glasses pro-
moted by warmth, the ascending steams may easily be caught
and reduced into a penetrant spirit. boyle.
speculative painting, without the assistance of manual ope-
ration, can never attain to perfeotion, but slothfully languishes;
for it was not with his tongue that apelles performed his noble
works. dryden's dufresnoy.
the pain and sickness caused by manna, are the effects of
its operation on the stomach and guts by the size, motion and
figure of its insensible parts. locke.
2. a&amp;tion; effect. this is often confounded with the former
sense.
repentance and renovation consist not in the strife, wish,
or purpose, but in the actual operations of good life. hamm.
many medicinal drugs of rare operation. heylyn.
that false fruit
far other operation first display'd,
carnal desire inflaming. milton's paradise lost.
the offices appointed, 2nd the powers exercised in the
church, by their institution and operation are holy. pearson.
in this understanding piece of clock-work, his body as well
as other senseless matter has colour, warmth and softness. but
these qualities are not subsistent in those bodies, but are ope-
rations of fancy begotten in something else. bentley.
3. [in chirurgery.] the part of the art of healing which depends
on the use of instruments. -
4. the motions or employments of an army.
o'perative. adj. [from operate.] having the power of a&amp;t-
ing ; having forcible agency; active; vigorous; efficacious.
to be over curious in searching how god's all-piercing and
operative spirit distinguishing gave form to the matter of the uni-
versal, is a search like unto his, who not contented with a
known ford, will presume to pass over the greatest rivers in all
parts where he is ignorant of their depths. raleigh.
many of the nobility endeavoured to make themselves po-
pular, by speaking in parliament against those things which
were most grateful to his majesty; and he thought a little dis-
countenance upon those persons would suppress that spirit
” within themselves, or make the poison of it less operative upon
others. clarendon.
in actions of religion we should be zealous, active and ope-
rative, so far as prudence will permit. taylor.
this circumstance of the promise must give life to all the
rest, and make them operative toward the producing of good
life. decay of piety.
it holds in all operative principles, especially in morality; in
which, not to proceed, is certainly to go backward. south.
the will is the conclusion of an operative syllogism. norris.
opera'tor. m. s. [operateur, french; from operate.] one
that performs any act of the hand ; one who produces any
effect.
2
an imaginary operator opening the first with a great deal of
nicety, upon a cursory view it appeared like the head of an-
other. addison's spectator.
to administer this dose, there cannot be fewer than fifty
thousand operators, allowing one operator to every thirty.
swift.
operoose. adj. [operosus, latin.] laborious; full of is:
and tediousness. -
such an explication is purely imaginary, and also very ope.
rose; they would be as hard put to it to get rid of this water,
when the deluge was to cease, as they were at first to procure
it. - - - - burnet's theory.
written language, as it is more operous, so it is more di-
gested, and is permanent. holder.
oonacow. adj. [??os and pow.] serpenteating. not
utle (1.
all snakes are not of such poisonous qualities as common
opinion presumeth; as is confirmable from ophiophagous na-
tions, and such as feed upon serpents. brown.
oph1’t es. m. s. a stone, resembling a serpent.
ophite; has a dusky greenish ground, with spots of a lighter
green, oblong, and usually near square. woodward.
oro' halmick, adj. [ophthalmique, fr. from 3p$2xpos, gr.]
relating to the eye. -
ophthalmy. m. s. sophthalmie, fr. from of $2xpos, gr.] a
disease of the eyes, being an inflammation in the coats, pro-
ceeding from arterious blood gotten out of the vessels and col-
lected into those parts. dic7.
the use of cool applications, externally, is most easy to the
eye ; but after all, there will sometimes ensue a troublesome
ophthalmy. sharp's surgery.
o'piate. n.s. a medicine that causes sleep. -
they chose atheism as an opiate, to still those frightning
apprehensions of hell, by inducing a dulness and lethargy of
mind, rather than to make use of that native and salutary me-
dicine, a hearty repentance. bentley.
thy thoughts and music change with ev'ry line;
no sameness of a prattling stream is thine,
which, with one unison of murmur flows,
opiate of inattention and repose. - harte.
oo:: adj. soporiferous; somniferous; narcotick; causing
eep.
the particular ingredients of those magical ointments, are
opiate and soporiferous. for anointing of the forehead and
back bone, is used for procuring dead sleeps. bacon.
all their shape
spangled with eyes, more numerous than those
of argus, and more wakeful than to drouze,
charm'd with arcadian pipe, the past'ral reed
of hermes, or his opiate rod. milton's parad's left.
lettuce, which has a milky juice with an anodyne or
opiate quality resolvent of the bile, is proper for melancholy.
arbuthnot on aliments.
o'pifice. m. s. sopificium, lat.] workmanship; handiwork.
* - dief.
o'pificer; n.s. sopifex, latin.] one that performs any work;
artist. a word not received. -
there is an infinite distance betwixt the poor mortal artist,
and the almighty opificer. bently's sermons.
qpina ple, adj. [opinor, lat.] which may be thought. dia.
opination. m. s. [opinor, lat.j opinion; notion. dicf.
opina tor. m. s. [opinor, lat.] one who holds an opinion.
confider against what kind of opinators the reason above
given is levelled. hale's origin of mankind.
to qpi'ne. v. n. [epinor, latin.] to think; to judge; to be
of opinion.
fear is an ague, that forsakes
and haunts by fits those whom it takes;
and they'll opine they feel the pain
and blows they felt to day, again. hudibrar.
in matters of mere speculation, it is not material to the well
fare of government, or themselves, whether they opine right or
wrong, and whether they be philosophers or no. south.
but i, who think more highly of our kind,
opine, that nature, as in duty bound,
deep hid the shining mischief under ground. pope.
opi'niative. adj. [from opinion.]
i. stiff in a preconceived notion.
2. imagined ; not proved.
it is difficult to find out truth, because it is in such incon-
fiderable proportions scattered in a mass of opiniative uncer-
tainties ; like the filver in hiero's crown of gold. glanville.
opinia"tor. n.s. [opiniatre, french..] one fond of his own
notion; inflexible; adherent to his own opinion.
what will not opiniators and self-believing men dispute of
and make doubt off raleigh.
essex left lord roberts governour; a man of a sour and
surly nature, a great opiniator, and one who must be overcome
before he would believe that he could be so. clarendon.
for all his exact plot, down was he cast from all his great-
ness, and forced to end his days in a mean condition; as it is
pity but all such politick opiniators should. south.
opinia"i rae.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o o p i
|
*
opinia tre. adj. [french..] obstinate; stubborn.
instead of an able man, you defire to have him an insignifi-
cant wrangler, opiniatre in discourse, and priding himself in
contradicling others. locke.
go n. s. [opiniatrete, french.] obstinacy ; in-
op1’niatry. flexibility; determination of mind; stub-
bornness. this word, though it has been tried in different
forms, is not yet received, nor is it wanted.
lest popular opiniatry should arise, we will deliver the chief
opinions. brown's pulgar errours.
the one sets the thoughts upon wit and false colours, and
not upon truth ; the other teaches fallacy, wranging and
opiniatry. locke on education.
so much as we ourselves comprehend of truth and rea-
son, so much we poliess of real and true knowledge. the
floating of other men's opinions in our brains, make us not
one jot the more knowing, though they happen to be true:
what in them was science, is in us but opiniatrety. locke.
i can pass by opiniatry and the busy meddling of those who
thrust themselves into every thing. jwoodward's letters.
i was extremely concerned at his opiniatrety in leaving me:
but he shall not get rid so. pope.
opitnion. m. s. sopinion, fr. opinio, lat.]
1. perswasion of the mind, without proof or certain knowledge.
opinion is a light, vain, crude and imperfect thing, settled
in the imagination, but never arriving at the understanding,
there to obtain the tineture of reason. ben. johnson.
opinion is, when the assent of the understanding is so far
gained by evidence of probability, that it rather inclines to one
perswasion than to another, yet not altogether without a mix-
ture of incertainty or doubting. hale.
time wears out the fictions of opinion, and doth by degrees
discover and unmask that fallacy of ungrounded perswasions;.
but confirms the dictates and sentiments of nature. wilkins.
blest be the princes who have fought
- for pompous names, or wide dominion,
since by their error we are taught, -
that happiness is but opinion. prior.
2. sentiments; judgment; notion.
where no such settled custom hath made it law, there it
hath force only according to the strength of reason and cir-
cumstances joined with it, or as it shews the opinion and judg-
ment of them that made it; but not at all as if it had any
commanding power of obedience. selden.
can they make it out against the common sense and opinion
of all mankind, that there is no such thing as a future state of
misery for such as have lived ill here. south.
charity itself commands us, where we know no ill, to
think well of all; but friendship, that always goes a pitch
higher, gives a man a peculiar right and claim to the good
opinion of his friend. south.
we may allow this to be his opinion concerning heirs, that
where there are divers children the eldest son has the right to
be heir. locke.
philosophers are of opinion, that infinite space is possessed by
god's infinite omnipresence. locke.
a story out of boccalini sufficiently shews us the opinion
that judicious author entertained of the criticks. addison.
3. favourable judgment. -
in actions of arms small matters are of great moment,
cspecially when they serve to raise an opinion of commanders.
hayward.
howsoever i have no opinion of those things; yet so much
i conceive to be true, that strong imagination hath more force
upon things living, than things merely inanimate. bacon.
if a woman had no opinion of her own person and dress, she
would never be angry at those who are of the opinion with her-
self. law.
to opi'nion. v. a. [from the noun.] to opine; to think. a
word out of use, and unworthy of revival.
the stoicks opinioned the souls of wise men dwell about the
moon, and those of fools wandered about the earth: whereas
the epicureans held nothing after death. brown.
that the soul and the angels are devoid of quantity and di-
mension, is generally opinioned. glanville's scepsis.
opinionative. adj. [from opinion.] fond of preconceived no-
tions; stubborn.
striking at the root of pedantry and opinionative assurance,
would be no hindrance to the world’s improvement. glanv.
one would rather chuse a reader without art, than one ill
instructed with learning, but opinianative and without judg-
ment. burnet's theory of the earth.
opi'nion atively. adv. [from opinionative..] stubbornly.
op1’n ion ativ eness. n.s.. [from opinionative..] obstinacy.
op1’nio n is t. n.f. [opinionisle, fr. from opinion.] one fond of
his own notions.
every conceited opinion's sets up an infallible chair in his
own brain. glanville to albius.
op1 pa rous. adj. [opiparus, lat.] sumptuous. dic7.
opitulation. n.s. sopitulatio, latin.] an aiding ; a help-
ing. die?.
ool. n, s. a juice, partly of the resinous, partly of the
gummy kind. it is brought to us in flat cakes or masses, very
heavy and of a dense texture, not perfectly dry: its colour is
a dark brownish yellow ; its smell is of a dead saint kind; and
its taste very bitter and very acrid. it is brought from na-
tolia, egypt, and the east-indies, produced from the white
garden poppy : with which the fields of asia-minor are in
many places sown. when the heads grow to maturiy, but
are yet soft, green and full of juice, incisions are made in
them, and from every one of these a few drops flow of a milky
juice, which soon hardens into a solid consoonce. the finest
opium proceeds from the first incisions. what we generally
have is the mere crude juice, worked up with water, or
honey sufficient to bring it into form. externally applied it
is emollient, relaxing and discuticist, and greatly pronotes sup-
putation. a moderate dose of opium taken interially, is gene-
rally under a grain, yet custom will make people bear a dram,
but in that case nature is vitated. its first effect is the
making the patient cheerful ; it removes melancholy, and dis-
sipates the dread of danger; the turks always take it when
they are going to battle : it afterwards quiets the spirits, eases
pain, and disposes to sleep. after the effect is over, the pain
generally returns in a more violent manner; the spirits become
lower than before, and the pulse languid. an immoderate
dose of opium brings on drunkenness, cheerfulness and loud
laughter, at first, and, after many terrible symptoms, death
itself. those who have accustomed themselves to an
immoderate use of opium, are apt to be faint, idle and thought-
less; they lose their appetite, and grow old before their time.
- płill.
sleep hath forsook and giv'n me o'er
to death's benumbing opium as my only cure. milton.
the colour and taste of opium are, as well as its soporific
or anodyne virtues, mere powers depending on its primary
qualities, whereby it is fitted to produce different operations
on different parts of our bodies. locke.
o'pl e-tree. m. s. [opulus; ople and tree..] a sort of tree.
, - ainsworth.
opoba lsamu.m. m. s. [latin.] balm of gilead.
opo ponax. m. s. [latin.] a gum resin in small loose gra-
nules, and sometimes in large masses, of a strong disagree-
able smell, and an acrid and extremely bitter taste; brought
to us from the east, and known to the greeks; but we
are entirely ignorant of the plant which produces this drug.
hill.
o'ppidan. m. s. [oppidanus, latin.] a townsman; an inhabi-
tant of a town.
to opp, gnerate., v. a. [oppignero, latin.] to pledge; to
pawn. not in use.
the duke of guise henry was the greatest usurer in france,
for that he had turned all his estate into obligations; meaning
that he had sold and oppignorated all his patrimony, to give
large donatives to other men. bacon.
ferdinando merchanded with france, for the restoring
rousfillion and perpignan, oppignorated to them. bacon.
to o'ppilate. v. a. [oppilo, latin; oppiler, fr.] to heap
up obstruction.
oppilation. m. s. softpilation, french; from oppilate.] ob-
struction; matter heaped together.
the ingredients prescribed in their substance a&amp;tuate the
... spirits, reclude oppilations, and mundify the blood. harvey.
o'ppilati ve. adj. [oppilative, fr.] obstructive.
oppleted. adj. [oppletus, lat.] filled ; crouded.
oppo'nent. adj. [opponens, lat..] opposite; adverse,
ere the foundations of this earth were laid,
it was opponent to our search ordain'd,
that joy, still sought, should never be attain'd.
oppo'n ent. m. s. [opponens, lat.]
1. antagonist; adversary.
2. one who begins the dispute by raising objestions to a tenet,
correlative to the defendant or respondent.
inasmuch as ye go about to destroy a thing which is in
force, and to draw in that which hath not as yet been received,
to impose on us that which we think not ourselves bound
unto ; that therefore ye are not to claim in any conference
other than the plaintiffs or opponents part. hooker.
how becomingly does philopolis exercise his office, and
seasonably commit the opponent with the respondent, like a long
practised moderator. - amore.
opportune. adj. [opportune, fr. opportunus, lat..] sea-
sonable; convenient; fit; timely; well-timed; proper. -
there was nothing to be added to this great king's felicity,
being at the top of all worldly bliss, and the perpetual con-
stancy of his prosperous successes, but an opportune death to
withdraw him from any future blow of fortune. bacon.
will lift us up in spite of fate,
nearer our ancient seat; perhaps in view -
of those bright confines, whence with neighb'ring arms
and opportune excursion, we may chance
re-enter heav'n. milton's paradise los’,
consider'd every creature, which of all
most opportune might serve his wiles; and found
the serpent subtlest beast of all the field.
priors
milton.
gpporru'nely/
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o p p
o p p
opportu'nely. adv. [from opportune.] seasonably; conve-
niently ; with opportunity either of time or place.
he was resolved to chuse a war rather than to have bre-
tagne carried by france, being situate so opportunely to annoy
england either for coast or trade. bacon's henry vii.
against these there is a proper objection, that they offend
uniformity; whereof i am therefore opportunely induced to say
somewhat. wotton’s archite&amp;ure.
the experiment does opportunely supply the *::::
oyle.
opportu'nity. n. s. [opportunite, fr. opportunitas, lat.] fit
time ; fit place; time; convenience; suitableness of circum-
stances to any end.
a wise man will make more opportunities than he finds.
mens behaviour should be like their apparel, not too straight
but free for exercise. bacon.
opportunity, like a sudden gust,
hath swell'd my calmer thoughts into a tempest.
accursed opportunity /
that work'st our thoughts into desires, desires
to resolutions; those being ripe and quicken'd,
thou giv'st them birth, and bring'st them forth to action.
- lenham.
tho' their advice be good, their counsel wise,
yet length still loses opportunities. denham.
i had an opportunity to see the clouds descend, and after it
was past, to ascend again so high as to get over part of the
mountain. - brown’s travels.
neglect no opportunity of doing good, nor check thy desire
of doing it, by a vain fear of what may happen. atterbury.
all poets have taken an opportunity to give long descriptions
of the night. broome.
to oppo'se. v. a. [opposer, french ; oppono, latin.]
1. to act against ; to be adverse; to hinder; to resist.
there's no bottom, none
in my voluptuousness :-and my desire
all continent impediments wou'd o'erbear,
that did oppose my will. shakespeare's macbeth.
2. to put in opposition ; to offer as an antagonist or rival.
if all men are not naturally equal, i am sure all slaves are ;
and then i may, without presumption, oppose my single opinion
to his. locke.
3. to place as an obstacle.
since he stands obdurate,
and that no lawful means can carry me
out of his envy's reach, i do *;
my patience to his fury. shakesp. merchant of venice.
i thro’ the seas pursu'd their exil'd race,
engag'd the heav'ns, oppos'd the stormy main;
but billows roar'd and tempests rag'd in vain. dryden.
4. to place in ficnt ; to place over against. -
her grace sat down
in a rich chair of state; opposing freely
the beauty of her person to the people. shakespeare.
to oppo’s e. v. n.
1. to act adversely.
a servant, thrill'd with remorse,
oppos'd against the act, bending his sword
to his great master. shakesp. king lear.
he practised to dispatch such of the nobility as were like to
oppose against his mischievous drift, and in such sort to encum-
ber and weaken the rest, that they should be no impediments
to him. hayward.
2. to object in a disputation; to have the part of raising diffi-
culties against a tenet supposed to be right.
oppo'seless, adj. [from oppose..] irresistible; not to be opposed.
. . i could bear it longer, and not fall
to quarrel with your great opposeles, wills. shakespeare.
oppo's er. m. s. [from oppose.]: one that opposes; antagonist;
enemy; rival.
now the fair goddess fortune
fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
misguide thy opposers swords : bold gentleman'
prosperity be thy page. shakesp. coriolanus.
brave wits that have made essays worthy of immortality;
yet by reason of envious and more popular opposers, have sub-
mitted to fate, and are almost lost in oblivion. glanville.
i do not see how the ministers could have continued in their
stations, if their opposers had agreed about the methods by
which they should be ruined. swift.
a hardy modern chief,
a bold opposer of divine belief. blackmore.
o'pposite. adj. [opposite, fr. oppositus, lat.]
1. placed in front; facing each other. -
to th’ other five,
their planetary-motions and aspeas,
in sextile, square, trine and opposite,
of noxious efficacy. milton's paradise loft,
2. adverse; repugnant. * * * * *
nothing of a foreign nature, like the trifling novels, by
which the reader is misled into another sort of pleasure, opposite
to that which is designed in an epick poem. dryden,
this is a prospest very uneasy to the lusts and passions,
and opposite to the strongest desires of flesh and blood. rogers.
3. contrary. -
in this fallen state of man religion begins with repentance
and conversion, the two opposite terms of which are god and
sin. tilotson.
particles of speech have divers, and sometimes almost oppo-
site significations. locke.
opposits. m. s. adversary; opponent; antagonist; enemy.
to the best and wisest, while they live, the world is conti-
nually a froward opposite, a curious observer of their defeats
and imperfections; their virtues it afterwards as much admir-
eth. hooker.
he is the most skilful, bloody, and fatal opposite that you
could have found in illyria. shakesp. twelfth night.
the knight whom fate or happy chance
shall grace his arms so far in equal fight,
from out the bars to force his opposite,
the prize of valour and of love shall gain.
oppositely, adv. [from opposite.]
1. in such a situation as to face each other.
the lesler pair are joined edge to edge, but not oppositely
with their points downward, but upward. grew.
2. adversely.
i oft have seen, when corn was ripe to mow, }
dryden.
and now in dry, and brittle straw did grow,
winds from all quarters oppositely blow. may's virgil.
o'ppositeness. m. s. [from opposite.] the state of being oppo-
fite.
opposition, n. s. [opposition, fr. oppositio, lat.]
1. situation so as to front something opposed; standing over
against.
2. hostile resistance.
he
cry’d oh! and mounted; sound no opposition
from what he look'd for should oppose. shakespeare.
virtue which breaks thro' opposition,
and all temptation can remove,
most shines, and most is acceptable above. milton.
he considers lausus rescuing his father at the hazard of his
own life, as an image of himself when he took anchises on his
shoulders, and bore him safe thro' the rage of the fire and the
opposition of his enemies. dryden's dufresnoy.
3. contrariety of affection.
they who never tried the experiment of a holy life, mea-
sure the laws of god not by their intrinsical goodness, but by
the reluctancy and opposition which they find in their own
hearts. tillotson.
4. contrariety of interest; contrariety of measures.
when the church is taken for the persons making profession
of the christian faith, the catholick is often added in opposition
to hereticks and schismaticks. pearson.
5. contrariety of meaning; diversity of meaning.
the parts of every true opposition do always both concern
the same subject, and have reference to the same thing, fith
otherwise they are but in shew opposite, not in truth. hocker.
the use of language and custom of speech, in all authors
i have met with, has gone upon this rule, or maxim, that ex-
clusive terms are always to be understood in opposition only to
what they are opposed to, and not in opposition to what they
are not opposed to. //aterland.
6. inconsistency. -
reason can never permit the mind to reject a greater evi-
dence, to embrace what is less evident, nor allow it to enter-
tain probability in opposition to knowledge and certainty. locke.
to oppress. v. a. [oppressus, lat.]
1. to crush by hardship or unreasonable severity.
israel and judah were oppressed together, and all that took
them captives held them fast, they refused to let them go. jer.
alas! a mortal most oppress of those
whom fate has loaded with a weight of woes. pope.
2. to overpower ; to subdue.
we're not ourselves,
when nature, being oppress, commands the mind
to suffer with the body. shakso. king lear.
in blazing height of noon,
the sun oppress'd, is plung'd in thickest gloom.
oppre'ssion, n.s. [oppression, fr. from oppress.]
1. the act of oppresfing; cruelty; severity.
if thou seest the opposin, of the poor, marvel not at the mat-
thomson.
ter; for he that is higher than the highest regardeth. eccles:
2. the state of being oppressed; misery.
famine is in thy cheeks;
need and oppression stare within thine eyes,
contempt and beggary hang upon thy back. shakesp.,
caesar himself has work, and our oppression
exceeds what we expected. shałoft. ant. and cleopatra.
3. hardship; calamity.
we are all subject to the same accidents; and when we see
any under particular oppression, we should look upon it as the
common lot of human nature. dudson.
4. dullness of spirits; lasfitude of body.
drousiness,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o p t
o r a
o, *
o
o
*
o:
s
g
o
“s.
drousiness, oft/roson, heaviness, and lastitude, are signs of
a too plentiful meal. arbuthnot on aliments.
oppre'ssive. adj. [from of press.]
1. cruel; inhuman-; unjustly exactious or severe.
2. heavy overwhelming. * . o
alicia, reach thy friendly arm, -
and help me to support that feeble frame, . . -
that nodding totters with oppressive woe,
"and finks beneath its load. " rowe's jane shore.
to case the soul of one oppressive weight,
this quits an empire, that embroils a state. pope.
oppre’ssor. m. s. [oppressur, fr. from oppress.] one who ha-
raises others with unreasonable or unjust severity, , *
i from oppressors did the poor defend, . -
the fatherless, and such as had no friend, . sandys.
the cries of orphani, and th' oppressor's rage,
had reach'd the stars. - . . . . . . . . dryden.
power when employed to relieve the oppressed, and to punish
the oppressor, becomes a great blesfing. . = - swift.
oppro brious, adj. [from oppr:brium, lat.]
1. reproachful; disgraceful ; causing infamy ; scurrilous.
himself pronounceth them blessed, that should for his
name sake be subject to all kinds of ignominy and opprobrious
'malediction. hooker.
they see themselves unjustly aspersed, and vindicate them-
felves in terms no less of probrious than those by which they are
attacked. - addison's freeholder.
2. blasted with infamy. . - a
o i will not here defile . . . . .
my unstain’d verse with his of probrious name. daniel.
solomon he led by fraud to build * . --
his temple right against the temple of god,
on the opprobrious hill. milton's paradis. loft.
oppr o'briously, adv. [from of probrious...] reproachfully;
scurrilously.
think you, this little prating york
was not incensed by his subtle mother,
to taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously. shakesp. r. iii.
opp roop r1ousn ess. n.s.. [from opprabrious.] reproachfulness;
scurroit v.
to oppu'gn. v. a. [oppugno, lat.] to oppose; to attack; to
resisł. -
for the ecclesiastical laws of this land we are led by a great
reason to observe, and ye be by no necessity bound to oppugn
them. - hooker.
they said the manner of their impeachment they could not
but conceive did oppugn the rights of parliament. clarendon.
if nothing can oppugn his love, - -
and virtue envious ways can prove,
what cannot he confide to do
that brings both love and virtue too hudibras.
the ingredients reclude oppilations, mundify the blood, and
oopugit putrefaction. iharvey.
oppus on alicy. m. s. [from opugn.] opposition.
take but degree away, untune that string,
and bark what disco, d follows, each thing meets ..
in meer oppognancy. shao so. trail. and cressida.
oppu‘gner. m. s. [foom of pugn.] one who opposes or attacks.
the modern and dogenerate jews be, upon the score of be-
ing the great patrons of man's free will, not causelessly esteemed
the great oppugners of god's free grace. . . . . boyle.
opsi(mathy. m.s. [3]o 23 (2.] late education; late erudition.
orson a^+ ion. m. s. sojonatio, latin.] catering; a buying
provisions. - ... dici.
o’porable. adj. [optabilis, latin.] desirable; to be wished.
o'pt ative. adj. [aptativus, latin j expressive of desire. [in
grammar.] - - -
the verb undergoes in greek a different formation to fig-
nify wishing. which is called the optative mood. clarke.
o'prical. n.s. [&amp;#x2:..] relating to the science of optics.
it seems not agreeable to what anatomists and optical writers
deliver, touching the relation of the two eyes to each other. boyl.
opti'ci an. n. / [from optick.] one skilled in opticks.
optick. adj. [3:1:20;, optique, fr.]
1. visual; producing vision; subservient to vision. ,
may not the harmony and discord of colours arise from the
proportions of the vibrations propagated through the fibres of
the optic nerves into the brain, as the harmony and discord of
founds arise from the proportions of the vibrations of the air
2. relating to the science of vision.
where our master handleth the contractions of pillars, we
have an optic rule, that the higher they are, the less should be
always their diminution aloft, because the eye itself doth con-
tract all objects, according to the distance. . . wotton.
o'frick. n.s. an instrument of fight ; an organ of sight.
can any thing escape the perspicacity of eyes which were
before light, and in whose opticks there is no opacity. brown.
• our corporeal eyes we find -
i)azzle the optic}s of our mind. - * - denham,
you may neglect, or quench, or hate the flame,
whose smoke too long obscur'd your rising name,
vol. ii.
newton's opticks.
and quickly cold indiff'rence will ensue,
when you love's joys thro’ honour's optio view. prizr.
why has not man a microscopick eye *
for this plain reason, man is not a fly.
say what the use, were finer opticks giv'n,
t'inspect a mite, not comprehend the heav'n. pope.
opticks. n.j. [crlixoi...] the science of the nature and laws
of vision.
no spherical body of what bigness soever illuminates the
whole sphere of another, although it illuminate something
more than half of a lesser, according unto the doctrine of
optio. brown's vulgar erroirs.
... those who desire satisfaction must go to the admirable trea.
tise of opticks by sir isaac newton. * cheyne.
o'pti macy, n.s.. [optimates, lat.] nobility; body of nobles;
in this high court of parliament there is a rare coordination
of power, a wholesome mixture betwixt monarchy, optimacy,
and democracy. - hooves:
opti'm it y. n.s.. [from optimus.] the state of being best.
o'ption. m. s. [optio, lat.] choice; ele&amp;tion.
he degrees to punish the contumacy finally, by assigning
them their own options. . - - hammond.
transplantation must proceed from the option of the people,
: else it sounds like an exile; so the colonies must be rised by
the leave of the king and not by his command. b.co.
which of these two rewards we will receive, he hath left
to our option. **- smalridge.
o'pulence. }*s [opulence, fr. opusntia, latin.] wealth;
o'pule ncy. riches; affluence, a -
… it must be a discovery of the infinite flatteries that follow
youth and opulency. - shakosheare's 7 zoon.
after eight years spent in outward opulency and inward mor-
mur, that it was not greater; after vast sums of money and
great wealth gotten, he died unlamented. clarendon.
he had been a person not only of great pulmoy, but au-
thority. * atterbury.
there in full opulence a banker dwelt,
who all the joys and pangs of riches felt ;
his side-board glitter'd with imagin'd plate, ".
and his proud fancy held a vast estate. * swift.
o'pulent. adj. [opulent, fr. opulentus, lat.] rich; wealthy;
affluent. - -
he made him his ally, and provoked a mighty and ont
king by an offensive war in his quarrel. bacon.
to begin with the supposed policy of gratifying only the
rich and opulent. does our wise man think that the grandee
whom he courts does not see through all the little plots of his
courtship. - - - * south.
qpulently, adv. [from opulent.] richly; with splendor.
or. conjung?... [ooeji, saxon.]
i. a disjunctive particle, marking distribution, and sometimes
opposition. *
inquire what the antients thought concerning this world,
whether it was to perish or no; whether to be destroyed or to
stand eternally - - - - burnet.
he my muse's homage should receive,
... if i cou’d write, or holles cou’d forgive. . garth.
. . by intense study, or application to business that requires
little action, the digestion of foods will soon proceed more
slowly, and with more uneasiness. blackmore.
every thing that can be divided by the mind into two or
more ideas, is called complex. * //atts's logick.
2. it corresponds to either he must either fall or fly.
at venice you may go to any house either by sand or water.
- addison.
3. it sometimes, but rather inelegantly, stands for either.
for thy vast bounties are so numberless,
that them or to conceal, or else to tell, -
is equally impossible. cowley.
4. or is sometimes redundant, but is then more properly omitted.
how great soever the sins of any unreformed person are,
christ died for him because he died for all; only he must re.
form and forsake his fins, or else he shall never receive benefit
of his death. hammond.
5. [on, or aene, sax.j. before; or ever, is before ever. obsolete.
or we go to the declaration of this psalm, it shall be con-
venient to shew who did write this psalm. fisher.
the dead man’s knell
is there scarce ask'd for whom, and good men's lives
expire before the flowers in their caps,
dying or ere they ficken. shakesp. malboth.
learn before thou speak, and use physick or over thou be
sick. ecclus xviii. 19.
or. m. s. [french.] gold. a term of heraldry. .
the show'ry arch as --
with listed colours gay, or, azure, gules,
delights and puzzles the beholders eyes.. . ~ philing.
o'rach. n.s.. [atriplex.] there are thirteen species; garden
arach, was cultivated as a culinary herb, and used as spinach,
though it is not generally liked by the english, but stili
esteemed by the french. • a filler.
o'racle, n.s. [oracle, fr. craculum, lat.]
17 r 1. something<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o r a
o r b
1. something delivered by supernatural wisdom. -
the main principle whereupon our belief of all things there-
in contained dependeth, is, that the scriptures are the oracles
of god timself. - hooker.
2. the place where, or person of whom the determinations of
heaven are enquired.
why, by the verities on thee made good,
may they not be my oracles as well,
and set me up in hope shakesp. macbeth.
god hath now sent his living oracle -
into the world to teach his final will,
and sends his spirit of truth henceforth to dwell,
in pious hearts, an inward oracle,
to all truth requisite for men to know. milion.
3. any person or place where certain decisions are obtained.
there mighty nations shall enquire their doom,
the world’s great oracle in times to cone. pope.
4. one famed for wisdom ; one whose determinations are not
to be disputed.
to o'racle. v. n. [from the noun..] to utter oracles. a
word not received.
no more shalt thou by cracling abuse
the gentiles.
go. ! adj. [from oracle.]
1. uttering oracles; resembling oracles.
thy counsel would be as the oracle of
urim and thummim, those oraculous gems
on aaron's bleast, or tongue of seers old
infallible. milton's parad's rig.
here charles contrives the ord'ring of his states,
here he resolves his neighb'ring princes fates;
what nation shall have peace, where war be made,
determin'd is in this oracolous shade. //aller.
they have something venerable and oracular, in that un-
milton.
-
adorned gravity and shortiness in the expression. pope.
th’ oracolous seer frequents the pharian coast,
proteus a name tremendous o'er the main. pope.
2. positive; authoritative; magisterial; dogmatical.
though their general acknowledgments of the weakness of
human understanding look like cold and sceptical discourage-
ments; yet the particular expressions of their sentiments are
as oraculous as if they were omniscient. glanville's scepsis.
3. obscure; ambiguous; like the answers of ancient oracles.
he spoke oraculous and sly,
he'd neither grant the question, nor deny. king.
ora"culously. adv. [from oraculous.] in manner of an
oracle.
the testimonies of antiquity, and such as pass oraculously
amongst us, were not always so exact as to examine the doc-
trine they delivered. brown's wugar errours.
hence rise the branching beech and vocal oak,
where jove of old oraculousy spoke. dryden.
or a culous n ess. n. / [from oracular.] the state of being
oracular. -
or aiso n. m. s. saraison, fr. oratio, latin.] prayer; verbal
supplication; or oral worship: more frequently written crison.
this word is pronounced short both by shakespeare and dry-
don; or son is sometimes long and sometimes short.
stay, let's hear the oraisons he makes. shakes eare.
business might shorten, not disturb her pray’r;
heav'n had the best, if not the greater share :
an active life, long oraisons for bids,
yet still she pray'd, for still she pray’d by deeds. drydon.
o'ral. adj. [oral, fr. of, oris, lat j delivered by mouth ;
inot writtell.
oral discourse, whose transient faults dying with the sound
that gives them life, and so not subject to a strict review,
more easily escapes observation. locke on education.
st. john was appealed to as the living oracle of the church;
and as his oral testimony lasted the first century, many have
observed, that by a particular providence several of our sa-
viour's disciples, and of the early converts, lived to a very great
age, that they might personally convey the truth of the gos-
pol to those times which were very remote. addison.
o'rally. adv. [from cral) by mouth ; without writing.
oral tradition were incompetent without written monu-
ments to derive to us the original laws of a kingdom, because
thcy are complex, not orally traducible to so great a distance
of ages. hale's common law.
o'ra n g f. m. f [orange, fr. aurantia, lat..] the leaves have
two lobes or appendages at their base like ears, and cut in
form of a heart ; the fruit is round and depressed, and of a
yellow colour when ripe, in which it differs from the citron
and lemon. the species are eight. a mill, r.
i will discharge it in your straw-colour’d beard, your orange
tawny beard. shakes?. midsummer night's dream.
the notary came aboard, holding in his hand a fruit like
an orange, but of colour between orange tawny and scarlet,
which cast a most excellent odour, and is used for a preserva-
tive against infection. bacon’s new atlantis.
the ideas of orange colour and azure, produced in the
mind by the same infusion of lignum nephriticum, are no less
distinct ideas than those of the same colours taken from two
different bodies. locke.
fine oranges, sauce for your veal,
are charming when squeez'd in a pot of brown ale. swift.
the punic granate op'd its rose-like flow’rs;
the orange breath'd its aromatic pow's. hartz.
or angery. m. s. [orangerie, fr. j plantation of oranges.
a kitchen garden is a more pleasant fight than the finest
orangery, or artificial green house. steffatar.
o'r ang emus k. m. s. a species of pear. a
o'rangew ife. m. s. [orange and wise.] a woman who sells
oranges.
you wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause
between an orangewise and a fosset filler. shakest.
o'ranget aw n.e.x. n.s. [orange and tawny.] red, resembliog
an orange.
baronets, or knights of nova scotia, are co mmonly distin-
guished from others by a riboon of orangetawny. heylyn.
ora rios. m. s. so ation, fr. orato, lat. a speech made ac-
cording to the laws of rhetorick; a harangue; a declamation.
there shall i try,
in my oration, how the people take
the cruel issue of these bloody men. shosh. jul. cas:
this gives life and spirit to every thing that is spoken,
awakens the dullest spirits, and adds a singular grace and excel.
lency both to the person and his oration. // atts.
or at o'rica l. adj. [from or at-wr.] rhetorical; befitting an
oi a tour.
where he speaks in an oratorical, affecting, or persuasive
way, let this be explained by other places where he treats of
the same theme in a doctrinal way. j/atts.
o'ra tour. m. s. [orateur, fr. orator, lat.]
i. a publick speaker; a man of eloquence.
poor queen and son your labour is but lost;
for warwick is a subtle orator. soakesp. henry vi.
as when of old some orator renown'd,
in athens or free rome, where eloquence
flourish'd, since mute to some great cause address'd,
stood in himself collected; while each part,
motion, each act, won audience.- a sistan's por. lo/?.
. it would be altogether vain and improper in matters belong-
ing to an orator to pretend to strict demonstration. is .4.
the constant design of both these crators in all their speeches
was to drive some one particular point. so.
i have listened to an orator of this species, without being able
to understand one single sentence. swift.
both orators so much renown'd,
in their own depths of eloquence were drown'd. dy len.
2. a petitioner. this sense is used in addresses to chancery.
or a to r y. m. s. [oratoria, ars, lat...]
1. eloquence ; rhetorical expression.
each pasture flored with sheep feeding with sober security,
while the pretty lambs with blcating oratory craved the dan.
comfort. sidney.
when a world of men
could not prevail with all their oratory,
yet hath a woman's kindness over-ruid. slakoscare.
when my oratory grew tow'd end,
i bid them that did love their country's good,
cry, god save richard. shaft. rich. iii.
sighs now breath'd
unutterable, which the spirit of pray’r
inspir'd, and wing'd for heav'n with seedier fli ht
than loud, storatory. 4filton's paradio lo?.
- by this kind of oratory and professing to decline ther own
inclinations and wishes, pur ly for peace and unity, they pre-
vailed over those who were its surprisd. clar endon.
hammond's subjects were such as had greatest influence on
practice, which he prest with most affectionate tenderness
making tears part of his oratory. f.
the former, who had to deal with a people of much more
politeness, learning, and wit, laid the greatest weight of his
oratory upon the frongh of his arguments. swift.
come harmless char.&amp;ters, that no one hit,
come henley's oratory, osborn's wit. pope.
2. exercise of eloquence.
the romans had seised upon the fleet of the antiates
among which there were six armed with rostra, with which o:
consul menenius adorned the publick place of oratory. arb.
3. [oratoire, french..]
oratory signifies a private place, which is deputed and al-
lotted for prayer alone, and not for the general celebration of
divine service. zoise's paregon.
they began to erect to themselves orator, not in any
fumptuous or sately manner, which neither was possible by
reason of the poor estate of the church, and had been perious
in regard of the world's envy towards them. '• aer.
do not omit thy prayers for want of a good oratory or place
to pray in ; nor thy duty for want of temporal encourage-
ments. taylor's guide to devel)
orb. m. s. sorte, fr. orbis, latin.] j *u31 107.
1. sphere ;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o r b
o r. d.
o
soto
s
o
s
*.
**
are
1. sphere; orbicular body.
a mighty colle&amp;tion of water inclosed in the bowels of the
carth, constitutes an huge orb in the interior or central parts;
upon the surface of which orb of water the terrestrial strata are
expanded. //codward's natural hylory.
2. circular body. -
they with a storm of darts to distance drive
the trojan chief; who held at bay from far,
on his vulcanian orb sustain'd the war. dryden.
3. mundane sphere ; celestial body; light of heaven.
in the floor of heav'n
there's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st,
but in his motion like an angel sings,
still quiring to the young-ey'd cherubims. shakespeare.
4. wheel; any rolling body.
the orbs
of his fierce chariot roll'd as with the sound
of torrent floods. milton's paradis? loft.
5. circle ; line drawn round.
does the son learn action from the father yet all his ac-
tivity is but in the epicycle of a family: whereas a subject's
motion is in a larger orb. holydoy.
6. circle described by any of the mundane spheres.
astronomers, to solve the phenomena, framed to their con-
ceit eccentricks and epicycles, and a wonderful engine of
crbs, though no such things were. bacon.
with smiling aspect you serenely move,
in your fifth orb, and rule the realm of love. dryden.
7. period ; revolution of time.
self-begot, self-rais'd,
by our own quick’ning pow'r, when fatal course
had circled his full orb, the birth mature
of this our native heav'n. a silton's paradise loft.
8. sphere of action.
will you again unknit
this churlish knot of all abhorred war,
and move in that obedient orb again,
where you did give a fair and natoral light. sha'esh.
9. it is applied by azilton to the eye, as being luminous and sphe-
rical.
a drop serene hath quench'd their crls,
or dim suffusion veil’d. milton.
or bation. m. s. [orbatus, lat..] privation of parents or chil-
dren. *
o'rbed. adj. [from orb.]
1. round ; circular ; orbicular.
all those sayings will i overswear,
and all those swearings keep as true in soul,
as doth that orbed continent the fire,
that severs day from night. shakesp. twelfth night.
2. formed into a circle.
truth and justice then
will down return to men,
orb’d in a rainbow, and like glories wearing.
3. rounded.
a golden axle did the work uphold,
gold was the beam, the wheels were orb’d with gold. all.
or b1 cu l.a.r. adj. [orbiculaire, fr. orbiculatus, lat...]
i. spherical.
he shall monarchy with thee divide
of all things, parted by th’ empyreal bounds,
his quadrature from thy orbicular world.
2. circular; approaching to circularity.
the form of their bottom is not the same ; for whereas be-
fore it was of an orbicular make, they now look as if they were
pressed. addison's guardian.
by a circle i understand not here a perfect geometrical
circle, but an orbicular figure, whose length is equal to its
breadth, and which as to sense may seem circular. newton.
or biocul arly. adv. [from orbicular.j spherically; circularly.
orb1"cula rn ess. m. s. [from crbicular. j. the state of being
orbicular.
or b1 cu late d. adj. [orbiculatus, lat.] moulded into an orb.
o'rbit. m. s. [orbite, fr. orbita, latin.]
1. the line described by the revolution of a planet.
suppose more suns in proper orbits roll’d,
dissolv'd the shows and chac'd the polar cold. blackm.
suppose the earth placed nearer to the sun, and revolve for
instance in the orbit of mercury; there the whole ocean would
even boil with extremity of heat, and be all exhaled into va-
milton.
milton,
pours; all plants and animals would be scorched. bently,
2. a small orb. not proper.
attend, and you discern it in the fair
conduct and finger, or reclaim a hair;
or roll the lucid orbit of an eye;
on in full joy elaborate a figh. young.
o'rbit y. m. s. [orbus, latin.] loss, or want of parents or
children. bacon.
o'rey. adj. [from crh..] resembling an orb. not used.
it smote atrides orbie targe; but runne not through the
braise. * chapman.
2.
when, now arraid
the world was with the spring; and crlie hourts
had gone the round againe, through herbs and flowers.
chapman,
orc. m. s. sarca, lat, oz.) a sort of sea-fish. aoy.
an island salt and bare,
the haunt of seals and orcs, and sea-maws clang. æon.
o'rcha. m.s. a stone from which a blue colour is made.
a ainsworth.
o's cri an et. m. s. an herb. aos.
o'r chard. m. s. [cither hortyard or wortyard, sys skinner;
croeano, saxon jonous. j a garden of fruit-trees.
planting of orchards is very profitable, as well as pleasur-
able. 1. oom's voivoce to willions.
they overcome their riches, not by making
paths, orchards, fish pools. ben, osm.
his parsonage-house from an incommodious ruin he had
rendered a fair and pleasant dwelling, with the conveniences
of gardens and orchards. foll.
her private orchards wall'd on ev'ry side,
to lawless sylvans all access deny'd. poze.
o'rches i re. m. s. [french; oz..] the place whore
the musicians are set at a publick show.
or d. m. s. an edge or sharpness; as in ordheim, cro right, ‘‘c.
and in the islandish tongue, ord signifies a spear or dart. cib.
ord, in old en lish, signified heronning; whence proba ly
the proverb' is phrase odd, [ords] and ends, for scraps or rem-
nants. and perhaps orts for waste provision.
to or datn. v. a. sordino, lat. o. anner, fr.]
i. to appoint ; to decree.
know the cause why musick was ordain'd;
was it not to refresh the mind of man
after his studies, or his usual pain shakes eare.
jeroboam ordained a feast. 1 kongs xii. 32.
as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. a 's.
he commanded us to testify that it is he which was ordained
of god to be the judge of quick and dead. 4e's x. 42.
to souls oppress'd and dumb with grief,
the gods ordain this kind relief,
that musick should in sounds convey
what dying lovers dare not say.
the fatal tent,
the scene of death, and place ordain’d for punishment.
dryden.
j.7..."&lt;rs
my reason bends to what thy eyes ordain;
for i was born to jove, and thou to reign.
2. to establish; to settle, to institute.
mulmutius
ordain’d our laws, whose use the sword of caesar
hath too much mangled shosh cymbone.
i will ordain a place for israel. i coron. xvii. 9.
god from sinai descending, will himself
in thunder, sightning, and loud trumpets found,
ordain them laws. a ii. on's par. los’.
some laws ordain, and some attend the choice
of holy senates, and elect by voice.
3. to set in an office.
all signified unto you by a man, who is ordained over the
affairs, shall be utterly destroyed. ether xiii. 6.
4. to invest with ministerial function, or sacerdotal power.
meletius was ordai, ea by arian bishops, and yet i is ordi-
nation was never questioned. stilling fleet.
orda’in er. m. s. [from ordain..] he who ordains.
o'rdeal, n.s. [onbal, sax, ordalium, low lat. ordalie, fr.]
a trial by fire or water, by which the person accused appealed
to heaven, by walking blindfold over hot bars of iron ; or
being thrown, i suppose, into the water; whence the vulgar
trial of witches.
their ord as laws they used in doubtful cases, when clear
proofs wanted. hakewill on providence.
in the time of king john, the purgation per ignem et
aquam, or the trial by ordeal continued ; but it ended with
this king. hale.
o'rder. m. s. [ordo, tat. ordre, fr.]
1. method; regular disposition.
to know the true state of solomon’s house, i will keep
this order; i will set forth the end of our foundation, the in-
struments for our works, the several employments assigned,
and the ordinances we observe. bacon's new atlants.
as st. paul was full of the dogrine of the gospel; so it lay
all clear and in order, open to his view. locke.
2. established process.
the moderator, when either of the disputants breaks the
rules, may interpose to keep them to order. //arts.
3. proper state.
any of the faculties wanting, or out of order, produce suit-
prior.
dryden.
able defects in mens understandings. locke.
4. regularity; settled mode.
this order with her sorrow she accords,
which orderless all form of order brake. daniel.
kings are the fathers of their country, but unless they keep
their<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o r d
o r d
their own estates, they are such fathers as the sons maintain,
which is against the order of nature. davenant.
5. mandate; precept ; command. -
give order to my servants, that they take
no note of our being absent. shakesp. mer. of wen.
if the lords of the council issued out any order against them,
or if the king sent a proclamation for their repair to their
houses, presently some nobleman published a protestation
against those orders and proclamations. clarendon.
upon this new fright, an order was made by both houses
for disarming all the papists in england; upon which, and
the like orders, though seldom any thing was after done, yet
it served to keep up the apprehensions in the people, of dan-
gers and designs, and to disincline them from any reverence or
affection to the queen. clarendon.
when christians became a distinet body, courts were set
up by the order of the apostles themselves, to minister ju-
dicial process. - kettleworth.
i have received an order under your hand for a thousand
pounds in words at length. tatler.
6. rule; regulation. -
the church hath authority to establish that for an order at
one time, which at another time it may abolish, and in both
do well. plooker.
7. regular government.
the night, their number, and the sudden act
would dash all order, and protect their fact. daniel.
as there is no church, where there is no order, no ministry;
so where the same order and ministry is, there is the same
church. pearson.
8. a society of dignified persons distinguished by marks of ho-
il ous,
elves,
the several chairs of order look you scour,
with juice of balm and ev’ry precious flow'r. shakespeare.
princes many times make themselves desires, and set their
hearts upon toys; sometimes upon a building; sometimes
upon erecting of an order. bacon.
she left immortal trophies of her fame,
and to the noblest order gave the name. dryden.
by shining marks, distinguish'd they appear,
and various orders various ensigns bear. granville.
9. a rank, or class.
the king commanded the high priest and the priests of the
second order, to bring forth out of the temple all the vessels.
2 kings xxiii. 4.
.th' almighty seeing,
from his transcendent seat the saints among,
to those bright orders utter'd thus his voice. milton.
like use you make of the equivocal word dignity, which is
of order, or office, or dominion, or nature; and you arti-
ficially blend and confound all together. jwaterland.
io. a religious fraternity.
find a bare foot brother out,
one of our order to associate me,
here visiting the sick. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
i 1. [in the plural.] hierarchical state.
if the faults of men in orders are only to be judged among
themselves, they are all in some sort parties. dryden.
having in his youth made a good progress in learning, that
he might dedicate himself more intirely to religion, he entered
into holy orders, and in a few years became renowned for his
sancity of life. - addison's spectator.
when ouranius first entered into holy orders, he had
haughtiness in his temper, a great contempt and disregard for
all foolish and unreasonable people; but he has prayed away
this spirit. 410.
12, means to an end.
virgins must remember, that the virginity of the body is
only excellent in order to the purity of the soul; for in the
same degree that virgins live more spiritually than other per-
sons, in the same degree is their virginity a more excellent
ftate. taylor's rule of living hoy.
we should behave reverently towards the divine majesty,
and justly towards men; and in order to the better discharge
of these duties, we should govern ourselves in the use of sen-
sual delights, with temperance. tillotson.
the best knowledge is that which is of greatest use in order
to our eternal happiness. tillotson.
what we see is in order only to what we do not see; and
both these states must be joined together. atterbury.
one man pursues power in order to wealth, and another
wealth in order to power, which last is the safer way, and
generally followed. swift.
13. measures; care.
it were meet you should take some order for the soldiers,
which are now first to be discharged and disposed of some way;
which may otherwise grow to as great inconvenience as all this
that you have quit us from. spensor on hel...nd.
provide me soldiers,
whilst i take order for mone who affairs. ''.7%are.
the money promised unto the king, he took no order for,
albeit sostratus required it. 2 am.ac. iv. 27.
if any of the family be distressed, order is taken for their
relief and competent means to live. bacan.
14. [in archite&amp;ture.] a system of the several members, orna-
ments, and proportions of columns and pilasters; or it is a
regular arrangement of the projecting parts of a building,
especially those of a column; so as to form one beautiful whole:
or order is a certain rule for the proportions of columns, and
for the figures which some of the parts ought to have, on the
account of the proportions that are given them. there are
five orders of columns; three of which are greek, viz. the
doric, ionic, and corinthian ; and two italian, viz. the tuscan
and composite. the whole is composed of two parts at least,
the column and the entablature, and of four parts at the
most ; where there is a pedestal under the columns, and one
acroter or little pedestal on the top of the entablature. the
column has three parts; the base, the shaft, and the capital ;
which parts are all different in the several orders.
in the tuscan order, any height being given, divide it into
ten parts and three quarters, called diameters, by diameters
is meant the thickness of the shaft at the bottom, the pedestal
having two ; the column with base and capital, seven ; and
the entablature one and three quarters.
in the doric order, the whole height being given, is di-
vided into twelve diameters or parts, and one third; the pe-
destal, having two and one third, the column eight, and the
entablature two.
in the ionic order, the whole height is divided into thir-
teen diameters and a half, the pedestal having two and two
thirds, the column nine, and the entablature one and four
fifths.
in the corinthian order, the whole height is divided into
fourteen diameters and a half, the pedestal having three, the
column nine and a half, and the entablature two.
in the composite order, the whole height is divided into fif-
teen diameters and one third ; the pedestal having three and
one third, the column ten, and the entablature two.
in a colonnade or range of pillars, the intercolumniation
or space between columns in the tuscan order, is four di-
ameters. in the doric order, two and three quarters; in the
ionic order, two and a quarter; in the corinthian order, two;
and in the composite order, one and a half. builder’s dic.
to o'rder. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to regulate ; to adjust ; to manage; to conduct.
to him that ordereth his conversation aright, will i shews
the salvation of god. ps. 1. 23.
as the sun when it ariseth in the heaven, so is the beauty
of a good wife in the ordering of her house. ecclus. xxvi. 16.
thou hast ordered all in measure, number, and weight.
josd. xi. 2d.
bias being asked how a man should order his life answered,
as if a man should live long, or die quickly. bacon.
2. to manage; to procure.
the kitchin clerk that hight digestion,
did order all the cates in seemly wise. speoser.
3. to methodise; to dispose fitly.
these were the orderings of them in their service, to come
into the house of the lord. i chron. xxiv. 19.
4. to direct; to command.
5. to ordain to sacerdotal funetion. -
the book requireth due examination, and giveth liberty to
object any crime against such as are to be ordered. whitgift.
to o'rder. v. n. to give command ; to give direction.
so spake the universal lord, and seem’d
so ordering. - milton.
o'rderer. m. s. [from order.] one that orders, methodises,
or regulates.
that there should be a great disposer and orderer of all things,
a wise rewarder and punisher of good and evil, hath appeared
so equitable to men, that they have concluded it necessary.
suckling.
o'rder less, adj. [from order.] disorderly; out of rule.
all form is formless, order orderles,
save what is opposite to england's love. shakes rare.
oo:: n: / (from orderly.] regularity; methodical-
ne/s,
o'rderly. adj. [from order.]
1. methodical ; regular.
the book requireth but orderly reading. hocker.
2. observant of method.
then to their dams
lets in their yong; and wondrous orderly,
with manly haste, dispatcht his housvifery. chapman.
3. not tumultuous; well regulated.
balfour, by an orderly and well-governed march, passed in
the king's quarters without any considerable loss, to a place of
safety. clarendon.
4. according with established method.
as for the orders established, fith the law of natore, of god
and man, do all favour that which is in being, till orderly
i judgment
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o r d
o r d
.
|
!!
*
judgment of decision be given against it, it is but justice to
exact obedience of you. hooker.
a clergy reformed from popery in such a manner, as hap-
pily to preserve the mean between the two extremes, in doc-
trime, worship, and government, perfected this reformation by
quiet and orderly methods, free from those confusions and tu-
mults that elsewhere attended it. atterbury.
o'rderly. adv. [from order.] methodically; according to
order; regularly; according to rule.
all parts of knowledge have been thought by wise men to be
then most orderly delivered and proceeded in, when they are
drawn to their first original. - płocker.
ask him his name, and orderly proceed
to swear him. shakesp. richard iii.
make it orderly and well,
according to the fashion of the time. shakespeare.
it is walled with brick and stone, intermixed orderly.
sandys.
how should those aetive particles, justled by the occursion
of other bodies, whereof there is an infinite store, so orderly
keep their cells without any alteration of site. glanville.
in the body, when the principal parts, the heart and liver,
do their offices, and all the inferior smaller vessels act orderly and
duly, there arises a sweet enjoyment upon the whole, which
we call health. south's sermons.
o'rdin ael e. adj. [ordino, lat..] such as may be appointed.
all the ways of oeconomy god hath used toward a rational
creature, to reduce mankind to that course of living which is
most perfeotly agreeable to our nature, and by the mercy of
god ordinalle to eternal bliss. hammond.
o'rdin al. adj. [ordinal, fr. ordinalis, lat..] noting order: as,
second, third.
the moon's age is thus found, add to the epast the day of
the month and the ordinal number of that month from march
inclusive, because the epact begins at march, and the sum of
those, casting away thirty or twenty-nine, as often as it ariseth,
is the age of the noon. holder.
o'rdina l. n.s. [ordinal, fr. ordinale, lat.] a ritual ; a book
containing orders. ains.
o'rdinan ce. m. s. [ordonnance, fr.]
1. law ; rule; prescript.
it seemeth hard to plant any sound ordinance, or reduce
them to a civil government; since all their ill customs are per-
mitted unto them. - spenser on ireland.
let richard and elizabeth,
the true succeeders of each royal house,
by god's fair ordinance conjoin together
2. observance commanded.
one ordinance ought not to exclude the other, much less to
disparage the other, and least of all to undervalue that which
is the most eminent. taylor.
3. appointment.
things created to shew bare heads,
when one but of my ordinance stood up,
to speak of peace or war. shakesp. coriolanus.
4. a cannon. it is now generally written for distinction ord-
nance ; its derivation is not certain ; perhaps when the word
cannon was first introduced, it was mistaken for canon, and so
not improperly translated ordinance. it is commonly used in
a collective sense for more cannons than one.
caves and womby vaultages of france,
shall chide your trespass and return your mock,
- in second accent to his ordinance. shakesp. henry v.
o'r dinarily. adv. [from ordinary.] -
j. according to established rules; according to settled method.
we are not to look that the church should change her pub-
lick laws and ordinances, made according to that which is
judged ordinarily, and commonly fittest for the whole, although
it chance that for some particular men the same be found in-
convenient. płooker.
springs and rivers do not derive the water which they ordi-
marily refund, from rain. isoodward's nat. hist,
2. commonly ; usually.
the instances of human ignorance were not only clear
ones, but such as are not so ordinarily suspected. glanville.
prayer ought to be more than ordinarily fervent and vigo-
rous before the sacrament. - south.
shakespeare.
o's din ary. adj. [ordinarius, latin.]
1. established ; methodical ; regular.
though in arbitrary governments there may be a body of
laws observed in the ordinary forms of justice, they are not
sufficient to secure any rights to the people; because they may
be dispensed with. . addison's freeholder.
the standing ordinary means of conviction failing to influ-
ence them, it is not to be expected that any extraordinary
means should be able to do it. alterbury.
through the want of a sincere intention of pleasing god
in all our actions, we fall into such irregularities of life, as by
the ordinary means of grace we should have power to avoid.
law.
2. common ; usual. -
yet did she only utter her doubt to her daughters, thinking,
vol. ii.
since the worst was past, she would attend a further occasion,
left over much haste might seem to proceed of the ordinary
mislike between sisters in law. sidney.
it is sufficient that moses have the ordinary credit of an his-
torian given him. to setson.
. this designation of the person our author is more than or-
dinary obliged to take care of, because he hath made the con-
veyance, as well as the power itself, sacred. docke.
- there is nothing more ordinary than children's receiving
inio their minds propositions from their parents; which being
fastened by degrees, are at last, whether true of false, riveted
there. - locke.
method is not less requisite in ordinary conversation, than in
writing. addison.
3. mean; of low rank.
these are the paths wherein ye have walked, that are of the
ordinary sort of men ; these are the very steps ye have trod-
den, and the manifest degrees whereby ye are of your guides
and directors trained up in that school. hooker.
men of common capacity, and but ordinary judgment, are
not able to discern what things are fittest for each kind and
state of regiment., hooker.
every ordinary reader, upon the publishing of a new poem,
has will and ill-nature enough to turn several passages of it into
ridicule, and very often in the right place. addison.
my speculations, sold single, are delights for the rich and
wealthy; after some time they come to the market in great
quantities, and are every ordinary man's money. addison.
you will wonder how such an ordinary fellow as wood,
could get his majesty's broad seal. swift.
4. ugly; not handsome : as, she is an ordinary woman.
o'rdinary. n.).
1. established judge of ecclesiastical causes.
the evil will • *
qf all their parishioners they had constrain'd, /
who to the ordinary of them complain'd. . hubberd.
if fault be in these things any where justly found, law hath
refered the whole disposition and redress thereof to the ordinary
of the place. hooker.
2. settled establishment.
spain had no other wars save those which were grown into
an ordinary; now they have coupled therewith the extraordi-
nary of the valtoline and palatinate. bacon.
3. actual and constant office.
villiers had an intimation of the king's pleasure to be his
cup-bearer at large; and the summer following he was admitted
in ordinary. j/otton.
he at last accepted, and was soon after made chaplain in
ordinary to his majesty. foll.
4. regular price of a meal.
our courteous antony,
being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feast;
and for his ordinary pays his heart
for what his eyes eat only. shakes). ant, and cleopatra.
5. a place of eating established at a certain price.
they reckon all their errors for accomplishments; and all
the odd words they have picked up in a coffee-house, or a
gaming ordinary, are produced as flowers of style. swift.
to o'rdinate. v. a. sordinatus, latin.] to appoint.
finding how the certain right did stand,
with full consent this man did ordinate
the heir apparent to the crown and land. daniel.
o'rdinate. adj. [ordinatus, lat..] regular; methodical.
ordinate figures are such as have all their fides, and all their
angles equal. ray on the creation.
or dination. n. s. [ordinatio, lat. from ordinate.]
1. established order or tendency, consequent on a decree.
every creature is good, partly by creation, and partly by
ordination. perkins,
virtue and vice have a natural ordination to the happiness
and misery of life respectively. norris.
2. the aet of investing any man with sacerdotal power.
though ordained by arian bishops, his ordination was never
questioned. - stillingfleet.
st. paul looks upon titus as advanced to the dignity of a
prime ruler of the church, and entrusted with a large diocese
under the immediate government of their respective elders;
and those deriving authority from his ordination. south.
o'rdn ance. n.s.. [this was anciently written more frequently
ordinance; but ordnance is used for distinction.] cannon;
great guns.
have i not heard great ordnance in the field?
and heav'n's artillery thunder in the skies shakesh.
when a ship feels or rolls in foul weather, the breaking
loose of ordnance is a thing very dangerous. raleigh.
there are examples of wounded persons that have roared
for anguish and torment at the discharge of ordnance, though
at a very great distance. bentley.
ordonnance. n.s. [french..] disposition of figures in a
picture.
o'rdure. m. s. [ordure, french; from sorder, lat. skinner.]
dung; filth. - -
17 s gard’ners
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o r. g.
o r i
gard’ners with ordure hide those roots
that shall first spring and be most delicate. shakesp.
working upon human ordure, and by long preparation ren-
dering it odoriferous, he terms it zibetta occidentalis. brown.
we added fat pollutions of our own,
to encrease the steaming ordures of the stage. dryden.
renew’d by ordure's sympathetick force,
as oil'd with magic juices for the course,
vigorous he rises. | pope.
or e. n.s. [one, or ona, saxon; oor, dutch, a mine.]
1. metal unrefined ; metal yet in its fossil state.
round about him lay on every fide,
great heaps of gold that never would be spent ;
of which some were rude ore not purify'd
of mulciber's devouring element. spenser.
they would have brought them the gold ore aboard their
ships. - raleigh's apology.
* a hill not far,
shone with a glossy scurf, undoubted sign
that in his womb was hid metallic ore,
the work of sulphur. a/ilton's parads: lost.
who have labour'd more
to search the treasures of the roman store,
or dig in grecian mines for purer ore ? roscommon.
quick-silver ore of this mine is the richest of all ores i have
yet seen, for ordinarily it contains in it half quick-silver, and
in two parts of ore, one part of quick-filver, and sometimes
in three parts of ore, two parts of quick-silver. brown.
we walk in dreams on fairy land,
where golden ore lies mixt with common sand. dryden.
those who unripe veins in mines explore,
on the rich bed again the warm turf lay,
*till time digests the yet imperfect ore,
and know it will be gold another day. dryden.
those profounder regions they explore,
where metals ripen in vast cakes of ore. garth.
2. metal.
the liquid ore he drain'd
first his own tools; then what might else be wrought,
fusile, or grav’n in metal. milton's paradise lost.
o'rew e e d. ! n, s. a weed either growing upon the rocks un-
o’rewood. der high water mark, or broken from the bot-
tom of the sea by rough weather, and cast upon the next by
the wind and flood. carew's survey of cornwall.
o'rfgild. m. s. the restitution of goods or money taken away
by a thief by violence, if the robbery was committed in the
day-time. ainsworth.
o'rgal. m. s. lees of wine.
organ. n.s. [organe, fr. pyzvoy.]
1. natural instrument; as the tongue is the organ of speech,
the lungs of respiration.
when he shall hear she died upon his words,
the ever lovely organ of her life
shall come apparell’d in more precious habit,
than when she liv'd indeed. shakespeare.
for a mean and organ, by which this operative virtue might
be continued, god appointed the light to be united, and gave
it also motion and heat. raleigh.
the aptness of birds is not so much in the conformity of
the organs of speech, as in their attention. bacon.
wit and will
can judge and chuse, without the body’s aid;
tho' on such objects they are working still,
as thro’ the body's organs are convey’d. davies.
2. an instrument of musick consisting of pipes filled with wind
and of stops, touched by the hand. [orgue, fr.]
a hand of a vast extension, and a prodigious number of
fingers playing upon all the organ pipes in the world, and
making every one sound a particular note. keil.
while in more lengthen’d notes and slow,
the deep, majestick, solemn organs blow. pope.
orga"nic al.
* - - -
ad;. sorganique, fr. organicus. lat.
or ganick. } j. [organique, o 2 j
1. consisting of various parts co-operating with each other.
he rounds the air, and breaks the hymnick notes
in birds, heav'n's choristers, organick throats;
which, if they did not die, might seem to be
a tenth rank in the heavenly hierarchy. donne.
he with serpent tongue
organick, or impulse of vocal air, -
his fraudulent temptation thus began. milton.
the organical structure of human bodies, whereby they live
and move and are vitally informed by the soul, is the work-
manship of a most wise, powerful, and beneficent being.
bentley.
2. instrumental; acting as instruments of nature or art, to a cer-
tain end. .
read with them those organick arts which enable men to
discourse and write perspicuously, elegantly, and according to
the fittest style of lofty, mean, or lowly. milton.
3. respecting organs. -
she could not produce a monster of any thing that hath
more vital and organical parts than a rock of marble. ray:
they who want the sense of discipline, or hearing, are by
consequence deprived of speech, not by any immediate orga-
nical indisposition, but for want of discipline. holder.
organically: adv. [from organical.] by means of organs or
instruments; by organical disposition of parts.
all stones, metals, and minerals, are real vegetables; that
is, grow organically from seeds, as well as plants. locke.
oo::can ess. n.s [from organical.] state of being orga-
in 1c a 1.
o'rcanism, n.s.. [from organ.] organical struaure.
how admirable is the natural structure or organism of bo-
dies. grew's cosmol.
o'rganist. n s. [organisłe, fr. from organ.] one who plays
on the organ.
an organisi serves that office in a publick choir. boyle.
organization. m. s. [from organize.] construction in which
the parts are so disposed as to be subservient to each other.
every man's senses differ as much from others in their figure,
colour, site, and infinite other peculiarities in the organization,
as any one man's can from itself, through divers accidental
variations. glanville's scepsis.
that being then one plant, which has such an organization
of parts in one coherent body, partaking of one common life,
it continues to be the same plant, though that life be commu-
nicated to new particles of matter, in a like continued orga-
1772,4112/7. locke.
to o'rganize. v. a. sorganisor, fr. from organ.] to con-
struct so as that one part co-operates with another; to form
organically.
as the soul doth organize the body, and give unto every
member that substance, quantity, and shape, which nature
secth most expedient, so the inward grace of sacraments may
teach what serveth best for their outward form. hocker.
a genial and cherishing heat so acts upon the fit and obse-
quious matter, wherein it was harboured, as to organize and
fashion that disposed matter according to the exigencies of its
own nature. boyle.
those nobler facultics in the mind, matter organized could
never produce. ray on the creation.
the identity of the same man consists in a participation of
the same continued life, by constantly fleeting particles in suc-
cession vitally united to the same organized body. locke.
o'rganlof t. n.s. [organ and lost.] the loft where the or-
gans stand.
five young ladies of no small fame for their great severity
of manners, would go no where with their lovers but to an
organlost in a church, where they had a cold treat and some
few opera songs. tatler.
o'ro anppe. m. s. [organ and pipe.] the pipe of a musical
organ. -
the thunder,
that deep and dreadful organpipe pronounc'd
the name of prosper. shakespeare's tempes?.
o'rca ny. m. s. [origanum, lat..] an herb. ains.
orga's m. m. s. [orgosne, fr. pyztwo;..] sudden vehemence.
this rupture of the lungs, and consequent spitting of blood,
usually arises from an orgasm, or immoderate motion of the
blood. - blackmore.
by means of the curious lodgment and inosculation of the
auditory nerves, the orgasms of the spirits should be allayed, and
perturbations of the mind quieted. derham.
o'rg eis. m. s. a sea-fish, called likewise organling. both seem
a corruption of the orkenyling, as being taken on the orkney
coast. - - - ans.
oo:: adj. [orgiscilloux, fr.] proud; haughty. not in
ulle.
from isles of greece •
the princes orgillous, their high blood chased, *
have to the post of athens sent their ships. shakesp.
o'rgifs. m. s. [orgies, fr. orgia, lat.] mad rites of bacchus;
frantick revels. .
these are nights
solemn to the shining rites
of the fairy prince and knights,
while the moon their orgies lights. ben. johnson.
she feign'd nocturnal orgies; left my bed,
and, mix’d with trojan dames, the dances led. dryden.
o'rich alch... n. s. [cricha'com, lat..] brass.
not bilbo steel, nor brass from corinth set,
nor costly crichal.h from strange phoenice,
but such as could both phoebus' arrows ward,
and th’ hailing darts of heav'n beating hard. spensor.
o'rient. adj. [oriens, latin.]
1. rising as the sun.
moon that now meet'st the orient sun, now fly'st
with the fix’d stars. milton's par. les?.
when fair morn orient in heav'n appear'd. milton.
2. eastern ; oriental.
3. bright; shining; glittering ; gaudy; sparkling.
- the liquid drops of tears that you have shed,
shall come again transform'd to orient pearl;
advantaging
2.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">:
so
o
o
"...
s
-
o r i
advantaging their loan with interest,
ostentimes double gain of happiness. shakspeare.
there do breed yearly an innumerable company of gnats,
whose property is to fly unto the eye of the lion, as being a
bright and orient thing. abbot on the //orld.
ho of +
o r. n.
logo and ability god at fift gave him, would still have con-
tinued. - joake's prep. for death.
you still, fair mother, in your offspring trace
the stock of beauty destin'd for the race;
kind nature, forming them the pattern took,
we have spoken of the cause of orient colours in birds; from heav'n's first work, and eve's original look. prior.
which is by the fineness of the strainer. bacon's nat. hist. or (ginally. adv. [from original.]
morning light 1. primarily; with regard to the first cause; from the begin-
more orient in yon western cloud, that draws
o'er the blue firmament a radiant white. milton.
in thick shelter of black shades imbowr’d,
he offers to each weary traveller
his orient liquor in a crystal glass,
to quench the drouth of phoebus. milton.
the chiefs about their necks the scutcheons wore,
with orient pearls and jewels powder'd o'er. dryden.
o'rient. n.s. [orient, fr.] the east; the part where the sun
first appears.
orie’ntal. adj. [oriental, french.] eastern; placed in
the east; proceeding from the east.
your ships went as well to the pillars of hercules, as to
pequin upon the oriental seas, as far as to the borders of the
east tartary. - bacon's new atlantis.
some ascribing hereto the generation of gold, conceive the
bodies to receive some appropriate influence from the sun's
ascendent and oriental radiations. brown.
or 1 ent al. m. s. an inhabitant of the eastern parts of the
world.
they have been of that great use to following ages, as to
be imitated by the arabians and other orientals. grew.
orie’ntalism. n.s.. [from oriental.] an idiom of the eastern
languages; an eastern mode of speech.
orienta(lity. m. s. [from oriental.] state of being oriental.
his revolution being regular, it hath no efficacy peculiar
from its orientality, but equally disperseth his beams. brown.
o'rifice. m. s. [orifice, fr. orificium, lat.] any opening or
perforation.
the prince of orange, in his first hurt by the spanish
boy, could find no means to stanch the blood, but was fain
to have the orifice of the wound stopped by men's thumbs,
fucceeding one another for the space of two days. bacon.
their mouths
with hideous orifice gap'd on us wide,
portending hollow truce. milton's par. loft.
ætna was bored through the top with a monstrous ori-
occo. addison's guardian.
blood-letting, hippocrates faith, should be done with
broad lancets or swords, in order to make a large orifice by
ftabbing or pertusion. arbuthnot on coins.
o'riflamb. m. s. [probably a corruption of auriflamma, lat.
or flamme d'or, fr. in like manner as orpiment is corrupted.]
a golden standard. ains.
o'rig an. m. s. [origan, fr. origanum, lat..] wild marjorum.
i saw her in her proper hue,
bathing herself in origan and thyme. spensor.
3:... ; n. s. [origine, fr. origo, lat.]
1. beginning; first existence.
the sacred historian only treats of the origins of terrestrial
animals. - bentley's sermons.
2. fountain; source; that which gives beginning or existence.
nature which contemns its origin,
cannot be border'd certain in itself. shakesp. king lear.
if any station upon earth be honourable, theirs was ; and
their posterity therefore have no reason to blush at the me-
mory of such an original. - atterbury.
some philosophers have placed the original of power in ad-
ning.
a very great difference between a king that holdeth his
crown by a willing act of estates, and one that holdeth it
originally by the law of nature and descent of blood. bacon.
as god is originally holy in himself, so he might commu-
nicate his sanctity to the sons of men, whom he intended to
bring unto the fruition of himself. pearson.
a present blesling upon our fasts, is neither originally due
from god's justice, nor becomes due to us from his vera-
city. smallridge's sermons.
2. at first.
the metallic and mineral matter, found in the perpendi-
cular intervals of the strata, was originally, and at the time of
the deluge, lodged in the bodies of those strata. #2 codward.
3. as the first author.
for what originally others writ,
may be so well disguis'd and so improv’d,
that with some justice it may pass for yours. rossommon.
originalnes5. m. j. [from original.] the quality or state
of being original.
originary. adj. [originaire, fr. from origin.]
1. productive ; causing existence.
the production of animals in the originary way, requires
a certain degree of warmth, which proceeds from the sun's
influence. cheyne's phil. prin.
2. primitive; that which was the first state.
remember i am built of clay, and must
resolve to my originary dust. sandys on job.
to or1'ginate. v. a. [from origin..] to bring into exist-
ence.
to or1'ginate. v. n. to take existence.
origin a rion. m. s. [originatio, lat. from originate.]
1. the act or mode of bringing into existence; first produc-
tion.
the tradition of the origination of mankind seems to be uni-
versal; but the particular methods of that origination excogi-
tated by the heathen, were particular. hale.
this cruca is propagated by animal parents, to wit, but-
terflies, after the common origination of all caterpillars. ray.
descartes first introduced the fancy of making a world,
and deducing the origination of the universe from mechanical
principles. - reil.
2. descent from a primitive.
the greek word used by the apostles to express the church,
signifieth, a calling forth, if we look upon the origina.
tion. pearson.
o'risons. m. s. [oraison, french. this word is variously ac-
cented; shakespeare has the accent both on the first and se-
cond syllables; milton and crashaw on the first, others on
the second..] a prayer; a supplication.
nymph, in thy crisons
be all thy sins remember'd. shakesp. hamlet.
alas! your too much love and care of me
are heavy crisons 'gainst this poor wretch. shakesp.
he went into st. paul's church, where he had orisons and
te deum sung. bacon's henry vii.
my wakeful lay shall knock
at th' oriental gates, and duly mock
the early larks shrill orisons, to be
miration, either of surpassing form, great valour, or superior an anthem at the day's nativity. crashaw,
understanding. davenant. his daily orisons attract our ears. sandys on job.
original of beings | pow'r divine ! lowly they bow'd, adoring, and began
since that i live and that i think, is thine. prior. " their orisons, each morning duly paid. milton.
these great orbs, so went he on with his orisons,
primitive founts, and origins of light. prior. which, if you mark them well, were wise ones, cotton.
3. first copy; archetype; that from which any thing is tran- here at dead of night
scribed or translated. in this sense origin is not used. |the hermit oft, mid his orisons, hears
compare this translation with the original, the three first aghast the voice of time disparting tow’rs. dyer.
. . stanzas are rendered almost word for word, not only with the
same elegance, but with the same turn of expression. addison.
external material things, as the objects of sensation; and
the operations of our minds within, as the objects of re-
fle&amp;tion; are the only originals from whence all our ideas take
their beginnings. locke.
4. derivation; descent.
they, like the seed from which they sprung, accurst
against the gods immortal hatred nurst;
an impious, arrogant, and cruel brood,
- expressing their original from blood. dryden.
ori'ginal... adj. [originel, fr. originalis, latin.] primitive;
pristine; first.
the original question was, whether god hath forbidden
the giving any worship to himself by an image stillingfleet.
had adam obeyed god, his original perfection, the know-
the mid-night-clock attests my servent pray'rs,
the rising sun my orisons declares.
ork. n.s. [orca, lat..] a sort of great fish.
o'rlop. m. s. soverloop, dutch..] the middle deck. skinner,
a small ship of the king's called the penfie, was assailed by
the lyon, a principal ship of scotland; wherein the penfie so
applied her shot, that the lyon's oreloop was broken, her sails
and tackling torn ; and lastly, she was boarded and taken.
hayward.
o'rnament. n.s. [ornamentum, lat, ornement, fr.]
1. embellishment; decoration.
so may the outward shows be least themselves;
the world is still deceiv'd with ornament.
2. something that embellishes.
ivorie, wrought in ornaments to decke the cheekes of horse.
chapman.
the
harte.
shakes?.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o r. r.
o r t
the tuscan chief, to me has sent
their crown, and ev'ry regal ornament. dryden.
no circumstances of life can place a man so far below the
notice of the world, but that his virtues or vices will render
him, in some degree, an ornament or disgrace to his profession.
rogers.
3. honour; that which confers dignity. -- g t
they are abused and injured, and betrayed from their only
perfeotion, whenever they are taught, that any thing is an or-
nament in them, that is not an ornament in the wisest amongst
mankind. ecw.
the persons of different qualities in both sexes, are indeed
allowed their different ornaments; but these are by no means "
costly, being rather defigned as marks of distinction than to
-
make a figure. o so. addison on italy.
orname'ntal, adj. [from ornament.]. serving to decoration;
giving embellishment. o - a- o
some think it most ornamental to wear their bracelets on
their wrists, others about their ancles, brown.
if the kind be capable of more perfeotion, though rather
in the ornamental parts of it, than the essential, what rules of
morality or respect have i broken, in naming the defects that
they may hereafter be amended ? dryden.
even the heathens have esteemed this variety not only orna-
mental to the earth, but a proof of the wisdom of the creator.
j/oodward's natural history.
lf no advancement of knowledge can be had from univer-
sities, the time there spent is lost; every ornamental part of
education is better taught elsewhere. swift on religion.
orname’nt a lly. adv. [from ornamental.] in such a manner
as may confer embellishment. * * * *
ornamented, adj. [from ornament.] embellished; bedecked.
this is, i think, a word of late introduction, not very elegant.
o'rnate. adj. [ornatus, lat.] bedecked; decorated; fine.
what thing of sea or land, -
female of sex it seems, * *
that so bedeck'd, ornate and gay, oo
comes this way sailing. * , milton's agonises.
o'rnaten ess. n.f. [from ornate.] finery; state of being em-
bellished. - -
o'rnature. m. s. [ornatas, lat.] decoration. ains.
orn1'scopist, n, f, lovic and frkorz.). one who examines
the flight of birds in order to foretel futurity.
orn1thoology, nos. [&amp;ty1, and aeyo;..] a discourse on birds.
o'rphan. m.s. [3:?&amp;wo: ; orphelin, fr.] a child who has lost
father or mother, or both. -
poor orphan in the wide world scattered,
as budding branch rent from the native tree,
and thrown forth until it be withered :
such is the state of man.
who can be bound by any solemn vow
to reave the orphan of his patrimony,
to wring the widow from her custom'd right,
and have no other reason for his wrong,
but that he was bound by a solemn oath
sad widows, by thee rifled, weep in vain,
and ruin’d orphans of thy rapes complain.
the sea with spoils his angry bullets strow,
widows and orphans making as they go. it
pity, with a parent's mind,
this helpless orphan whom thou leav'st behind. dryden.
collections were made for the relief of the poor, whether
widows or orphans. nelson.
o'rphan, adj. [orpholin, fr.] berest of parents.
this king left orphan both of father and mother, found his
estate, when he came to age, so disjointed even in the noblest
and strongest limbs of government, that the name of a king
was grown odious. sidney.
o'rphanage. l n.s. sorphelinage, fr. from orphan.] state of
o'rph ...} an orphan. of os a
o'rpiment. m. s. sauripigmentum, lat, orpiment, orpin, fr.]
true and genuine orpiment is a foliaceous fosfil, of a fine and
pure texture, remarkably heavy, and its colour is a bright and
beautiful yellow, like that of gold. it is not hard but very
tough, easily bending without breaking. orpiment has been
supposed to contain gold, and is found in mines of gold, silver,
and copper, and sometimes in the strata of marl. hill.
for the golden colour, it may be made by some small mix-
ture of orpiment, such as they use to brass in the yellow alchy-
my ; it will easily recover that which the iron loseth. bacon.
ortha'not rophy. m. s. ['scaves and leopa.] an hospital for
orphans.
spensor.
shakesp.
sandys.
waller.
o'rpine. m. s. [arpin, fr. telephon, lat..] liverer or rose root, .
anacampferos, telephum, or rhodia radis. a plant. miller.
cool violets and orpine growing still, * -
embathed balm and cheerful galingale. spenser.
o'rr ery, n.f. an instrument which by many complicated
movements represents the revolutions of the heavenly bodies.
it was first made by mr. rowley, a mathematician born at
litchfield, and so named from his patron the earl of orrery:
by one or other of this family almost every art has been en-
couraged or improved. .** * * * *
o'rr1s. n.s.. [oris, latin.j.. a plant and flower. mill,
the nature of the orris root is almost singular; for root,
that are in any degree sweet, it is but the same sweetnes, with
the wood or leaf; but the orris is not sweet in the leaf; no.
ther is the flower any thing so sweet as the root. bacon,
o'rr1s. m. s. [old fr.] a sort of gold or silver lace.
ort's. n. s. seldom with a singular. [this word is derived by
skinner from ort, german, the fourth part of any thing; by
mr. lye more reasonably from orda, irish, a fragment.’ jo
anglo saxon, ord signifies the beginning; whence in some
provinces odds and ends, for ords and ends signify remnants
scattered pieces, refuse; from ord thus used probably came
ort.] - refuse ; things left or thrown away. obsolete.
he must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;
a barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
on abject orts and imitations. shakes. julius casar,
the fractions of her faith, arts of her love,
the fragments, scraps, the bits, and greasy reliques
of her o'er eaten faith, are bound to liomede. shakes.
much good do’t you then ;
brave plush and velvet men, *
can feed on orts and safe in your stage-cloths,
dare quit, upon your oaths,
the stagers, and the stage-wrights too. ben. johnson.
o'rthodox. adj. [3:30; and doxia ; orthodox, french.]
orthodo’xal. ; sound in opinion and doctrine; not
heretical. v. orthodoxal is not used. a
be you persuaded and settled in the true protestant religion
professed by the church of england; which is as sound and
orthodox in the doctrine thereof, as any christian church in the
world. bacon.
an uniform profession of one and the same orthodoxal verity,
which was once given to the saints in the holy apostles days.
- • * * * j/hite.
eternal bliss is not immediately superstructed on the most
orthodox beliefs; but as our saviour faith, if ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them; the doing must be first
superstructed on the knowing or believing, before any hap-
piness can be built on it. hammond.
origen and the two clemens's, their works were origi-
nally orthodox, but had been afterwards corrupted, and inter-
polated by hereticks in some parts of them. waterland.
o'rthodoxly, adv. [ from orthodox. j. with soundness of
optivion. * * * * - - -
the docirine of the church of england, expressed in the
thirty-nine articles, is so soundly and so orthodoxly settled, as
cannot be questioned without extreme danger to the honour of
our religion. bacon.
o'rthodoxy. m. s. [3:30%;2; orthodoxie, fr. from orthodox.]
soundness in opinion and doctrine. - -
basil himself bears full and clear testimony to gregory's or-
thodoxy.… . . . . * //aterland.
i do not attempt explaining the mysteries of the christian
religion, since providence intended there should be mysteries,
it cannot be agreeable to piety, orthodoxy, or good sense, to go
about it. swift.
o'rthodrom icks. n. s. [from 3:33, and oute.] the art
of sailing in the arc of some great circle, which is the shortest
or straightest distance between any two points on the surface
of the globe.. - harris.
o'rt hodromy. m.s. [3:36, and 3:go'; orthodromie, french.j
sailing in a flraight course. - -
o'rthogon. m.s. (#32; and yopia.] a reetangled figure.
the square will make you ready for all manner of com-
partments; your cylinder for vaulted turrets and round build-
ings ; your orthogon and pyramid, for sharp steeples. peach.
ortho gonal. adj. [orthogonel, fr. from orthogon.] reaan-
gular. . - -,
orthographer, n.s. [369c, and ytoto.] one who spells
according to the rules of grammar. -
he was wont to speak plain, like an honest man and a sol-
dier; and now he is turn'd orthographer, his words are just so
many strange dishes. * shakespeare.
ort hog raphical. adj. [from orthography.]
1. rightly spelled. - -
2. relating to the spelling,
i received from him the following letter, which, after hav-
ing rectified some little orthographical mistakes, i shall make a
present of to the public. addison's speciator.
3. delineated according to the elevation, not the ground-plot.
* in the orthographical schemes there should be a true delinea-
tion and the just dimensions of each face, and of what be-
longs to it. mortimer's husbandry,
orthographically. adv. [from orthographical.]
i. according to the rules of speiling.
2. according to the elevation.
ortho'graphy, n.s. (3:30; and yeo to ; orthographie, fr.]
1. the part of grammar which teaches how words should be
spelled. -
this would render languages much more easy to be learned,
as to reading and pronouncing, and especially as to the writ-
ing them, which now as they stand we find to be tookoo,
. 3 il
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o s s
o s t
i
;
!
*
o
o:
3.
.
io:
--
and it is no small part of grammar which treats of orthography
and right pronunciation. bolder.
2: the art or practice of spelling.
in london they clip their words after one manner about the
court, another in the city, and a third in the suburbs; all
which reduced to writing, would entirely confound orthogra-
phy. swift.
3. the elevation of a building delineated.
you have the orthography or upright of this ground-plat, and
the explanation with a scale of feet and inches. moxon.
ortho'pno e.a. m. s. [3:32:ry 2; orthopnee, fr.] a disorder
of the lungs, in which respiration can be performed only in
an upright posture.
his disease was an asthma oft turning to an orthopnara ; the
cause a translation of tartarous humours from his joints to his
lungs. harvey on consumptions.
o'rt1 v e. adj. [ortive, fr. ortivus, lat..] relating to the rising
of any planet or star.
o'rtolan. m. s. [french.] a small bird accounted very de-
licious.
nor ortolans nor godwits. cowley.
o'rv al. n.s. [orvale, fr. orvala, lat..] the herb clary. die?.
or vietan. m. s. [orvietano, italian ; so called from a moun-
tebank at orvieto in italy..] an antidote or counter poison;
a medicinal composition or electuary, good against poison.
bailey.
oscheo'cele. m. s. [3rxsov and xoan.] a kind of hernia when
the intestines break into the scrotum. dic?.
oscilla tion, n. s. [oscillum, latin.] the act of moving
backward and forward like a pendulum.
osci'll ator y. adj. [oscillum, lat.] moving backwards and
forwards like a pendulum.
the aetions upon the solids are stimulating or increasing
their vibrations, or oscillatory motions. arbuthnot.
oscist ancy. n.s. [oscitantia, lat.]
1. the agt of yawning."
2. unusual sleepiness; carelessness.
if persons of circumspect piety have been overtaken, what
security can there be for our wreckless oscitancy p gov. ton.
it might proceed from the oscitancy of transcribers, who, to
dispatch their work the sooner, used to write all numbers in
cyphers. addison's speciator.
oscitant. adj. [oscitans, latin.]
1. yawning ; unusually sleepy.
2. sleepy sluggish.
our oscitant lazy piety gave vacancy for them, and they
will now lend none back again. decay of piety.
oscitation. m. s. [oscito, lat..] the aet of yawning.
i shall defer considering this subject till i come to my trea-
tise of oscitation, laughter, and ridicule. tatler.
o's ier, n. s. [osier, fr. vitex.] a tree of the willow kind,
growing by the water, of which the twigs are used for basket-
work.
the rank of osiers, by the murmuring stream,
left on your right hand, brings you to the place. shakesp.
ere the sun advance his burning eye,
i must fill up this ofter cage of ours
with baleful weeds and precious juiced flowers. shakesh.
car comes crown'd with ozier, segs and weeds. drayton.
bring them for food sweet boughs and offers cut,
nor all the winter long thy hay rick shut. , 4zay's virgil.
like her no nymph can willing offers bend,
in basket-works, which painted streaks commend. dryden.
along the marshes spread,
we made the ofter fringed bank our bed. pope.
o’s mund. m. s. a plant. it is sometimes used in medicine.
it grows upon bogs in divers parts of england. ailler.
o'spray, n.s.. [corrupted from off fraga, lat.] the sea-eagle,
of which it is reported, that when he hovers in the air, all
the fish in the water turn up their bellies, and lie still for him
to seize which he pleases. hanmer.
i think he’ll be to rome
as is the ospray to the fish who takes it,
by sovereignty of nature. shakesp. coriolanus.
among the fowls shall not be eaten, the eagle, the offifrage,
and the ospray. - numbers xi. 13.
o'sse let. m. s. [french.] a little hard substance arising on
the inside of a horse's knee, among the small bones; it grows
out of a gummy substance which fastens those bones together.
farrier's dici.
ossi'cle. n.s. [officulum, lat.] a small bone.
there are three very little bones in the ear, upon whose right
constitution depends the due tension of the tympanum ; and
if the aetion of one little muscle, which serves to draw one of
these officles, fixt to the tympanum, be lost or abated, the ten-
sion of that membrane ceasing, sound is hindered from com-
ing into the ear. * holder on speech.
ossi'fick. adj. [affa and socio, latin.] having the power of
making bones, or changing carneous or membranous to bony
substance.
if the caries be superficial, and the bone firm, you may by
medicaments consume the moisture in the carics, dry the bone,
vol. ii.
and dispose it, by virtue of its asso s. culty, to thrust out
callus, and make separation of its caries. j/iseman.
ossifica’rios. m. s. strom off:fy.] change of carnedus, mem-
branous, or cartilaginous, into bony substance.
offications or indurations of the a tery, appear so con-
stantly in the beginnings of aneurisms, that it is not easy to
judge whether they are the cause or the effect of them. sharp.
ossi rage., n. j. fossraga, latin; oftagu, french.) a
kind of eagle, whose flesh is forbid under the name of gry-
phon. the o/fraga or ospray, is thus called, because it
breaks the bones of animals in order to come at the marrow.
it is said to dig up bodies in church-yards, and eat what it
finds in the bones, which has been the occasion that the
latins call it avis buffaria. see ospray. calmet.
7, ossify: v. a. sasa and facio..] to change to bone.
the dilated aorta every where in the neighbourhood of the
cyst is generally sifted. sharp's surgery.
oss, yorous, adj. [offa and voro..] devouring bones.
the bore of the gullet is not in all creatures alike answer-
able to the body or stomach; as in the fox, which feeds on
bones, and swallows whole, or with little chewing; and
next in a dog and other offivorous quadrupeds, it is very large.
- derham's poys 2 theology.
o'ssuary. m. s. [osarium, latin.] a charnel house; a plase
o where the bones of dead people are kept. • dic.
st.
oust. ! m. s. a vessel upon which hops or malt are dried. dio.
ost ensible, adj. [0/endo, latin.] such as is proper or in-
tended to be shewn.
ostensive. adj. [oftentis, fr. offends, latin.] showing; be-
tokening. -
o's tent. n. s. [offentum, latin.]
1. appearance; air ; manner; mien.
. use all th’observance of civility,
like one well studied in a sad oftent,
to please his grandam. shakesp. merchant of venka.
2. show; token. these senses are peculiar to shakesp?are.
be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
to courtship, and such fair oftents of love
as shall conveniently become you there.
3. a portent; a prodigy; anything ominous.
to stirre our zeales up, that admir'd, wherof a fact so
cleane
of all ill as our sacrifice, so fearfull an oftent
should be the issue. -
latinus, frighted with this dire oftent,
for counsel to his father faunus went ;
and sought the shades renown'd for prophecy,
which near albunia's sulph'rous fountain lie. dryden;
osor entation. m. s. solentation, fr. offentatio, lat.] -
1. outward show ; appearance.
if these shows be not outward, which of you
but is four volscians ?—
—march on my fellows;
make good this offentation, and you shall
divide in all with us. shakespeare's coriolanur,
you are come
a market-maid to rome, and have prevented
the offentation of our love. shakespeare.
2. * display; boast; vain show. this is the usual
en le.
if all these secret springs of detraction fail, yet a vain offen-
tation of wit sets a man on attacking an established name,
and sacrificing it to the mirth and laughter of those about him.
addison's spediator.
he knew that good and bountiful minds were sometimes in-
clined to offentation, and ready to cover it with pretence of in-
citing others by their example, and therefore checks this
vanity : take heed, says he, that you do not your alms be-
fore men, to be seen. atterbury.
with all her lustre, now, her lover warms;
then out of offentation, hides her charms. 1%ung.
the great end of the art is to strike the imagination. the
painter is therefore to make no oftentation of the means by
which this is done; the spectator is only to feel the result in
his bosom. - reynolds.
3. a show ; a spectacle. not in use.
the king would have me present the princess with some de-
lightful offentation, show, pageant, antick, or firework.
shakespeare's love's labour loft.
ostentatious. adj. [oftento, latin.] boastful; vain;
fond of show ; fond to expose to view.
your modesty is so far from being offentatious of the good
you do, that it blushes even to have it known; and therefore
i must leave you to the satisfaction of your own conscience,
which, though a silent panegyrick, is yet the best. dryden.
they let ulysses into his disposition, and he seems to be
ignorant, credulous, and offentations. broome on odyssey
oforatovox. adv. [from osientatious.] vainly ; boast-
ully.
ostenta’riousness. n.s.. [from offentatious.) vanity; boast.
fulness. -
17 t ostent a*tour.
shakespeare.
chapman,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o t h
o t t
ostent a tour. m. s. sosientateur, fr. offento, lat..] a boaster;
a vain setter to show.
osteocolla, n.s. [ostov and x0xx&amp;o; ofteorolle, fr.] osleocola
is frequent in germany, and has long been famous for bring-
ing on a callus in fractured bones. hill's mat. med.
oreocola is a spar, generally coarse, concreted with earthy
or stony matter, precipitated by water, and incrusted upon
sticks, stones, and other like bodies. i/oodward.
osteocope. m. s. [3rtov and xario ; offeocope, french.j pains
in the bones, or rather in the nerves and membranes that en-
compass them. die?.
osteology. n.s. [3; toy and asyo ; offeologie, fr.] a descrip-
tion of the bones.
richard farloe, well known for his acuteness in dissection
of dead bodies, and his great skill in offeology, has now laid
by that practice. tatler.
osri ary. n.s. [offium, lat.] the opening at which a river
disembogues itself.
it is received, that the nilus hath seven offiaries, that is,
by seven channels disburtheneth itself unto the sea. brown.
o's tl.e.r. m. s. [hostelier, french..] the man who takes care of
horses at an inn.
the smith, the offler, and the boot-catcher, ought to par-
take. swift's direct. to the groom.
o's tlery. m. s. [hosielerie, french..] the place belonging to
the ostler. -
o'str acis m. m. s. [&amp;pzziro; ; ostracisme, fr.] a manner of
'passing sentence, in which the note of acquital or condemna-
tion was marked upon a shell which the voter threw into a
vessel. banishment ; publick censure.
virtue in courtiers hearts
suffers an ostra isn, and departs;
profit, ease, fitness, plenty, bid it go,
but whither, only knowing you, i know. domne.
publick envy is as an offracism, that eclipseth men when
- they grow too great; and therefore it is a bridle to keep them
within bounds. bacon's essays.
hyperbolus by suffering did traduce
the o/aracism, and sham'd it out of use. cleaveland.
this man, upon a slight and false accusation of favouring
arbitrary power, was banished by ostracism; which in english
would signify, that they voted he should be removed from
their presence and council for ever. swift.
o's tracites. n. s. q/racites expresses the common oyster in
its fossil state. hill's materia medica.
o'st rich. m. s. sautruche, french; //ruthio, latin.) ostrich
is ranged among birds. it is very large, its wings very short,
and the neck about four or five spans. the feathers of its
wings are in great esteem, and are used as an ornament for
hats, beds, canopies: they are stained of several colours, and
made into pretty tufts. they are hunted by way of course,
for they never fly; but use their wings to assist them in run-
ning more swiftly. the o/lrich swallows bits of iron or brass,
in the same manner as other birds will swallow small stones or
gravel, to assist in digesting or comminuting their food. it
lays its eggs upon the ground, hides them under the sand, and
the sun hatches them. calmet.
i’ll make thee eat iron like an offrich, and swallow my sword
like a great pin, ere thou and i part. shakespeare.
gavest thou the goodly wings unto the peacock 3 or wings
and feathers unto the ostrich. - job xxxix. 13.
the scots errant fight, and fight to eat,
their ostrich stomachs make their swords their meat. cleav.
modern striches are dwindled to meer larks, in comparison
with those of the ancients. arbuthnot.
otacoustick, n, s soro, and 24%; otacousique, french..] an
instrument to facilitate hearing. *
in a hare, which is very quick of hearing, it is supplied
with a bony tube ; which, as a natural otacousiick, is so di-
rected backward, as to receive the smallest and most distant
found that comes behind her. grew's cosmal.
other. pron. [ooen, sax. autre, fr.]
i. not the same ; not this ; different. in this sense it seems an
adjective, yet in the plural, when the substantive is suppressed,
it has contrarily to the nature of adjectives a plural termina-
tion; as, of loft week three days were fair, the others rainy.
of good actions some are better than other some. hooker.
will it not be received
that they have don’t,
who dares receive it other 2 shakesp. king lear.
the dismayed matrons and maidens, some in their houses,
other some in the churches, with floods of tears and lament-
able cries, poured forth their prayers to the almighty, craving
his help in that their hard distress. knolles.
he that will not give just occasion to think, that all govern-
ment in the world is the product only of force and violence,
and that men live together by no other rules but that of beasts,
where the strongest carries; and so lay a foundation for per-
petual disorder and mischief, tumult, sedition and rebellion;
things that the followers of that hypothesis so loudly cry
out against, must of necessity find out another state of govern-
in cint, - locke.
~
no leases shall ever be made other than leases for years not
exceeding thirty-one, in postession, and not in reversion or
remainder. - swift.
2. not i, or he, but some one else: in this sense it is a sub-
stantive, and has a genitive and plural.
were i king,
i should cut off the nobles for their lands;
idesire his jewels and this other's house. sha's care,
physicians are some of them so conformable to the homou.
of the patient, as they press not the cure of the disease; and
some other are so regular in proceeding according to art, as
they respect not the condition of the patient. bacon.
the confusion arises, when the one will put their sickle
into the other’s harvest. losky.
never allow yourselves to be idle, whilst others are in want
of aty thing that your hands can make for them. law,
the king had all he cray’d, or could compel,
and all was done—let others judge how well. daniel.
3. not the one, not this, but the contrary.
there is that controling worth in goodness, that the will
cannot but like and desire it; and on the oth r fide, that
odious deformity in vice, that it never offers itself to the
affections of mankind, but under the disguise of the other. "
south.
4. correlative to each.
in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than them-
selves. phil. ii. 3.
scotland and thou did each in other live, - -
nor would'st thou her, nor could she thee survive.
5. something besides.
the learning of latin being nothing but the learning of
words, join as much other real knowledge with it as you can.
locke on education,
dryd.
6. the next.
thy air, .
thou other gold bound brow, is like the first ; -
a third is like the former. shakespeare's macbeth.
7. the third past.
bind my hair up: as 'twas yesterday:
no, nor the to other day. ben. johnson.
8. it is sometimes put elliptically for other thing; something
different. -
i can expe&amp;t no other from those that judge by fingle fights
and rash measures, than to be thought fond or insolent. glanv.
other gates. adv. [other and gate, for way.] in another
iilanner.
if fir toby had not been in drink, he would have tickled
you othergates than he did. shakesp. twelfth night.
o'ther guis e. adj. [other and guise. this is often pronounced
and sometimes written otherguess.] of another kind.
o'therw here. adv. [other and where.] in other places.
as jews they had access to the temple and synagogues, but
as christians they were of necessity forced otherwhere to assemble
themselves. hooker.
his godlike acts, and his temptations fierce,
and former sufferings, otherwhere are found. milton,
other while. adv. [other and while.] at other times.
other wis e. adv. [other and wise.]
1. in a different manner.
they only plead, that whatsoever god revealeth, as neces.
sary for all christian men to do and believe, the same we ought
to embrace, whether we have received it by writing or other-
wift, which no man denieth. hooker.
the whole church hath not tied the parts unto one and the
same thing, they being therein left each to their own choice,
may either do as others do, or else otherwise, without any
breach of duty at all. hocker.
the evidences for such things are not so infallible, but that
there is a possibility, that the things may be otherwise. iłzkins.
in these good things, what all others should practise, we
should scarce know to practise otherwise. spratt.
thy father was a worthy prince,
and merited, alas ! a better fate;
but heaven thought otherwise. addison's cato.
2. by other causes.
sir john norris failed in the attempts of lisborn, and re-
turned with the loss, by sickness and otherwise, of eight thou-
sand men. - raleigh.
3. in other respects. -
it is said truly, that the best men otherwis, are not always
the best in regard of society. hooker.
men seldom consider god any otherwise than in relation to
themselves, and therefore want some extraordinary benefits to
excite their attention and engage their love. rogers.
otter. m. s. socer, saxon; sutra.] an amphibious animal
that preys upon fish.
the toes of the otter's hinder feet, for the better swimming,
are joined together with a membrane, as in the bewir; from
which he differs principally in his teeth, which are canin;
and in his tail, which is felin, or a long taper: so that he
may not be unfitly called putoreus aquaticus, or the water pole-
cat. he makes himself burrows on the water side, as a beyir
7 13
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
o v e
-
o
is sometimes tamed and taught, by ninbly surrounding the
fishes to drive them into the net. grew.
at the lower end of the hall is a large citer's skin stuffed
with hay.
would you preserve a num’rous finny race :
let your fierce dogs the rav'nous atter chase;
th'amphibious monster ranges all the shores, -
darts thro’ the waves, and ev'ry haunt explores. gay.
o'v al. adj. [ovale, fr. ovum, an egg.] oblong; resembling
the longitudinal section of an egg.
the mouth is low and narrow, but, after having entered
pretty far in the grotto, opens itself on both sides in an oval
figure of an hundred yards. addison on italy.
mercurius, nearest to the central sun,
does in an oval orbit, circling run ;
but rarely is the object of our sight,
in solar glory sunk.
o'v a l. m. s. -
a triangle is that which has three angles, or an oval is that
which has the shape of an egg. j/atts's logick.
ova’rious. adj. [from ovun.] consisting of eggs.
- he to the rocks
dire clinging gathers his ovarious food. thomson.
o'v ary. n.s. sovaire, fr. ovarium, latin.] the part of the
body in which impregnation is performed. *
the ovary or part where the white involveth it, is in the
second region of the matrix, which is somewhat long and in-
verted. - brown's wulgar errours.
ov ation. n.s. sovation, fr. ovatio, latin.] a lesser triumph
among the romans allowed to those commanders who had
won a victory without much bloodshed, or defeated some less
formidable enemy. - dio.
o'ueat. n.s. seruca pilosa..] a sort of caterpillar; an insect.
o' u bus t. ; dic?.
cuch. m. s. an ornament of gold or jewels.
ouches or spangs, as they arc of no great cost, so they are
of most glory. bacon.
ouch of a boar. the blow given by a boar's tusk. ains.
o'v en. n.s. [open, saxon.] an arched cavity heated with fire
to bake bread.
he loudly bray'd, that like was never heard,
and from his wide devouring oven sent
blackmore.
• a flake of fire, that flashing in his beard,
him all amaz'd. spensor.
here's yet in the world hereafter, the kneading, the making
of the cake, the heat of the oven, and the baking. shakesp.
bats have been found in ovens and other hollow close places,
matted one upon another; and therefore it is likely that they
sleep in the winter, and eat nothing. bacon.
o've r hath a double signification in the names of places, accord-
ing to the different situations of them. . if the place be upon
or near a river, it comes from the saxon cyne, a brink or
bank; but if there is in the neighbourhood another of the
fame name, distinguished by the addition of nether, then over
is from the gothick usar, above. gilson's camden.
o’v er. prep. [ufar, gothick; orne, saxon.]
1. above ; with respect to excellence or dignity.
how happy some, o'er other some can be
thro' athens i am thought as fair as she. shakesp.
young pallas shone conspicuous o'er the rest;
gilded his arms, embroider'd was his vest. dryden.
- high, over all, was your great condust shown,
you sought our safety, but forgot your own. dryden.
the commentary which attends this poem, will have one
advantage over most commentaries, that it is not made upon
conjectures. . . pope.
it will afford field enough for a divine to enlarge on, by
shewing the advantages which the christian world has over the
heathem. swift.
2. above, with regard to rule or authority. opposed to under.
the church has over her bishops, able to silence the fac-
tious, no less by their preaching than by their authority. south.
captain, yourself are the fittest to live and reign not over,
but next and immediately under the people. dryden.
3. above in place. opposed to below. -
he was more than over shoes in love. shakespeare.
the street should sce as she walkt over head. shakesp.
thrice happy is that humble pair,
beneath the level of all care ;
over whose heads those arrows fly,
of sad distrust and jealousy. waller.
4. across; from side to side: as, he leased over the brook.
come o'er the brook befly to me,
she dares not come over to thee. - shakespeare.
certain lakes and pits, such as that of avennes, poison
birds which fly over them. bacon's nat. hist.
the geese fly o'er the barn, the bees in arms
drive headlong from their waxen celis in swarms.
5. through, diffusively.
all the world over, those that received not the commands
of christ and his doctrines of purity and perseverance, were
signally destroyed. - hammond.
dryd.
addison's speciator.
6. upon.
wise governours have as great a watch over fames, as they
have of the actions and designs. bacon.
- angelic quires
sung heav'nly anthems of his viaory
o'er temptation and the tempter proud.
7. before. this is only used in ov.r night.
on their intended journey to proceed,
and over night whatso thereto did necd.
8. it is in all senses written by contraction o’er.
o'v er. adv.
1. above the top. -
give, and it shall be given unto you ; good measure, pressed
down and shaken together and running over, shall men give.
- luke vi. 38.
!!...tzm.
hubbard.
2. more than a quantity asfigned.
even here likewise the laws of nature and reason be of ne-
cessary use ; yet somewhat over and besides them is necessary,
namely human and positive law. - a120 ker.
when they had mete it, he that gathered much had nothing
over, and he that gathered little had no lack. ex. xvi. 18.
the ordinary soldiers having all their pay, and a month's
pay over, were sent into their countries. hayward.
the eastern people determined their digit by the breadth of
barley-corns, six making a digit, and twenty-four a hand's
breadth: a small matter over or under. arbuthnot.
3. from side to side.
the fan of an indian king, made of the feathers of a pea-
cock's tail, composed into a round form, bound altogether
with a circular rim, above a foot over. grew.
4. from one to another.
this golden cluster the herald delivereth to the tirsan, who
delivereth it over to that son that he had chosen. bacon.
5. from a country beyond the sea. -
it hath a white berry, but is not brought over with the
coral. - bacon's natural history.
they brought new customs and new vices o'er ;
taught us more arts than honest men require.
6. on the surface.
the first came out red all over, like an hairy garment. gen.
7. past. this is rather the sense of an adjective.
soliman pausing upon the matter, the heat of his fury be-
ing something over, suffered himself to be intreated. knoller.
meditate upon the effects of anger; and the best time to do
philips.
this, is to look back upon anger when the fit is over, bacon,
what the garden choicest bears
to fit and taste, till this meridian heat
be over, and the sun more cool decline. milton.
the aet of stealing was soon over, and cannot be undone,
and for it the finner is only answerable to god or his vicege-
icnt. taylor's rule of living haly.
he will, as soon as his first surprize is over, begin to won-
der how such a favour came to be bestowed on him. atterb.
there youths and nymphs in consort gay 2
shall hail the rising, close the parting day;
with me, alas! with me those joys are o'er,
for me the vernal garlands bloom no more. pope.
8. throughout; completely.
well,
have you read o'er the letters i sent you ? shakespeare.
let them argue over all the topicks of divine goodness
and human weakness, yet how trifling must be their plea
- south's sermons.
9. with repetition; another time.
he o'er and o'er divides him,
*twixt his unkindness and his kindness. shaks eare.
sitting or standing still confin'd to roar,
in the same verse, the same rules o'er and o'er. dryden,
longing they look, and gaping at the fight,
devour her o'er and o'er with vast delight. dryden.
thou, my hector, art thyself alone,
my parents, brothers, and my lord in one:
o kill not all my kindred o'er again,
nor tempt the dangers of the dusty plain; }
but in this tow'r, for our defence, remain. dryden.
when children forget, or do an action aukwardly, make
them do it over and over again, till they are perfect. locke.
if this miracle of christ's rising fron the dead, be not suf-
ficient to convince a resolved libertine, neither would the
rising of one now from the dead be sufficient for that purpose;
fince it would only be the doing that over again which hath
been done already. atterbury.
the most learned will never find occasion to act over again
what is fabled of alexander the great, that when he had con-
quered the eastern world, he wept for want of more worlds to
conquer. jwatts.
he cramm’d his pockets with the precious store,
and ev’ry night review’d it o'er and o'er. harte.
io. extraordinary; in a great degree.
the word symbol should not seem to be over difficult. baker.
ii. qv er and above. besides; beyond what was first supposed
or immediately intended.
* moses
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
o v e
moses took the redemption money of them that were over
and above. numb. iii. 49.
he gathered a great mass of treasure, and gained over and
above the good will and esteem of all people wherever he came.
l'estrange.
12. over against. opposite; regarding in front.
in ticinum is a church with windows only from above. it
reporteth the voice thirteen times, if you stand by the close
end of the wall, over against the door. bacon.
i visit his picture, and place myself over agains it whole
hours together. addison's speciator.
over against this church stands a large hospital, erected by a
shoemaker. - addison on italy.
3. to give over. to cease from.
these when they praise, the world believes no more,
than when they promise to give scribling o'er. pope.
14. to give over. to attempt to help no longer; as, his phys-
tians have given bim over; his friend, who advised him, have
given him over.
15. in composition it has a great variety of significations; it is
arbitrarily prefixed to nouns, adjectives, or other parts of
speech in a sense equivalent to more than enough ; too much.
devilish macbeth,
by many of these trains hath sought to win me
into his pow'r : and modest wisdom plucks me
from over-credulous haste. shakespeare's macbeth.
st. hierom reporteth, that he saw a satyr; but the truth
hereof i will not rashly impugn, or over-boldly affirm.
peacham.
these over-busy spirits, whose labour is their only reward,
hunt a shadow and chase the wind. decay of piety.
if the ferment of the breast be vigorous, an over-fermenta-
tion in the part, produceth a phlegmon. //iseman.
a gangrene doth arise in phlegmons, through the unsea-
sonable application of over-cold medicaments. wiseman.
poets, like lovers, should be bold and dare,
they spoil their business with an over-care :
and he who servilely creeps after sense,
is safe, but ne'er will reach an excellence.
wretched man! o'erfeeds
his cramm'd desires, with more than nature needs. dryd.
bending o'er the cup, the tears she shed,
seem’d by the posture to discharge her head,
o'er-fill'd before. dryden's boccace.
as they are likely to over-flourish their own case, their flat-
tery is hardest to be discovered: for who would imagine him-
self guilty of putting tricks upon himself? collier.
he has afforded us only the twilight of probability; suitable
to that state of mediocrity he has placed us in here; wherein
to check our over-confidence and presumption, we might, by
every day's experience, be made sensible of our shortfighted-
ness. locke.
this part of grammar has been much negle&amp;ted, as some
others over-diligently cultivated. it is easy for men to write
one after another, of cases and genders. locke.
it is an ill way of establishing this truth, and silencing
atheists, to take some men's having that idea of god in their
minds, for the only proof of a deity; and out of an oversond-
mess of that darling invention, cashier all other arguments.
locłe.
a grown person surfeiting with honey, no sooner hears the
name of it, but his fancy immediately carries sickness and
qualms to his flomach : had this happened to him by an over-
dose of honey, when a child, all the same effects would have
followed, but the cause would have been mistaken, and the
antipathy counted natural. locke.
take care you over-burn not the turf; it is only to be burnt
so as may make it break. mortimer.
don't over-fatigue the spirits, lest the mind be seized with
a lassitude, and thereby nauseate and grow tir'd of a particu-
lar subject. watts.
the memory of the learner should not be too much crowded
with a tumultuous heap of ideas, one idea effaces another. an
over-greedy grasp does not retain the largest handful. watts.
to o'v er-aboux d. v. n. [over and abound..] to abound more
than enough.
dryden.
both imbibe
fitting congenial juice, so rich the soil,
so much does fructuous moisture o'er-abound. philips.
the learned, never over-abounding in transitory coin, should
not be discontented. pope's letters.
to over-act. v. a. sover and aff.] to ad more than enough.
you over-aci, when you should underdo:
a little call yourself again, and think. ben. johnson.
princes courts may over-act their reverence, and make them-
selves laughed at for their foolishness and extravagant relative
worship. stillingfleet.
good men often blemish the reputation of their piety, by
over-aeting some things in religion; by an indiscreet zeal about
things wherein religion is not concerned. tillotson.
he over-aded his part; his passions, when once let loose,
were too impetuous to be managed. atterbury,
to over-ba'lance. v. a.
to over-blow. v. n. [over and blow.]
to over-a'ach. v. a. sover and arch..] to cover as with an
arch.
where high ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
brown with o'er-arching shades and pendant woods.
pope.
to over-a’we. v. a. [over and awe.] to keep in awe by su-
periour influence.
the king was present in person to overlook the magistrates,
and to over-awe these subjects with the terror of his sword.
spenser on i, eland.
her graceful innocence, her every air,
qf gesture, or least action, over-aw'd
his malice. milton's paradise left.
i could be content to be your chief tormentor, ever paying
you mock reverence, and sounding in your ears, the empty
title which inspired you with presumption, and over-awed my
daughter to comply. addison's guardian.
a thousand fears
still over-awe when she appears. granville's poems.
to weigh down; to preponderate.
not doubting but by the weight of reason i should conter-
poise the over-balancings of any factions. king charles.
the hundred thousand pounds per annum, wherein we
ove:halance them in trade, must be paid us in money. lette.
. when these important considerations are set before a ra.
tional being, acknowledging the truth of every article, should
a bare single possibility be of weight enough to over-balanc,
them. rogers.
over-ba'lance. n. s. sover and balance.] something more
than equivalent.
our exported commodities would, by the return, encrease
the treasure of this kingdom above what it can ever be by
other means, than a mighty over-balance of our exported to
our imported commodities. 7 emple.
.the mind should be kept in a perfect indifference, not in.
slining to either fide, any further than the over-balance of pro-
bability gives it the turn of assent and belief. 12:#e.
over-ba(rtle. adj. [of this word i know not the deriva-
tion; batten is to grow fat, and to battle, is at oxford to seed
on trust.] too #. exuberant. -
in the church of god sometimes it cometh to pass, as in
over-battle grounds; the fertile disposition whereof is good,
yet because it exceedeth due proportion, it bringe:h abun-
dantly through too much rankness, things less profitao,
whereby that which principally it should yield, either pre-
vented in place or defrauded of nourishment, faileth. a..….
to over-bear. v. a. sover and bear.] to repress; to sub-
due ; to whelm ; to bear down.
what more savage than man, if he see himself able by
fraud to over-reach, or by power to over-lear the laws : hao.
my desire
all continent impediment would over-kar,
that did oppose my will. shakesfeare's macbeth,
the ocean o'er-peering of his list, -
eats not the flats with more impetuous hasle
than young laertes, in a riotous head
o'er-bears your officers.
t. so it pleas'd your highness
o over-bear. shakes care's king ‘f.
glo'ster, thou shalt well perceive, */. g john.
that nor in birth or for authority,
the bishop will be over-borne by thee. shakes?eare.
the turkish commanders, with all their forces, aja
the city, thrusting their men into the breaches by heaps, as
if they would, with very multitude, have discouraged of *:
born the christians. c knoller.
the point of reputation, when news first came of the battle
shałospeare.
lost, did over-bear the season of war. bacon.
yet fortune, valour, all is over-born,
by numbers; as the long resisting bank
by the impetuous torrent. denham.
a body may as well be over-born by the violence of a shai.
low, rapid stream, as swallowed up in the gulph of smooth
water, - l'a/irange.
crowding on the last the first impel; -
till over-born with weight the cyprians fell. dryden:
the judgment, if swayed by the over-bearing of passion,
and stored with lubricous opinions instead of clearly conceived
truths, will be erroneous. glanville's scoss.
take care that the memory of the learner be not too oft
crowded with a tumultuous heap, or over-bearing multitude of
documents at one time. j/atts.
the horror or loathsomness of an object may over-bear the
pleasure which results from its greatness, novelty, or beauty.
443/2n's soedjator.
to over-bi'd. v. a. sover and bid.] to offer more thin equi-
valent.
you have o'er-bid all my past sufferings,
and all my future too. dryden's spanish fryar.
to be past its vio-
lence.
led with delight, they thus beguile the way,
until the blustring storm is over-town." spensor.
li
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
all those tempests being over-blown, there long after arose
a new storm which over-run all spain. spensor.
this ague fit of fear is over-blown, '- -
an easy task it is to win our own. shalop, rich. ii.
seiz'd with secret joy, -
when storms are over-blown. dryden's wirgi'.
to over-blow. v. a. [over and blow.] to drive away as
clouds before the wind. * -
some angel that beholds her there,
instruct us to record what she was here;
and when this cloud of sorrow's over-blown,
thro' the wide world we'll make her graces known. isa’ler.
over-bo'ard. adu. [over and board. sce boar d.j. off the
ship; out of the ship. - * *
the great assembly met again ; and now he that was the
cause of the tempest being thrown over-board, there were hopes
a calm should ensue. - howel.
a merchant having a vessel richly fraught at sea in a storm,
there is but one certain way to save it, which is, by throwing
its rich lading over board. * south.
the trembling dotard, to the deck he drew,
and hoisted up and over-board he threw ;
this done, he seised the helm. - dryden.
he obtained liberty to give them only one song before he
leaped over-board, which he did, and then plunged into the
sea. o - l’estrange.
though great ships were commonly bad sea-boats, they had
a superiour force in a sea engagement: the shock of them be-
ing sometimes so violent, that it would throw the crew on the
upper deck of lesser ships over-board. .* arbuthnot.
to over-bu'lk. v. a. [over and bulk.] to oppress by bulk.
the feeding pride,
in rank achilles, must or now be cropt,
or shedding, breed a nursery of like evils, -
to over-bulk us all. shakesp. trail. and cressida.
to ove r-bu'rden. v. a. [over and burthen..] to load with too
great weight. - *
if she were not cloyed with his company, and that she
thought not the earth over-burthened with him, she would cool
his fiery grief. sidney.
to over-bu'y. v. a. sover and buy..] to buy too dear.
he, when want requires, is only wise,
who slights not foreign aids, nor over-buys ; {
but on our native strength, in time of need, relies. dryd.
tz ov er-ca'rry. v. a. sover and carry..] to hurry too far; to
be urged to any thing violent or dangerous.
he was the king's uncle, but yet of no capacity to succeed;
by reason whereof his natural affection and duty was less easy
to be over-carried by ambition. hayward.
to ove r-ca's t. v. a. part. over-caff. [over and cosł.]
1. to cloud; to darken; to cover with gloom.
as they past,
the day with clouds was sudden over-cos’. spensor.
hie, robin, over-cast the night;
the starry welkin cover thou anon,
with drooping fogs, as black as acheron. shakesp.
our days of age are sad and over-cost, in which we find that
of all our vain passions and affections past, the sorrow only
abideth. - raleigh's hył. of the j/orld.
i of fumes and humid vapours made,
no cloud in so serene a mansion find,
to over-tast her ever shining mind. waller.
those clouds that over-cost our morn shall fly,
dispell'd to farthest corners of the sky. dryden.
the dawn is over cas, the morning lours,
and heavily in clouds brings on the day. addison.
2. to cover. this sense is hardly retained but by needle-wo-
men, who call that which is incircled with a thread, over-
ca/l.
when malice would work that which is evil, and in work-
ing avoid the suspicion of an evil intent, the colour wherewith
it over-casseth itself is always a fair and plausible pretence of
seeking to further that which is good. hooker.
their arms abroad with gray moss over-caff,
and their green leaves trembling with every blast. spenser.
3. to rate too high in computation.
the king in his accompt of peace and calms, did much
over-cas his fortunes, which proved full of broken seas, tides,
and tempests. bacon's henry vii.
to ov er-charge. v. a. sover and charge.]
1. to oppress; to cloy ; to surcharge. -
on air we feed in every instant, and on meats but at times;
and yet the heavy load of abundance, wherewith we oppress
and over-charge nature, maketh her to sink unawares in the
mid-way. raleigh's his of the iworld.
a man may as well expe&amp;t to grow stronger by always eat-
ing, as wiser by always reading. too much over charges na-
ture, and turns more into disease than nourishment. collier.
2. to load; to crowd too much. -
our language is over-charged with consonants. pope.
3. to burthen. -
wol. ii.
*-
he whispers to his pillow,
the secrets of his over-charged soul. . shosheare.
4. to rate too high
here's gloster, a foe to citizens,
.0 or charging your free purses with large fines. shakos.
5. to fill too full.
her heart is but o'er-charg’d; she will recover. shakesh.
the fumes of passion do as really intoxicate, and confound
the judging and discerning faculty, as the fumes of drink
discompose and stupify the brain of a man over-charged with it.
south.
if they would make distinet abstract ideas of all the varieties
in human actions, the number must be infinite, and the me-
mory over-charged to little purpose. - locke.
the aetion of the iliad and æneid in themselves exceeding
short, are so beautifully extended by the invention of episodes
that they make up an agreeable story sufficient to employ in:
memory without over-charging it: addison's speciator.
6. to load with too great a charge.
they were . . . . “r on
as cannons over-charg’d with double cracks. ... shao.
who in deep mines, for hidden knowledge toils,
like guns o'er-charg’d, breaks, misses, or recoils. doiham.
to ove r-cloud. v. a. [over and cloud.] to cover with
clouds. -
the filver empress of the night . . . " :
o'er-clouded, glimmers in a fainter light. o tickel.
7% over-cloox. o. a. sover and dy..] to fill beyond satiety.
a scum of britons and base lackey peasants,
whom their o'er cloyed country vomits forth
to desperate adventures and destruction. shakes eare:
to overco m f. v. a. pret. 1 overcame; part. pass. ovircome;
anciently overcomen, as in spenser. [overcomen, dutch.j.
. to subdue ; to conquer; to vanquish.
they coercomen, were deprived
of their proud beauty, and the one moiety * - *
transformed to fish, for their bold surquedry. sjensor.
this wretched woman, overcome
of anguish rather than of crime hath been. * . spensor.
of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
bondage. 2 pet. ii. 19.
fire by thicker air o'ercome,
and downward forc'd in earth's capacious womb,
alters its particles ; is fire no more. prior.
2. to furnount.
miranda is a constant relief to poor people in their mis.
fortunes and accidents; there are sometimes little misfortunes
that happen to them, which of themselves they could never
be able to overcome. law.
3. to over-flow; to surcharge. * . . . -
th’ unfallow'd glebe -
yearly o'ercomes the granaries with stores. philos.
4. to come over or upon to invade suddenly. not in use.
can't such things be,
and overcome us like a summer's choud, -
without our special wonder * shakesp. macbeth.
to overco'me. v. n. to gain the superiority.
that thou mightest be justified in thy sayings, and mightest
overcome when thou art judged: - - - rom. iii. 4.
ov er co’mer. m. s. [from the verb.] he who overcomes.
to over-co unt. v. a. sover and count..] to rate above the
true value.
thou know'st how much -
we do o'er-count thee. * shakesh. antony and clopatra.
to over-cover. v. a. sover and cover.]. to cover compleatly.
shut me nightly in a charnel house, “ , ”
o'er-cover'd quite with dead mens rattling bones,
with reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls. shakes).
to over-crow. v. a. sover and crow. j. to crow as in
triumph.
a base varlet, that being but of late grown out of the
dunghil, beginneh now to over-crow so high mountains, and
make himself the great protector of all out-laws. * spensor.
to overdo", v. a. sover and do..] to do more than enough.
any thing so over-done is from the purpose of playing;
whose end is to hold the mirrour up to nature. shakesp.
nature so intent upon finishing her work, much oftner
over-does than under-does. you shall hear of twenty animals
with two heads, for one that hath none. grew.
when the meat is over-dome, lay the fault upon your lady
who hurried you. swift.
to ovi. r dre'ss. v. a. sover and dros...] to adorn lavishly.
in all, let nature never be forgot;
but treat the goddess like a modest fair,
nor over-dress, nor leave her wholly bare. pope.
to over-dr1've. v. a. sover and drive.] to drive too hard,
or beyond strength.
the flocks and herds with young, if men should over-drive
one day, all will die. -- gen. xxxiii. 13.
to ove r-ey’e. v. a. sover and eye.]
1. to superintend. - * *
17 u 2. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
o v e
2. to observe; to remark.
i am doubtful of your modesties,
left over-eying of his odd behaviour,
you break into some merry passion. shakespeare.
to over-empty. v. a... [over and empty..] to make too
empty. \
the women would be loth to come behind the fashion in
new-fangledness of the manner, if not in costliness of the mat-
ter, which might over-empty their husbands purses. carew.
over fal. n.s.. [over and fall.] cataract.
tostatus addeth, that those which dwell near those falls of
water, are deaf from their infancy, like those that dwell near
the oversals of nilus. raleigh's hist. of the j/orld.
to over-flo’at. v. n. [over and float.] to swim ; to float.
the town is fill'd with slaughter, and o'er-floats
with a red deluge, their increasing moats. dryden.
to qver-flow. v. n. [over and flow.]
i. to be fuller than the brim can hold.
while our strong walls secure us from the foe,
e'er yet with blood our ditches over-flow. dryden.
had i the same consciousness that i saw noah's flood, as
that i saw the overflowing of the thames last winter, i could
not doubt, that i who saw the thames overflowed, and viewed
the flood at the general deluge, was the same self. locke.
2. to exuberate; to abound.
a very ungrateful return to the author of all we enjoy, but
such as an overflowing plenty too much inclines men to make.
rogers.
to over-flow. v. a. pret, over-flowed, part, pass over-flowed,
or over-flown.
1. to fill beyond the brim.
suppose thyself in as great a sadness as ever did load thy
spirit, wouldst thou not bear it cheerfully if thou wert sure that
some excellent fortune would relieve and recompense thee so
as to over-fow all thy hopes. - taylor.
new milk that all the winter never fails,
and all the summer over-flows the pails. dryden.
2. to deluge; to drown; to over-run; to over-power.
the scythians, at such time as the northern nations over-
jlowed all christendom, came down to the sea-coast. spenser.
clanius overflow'd th’ unhappy coast. dryden,
do not the nile and the niger make yearly inundations in
our days, as they have formerly done? and are not the coun-
tries so over-flown, still situate between the tropicks bently.
sixteen hundred and odd years after the earth was made, it
was overflowed and destroyed in a deluge of water, that over-
spread the face of the whole earth, from pole to pole, and
from east to west. burnet.
thus oft by mariners are shewn,
earl godwin's castles over-flown. swift.
oyer-flow. n. s. sover and fow.] inundation; more than
fulness; such a quantity as runs over ; exuberance.
did he break out into tears –
in great measure—
—a kind over-flow of kindness. shakespeare.
where there are great over-flows in fens, the drowning of
them in winter maketh the summer following more fruitful;
for that it keepeth the ground warm. bacon's nat. hisł.
it requires pains to find the coherence of abstruse writings:
so that it is not to be wondered, that st. paul's epistles have,
with many, passed for disjointed pious discourses, full of
warmth and zeal and over-flows of light, rather than for calm,
strong, coherent reasonings all through. locke.
after every overflow of the nile, there was not always a
, mensuration. arbuthnot on coins.
the expression may be ascribed to an over-flow of gratitude
in the general disposition of ulysses. broome.
over-flowing. m. s. [from over-sow.] exuberance; copi-
ousness.
when men are young, they might vent the overflowings of
their fancy that way. denham's dedication.
when the over-flowings of ungodliness make us afraid, the
ministers of religion cannot better discharge their duty of op-
posing it. rogers.
over-flowingly, adv. [from over-flowing.] exuberantly;
in great abundance. a word not elegant nor in use.
nor was it his indigence that forced him to make the
world; but his goodness pressed him to impart the goods
which he so over-fowingly abounds with. boyle.
7, over-fly". v. a. sover and fly.] to cross by flight.
a sailing kite
can scarce o'er-fly them in a day and night. dryden.
ovo-forwardness. n.s. sover and forwardness.] too great
quickness; too great readiness.
by an over-forwardness in courts to give countenance to fri-
volous exceptions, though they make nothing to the true me-
rit of the cause, it often happens that causes are not deter-
mined according to their merits. płale.
to over-fre’ight. v. a. pret. over freighted; part. over-
fraught. [over and freight.] to load too heavily; to fill with
too great quantity.
3
a boat over-freighted with people, in rowing down the river
&gt;
was, by the extreme weather, sunk. carew
grief, that does not speak, -v-
whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break. shakes
sorrow has so o'er-fraught p.
this sinking barque, i shall not live to shew
how i abhor my first rash crime. denham
7%. over-get. v. a. [over and get.] to pass; to leave be-
hind.
with six hours hard riding, through so wild places, as it
was rather the cunning of my horse sometimes, than of .
self, so rightly to hit the way, i over-get them a little before
night. - sidney.
to over-gla'nce. v. a. sover and glance.] to look hastily
owes.
i have, but with a cursory eye,
o'er glanc'd the articles.
to qv er-go'. v. a. [over and go.]
i. to surpass; to excel.
thinking it beyond the degree of humanity to have a wit
so far over-going his age, and such dreadful terror proceed from
shaks). henry w.
so excellent beauty. sidney,
great nature hath laid down at last,
that mighty birth wherewith so long she went,
and over-went the times of ages past,
here to lye in upon our soft content. daniel,
2. to cover. obsolete.
all which, my thoughts say, they shall never do,
but rather, that the earth shall overgo
some one at least. chapman.
to over-go'rge. v. a. sover and gorge.] to gorge too much.
art thou grown great,
and, like ambitious sylla, over-gorg’d. shakespeare,
over-gre'at. adj. [over and great..] too great.
though putting the mind unprepared upon an unusual
stress ought to be avoided ; yet this must not run it, by an
or great shyness of difficulties, into a lazy sauntring about
obvious things. locke.
to over grow. v. a. sover and grow.]
1. to cover with growth.
roof and floor, and walls were all of gold,
but over-grown with dust and old decay,
and hid in darkness that none could behold
the hue thereof.
the woods and desart caves,
with wild thyme and the gadding vine o'er-grown,
and all their echo's mourn.
2. to rise above.
if the binds be very strong and much over-grown the poles,
some advise to strike off their heads with a long switch. mort.
to oy er-grow. v. n. to grow beyond the fit or natural size.
one part of his army, with incredible labour, cut a way
thorough the thick and over-grown woods, and so came to soly.
knolls's hist, of the turks.
speos. r.
assistan -
ii]all.
a huge over-grown ox was grazing in a meadow. l'asir.
him for a happy man i own,
whose fortune is not over-grown. swift.
over-growth. m. s. [over and growth..] exuberant growth.
the over-growth of some complexion,
qst breaking down the pales and forts of reason. shakes.
the fortune in being the first in an invention, doth cause
sometimes a wonderful over-growth in riches. bacon.
suspected to a sequent king, who seeks
to stop their over-growth, as in-mate guests
too numerous. 4/ilton's paradis, loft.
to over-ha'le. v. a. sover and hale.]
i. to spread over.
the welked phoebus gan availe
his weary wain, and now the frosty night
her mantle black thro’ heaven gan over-hale. spensor,
2. to examine over again: as, he over-haled my account.
to over-ha'ng. v. a. sover and hang.] to jut over; to im-
pend over.
lend the eye a terrible aspect,
let the brow overwhelm it,
as fearfully as doth a galled rock
o'er-hang and jutty his confounded base.
hide me ye forests, in your closest bow’rs,
where flows the murm'ring brook, inviting dreams,
where bord’ring hazle over-hangs the streams. gay,
if you drink tea upon a promontory that over-hang; the sea,
shakespeare.
it is preferable to an assembly. pope.
to over-ha'ng. v. n. to jut over.
the rest was craggy cliff, that over-hang
./milton.
still as it rose, impossible to climb.
to over-ha'rden. v. a. sover and harden.] to make too
hard.
by laying it in the air, it has acquired such a hardness, that
it was brittle like over-hardened steel. boyle.
over-he’ad. adv. [over and head..] aloft; in the zenith;
above ; in the cieling.
- over-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
:
:
:
*:
over-head the moon
sits arbitress, and nearer to the earth
wheels her pale course. milton's paradise lost.
the four stars over-head, represent the four children. adais.
7%. over-he’ar. v. a. sover and hear.] to hear those who do
not mean to be heard.
i am invisible,
and i will over-hear their conference. shakespeare.
they had a full fight of the infanta at a mask dancing,
having over-heard two gentlemen who were tending towards
that sight, after whom they pressed. //otton.
that such an enemy we have who seeks
our ruin, both by thee inform'd i learn,
and from the parting angel over-heard." milton.
they were so loud in their discourse, that a black-berry
from the next hedge over-heard them. l’estrange.
the nurse,
though not the words, the murmurs over-heard. dryden.
the witness over-hearing the word pillory repeated, slunk
away privately. addison.
to ove r-he’at. v. a. sover and heat..] to heat too much.
pleas'd with the form and coolness of the place,
and over-heated by the morning chace. addison.
it must be done upon the receipt of the wound, before the
patient's spirits be over-heated with pain or fever. //iseman.
to ove r-he'nd. v. a. sover and hend..] to overtake; to reach.
als his fair leman flying through a brook,
he over-hent nought moved with her piteous look. spensor.
to oye r-jo'y. v. a. [over and joy..] to transport; to ravish.
he that puts his confidence in god only, is neither over-
joyed in any great good things of this life, nor sorrowful for a
little thing. taylor's guide to devotion.
the bishop, partly astonished and partly over-joyed with
these speeches, was struck into a sad silence for a time. hayw.
this love-sick virgin, over-joy'd to find
the boy alone; still follow'd him behind.
over-jo'y. m. s. transport; ecstasy.
the mutual conf’rence that my mind hath had,
makes me the bolder to salute my king
with ruder terms; such as my wit affords,
and over-joy of heart doth minister. shakesh. henry vi.
to over-ri'pen. v. a. sover and ripen.] to make too ripe.
why droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn,
hanging the head with ceres' plentedus load shakesh.
to overlasbour. v. a. [over and labour.] to take too much
pains on anything ; to harass with toil.
she without noise will over-see
his children and his family;
and order all things till he come,
sweaty and over-labour'd hone. - dryden,
to ov er la’d e. v. a. sover and lade.] to over-burthen.
thus to throng and over-lade a soul
with love, and then to have a room for fear,
that shall all that controul,
what is it but to rear
our passions and our hopes on high,
that thence they may descry
the noblest way how to despair and die? suckling.
over large. adj. [over and large.] larger than enough.
our attainments cannot be over-large, and yet we manage
a narrow fortune very unthriftily. collier.
over la’s hingly. adv. [over and lash..] with exaggeration.
a mean word, now obsolete.
although i be far from their opinion who write too over-
lashingly, that the arabian tongue is in use in two third parts
of the inhabited world, yet i find that it extendeth where the
religion of mahonet is professed. brerewood.
to over la'y. v. a. [over and lay.]
1. to oppress by too much weight or power.
some commons are barren, the nature is such,
and some over-layeth the commons too much. tussor.
not only that mercy which keepeth from being over-laid
and opprest, but mercy which saveth from being touched with
grievous miscries. - hooker.
when any country is over-laid by the multitude which live
upon it, there is a natural necessity compelling it to disburthen
itself and lay the load upon others. raleigh.
we praise the things we hear with much more willingness
than those we see ; because we envy the present, and reve-
rence the past; thinking ourselves instructed by the one, and
over-laid by the other. ben. johnson.
good laws had been antiquated by the course of time, or
addison.
over-laid by the corruption of manners. king charles.
our sins have over-laid our hopes. king charles.
the strong emetrius came in arcite's aid,
and palamon with odds was over-laid. dryden.
2. to smother with too much or too close covering.
northen destroys it with too fond a stay,
like mothers, which their infants over-lay.
the new born babes by nurses over-laid.
3. to smother ; , to crush; to overwhelm. -
they quickly stifled and over-laid those infant
milton.
dryden.
principles
of piety and virtue, sown by god in their hearts; so that
they brought a voluntary darkness and stupidity upon their
minds. south's sermons.
the gods have made your noble mind for me,
and her insipid soul for ptolemy:
a heavy lump of earth without desire,
a heap of ashes that o'er-lays your fire. dryden.
the stars, no longer over-laid with weight,
exert their heads from underneath the mass,
and upward shoot. dryden.
season the passions of a child with devotion, which seidom
dies; though it may seem extinguished for a while, it breaks
9t as soon as misfortunes have brought the man to himself.
the fire may be covered and over-laid, but cannot be entirely
quenched and smothered. addison's spectator.
in preaching, no men succeed better than those who trust
to the fund of their own reason, advanced but not over-laid
*} commerce with books. swift.
4. to cloud; to over-cast.
phoebus' golden face it did attaint,
as when a cloud his beams doth over-lay. syesor.
5. to cover superficially.
the over-laying of their chapiters was of silver, and all the
pillars were filleted with silver. ex. xxxviii. 17.
by his prescript a sanetuary is fram'd
of cedar, over-laid with gold.
6. to join by something laid over.
thou us impower'd
to fortify thus far, and over-lay,
with this portentous bridge, the dark abyss. milton.
to overle’ap. v. a. sover and leap.] to pass by a jump.
a step
on which i must fall down or else o'er-leap,
for in my way it lies. shakespeare’s macbeth;
in vain did nature's wise command
divide the waters from the land;
if daring ships and men prophane,
th’ eternal fences over-leap,
and pass at will the boundless deep.
o've rlfather. m. s. [over and leather.] the part of
that covers the foot.
i have sometimes more feet than shoes;
toes look through the over-leather. shakespeare.
over light...n, s. sover and light.j too strong light.
an over-light maketh the eyes dark, insomuch as perpetual
looking against the sun would cause blindness. bacon.
7o qver live. v. a. sover and live.] to live longer than an-
other; to survive; to out-live.
musicorus, who shewed a mind not to over-
milton.
dr. den.
the shoe
or such shoes as my
live pyrocles,
prevailed. sidney.
he concludes in hearty prayers,
that your attempts may over-live the hazard
and fearful meeting of their opposite. shakespeare.
they over-lived that envy, and had their pardons afterwards.
hayward;
to overli’ve. v. n. to live too long.
why do i over-live? -
why am i mock'd with death, and lengthen'd out
to deathless pain milton's paradis, loft.
overli've r. m. s. [from over-live..] survivor; that "who
lives longest.
a peace was concluded, to continue for both the kings lives,
and the over liver of them. bacon's henry vii.
to over load. v. a. sover and lead..] to burthen with too
much.
the memory of youth is charged and over-loaded, and all
they learn is meer jargon. felton.
men overload d with a large estate
may spill their treasure in a nice conceit;
the rich may be polite, but oh 'tis sad,
to say you're curious, when we swear you're mad. 1%ung.
overlo'ng, adj. sover and long.] too long.
i have transgressed the laws of oratory, in making my
periods and parentheses over-long. boyle.
to overlook. v. a. [over and look.]
1. to view from a higher place.
the pile o'er-lood the town, and drew the fight,
surpris'd at once with rev'rence and delight. drydon.
i will do it with the same respect to him, as if he were alive,
and over-looking my paper while i write. dryden.
2. to examine by the eye; to peruse.
wou'd i had o'er-look'd the letter. shakespeare.
3. to superintend; to over-see.
he was present in person to over-look the magistrates, and
to over-awe those subjects with the terror of his sword. spens.
in to greater out parishes many of the poor parishioners
through neglect do perish, for want of some heedful eye to
aver-look theon. graunt,
4. to review.
the time and care that are required,
to over-look and file, and polish well,
fright poets from that necessary toil. roscommon.
5. te
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
o v f.
- lgently. - -
5. to: o: oute which consists in the pardoning
and ...boting of faults, is to be exercised only in doing our-
selves justice in the ordinary commerce of life. addison.
in vain do we hope that god will over-look such high con.
trajaion of finners, and pardon offences committed against
the plain o: conscience. rogers.
gleot; to slight.
6. "3. two ions, christ over-looked the meaner, and de-
nominated them solely from the more honourable. south.
to over-look the entertainment before him, and languish
for that which lies out of the way, is sickly and servile. collier.
the suffrage of our poet laureat should not be over-looked.
addison.
religious fear, when produced by just apprehensions of a
divine power, naturally over-looks all human greatness that
stands in competition with it, and extinguishes every o:
- 1/3??.
“the happiest of mankind, over-looking those solid blessings
which they already have, set their hearts upon somewhat they
want. atterbury.
they over-look truth in the judgments they pass on adver-
fity and prosperity. the temptations that attend the former
they can easily see, and dread at a distance; but they have
no apprehensions of the dangerous consequences of the latter.
atterbury.
overlook er. m. s. sover and look.]
the original word signifies an over-looker, or one who stands
higher than his fellows and over-looks them. watts.
o’ve rloop. m. s. the same with orlop.
in extremity we carry our ordnance better than we were
wont, because our nether over-loops are raised commonly from
the water; to wit, between the lower part of the port and
the sea. raleigh.
over ma's te d. adj. sover and mas?..] having too much mast.
cloanthus better mann'd, pursu'd him fast,
but his o'er masted gally check'd his haste. dryden.
to over ma's ter. v.a.[over and master.] to subdue; to govern.
for your desire to know what is between us,
o'er-master it as you may. shakespeare's hamlet.
so sleeps a pilot, whose poor bark is prest
with many a merciless o'er-masī’ring wave. crashaw.
they are over-mastered with a score of drunkards, the only
soldiery left about them, or else comply with all the rapines
and violences. milton on education.
to over match. v. a. sover and match..] to be too power-
ful; to conquer; to oppress by superior force.
i have seen a swan
with bootless labour swim against the tide,
and spend her strength with over-matching waves, shakesp.
sir william lucy, with me
set from our o'er-match'd forces forth for aid. shakesp.
assist, lesł i who erst
thought none my equal, now be over match'd.
paradise regained.
how great soever our curiosity be, our excess is greater,
and does not only over-match, but supplant it. dec. of piety.
he from that length of time dire omens drew,
of english over-match'd, and dutch too strong,
who never fought three days but to pursue. dryden.
it moves our wonder, that a foreign guest -
should over match the most, and match the best. dryden.
ov erma^rch. n. s. sover and match..] one of superior powers;
one not to be overcome.
spain is no over-match for england, by that which leadeth
all men; that is, experience and reason. bacon.
eve was his over-match, who self-deceiv'd
and rash, before-hand had no better weigh'd
the strength he was to cope with or his own. milton.
in a little time there will scarce be a woman of quality in
great-britain, who would not be an over-match for an irish
priest. addison's freeholder.
ove r-me'asu re. m. s. [over and measure.] something given
over the due measure.
to over-m1'x. v. a. sover and mix.] to mix with too much.
those things these parts o'er-rule, no joys shall know,
or little pleasure over-mixt with woe. creech.
over most. adj. [over and moff.] highest; over the rest in
authority. - ains.
over mu'ch. adj. [over and much..] too much; more than
enough.
it was the custom of those former ages, in their over-much
gratitude, to advance the first authors of any useful discovery
among the number of their gods. wilkins.
an over-much use of salt, besides that it occasions thirst and
over-much drinking, has other ill effects. locke.
over mu'ch. adv. in too great a degree.
the fault which we find in them is, that they over-much
abridge the church of her power in these things. whereupon
they re-charge us, as if in these things we gave the church
a liberty which hath no limits or bounds, hocker.
perhaps
i also erred, in over-much admiring
what seem'd in thee so perfeoł, that i thought
no evil durst attempt thee. 4….. 1'-dio lo?
deject not then so over-much thyself, ... ---.
who hast of sorrow thy full load besides.
over mu'ch. m. s. more than enough.
by attributing over-much to things -
less excellent, as thou thyself perceiv'st. amilton
with respect to the blessings the world enjoys, even good
men may ascribe over-much to themselves. 'rew,
ov ermu'chn ess. n.s.. [from over-muck.] exuberance; super-
abundance. a word not used, nor elegant.
there are words that do as much raise a style, as others
can depress it ; superlation and over-mushness amplifies. it
may be above faith, but not above a mean. ben. johnson.
ov ern1 ght. m. s. sover and night. this seems to be used b
shakespeare as a noun, but by addison more properly, as f
have before placed it, as a noun with a preposition.] night
before bed-time.
if i had given you this at over-night,
she might have been o’erta'en. shakespeare.
will confesses, that for half his life his head ached eve
morning with reading men over-night. addison.
to ov erna me. v. a. sover and name.] to name in a series.
over-name them ; and as thou namest them i will describe
them. shakesp. merchant of senio.
to ove ro'ffice. v. a. sover and office.] to insult by virtue of
an office. -
this might be the fate of a politician which this ass over-
6|fices. shakespeare's hamlet.
ov erof f1'cious. adj. [over and officus.] too busy; too im.
portunate.
this is an over-officious truth, and is always at a man's
heels; so that if he looks about him, he must take notice of
it. colli.r on reason,
to ove rpa'ss. v. a. sover and poss.] -
1. to cross.
i stood on a wide river's bank,
which i must needs o'er-pas,
when on a sudden torrismond appear'd,
gave me his hand, and led me lightly o’er. dryden,
what have my scyllas and my syrtes done,
when these they o'er-pass, and those they shun ? dryden,
2. to over-look; to pass with disregard.
the complaint about psalms and hymns might, as well be
over-f6/? without any answer, as it is without any cause
brought forth. ihocker,
i read the satire thou entitlest first,
and laid aside the rest, and over-pas,
and swore, i thought the writer was accurst,
that his first satire had not been his last. harrington.
remember that pellean conqueror,
a youth, how all the beauties of the east
he slightly view'd, and slightly over pass'd. milton,
3. to omit in a reckoning.
arithmetical progression demonstrates how fast mankind
would increase, over-passing as miraculous, though indeed na-
tural, that example of the israelitcs who were multiplied in
two hundred and fifteen years, from seventy to fixty thousand
able men. raleigh.
4. to omit; not to receive; not to comprise.
if the grace of him which saveth over-pas; some, so that the
prayer of the church for them be not received, this we may
leave to the hidden judgments of righteousness. hocker.
over pa's t. part. adj [from over-pass. j gone; past.
what cant thou swear by now —
—by time to come, -
that thou hast wronged in the time over-pass. shakesp.
to over pay. v. a. sover and pay.) to reward beyond the price.
take this purse of gold,
and let me buy your friendly help thus far,
which i will over-pay, and pay again,
zon.
when i have found it. shakspeare.
you have yourself, your kindness over-paid,
he ceases to oblige who can upbraid. dryden.
wilt thou with pleasure hearthy lover's strains,
and with one heav'nly smile o'er-fay his pains. prior,
to over pe(rch. v. a. sover and perch...] to fly over.
with love's light wings did i o'er-perch these walls,
for stony limits cannot hold love out. shakespeare.
to over pe'er. v. a. sover and peer.] to over-look; to hover
above. it is now out of use.
the ocean over-peering of his list,
eats not the flats with more impetuous haste,
than young laertes, in a riotoas head,
o'er-bears your officers. shakes care’s hamlet.
your argosies with portly sail,
do over-peer the petty traffickers,
that curt’sy to them, do them reverence. shaos.
mountainous error wou'd be too highly heapt,
for truth to o'er-peer. shakespeare's coriolanus.
thus yields the cedar to the ax's edge.
whose top branch o'erpeer'd jove's spreading tree,
and kept low shrubs from winter's pow'rful wind. shaieff.
they
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
r
l
.
:
o:
o
5
they are invincible by reason of the over-peering mountains
that back the one, and slender fortifications of the other to
land-ward. sandys’ journey.
over plus. n.s. [over and plus.] surplus ; what remains more
than sufficient.
some other sinners there are, from which that overplus of
strength in persuasion doth arise. hooker's preface.
a great deal too much of it was made, and the overplus re-
mained still in the mortar. l'e//range.
it would look like a fable to report, that this gentleman
gives away all which is the overplus of a great fortune. addis.
to ov er ply. v. a. sover and fly.] to employ too laboriously.
what supports me, dost thou ask? -
the conscience, friend, t' have lost them over-ply'd,
in liberty's defence. milton's poems,
to oy er poise. v. a. sover and poise.] to outweigh.
whether cripples who have lost their thighs will float ;
their lungs being able to waft up their bodies, which are in
others over-posed by the hinder legs; we have not made expe-
riment. brown's pulgar errours.
- the scale
o'er-fcis'd by darkness, lets the night prevail;
and day, that lengthen’d in the summer's height,
3 - shortens till winter, and is lost in night. creech.
over posis e. n.s.. [from the verb.] preponderant weight.
horace, in his first and second book of odes, was still rising,
but came not to his meridian till the third. after which his
judgment was an over-poise to his imagination. he grew too
cautious to be bold enough, for he descended in his fourth by
slow degrees. dryden.
some over-poise of sway, by turns they share,
in peace the people, and the prince in war. dryden.
to cver pow er. v. a. […ver and power.] to be predominant
over ; to oppress by superiority.
now in danger try’d, now known in arms
not to be over-power'd. milton's paradis. loft.
as much light over-powers the eye, so they who have weak
eyes, when the ground is covered with snow, are wont to
complain of too much light, boyle.
reason allows none to be confident, but him only who go-
verns the world, who knows all things, and can do all things ;
and can neither be surprised nor over-powered. south.
after the death of crassus, pompey found himself outwitted
by caesar; he broke with him, over-powered him in the senate,
and caused many unjust decrees to pass against him.
- dryden's dedicat. to æneid.
the historians make these mountains the standards of the rise
of the water; which they could never have been, had they
- not been standing, when it did so rise and over-power the earth.
jwoodward’s natural history.
inspiration is, when such an over-powering impression of
any proposition is made upon the mind by god himself, that
gives a convincing and indubitable evidence of the truth and
divinity of it. watts's logick.
to ove rpre'ss. v. a. sover and press.] to bear upon with irre-
sistible force; to overwhelm ; to crush.
having an excellent horse under him, when he was over-
prised by some, he avoided them. sidney.
michael's arm main promontories flung,
and over-press'd whole legions weak with fin. roscommon.
when a prince enters on a war, he ought maturely to con-
fider whether his coffers be full, his people rich by a long
peace and free trade, not over-preffed with many burthensome
taxos. swift.
to ov er pri'ze. v. a. sover and prize.] to value at too high
price.
parents over-prize their children, while they behold them
through the vapours of affection.] wotton.
ove r. ra/nk, adj. [over and rank.] too rank.
it produces over-rank binds. mortimer's husbandry.
to ov erra't e. v. a. [over and rate.] to rate at too much.
while vain shows and scenes you over-rate,
'tis to be fear'd,
that as a fire the former house o'erthrew,
machines and tempests will destroy the new. dryden.
to avoid the temptations of poverty, it concerns us not to
over-rate the conveniencies of our station, and in estimating
the proportion fit for us, to fix it rather low than high ; for
our desires will be proportioned to our wants, real or imagi-
nary, and our temptations to our desires. rogers.
to over re(ach. v. a. [over and reach.]
i. to rise above.
the mountains of olympus, atho and atlas, over-reach
and surmount all winds and clouds. raleigh.
sixteen hundred years after the earth was made, it was
overflowed in a deluge of water in such excess, that the floods
over-reached the tops of the highest mountains. burnet.
2. to deceive ; to go beyond; to circumvent. a sagacious
man is said to have a long reach.
what more cruel than man, if he see himself able by fraud
to over-reach, or by power to over-bear the laws whereunto
he should be subject. hooker.
vol. ii,
i have laid my brain in the sun and dried it, that it wants
matter to prevent so gross over-reaching. shakspeare.
shame to be overcome, or over-reach'd, - -
would utmost vigour raise, and rais’d unite. a sistin.
a man who had been matchless held
in cunning, over-reach'd where least he thought,
to save his credit, and for very spight -
still will be tempting him who foils him still. a silt in,
there is no pleasanter encounter than a trial of skill be-
twixt sharpers to over-reach one another. l’estrange.
forbidding oppression, defrauding and over. reaching one an-
other, perfidiousness and treachery. tillotson.
we may no more sue for them than we can tell a lie, or
swear an unlawful oath, or over-reach in their calise, or be
guilty of any other transgression. kottle-worth.
such a principle is ambition, or a desire of fame, by which
many vicious men are over-reached, and engaged contrary to
their natural inclinations in a glorious and laudable course of
action. 4.idson's spectator.
john had got an impression that lewis was so deadly cut-
ning a man, that he was afraid to venture himself alone with
him ; at last he took heart of grace; let him come up, quotii
he, it is but sticking to my point, and he can never over-
reach me. - - hi/ory of john b. l.
7% over re ach. v. n. a horse is said to over-roach, when he
brings his hinder feet too far forwards, and strikes his toes
against his fore shoes. - - farrier's dics.
ovar roach er. m. s. (from over-reach..] a cheat; a deceiver.
to over read. v. a. sover and read. } . to peruse. -
the contents of this is the return of the duke; you shall
anon over-read it at your pleasure. , shakspeare.
to over-re'd. v. a. sover and red.] to snear with red.
prick thy face and over-rea thy fear,
thou lilly liver'd boy. - sod off. macbeth.
to ov erro’as’r. v. a. sover and roas.] to roast too much.
'twas burnt and dried away,
and better ’t were, that both of us did fast,
since of ourselves, ourselves are cholerick,
than feed it with such over-reafted flesh.
to ov erru’le. v. a. sover and rule. j . -
1. to influence with predominant power; to be superior in
authority. - -
. which humour perceiving to over-rule me, i strave against
1t. - - - sidney,
that which the church by her ecclesiastical authority shali
probably think and desire to be true or good, must in con-
gruity of reason over-rule all other inferior arguments whatso-
ever, - - hooker.
except our own private, and but probable resolutions, be by
the law of publick determinations over-ruled, we take away
all possibility of sociable life in the world. , . hooker,
what if they be such as will be over-ruled with some one,
whom they dare not displease. . . . . . // hitgifte.
his passion and animosity over-ruled his conscience. claren.
a wise man shall over-rule his stars, and have a greater in-
, fluence upon his own content, than all the constellations and
planets of the firmament. taylor.
he is acted by a passion which absolutely over-rules him;
and so can no more recover himself, than a bowl rolling down
an hill stop itself in the midst of its career. south.
'tis temerity for men to venture their lives upon uncoual
encounters; unless where they are obliged by an over-ruling
impulse of conscience and duty. - l'e/irange.
a man may, by the influence of an over-ruling planet, be
inclined to lust, and yet by the force of reason overcome that
bad influence. - - - - swift.
2. to govern with high authority; to superintend. * -
wherefore does he not now come forth and openly over-
rule, as in other matters he is accustomed . . . hayward.
3. to supersede: as in law to over-rule a plea, is to reject it as in-
competent. -
thirty acres make a farthing land, nine farthings a cornish
acre, and four cornish acres a knight's fee. but this rule is
over-ruled to a greater or lesler quantity, according to the fruit-
fulness or barrenness of the soil. . carew.
to over ru'n. v. a. sover and run.] . . . . . . . -
i. to harass by incursions; to ravage ; to rove over in a hostile
manner. - - -
those barbarous nations that over-ran the world, possessed
t
shakosheare.
, those dominions, whereof they are now so called. spenser.
- till the tears she shed,
like envious floods o'er-ran her lovely face, --
she was the fairest creature in the world. chaos care.
they err, who count it glorious to subduc
by conquest far and wide, to over-run
large countries, and in field great battles win, -
great cities by assault. 41iton's paradise loss.
- the nine , - .
. their fainting foes to shameful flight compell’d,
and with resistless force o'er-run the field. dryden.
gustavus adolphus could not enter this part of the empire
after having over-run most of the rest. addisor.
17 x a com:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
a commonwealth may be over-run by a powerful neigh-
ich may produce bad consequences upon your trade
which may i swift's miscellanies.
bour.
and liberty.
2. to out-run to paso behind.
pyrocles being come to fixteen, over-run his age in so
strength, and all things following it, that not musidorus cou
perform any action on horse or foot more strongly, or deliver
that strength more nimbly, or become the delivery, more
... 1. to turn bottom upwards; to throw off the basis; to sub-
vert.
the tempests met,
the sailors master'd, and the ship o'er-set. dryden.
it is forced through the hiatus's at the bottom of the sea
with such vehemence, that it puts the sea into horrible pertur-
bation, even when there is not the least breath of wind; over-
setting ships in the harbours, and sinking them. woodward,
+
- - :- - sidney. would the confederacy exert itself, as much to anno
socially, or “to oo”y. * enjo"ij"..."..."...". might bear %.
by violent swiftness, that which we run at, down with the weight of our armies, and over-set the whole
and lose by over-running. shakesp. henry viii. power of france. - - addison on the war.
ahimaz ran by the way of the plain, and over-ran cushi. 2. to throw out of regularity. . -
2 sam. xviii. 23. his action against catiline ruined the consul, when it saved
galilaeus noteth, that if an open trough, wherein water is, the city; for it so swelled his soul, that ever afterwards it was
be driven faster than the water can follow, the water gather- apt to be over-set with vanity. dryden.
eth upon an heap towards the hinder end, where the motion to overset. v. n. to fall off the basis; to turn upfide down.
began; which he supposeth, holding the motion of the earth part of the weight will be under the axle-tree, which will
to be the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the ocean : be- so far counterpoise what is above it, that it will very much
cause the earth over-runneth the water. bacon. prevent the aversetting. ortimer.
3. to overspread; to cover all over. to oversha d.e. v. a. sover and shade.] to cover with any
with an over-running flood he will make an utter end of the thing that causes darkness. -
place, nah. i. 8. dark cloudy death o'er-shades his beams of life,
this disposition of the parts of the earth, shews us the foot- and he nor sees, nor hears us. - shakespears.
fleps of some kind of ruin which happened in such a way, - no great and mighty subject might eclipse or over-soi, the
that at the same time a general flood of waters would necessa- imperial power. *
rily over-run the whole earth. burnet. if a wood of leaves o'er-shade the tree,
his tears defac'd the surface of the well, in vain the hind shall vex the threshing floor,
and now the lovely face but half appears, for empty chaff and straw will be thy store. dryden.
o'er-run with wrinkles and deform'd with tears. addison, should we mix our friendly talk,
4. to mischief by great numbers ; to pcster. q'er-shaded in that favorite walk;
to flatter foolish men into a hope of life where there is both pleas'd with all we thought we wanted. prior.
none, is much the same with betraying people into an opinion, to overshadow. v. a. sover and shadow.]
that they are in a virtuous and happy state, when they are over- 1. to throw a shadow over any thing.
run with passion and drowned in their lusts. l’estrange. weeds choak and over-shadow the corn, and bear it down,
bacon.
were it not for the incessant labours of this industrious ani- or starve and deprive it of nourishment. bacon.
mal, egypt would be over-run with crocodiles. addison. death,
such provision made, that a country should not want
springs as were convenient for it; nor be over-run with them,
and afford little or nothing else; but a supply every where
suitable to the necessities of each climate and region of the
globe. woodward's natural history.
5. to injure by treading down.
6. among printers, to be obliged to change the disposition of the
lines and words in correcting, by reason of the insertions.
to cverru'n. v. m. to overflow ; to be more than full.
though you have left me,
yet still my soul o'er-runs with fondness towards you. smith.
cattle in inclosures shall always have fresh pasture, that now
is all trampled and over-run.
to overse'e. v. a. sover and see.]
1. to superintend; to overlook.
he had charge my discipline to frame,
and tutors nouriture to oversee.
she without noise will oversee
his children and his family.
2. to overlook; to pass by unheeded; to omit.
i who resolve to oversee
no lucky opportunity,
let the damps of thy dull breath
over-shadow even the shade,
and make darkness self afraid.
darkness must over-shadow all his bounds,
palpable darkness, and blot out three days. milton,
2. to shelter ; to protect; to cover with superior influence.
my over-shadowing spirit and might, with thee
i send along: ride forth and bid the deep
within appointed bounds. milton's paradis. loft.
on her should come
the holy ghost, and the power of the highest
o'er-shadow her. milton.
spenser. to oy er shoot. v. n. [over and shoot..] to fly beyond the mark.
often it drops, or over-shoots by the disproportions of dis.
tance or application. collier on reason.
to over shoot. v. a.
spenser. i. to shoot beyond the mark.
every inordinate appetite defeats its own satisfaction, by
over-shooting the mark it aims at. tillotsan.
2. to pass swiftly over.
high-rais'd on fortune's hill, new apples he spies,
q'er-shoots the valley which beneath him lies,
will go to council to advise forgets the depths between, and travels with his eyes.
which way to encounter, or surprise. hudibras. harte.
overse'en. part. [from oversee..] mistaken; deceived. 3. [with the reciprocal pronoun..] to venture too far; to af.
a common received error is never utterly overthrown, till sert too much.
such times as we go from signs unto causes, and shew some leave it to themselves to confider, whether they have in
manifest root or fountain thereof common unto all, whereby this point or not over-shot themselves; which is quickly done,
it may clearly appear how it hath come to pass that so many even when our meaning is most sincere. hooker.
have been overseen. phooker. in finding fault with the laws i doubt me, you shall much
such overseers, as the overseers of this building, would be over-shoot yourself, and make me the more dislike your other
so overseen as to make that which is narrower, contain that dislikes of that government. - spenser on ireland. |
crashaw,
dryden.
which is larger. holyday. for any thing that i can learn of them, you have over-shot
they rather observed what he had done, and suffered for the yourself in reckoning.
king and for his country, without farther enquiring what he o'w er sight. m. / [from over and sight.]
had omitted to do, or been overseen in doing. clarendon, 1. superintendence. ~
overse er. n.s. [from oversee.] they gave the money being told unto them, that had the
1. one who overlooks; a superintendent. oversight of the house. - 2 king: xii. 11.
there are in the world certain voluntary overseers of all feed the flock of god, taking the over-sight to: not by
books, whose censure would fall sharp on us. hooker. constraint, but willingly. - i bi. v. 2-
jehiel and azariah were overseers unto cononiah. chron. 2. mistake; error. -
to entertain a guest, with what a care, amongst so many huge volumes, as the infinite pains of st.
wou'd he his houshold ornaments prepare; augustine have brought forth, what one hath gotten greater
harrass his servants, and as o'erseer stand, love, commendation, and honour, than the book wherein
to keep them working with a threat'ning wand. he carefully owns his cuer-sights and sincerel y condemneth
clean all my plate, he cries. dryden. them. -&gt; hooker’s preface.
2. an officer who has the care of the parochial provision for they watch their opportunity to take advantage of their
as higifte, o
the poor. adversaries over-sigh -
- -- er-sight. aettlewell.
the church wardens and overseers of the poor might find it not so his son, he mark'd this over-sight, t
possible to discharge their duties, whereas now in the greater and then mitook reverse of wrong for fight. pope.
out-parishes many of the poorer parishioners, through ne- 7, owossos., a. [over and size.]
gleet, do perish for want of some heedful eye to overlook i. to surpass in bulk.
them. graunt's bills of moriality those bred in a mountain
- - ous country, over-size those that
t. overse’r. v. a. sover and/o. 1 - dwell on low levels. y; so journey,
2. [over
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">a. [over and size, a compost with which masons cover walls.]
to plaster over.
he, thus o'er-siz'd with coagulate gore,
old grandfire priam seeks. shakespeare's hamlet.
to overski'p. v. a. sover and skip.]
1. to pass by leaping. -
presume not ye that are sheep, to make yourselves guides of
them that should guide you; neither seek ye to over-skip the
fold, which they about you have pitched. hooker.
2. to pass over. -
mark if to get them she o'er-skip the rest,
mark if she read them twice, or kiss the name.
3. to escape.
when that hour o'er-skips me in the day,
wherein i figh not, julia, for thy sake;
the next ensuing hour some foul mischance
torment me. shakesh. two gentlemen of werona.
who alone suffers, suffers most i' th' mind;
but then the mind much suff’rance does o'er-skip,
when grief hath mates and bearing fellowship. shakesp.
to oversloep. v. a. sover and sleep.] to sleep too long.
to oversli'p. v. a. sover and slip.] to pass undone, unno-
ticed, or unused; to neglect.
the carelessness of the justices in imposing this rate, or the
negligence of the constables in collecting it, or the backward-
ness of the inhabitants in paying the same, over-slipped the
time. carew's survey of cornwall.
he that hath over-slipt such opportunities, is to bewail and
retrieve them betimes. hammond.
it were injurious to over-slip a noble act in the duke during
this employment, which i must celebrate above all his ex-
pences. wotton.
to ove rsno'w. v. a. sover and snow..] to cover with snow.
these i wielded while my bloom was warm,
ere age unstrung my nerves, or time o'er-snow'd my head.
dryden's aeneis.
overso'ld. part. [from oversel.] sold at too high a price.
life with ease i can disclaim,
and think it over-sold to purchase fame. dryden.
over soon. adv. [over and soon.] too soon. -
the lad may prove well enough, if he over-soon think not
too well of himself, and will bear away that he heareth of his
elders. - sidney.
overspe’nt. part. [over and spend. j . wearied; harassed;
forespent. the verb overspend is not used.
thestylis, wild thyme, and garlick beats, -
for harvest.hinds, o'erspent with toil and heats. dryden.
to overs pre(ad. v.a. [over and spread..] to cover over; to
fill ; to scatter over.
whether they were spaniards, gauls, africans, gothes,
or some other which did overspread all christendom, it is im-
possible to affirm. spenser.
of the three sons of noah was the whole earth overspread.
gen. ix. 19.
donne.
darkness europe's face did overspread,
from lazy cells, where superstition bred. denham.
not a deluge that only over-run some particular region;
but that overspread the face of the whole earth from pole to
pole, and from east to west. burnet.
to oversta‘n p. v. a. sover and sland.] to stand too much
upon conditions. -
her’s they shall be, since you refuse the price ;
what mademan would o'erstand his market twice. dryd.
to overst a(re. v. a. sover and share.] to stare widely.
some warlike sign must be used; either a flovenly buskin,
or an oversaring frounced head. ascham.
to overstock. v. a. sover and/lock.] to fill too full; to croud.
had the world been eternal, it must long ere this have
been overslocked, and become too narrow for the inhabi-
tants. //ilkins.
lf raillery had entered the old roman coins, we should
have been overslocked with medals of this nature. addison.
some bishop, not overslocked with relations, or attached to
favourites, bestows some inconsiderable benefice. swift.
since we are so bent upon enlarging our flocks, it may be
worth enquiring what we shall do with our wool, in case
barnstaple should be ever overstocked. - swift.
to overs ro're. v.a. [over and/lore.] to store with too much.
fishes are more numerous than beasts or birds, as appears by
their numerous spawn; and if all these should come to matu-
rity, even the ocean itself would have been long since over-
flored with fish. hale's origin of mankind.
to overstra'i n. v. m. [over and strain..] to make too vio-
lent efforts.
crassus lost himself, his equipage, and his army, by over-
straining for the parthian gold. collier,
he wished all painters would imprint this lesson deeply in
their memory, that with overstraining and earnestness of
finishing their pieces, they often did them more harm than
good. dryden's dufresnoy.
to overstra'in. v. a. to stretch too far. - -
confessors were apt to over/train their privileges, in which
st. cyprian made a notable stand against them. 4%.
towao. v. a. sover and sway..] to over-rule; to bear
own.
when they are the major part of a general assembly, then
their voices being more in number, must oversway their judg-
ments who arc fewer. hocker.
great command o'ersways our order. . . shakespeare.
some great and powerful nations over-sway the rest. heylyn.
to oves...we'll: v. a. sover and swell.] ‘to rise above.
fill, lucius, ’till the wine o'erswell the cup;
i cannot drink too much of brutus' love.
when his banks the prince of rivers, po,
doth overswell, he breaks with hideous fall.
o’ver t. adj. [ouvert, fr.] open ; publick; apparcnt
to vouch this, is no proof,
without more certain and more over; test, -
than these thin habits and poor likelihoods. shakes.
overt and apparent virtues bring forth praise; but there be
secret and hidden virtues that bring forth fortune; certain del
liveries of a man's self. bacca.
my repulse at hull, was the first overt essay to be made hoo,
patiently i could bear the loss of my kingdoms. k. chao.
the design of their destruction may have been projected in
the dark; but when all was ripe, their enemies proceeded to
so many overt acts in the face of the nation, that it was obvil
ous to the meanest. swift.
whereas human laws can reach no farther than to restrain
the overt action, religion extends to the secret motions of the
soul. - - rogers,
qvertly adv. [from the adjective..] openly.
to overtaske. v. a. sover and take.j - -
1. to catch any thing by pursuit; to come up to something
going before.
we durst not continue longer so near her confines, lest her
plagues might suddenly overtake us before we did cease to be
shats.
fairfax.
partakers with her sins. hooker.
if i had given you this at over-night,
she might have been o’ertaken; and yet she writes
pursuit would be but vain. shakespeare.
i shall see
the winged vengeance overtake such children. shakes.
the enemy said, i will pursue, i will overtake, i will a.
vide the spoil. - exod. xv. 9.
my soul, more earnestly releas'd,
will out-strip hers, as bullets flown before
a later bullet may o'ertake, the powder being more. donne.
to thy wishes move a speedy pace,
or death will soon o’ertake thee in the chace. dryden.
how must he tremble for fear vengeance should avoias.
him, before he has made his peace with god?
2. to take by surprize.
if a man be overtaken in a fault ye which are spiritual re-
store such an one in the spirit of meekness. gal. vi. 1.
if it fall out, that through infirmity we be overtaken by any
temptation, we must labour to rise again, and turn from one
fin to god by new and speedy repentance. perkins.
to over task. v. a. sover and task.] to burthen with too
heavy duties or injunetions.
that office is performed by the parts with difficulty, because
they were overtosted. arvey on consumptions:
to qv erta'z. v. a. sover and tax.] to tax too heavily.
to overthrotw. v. a. sover and throw; preter, ovorow;
part. overthrown.]
1. to turn upside down.
pittacus was a wise and valiant man, but his wife overthrao
the table when he had invited his friends. taylor.
2. to throw down. -
the overthrown he rais'd, and as a herd
drove them before him.
3. to ruin; to demolish. . . . -
when the walls of thebes he overthrew,
his fatal hand my royal father flew.
4. to defeat; to conquer; to vanquish. -
our endeavour is not so much to overthrow them with
whom we contend, as to yield them reasonable causes. hooker.
to sujah next, your conquering army drew,
him they surpris'd, and easily o'erihrew. dryden.
5. to destroy; to subvert; to mischief; to bring to nothing.
she found means to have us accused to the king, as though
we went about some practise to overthrow him in his own
estate. sidney.
aagers-
milton.
drydon.
here’s gło’słer -
o'er-charging your free purses with large fines,
that seeks to overthrow religion. shakesp. henry vi.
thou walkest in peril of thy overthrowing. eccl. xiii. 13.
god overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness. pro.
o loss of one in heav'n, to judge of wise
since satan fell, whom folly overthrew. milton.
overthrow, n.f. [from the verb.]
1. the state of being turned upside down.
2. ruin; destruction.
of those christian oratories, the overthrow and ruin is desired,
not
1
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e
o v e
not by infidels, pagans, or turks, but by a special refined
se&amp;t of christian believers. hooker.
they return again into florida, to the murther and over-
throw of their own countrymen. abbot.
- i serve my mortal foe,
the man who caus'd my country’s overthrow.
3. desert ; discomfiture. . .
from without came to mine eyes the blow,
w! ereto mine inward thoughts did faintly yield;
both these conspir’d poor reason's overthrow ;
false in myself, thus have i lost the field.
quiet soul, depart;
for i have seen our enemies overthrow. shakespeare.
from these divers scots feared more harm by victory
than they found among their enemies by their overthrow. hayw.
poor hannibal is maul’d,
• the theme is giv'n, and strait the council’s call’d,
whether he show.ld to rome directly go,
dryden.
sidney.
to reap the fruit cf the dire overthrow. dryden.
4. degradation.
his overthrow heap'd happiness upon him;
for then, and not 'till then he sell himself, -
and found the blessedness of being little. shakesp.
ov erth roo wrk. m /. [from overthrow.j he who overthrows.
over hwat&amp;t. adj. sover and thwart.]
1. opposite; being over against.
we whisper, for fear our overthwart neighbours
should hear us, and betray us to the government.
2. crossing any thing perpendicularly.
3. perverse; adverse ; contradictious ; cross.
two or three acis disposed them to cross and oppose any
proposition; and that overthwart humour was discovered to
rule in the breasts of many. clarendon.
ov er thw a'rt. prep. across; as, he laid a plank overthwart
the brook. this is the original use.
over t h was rtly. adv. [from overthwart j
1. across ; transversely.
the brawn of the thigh shall appear, by drawing small hair
strokes from the hip to the knee, shadowed again overthwart.
peacham on drawing.
dryd.
2. pervicaciously; perversely.
overth w a rtn ess. n.s. [from overthwart.]
i. posłure across.
2. pervicacity; perverseness.
over took. pret. and part. pass of overtake.
to over to'p. v. a. sover and top.]
1. to rise above ; to raise the head above,
pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
to o'er-top old pelion or the skyish head
of blue olympus. shakespeare's hamlet.
in the dance the graceful goddess leads
the quire of nymphs, and overtops their heads.
2. to excel; to surpass.
who ever yet
have stood to charity, and display'd th’ effe&amp;ts
of disposition gentle and of wisdom
o'ertopping woman's power. shakesh. henry viii.
as far as the soul o'er tops the body, so far its pains, or rather
mournful sensations, exceed those of the carcase. harvey.
3. to obscure ; to make of less importance by superiour ex-
cellence. -
whereas he had been heretofore an arbiter of europe, he
should now grow less, and be over-topped by so great a son-
junction. bacon's henry vii.
dryden.
one whom you love,
had champion kil'd, or trophy won,
rather than thus be overtoft,
wou'd you not wish his laurels cropt : swift.
to ove rtr1. p. v. a. [over and trip.] to trip over; to walk
lightly over.
. in such a night,
did thisbe fearfully o’ertrip the dew,
and saw the lion's shadow ere himself,
and ran dismay'd away. shakesp. merchant of venice,
c’v erture. m / souverture, french.]
1. opening; disclosure ; discovery.
- i wish
you had only in your filent judgment try’d it,
without more voture shakesp. winter's tale.
2. proposal; som: thing offered to consideration.
mac mutugh moved henry to invade ireland, and made
an overture unto him for obtaining of the sovereign lordship
davies on ireland.
thereof. -
all these fair overtures, made by men well esteemed for
honest dealing, could not take place. hayward.
- we with open breast
s. and ready to recove them, if they like
our 27 erture, and turn not back per verse. milton.
withit and the overtures of ill, a d be intent and serious
in good. fess.
the earl of pembroke who b; orro' the war, promoted all
overtures towards accom...odation with great importunity. llar.
if a convenient supply offers itself to be seised by force or
gained by fraud, human nature persuades us to hearken to the
inviting overture. - - rogers.
suppose five hundred men proposing, debating, and voting
according to their own little or much reason, abundance of
indigoted and abortive, many pernicious and foolish oria.
would arise. swift
to qv er tu'rn. v. a. sover and turn.] -
1. to throw down; to topple down ; to subvert; to ruin.
he is wise in heart and mighty in strength—which remov.
eth the mountains, and overturn-th them in his anger. job
these will sometimes overturn, and sometimes swallow u -
towns, and make a general confusion in nature. }.
this he obviates, by saying we see all the ideas in god.
which is an answer to this objection, but such an one as •vor:
*...* his whole hypothesis, and renders it useless and as unin-
telligible, as any of those he has laid aside. locke
but he comes round about again, and overturns every stone
that he had laid. lesle
if we will not encourage publick works of beneficence %
we are secure that no storm shall overturn what we help to
build, there is no room left for charity. 4tterbury
a monument of deathiess fame, j.
a woman's hand o'er urns. rowe
2. to over-power ; to conquer. -
pain excessive overturns all patience. milton.
ov ertu'rner. m. s. [from overturn..] subverter.
i have brought before you a robber of the publick treasure
an overturner of law and justice, and the destruction of th:
sicilian province. swift
7. overvalue. v. a. sover and value.] to rate at too high
a price. -
we have just cause to stand in some fear, least by thus 07/er-
*g their sermons they make the price and estimation of
scripture, otherwise notified, to fall. - hooker
to over value human power is likewise an argument of hu-
man weakness. - holyda
to ovor v e1. l. v. a. sover and veil..] to cover. y.
the day begins to break, and night is fled;
whole pitchy mantle ove veil a the earth. shakesheare
to overvo te. v. a. [over and vote.] to conquer by pluralit -
of votes. y
. . the lords and commons might be content to be overvoted
by the major part of both houses, when they had used each
their own freedom. king charles
to over watch. v. n. [over and watch..] to subdue with
long want of rest.
morpheus is dispatch'd;
which done, the lazy monarch overwatch'd,
down from his propping elbow drops his head,
dissolv’d in sleep, and shrinks within his bed. dryden
over watch ed. adj. i ired with too much watching. -
while the dog hunted in the river, he had withdrawn him-
self to pacify with sleep his over-watched eyes. sidne
over weak, adj. [over and weak.] too weak; too feeble. y-
- paternal persuasions, after mankind began to forget the ori-
ginal giver of life, became in all overweak to resis †. first in-
clination of evil; or after, when it became habitual, to
constrain it. aaleigh's hyssory of the //orld.
owox. v. a. sover and weary..] to subdue with
atigue. -
might not palinurus fall asleep and drop into the sea, having
been over-wearied with watching. doyle.
to over weat her. v. a. [over and weather.] to batter by
violence of weather.
- how like a younker or a prodigal,
the skarfed bark puts from her native bay,
hugg’d and embraced by the strumpet wind
how like the prodigal doth she return,
with over-weather'd ribs and ragged fails,
lean, rent, and beggar'd by the strumpet wind. shakes,
to over we'en. v. m. [over and ween.] to think too high, :
to think with arrogance. y 5
to reach beyond the truth of any thing in thought; espe-
cially in the opinion of a man's self. pł
oft have i seen a hot o'erweening cur, 47??hler.
run back and hite, because he was with held. soakesp.
my matter hath sent for me, to whose feeling sorrows i
might be some allay, or 1 o'erween to think to. shakesp.
lash hence these overween ng rags of france,
these famish'd beggars, weary of their lives. shakes?.
my eye's too quick, my heart o'er wens too much
unless my hard and strength could equal them. sass.
take heed of ove, weeing, and compare -
thy peacock's feet with thy gay peacock's train;
study the best and highest things that are,
but of thyself an humble thou ht retain.
they that overween, -
and at thy growing virtues fret their spleen,
no anger find in t t e.
satan might have learnt
less overwoning, since he als'd in job,
davies.
asilon.
whose
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o v e.
o u r
:
whose constant perseverance overcame
whate'er his cruel malice could invent. milton.
no man is so bold, rash, and overweening of his own works,
as an ill painter and a bad poet. drydon.
enthusiasm, though founded neither on reason nor revela-
tion, but rising from the conceits of a warmed or overweening
brain, works more powerfully on the persuasions and acions
of men, than either or both to other. - locke.
men of fair minds and not given up to the overweening of
self-flattery, are frequently guilty of it: and, in many cases,
one with amazement hears the arguings, and is aston, shed at
the obstinacy of a worthy man who yields not to the evidence
of reason. locke.
now enters overweening pride,
and scandal ever gaping wide. swift.
ove rw e eningly. adv. [from overween.] with too much
arrogance; with too high an opinion.
to ov er wei'gh. v. a. sover and weigh.) to preponderate.
sharp and subtile discourses of wit, procure many times very
great applause, but being laid in the balance with that which
the habit of sound experience delivereth, they are overweighed.
hooker.
my unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life,
will so your accusation overweigh,
that you shall stifle in your own report. shakespeare.
over w e1'ght. m. s. sover and weight.] preponderance.
sinking into water is but an overweight of the body, in
respect of the water. bacon's natural history.
to overwhel m. v. a. sover and whelm.]
1. to crush underneath something violent and weighty.
what age is this, where honest men,
plac'd at the helm,
a sea of some foul mouth or pen,
shall overwhelm ? ben. johnson.
back do i toss these treasons to thy head,
with the hell hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart. shakespeare.
how trifling an apprehension is the shame of being laughed
at by fools, when compared with that everlasting shame and
astonishment which shall overwhelm the finner, when he shall
appear before the tribunal of christ. rogers.
blind they rejoice, though now even now they fall;
death hastes amain ; one hour o'erwhelms them all. pope.
2. to overlook gloomily.
let the brow o'erwhelm it,
as fearfully as doth a galled rock
o'erhang and jutty his confounded base.
an apothecary late i noted,
in tatter'd weeds with overwhelming brows,
culling of simples. shakesp. romeo and julist.
oyr rw he'lmingly. adv. [from overwhelming.] in such a
manner as to overwhelm. inelegant, and not in use.
men should not. tolerate themselves one minute in any
known sin, nor impertinently betray their souls to ruin for that
which they call light and trivial 3, which is so indeed in respect
of the acquest, but overwhelmingly ponderous in regard of the
pernicious consequents. decay of piety.
over wi's e. adj. [aver and wise.] wise to affectation.
make not thyself overwise. eccl. vii. 16.
ov erw rou'ght. part. [over and wrought.]
1. laboured too much.
apelles said of protogenes, that he knew not when to give
over. a work may be overwrought, as well as underwrought:
too much labour often takes away the spirit, by adding to the
polishing; so that there remains nothing but a dull correct-
ness, a piece without any considerable faults, but with few
beautics. dryden's dufresnoy.
2. worked all over.
- of gothic structure was the northern side,
o'erwrought with ornaments of barbarous pride. pope.
3. it has in shakespeare a sense which i know not well how to
reconcile to the original meaning of the word, and therefore
conclude it misprinted for overraught that is, overreached or
cheated.
shakes care.
by some device or other,
the villain is o'er wrought of all my money:
they say this town is full of cozenage. shakespeare.
ove rwo rn. part. [over and worn.]
1. worn out; subdued by toil.
with watching overworn, with cares opprest,
unhappy i had laid me down to rest. dryden.
2. spoiled by time.
the jealous o'erworn widow and herself,
are mighty gossips in this monarchy. shakespeare.
overy ea red. adj. [over and year.] too old.
among them dwelt
a maid, whose fruit was ripe, not overyeared. fairfax.
overze a'lous, adj. [over and zealots.] too zealous.
it is not of such weighty neceflity to determine one way
or the other, as some overzealous for or against the immate-
riality of the soul, have been forward to make the world be-
lieve. - locke.
vol. ii.
quoit, a. s. sash;t, that is, a whit, saxon. this word t,
therefore more properly written aught. see au gur.] any
thing; not nothing.
for ought that i can understand, there is no part but the
bare english pale, in which the irish have not the greatest
footing. . . . spenser on ireland.
he asked him if he saw ought. 4/ark viii. 23.
to do coght good never will be our task ;
but ever to do ill our sole delight. adistan's par. laff.
universal lord be bounteous still &lt;/
to give us only good ; and if the night
have gather'd orght of evil, or conceal’d,
disperse it, as now light dispels the dark. a silton.
ought verb. imperso; in the second person ongos. [this
word the etymologists make the preterite of ove, but it has
often a present signification.]
1. looterite of awe.] owed; was bound to pay; have been
indebted.
apprehending the occasion, i will add a continuance to
that happy motion, and besides give you some tribute of the
love and duty i long have ought you. spelman.
this blood which men by treason sought,
that followed, fir, which to myself i ought. dryden.
2. to be obliged by duty.
know how thou oughte/? to behave. timothy.
speak boldly as i ought to speak. ephsians.
she acts just as she ought,
but never, never reach'd one gen’rous thought. pope.
judges ought to remember, that their office is to interpret
law, and not to make or give law. bacon.
we ought to profess our dependance upon him, and our
obligations to him for the good things we enjoy. we ought
to publish to the world our sense of his goodness with the
voice of praise, and tell of all his wondrous works. we
ought to comfort his servants and children in their afflictions,
and relieve his poor distressed members in their manifold
necessities, for he that giveth alms, sacrificeth praise. nelson.
3. to be fit; to be necessary.
these things ought not so to be. james.
if grammar ought to be taught, it must be to one that can
speak the language already. locke.
4. applied to persons it has a sense not easily explained. to
be fit, or necessary that he should. -
ought not christ to have suffered. lake.
5. ought is both of the present and past tenses, and of all persons
except the second singular.
ovifoxm. adj. [ovum and forma, lat..] having the shape of
an egg.
this notion of the mundane egg, or that the world was
•visorm, hath been the sense and language of all antiquity.
burnet.
ovi'parous. adj. sovum and pario, latin.] bringing forth
eggs ; not viviparous.
that fishes and birds should be oviparous, is a plain sign of
providence. 440 e's ant, against atheism.
birds and oviparous creatures have eggs enough at first con-
ceived in them to serve them for many years laying. ray,
ounge. m. s. [once, fr. uncia, latin.) a name of weight of
different value in different denominations of weight. in troy
weight, an ounce is twenty penny weight; a penny-weight,
twenty-four grains.
the blood he hath lost,
which i dare vouch is more than that he hath
by many an ounce, he dropt it for his country. shakes.
a sponge dry weigheth one ounce twenty-six grains; the
same sponge being wet, weigheth fourteen ounces fix drams
and three quarters. - bacon.
ounce. m. s. [once, french; onza, spanish.] an animal be.
tween a panther and a cat.
the ounce,
the libbard, and the tiger, as the mole
rising, the crumbled earth above them threw
in hillocks. milton's paradise loft.
ouphe, n. s. sauff, teutonick.] a fairy; a goblin.
nan page and my little son, we'll dress
like urchins, ouphes, and fairies, green and white.
shakespeare.
ou'phen. adj. [from cuph.] elfish.
fairies, black, gray, green, and white,
ye moon-shine revellers and shades of night,
you ouphen heirs of fixed destiny,
attend your office.
our. pron. poss. [une, saxon.]
1. pertaining to us; belonging to us.
you shall
lead our first battle, brave macduff, and we
shall take upon us what else remains.
our wit is given almighty god to know,
our will is given to love him being known;
but god could not be known to us below,
but by his works which through the sense are shown.
17 y so
shakespears.
shakespears.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o u t
o u t
s5 in our little world this soul of ours
being only one, and to one body ty'd,
dôth use on divers objects divers powers, -
and so are her effects diversify’d. davies.
o, soul is the very same being it was yesterday, last
year, twenty years ago. - - - beattie.
2. when the substantive goes before, it is written ours.
edmund, whose virtue in this instance,
so much commands itself, you shall be ours. shakesp.
thou that hast fashion'd twice this soul of ours, -
so that she is by double title thine. davies.
be ours, who e'er thou art,
forget the greeks. denham.
taxalian, shook by montezuma's powers,
has, to resist his forces, call’d in ours. dryden.
the same thing was done by them in suing in their courts,
which is now done by us in suing in ours. - kettleworth.
reading furnishes the mind only with materials of know-
ledge, it is thinking makes what we read ours : it is not
enough to cram ourselves with a great load of collections,
unless we chew them over again, they will not give us
strength. - locke.
their organs are better disposed than ours, for receiving
grateful impressions from sensible objects. atterbury.
our's elves. reciprocal pronoun. [the plural of myself.]
1. we; not others: it is added to we by way of emphasis or op-
position. ". . . -
is cursives mi. ht distinetly number in words a great deal
farther than we usually do, would we find out but some fit
denominations to signify them by. lotke.
2. us; not others, in the oblique cases.
safe in ours.lves, while on ourselves we stand,
the sea is ours, and that defends the land. dryden.
our confession is not intended to instruct god, who knows
our fins much better than ourselves do, but it is to humble
ourselves, and therefore we must not think to have consfied a
right till that be done. duty of 44an.
ourse/lf is used in the regal file.
to make society
the sweeter welcome, we will keep ours of
till supper time alone. shakesp. macbeth.
- we ourses will follow
in the main battle. shakespeare.
not so much as a treaty can be obtained, unless we would
denude ourself of all force to defend us. clarendon.
ouse. m. s. tanners bark; rather cose. ains.
ou's el. m. s. [orle, saxon. j a blackbird.
the merry lark her mattins sings aloft,
the thrush replies, the mavis descant plays,
the ousel shrills, the ruddock warbles fost;
so goodly all agree, with sweet consent,
to this day's merriment. stensor.
the cusel cock so black of hue,
with orange tawney bill. shakespeare.
thrushcs and ousel, or blackbirds, were commonly sold for
three pence a-piece. hakewill on providence.
to oust. v. a. solo/ler, 8ter, french.]
. 1. to vacate; to take away.
multiplication of actions upon the case were rare formerly,
and thereby wager of law oyled, which discouraged many suits.
hale.
2. to deprive; to ejest.
though the deprived bishops and clergy went out upon
account of the oaths, yet this made no schism. no not even
when they were a&amp;ually deprived and owled by act of parlia-
timent. losley.
out. adv. suz, saxon; tyt, dutch.]
1. not within.
the gown with stiff embroid’ry shining,
looks charming with a slighter lining ;
the out, if indian figures stain,
the inside must be rich and plain. prior.
2. it is generally opposed to in.
that blind rascally boy, that abuses every one's eyes be-
cause his own are out, let him be judge how deep i am in
bove. shakespeare.
3. in a state of disclosure.
fruits and grains are half a year in concoeting; whereas
leaves are out and perfect in a month, bacon.
4. not in confinement or concealment.
nature her custom holds,
let shame say what it will; when these are gone,
the woman will be out. shakespeare.
5. from the place or house.
out with the dog, says one; what cur is that ? says an-
other: whip him out, says the third. shakespeare.
6. from the inner part.
this is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass
offering ; that they bear it not out into the utter court, to sinc-
tify the people. ezek. xlvi. 20.
7. not at home; as, when you called i was out.
8. in a state of extinotion.
it was great ign'rance, gloster's eyes being cut,
to let him live; where he arrives he moves
all hearts. shakso. king lear.
this candle burns not clear; 'tis i must snuff it,
then out it goes. shakesp. henry viii,
bid thy ceremony give thee cure
thinkst thou the firy fewer will go out
with titles blown from adulation.
her candle goeth not out by night.
9. in a flate of being exhausted. -
when the butt is out we will drink water, not a drop be.
fore; bear up and board them. shakesp. tempesi,
large coals are properest for dressing meat; and when they
are out, if you happen to miscarry in any dish, lay the fault
upon want of coals. swift,
10. not in employment; not in office.
so we'll live and hear poor rogues
talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too,
who loses, and who wins; who's in, who's out. soaks.
1 1. not in any sport or party.
the knave will stick by thce : he will not out, he is true
bred. shakyp. henry iv.
i am not so as i should be; -
but i’ll ne'er cut, shakes. antony and cleopatra.
i never was out at a mad frolick, though this is the moddest
i ever undertook. drydon.
12. to the end.
shakesp. henry v.
prov, xxxi. 18.
hear me out ; -
he reap'd no fruit of conquest, but these blessings. drydin.
you have still your happiness in doubt,
or else 'tis past, and you have dream'd it out. dryden.
the tale is long, nor have i heard it out;
thy father knows it all. , -
13. loudly; without restraint.
at all i laugh, he laughs no doubt;
the only difference is, i dare laugh out. pope,
14. not in the hands of the owner. -
if the laying of taxes upon commodities does affect the land
that is out at rack rent, it is plain it does equally affect all the
other land in england too. locke.
those lands were out upon leases of four years, after the
expiration of which tenants were obliged to renew. art:::h,
15. in an errour.
as he that hath been often told his fault,
and still persists, is as impertinent,
as a musician that will always play,
and yet is always out at the same note. roscom:n.
you are mightily out to take this for a token of esteem,
which is no other than a note of infamy. l'e/orange,
this i have noted for the use of those who, i think, are
much out in this point. aottlewol.
according to hobbes's comparison of reasoning with cast-
ing up accounts, whoever finds a mistake in the sum total,
must allow himself cut, though after repcated trials he may not
sec in which article he has misleckoned. swift.
16. at a loss; in a puzzle.
like a dull actor now :
i have forgot my part, and i am out, -
even to a full disgrace. shak sp. criolanus.
this youth was such a mercurial, as the like hath seldom
been known ; and could make his own part, if at any time
he chanced to be out. bacon's henry vii.
17. with torn cloaths. the parts being cut, that is, not
covered.
addison's cato.
evidences swore;
who hither coming out at heels and knces,
for this had titles. dryden,
18. away, so as to consume. -
let all persons avoid niceness in their cloathing or diet, be-
cause they dress and comb out all their opportunities of morn-
ing devotion, and sleep out the care for their souls. taylor.
19. deficient; as, out of pocket, noting loss.
upon the great bible, he was out fifty pounds, and reim-
burst himself only by selling two copies. fell.
20. it is used emphatically before alas.
out, alas ! no sea, i find,
is troubled like a lover’s mind. suckling.
21. it is added emphatically to verbs of discovery.
if ye will not do so, be sure your fin will find you out.
nun. xxxii. 23.
out. interje?.
i. an expression of abhorrence or expulsion.
out on thee, rude man thou dost shame thy mother. shah.
qut varlet from my fight. shakesp. king lear.
qut, you mad-headed apes a weazel hath not such a deal
of spleen. shakes care's henry iv.
out of my door, you witch you hag!
out, out, out. shakesp. merry joves of i/indsor.
out, out, hyena; these are thy wonted arts,
to break all faith. milton's agonister.
5 2. it
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o u to
o u t.
:
o
r
2. it has sometimes upon after it.
out upon this half-fac’d fellowship. shałoneare.
out upon it, i have lov’d
three whole days together;
and am like to love three more,
if it prove fair weather. suckling.
out of prep. [of seems to be the preposition, and out only to
modify the sense of of..]
1. from ; noting produce.
so many neroes and caligulas,
out of these crooked shores must daily raise. speosor.
those bards coming many hundred years after, could not
know what was done in former ages, nor deliver certainty of
any thing, but what they feigned out of their own unlearned
heads. spensor on ireland.
alders and ashes have been seen to grow out of steeples;
but they manifestly grow out of clefts. - bacon.
juices of fruits are watry and oily: among the watry are all
the fruits cut of which drink is expressed; as the grape, the
apple, the pear, and cherry. bacon.
he is softer than ovid ; he touches the passions more deli-
cately, and performs all this out of his own fund, without diving
into the sciences for a supply. dryden.
2. not in; noting exclusion, dismission, absence, or dercliction.
the sacred nymph
was cut of dian's favour, as it then befel.
- fairy queen.
guiltiness
will speak, though tongues were out of use. shafts).
the cavern's mouth alone was hard to find,
because the path disus’d was out of mind. dryden.
my retreat the best companions grace,
chiefs out of war, and statesmen out of place. pope.
- does he fancy we can fit,
to hear his out of fashion wit?
but he takes up with younger folks,
who, for his wine, will bear his jokes. - swift,
they are out of their element, and logic is none of their
talent. baker on learning.
3. no longer in.
enjoy the present smiling hour;
and put it out of fortune's pow'r,
4. not in ; noting unfitness.
he is witty out of season ; leaving the imitation of nature,
and the cooler dictates of his judgment. dryden,
thou'lt say my passion's out of season,
that cato's great czample and misfortunes
should both conspire to drive it from my thoughts. addis.
5. not within ; relating to a house.
court holy water in a dry house, is better than the rain
waters out of door. shakesp. king lear.
6. from ; noting copy.
st. paul quotes one of their poets for this saying, notwith-
standing t. g's censure of them out of horace. stillingfleet.
7. from ; noting rescue.
christianity recovered the law of nature out of all those
errors with which it was overgrown in the times of paganism.
addison's freeholder.
8. not in ; noting exorbitance or irregularity.
why publish it at this juncture; and so, out of all method,
apart and before the work. swift.
using old thread-bare phrases, will often make you go out
of your way to find and apply them. swift.
9. from one thing to something different,
he that looks on the cternal things that are not seen, will,
through those opticks, exactly discern the vanity of all that is
visible; will be neither frighted nor flattered out of his duty.
- decay of piety.
words are able to persuade men out of what they find and
feel, and to reverse the very impressions offense. south.
io. to a different state from ; in a different state.
that noble and most sovereign reason,
ilike sweet beils jangl'd out of tune and harsh ;
that unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth,
blatted with extasy. - - shakespeare's hemlet.
when the mouth is out of taste, it maketh things taste some-
times salt, chiefly bitter, and sometimes loathsome, but never
sweet. bacon.
by the same fatal blow, the earth sell out of that regular
form wherein it was produced at first, into all these irregula-
rities in its present form. burnet on the earth.
they all at cnce chiploy their thronging daits,
but out of order thrown, in air they join,
and multitude makes frustrate the design.
11. not according to.
. that there be an cquality, so that no man acts or speaks
out of character. broome's l'irw of ep. poem.
12. to a different state frcm ; noting separation.
whosoever doth measure by number, must needs be greatly
but of love with a thing that hath so many faults; whosoever
by weight cannot chute but esteem very highly of that where-
in the wit of so scrupulous adversaries hath not hitherto ob-
dryden.
dryden.
served any descoł, which themselves can seriously think to be
of moment. hooker.
if ridicule were employed to laugh men out of vice and
folly, it might be of some use; but it is made use of to laugh
o out of virtue and good sense, by attacking every thing
* i. o *. zddison's soedjator.
amongst those things which have been received with great
reason, ought that to be reckoned which the antient prisie
of the church hath continued out of mind. azazker.
what, out of hearing gone : no sound, no word?
alack, where are you ? shakorare
i have been an unlawful bawd, time zoo of mind. *s.
few had suspicion of their intentions, till they were both
out of distance to have their conversion attempted. co.
with a longer peace, the power of france with so great
revenues, and such application, will not encrease every year
out of proportion to what ours will do. - 7 emple.
he shall only be prisoner at the soldiers quarters; and
when i am out of reach, he shall be released. dryden.
we see people lulled asleep with solid and elaborate dis-
courses of piety, who would be transported out of themselves
by the bellowings of enthusiasm. addison
milton's story was transacted in regions that lie out of o
reach of the sun and the sphere of the day. odson.
women weep and tremble at the fight of a moving preacher
though he is placed quite out of their hearino. -&gt; joo.
the supream being has made the b st arguments fo
own existence, in the formation of the heavens and the earth.
and which a man of sense cannot forbear attendin *
- - - g to, who is
out of the noise of human affairs. c -
- - - - on.
14. deviating from ; noting irregularity.
heaven defend but still i should sland so,
so long as cut of limit, and true rule,
you stand against anointed majesty shakes rare.
15. past ; without ; noting something worn out or exhaused.
i am cut of breath,
—how art thou out of breath, when thou has breath ;
to say to me that thou art off of breath shakes?.
out of hope to do any o: directed his o
corone. - anclies
he found himself left far behind, -
both out of beart and out of wind. hudi'raj.
! published scine fabies, which are out of print. zo.
16. by means of.
out of that will i cause those of cyprus to mutiny. shak.
17. in consequence of; noting the motive or reason.
she is persuaded i will marry her, out of her own love and
flattery, not out of my promise. sła, speare's ototo.
the pope, out of the care of an universal father, had in
the conclave divers consultations about an holy war against
the turk. bacon's henry vii.
not out of cunning, but a train
of atoms justling in his brain,
as learn'd philosophers give out. hodoras.
cromwell accused the carl of manchester, of having be-
trayed the parliament out of cowardice. clarendon.
those that have recourse to a new creation of waters, are
such as do it out of laziness and ignorance, or such as do it.
out of necessity. borne's zheory of the earth
distinguish betwixt those that take state upon then purel -
ont of pride and humour, and those that do the same in .
pliance with the necessity of their affairs. 1. orange.
make them conformable to laws, not only for wrath and
out of fear of the magistrate's power, which is but a weak
pringiple of obedience; but out of conscience, which is a firm
and lasting principle. 7 is tson.
what they do not grant out of the generosity of their na-
ture, they may grant out of mere inpatience. smallridge.
. our succetics have been the consequences of a neces.
war; in which we engaged, not out of ambition, but for the
defence of all that was dear to us. alterbury.
18. out of hand; immediately; as that is easily used which is
ready in the hand. -
he bode to open wide his brazen gate,
which iong time had been shut, and out of hand,
proclaimed joy and peace through all his state. soesor.
- no more ado, -
but gather we our forces out of hand,
and set upon our boasting enemy. shakes rare.
to cut. v. a. to deplive by expulsion.
the members of both houses who withdrew, were counted
deserters, and cited of their places in parliament. k. charf.
the french having been outed of their bolds. ho.
so many of their orders, as were outed from their fat pdffes-
fions, would endeavour a re-entrance against those whom they
account hereticks. - ixrydon.
out, in composition, generally signifies something beyond or
more than another; but sometimes it betokens emission ex-
... clusion, or something external. 2.
to out act. v. a. [aut and a 1.] to do beyond,
he
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o u t
o u t
i
he has made me heir to treasures, - -
would make me out act a real widow's whining. otway.
t, ourgalance. v. a. [out and balance.] to over-weigh 3
to prepongerate. -
let dull ajax bear away my right, -
when all his days outbalance this one night. - dryden.
t, outba‘r. v. a. [out and bar.] to shut out by fortification.
these to outhar with painful pionings,
from sea to sea he heap'd a mighty mound. she's r.
to ourbi'd. v. a. [out and bid.] to over-power by bidding a
higher price.
if in thy heart
new love created be by other men,
which have their stocks entire, and can in tears,
in fighs, in oaths, in letters outbid me,
this new love may beget new fears. donne.
for indian spices, for peruvian gold,
prevent the greedy, and outbid the bold. pope.
proddes. n.). [out and bid.] one that out-bids. -
go; # [out and &amp;low.] inflated ; swollen with
wind. -
at their roots grew floating palaces,
whose outblown bellies cut * yielding seas. dryden.
“rbor n. adj. [out and born.] foreign : not native. ..
3. }} [out and bound..] destinated to a distant
voyage; not coming home.
'triumphant flames upon the water float,
and outbound ships at home their voyage end. dryden.
to outer ave. v. a. [out and brave.] to bear down and de-
feat by more daring, insolent, or splendid appearance,
i would out-stare the sternest eyes that look,
outbrave the heart most daring on the earth,
to win thee, lady. shakespeare.
here sodom's tow’rs raise their proud tops on high,
the tow’rs, as well as men, out-brave the sky. cowley.
we see the danger, and by fits take up some faint resolution
to outbrave and break through it. l’estrange.
to outer aozen. v. a. [out and brazen.] to bear down with
impudence. -
outbreak. n.s. [out and break.] that which breaks forth ;
eruption.
breathe his faults so quaintly,
that they may seem the taints of liberty,
the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind. shakespeare.
to out breathe. v. a. [out and breath.]
1. to weary by having better breath.
mine eyes saw him
rendering faint quittance, wearied and outbreath'd,
to henry monmouth. shakespeare.
2. to expire.
that sign of last outbreathed life did seem. spensor.
outca's t. part. [out and cast. it may be observed, that both
the participle and the noun are indifferently accented on either
syllable. it seems most analogous to accent the participle on
the last, and the noun on the first.] -
1. thrown into the air as refuse, as unworthy of notice.
abandon soon, i read, the caitive spoil
of that same outcos' carcass. spensor.
2. banished; expelled.
behold, instead
of us outcast, exil'd, his new delight
mankind created. milton's paradis. loft.
cutca's t. n. s. exile; one rejected; one expelled.
let's be no stoicks, nor no stocks,
or so devote to aristotle,
as ovid, be an outcast quite abjur’d. shakespeare.
o blood-bespotted neapolitan,"
outcast of naples, england's bloody scourge i shakesp.
for me, outcast of human race,
love's anger only waits, and dire disgrace. prior.
he dies sad outcast of each church and state 1
and harder still flagitious, yet not great. pope.
to outcra’ft. v. a. [out and craft.] to excel in cunning.
italy hath outcrafted him,
and he's at some hard point.
outcry. n.s. [out and cry.]
1. cry of vehemence; cry of distress; clamour.
these outcries the magistrates there shun, since they are
readily hearkened unto here. spenser on ireland.
so strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
thou interposest, that my sudden hand
prevented, spares. milton's paradise lost.
i make my way
where noises, tumults, outcries, and alarms
i heard. denham.
2. clamour of detestation. -
there is not any one vice, incident to the mind of man,
against which the world has raised such a loud and universal
outcry, as against ingratitude. south.
3. a publick sale; an auoion. ains.
% out dare. v. a. [out and dare.] to venture beyond,
shakesp. cymbeline.
myself, my brother, and his son, t
that brought you home, and boldly did outdare -
the dangers of the time. shakespeare
to outdate. v. a. sout and date.] . to antiquate. -
works and deeds of the law, in those places, signify legal
obedience, or circumcision, and the like judaical outdose. o
remonies; faith, the evangelical grace of giving up the whole
heart to christ, without any such judaical observances. ham
to outpo.o. a. [out and do..] to excel; to surpas, too.
form beyond another.
he hath in this action outdone his former deeds doubly. shak
what brave commander is not proud to see -
thy brave melantius in his gallantry :
our greatest ladies love to see their scorn
outdone by thine, in what themselves have worn. iro,
heav'nly love shall outdo hellish hate,
giving to death, and dying to redeem,
so dearly to redeem what hellish hate
so easily destroy’d. milton.
here let these who boast in mortal things, -
learn how their greatest monuments of fame,
and strength, and art, are easily outdone
by spirits reprobate. milton.
an impostor outdoes the original. l'estrange.
now all the gods reward and bless my son;
thou hast this day thy father's youth outdone. dryden,
i must confess the encounter of that day
warm'd me indeed, but quite another way;
not with the fire of youth, but generous rage,
to see the glories of my youthful age
so far outdone. dryden,
the boy's mother despised for not having read a system of
logick, outdoes him in it. locke,
i grieve to be outdone by gay,
in my own humourous biting way. swift,
to outdwe'l. v. a. (out and dwell.] to stay beyond.
he outdwels his hour,
for lovers ever run before the clock. shakespeare.
outer. adj. [from out..] that which is without: opposed to
17777e?".
the kidney is a conglomerated gland only in the outer
part: for the inner part, whereof the papillae are composed, is
muscular. grew's cosmol.
outerly. adv. [from outer.] towards the outside.
in the lower jaw, two tusks like those of a boar, standing
outerly, an inch behind the cutters. grew's musario.
out . most adj. [superlative, from outer.] remotest from the
mid o
try if three bells were made one within another, and air
betwixt each; and the outermost bell were chimed with a ham-
mer, how the sound would differ from a single bell. bacon.
the outerog/l corpuscles of a white body, have their various
little surfaces of a specular nature, boyle.
many handsome contrivances of draw-bridges i had seen,
sometimes many upon one bridge, and not only one after,
or behind another, but also sometimes two or three on 4
breast, the oute most oncs serving for the retreat of the foot,
and the middle for the horse and carriages. brown's travci.
to qutfa’ce. v. a. [out and face.j
1. to brave; to bear down by shew of magnanimity; to bear
down with impudence.
we shall have old swearing -
that they did give the rings away to men; -
but we'll outface them and out-swear them too. shakos.
dost thou come hither v
to outface me with leaping in her grave
be buried quick with her, and so will i. shakes care.
be fire with fire; -
threaten the threatener; and outface the brow
of bragging horror. shakesp. king john,
they bewrayed some knowledge of their perions, but were
outfaced. j%tton.
2. to stare down.
we behold the sun and enjoy his light, as long as we look
towards it circumspectly : we warm ourselves safely while we
ftand near the fire; but if we seek to outface the one, to
enter into the other, we forthwith become blind or burnt.
raleigh.
to outfa’w n. v. a. [out and fawn..] to excel in fawning.
ln affairs of less import,
that neither do us good nor hurt,
and they receive as little by,
qutsawn as much and out comply ;
and seem as scrupulously just
to bait the hooks for greater trust. hulihras,
to outfly'. v. a. [out and fly.) to leave behind in flight.
his evasion wing'd thus swift with scorn, -&gt;
cannot outfly our apprehensions. shakespeare,
horoscop's great soul, -
rais'd on the pinions of the bounding wind,
outflew the rack, and left the hours behind. garth.
4. outfo’rs1.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o u t
o u t
* ...
o
r
--
- *
ho
--
-
- -
outfo'r.m. m. s. [out and form.] external appearance.
cupid, who took vain delight
in meer outforms, until he lost his fight,
hath chang'd his soul, and made his object you.
ben. johnson.
to out frow n. v. a. sout and frown.] to frown down; to
over-bear by frowns.
for thee, oppressed king, am i cast down,
myself could else outfrown false fortune's frown.
shakespeare.
ou’t gate. m. s. [out and gate.] outlet; passage outwards.
those places are so fit for trade, having most conveni-
ent out-gates by divers ways to the sea, and in-gates to the
richest parts of the land, that they would soon be enriched.
spenser.
to out gi’ve. v. a. [out and give.] to surpass in giving.
the bounteous play’r outgave the pinching lord. dryden.
to out go'. v. a. pret. outwent ; part. outgone. [out and go.]
1. to surpass 5 to excel.
for frank, well ordered and continual hospitality, he out-
went all shew of competence. carew.
while you practised the rudiments of war, you out-went
all other captains; and have since found none but yourself
alone to surpass. dryden.
where they apply themselves, none of their neighbours.
cut go them. locke on education.
2. to go beyond; to leave behind in going.
many ran afoot thither out of all cities, and out-went them,
and came unto him. 44ark vi. 33.
3. to circumvent; to overreach.
mollesion
thought us to have out-gone
with a quaint invention. denham.
to out grow. v. a. [out and grow.] to surpass in growth;
to grow too great or too old for anything.
much their work outgrew,
the hands dispatch of two, gard’ning so wide. milton.
when some virtue much outgrows the rest,
it shoots too fast and high. dryden.
this essay wears a dress that possibly is not so suitable to
the graver geniuses, who have outgrown all gaieties of stile and
outhful relishes. glanville's scepsis, pref.
the lawyer, the tradesman, the mechanic, have found so
many arts to deceive, that they far outgrow the common pru-
dence of mankind. swift.
ou'rgu ard. m. s. [out and guard.] cne posted at a distance
from the main body, as a defence.
as soon as any foreign object presses upon the sense, those
fpirits which are posted upon the out-guards, immediately
scowre off to the brain. south.
you beat the outguards of my master's host. dryden.
these cut guards of the mind are sent abroad,
and still patrolling beat the neighb'ring road,
or to the parts remote obedient fly,
keep polis advanc'd, and on the frontier lye. blackmore.
out je sor. v. a. [out and jest.] to over-power by jesting.
the fool labours to outjesł
his heart-struck injuries. shakespeare's king lear.
to out kna v e. v. a. [out and knave.] to surpass in kna-
wer w.
†he world calls it out-witting a man, when he's only
out knaved. l’e/irange.
out la's dish. adj. sout and land.] not native; foreign.
yourself transplant
a while from hence: perchance outlandish ground
bears no more wit than ours; but yet more scant
are those diversions there which here abound. donne.
tedious waste of time to fit and hear
so many hollow compliments and lies,
outlandish flatteries. milton.
upon the approach of the king's troops under general wills,
who was used to the outlandish way of making war, we put in
practice passive obedience. addison.
to out la's r. v. a. [out and las!..] to surpass in dura-
tl oi).
good housewives, to make their candles burn the lorger,
lay them in bran, which makes them harder; insomuch as
they will out-lost other candles of the same stuff, half in half.
bacon's natural history.
summer's chief honour if thou hadst outlasted,
bleak winter's force that made thy blossoms dry. milton.
the present age hath attempted perpetual motions, whose
revolutions might outloft the exemplary mobility, and out-
measure time itself. - - brown.
what may be hop'd,
when not from helicon's imagin'd spring,
but sacred writ, we borrow what we fing :
this with the fabrick of the world begun,
elder than light, and shall outlast the sun. waller.
ou’rlaw. n.s.. [uzlaza, saxon.] one excluded from the be-
nefit of the law. a robber ; a bandit.
vol. ii.
an outlaw in a castle keeps. shakesp. henry vi.
gathering unto him all the scatterlings and outlaws out of
the woods and mountains, he marched forth into the english
pale. spenser.
as long as they were out of the protection of the law; so
as, every englishman might kill them, how should they be
other than outlaws and enemies to the crown of england
- - davies on irelan i.
you may as well spread out the unsun'd heaps
qf misers treasure by an outlaw's den,
and tell me it is safe, as bid me hope
danger will let a helpless maiden pass. milton.
a drunkard is outlawed from all worthy and creditable con.
verse: men abhor, loath, and despise him. south.
to 9. thaw. v. a. to deprive of the benefits and prototion
of the law.
i had a son -
now outlaw'd from my blood; he sought my life.
słas ore.
- he that is drunken, speare
is outlaw'd by himself: all kind of ill
did with his liquor slide into his veins. herbert.
like as there are particular persons outlawed and pro-
scribed by civil laws, so are there nations that are out owed
and proscribed by the law of nature and nations. bacon.
all those spiritual aids are withdrawn, which should assis,
him to good, or fortify him against ill; and like an out-
lawed person he is exposed to all that will assault him.
- decay of piety.
ou'rl awry. [from outlaw.] a decree by which any man is
cut off from the community, and deprived of the protection
of the law.
by proscription and bills of outlawry,
octavius, antony, and lepidus,
have put to death an hundred senators, shaky?eare.
divers were returned knights and burgesses for the parlia-
liament; many of which had been by richard iii. attainted
by outlawries. bacon's henry vii.
to our leap. v. a. [out and leap.] to pass by leaping; to
start beyond.
outleap. n.s.. [from the verb.] sally; flight; escape.
since youth must have some liberty, some outleaps, they
might be under the eye of a father, and then no very great
harm can come of it. - locke cn education.
outlet. m. s. [out and let.] passage outwards; discharge
outwards ; egress; passage of egress.
colonies and foreign plantations, are very necessary, as
outlets to a populous nation. bacon.
the enemy was deprived of that useful out-let. clarendon.
so 'scapes th’ insulting fire his narrow jail,
and makes small outlets into open air. dryden.
have a care that these members be neither the inlets
nor outlets of any vices; that they neither give admission to
the temptation, nor be expressive of the conception of them.
ray.
ou'tline. m. s. so and line.] contour; line by which any
figure is defined; extremity.
painters, by their outlines, colours, lights, and shadows,
represent the same in their pictures. dryden.
to outlive. v. a. [out and live.] to live beyond; to sur-
w1wc.
with these mossed trees,
that have outliv'd the eagle, page thy keels,
and skip when thou point'st out.
die two months ago, and not forgotten,
yet then there is hopes a great man's memory
may outlive his life half a year. shakesp. hamlet.
he that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
will stand a tiptoe when this day is nam'd. shakesp.
his courage was so signal that day, that too much could not
be expe&amp;ted from it, if he had outlived it. clarendon.
thou must outlive
thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
to wither'd, weak, and gray. milton's par. loft.
time, which made them their fame outlive, -
to cowley scarce did ripeness give. denham.
the soldier grows less apprehensive, by computing upon
the disproportion of those that cutlive a battle, to those that
fall in it. - l'estrange.
shakoshcare.
since we have lost
freedom, wealth, honour, which we value most,
i wish they would our lives a period give ; -
they live too long who happiness outlive. dryden:
it is of great consequence where noble families are gone to
decay; because their titles outlive their estates. swift.
pray outlive me, and then die as soon as you please.
swift.
two bacon-flitches made his sunday's chear;
some the poor had, and some cut-liv'd the year. harte.
out li'v er. m. s. [out and live..] a surviver.
to out look. v. a. [cit and look.] to face down; to browbeat.
17 z i cull'd<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o u t
o u t.
o
i cull'd these fiery spirits from the world,
to cutlook conquest, and to win renown,
ev’n in the jaws of danger and of death. - shałos).
to outlu's tre v. a. saut and losire.] to excel in bright-
ness. - -
she went before others i have seen, as that diamond of yours
outlostres many i have beheld. shakesp. cymbeline.
our ly’ing. part. adj. [out and lie.] not in the common
course of order. removed from the general scheme. .
the last survey i proposed of the four out-lying empires,
was that of the arabians. temple.
we have taken all the out-lying parts of the spanish mo-
narchy, and made impressions upon the very heart of it.
addison.
to outmea’s ure. v. a. [out and measure.] to exceed in mea-
sure. -
the present age hath attempted perpetual motions and en-
gines, and those revolutions might out-last the exemplary mo-
bility, and cut-measure time itself. - brown.
to out nu'mbek. v. a. [out and number.] to exceed in num-
ber.
the ladies came in so great a body to the opera, that they
cutnumber ed the oncony. addison's spe:lator.
7, ou 1 to aokch. v. a. soot and march..] to leave behind in the
march.
the horse cut-marched the foot, which, by reason of the
heat, was not able to use great expedition. clarendon.
out most. adj. [out and mg/?..] remotest from the middle.
chaos retir’d,
as from her outmos' works a broken foe. milton.
if any man suppose that it is not reflected by the air, but
by the outmost superficial parts of the glass, there is still the
same difficulty. newton's opticks.
the generality of men are readier to fetch a reason from the
immense distance of the starry heavens, and the outmos! walls of
the world. bentley.
outpa'ris h. m. s. [out and parish..] parish not lying within
the walls.
in the greater outparishes many of the poorer parishioners,
through neglect, do perish for want of some heedful eye to
overlook them. graunt.
outpart. n. s. [out and part.] part remote from the center
or main body.
he is appointed to supply the bishop's jurisdiction and other
judicial offices in the outparts of his diocese. ayliffe.
to out pa(ce. v. a. [out and pace.] to outgo; to leave be-
hind.
orion's speed
could not outpace thee; or the horse laomedon did breed.
chapman's iliads.
to outpou'r. v. a. [out and pour.] to emit; to send forth in
a stream.
he looked and saw what number, numberless
the city gates outpour’d; light arm'd troops
in coats of mail and military pride. milton's par. rog.
to outpr1'2e. v. a. [out and prize.] to exceed in the value
set upon it.
either your unparagon'd mistress is dead, or
she's culprized by a trifle. shakesp. cymbeline.
73 outrage. v. a. soutrager, french. j. to injure vio-
sently or contumeliously; to insult roughly and tumultu-
ously.
*ah heavens ! that do this hideous act hehold,
and heavenly virgin thus outraged see ;
how can the vengeance just so long withhold ! spenser.
the news put divers young bloods into such a fury, as the
inglish embassadors were not without peril to be outraged.
bacon's henry vii.
base and insolent minds outrage men, when they have hopes
of doing it without a return. atterbury.
this interview outrages all decency; she forgets her mo-
desty, and betrays her virtue, by giving too long an audience.
broome.
to outragf. v. n. to commit exorbitancies. not in use.
three or four great ones in court will outrage in apparel,
huge hose, monstrous hats, and garish colours. ascham.
outrage. m. s. [outrage, fr.]
1. open violence; tumultuous mischief.
he wrought great outrages, wasting all the country where
he went. spenser on ireland.
he doth himself in secret shrowd,
to fly the vengeance for his outrage due. spenser.
in that beastly fury
he has been known to commit outrage,
and cherish factions. shakespeare's timon.
uncharitably with me have you dealt,
and shamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd;
my charity is outrage. shakesp. richard iii.
2. this word scens to be used by philips for mere commo-
tion, without any ill import, contrary, to the universal use
of writers, -
see with what outrage from the frosty north,
the early valiant swede draws forth his wings
in battailous array. philipi.
outragious. adj. [ outrageux, french. i it should, i
think, be written outrageous; but the custom seems other.
wise.]
1. violent ; furious ; raging ; exorbitant ; tumultuous; tur-
bulent.
under him they committed divers the most outragious vil-
lanies, that a base multitude can imagine. sidney.
as she went her tongue did walk,
in foul reproach and terms of vile despight,
provoking him by her outragious talk, -
to heap more vengeance on that wretched wight.
- - spenser.
they view'd the vast immeasurable abyss,
outragious as a sea, dark, wasteful, wild. milton,
when he knew his rival freed and gone,
he swells with wrath; he makes outragious moan:
he frets, he fumes, he stares, he stamps the ground;
the hollow tow'r with clamours rings around. dryden.
2. excessive ; passing reason or decency.
my characters of antony and cleopatra, though they are
favourable to them, have nothing of outragious panegyrick.
dryden's dufresnoy,
3. enormous ; atrocious.
think not, although in writing i prefer'd
the manner of thy vile outragious crimes,
that therefore i have forg'd. shakesp. henry vi,
outra giously, adv. [from outragious.] violently; tumul-
tuously; furiously.
that people will have colour of employment given them,
by which they will poll and spoil so outragiously, as the very
enemy cannot do worse. spenser on irelani,
let lust burn never so outragiously for the present, yet age
will in time chill those heats. south.
outra giousness. n. s. [from outragious. j fury; vio-
lence.
virgil, more discreet than homer, has contented himself
with the partiality of his deities, without bringing them to
the outragiousness of blows. dryden.
to outr ea'ch. v. a. [out and reach..] to go beyond.
this usage is derived from so many descents of ages, that
the cause and author outreach remembrance. carew.
our forefathers could never dream so high a crime as par-
ricide, whereas this outreaches that fact, and exceeds the re-
gular distinctions of murder. brown.
to outri'de. v. a. [out and ride.] to pass by riding.
this advantage age from youth hath won,
as not to be outridden, though out-run. dryden.
out-r1'der. m. s. [from out and rider.] a summoner whose
office is to cite men before the sheriff. dic7.
outr1'ght. adv, [out and right.]
i. immediately; witthout delay.
when these wretches had the ropes about their necks,
the first was to be pardoned, the last hanged outright.
arbuthnot,
2. completely.
by degrees accomplish’d in the beast,
he neigh’d outright, and all the steed exprest. addison.
7%. out roa'r. v. a. saut and roar.] to exceed in roar.
ing.
o that i were
upon the hill of basan, to outroar
the horned herd shakes?. antony and cleopatra.
outro'd e. m. s. [out and rode.] excursion.
he set horsemen and footmen, to the end that issuing
out, they might make outrodes upon the ways of judea.
1 mac. xv. 41.
to outroot. v. a. [out and root.] to extirpate ; to era-
dicate.
pernicious discord seems
qutreated from our more than iron age;
since none, not ev'n our kings, approach their temples
with any mark of war's destructive rage,
but sacrifice unarm’d, rowe's amb. step-mother.
to qutru'n. v. a. [out and run.] -
1. to leave behind in running.
by giving th' house of lancaster leave to breathe,
it will outrun you, father, in the end. shakoffeare.
the expedition of my violent love
outruns the pauser reason.
we may outrun,
by violent swiftness, that which we run at. shakesp.
when things are come to the execution, there is no fe-
crecy comparable to celerity, like the motion of a bullet in
shakoffeare's macbeth.
the air, which flieth so swift as it outrun; the eye. baccm.
this advantage age from youth hath won,
as not to be out-ridden, though outrun. dryden.
2. to exceed.
we outrun the present income, as not doubting to reim-
burse
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o u t.
o u t
.
o
o:
burse ourselves out of the profits of some future pro-
ject. addison.
outscape. n.s. [out and so power of escaping.
it pos -
our powres to lift aside a log so vast, -
as barr'd all outscape. chapman.
to ours a1 l. v. a. [out and sail.] to leave behind in sailing.
the word signifies a ship that outsail; other ships. broome.
to oursco r.n. v. a. [out and scorn.] to bear down or con-
front by contempt ; to despise; not to mind.
he strives in his little world of man t’ous orn
the to and fro conflicting wind and rain. shakespeare.
to outse’l. v. a. [cut and s.l..]
1. to exceed in the price for which a thing is sold ; to sell at a
higher rate than another. -
it would soon improve to such a height, as to outsil our
neighbours, and thereby advance the proportion of our ex-
ported commodities. temple.
2. to gain an higher price.
her pretty action did outsol her gift,
and yet enrich'd it too. shakespeare's cymbeline.
to out's hi(ne. v. a. [out and shine.]
1. to emit lustre.
witness my son, now in the shade of death ;
whose bright outshining beams thy cloudy wrath -
hath in eternal darkness folded up. shakesp. rich. iii.
2. to excel in lustre.
by shakespeare's, johnson's, fletcher's lines,
our stage's lustre rome's outshines. denham.
beauty and greatness are so eminently joined in your royal
highness, that it were not easy for any but a poet to deter-
mine which of them outshines the other. dryden.
homer does not only outshine all other poets in the variety,
but also in the novelty of his characters. addison.
we should see such as would outshine the rebellious part of
their fellow-subjects, as much in their gallantry as in their
cause. addison's freeholder.
such accounts are a tribute due to the memory of those
only, who have outshone the rest of the world by their rank
as well as their virtues. atterbury.
happy you !
whose charms as far all other nymphs outskine,
as others gardens are excell’d by thine.
to out's hoot. v. a. [out and shoot.j
1. to exceed in shooting.
the forward youth
will learn to outshoot you in your proper bow.
2. to shoot beyond.
men are resolved never to outshoot their forefathers mark ;
but write one after another, and so the dance goes round in
a circle. norris.
outsi d e. n.s. [out and side.]
1. superficies; surface ; external part.
what pity that so exquisite an outside of a head should not
pope.
dryden.
have one grain of sense in it. l'e/irange.
the leathern outsi.ie, boist’rous as it was,
gave way and bent. dryden.
2. extreme part ; part remote from the middle.
hold an arrow in a flame for the space of ten pulses, and
when it cometh forth, those parts which were on the outsides
of the flame are blacked and turned into a coal. bacon.
3. superficial appearance.
you shall find his vanities forespent
were but the outside of the roman brutus,
covering discretion with a coat of folly. shakespeare.
the ornaments of conversation, and the outside of fashion-
able manners, will come in their due time. locke.
created beings see nothing but our outside, and can there-
fore only frame a judgment of us from our exterior actions.
addison's speciator.
4. the utmost. a barbarous use.
two hundred load upon an acre, they reckon the outside of
what is to be laid. 4/ortimer's husbandry.
5. person ; external man.
fortune forbid, my outside have not charm'd her | shak.
your outside promiseth as much as can be expected from a
gentleman. bacon.
what admir'st thou, what transports thee so
an outside p fair, no doubt, and worthy well
thy cherishing and thy love. milton's paradise loft.
6. outer side; part not inclosed.
i threw open the door of my chamber, and found the fa-
mily standing on the outside. spediator.
to out slot. v. a. [out and sit..] to fit beyond the time of any
thing.
he that prolongs his meals and sacrifices his time, as well
as his other conveniences, to his luxury, how quickly does he
outsit his pleasure ? south.
to outsle'ep. v. a. [out and sleep.] to sleep beyond.
lovers, to bed; 'tis almost fairy time:
i fear we shall out/leep the coming morn. shakespeare.
to ourspe’ar. v. a. [out and speak.] to speak something be.
yond ; to exceed.
rich stuffs and ornaments of houshold
i find at such proud rate, that it outspeaks - -
possession of a subject. shakesp. henry viii.
to outsport. v. a. sout and sort.] to sport beyond.
let's teach ourselves that honourable stop, -
not to outsport discretion. shakespeare's othello.
toro. v. a. [out and spread..] to extend; to dif-
llle,
with sails outspread we fly.
to outsta‘nd. v. a. [out and sland.]
1. to support ; to resist.
each could demolish the other's work with ease enough,
but not a man of them tolerably defend his own; which
was sure never to out/#and the first attack that was made.
pope.
- //o.dward.
2. to stand beyond the proper time.
i have out/food my time, which is material .
to th’ tender of our present. shakes. cymbeline.
to qu'rst and. v. n. to protuberate from the main body.
to outsta‘re. v. a. [out and stare.] to face down; to
brow-beat; to outface with effrontery.
i would out/lare the sternest eyes that look,
to win thee, lady. shakspeare's merchant of venice.
these curtain'd windows, this self-prison'd eye,
outsiares the lids of large-lookt tyranny. crashaw.
outst reset. n.s. [out and sirect.] street in the extremities of
a to wil.
to outstretch. v. a. [out and stretch..] to extend ; to
spread out.
make him stand upon the mole-hill,
that caught at mountains with out-stretched arms.
shakespeare.
out-stretch'd he lay, on the cold ground, and oft
curs'd his creation. milton's paradis. loft.
a mountain, at whose verdant feet
a spacious plain, out stretch'd in circuit wide
lay pleasant. milton's paradise regained.
does theseus burn ? -
and must not she with out-stretch'd arms receive him
and with an equal ardour meet his vows? smith,
to ou'tstrip. v. a. [this word skinner derives from out and
spritzen, to spout, german. i know not whether it might
not have been originally out-trip, the s being afterward in-
serted.] to outgo ; to leave behind in a race.
if thou wilt out-strip death, go cross the seas,
and live with richmond from the reach of hell.
do not smile at me, that i boast her off;
for thou shalt find, she will out-strip all praise,
and make it halt behind her. shakes. temps?.
thou both their graces in thyself hast more
outstript, than they did all that went before. b. johnson:
my soul, more earnestly releas'd,
will ort-strip hers; as bullets flown before
a latter bullet may o'ertake, the powder being more.
donne.
a fox may be out-witted, and a hare out-stript. l’e/or.
he got the start of them in point of obedience, and there-
by outstript them at length in point of knowledge. south.
with such array harpalice bestrode -
her thracian courser, and out-strip'd the rapid flood. -
- dryden.
to ou′t-sweet en. v. a. [out and sweeten..] to excel in sweet-
ness.
the leaf of eglantine, which not to slander,
out-sweeten’d not thy breath. . shakesp. cymbeline.
outswea'r. v. a. [out and swear.] to over-power by swear-
ing.
siaos.
we shall have old swearing,
but we’ll out-face them, and out-swear them too. shoes.
to out-to'ngue. v. a. [out and tongue.] to bear down by
noise. -
let him do his spite :
my services which i have done the signory,
shall out-tongue his complaints. shakesh. othella.
to out ta’lk. v. a. [out and task.] to over-power by talk.
this gentleman will out-talk us all. shakspeare:
to out-v a'lue. v. a. [out and value.] to transcend in
i icc.
p he gives us in this life an earnest of expe&amp;ted joys, that
out-values and transcends all those momentary pleasures it
requires us to forsake. boyle.
to ourve'nom. v. a. saut and venom.] to exceed in poi-
son.
'tis slander ;
whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
out-venoms all the worms of nile. shakesp. cymbeline.
to out v1'e. v. a. [out and vie..] to exceed; to surpass.
for folded flocks, on fruitful plains,
fair britain all the world outvies, dryden.
one
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o w e
one of these petty sovereigns will be still endeavouring to
equal the pomp of greater princes, as well as to out-vie those
of his own rank. addison.
to out-viollai n. v. a. [out and villain..] to exceed in vil-
lany."
#. hath out-villain'd villainy so far, that the rarity redeems
him. - shakesp. all's well that ends well.
to outvorce. v. a. [out and voice.] to out-roar; to exceed
in clamour.
the english beach
pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys,
whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouth'd sea.
shakespeare.
to outvo"te. v. a. [out and vote.] to conquer by plurality
of suffrages.
they were out-voted by other se&amp;s of philosophers, nei-
ther for fame, nor number less than themselves. south.
to our walk. v. a. [out and walk.] to leave one in walking.
outwa'll. n.s. [out and wall.]
1. outward part of a building.
2. superficial appearance.
for confirmation that i am much more
than my out-wall, open this purse and take
what it contains. shakesp. king lear.
ou’twa rd. adj. [utpeanb, saxon.]
1. materially external.
2. external ; opposed to inward : visible.
if these shews be not outward, which of you .
but is four volscians? shakspeare's coriolanus.
oh what may man within him hide,
though angel on the outward side shakespeare.
his calls and invitations of us to that repentance, not only
outward, in the ministry of the word, but also inward, by
the motions of the spirit. duty of man.
he took a low'ring leave; but who can tell
what outward hate might inward love conceal dryden.
3. extrinsick; adventitious.
princes have their titles for their glories,
an outward honour, for an inward toil.
part in peace, and having mourn'd your fin
for outward eden lost, find paradise within. dryden.
4. foreign, not intestine.
it was intended to raise an outward war to join with some
sedition within doors. hayward.
5. tending to the out-parts.
the fire will force its outward way,
or, in the prison pent, consume the prey. dryden.
6. [in theology..] carnal ; corporeal; not spiritual.
when the soul being inwardly moved to lift itself up by
prayer, the outward man is surprized in some other posture;
god will rather look to the inward motions of the mind,
than to the outward form of the body. duppa.
we may also pray against temporal punishments, that is,
any outward affliction, but this with submission to god's will,
according to the example of christ. duty of man.
outw ard. n. s. external form.
i do not think
so fair an outward, and such stuff within,
endows a man but him. shakespeare's cymbeline.
ou’twa r d. adv.
1. to foreign parts : as, a ship outward bound.
2. to the outer parts.
ou'rw ar bly. adv. [from outward.]
1. externally : opposed to inwardy.
that which inwardly each man should be, the church out-
wardly ought to testify. hooker.
griev'd with disgrace, remaining in their fears:
however seeming outwardly content,
yet th’ inward touch their wounded honour bears. daniel.
2. in appearance not sincerely.
many wicked men are often touched with some inward
reverence for that goodness which they cannot be persuaded
to practise; nay, which they outwardly seem to despise. spratt.
ou’t war ds. adv. towards the out parts.
do not black bodies conceive heat more easily from light
than those of other colours do, by reason that the light fall-
ing on them is not refle&amp;ted outwards, but enters the bodies,
and is often refle&amp;ted and refracted within them until it be
stifled and lost newton's opticks.
to out we a. r. v. a. [cut and wear.]
1. to pass tediously.
by the stream, if i the night out-wear,
pope. }
shakespeare.
thus spent already how shall nature bear
the dews descending and nocturnal air.
2. to last longer than something else.
‘so ourw e ep. v. a. [out and weed.] to extirpate as a
weed.
wrath is a fire, and jealousy a weed ;
the sparks soon quel ch, the springing weed out-weed.
spenser.
to outwo 1's h. v. a. [out and weigh.]
1. to exceed in gravity.
these instruments require so much strength for the sup-
porting of the weight to be moved, as may be equal unto it,
besides that other super-added power whereby it is out-weighed
and moved. //ilkins's mathematical magic.
2. to preponderate; to excel in value or influence.
if any think brave death out-weighs bad lite,
let him express his disposition. shakesp. coriolanus.
all your care is for your prince i see,
your truth to him out-weighs your love to me. dryden.
whenever, he finds the hardship of his slavery out-weigh
the value of his life, it is in his power, by refitting the will
of his master, to draw on himself the death he desires. locke.
the marriage of the clergy is attended with the poverty of
some of them, which is balanced and out-weighed by many
single advantages. atterbury.
t2 gowo. v. a. [out and well.] to pour out. not in
ulc.
as when old father nilus 'gins to swell,
with timely pride about the aegyptian vale,
his fattie waves do fertile sline out-well,
and overflow each plain and lowly dale. spensor,
to outwit. v. a. [out and wit..] to cheat; to overcome by
stratagem.
the truer hearted any man is, the more liable he is to be
imposed on ; and then the world calls it out-witting a man,
when he is only out-knaved. l'asirange.
justice forbids defrauding, or going beyond our brother in
any manner, when we can over-reach and out-wit him in the
same. kettlewell.
after the death of crassus, pompey found himself out-witted
by caesar and broke with him. dryden.
nothing is more equal in justice, and indeed more na-
tural in the direct consequence of effects and causes, than
for men wickedly wise to out-wit themselves; and for such
as wrestle with providence, to trip up their own heels.
- south.
ou"twork. n s [out and work.] the parts of a fortification
next the enemy.
take care of our out-work, the navy royal, which are
the walls of the kingdom ; and every great ship is an impreg-
nable fort ; and our many safe and commodious ports as the
redoubts to secure them.
death hath taken in the out-works,
and now affails the fort; i feel, i feel him
gnawing my heart-strings. denham.
oyoos. part. [from out-wear.] consumed or destroyed by
lic.
bacon.
better at home lie bed-rid, idle,
inglorious, unemploy'd, with age out-worn. milton.
to outwre'st. o. a. [out and wrest...] to extort by violence.
the growing anguish
rankled so fore and fester'd inwardly,
till that the truth thereof i did out-wrest. spenser.
outwrou’g ht. part. [out and wrought.] out-done; exceeded
in efficacy.
in your violent acts,
the fall of torrents and the noise of tempests,
the boyling of carybdis, the sea's wildness,
the eating force of flames, and wings of winds,
be all out-wrought by your transcendent furies. b. yohnson.
to outwo'rth. v. a. [out and worth.] to excel in value.
a beggar's book
out-worths a noble's blood. shakesp. henry viii.
to owe. v. a. [eg aa, i owe, or i ought, islandick.]
1. to be obliged to pay; to be indebted.
i owe you much, and, like a withess youth,
that which i owe is lost. shakesp. merchant of penice.
let none seek needless causes to approve
the faith they owe. milton’s paradiso l27.
a son owes help and honour to his father; and is a subject
less indebted to the king. holyday.
all your parts of pious duty done,
you owe your ormond nothing but a son. dryden.
thou hast deserv'd more love than i can show,
but 'tis thy fate to give, and mine to owe. dryden.
if, upon the general balance of trade, english merchants
owe to foreigners one hundred thousand pounds, if commodities
do not, our money must go out to pay it. lo. #e.
2. to be obliged to ascribe; to be obliged for.
by me upheld, that he may know how frail
his fall'n condition is, and to me owe
all his deliv'rance, and to none but me. milicz,
3. to have from anything as the consequence of a cause.
o deem thy fall not ow'd to man's decree,
jove hated greece, and punish’d greece in thee. pete.
4. to possess; to be the right owner of. for ove, which is, in
this sense, obv.ete, we now use own.
thou dost her usurp
the name thou ow/? not, and hast put thyself
upon this island as a spy. shakesp. toznfe?.
fate
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o w n
o x y
3.
o
o
fate, shew thy force; ourselves we do not owe ;
what is decreed must be ; and be this so. shakespeare.
not poppy nor mandragora,
nor all the drowsy sirups of the world,
shall ever med'cine thee to that sweet sleep
o which thou owed/? yesterday. shakspeare's othello.
if any happy eye
this roving wanton shall descry,
let the finder surely know
mine is the wag; 'tis i that owe
the winged wand’rer. crashaw.
owin g. part.[from owe. a practice has long prevailed among
writers, to use owing, the aetive participle of owe, in a passive
fense, for owed or due. of this impropriety some writers were
aware, ared having no quick sense of the force of english
words, have used due, in the sense of consequence or in-
putation, which by other writers is only used of debt. we
say, the money is due to me; they say likewise, the effect is
due to the cause.]
1. consequential.
this was owing to an indifference to the pleasures of life,
and an aversion to the pomps of it. atterbury.
2. due as a debt. here due is undoubtedly the proper word.
you are both too bold;
i'll teach you all what's owing to your queen. dryden.
the debt, owing from one country to the other, cannot be
paid without real effects sent thither to that value. locke.
3. imputable to, as an agent.
if we estimate things, what in them is owing to nature,
and what to labour, we shall find in most of them ’’, to be
on the account of labour. locke.
the custom of particular impeachments was not limited any
more than that of struggles between nobles and commons, the
ruin of greece was owing to the former, as that of rome was
to the latter. swift.
owl. : n. s. sule, saxon; hulote, french and scottish.) a
owlet. s bird that flies about in the night and catches mice.
adder's fork, and blind worm's sting,
lizard's leg, and owlet's wing
for a charm. shakespeare's macbeth.
return to her |
no 1 rather i abjure all roofs, and chuse
to be a comrade with the wolf and owl. shakespeare.
'twas when the dog-star's unpropitious ray -
smote ev'ry brain, and wither'd every bay;
sick was the sun, the owl forsook his bow’r. dunciad.
then lady cynthia, mistress of the shade,
goes, with the fashionable owls, to bed. - young.
owl er. m. s. one who carries contraband goods: in the
legal sense, one that carries out wool illicitely. perhaps
from the necessity of carrying on an illicit trade by night:
but rather, i believe, a corruption of wooller, by a collo-
quial negle&amp;t of the w, such as is often observed in woman,
and by which goodwise is changed to go-dy. wooller, coller,
owler.
by running goods, these graceless owlers gain. swift.
we understand by some owlers, old people die in france.
- tatler.
own. m. s. sagen, saxon; cygen, dutch.]
1. this is a word of no other use than as it is added to the
possessive pronouns, my, thy, his, our, your, their. it seems
to be a substantive; as, my own, my peculiar: but is, in rea-
lity, the participle passive of the verb owe, in the participle owen
or own : my own ; the thing owned by, or belonging to me.
inachus in his cave alone,
wept not another's losses, but his own. dryden.
2. it is added generally by way of emphasis or corroboration.
i yet never was forsworn,
scarcely have coveted what was my own. shakespeare.
every nation made gods of their own, and put them in high
places. 2 kings xvii. 29.
for my own share one beauty i design,
engage your honours that she shall be mine." dryden.
it is conceit rather than understanding, if it must be under
the restraint of receiving and holding opinions by the autho-
rity of any thing but their own perceived evidence. locke. ,
will she thy linen wash, or hosen darn,
and knit thee gloves made of her own spun yarn. gay.
passion and pride were to her soul unknown,
convinc'd that virtue only is our own. pope.
. sometimes it is added to note opposition or contradistinction;
domestick; not foreign ; mine, his, or yours; not another's.
these toils abroad, these tumults with his own,
fell in the revolution of one year. daniel.
there's nothing fillier than a crafty knave out-witted, and
beaten at his own play. l'estrange.
to own. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to acknowledge; to avow for one's own.
when you come, find me out,
and own me for your son.
2. to possess 5 to claim 5 to hold by right.
vol. ii.
dryden's cleomenes.
tell me, ye trojans, for that name you own;
of is your course upon our coasts unknown.
others on earth o'er human race preside,
of these the chief, the care of nations own,
and guard with arms divine the british throe. pope.
3. to avow.
- nor hath it been thus only amongst the more civilized na-
tions; but the barbarous indians likewise have owned that tra-
dition. j/ilkins.
dryden.
drydon.
i'll venture out alone,
since you, fair princes, my protection own.
4. to confess; not to deny.
make this truth so evident, that those who are unwilling to
own it may yet be ashamed to deny it. willion.
others will own their weakness of understanding. locke.
it must be owned, that, generally speaking, good parents
are never more fond of their daughters, than when they see
them too fond of themselves. law.
oor. 7. / [from owner.] property; lightful posses-
on.
in a real action, the proximate cause is the property or
ownership of the thing in controversy. ayliffe's parergon.
own e.r. m. s. [from own.] one to whom anything belongs;
master; rightful possessor.
a bark
stays but till her owner comes aboard.
it is not enough to break into my garden,
climbing my walls in spight of me the owner,
but thou wilt brave me. shakes care.
here shew favour, because it happeneth that the own r ha-h
incurred the forfeiture of eight years profit of his lands, before
he cometh to the knowledge of the process against him.
shakoshcare.
bacon:
they intend advantage of my labours,
with no small profit daily to my owners. milton.
these wait the owners last despair,
and what's permitted to the flames invade. dryden.
a freehold, though but in ice and snow, will make the
owner pleased in the possession, and stout in the defence of it.
addison's feeholder.
that small muscle draws the nose upwards, when it ex-
presses the contempt which the owner of it has upon seeing
any thing he does not like. addison's speciator.
victory hath not made us insolent, nor have we taken ad-
vantage to gain anything beyond the honour of restoring every
one's right to their just owners. alterbury.
what is this wit, which must our cares employ
the owner's wife, that other men enjoy. pope.
qwre. m. s. [urus jubatus, latin.] a beast. ainsworth.
ox. m. s plur. oxes. [oxa, saxon; oxe, danish.]
1. the general name for black cattle.
the black ox hath not trod on his foot. camden.
sheep run not half so tim’rous from the wolf, t
or horse or oxen from the leopard,
as you fly from your oft-subdued slaves. shakes care.
i saw the river clitumnus, celebrated by the poets for
making cattle white that drink of it. the inhabitants of
that country have still the same opinion, and have a great
many oxen of a whitish colour to confirm them in it. allison.
2. a castrated bull.
the horns of oxen and cows are larger than the bulls;
which is caused by abundance of moisture. bacon.
although there be naturally more males than females, yet
artificially, that is, by making geldings, oxen and weathers,
there are fewer. o graunt.
the field is spacious i design to sow,
with oxen far unfit to draw the plough. dryden.
the frowning bull
and ox half-rais’d.
oxba'n.e. n.s. [buphones.] a plant. ainsworth.
oxeye. m. s. [buphihalmu;..] a plant. 4/iller.
o'xfly. n.s.. [from ox and fly; talbanus, lat..] a fly of a par-
ticular kind.
thomson's summer.
oxg ang of land. n.s. twenty acres. ains.
oxheal, n. / [from ox and heal; hellebori nigri radix.] a
plant. ainsworth.
oxli p. m. s. [from ox and lip; veris primula, lat.] the same
with cowslip, a vernal flower.
a bank whereon the wild thyme blows,
where oxlip and the nodding violet grows.
oxsta'll. n.s. [ox and shall.] a stand for oxen.
oxtongue. m. s. slugossa.] a plant. ains.
o'xy ckate, n.s. [ox: xloo, oxycrat, fr. 03); and xspaz.] a
mixture of water and vinegar.
apply a mixture of the same powder, with a compres, prest
out of oxycrate, and a suitable bandage. j// man.
oxx me l. m. s. [33%ix, oaos, and pox, j a mixture of vinegar
and honey. -
in fevers, the aliments prescribed by hippocrates, were
ptisans and deco&amp;tions of some vegetables, with oxymel or the
mixture of honey and vinegar. at histhmat.
18 a 18 z oxx mo‘ron.
shakesp.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o y l
o z ae
oxy mo'ron. m. s. scouwpov.] a rhetorical figure, in which an
epithet of a quite contrary signification is added to any word.
oxy"rr hop ine. m. s. [coodivov, sac; and £6%v.] a mixture
of two parts of oil of roses with one of vinegar of roses.
the spirits, opiates, and cool things, readily compose oxyr-
rhodines. floyer on the humours.
o'yer. m. s. soyer, old french, to hear.] a court of oyer and
terminer, is a judicature where causes are heard and deter-
mined.
oye's. [oyez, hear ye, french.] is the introduction to any pro-
clamation or advertisement given by the publick criers both
in england and scotland. it is thrice repeated.
fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
attend your office and your quality.
crier hobgoblin make the fairy o yes. shakespeare.
o yes / if any happy eye
this roving wanton shall descry;
let the finder surely know
mine is the wag. crashaw.
oyle thole. n. s. see oylet. [it may be written oylet,
from ceillet, french; but eylet seems better.]
distinguish'd slashes deck the great,
as each excels in birth or state;
his oyletholes are more and ampler,
the king's own body was a samplar.
prior.
---
o'yst er. m. s. [oosier, dutch ; huitre, french..] a bivalve tes-
taceous fish.
i will not lend thee a penny—
—why then the world’s mine oyster which i with sword
will open. shakesp. merry loves of so in 'sor.
rich honesty dwells like your miser, fir, in a poor house;
as your pearl in your foul oysłer. shakes are.
another mass held a kind of oyster shell, and other bivalves.
1%dward cn io.
there may be many ranks of beings in the invisible world
as superior to us, as we are superior to all the ranks of
being in this visible world; though we descend telow the
oyster to the least animated atoms discovered by microscopes.
watts's improvement of the mind.
where oyster tubs in rows
are rang'd beside the posts, there stay thy haste. gay.
o'ysterwench. r. m. s. soyler and wench, or woman.] a wo-
8:::::::::: man whose business is to sell oysters.
proverbially. a low woman.
off goes his bonnet to an oysłerwench. shakespeare.
the oysterwomen lock'd their fish up,
and trudg'd away to cry no bishop. hudibrar.
ozze"na. m. s. [3.2izz, from 3%. 5 ozene, fr.] an ulcer in
the infide of the nostrils that gives an ill stench. quincy.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div>

alphasectend
