
<p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r.
r a b
is called the canine letter, because it is uttered with
some resemblance to the growl or snarl of a cur:
it has one constant sound in english, such as it
_ has in other languages; as red, rose, more, mu-
- riatick: in words derived from the greek, it is
followed by an h, rhapsody: r is never mute, unless the se-
cond r may be accounted mute, where two rr are used ; as
myrrh.
t, ra’bate. v. n. [rabattre, fr.] in falconry, to recover a
hawk to the fist again, ainsworth.
ra’b.a.to... n.s. a neckband, a ruff. -
i think your other rabato were better.
- - shakesp. much ad about nothing.
broke broad jests upon her narrow heel -
pok'd her rabatos, and survey'd her steel. old comedy.
te ra‘bbet. v. a. [rabatre, rabzter, fr.] to pare down
pieces of wood so as to fit one another.
the rabbet plane is to cut part of the upper edge of a
board straight or fouare down, that the edge of another board,
cut down in the same manner, may join into the fouare of
the first ; and this lapping over of two boards is called
rabbeting. - moxon’s mechanical exercises.
the window frame hath every one of its lights rabbetted on
its outside about half an inch into the frame, and all these
rabbets are groved square. a103 on.
ra’bbet. n.f. [from the verb..] a joint made by paring two
pieces so that they wrap over one another.
having drove in the hooks, they set the rabbets of the door
within the rabbets of the door-post. moxon.
£o. ; n. s. a doctor among the jews.
the hebrew rabbins say, that nature hath given man, for
the pronouncing of all letters, the lips, the teeth, the tongue,
the palate and throat. camden's remains.
be not ye called rabbi ; for one is your master, even christ,
and all ye are brethren. mat. xxiii. 8.
ra'bbit. n.s. [roble, robbekin, dutch..] a furry animal that
lives on plants, and burrows in the ground.
i knew a wench married, as she went to the garden for
parsly to stuff a rabbit. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
a company of scholars, going to catch conies, carried one
with them which had not much wit, and gave in charge, that
if he saw any, he should be silent for fear of scaring of them ;
but he no sooner espied a company of rabbits, but he cried
aloud, ecce multi cuniculi; which he had no sooner said, but
the conies ran to their burrows ; and he being checked by
them for it, answered, who would have thought that the rab-
bits understood latin bacon’s apophthogms.
ra(bble. n.s. [rabula, lat. rabulari, low lat..] a tumul-
tuous croud; an assembly of low people.
countrymen, will ye relent, and yield to mercy,
for let a rabble lead you to your deaths shakesp.
go bring the rabble here to this place. shakesp.
of these his several ravishments, betrayings, and stealing
away of men's wives, came in all those ancient fables, and
all that rabble of grecian forgeries. raleigh.
the better sort abhors scurrility,
and often censures what the rabble like. roscommon.
that profane, atheistical, epicurean rabble, whom the whole
nation so rings of, are not the wisest men in the world. south.
to gratify the barbarous audience, i gave them a short
rabble scene, because the mob are represented by plutarch and
polybius with the same character of baseness and cowardice.
dryden’s proface to cleomenes.
in change of government,
the rabble rule their great oppressors fate,
do sov’reign justice and revenge the state. dryden.
his enemies have been only able to make ill impressions
upon the low and ignorant rabble, and to put the dregs of
the people in a ferment. addison's freeholder.
vol. ii.
*-
r a c
ra’splex. est. m. s. [from rabble.] croud; tumultuous as-
sembly of mean people. not in use.
a rude rabblement,
whose like he never saw, he durst not bide,
but got his ready steed, and fast away 'gan ride. spensor.
the rabblement houted, clapp'd their chopt hands, and ut-
tered a deal of stinking breath. shakesp. julius cæsar.
there will be always tyrants, murderers, thieves, traitors,
and other of the same rabblement. camden's remains.
rabid. adj. [rabidus, lat..] fierce; furious; mad.
ra'binet. n.s. a kind of smaller ordnance. ainsworth,
race. m. s. [race, fr. from radice, lat.]
1. a family ascending.
2. family descending.
he in a moment will create
another world; out of man, a race
of men innumerable, there to dwell. milton.
male he created thee, but thy consort
female for race. milton.
high as the mother of the gods in place,
and proud like her of an immortal race. dryden.
hence the long race of alban fathers come. dryden.
3. a generation ; a collective family.
a race of youthful and unhandled colts,
fetching mad bounds. shakesp. merchant of penice.
4. a particular breed.
the race of mules, fit for the plough is bred. chapman.
instead
of spirits malign, a better race to bring
into their vacant room. milton.
in the races of mankind and families of the world, there
remains not to one above another the least pretence to have
the right of inheritance. locke.
if they are all debas'd and willing slaves,
the young but breathing to grow grey in bondage,
and the old finking to ignoble graves,
of such a race no matter who is king. murphy.
5. race of ginger. [rayz de gengibre, spanish.] a root or sprig
of ginger.
6. a articular strength or taste of wine, applied by temple to
any extraordinary natural force of intellect,
of gardens there may be forms wholly irregular, that may
have more beauty than of others; but they must owe it to
some extraordinary dispositions of nature in the seat, or some
great race of fancy or judgment in contrivance. temple.
7. [ras, islandick.] contest in running.
to describe races and games
or tilting furniture. milton,
stand forth, ye champions who the gauntlet wield,
or you the swiftest racers of the field;
stand forth, ye wrestlers who these pastimes grace,
1 wield the gauntlet, and i run the race. pope.
8. course on the feet.
the flight of many birds is swifter than the race of any
beasts.
9. progress; course.
it suddenly fell from an excess of favour, which many ex-
amples having taught them, never stopt his race till it came
bacon.
to a headiong overthrow. sidney.
my race of glory run, and race of shame, milton.
the great light of day yet wants to run
much of his race though steep. milton.
he safe return'd, the race of glory past,
new to his friends embrace. pope's odyssy.
10. train; process.
an offensive war is made, which is unjust in the aggressor;
the prosecution and race of the war carrieth the defendant to
invade the ancient patrimony of the first aggressor, who is
now turned defendant; shall he sit down, and not put him-
self in defence o bacon.
21 d the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a c
r a d
the race of this war fell upon the loss of urbin, which he
re-obtained. bacon.
ra cf horse. m. s. [race and horse.] horse bred to run for
prizes. - -
the reason hudibras gives, why those, who can talk on
trifles, speak with the greatest fluency, is, that the tongue is
like a racehorse, which runs the faster the less weight it
carries. -&gt; - ailson.
race ma"rion. m. s. [raconius, lat.] cluster, like that of
grapes. - --- -
a cock will in one day fertilitate the whole racemation or
cluster of eggs, which are not excluded in many weeks
after. - brown's j'u'ar errours.
ract, 1 ferous. adj. [racemus and fero, latin.] bearing
clusters. -
ra’c er. m. s. [from race. j runner; one that contends in
speed. - • 1 - -
his stumbling founder'd jade can trot as high
as any other pegasus can fly;
so the dull eel moves nimbler in the mud,
than all the swift-finn’d racers of the flood. dost.
a poet's form she plac’d before their eyes,
and bad the nimblest racer scize the prize. pope.
ra’cis ess. m. s. [form racy..] the quality of being racy.
rack. m. s. [racio, dutch, from racken, to stretch..]
engine to torture.
1. an vox not his ghost; o let him pass he hates him
that would, upon the rack of this rough world,
stretch him out longer. shakesp. kong lear.
did ever any man upon the rack afflict himself, because he
had received a cross answer from his mistress. 7aylor.
!ct them feel the whip, the sword, the fire, -
and in the tortures of the rack expire. addison.
2, "footure ; extreme pain. -
a fit of the stone puts a king to the rack, and makes him
as miserable as it does the meaneit subject. temple.
a cool behaviour sets him on the rack, and is interpreted
as an instance of aversion or indifference. addison.
3. any instrument by which extension is performed. -
these bows, being somewhat like the long bows in use
amongst us, were b-nt only by a man’s immediate strength,
without the help of any bender or rack that are used to
others. jwilkins's mathematical magick.
4. a distaff; commonly a portable distaff, from which they
spin by twirling a ball. it is commonly spoken and written
rock. -
the siscrg turn the whecl,
empty the woolly rack, and fill the reel. drydon.
5. [racke, dutch, a track.] the clouds as they are driven by
the wind.
that, which is now a horse, even with a thought
the rack dislimns, and makes it indistinet
as water is in water. shakesp. autony and cleopatra.
the great globe itself,
yea, all, which it inherit, shall dissolve :
and, like this insubsiantial pageant, faded,
leave not a rack behind.
we often sce against some storm,
a silence in the heav'ns, the rack stand still,
the bold winds speechless, and the orb below
as hush as death. shakso. hamlet.
the winds in the upper region, which move the clouds
above, which we call the rack, and are not perceived below,
pass without noise. bacon's natural history.
as wint'ry winds contending in the sky,
with equal force of lungs their titles try;
they rage, they roar: the doubtful rack of heav'n
stands without motion, and the tide undriv'n, dryden.
6. [pracca, the occiput, saxon ; racca, islandick, hinges or
joints.] a neck of mutton cut for the table.
7. a grate. -
8. a wooden grate in which hay is placed for cattle.
their bulls they send to pastures far, -
or hills, or feed them at full racks within. moy's pirgil.
the best way to feed cattle with it, is to put it in racks,
because of the great quantity they tread down. alsortimer.
he bid the nimble hours
bring forth the steeds; the nimble hours obey:
from their full racks the gen’rous steeds retire.
•. arrack; a spirituous liquor. see arrack.
io rack. v. n. [from the noun..] to stream as clouds before
the wind.
three glorious suns, each one a perfeot sun,
not separated with the racking clouds,
shakesp. temp;3.
addison.
shakespeare.
but sever'd in a pale clear-shining sky.
t. rack. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to torment by the rack.
unhappy most like tortured me, -
their joints new set to be new rac{'d again. cowley.
hold, o dreadful sir,
you will not rack an innocent old man.
2. to torment; to harass.
dryden and lee.
th’apostate angel, though in pain,
vaunting aloud, but rack'd with deep despair.
. to harass by exaction. -
the landlords there shamefully rack their tenants, exacting
of them, besides his covenants, what he pleaseth. spensor.
the commons hast thou raca'd; the clergy's bags
are lank and lean with thy extortions. shakespeare.
he took possession of his just estate,
nor rack'd his tenants with increase of rent.
4. to screw ; to force to performance.
they racking and stretching scripture further than by god
was meant, are drawn into fundry inconveniencies. hooker.
the wisest among the heathens racked their wits, and cast
about every way, managing every little argument to the ut-
most advantage. tillotson's sermons.
it was worth the while for the adversary to rack invention,
and to call in all the succours of learning and critical skill to
assail them, if posible, and to wrest them out of our hands.
milton.
dryden,
- j/aterland.
5. to stretch ; to extend.
nor have i money nor commodity
to raise a present sun;
try what my credit can in venice do, -
that shall be rack'd even to the uttermost. shakespeare.
6. to defecate ; to draw off from the lees. i know not whence
this word is derived in this sense; rein, german, is clear,
pure, whence our word to rise: this is perhaps of the same
rzice.
it is common to draw wine or beer from the lees, which
we call racking, whereby it will clarify much sooner. bacon.
some roll their cask about the cellar to mix it with the
lees, and, after a few days resettlement, rack it off. asortim.
rack-rent. m. s. [rack and rent.] rent raised to the utter-
mosł.
have poor families been ruined by rack-rents, paid for the
lands of the church : swift's miscellanies.
rack-renter. m. s. [rack and rester.] one who pays the
uttermost rent. -
though this be a quarter of his yearly income, and the
publick tax takes away one hundred; yet this influences not
the yearly rent of the land, which the rack-renter or under-
tenant pays. locke.
ra'ck e.t. r. s. [of uncertain derivation; m. casaubon derives
it, after his custom, from £2x3, the dash of fluctuation
against the shore.]
i. an irregular clattering noise.
that the tennis court keeper knows better than i, it is a
low clb of linen with thee, when thou keepest not racket
there. shakesp. henry iv.
2. a confused talk. in burlesque language.
ambition hath removed her lodging, and lives the next
door to faction, where they keep such a racket, that the whole
parish is disturbed and every night in an uproar. swift.
3. [raquette, fr.]. the instrument with which players at ten-
nis strike the ball. whence perhaps all the other senses.
when we have matcht our rackets to these balls,
we will in france play a set,
shall strike his father's crown into the hazard. shafts.
the body, into which impression is made, either can yield
backward or it cannot: if it can yield backward, then the
impression made is a motion; as we see a stroke with a
racket upon a ball, makes it fly from it. digby on the soul.
he talks much of the motives to do and forbear, how they
determine a reasonable man, as if he were no more than a
tennis-ball, to be tossed to and fro by the rackets of the second
causes. bramhall against hobbes.
ra cking. m. s.
racking pace of a horse is the same as an amble, only that
it is a swifter time and a shorter tread; and though it does
not rid so much ground, yet it is something casier. far. dio.
ra'ckoox. m. s. - -
the rackson is a new england animal, like a badger, hav-
ing a tail like a fox, being cloathed with a thick and deep
furr: it fleeps in the day time in a hollow tree, and goes out
a-nights, when the moon shines, to feed on the sea fide, where
it is hunted by dogs, - bailey.
racy. adj. [perhaps from rayz, spanish, a root..] strong;
flavorous; tasting of the soil.
rich racy verses in which we
the soil, from which they come, taste, smell, and see.
cowley.
from his brain that helicon distis, -
whose acy liquor did his offspring fill. penham.
the cyder at first is very luscious, but if ground more
early, it is more racy. 44%rtimer's husandry.
the hospitable sage, in sign
of social welcome, mix’d the racy wine,
late from the mellowing cask restor'd to light,
by ten long years refin'd, and rosy bright.
rad. the old pret. of read.
rad,
rad, red and red, differing only in dialest, signify so
1-1
pof e.
spens, ?".
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a g
f: ; as conrad, powerful or skilful in counsel; ethelred, a
nose counsellor; rodbert, eminent for counsel ; eubulus
and thrasybulus have almost the same sense. gilson.
r&amp;poock, or ruddock. m. s. a bird ; the red breast.
the raddock would,
with charitable bill, bring thee all this. shakespeare.
§: ! m. s. [radiare, lat.] sparkling lustre; glitter.
by the scred radiance of the sun,
by all the operations of the orbs, -
here 1 disclaim all my paternal care. shaftsp. k. lear.
whether there be not too high an apprehension above its
natural radiancy, is not without just doubt; however, it be
granted a very splendid gem, and whose spokes may some-
what resemble the glances of fire. brown's sugar errours,
- the son
girt with omnipotence, with radiance crown'd
of majesty divine. milton.
a glory surpassing the sun in its greatest radiancy. burnet.
ra'diant. adj. [radians, lat.] shining; brightly sparkling;
emitting rays. -
there was a sun of gold radiant upon the top, and before,
a small cherub of gold with wings displayed. , bacon.
mark what radiant state she spreads,
in circle round her shining throne, -
shooting her beams like silver threads, -
this, this is she alone. milton's acades.
virtue could see to do what virtue would -
by her own radiant light, though fun and moon
were in the flat sea sunk. a.'ilton.
i see the warlike host of heaven,
radiant in glitt’ring arms and beamy pride,
go forth to succour truth below. a filton.
o, ra diate. v. n. [radio, lat.] to emit rays; to shine ;
to sparkle.
though with wit and parts their possessors could never en-
gage god to send forth his light and his truth; yet now that
revelation hath disclosed them, and that he hath been pleased
to make them radiate in his word, men may recollect those
featter'd divine beams, and kindling with them the topicks
proper to warm our affections, enflame holy zeal. boyle.
light radiates from luminous bodies directly to our eyes,
and thus we see the sun or a flame; or it is reflected from
other bodies, and thus we see a man or a picture. locke.
ra d1 at e d. adj. [radiatus, lat.] adorned with rays.
the radiated head of the phoenix gives us the meaning of
a passage in ausonius. addison.
ra151a"rios. m. s. [radiatio, lat. radiation, fr.] -
1. beamy lustre; emission of rays. - -
we have perspe&amp;tive houses, where we make demonstra-
tions of all lights and radiations, and of all colours. bacon.
should i say i liv'd darker than were true, -
your radiation can all clouds subdue, - }
but one; ’tis best light to contemplate you. donne.
2. emission from a center every way.
sound paralleleth in many things with the light, and ra-
diation of things visible. bacon’s natural hislory.
ratxical. adj. [radical, fr. from radix, latin.]
1. primitive; original.
the differences, which are secondary and proceed from
these radical differences, are, plants are all figurate and de-
terminate, which inanimate bodies are not. bacon.
such a radical truth, that god is, springing up together
with the essence of the soul, and previous to all other thoughts,
is not pretended to by religion. bently.
2. implanted by nature. -
the emission of the loose and adventitious moisture doth
betray the radical moisture, and carrieth it for company. bac.
if the radical moisture of gold were separated, it might be
contrived to burn without being consumed. j/ilkins.
the sun beams render the humours hot, and dry up the
radical moisture. arbuthnot.
3. serving to origination.
radica'lity. m. s. [from radical.] origination.
there may be cquivocal seeds and hermaphroditical prin-
ciples, that contain the radicality and power of different
forms; thus, in the seeds of wheat, there lieth obscurely the
seminality of darnel. brown's wu'ar errours.
rasdicalix, adv. [srom radical.] originally ; primitively.
it is no easy master to determine the point of death in in-
se&amp;ts, who have not their vitalities radically confined unto one
part- brown's pulgar errours.
these great orbs thus radically bright,
primitive founts, and origins of light
enliven worlds deny'd to human fight. prior.
ra'dicaln ess. m. s. [from radical.] the state of being
radical. -
t, raticatf. v. a. [radicatus, stom radix, lat.] to
root; to plant deeply and firmly.
meditation will radicate these seeds, fix the transient gleam
of light and warmth, confirm resolutions of good, and give
them a durable consistence in the soul. miammand.
s
nor have we let fall our pen upon discouragement of un-
belief, from radicated beliefs, and points of high pre-
scription. - - brown's soar erreurs.
f the object stays not on the sense, it makes not impresion
enough to be remembered; but if it be repeated there, it leaves
plenty enough of those images behind it, to strengthen the
knowledge of the object: in which radicated knowledge, if
the memory consist, there would be no need of reorving those
atoms in the brain. glanville's pfence.
radication. m. s. [radication, fr. from radicate j the aet
of taking root and fixing deep.
they that were to plant a church, were to deal with men
of various inclinations, and of different habits of fin, and
degrees of radication of those habits; and to each of these
some proper application was to be made to cure their souls.
issammond's fundamental.
ra'drcle, m. s. [radiale, fr. from radix, lat.]
radicle is that part of the seed of a plant, which, upon its
vegetation, becomes its scot. &amp;uincy.
rat is h. m. s. [radic, sax, radis, raisart, tr. rathanas, lat.]
a root.
r4 dius. m. s. [latin.]
1. the semi-diameter of a circle. -
2. a bone of the fore-arm, which accompanies the ulna from
the elbow to the wrist.
to raf f. v. a. to sweep; to huddle; to take hastily with-
out dislinołion. -
their causes and effects i thus raff up together. carew.
to raf fle. v. m. [raffir, to snatch, fr.] to cast dice for
a prize, for which every one lays down a flake.
letters from hampstead give me an account, there is a late
institution there, under the name of a raffing shop, tatler.
raf fle. n.s. [roffe, fr. from the verb.j a species of game
or lottery, in which many stake a small part of the value of
some single thing, in consideration of a chance to gain it.
the toy, brought to rome in the third triumph of pompey,
being a pair of tables for gaming, made of two precious stones,
three foot broad, and four foot long, would have made a fine
raffle. arbuthnot on coins.
raf.t. m. s. [probably from ratis, latin.] a frame or float
made by laying pieces of timber cross each other.
where is that son
4.si.er.
that floated with thce on the fatal raft. shakesp.
fell the timber of yon lofty grove,
and form a rost, and build the rising ship. pope.
raf.t. part. pass of reave or raff. spenser. torn; rent.
rafter. m. s. snapton, sax, roster, dutch; corrupted, says
junius, from roof tree.] the secondary timbers of the
house; the timbers which are let into the great beam.
the rosters of my body, bone, -
being still with you, the muscle, sinew and vein,
which tile this house, will coine again.
shepherd,
i trust thy honest offer'd courtesy,
which oft is sooner found in lowly sheds
with smoky rafters, than in tap'st; y halls. milton.
on them the trojans cast
stones, rafters, pillars, beams. denham.
by donaus, king of egypt, when he fled from his brother
, rameses, the use of shipping was first trought among the
grecians, who before that time knew no other way of crossing
their narrow seas, but on beans, or rosters tied to one ano-
ther. hylyn.
donne.
from the east, a belgian wind
his hostile breath through the dry refers sent;
the flames impell’d. dryden.
the roof began to mount aloft, _
aloft rose every beam and rafter,
the heavy wall climb'd slowly after. swift's assol.
ra'ftered. adj. [from rafter.j built with rasters.
no raft’red roofs with dance and tabor sound,
no noon-tide bell invites the country round.
rag. m. s. [p]lacobe, torn, saxon; £423 j
i. a piece of cloth torn from the rest ; a tatter.
cowls, hoods and habits, with their wearers tost,
and flutter'd into rags. - a sister.
rags are a great improvement of chalky lands. a. timer.
2. anything rent and tattered; worn out cleaths: proverbially,
mean dress.
fathers that wear rags,
do make their children blind;
but fathers that bear bags,
shall see their children kind.
they tooke from me
both coate and cloake, and all things that might be
grace in my habit; and in place, put on
these tatter'd rags.
- worn like a cloth,
gnawn into rags by the devouring moth.
content with poverty, my soul i arm;
and virtue, though in rags, will keep the warm. dryden.
3. a fragment of dicts.
pope.
shakes?. king lear.
chapman.
sandy.
he
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a g
r a i
he had first matter seen undrest;
he took her naked all alone,
before one rag of form was on. hudibrar.
rag amu'ff in. n.s.. [from rag and i know not what else..] a
paltry mean fellow.
i have led my ragamuffins where they were pepper'd; there's
not three of my hundred and fifty left alive; and they are
for the town's end to beg during life.
shall we brook that paltry ass
and feeble scoundrel, hudibras,
with that more paltry ragamuffin,
ralpho, vapouring and huffing. hudibras.
attended with a crew of ragamuffins, she broke into his
house, turned all things topsy-turvy, and then set it on
fire. swift.
rage. m. s. [rage, fr.] -
1. violent anger; vehement fury.
this tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
the harm of unskann'd swiftness, will, too late,
tie leaden pounds to's heels. shakesp. coriolanus.
- desire not
t’allay my rages and revenges with
your colder reasons. shakespeare.
argument more heroick than the rage
of turnus for lavinia disespous’d. milton.
torment and loud lament and furious rage. milton.
2. vehemence or exacerbation of anything painful.
the party hurt, who hath been in great rage of pain, till
the weapon was re-anointed. bacon’s natural history.
the rage of thirst and hunger now supprest. pope.
3. enthusiasm; rapture.
who brought green poesy to her perse&amp;t age,
and made that art which was a rage. cowley.
4. eagerness; vehemence of mind: as, a rage of money
getting.
you purchase pain with all that joy can give,
and die of nothing but a rage to live. pope.
then may his soul its free born rage enjoy,
give deed to will, and ev'ry pow'r employ. harte.
to rac e. v. n. [from the noun.j
1. to be in fury; to be heated with excessive anger.
wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging; and whosoever
is deceived thereby, is not wise. prov. xx. 1.
why do the heathen rage * psalm ii. 1.
at this he inly rag'd, and as they talk'd,
smote him into the midriff. a4ision.
2. to ravage; to exercise fury.
heart-rending news,
that death should license have to rage among
the fair, the wise, the virtuous. waller.
3. to act with mischievous impetuosity.
the chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one
against another, seem like torches, and run like the light-
cnings. nah. ii. 4.
the madding wheels of brazen chariots rag’d. milton.
after these waters had raged on the earth, they began to
lessen and shrink, and the great fluetuations of this deep being
quieted by degrees, the waters retired. burnet.
ra gefu l. adj. [rage and full.] furious ; violent.
this courtesy was worse than a bastinado to zelmane; so
that again with rageful eyes she bad him defend himself; for
no less than his life would answer it. sidney.
a popular orator may represent vices in so formidable ap-
pearances, and set out each virtue in so amiable a form, that
the covetous person shall scatter most liberally his beloved
idol, wealth, and the ragsful person shall find a calm. hamm.
ra'gg ed. adj. [from rag..]
1. rent into tatters.
. . . how like a prodigal,
the skarfed bark puts from her native bay,
hugg’d and embraced by the strumpet wind;
how like the prodigal doth she return
with over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails,
lean, rent, and beggar'd by the strumpet wind. shakesp.
as i go in this ragged tattered coat, i am hunted away
from the old woman's door by every barking cur. arbuthnot.
2. uneven ; consisting of parts almost disunited.
the earl of warwick's ragged staff is yet to be seen pour-
trayed in their church steeple. carew's survey of cornwall.
that some whirlwind bear
unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock,
and throw it thence into the raging sea. shakespeare.
the moon appears, when looked upon with a good glass,
rude and ragged. burnet's theory of the earth.
3. dressed in tatters.
since noble arts in rome have no support,
and ragged virtue not a friend at court.
4. rugged; not smooth. -
the wolf would barter away a ragged coat and a raw-
boned carcase, for a smooth fat one. l’eslrange.
what shepherd owns those ragged sheep? dryden.
raggedx ess. n.s.. [from ragged..] state of being dressed in tatters.
dryden.
shakesp. henry iv.
poor naked wretches, whereseo'er you are,
that bide the pelting of this pitiless storm
how shall your houseless heads and unsed sides,
your loop'd and window'd raggedness defend you ? shakes,
ra'gingly, adv. [from raging.] with vehement fury.”
ragman. n.s. [rag and man.] one who deals in rags.
ragout. m. s. [french..] "meat stewed and highly sea-
soned.
to the stage permit
ragouts for tereus or thyestes drest,
tis task enough for thee to expose a roman feast. drydon,
no fish they reckon comparable to a ragout of snails. add.
when art and nature join, th’ effect will be
some nice ragout, or charming fricasy. king's cookery.
ra'gwort. m. s. [rag and wort..] a plant. mil.
ra'gst on e. m. s. [rag and some.] -
1. a stone so named from its breaking in a ragged, uncertain,
irregular manner. j/oodward on fijili.
2. the stone with which they smooth the edge of a tool new
ground and left ragged. -
rail. m. s. [riegel, german.]
1. a cross beam fixed at the ends in two upright posts.
if you make another square, and also a tennant on each
untennanted end of the stiles, and another mortess on the top
and bottom rails, you may put them together. maxoo.
2. a series of posts connected with beams, by which any thing
is inclosed : a pale is a series of small upright posts rising above
the cross beam, by which they are connected: a rail is a se-
ries of cross beams supported with posts, which do not rise
intuch above it. -
a man, upon a high place without rails, is ready to fall.
bacon's natural history.
a large square table for the commissioners, one side being
sufficient for those of either party, and a rail for others which
went round. clarendon.
3. a kind of bird.
of wild birds cornwall hath quail, rail, partridge and
pheasant. carew's survey of cornwall.
4 [negle, saxon.] a woman's upper garment. this is pre-
served only in the word night rail.
to rail. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to inclose with rails. -
the hand is square, with four rounds at the corners; this
fhould first have been planched over, and railed about with
ballisters. carew's survey of corazall.
as the churchyard ought to be divided from other profane
places, so it ought to be fenced in and railed. aysis.
sir roger has given a handsome pulpit-cloth, and railed in
the communion-table. addison's speciator.
2. to range in a line.
they were brought to london all railed in ropes, like a team
of horses in a cart, and were executed some at london, and
the rest at divers places. bacon’s henry vii.
to rail. v. n. [railler, fr. rallen, dutch..] to use insolent
and reproachful language; to speak to, or to mention in op-
probrious terms: formerly with on, now commonly with at.
your husband is in his old lunes again; he so rails against
all married mankind, curses all eve's daughters. shop.
what a monstrous fellow art thou ? thus to rail on one,
that is neither known of thee, nor knows thee. shakesp.
'till thou can's rail the seals from off my bond,
thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud. shakesp.
he tript me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd,
and put upon him such a deal of man,
that worthied him. shakesp. king zcar.
angels bring not railing accusation against them. 2 pet. ii.
the plain the forests doth disdain:
the forests rail upon the plain.
if any is angry, and rails at it, he may securely.
thou art my blood, where johnson has no part;
where did his wit on learning fix a brand,
drayton.
locke.
and rail at arts he did not understand 2 dryden.
lesbia for ever on me rail,
to talk of me she never fails. swift.
rai’l. er. m. s. [from rail.] one who insults or defames by
opprobrious language.
if i build my felicity upon my reputation, i am as happy
as long as the railer will give me leave. south's sermons.
let no presuming impious railer tax
creative wisdom. thomson's summer.
rai'll ery. n. s. [raillerie, fr. j slight satire; satirical mer-
riment.
let raillery be without malice or heat. benj. johnson.
a quotation out of hudibras shall make them treat with
levity an obligation wherein their welfare is concerned as to
this world and the next: raillery of this nature is enough to
make the hearer tremble. addison's freeholder.
studies employed on low objects; the very naming of
them is sufficient to turn them into raillery, addison.
to these we are solicited by the arguments of the subtile,
and the railleries of the prophane. rogers's sermons.
ra1(ment. n.s. [for arrainent, from array.] vesture; vest-
nest 5
*
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a i r a j.
ment; cloaths; dress ; garment. a word now little used 4. to exalt to a state more great or illustrious.
but in poetry. counsellors may manage affairs, which nevertheless are sat
his rainents, though mean, received handsomeness by the from the ability to raise and amplify an estate. bacon.
grace of the wearer. sidney. thou so pleas'd,
o protheus, let this habit make thee blush | qan'st raise thy creature to what height thou wilt
be thou asham'd, that i have took upon me of union. milton.
• such an immodest raiment. shakespeare. 5. to amplify; to enlarge. -
living, both food and rainent she supplies. dryden. that eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh,
... you are to consider them as the servants and instruments of to raise my fortunes. shakesp. king lear.
aclion, and so give them food, and rest, and raiment, that 6. to increase in current value, -
they may be strong and healthful to do the duties of a cha- the plate-pieces of eight were raised three-pence in the
... ritable, useful, pious life. law. piece. temple's miscellanies.
to rain. v. n. [nenian, saxon; regenen, dutch.] 7. to elevate ; to exalt, -
1. to fall in drops from the clouds. the persians gazing on the sun,
like a low-hung cloud, it rains so fast, admir’d how high 'twas plac'd, how bright it shone;
that all at once it falls. dryden's knight's tale. but as his pow'r was known, their thoughts were rail'd,
the wind is south west, and the weather lowring, and and soon they worshipp'd, what at first they prais'd. prior.
like to rain. locke. 8. to advance; to promote; to prefer,
2. to fall as rain. this gentleman came to be raised to great titles. clarend.
the eye marvelleth at the whiteness thereof, and the heart 9. to excite; to put in action.
is astonished at the raining of it. ecclus. xliii. 18. he raiseth the stormy wind. psalm cvii. 28.
they sat them down to weep; nor only tears . he might taint
rain’d at their eyes, but high winds rose within. milton; th’ animal spirits, that from pure blood arise,
3. it rains. the water falls from the clouds. . thence raise distemper'd thoughts. milton.
that which serves for gain, - gods encountering gods, jove encouraging them with his
and follows but for form, thunders, and neptune raising his tempests. pope.
will pack when it begins to rain, lo. to excite to war or tumult; to stir up.
and leave thee in the storm. shakesp. king lear. he first rais'd head against usurping richard. shakesp.
to rain. v. a. to pour down as rain. - they neither found me in the temple disputing with any
it rain'd down fortune, show'ring on your head. shak. man, neither raising up the people. aeïs xxiv. 12.
rain sacrificial whisp'rings in his ear, æneas then employs his pains
make sacred even his stirrop. shakesp. timon of athens. in parts remote to raise the tuscan swains. dryden.
israel here had famish'd, had not god ii. to rouse; to stir up. -
rain'd from heav'n manna. milton's paradise loft. they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep. job.
rain. m. s. snen, saxon.] the moisture that falls from the clouds. 12. to give beginning to; as, he raised the family.
when shall we three meet again; 13. to bring into being. - -
in thunder, lightning, or in rain. shakespeare. one hath ventur'd from the deep to raise
with strange rains, hails, and showers were they perse- new troubles. - milton.
cuted. wisdom xvi. 16. god vouchsafes to raise, another world -
the lost clouds pour - from him. - - milton.
into the sea an useless show'r, 14. to call into view from the state of separate spirits.
and the vext sailors curse the rain, the spirits of the deceased, by certain spells and infernal
for which poor farmers pray'd in vain. waller. sacrifices, were raised. sandys's journey.
pain is water by the heat of the sun divided into very small these are spectres, the understanding raises to itself, to
parts ascending in the air, till encountering the cold, it be a flatter its own laziness. locke.
condensed into clouds, and descends in drops. ray. 15. to bring from death to life.
rai’nbow. n.s. [rain and bow.] the iris; the semicircle of he was delivered for our offences, and raised again for our
various colours which appears in showery weather. justification. romans iv. 25.
casting of the water in a most cunning manner, makes a it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in
perfect rainbow, not more pleasant to the eye than to the weakness, it is raised in power. i cor. xv. 23.
mind, so sonsibly to see the proof of the heavenly iris. sidney. 16. to occasion; to begin.
to add another hue unto the rainbow. shakespeare. 'raise not a false report, exodus xxiii. 1.
the rainbow is drawn like a nymph with large wings dispread the common ferryman of egypt, that wasted over the
in the form of a semicircle,the feathers of sundry colours. peach. dead bodies from memphis, was made by the greeks to be
they could not be ignorant of the promise of god never the ferryman of hell, and solemn stories raised after him. bre.
to drown the world, and the rainbow before their eyes to put wantonness and pride
them in mind of it. brown's vulgar errours. raise out of friendship hostile deeds in peace. milton.
this rainbow never appears but where it rains in the sun- 17. to set up; to utter loudly.
fhine, and may be made artificially by spouting up water, all gaze, and all admire, and raise a shouting sound. dry.
which may break aloft, and scatter into drops, and fall down soon as the prince appears, they raise a cry. dryden.
like rain; for the sun, shining upon these drops, certainly 18. to colle&amp;t ; to obtain a certain sum. -
causes the bow to appear to a spectator standing in a true po- britain, once despis'd, can raise
sition to the rain and sun; this bow is made by refraction of as ample sums, as rome in caesar's days. arbuthnot.
the sun's light in drops of falling rain. newton's opticks. i should not thus be bound,
the dome's high arch reflects the mingled blaze, if i had means, and could but raise five pound. gay.
and forms a rainbow of alternate rays. pope. 19. to collect ; to assemble ; to levy.
gay rainbow silks her meliow charms infold, . he out of smallest things could without end
and nought of lyce but herself is old. 7%ung. have rais'd inceslant armies. milton.
ra1‘ndeer. m. s. [pranar,saxon; rangifer, latin.] a deer with 20. to give rise to,
large horns, which, in the northern regions, draws sledges higher argument
through the snow. - remains, sufficient of itself to raise
ra1‘niness. n.s. [from rainy..] the state of being showery. that name, unless years damp my wing. milton.
rain-war er, n.s. [rain and water:l water not taken from 21; to procure to be bred or propagated: as he raised sheep;
springs, but falling from the clouds. he raised wheat where none grew before.
court holy water in a dry house, is better than the rain- 22. to raise is, in all its senses, to elevate from low to high, from
water out o' doors. shakesp. king lear. mean to illustrious, from obscure to famous, or to do something
we took distilled rain water. boyle. that may be by an easy figure referred to local elevation. "
rain-water is to be preferred before spring-water. mart. 23. to raise paste. to form paste into pies without a dish:
rai'ny. adj. [from rain..] showery; wet. miss liddy can dance a jig, and raise posle. speciator.
our gayness and our gilt are all besmirch'd, rai's er. m. s. [from raise.] he that raises.
with rainy marching in the painful field. shakesp. hen. v. and drinke the dark-deepe water of the spring,
a continual dropping in a very rainy day, and a conten- bright arethusa, the most nourishing
tious woman, are alike. prov. xxvii. 15. raiser of heards. chapman.
to raise. v. a. [resa, swedish; reiser, danish.] then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes. dan. xi.
1. to list; to heave. they that are the first raisers of their houses, are most
the elders went to raise him up from the earth. 2 sam. xii. indulgent towards their children. bacon.
such a bulk as no twelve bards could raise he that boasts of his ancestors, the founders and raisers of
twelve starv'ling bards of these degen'rate days. pope. a family, doth confess that he hath less virtue. taylor.
2. to set upright: as, he raised a mast. raiser of human kind by nature cast,
3. to escot; to build up. - naked and helpless. thomson's autumn.
take his carcase down from the tree, cast it at the enter- rai’s in. m. s. [racemus, lat. raisin, fr.] -
ing cf the gate, and raise thereon a heap of stones. jos. viii. raisins are the fruit of the vine suffered to remain on the
vol. ii. 21 e tree<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a k
r a m
tree till perfeołly ripened, and then dried: grapes of every
kind, preserved in this manner, are called raisins, but those
dried in the fun are much sweeter and pleasanter than those
dried in ovens; they are called jar raisins, from their being
imported in earthen jars. hill's materia medica.
dried grapes or raisins, boiled in a convenient proportion
of water, make a sweet liquor, which being betimes distilled,
afford an oil and spirit much like the raisins themselves. boyle.
rake... m. s. [rostrum, lat. jace, sax. racche, dutch.]
1. an instrument with teeth, by which the ground is divided,
or light bodies are gathered up.
at midsummer down with the brembles and brakes,
and after abroad with thy forkes and thy rakes. tosor.
o that thy bounteous deity wou'd please
to guide my rake upon the chinking sound
of some vast treasure hidden under ground. dryden.
he examines his face in the stream, combs his rueful locks
with a rake. garth.
2. [racaille, fr. the low rabble; or rekel, dutch, a worthless
cur dog..] a loose, disorderly, vicious, wild, gay, thought-
less fellow ; a man addicted to pleasure.
the next came with her son, who was the greatest rake in
the place, but so much the mother's darling, that she left her
husband for the sake of this graceless youth. addison.
rakes hate iober grave gentlewomen. arbuthnot.
men, some to bus'ness, some to pleasure take ; -
but ev'ry woman is at heart a rake. pope.
the fire saw smiling his own virtues wake;
the mother begg'd the blessing of a rake. pope.
to dance at publick places, that fops and rakes might ad-
mire the fineness of her shape, and the beauty of her motions.
law.
to rake. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to gather with a rake.
mow barlie, and rake it, and set it on cocks. toffer.
harrows iron teeth shall every where
rake helmets up. may’s wirgil's georgic{s.
is it be such a precious jewel as the world takes it for, yet
they are forced to rake it out of dunghills; and accordingly
the apostle gives it a value suitable to its extraet. south.
2. to clear with a rake.
as they rake the green appearing ground,
the ruffet hay-cock rises. thomson.
3. to draw together by violence.
an eager desire to rake together whatsoever might preju-
dice or any way hinder the credit of apocryphal books, hath
caused the collector's pen so to run as it were on wheels, that
the mind, which should guide it, had no leisure to think. hook.
what piles of wealth hath he accumulated
how, i' th' name of thrift,
does he rake this together.
a sport more formidable -
had rak'd together village rabble. hudibras.
ill-gotten goods are squandered away with as little con-
science as they were raked together. l’estrange.
4. to scour; to search with eager and vchement diligence.
the statesman rakes the town to find a plot. swift.
5. to heap togethe, and cover. to rate the fire is still used.
o here i' th' sands
thec i’ll rake up, the post unsanetified
of north’rous lechers. shakes. king lear.
the blazing wood may to the eye seem great,
but 'tis the fire rak’d up that has the heat,
and keeps it long.
to rar. e. v. n.
1. to scarch ; to grope.
or noisomness.
shakesp. henry viii.
suckling.
it has always an idea of coarseness
if you hide the crown
ev’n in your hearts, there will he rake for it. shakespeare.
it is as offensive, as to rake into a dunghill. south.
another finds the way to dye in grain ;
or for the golden ore in rivers rakes,
then melts the mass. dryden's persius.
one is for raking in chaucer for antiquated words, which
are never to be revived, but when sound or significancy is
wanting. dryden.
after having made essays into it, as they do for coal in
england, they rake into the most promising parts. addison.
2. to pass with violence.
when pas hand reached him to take,
the fox on knees and elbows tumbled down :
pas could not stay, but over him did rake,
and crown'd the earth with his first touching crown. sidney.
the belgians tack upon our rear,
and raking chase-guns through our sterns they send. dryd.
ra(ke r. n.s.. [from rake..] one that rakes.
ra/kehell. m. s. [of this word the etymology is doubtful: as
it is now written, it is apparently derived from rake and hell,
and may aptly represent a wretch whose life is passed in places
of lewdness and wickedness: skinner derives it from racaille,
french, the rabble ; junius, from rekel, dutch, a mongrel
dog.] a wild, worthless, dissolute, debauched, sorry fellow.
out of the frie of these rakehell horse-boys, growing up
in knavery and villainy, are their kern supplied. speoser.
the king, when he heard of perkins's fiege of exeter,
said in sport, that the king of raschells was landed in the
west, and that he hoped now to see him. bacon.
a rakehell of the town, whose character is set off with ex-
cessive prodigality, prophaneness, intemperance and lust, is re.
warded with a lady of great fortune to repair his own, which
his vices had almost ruined. swift.
ra’ke helly. adj. [from rakehell.] wild; dissolute.
i scorn the rakehely rout of our ragged rhimers, which
without learning boast, without judgment jangle, and with-
out reason rage and foam. spenser's pastorals.
no breaking of windows or glasses for spight,
and spoiling the goods for a rakshelly prank. ben. johnson,
ra'k is h. adj. [from rake j loose ; lewd ; dissolute.
there seldom can be peculiarity in the love of a rakis,
heart. clariffa.
to ra'lly. v. a, srallier, fr j
1. to put disordered or dispersed forces into order.
with rallied arms to try what may be yet
regain’d in heav'n. milton.
publick arguing serves to whet the wits of hereticks, and
by she wing weak parts of their doctrines, prompts them to
rally all their sophistry to fortify them with fallacy. d. of piety.
luther deters men from solitariness; but he does not mean
from a sober solitude, that rallies our scattered strengths, and
prepares us against any new encount.crs from without. atterb.
2. [railler, fr.] to treat with slight contempt ; to treat with
satirical merriment.
honeycomb has not lived a month, for these forty years,
out of the smoke of london, and rallies me upon a country
life. addison’s spectator.
if after the reading of this letter, you find yourself in a
humour rather to rally and ridicule, than to comfort me, i
desire you would throw it into the fire. addison.
strephon had long confess'd his am’rous pain,
which gay corinna rally'd with disdain. gay.
to ra'lly. v. n.
1. to come together in a hurry.
if god should shew this perverse man a new heaven and
a new earth, springing out of nothing, he might say, that
innumerable parts of matter chanced just then to rally toge-
ther, and to form themselves into this new world. tillom.
2. to come again into order.
the grecians rally, and their pow'rs unite;
with fury charge us. dryden's afneis:
3. to exercise satirical merriment.
ram. n. s. snam, saxon ; ram, dutch..]
1. a male sheep; in some provinces, a tup.
the ewes, being rank, turned to the rams. shaks).
an old sheep-whistling rogue, a ram tender. shakesp.
much like a well growne bel-weather, or feltred ram he
shews. chapm.an.
you may draw the bones of a ram's head hung with strings
of beads and ribbands. peacham on drawing.
a ram their off'ring, and a ram their meat. dryden.
2. aries, the vernal sign.
the ram having pass'd the sca, serenely shines,
and leads the year. creech’s manilius.
3. an instrument with an iron head to batter walls.
let not the piece of virtue,
which is set as the cement of our love,
to keep it builded, be the ran to batter
the fortress of it. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
judas calling upon the lord, who without any rams or
engines of war did cast down jericho, gave a fierce affault
against the walls.
to ram. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to drive with violence, as with a battering ram.
ram thou thy faithful tidings in mine ears,
that long time have been barren. . shakoffeare.
having no artillery nor cngines, and finding that he could
do no good by ramming with logs of timber, he set one of
the gates on fire. bacon's henry vii.
the charge with bullet, or paper wet and hard stopped,
or with powder alone rammed in hard, maketh no great dif-
ference in the loudness of the report.
here many poor people roll in vast balls of snow, which
they ram together, and cover from the sun shine. addison.
2. to fill with any thing driven hard together.
as when that devilish iron engine wrought
in deepest bell, and fram'd by furies skill,
with windy nitre and quick sulphur fraught,
and ramm'd with bullet round ordain’d to kill.
he that proves the king,
to him will we prove loyal ; till that time, -
have we ramm’d up our gates against the world. shakesp.
they mined the walls, laid the powder, and rammed the
mouth, but the citizens made a countermine. haywara.
this into hollow engines, long and round,
thick ramin'd, at th' other bore with touch of fire
dilated
244ac, xii. 15. .
bacon's nat. hist."
soft-- *
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a m
dilated and infuriate, shall send forth
such implements of mischief, as shall dash
to pieces. milton’s paradise loss.
a ditch drawn between two parallel furrows, was filled
with some found materials, and rammed to make the founda-
tion solid. arbuthnot on coins.
ramage. m. s [from ramus, lat.] branches of trees.
to ramage. v. a. see to rummage.
i, ramble. v. n. [rammelen, dutch, to rove loosely in lust ;
ramb, swedish, to rove.] to rove loosely and irregularly ;
to wander, -
shame contracts the spirits, fixes the ramblings of fancy,
and gathers the man into himself. south.
he that is at liberty to ramble in perfeot darkness, what is
his liberty better than if driven up and down as a bubble by
the wind. - locke.
chapman has taken advantage of an immeasurable length
of verse, notwithstanding which, there is scarce any para-
phrase so loose and rambling as his. pope.
never ask leave to go abroad, for you will be thought an
idle rambling fellow. swift's direaions to footmen.
o'er his ample sides the rambling sprays
luxuriant shoot. thomson's spring.
ra(xible. n.s.. [from the verb.] wandering; irregular ex-
cursion.
this conceit puts us upon the ramble up and down for re-
lief, 'till very weariness brings is at last to ourselves. l’esir.
coming home after a short christmas ramble, i found a
letter upon my table. - swift.
he quits the narrow path of sense
for a dear ramble through impertinence. swift's mistel.
ra'mbler. m. s. [from ramble.] rover ; wanderer.
says the rambler, we must e'en beat it out. l’estrange.
ra'm booze. un. s. a drink made of wine, ale, eggs and sugar
ram buse. ; in the winter time; or of wine, milk, sugar and
rosewater in the summer time. bailey.
ra'mek1 n. m. s. [rameguins, fr.] in cookery, small slices
ra’meqy 1ns. { of bread covered with a farce of cheese and
eggs. bailey.
ra’ments. m. s. [ramenta, lat..] scrapings; shavings. dici.
rami fication. n.s. [ramification, fr. from ramus, latin.]
1. division or separation into branches; the act of branching out.
by continuation of profane histories or other monuments
kept together, the genealogies and ramjications of some single
families to a vast extension may be preserved. hale.
small branches.
as the blood and chyle pass together through the ramifica-
tions of the pulmonary artery, they will be still more per-
fectly mixed; but if a pipe is divided into branches, and these
again subdivided, the red and white liquors, as they pass
through the ramifications, will be more intimately mixed; the
more ramifications, the mixture will be the more perfect. arb.
to rami fy. v. a. [ramifier, fr. ramus and facio, lat.] to
separate into branches.
the mint, grown to have a pretty thick stalk, with the
various and rainfied roots, which it shot into the water, pre-
sented a spectacle not unpleasant to behold. boyle.
to ra's. ify. v. n. to be parted into branches.
asparagus affects the urine with a foetid smell, especially if
cut when they are white; when they are older, and begin to
ramify, they lose this quality. arbuthnot on aliments.
ra(mmer. m. s [from ram.]
1. an instrument with which any thing is driven hard.
the master bricklayer must try the foundations with an
iron crow and rammer, to see whether the foundations are
found. amoxon's mechanical exercises.
2. the stick with which the charge is forced into the gun.
a mariner loading a gun suddenly, while he was ramming
in a cartridge, the powder took fire, and shot the rammer out
of his hand. //?seman's surgery.
ra’m is h. adj. [from ram.] strong scented.
ra'mous. adj. [from ramus, latin.] branchy; consisting of
branches.
which vast contraction and expansion seems unintelligible,
by feigning the particles of air to be springy and ramous, or
rolled up like hoops, or by any other means than a repulsive
power. newton's opticks.
a ramous efflorescence, of a fine white spar, found hang-
ing from a crust of like spar, at the top of an old wrought
2.
cavern. - woodward on foji.
to ramp. v. n. [ramper, french; rampare, italian ; nempen,
saxon.]
1. to leap with violence.
foaming tarr, their bridles they would champ,
and trampling the fine element, would fiercely ramp. spens.
out of the thickest wood
a ramping lyon rushed suddenly,
hunting full greedy after savage blood. spenser.
they gape upon me with their mouths; as a ramping and
roaring lion. psalm xxii. 13.
upon a bull, that deadly bellowed, -
two horrid lions rampt, and seiz'd, and tugg’d. chapman:
sporting the lion ramp'd; and in his paw
dandled the kid. milton,
2. to climb as a plant.
furnished with claspers and tendrils, they catch hold of
them, and so ramping upon trees, they mount up to a great
height. ray on the creation.
ramp. m. s. [from the verb.] leap; spring.
he is vaulting variable ramps,
in your despight, upon your puse. shał sp. cymbeline.
the bold ascalonite
fled from his lion ramp, old warriors turn’d -
their plated backs under his heel. milton's ajonisłes.
rampa1 li an. m. s. a mean wretch. not in use.
away you scullion, you ram; allian, you fusti.arian. shak.
rampa ncy. m. s. [from rampant j prevalence; exubera ce.
as they are come to this height and rampancy of vice, from
the countenance of their betters, so they have took some steps
in the same, that the extravagances of the young carry with
them the approbation of the old. south.
rampant. adj. [rampant, fr. from ramp.]
i. exuberant; overgrowing restraint. -
the foundation of this behaviour towards persons set apart
for the service of god, can be nothing else but atheism ; the
growing rampant sin of the times. south.
the seeds of death grow up, till, like rampant weeds,
they choak the tender flower of life. clarija.
2. [in heraldry.]
rampant is when the lion is reared up in the escutcheon, as
it were ready to combate with his enemy. peacham.
if a lion were the proper coat of judah, yet were it not
probable a lion rampant, but couchant or dormant. brown.
the lion rampant shakes his brinded mane. a4ilton.
to rampart. r. v. a. [from the noun j. to fortify with ram-
to rampire, : parts. not in use.
set but thy foot - -
against our rampir'd gates, and they shall ope, shakos.
the marquis direeted part of his forces to rampart the gates
and ruinous places of the walls. hayward.
ra'mpart, - -
ra'mpire. }*s. [rempart, fr.]
1. the platform of the wall behind the parapet.
2. the wall round fortified places.
she felt it, when past preventing, like a river; no rampire,
being built against it, till already it have overflowed. sidney.
yo' have cut a way for virtue, which our great men
held shut up, with all ramparts, for themselves. b. johns.
he who endeavours to know his duty, and practises what
he knows, has the equity of god to stand as a mighty wall or
rampart between him and damnation for any infirmities, south.
the son of thetis, rampire of our host,
is worth our care to keep. dryden.
the trojans round the place a rampire cast,
and palisades about the trenches plac'd. dryden.
no standards, from the hostile ramparts torn,
can any future honours give
to the victorious monarch's name. prior.
ra'mpions. m. s. [rapunculus, lat..] a plant. miller.
rampion is a plant, whose tender roots are eaten in the
spring, like those of radishes, mortimer's husbandry.
ram sons. n. s. [allium ursinum solves re.] an herb. ainsworth.
ran. preterite of run.
the dire example ran through all the field,
till heaps of brothers were by brothers kill’d. addison.
to ranch. v. a. [corrupted from wrench.] to sprain; to
injure with violent contortion. this is the proper sense, but,
in dryden, it seems to be to tear. .
against a stump his tusk the monster grinds,
and ranch'd his hips with one continu’d wound.
emeticks ranch, and keen catharticks scour.
ra'ncid. adj. [rancidus, lat.j strong scented.
the oil, with which fishes abound, often turns rancid, and
lies heavy on the stomach, and affects the very sweat with a
dryden.
garth.
rancid smell. arbuthnot on aliments.
ra'ncidness. ln. s. [from rancid; rancor, lat.j strong scent,
ranci/dity. as of old oil.
ra'ncorous. adj. [from rancour.] malignant; malicious;
spiteful in the utmost degree.
so flam'd his eyen with rage and rancorous ire.
because i cannot
duck with french nods and apish courtesy, -
i must be held a rancorous enemy. shakesp. rich. iii.
the most powerful of these were pharisees and sadduces;
of whose chief doctrines some notice is taken by the evange-
lists, as well as of their rancorous opposition to the gospel of
christ. west on the rosurreaion.
ra'ncorously. adv. [from rancorous.] malignantly.
rancour, n.s. [rancoeur, old fr.]
1. inveterate malignity; malice; stedfast implacability; stand-
ing hate.
spenser.
his breast full of rancor like canker to freat. tuscr.
as two brave knights in bloody fight
with deadly rancour he cnranged found. *"...i
all<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a n
r a n
all the way that they fled for very rantour and despite ; in
their return, they utterly consumed and wasted whatsoever
they had before left unspoiled. spensar's state of ireland.
rancour will out, proud prelate ; in thy face
i see thy fury. shakesp. henry vi.
it issues from the rancour of a villain,
a recreant and most degen'rate traitor.
such ambush
waited with hellish rancour imminent. milton.
no authors draw upon themselves more displeasure, than
those who deal in political matters, which is justly incurred,
considering that spirit of rancour and virulence, with which
works of this nature abound. addison's freeholder.
presbyterians and their abettors, who can equally go to a
church or conventicle, or such who bear a personal rancour
shakesp. rich. ii.
towards the clergy. swift.
2. virulence; corruption.
for banquo's issue, duncan have i murther'd ;
put rantour in the vessel of my peace
only for them. shakesp. macbeth.
rand. m. s. [rand, dutch..] border; seam: as, the rand of
a woman's shoe.
random. n.s. [randon, fr.j want of direetion ; want of
rule or method; chance ; hazard; roving motion.
for, not to speake
at needy random ; but my breath to breake
in sacred oath, ulysses shall return. chapman.
thy words at random argue inexperience. milton.
he lies at random carelessly diffus'd,
with languish'd head unpropt,
as one past hope abandon'd. milton.
fond love his darts at random throws,
and nothing springs from what he sows. waller.
the striker must be dense, and in its best velocity: the
angle, which the misfive is to mount by, if we will have it
go to its furthest random, must be the half of a right one ;
and the figure of the missive must be such, as may give scope
to the air to bear it. digby.
in the days of old the birds lived at random in a lawless
islate of anarchy; but in time they moved for the setting up
of a king. l’estrange's fables.
who could govern the dependance of one event upon an-
other, if that event happened at random, and was not cast
into a certain relation to some foregoing purpose to direct.
south's sermons.
'tis one thing when a person of true merit is drawn as like
as we can ; and another, when we make a fine thing at ran-
dom, and persuade the next vain creature that 'tis his own
likeness. pope.
random. adj. done by chance; roving without direetion.
virtue borrow'd but the arms of chance,
and struck a random blow ! 'twas fortune's work,
and fortune take the praise. dryden.
ra'n force. m. s. the ring of a gun next the touch-hole. bailey.
ran g. preterite of ring.
complaints were sent continually up to rome, and rang
all over the empire. grew's cosmol.
to range. v. a. [ranger, fr. rhenge, welsh.]
1. to place in order ; to put in ranks.
maccabeus ranged his army by bands, and went against
timotheus. 2 mac. xii. 20.
he saw not the marquis till the battle was ranged. clarend.
somewhat rais'd
by false presumptuous hope, the ranged pow'rs
disband, and wand'ring each his several way
pursues. milton.
men, from the qualities they find united in them, and
wherein they observe several individuals to agree, range them
into sorts for the convenience of comprehensive signs. locke.
a certain form and order, in which we have long accus-
tomed ourselves to range our ideas, may be best for us now,
though not originally best in itself. watts.
2, to rove over.
to the copse thy lesser spaniel take,
teach him to range the ditch and force the brake.
to rang e. v. n.
1. to rove at large.
caesar's spirit ranging for revenge,
with ate by his side come hot from hell,
shall in these confines, with a monarch's voice,
cry havock, and let slip the dogs of war. shakespeare.
! saw him in the battle range about ;
and watch'd him, how he singled clifford forth. shakesp.
as a roaring lion and a ranging bear ; so is a wicked ruler
over the poor people. prov. xxviii. 15.
other animals una&amp;tive range,
gay.
and of their doings god takes no account. milton.
thanks to my stars, i have not rang'd about
the wilds of life, ere i could find a friend. addison.
2. to be placed in order, to be ranked properly.
'tis better to be lowly born,
and range with humble livers in content,
than to be perk'd up in a glist'ring grief,
and wear a golden sorrow. shakesp. henry viii.
that is the way to lay the city flat,
to bring the roof to the foundation,
and bury all which yet distinetly ranges,
in heaps of ruin.
3. to lye in a particular dire&amp;tion.
direa my course so right, as with thy hand to show,
which way the forests range, which way thy rivers flow. dra.
range. n.s. [rangee, fr. from the verb.j
1. a rank; any thing placed in a line. .
you fled
from that great face of war, whose several ranges
frighted each other. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
the light, which passed through its several interstices,
painted so many ranges of colours, which were parallel and
contiguous, and without any mixture of white. newton.
from this walk you have a full view of a huge range of
mountains, that lie in the country of the grisons. addison.
these ranges of barren mountains, by condensing the va-
pours and producing rains, fountains and rivers, give the very
plains that fertility they boast of. bentley's sermans.
2. a class ; an order.
the next range of beings above him are the immaterial
intelligences, the next below him is the sensible nature. hale.
3. excursion; wandering.
he may take a range all the world over, and draw in all
that wide circumference of sin and vice, and center it in his
own breast. south's sermons.
4. room for excursion. -
a man has not enough range of thought, to look out for
any good which does not relate to his own interest. addison.
5. compass taken in by anything excursive, extended, or ranked
in order.
the range and compass of hammond's knowledge filled
shakesp. coriolanai.
the whole circle of the arts. fell.
far as creation's ample range extends,
the scale of sensual mental pow'rs ascends. pope.
judge we by nature ? habit can efface;
affections they still take a wider range. pope.
6. step of a ladder.
the liturgy, practised in england, would kindle that jea-
lousy, as the prologue to that design, and as the first range of
that ladder, which should serve to mount over all their
customs. - clarendon.
7. a kitchen grate.
it was a vaultybuilt for great dispence,
with many ranges rear'd along the wall,
and one great chimney. spenser.
the buttery must be visible, and we need for our ranges,
a more spacious and luminous kitchen. wotton's architect.
the implements of the kitchen are spits, ranges, cobirons
and pots. bacon's physical remains.
he was bid at his first coming to take off the range, and
let down the cinders. l'estrange.
8. a bolting sieve to fift meal. dief.
ranger. n.s.. [from range.]
1. one that ranges; a rover; a robber.
they walk not widely, as they were woont,
for fear of raungers and the great hoont,
but privily prolling to and fro. spenser's pastorals.
come, says the ranger, here's neither honour nor money
to be got by staying. l’estrange.
2. a dog that beats the ground.
let your obsequious ranger search around,
nor will the roving spy direct in vain,
but numerous coveys gratify thy pain. gay's rural sports.
3. an officer who tends the game of a forest.
their father tyrrheus did his fodder bring,
tyrrheus chief ranger to the latian king.
rank. adj. [nanc, saxon.]
1. high growing ; strong; luxuriant.
down with the grasse,
that groweth in shadow so ranke and so stout.
is not thilk same goteheard proud,
that sits in younder bank,
whose straying heard themselfe shrowde
emong the bushes rank. spenser.
who would be out, being before his beloved mistress 2
—that should you, if i were your mistress, or i should
think my honesty ranker than my wit. shakespeare.
in which disguise,
while otherjests are something rank on foot,
her father hath commanded her to slip
away with slender. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
team lastly thither com’n with water is so rank,
as though she would contend with sabryn. drayton.
hemp most hugely rank. drayton.
seven ears came up upon one stalk, rank and good. geness,
they fancy that the difference lies in the manner of ap-
pulse, one being made by a fuller or ranker appulse than the
other. holder's elements of speech.
the
dryden.
toser.
r
4.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">f–
}
th:
ro:
\\ .
.
*:--
r a n
the most plentiful season, that gives birth to the finest
flowers, produces also the rank/t weeds. . aldison.
2. fruitful; bearing strong plants. -
seven thousand broad-tail'd sheep graz'd on his downs ;
three thousand camels his rank pastures fed. sandys.
where land is rank, 'tis not good to sow wheat after a
fallow. mortimer's husbandry.
3. [rancidus, lat.) strong scented; rancid. . . . :
rank smelling rue, and cumulin good for eyes. spensor.
in their thick breaths, . . . . . . . .
rank of gross diet, shall we be enclouded, - :
and forc'd to drink their vapour. shakesp. cymbeline.
the ewes, being rank,
in the end of autumn turned to the rams... , shakesp.
the drying marshes such a stench convey, , .
such the rank steams of recking albula. . . . addison.
hircina, rank with sweat, presumes ..., * --
to censure phillis for perfumes. swift's miscellanies.
4. high tasted ; strong in quality. . . . . . * * *
such animals as feed upon flesh, because such kind of food
is high and rank, qualify it ; the one by swallowing the hair
of the beasts they prey upon, the other by devouring some
part of the feathers of the birds they gorge themselves with.
ray on the creation.
divers sea fowl taste rank of the fish on which they
feed. boyle.
bizantium's hot-bed better serv'd for use,
the soil less stubborn, and more rank the juice. harte.
5. rampant; highgrown; raised to a high degree.
for you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother
would infect my mouth, i do forgive
thy rankest faults. shakesp. tempes'.
this epiphanius cries out upon as rank idolatry, and the
device of the devil, who always brought in idolatry under fair
pretences. stillingfect's def. of discourse on roman idol.
'tis pride, rank pride, and haughtiness of soul,
the romans call it stoicism. addison's cato.
this power of the people in athens, claimed as the un-
doubted privilege of an athenian born, was the ranks! en-
croachment and the grossest degeneracy from the form solon
left. swift.
6. gross; coarse. -
my wife's a hobby-horse, deserves name
as rank as any flax-wench, that puts to
before her troth-plight. - shakesp. winter's tale.
7. the iron of a plane is set rank, when its edge stands so flat
below the sole of the plane, that in working it will take off
a thick shaving. moxon's mechanical exercises.
rank. m. s. [rang, fr.]
1. line of men placed a-breast.
fierce fiery warriours fight upon the clouds,
in ranks, and squadrons, and right form of war,
which drizzled blood upon the capitol. shakespeare.
i have seen the cannon,
when it hath blown his ranks into the air.
shakespeare.
is’t not pity -
that we, the sons and children of this isle,
fill up her enemies ranks p shakesp. king john.
his horse-troupes, that the vantgard had, he strictly did
command,
toride their horses temperatley,to keepetheir rankes, and shun
confusion. chapman.
2. a row.
west of this place down in the neighbour bottom,
the rank of osiers, by the murmuring stream,
left on your right hand brings you to the place. shakesp.
a sylvan scene, and as the ranks ascend
shade above shade, a woody theatre. milton.
if she walk, in even ranks they stand,
like some well-marshall'd and obsequious band. waller.
he cou’d through ranks of ruin go,
with storms above and rocks below.
3. range of subordination.
that state, or condition, by which the nature of anything
is advanced to the utmost perfection of which it is capable,
according to its rank and kind, is called the chief end or
happiness of such a thing. wilkins.
the wisdom and goodness of the maker plainly appears in
the parts of this stupendous fabrick, and the several degrees
and ranks of creatures in it. - locke.
4. class; order. s , - 4
the enchanting power of prosperity over private persons is
remarkable in relation to great kingdoms, where all ranks
and orders of men, being equally concerned in publick bles-
* -
sings, equally join in spreading the infection. atterbury.
nor rank, nor sex escapes the general frown,
but ladies are ript up, and cits knock'd down. 1%ung.
5. degree of dignity; eminence ; or excellence.
her charms have made me man, her ravish'd love
in rank shall place me with the bless'd above. dryden.
these all are virtues of a meaner rank,
perfeotions that are plac’d in bones and nerves. addison.
vol. ii.
. . . . himself with princes.
dryden's horace. …
r a n
he found many of the chief rank and figure overwhelmed
in publick and private vices. . . . . davenant.
lepidus's house, which in his consulate was the finest in
rome, within thirty-five years was not in the hundredth
rank. . * * * . . . . " a', buthnot on coins.
6. dignity; bigh place: as, he is a man of rank.
jo rank. v. a. [ranger, fr. from the noun.j
1. to place a-breaft. . . . . . . - -
in view stood rank'd of seraphin another row. mohan.
2. to range in any particular class. , o' -
ou, - if sour woe delights in fellowship, * - f'
... no and needly will be rank'd with other griefs; o
ot, or why follow'd not, when she said tybalt's dead,
o, o thy father or thy mother, ovo o - shakosheare.
s or o, . . . . . . . . he was a man to . .
- - - of an unbounded flomach, ever ranking - “... ."
shakes. harry viii.
heresy is ranked with idolatry and witchcraft. doz. of p.
i have ranked this diversion of christian practice among the
effects of our contentions. . . . . . . decay of piety.
poets were ranked in the class of philosophers, and the am-
cients made use of them as preceptors in musick and mo-
rality. broome's notes on the odyssey.
3. to arrange methodically. - * * * * * .* . .
much is said touching the ranking of dignities as well
temporal as spiritual. * * * * * &gt; . . . " selden.
who now shall rear you to the sun, or rank
your tribes. - • milton.
ranking all things under general and special heads, renders
the nature or uses of a thing more easy to be found out, when
we seek in what rank of beings it lies. watts's logick.
to rank. v. n. to be ranged; to be placed. -
let that one article rank with the rest;
and thereupon give me your daughter. shakespeare.
from straggling mountaineers, for publick good,
go rank in tribes, and quit the savage wood. . . . tote.
to rankle. v. m. [from rank.] to fester; to breed cor-
ruption; to be inflamed in body or mind. :
as when two boars with rankling malice met, “
their gory sides fresh bleeding fiercely fret. o' spenser.
i little smart did feel ; . * --&gt;
and now it rankleth more and more, * * .
and inwardly it festereth sore. spenser's posioral.
that fresh bleeding wound -
whilome doth rankle in my riven breast. spenser.
beware of yonder dog;
look, when he fawns, he bites; and, when he bites,
his venom tooth will rankle to the death. shakespeare.
the storm of his own rage the fool confounds,
and envy's rankling sting th' imprudent wounds. sandys.
thou shalt feel, enrag’d with inward pains,
the hydra's venom rankling in thy veins. addison.
i have endur'd the rage of secret grief,
a malady that burns and rankles inward. rowe.
rankly. adv. [from rank.] coarsely; grossly. . .
'tis given out, that, sleeping in my garden,
a serpent stung me: so the whole ear of denmark
is, by a forged process of my death,
rankly abus’d. - ** shakesh. hamlet.
ra'nkness. n.s.. [from rank.] exuberance; superfluity of
growth. --
it bringeth forth abundantly, through too much ran ones,
things less profitable, whereby that which principally it should
yield, being either prevented in place, or defrauded of nourish-
ment, faileth. * hooker.
begin you to grow upon me; i will physick your rankness.
shakesp. as you like it.
among the crowd i' th' abbey, where a finger
could not be wedg’d in more ; i am stifled “
with the mere rankness of their joy. shakesp. henry viii.
, , . we’ll like a bated and retired flood, “ . .
leaving our rankness and irregular course,
stoop low within those bounds, we have o'erlook'd. shak.
the crane's pride is in the rankness of her wing. l'e/ir.
he the stubborn soil manur’d,
with rules of husbandry the rankness cur'd ;
tam'd us to manners. dryden.
ra'nny. n.s. the shrewmouse.
the musaraneus, the shrewmouse or ranny. brown.
to ra'n sack. v. a. [nan, saxon, and saka, swedish, to search
for or seize.]
1. to plunder; to pillage.
a covetous spirit,
warily awaited day and night,
from other covetous fiends it to defend,
who it to rob and ransack did intend. , , spensor. -
their vow is made to ransack troy. shakespeare.
men by his suggestion taught,
ramsack'd the centre, and with impious hands
rifled the bowels of the earth. milton.
the ransack'd city, taken by our toils,
we left, and hither brought the golden spoils. dryden.
21 f t he<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a p
r a p
the spoils which they from ransack'd houses brought,
and golden bowls from burning altars caught. dryden.
2. to search narrowly.
i ransack the feveral caverns, and search into the store-
houses of water, to find out where that mighty mass of water,
which ovel flowed the earth, is bestowed. //oodward.
3. to violate; to deflower.
with greedy force he 'gan the fort assail,
whereof he weened possessed soon to be,
and with rich spoil of ransacked chastity. spensor.
ra'nsom e. m. s. . fr.] price paid for redemption
from captivity or punishment.
by his captivity in austria, and the heavy ransom that he
paid for his liberty, richard was hindered to pursue the con-
quest of ireland. davies on ireland.
ere the third dawning light
return, the stars of morn shall see him rise,
the ranson paid, which man from death redeems,
his death for man. milton's paradise loft.
has the prince lost his army or his liberty
tell me what province they demand for ansom. denham.
this as a ransm albemarie did pay, -
for all the glories of so great a lisc. dryden.
to adore that great mystery of divine love, god's sending
his only son into this world to save sinners, and to give his
life a jansom for then, would be noble exercise for the pens
of the greatest wits. - tillotson.
th’ avenging pow'r
thus will persist, relentless in his ire,
till the fair slave be render'd to her fire,
and ransom free restor'd to his abode. dryden.
to ra’nso m.e. v. a. [ranconner, fr.] to redeem srom capti-
vity or punishment.
how is't with titus lartius *
—condemning some to death and some to exile,
ransoming him, or pitying, threatning the other. shakes.
i will ranjoon then from the grave, and redeem them from
death. hosea xiii. 14.
he'll dying rise, and rising with him raise
his brethren, ransom'd with his own dear life. milton.
ra’ssom e.r. m. s. [from ransom.] one that redeems.
ran sox. el ess. adj. [from ransome.] free from ransome.
rajsamaly; here we set our prisoners frce. shakespeare.
ideliver him
up to his pleasure raisoeles; and free. shakspeare.
t. rant. v. n. [randon, dutch, to rave.] to rave in vio-
lent or high sounding language without proportionable dignity
of thought.
ilook where my ranting host of the garter comes ; there
is either liquor in his pate, or money in his purse, when he
looks io merrily. shakesp. merry of ives of //indsor.
nay, an thou’lt mouth, i'll ant as well as thou. shak.
they have attacked me; some with piteous moans, others
grinning and only slewing their teeth, others ranting and
hectoring, others scolding and reviling. stillingfleet.
rant. n.s.. [from the verb.] high sounding language unsup-
ported by dignity of thought.
dryden himself, to please a frantick age,
was forc’d to let his judgment stoop to rage,
to a wild audience he conform'd his voice,
comply'd to custom, but not err'd through choice;
deem then the people's, not the writer's sin,
almansor's rage, and rants of maximin. granville.
this is a stoical rant, without any foundation in the nature
of man or reason of things. .#tterbury's preface,
ranter. m. s. [from rant..] a ranting fellow.
ra’nt 1 pole. adj. [this word is wantonly formed from rant.]
wild; roving ; rakish. a low word. -
what at years of discretion, and comport yourself at this
rantipole rate congreve's iłay of the iworld.
to rantipol e. v. m. to run about wildly. a low word.
the eldest was a termagant imperious wench; she used to
rantipole about the house, pinch the children, kick the ser-
vants, and torture the cats and dogs. arbuthnot.
ranula. m. s. [latin j
ranula is a soft swelling, possessing the salivals under the
tongue: it is made by congestion, and its progress filleth up
the space between the jaws, and maketh a tumor externally
under the chin. j/ijeman's surgery.
ranu'nculus, m. s. crowfoot.
ranunculus's excel all flowers in the richness of their co-
lours : of them there is a great variety. mortimer.
to rap. v. n. [hnaeppan, saxon.]
1. to strike with a quick smart blow.
knock me at this gate -
and rap me well, or i'll knock your knave's pate. shakesp.
with one great peal they rap the door,
like footmen on a visiting day. prior.
2. to rap out. to utter with hasty violence.
he was provoked in the spirit of magistracy, upon disco-
vering a judge, who rasped out a great oath at his footman:
addison.
*
5
t, rap. v. a. [from rapio extra se, lat.]
1. to affect with rapture; to strike with extasy; to hurry out
of himself.
these are speeches of men, not comforted with the hope
of that they desire, but rapped with admiration at the view
of enjoyed bliss. hooker.
beholding the face of god, in admiration of so great ex-
cellency, they all adore him ; and being rapt with the love of
his beauty, they cleave inseparably for ever unto him. hooker.
what thus raps you ? are you well ? shakesp.
the government 1 cast upon my brother,
and to my state grew stranger, being transported
and rapt in secret studies. shakes eare.
you're rapt in some work, some dedication. słasyp.
circl'd me
with all their welcomes, and as chearfully
disposde their rapt minds, as if there they saw
their naturall countrie. chapman.
of . the rocks that did more high their foreheads raise
* to his rapt eye. chapman.
i'm rapt with joy to see my marcia's tears. addis. cato.
it is impossible duly to consider these things, without being
rapt into admiration of the infinite wisdom of the divine ar.
chitect. cloyne's philosophical principles.
raft into future times, the bard begun,
a virgin shall conceive, a virgin bear a son pope.
let heav'n seize it, all at once ’tis fir’d,
not touch'd, but rapt ; not waken'd, but inspir’d. pope.
2. to snatch away.
he leaves the welkin way most beaten plain,
and rapt with whirling wheels, inflames the skyen,
with fire not made to burn, but fairly for to shyne. spensor.
underneath a bright sea slow'd
of jasper, or of liquid-pearl, whereon
who after came from earth, sailing arriv'd
waffed by angels, or fiew o'er the lake
raft in a chariot drawn by fiery steeds. a filton.
standing on earth, not rapt above the pole. 41ilton.
3. to seize by violence.
adult’rous jour, the king of mambrant, rap’d
fair josian his dear love. drayton.
4. to exchange; to truck. a low word.
to rap and rand. [more properly rap and ran; raepan, saxon;
to bond, and rana, islandick, to plunder.] to seize by
violence.
their husbands robb'd, and made hard shifts
to administer unto their gifts
all they could rap and rend and pilfer,
. to scraps and ends of gold and silver. hudibras,
rap. m. s. [from the verb.] a quick smart blow.
how comest thou to go with thy arm tied up has old
lewis given thee a rap over thy fingers ends? arbuthnct.
rapa’cious, a j...[rapace, fr. rapax, lat.] given to plun-
der ; seizing by violence.
well may thy lord, appeas'd,
redeem thee quite from death's rapacious claim. 4silton.
shall this prize,
soon heighten’d by the diamond's circling rays,
on that rapacious hand for ever blaze? pope.
rapa’ciously, adv. [from rapacious.] by rapine ; by violent
robbery.
rapa’cious ness. m. s. [from rapacious.] the quality of
being rapacious.
rapa city. n. / [rapacitas, lat: rapacite, fr. from rapax.]
addictedness to plunder ; exercise of plunder; ravenousness.
* any of these, without regarding the pains of churchmen,
grudge them those small remains of ancient piety, which the
rapacity of some ages has scarce left to the church. spratt.
rap e. m. s. [rapt, fr. raptus, latin.]
1. violent defloration of chastity.
you are both decypher'd
for villains mark'd with rape. shaksp. titus andronicus.
rape call you it, to seize my own, -
my true betrothed love. shakesp. titus andronicus.
the parliament conceived, that the obtaining of women by
force into possession, howsoever afterwards assent might follow
by allurements, was but a rape drawn forth in length, because
the first force drew on all the rest. bacon's henry vii.
witness that night
in gibeah, when the hospitable door
expos'd a matron, to avoid worse rape. milton.
the haughty fair,
who not the rape ev’n of a god could bear. dryden.
tell the thracian tyrant’s alter'd shape,
and dire revenge of philomela's rape. roscommon.
2. privation; act of taking away.
pear grew after pear,
fig after fig came; time made never rape
of any dainty there. chapman's qasy.
3. something snatched away.
sad widows by thee rifled, weep in vain,
and ruin'd orphans of thy rapes complain. sandyt.
where
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a p
r a r
r
o
32.
2c
where now are all my hopes oh never more -
shall they revive nor death her rapes restore sandys.
4. the juice of grapes is drawn as well from the rape, or
whole grapes pluck'd from the cluster, and wine pour’d upon
them in a vessel, as from a vat, where they are bruised. ray.
5. a division of the county of sussex answering to a hundred
in other counties.
6. a plant, from the seed of which oil is expressed.
rap. d. adj. [rapids, fr. rapidus, lat.] quick; swift.
part shun the goal with rapid wheels. asilion.
while you so snoothly turn and rowl our sphere,
that rapid motion does but rest appear. dryden.
rap1’d ity. m. s. [rapidite, fr. rapiditas, from rapidus, latj
celerity; velocity; swiftness.
where the words are not monosyllables, we make them so
by our rapidity of pronunciation. addison's sprelator.
rap1’dly. adv. [from rapid.] swiftly ; with quick motion.
rapidness. n.f. [from rapid.] celerity; swiftness.
rapier. m. s. [rapiere, fr. so called from the quickness of its
mction.] a small sword used only in thrusting.
i will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
where it was forged, with my rapier's point. shakesp.
a soldier of far inferior strength may manage a rapier or
fire-arms so expertly, as to be an overmatch for his adver-
sary. pope's psy on homer's lattles.
rapier-fis h. m. s
the rapier-fish, called xiphias, grows sometimes to the
length of five yards: the sword, which grows level from the
snout of the fish, is here about a yard long, at the basis four
inches over, two-edged, and pointed exactly like a rapier: he
preys on fishes, having first stabbed them with this sword.
- grew's 44 yearn.
ra'pin e. m. s. [raftina, lat. rapine, fr.]
1. the act of plundering.
if the poverty of scotland might, yet the plenty of eng-
land cannot, excuse the envy and rapine of the church's
rights. izing charles.
the logick of a conquering sword may silence, but con-
vince it cannot ; its efficacy rather breeds aversion and abhor-
rence of that religion, whose first address is in blood and ra-
pine. decay of pity.
2. violence ; force.
her least action overaw’d
his malice, and with rapine sweet bercav'd -
his fierceness of its fierce intent. a filton.
ra’pper. m. s. (from rap.] one who strikes.
rap pok t. n.s. (rappat, fr.] relation ; reference ; propor-
tion. . a word introduced by the innovator, temple, but not
copied by others.
'tis obvious what rapport there is between the conceptions
and languages in every country, and how great a difference
this must make in the excellence of books. temple.
to rapt. v. n. [this word is used by chapman for rap impro-
perly, as appears from the participle, which from rapt would
be not rapt, but rapted.]. to ravish ; to put in ecstasy.
you may safe approve,
how strong in instigation to their love
their rapting tunes are. chapman's odyssy.
rapt. n.s.. [from rap.] a trance; an ecstasy. -
ra(pture. m. s.
1. violent seizure.
and thicke into our ship, he threw his flash:
that 'gainst a rocke, or flat, her keele, did dash
with headlong rapture. chapman.
2. ecstasy ; transport; violence of any pleasing passion; en-
thusiasm ; uncommon heat of imagination.
could virtue be seen, it would beget love, and advance it
not only into admiration, but rapture. hayday.
musick, when thus applied, raises in the mind of the hearer
great conceptions; it strengthens devotion, and advances
praise into rapture. addison's spedator.
you grow correot, that once with rapture writ. pope.
3. rapidity ; haste.
the wat'ry throng,
wave rowling after wave, where way they found,
if steep, with torrent rapture; if through plain
soft-ebbing; nor withstood them rock or hill. milton.
ra'ptured. adj. [from rapture..] ravished ; transported. a
bad word.
he drew
such madning draughts of beauty to the soul,
as for a while cancell'd his raptur'd thought
with luxury too daring. thomson's summer.
ra'ptu rous. adj. [from rapture.] ecstatick; transporting.
nor will he be able to forbear a rapturous acknowledgment
of the infinite wisdom and contrivance of the divine artificer.
blackmore.
are the pleasures of it so inviting and rapturous f is a man
bound to look out sharp to plague himself? callier.
: r are. adj. [rarus, lat. rare, fr. in all the senses but the
last.]
1- scarce; uncommon ; not frequent.
live to be the shew, and gaze o' th' time;
we’ll have you, as our rarer monsters are, -
painted upon a pole. shakespeare.
2. excellent; incomparable ; valuable to a degree seldom found.
this jealousy
is for a precious creature ; as she's rare,
must it be great ; and as his person's mighty,
must it be violent. - shas sp. jointer's tale.
on which was wrought the gods and giants fight,
rare work, all fill'd with terror and delight. cowley.
- above the rest i judge one beauty rare. dryden.
3. thinly scattered.
the cattle in the fields and meadows green
those rare and solitary, these in flocks -
pasturing at once, and in broad herds upsprung. a filton.
4. thin ; subtle; not dense.
they are of so tender and weak a nature, as they affect
only such a rare and attenuate substance, as the spirit of living
cicatul ics. , bacon's natural ilisory.
so eagerly the fiend
o'er bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
with head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way. a silton.
the dense and bright light of the circle will obscure the
rare and weak light of these dark colours round about it, and
render them almost insensible. , newton's opticos.
bodies are much more rare and porous than is commonly
believed : water is nineteen times lighter, and by consequence
nineteen times rarer than gold, and gold is so rare, as very
readily, and without the least opposition, to transmit the mag-
netick effiuvia, and easily to admit quicksilver into its porcs,
and to let water pass through it. newton's opticks.
5. raw ; not fully subdued by the fire. this is often pro-
nounced rear.
new-laid eggs, with baucis’ busy care,
turn’d by a gentle fire, and roasted rare. dryden.
ra’re e show. n.f. [this word is formed in imitation of the
foreign way of pronouncing rare show j a show carried in a
box.
the fashions of the town affe&amp;t us just like a rareeshow, we
have the curiosity to peep at them, and nothing more. pope.
of rare show; he sung, and punch's feats. gay.
raref ascot 10s. n.s. (raresaosion, fr. from raresy..] exten-
fion of the parts of a body, that makes it take up more room
than it did before ; contrary to condensation.
the water within being rarefied, and by raresacion resolved
into wind, will force up the smoak. l/otton's architecture.
when exhalations, shut up in the caverns of the earth by
rarfa'ssion or compression, come to be straitened, they strive
every way to set themselves at liberty. burnet.
ra’s e fiable. adj. [from rars; j admitting raresaction.
zo rarlfy. v. a. [rareffer, fr. ran us and facio, lat. rarify
were more proper.] to make thin: contrary to condrose.
to the hot equator crouding fast,
where highly rarefied the yielding air
admits their steam. - thomson,
to ra’re fy. v. n. to become thin. -
earth rarefies to dew ; expanded more
the subtil cew in air begins to soar.
ra/re ly. adv, [from rare.]
1. seldom ; not often ; not frequently.
his temperance in sleep resembled that of his meats;
mid-night being the usual time of his going to rest, and four
or five, and very rarely six, the hour of his rising. fell.
rarely they rise by virtue’s aid, who lie
plung'd in the depth of helpless poverty. dryden's juven.
vanesia in her bloom,
advanc'd like atalanta's star,
but rarely seen, and seen from far. swift's mistelanies.
2. finely ; nicely ; accurately. this is now seldom used but
ironically.
how rarely does it meet with this time's guise,
when man was will'd to love his enemies. shaksp.
ra’r eness. n.s.. [from rare.]
1. uncommonness; state of happening seldom ; infrequency.
tickling is most in the soles, arm-holes and sides: the cause
is the thinness of the skin, joined with the rareness of being
touched there ; for tickling is a light motion of the spirits,
which the thinness of the skin, the suddenness and rareness of
touch doth further. bacon.
for the rarens, and rare effe&amp;t of that petition, i’ll insert
it as presented. clarendon.
of my heart i now a present make : -
accept it as when early fruit we send,
and let the rareness the small gift commend. dryden.
2. value arising from scarcity.
roses set in a pool, supported with some stay, is matter of
rarens; and pleasure, though of small use. bacon.
to worthiest things,
virtue, art, beauty, fortune, now i see
dryden's fables.
rareness or use, not nature, value brings. ' donne. '
3. thinness; tenuity.
4. distance from each other; thinness.
- ra'rity.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a s
r a t
ra'r1ty. n.s. [rarita, fr. raritas, lat.]
1. uncommonness; infrequency.
far from being fond of any flower for its ra'ity, if i meet
with any in a field which pleases me, i give it a place in my
arden. speciator.
2. a thing valued for its scarcity.
sorrow would be a rarily most belov'd,
if all could so become it. shakesp. king lear.
it would be a rarity worth the seeing, could any one shew
us such a thing as a perfectly reconciled enemy. south.
i saw three rarities of different kinds, which pleased me
more than any other shows of the place. addison.
3. thinness ; subtlety: the contrary to density.
bodies, under the same outward bulk, have a greater thin-
ness and expansion, or thickness and solidity, which terms, in
english, do not signify fully those differences of quantity; there-
fore i will do it under the names of rarity and density. digiy.
this i do, not to draw any argument against them from
the universal rest or accurately equal diffusion of matter, but
only that i may better demonstrate the great rarity and tenuity
of their imaginary chaos. bentley's sermons.
rascal. m. s. [narcal, saxon, a lean beast.]
1. a mean fellow ; a scoundrel; a sorry wretch.
for the rostal commons, lest he cared. spenser.
and when him lift the rosal routs appal,
men into stones therewith he could transmew. spenser.
when marcus brutus grows so covetous
to lock such rostal counters from his friends:
be ready, gods, with all your thunder-bolts,
dash him to pieces. shakesp. julius caesar.
the rascal people, thirsting after prey,
join with the traitor. shakesp. henry vi.
but for our gentlemen,
the mouse ne'er shun'd the cat, as they did budge
from rostals worse than they. shakespeare.
i am accurst to rob in that thicf's company; the rastal hath
remov’d my horse. shakesp. henry iv.
scoundrels are insolent to their superiors; but it does not
become a man of honour to contest with mean rascals. l'e//r.
did i not see you, rascal, did i not
when you lay snug to snap young damon's goat? dryden.
i have sense, to serve my turn, in store,
and he's a rostal who pretends to more, dryden’s persus.
the poor girl provoked told him he lyed like a rascal. sw.
2. rascal deer, are still menticned for lean deer.
rasca lion. m. s. [from rascal.] one of the lowest people.
that proud dame
us'd him so like a base raftalion,
that old pig–what d'ye call him—malion,
that cut his mistress out of stone,
had not so hard a hearted one. hudibras.
rasca'lity. m. s. [from rascal.] the low mean people.
pretended philosophers judge as ignorantly in their way,
as the rascality in theirs. glanville's scepsis.
jeroboam having procured his people gods, the next thing
was to provide priests; hereupon, to the calves he adds a
commission, for the approving, trying and admitting the ros-
cality and lowest of the people to minister in that service. south.
ra'scall y. adj. [from rascal j mean ; worthless.
would'st thou not be glad to have the niggardly rasally
sheep-biter come by some notable shame. shakespeare.
our rascally porter is fallen fast asleep with the black cloth
and sconces, or we might have been tacking up by this
time. swift.
to ras e. v. a. [this word is written rase or raze: i would
write rase, when it signifies to strike slightly, persiringere; and
raze, when it signifies to ruin, delere; raser, fr. rasus, lat.]
i. to skim; to strike on the surface.
he certifies your lordship, that this night
he dreamt the boar had rased off his helm. shakespeare.
was he not in the nearest neighbourhood to death 2 and
might not the bullet, that rosed his cheek, have gone into
his head. south's sermons.
2. to overthrow ; to destroy; to root up.
her battering engines bent to rase some city. milton.
3. to blot out by rasure; to erase.
- though of their names in heav'nly records now
be no memorial, blotted out and rased. milton.
ra's e. m. s. [from to rase.]
1. a cancel.
2. a slight wound.
rash. adj. [rosch, dutch.]
1. hasty; violent; precipitate; acting without caution or reflestion.
this is to be bold without shame, rash without skill, full
of words without wit. astham's schoolmaster.
blast her pride, o ye blest gods ! so will you wish on me,
when the rash mood is on me. shakespeare.
be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be
hasty to utter any thing before god; for god is in heaven,
and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few. ecclus.
her rash hand in evil hour, o
forth reaching to the fruit, she pluck'd, she eat. milton.
2. hasty; requiring hase. not in use.
i have scarce leisure to salute you, -
my matter is so rash. shakes. troilus and gresida.
3. quick ; sudden ; as, rash gunpowder. out of use. -
rash. m. s. [roscia, italian.] .
1. sattin. asin/hew.
2. [corrupted probably from rush 3 an effiorescence on the
body; a breaking out.
ra's her. m. s. [rasara lardi, lat..] a thin slice of bacon.
if we grow all to be pork eaters, we shall not shortly have
a rasher on the coals for money. shakesp. 44erch. of senice.
white and black was all her homely cheer,
and rashers of sing'd bacon on the coals.
quenches his thirst with ale in nut-brown bowls,
and takes the hasty rasher from the coa's. king.
ra's hoy. adv. [from rash.j hastily; violently; without due
consideration.
this expedition was by york and talbot
too rashly plotted. shakesp. henry vi.
men are not oft'y to take that for done, which is not
done. bacon.
he that doth anything roshly, must do it willingly; for he
dryden.
was free to deliberate or not. 4'4/irange.
declare the secret villain,
the wretch so meanly base to injure phaedra,
so rashly b:ave to dare the sword of theseus. smith.
ra'sh noss. n.s. (from rash.j foolish contempt of danger;
inconsiderate heat of temper; precipitation; teinerity.
who feeth not what sentence it shall enforce us to give
against all churches in the world; in as much as there is not
one, but hath had many things established in it, which though
the scripture did never command, yet for us to condemn were
rashness. hooker.
nature to youth hot rashness doth dispence, *
but with cold prudence age doth recompence. denham.
in so speaking, we offend indeed against truth ; yet we
offend not properly by falshood, which is a speaking against
our thoughts; but by rashness, which is an affirming or de-
nying, before we have sufficiently informed ourselves. soutb.
the vain morat by his own ra hness wrought,
too soon discover'd his ambitious thought,
believ'd me his, because i spoke him fair. dryden.
rasp. m. s. [respo, italian.] a delicious berry that grows on
a species of the bramble; a raspberry.
set sorrel amongst rasps, and the rasps will be the smaller.
bacon's natural history.
now will the corinths, now the rasps supply
delicious draughts, when prest to wines. philips.
to rasp. v. a. [rospen, dutch; rasper, fr. rosare, italian.]
to rub to powder with a very rough file. ,
some authors have advised the rafting of these bones; but
in this case it is needless. //iseman's surgery.
having prepared hard woods and ivory for the lathe with
raping, they pitch it between the pikes. amoxon.
rasp. m. s. [from the verb.] a large rough file, commonly
used to wear away wood.
cafe-hardening is used by file cutters, when they make
coarse files, and generally most rasps have formerly been made
of iron and case-hardened. 4/oxon's mechanical exercises.
rox. m. s. [rosatoir, fr. from rasp.] a chirurgeon's
rasp.
i put into his mouth a rasatory, and pulled away the cor-
rupt flesh, and with cauteries burnt it to a crust.
joseman's surgery.
ra's prerry, or rosorry, n.s. a kind of berry.
raspberries are of three sorts; the common wild one, the
large red garden raspberry, which is one of the pleasantest
of fruits, and the white, which is little inferior to the
red. 41 reimer's husbandry.
raspberry-bush. m. s. a species of bramble.
ra’s u r e n.s. [rasura, lat.]
1. the act of scraping or shaving.
2. a mark in a writing where something has been rubbed out.
such a writing ought to be free from any vituperation of
rasure. ayliff's parergon.
rat. m. s. [ratte, dutch ; rat, fr. ratta, spanish..] an animal
of the mouse kind that infeds houses and ships.
our natures do pursue,
like rats that ravin down their proper bane. shakesp.
make you ready your stiff bats and clubs,
rome and her rats are at the point of battle. shakesp.
i have seen the time, with my long sword i would have
made you four tall fellows skip like rats. shakesp.
thus horses will knable at walls, and rats will gnaw
iron. brown's wulgar errours.
if in despair he goes out of the way like a rat with a dose
of arsenick, why he dies nobly. dennis.
to smell a ra r. #. be put on the watch by suspicion as the
cat by the scent of a rat; to suspect danger.
quoth hudibras, i smell a rat,
raipho, thou dost prevaricate.
ratable. aff. [from rate.] set at a certain value.
hu libras.
the
-:
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">the danes brought in a reckoning of money by ores, per
oras; i collect out of the abby-book of burton, that twenty
orz were ratable to two marks of silver. camden's remains.
ra'tably. adv. proportionably. . .
many times there is no proportion of shot and powder al-
lowed ratably by that quantity of the great ordnance. raleigh.
rata(fia. m. s. a liquor, prepared from the kernels of apri-
cots and spirits. - bailey.
rata'n. m. s. an indian cane. - dic?.
ratch. m. s. in clockwork, a sort of wheel, which serves
to lift up the detents every hour, and thereby make the clock
strike. - bailey.
rate. n.s. [ratus, lat. rate, old fr.]
i. price fixed on any thing. ! . . . . . ;
how many things do we value, because they come at dear
rates from japan and china, which if they were our own
manufacture, common to be had, and for a little money,
would be neglected locke.
i'll not betray the glory of my name,
'tis not for me, who have preserv'd a state, * - .
to buy an empire at so base a rate. dryden.
the price of land has never changed, in the several changes
have been made in the rate of interest by law; nor now that
the rate of interest is by law the same, is the price of land
every where the same. locke.
2. allowance settled. - -
his allowance was a continual allowance, a daily rate for
every day. 2 kings xxv. 30.
hey obliged themselves to remit after the rate of twelve
hundred thousand pounds sterling per annum, divided into so
many monthly payments. addison.
3. degree; comparative height or value.
i am a spirit of no common rate ; - -
the summer still doth tend upon my state. shakesp.
in this did his holiness and godliness appear above the rate
and pitch of other mens, in that he was so infinitely mer-
ciful. calamy's sermons.
to which relation whatsoever is done agreeably, is mo-
rally and essentially good; and whatsoever is done otherwise,
is at the same rate morally evil. south.
4. quantity assignable.
in goodly form comes on the enemy; -
and by the ground they hide, i judge their number
upon or near the rate of thirty thousand. shakesp.
5. that which sets value.
heretofore the rate and standard of wit was very different
from what it is now-a-days: no man was then accounted a
wit for speaking such things, as deserved to have the tongue
cut out. . . . . . . south's sermons.
a virtuous heathen is, at this rate, as happy as a virtuous
christian. atterbury.
6. manner of doing any thing; degree to which any thing is
done.
i have disabled mine estate,
by shewing something a more swelling port,
than my faint means would grant continuance;
nor do l now make moan to be abridged
from such a noble rate. shakesp. merchant of venice.
many of the horse could not march at that rate, nor come
up soon enough. . clarendon.
tom hinting his dislike of some trifle his mistress had said,
she asked him how he would talk to her after marriage, if he
talked at this rate before ? addison.
7. tax imposed by the parish.
they paid the church and parish rate,
and took, but read not the receipt. prior.
to rate. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to value at a certain price.
i freely told you, all the wealth i had
ran in my veins, i was a gentleman ;
and yet, dear lady,
rating myself as nothing, you shall see -
how much i was a braggart. shakesp. merch, of venice.
we may there be instructed, how to name and rate all
goods, by those that will concentre into felicity. boyle.
you seem not high enough your joys to rate,
you stand indebted a vast sum to fate,
and should large thanks for the great blessing pay. , dryden.
2. [reita, islandick.] to chide hastily and vehemently.
go rate thy minions, proud insulting boy,
becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
before thy sovereign. shakesp. henry vi.
an old lord of the council rated me the other day in the
street about you, sir. shakesp. henry iv.
what is all that a man enjoys, from a year's converse,
comparable to what he feels for one hour, when his conscience
shall take him aside and rate him by himself. south.
if words are sometimes to be used, they ought to be grave,
kind and sober, representing the ill or unbecomingness of the
faults, rather than a hasty rating of the child for it. locke.
t2 rate. v. n. to make an estimate.
in rating, when things are thus little and frivolous, we
vol. ii.
2. preferably to the other; with better reason.
4. more properly.
must not judge by our own pride and passions, which count
nothing little, but aggrandize every affront or injury that is
done to ourselves. - kettlewell.
rath. m. s. a hill. i know not whence derived.
there is a great use among the irish, to make great as-
semblies upon a rath or hill, there to parly about matters and
, wrongs between townships or private persons. spenser.
rath. adj. inao, saxon, quickly.] early ; coming before
the usual time.
thus is my summer worn away and wasted, "
thus is my harvest hasten’d all too rathe,
the ear, that budded fair, is burnt and blasted, -
and all my hoped gain is turn'd to scathe. spenser.
rath ripe are some, and some of later kind, -
of golden some, and some of purple rind. may's virgil.
bring the rath primrose that forsaken dies,
. the tufted crow-toe and pale jessamine. milton,
ra't her. adv. [this is a comparative from rath; na’s, saxon,
soon. now out of use. one may still say, by the same
form of speaking, i will sooner do this than that ; that is, i
like better to do this.]
1. more willingly; with better liking.
almighty god desireth not the death of a finner, but ra-
ther that he should turn from his wickedness and live.
common prayer.
'tis rather to be thought, that an heir had no such right
by divine institution, than that god should give such a right,
but yet leave it undeterminate who such heir is. locke.
3. in a greater degree than otherwise.
he sought through the world, but sought in vain,
and no where finding
g, rather fear'd her slain. drydon.
- this is an art, - -
which does mend nature, change it rather, but
- - -- - * * * * * * * ‘.
the art itself is nature. shakesp. //inter's tale.
5. especially.
you are come to me in a happy time,
the rather for i have some sport in hand. shakespear.
6. to have rather... [this is, i think, a barbarous expresfion
of late intrusion into our language, for which it is better to
say will rather.] to desire in preference.
'tis with reluctancy he is provoked by our impenitence to
apply the discipline of severity; he had rather mankind should
adore him as their patron and benefactor. rogers.
ratification. m. s. [ratification, fr. from ratiff.] the act
of ratifying ; confirmation.
ratifier. m. s. [from ratisy..] the person or thing that
ratifies.
they cry, “chuse we laertes for our king:”
the ratifiers and props of every word,
caps, hands and tongues applaud it to the clouds. shakesp.
to ratify. v. a. [ratum facio, latin.] to confirm; to
settle.
the church being a body which dieth hot, hath always
power, as occasion requireth, no less to ordain that which
never was, than to ratify what hath been before. hooker.
by the help of these, with him above
to ratify the work, we may again
give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights. shakesp.
we have ratified unto them the borders of judaea. 1 mac.
god ratified their prayers by the judgment brought down
upon the head of him, whom they prayed against. south.
tell me, my friend, from whence had'st thou the skill,
so nicely to distinguish good from ill -
and what thou art to follow, what to fly,
this to condemn, and that to ratiff p dryden.
ratio. m. s. [latin.] proportion.
whatever inclinations the rays have to the plane of inci-
dence, the fine of the angle of incidence of every ray consi-
dered apart, shall have to the fine of the angle of refraction
a constant ratio. cheyne's philosophical principles.
to ratio'cinate. v. n. [ratiocinor, lat.] to reason;
to argue.
ratiocination. m. s. [ratiocinatio, lat..] the act of tea-
soning; the act of deducing consequences from premises.
in simple terms, expressing the open notions of things,
which the second act of reason compoundeth into pro-
positions, and the last into syllogisms and forms of ratioci-
nation. - brown.
the discerning of that connexion or dependence which
there is betwixt several propositions, whereby we are enabled
to infer one proposition from another, which is called ratic-
cination or discourse. //ilkins.
can any kind of ratiocination allow christ all the marks of
the messiah, and yet deny him to be the messiah? south.
such an inscription would be self-evident without any ra-
tiocination or study, and could not fail constantly to exert its
energy in their minds. bentley.
ratio'cin ative. adj. [from raticcinate.] argumentative :
advancing by process of discourse.
some consecutions are so intimately and evidently connexed
21 g - to,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a t
r a v
to, or found in the premises, that the conclusion is attained
quasi per saltum, and without any thing of ratiocinative pro-
cess, even as the eye sees his object immediately, and without
any previous discourse. hale's origin of mankind.
rational. adj. [rationalis, latin.]
1. having the power of reasoning.
god decreed to create man after his own image, a free and
rational agent. hammond.
as that which hath a fitness to promote the welfare of
man, considered as a sensitive being, is stiled natural good;
so that which hath a fitness to promote the welfare of man,
as a rational, voluntary and free agent, is stiled moral good;
and the contrary to it moral evil. jwilkins.
if it is our glory and happiness to have a rational nature,
that is endued with wisdom and reason, that is capable of
imitating the divine nature ; then it must be our glory and
happiness to improve our season and wisdom, to act up to the
excellency of our rational nature, and to imitate god in all
our actions, to the utmost of our power. law.
2. agreeable to reason.
what higher in her society thou find'st
attractive, humane, rational, love still. milton.
when the conclusion is deduced from the unerring dictates
of our faculties, we say the inference is rational.
glanville's scepsis.
if your arguments be rational, offer them in as moving a
manner as the nature of the subject will admit; but beware
of letting the pathetick part swallow up the rational. swift.
3. wise ; judicious : as, a rational man.
no. n, s, [from ratio, lat..] a detail with reasons:
as, dr. sparrow's rationale of the common prayer.
rational st. m. s. [from rationa'.] one who proceeds in
his disquisitions and practice wholly upon reason.
he often used this comparison; the empirical philosophers
are like to pismires; they only lay up and use their store:
the rationalists are like to spiders ; they spin all out of their
own bowels: but give me a philosopher, who, like the bee,
hath a middle faculty, gathering from abroad, but digesting
that which is gathered by his own virtue. bacon.
rat ion a lity. m. s. [from rational.]
1. the power of reasoning.
when god has made rationality the common portion of
* mankind, how came it to be thy inclosure ? gov. of the tong.
2, reasonableness.
- in human occurrences, there have been many well directed
intentions, whose rationalities will never bear a rigid exami-
nation, brown's vulgar errours.
rationally. adv. [from rational, j reasonably ; with
reason.
upon the proposal of an agreeable object, it may rationally
be conjectured, that a man's choice will rather incline him to
accept than to refuse it. south.
ration alness. m. s. [from rational.] the state of being
rational.
rats ban e. m. s. [rat and lane.] poison for rats; arsenick.
he would throw ratsbane up and down a house, where chil-
dren might come at it. l'e/irange.
when murder's out, what vice can we advance
unless the new-found pois’ning trick of france;
and when their art of ratsane we have got,
by way of thanks, we'll send 'em o'er our plot. dryden.
i can hardly believe the relation of his being poisoned, but
sack might do it, though ratsbane would not. swift to pope.
ratteen. m. s. a kind of stuff.
we'll rig in meath-street egypt's haughty queen,
and anthony shall court her in rattern.
to rattle. v. n. [ratelen, dutch.)
1. to make a quick sharp noise with frequent repetitions and
collisions of bodies not very sonorous : when bodies are so-
norous, it is called jingling.
the quiver rattleth against him. job xxxix. 23.
the noise of a whip, of the rattling of the wheels, of
prancing horses, and of the jumping chariots. nah. iii. 2.
they had, to affright the enemies horses, big rattles co-
o vered with parchment, and small stones within; but the
rattling of shot might have done better service. hayward.
he was too warm on picking work to dwell;
he fagoted his notions as they fell,
and if they rhym'd and rattled all was well.
there she assembles all her blackest storms,
and the rude hail in rattling tempest forms.
2. to speak eagerly and noisily.
with jealous eyes at distance she had seen
whisp'ring with jove the silver-footed queen;
then, impotent of tongue, her silence broke,
thus turbulent in rattling tone she spoke. dryden.
he is a man of pleasure, and a free-thinker; he is an as-
sertor of liberty and property; he rattles it out against
popery. swist.
to rattle. v a. -
1. to move anything so as to make a rattle or noise.
her chains she ratiles, and her whip she shakes. dryden,
*
swift.
dryden. {
addison.
2. to slun with a noise; to drive with a noise.
sound but another, and another shall,
as loud as thine, rattle the welkin's ear,
and mock the deep-mouth'd thunder. shaky?eare,
he should be well enough able to scatter the irish as ajj
of birds, and rattle away this swarm of bees with their
king. bacon's henry vii.
3. to scold; to rail at with clamour.
hearing æsop had been beforehand, he sent for him in a
rage, and rattled him with a thousand traitors and villains for
robbing his house. l’estrance.
she that would sometimes rattle off her servants sharply
now if she saw them drunk, never took notice. aoi.
ra'ttle. m. s. [from the verb.] s
1. a quick noise nimbly repeated.
i'll hold ten pound my dream is out;
i'd tell it you but for the rattle
of those confounded drums.
2. empty and loud talk.
all this ado about the golden age, is but an empty ratt,
and frivolous conceit. hakewill on provid.nce.
3. an instrument, which agitated makes a clattering noise.
the rattles of isis and the cymbals of brasilea nearly enough
resemble each other. roeigh's history of the sorld,
opinions are the rattles of immature inteli cis, but the
advanced reasons have outgrown them. glanville's scopsis.
they want no rattles for their forward mood,
nor nurse to reconcile thern to their food.
farewel then verse, and love, and ev'ry toy,
the rhymes and ratiks of the man or boy;
what right, what true, what fit we justly call,
let this be all my care; for this is ali. pope.
4. a plant. [crisia galli, lat. an he b resembling a cock's-
comb. -
raort leheaded. adj. [rattle and head] giddy; not steady.
ra"rt lesna ke. m. s. a kind of serpent.
the rattlesnake is so called, from the rattle at the end of
his tail. grew's mussam.
she loses her being at the very fight of him, and drops
plump into his arms, like a charined bird into the mooth of
a rattlesnake. , a/oare's foundling,
rattlesnake root. m. s. - -
rattlesnake root, called also seneka, belongs to 2 plant, a na-
tive of virginia; the indians use it as a certain remedy against
the bite of a rattlesnake. hill.
to ravage. v. a. [ravager, fr.] to lay waste; to sack;
to ransack; to spoil ; to pillage; to plunder.
already caesar
has ravaged more than half the globe, and sees
prior.
dryden.
mankind grown thin by his destructive sword. adison.
his blasts obey, and quit the howling hill,
the shatter'd forest, and the ravag’d vale. toon,
ra'vao e. m. s. [ravage, fr. from the verb.] spoil; ruin;
waste.
some cruel pleasure will from thence arise,
to view the mighty ravage of your eyes. brydon.
would one think 'twere possible for love
to make such ravage in a noble soul. addisor.
those savages were not then, what civilized mankind is
now; but without mutual society, without arms of offence,
without houses or fortifications, an obvious and exposed prey
to the ravage of devouring beasts. bentley.
ra’v age.r. m. s. [from ravage.] plunderer; spoiler.
when that mighty empire was overthrown by the northern
people, vast sums of money were buried to escape the plum-
dering of the conquerors; and what remained was carried
off by those ravagers. swift's misoelanies.
rau'city. n.s. [raucus, lat.] hoarseness; loud rough noise.
inequality not stayed upon, but passing, is rather an en-
crease of sweetness; as in the purling of a wreathed string,
and in the raucity of a trumpet. bacon's nat. hisi.
to rave. v. n. [reven, dutch ; rever, fr.]
1. to be delirious ; to talk irrationally.
men who thus rave, we may conclude their brains are
turned, and one may as well read le&amp;tures at bedlam as treat
with such. -
it soon infecteth the whole member, and is accompanied
with watching and raving. łł's mun's surgery.
her grief has wrought her into frenzy,
the images her troubled fancy forms
are incoherent, wild; her words disjointed:
sometimes she raves for musick, light and air;
nor air, nor light, nor musick calm her pains.
2. to burst out into furious exclamations as if mad.
shall these wild distempers of thy mind,
this tempest of thy tongue, thus rave, and find
no opposition ? sandys's paraphrase on job.
our ravings and complaints are but like arrows shot up
smith.
into the air, at no mark, and so to no purpose. teople.
- wonder at my patience,
have i not cause to rave, and beat my breast,
to rend my heart with grief, and run distracted. addisor.
revenge,
government of the tongue.
o
a i
*
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a v
to ra've n. v. n.
*
r a v
revenge, revenge, thus raving through the streets,
tll cry for vengeance. south.rn's spartan dame.
he swore he could not leave me,
with ten thousand ravings. rowe's royal convert,
to be unreasonably fond : with upon before the object of
fondness. a colloquial and improper sense.
another partiality is a fantastical and wild attributing all
knowledge to the ancients or the moderns: this raving upon
antiquity, in matter of poetry, horace has wittily exposed in
one of his fatires. locke.
t, ravel. o. a. [ravelen, dutch, to entangle.] -
1. to entangle; to entwist one with another; to make intri-
cate; to involve; to perplex.
if then such praise the macedonian got,
for having rudely cut the gordian knot ;
what glory's due to him that cou’d divide
such ravel dint'rests, has the knot unty'd,
and without stroke so smooth a passage made,
where craft and malice such obstructions laid.
3.
j/aller.
...the more they fed, they raven'd still for more,
they drain'd fom dan, and left beersheba poor ;
but when some lay preferment fell by chance,
the gourmands made it their inheritance. dryden,
convulsions rack man's nerves and cares his breast,
his flying life is chas'd by , av'ning pains
through all his doubles in the winding veins. blackmore.
ra've nous, adj. [from raven.] furiously voracious; hungry
to rage.
thy desires
are wolfish, bloody, starv'd and ravenous. shakspeare.
as when a flock
of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote,
against the day of battle, to a field
where armies lie encamp'd, come flying, lur'd
with scent of living carcasses. 4/ilton's parad's lost.
what the kind ismena,
that nurs'd me, watch'd my sickness oh she watch'd me,
as rav'nous vultures watch the dying lion. smith.
2. to unweave; to unknit: as, to ravel out a twis' or piece of ra'v enously. adv. [from ravenous...] with raging voracity.
hit work.
let him for a pair of reechy kisses,
or padling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
make you to ravel all this matter out. shakop. hamlet.
sleep that knits up the ravel'd sleeve of care. shakesp.
3. to hurry over in confusion. this seems to be the meaning
in digby. - - - -
they but ravel it over loosely, and pitch upon disputing
against particular conclusions, that at the first encounter of
them single, seem harsh to them. digby.
7 ra’v el. v. n.
1. to fall into perplexity or confusion. -
as you unwind her love from him,
lest it should ravel, and be good to none,
you must provide to bottom it on me.
give the reins to wandering thought,
regardless of his glory's diminution;
till by their own perplexities involv’d,
they ravel more, still less resolv’d,
but never find self-satisfying solution.
1. to work in perplexity ; to busy himself with intricacies.
it will be needless to ravel far into the records of elder
times; every man's memory will suggest many pertinent
instances. decay of piety.
the humour of ravelling into all these mystical or in-
tangled matters, mingling with the interest and passions of
shakspeare.
**
princes and of parties, and thereby heightened and inflamed, ,
produced infinite disputes. temple.
ra*/a, lin. m. s. [french j in fortification, a work that
consists of two faces, that make a salient angle, com-
monly called half moon by the soldiers: it is raised before
the courtines or counterscarps. dic?.
ra'ven. n.s.. [hnaern, saxon.] a large black fowl, whose
cry is supposed ominous,
the raven himself is hoarse
that crokes the fatal entrance of duncan
under my battlements.
come thou day in night,
for thou wilt lie upon the wings of night,
vv hiter than snow upon a raven's back. shakoffeare.
i have seen a perfectly white ravin, as to bill as well as
feathers. boyle on colours.
he made the greedy ravens to be elias’ caterers, and bring
him food. - king charles.
on sev'ral parts a sev'ral praise bestows,
the ruby lips, and well-proportion'd nose,
the snowy skin, the raven glossy hair,
the dimpled cheek. dryden’s cymon and iphigenia.
the raven once in snowy plumes was drest,
white as the whitest dove's unsully'd breast,
shakoff, macbeth.
great eagerness and rapacity. -
thriftless ambition that will raven up
thine own life’s means. sha`speare.
our natures do pursue,
like rats that raven down their proper bane,
a thirsty evil; and when we drink we die. shakesp.
the cloyed will
that satiate, yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
both fill’d and running, ravening first the lanb,
longs after for the garbage. socks. cymbeline.
there is a conspiracy of the prophets, like a roaring lion
ravening the prey. - ezek. xxii. 25.
to prey with rapacity. -
benjamin shall raven as a wolf; in the morning he shall
devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil. gen.
they gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and
- a roaring lion. psalm xxii. 13.
ashan's agonises.
rav enousness. n. s. [from ravenous.] rage for prey; fu-
rious voracity.
the raverousness of a lion or bear are natural to them;
yet their mission upon an extraordinary occasion may be an
actus imperatus of divine providence. hale.
raught, the old pret. and part, pass. of reach. snatched;
reached; attained. - w
his tail was stretched out in wond’rous length,
that to the house of heavenly gods it raight,
and with extorted power and borrow'd strength,
the ever-burning lamps from thence it brought. spenser.
in like delights of bloody game,
he trained was till riper years he raught,
and there abode whilst any beast of name -
walk’d in that forest. spensor.
this staff of honour raught, there let it stand,
where best it fits to be, in henry's hand. shakes care.
the hand of death has raught him. shakespeare.
grittus furiously running in upon schenden, violently saught
from his head his rich cap of sables, and with his harsemen
took him. knoles's history of the surks.
ravi n. m.s.. [from raven; this were better written raven.]
1. prey ; food gotten by violence. -
the lion strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes
with prey, and his dens with ravin. nah. ii. 2.
to me, who with eternal famine pine,
alike is hell, or paradise, or heav'n ;
there best ; where most with ravin i may meet. milton.
2. rapine; rapaciousness.
they might not lie in a condition exposed to the ravin of
any vermin that may find them, being unable to escape.
ray on the creation.
ravingly. adv. [from rave..] with frenzy; with distrac-
tlcn.
in this depth of muses and divers sorts of discourses, would
she ravingly have remained.
z - - sidney.
to ra"vish. v. a. travir, fr.]
1. to constuprate by force.
they ravished the women and maids. lam. v. 11.
they cut thy sister's tongue, and raviso’d her
2. to take away by violence.
these hairs, which thou dost ravish from my chin,
will quicken and accuse thee. shakesp. king lear.
their vow is made
to ransack troy, within whose strong immures
the ravish'd helen sleeps. shojp. troilus and crossida.
his fire appear'd ;
and all his praize, to every syllable heard.
but then a rocke, in size more amplified.
then first he ravish't to him.
- shakesp.
- - - - - chapman.
his tongue, his prating tongue had chang'd him quite i owe myself the care,
to sooty blackness from the purest white. addison. my fame and injur’d honour to repair;
hence gildon rails, that raven of the pit, from thy own tent, proud man, in thy despite,
who thrives upon the carcasts of wit. 1%ung. this hand shall ravish thy pretended right. dryden.
to ra’v en. v. a. ina plan, saxon, to rob.] to devour with 3. to delight to rapture; to transport.
thou hast ravished my heart.
be thou ravished always with her love.
ravisis er. m. s. [ravisscir, fr. from ravis.]
1. he that embraces a woman by violence,
they are cruel and bloody, common ravishers of women,
and murtherers of children. $fenser's state of ireland.
a ravisher must repair the temporal detriment to the maid,
and give her a dowry, or marry her if she desire it.
cant. iv. 9.
prov. v. i 9.
taylor.
- turn hence those pointed glories of your eyes!
for if more charms beneath those circles rise,
so weak my virtue, they so strong appear,
i shall turn ravisher to keep you here. dryden.
2. one who takes anything by violence.
shall the ravisher display your hair,
while the fops envy, and the ladies stare. pope.
roscow. adv. [from ravishing.] to extremity of plea-
utc,
as
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r a w
r e a
as all the housewiferies of deities are
, to heare a voice, so ravishingly fair. -
ra'vishment. m. s. [ravisement, fr. from ravish.]
1. violation; forcible constupration. -
of his several ravishments, betrayings and stealing away of
men's wives, came in all those ancient fables of his transfor-
mations and all that rabble of grecian forgeries. raleigh.
tell them ancient stories of the ravishment of chaste
maidens. taylor's rule of living holy.
i told them i was one of their knight-errants that delivered
them from ravishment. s dryden.
a. transport; rapture; ecstasy; pleasing violence on the mind.
all things joy, with ravishment
chapman:
attracted by thy beauty still to gaze. milton.
can any mortal mixture of earth's mould
breathe such divine enchanting ravishment / milton.
what a ravishment was that, when having found out the
way to measure hiero's crown, he leaped out of the bath,
and, as if he were suddenly possest, ran naked up and down |
wilkins's daedalus.
raw. adj. [hneap, saxon; raa, danish ; rouw, dutch.]
1. not subdued by the fire.
full of great lumps of flesh, and gobbets raw. spenser.
2. not covered with the skin.
all aloud the wind doth blow,
and coughing drowns the parson's saw ;
and birds fit brooding in the snow,
and marian's nose looks red and raw. shakespeare.
if there be quick raw flesh in the risings, it is an old le-
prosy. - lev. xiii. io.
3. sore.
this her knight was feeble and too faint,
and all his sinews waxen weak and raw
through long imprisonment.
4. immature ; unripe; not conco&amp;ted.
5. unseasoned; unripe in skill.
some people, very raw and ignorant, are very unworthily
and unfitly nominated to places, when men of desert are held
back and unpreferred. raleigh's essays.
people, while young and raw, and soft-natured, are apt
to think it an easy thing to gain love, and reckon their own
friendship a sure price of another man's; but when experience
shall have once opened their eyes, they will find that a friend
spensor.
is the gift of god. - south.
sails were spread to ev'ry wind that blew,
raw were the sailors, and the depths were new. dryden.
well i knew
what perils youthful ardour would pursue,
young as thou wert in dangers, raw to war. dryden.
6. new. this seems to be the meaning.
i have in my mind
a thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks. shakesp.
7. bleak; chill.
they carried always with them that weed, as their house,
their bed and their garment; and coming lastly into ireland,
they found there more special use thereof, by reason of the
raw cold climate. spenser's state of ireland.
youthful still in your doublet and hose, this raw rheuma-
tick day. shakesp. merry wives of jwindsor.
once upon a raw and gusty day,
the troubled tyber chafing with his shores. shakesp.
8. not deco&amp;ted.
distilled waters will last longer than raw waters. bacon.
. not spun or twisted ; as, raw silk.
awboxed. adj. [raw and bone..] having bones scarcely co-
vered with flesh.
leau rawbon'd rascals' who would e'er suppose
they had such courage. shakesp. henry vi.
the wolf was content to barter away a rawboned carcase
for a smooth and fat one. l’estrange.
ra'w head. n.s. [raw and head..] the name of a spectre,
mentioned to fright children.
hence draw thy theme, and to the stage permit
rawhead and bloody bones, and hands and feet,
ragousts for tereus or thyestes drest. dryden.
servants awe children, and keep them in subjeclion, by
telling them of rawhead and bloody bones. locke.
raw ly. adv. [from raw.]
1. in a raw manner.
2. unskilfully; without experience.
3. newly.
some crying for a surgeon, some upon the debts they owe,
some upon their children rawly left. shakesp. henry v.
ra'w ness. n.s.. [from raw.]
1. state of being raw.
chalk helpeth concoetion, so it be out of a deep well; for
then it cureth the rawness of the water. bacon.
2. unskilfulness.
charles v. considering the rawness of his seamen, esta-
blished a pilot major for their examination, hakewill.
3. hasty manner. this seems t be the meaning in this ob-
scure passage: *
why in that rawnes left he wife and children,
without leave taking. shakesp. macbeth,
ray. m. s. [raie, rayon, fr. radius, lat.]
1. a beam of light. . . .
- these eyes that roll in vain
to find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn. awihon
the least sight, or part of light, which may be stopt alone,
or do or suffer any thing alone, which the rest of the light
doth not or suffers not, i call a ray of light. mewton.
sol through white curtains shot a tim’rous ray,
and op'd those eyes that must eclipse the day. pope.
2. any lustre corporeal or intelle&amp;tual.
the air sharpen'd his visual ray. milton.
he now observant of the parting ray,
eyes the calm sunset of thy various day. pope.
3. [raye, fr. raia, lat..] a fish. ainsworth.
4. [lolium, lat.] an herb. - ainsworth.
to ray. v. a. [rayer, fr. from the houn..] to streak; to
mark in long lines. . an old word. -
...beside a bubbling fountain low she lay,
which she increased with her bleeding heart, -
and the clean waves with purple gore did ray. sponsor.
his horse is raied with the yellows. shakespeare.
was ever man so beaten ? was ever men so raied? was
ever man so weary shakesp. taming of the shrew.
ray, for array. . . . . . . - spenser.
raze. m. s. [rayz, a root, spanish.] a root of ginger. this
is commonly written race, but less properly.
i have a gammon of bacon and two razes of ginger to be
delivered. * - shakesp. henry iv.
to raze. v. a. [raser, fr. rosus, lat..] see rase.
1. to overthrow ; to ruin; to subvert.
will you suffer a temple, how poorly built soever, but yet
a temple of your deity, to be razed. - sidney.
he yoaketh your rebellious necks,
rozeth your cities, and subverts your towns. shakes.
it grieved the tyrant, that so base a town should so long
hold out, so that he would threaten to raze it. knzlei.
shed christian blood, and populous cities raze;
because they're taught to use some diff'rent phrase. waler.
we touch'd with joy
the royal hand that raz'd unhappy troy. dryden.
the place would be razed to the ground, and its founda-
tions sown with salt, addison's speciator.
2. to efface.
fatal this marriage; cancelling your fame,
razing the characters of your renown. shakespeare.
pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
raze out the written troubles of the brain. shakespeare,
he in derision sets
upon their tongues a various spirit, to raze
quite out their native language; and instead,
to sow a jangling noise of words. milton's paradis? loo.
3. to extirpate.
i’ll find a day to massacre them all,
and raze their faction and their family. shakespeare.
ra"zor. m. s. [raser, lat.] a knife with a thick blade and
fine edge used in shaving. -
zeal, except ordered aright, useth the razor with such ea-
gerness, that the life of religion is thereby hazarded. hooker.
these words are razors to my wounded heart.
shakespeare.
those thy boist'rous locks, not by the sword
of noble warrior, so to stain his honour,
but by the barber's razor best subdu'd. milton's agonisles.
razor makers generally clap a small bar of venice steel
between two small bars of flemish steel, and weld them to-
gether, to strengthen the back of the razor. 44axon.
as in smooth oil the razor best is whet,
so wit is by politeness sharpest set,
their want of edge from their offence is seen;
both pain us least when exquisitely keen. 1%ung.
razors of a boar. a bear's tusks.
ra’zou rable. adj. [from razor.] fit to be shaved. not in use.
new-born chins be rough and razourable. shakespeare.
ra'zorfish... n.s.
the sheath or razorff resembleth in length and bigness a
man's finger. carew's survey of cornwal.
ra'zur e. m. s. [rosure, fr. rasara, latin.] act of erafing.
oh! your desert speaks loud; -
it well deserves with characters of brass
a forted residence, 'gainst the tooth of time
and razure of oblivion. shakesp. measure for masore.
re. is an inseparable particle used by the latins, and from them
borrowed by us to denote iteration or backward action ; as,
return, to come back ; to revive, to live again; repercussion,
the act of driving back: reciprocation, as to recriminate. it
is put almost arbitrarily before verbs and verbal nouns, so that
many words so compounded will perhaps be found, which it
was not necessary to insert. it sometimes adds little to the
simple meaning of the word, as in rejoice.
reacce'ss. n.s. [re and access.] visit renewed.
9
let
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o
*
o
o:-
**
o
so-!--
let pass the quailing and withering of all things by the
recess, and their reviving by the reaccess of the sun. hakewill.
t, reach. v. a. ancient preterite raught. [naecan, saxon.]
1. to touch with the hand extended.
round the tree
they longing flood, but could not reach.
what are riches, empire, pow'r ;
but larger means to gratify the will;
the steps by which we climb to rise and reach
our wish, and that obtained, down with a scaffolding
of scepters, crowns and thrones: they've serv'd their end,
and there like lumber to be left and scorn’d congreve.
2. to arrive at ; to attain any thing distant; to strike from a
distance.
milton.
the coast so long desir'd
thy troops shall reach, but having reach'd, repent. dryden.
what remains beyond this, we have no more a positive no-
tion of, than a mariner has of the depth of the sea; where,
having let down his sounding line, he reaches no bottom. locke.
it must fall perhaps before this letter reaches your hands. pope.
3. to strike from a distant place.
o patron pow'r, thy present aid afford,
that i may reach the beast !
4. to fetch from some place distant, and give.
he reached me a full cup.
, to bring forward from a distant place.
reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach
hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side. john xx. 27.
6. to hold out; to stretch forth.
these kinds of goodness are so nearly united to the things
which desire then, that we scarcely perceive the appetite to
stir in reaching forth her hand towards them. hooker.
7. to attain ; to gain ; to obtain.
the best accounts of the appearances of nature, which hu-
dryden.
2 esdr. xiv. 39.
man penetration can reach, comes short of its reality. cheyne.
8. to transfer.
through such hands
the knowledge of the gods is reach'd to man. rowe.
. to penetrate to.
whatever alterations are made in the body, if they reach
not the mind, there is no perception. locke.
10...to be adequate to.
the law reached the intention of the promoters, and this
act fixed the natural price of money. locke.
if these examples of grown men reach not the case of chil-
dren, let them examine. locke on education.
11. to extend to.
thy desire leads to no excess that reaches blame. milton.
her imprecations reach not to the tomb,
they shut not out society in death. addison's cato.
12. to extend ; to spread abroad.
- trees reach'd too far their pamper'd boughs,
to reach. v. n.
i. to be extended.
we hold that the power which the church hath lawfully
to make laws doth extend unto fundry things of ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and such other matters whereto their opinion is,
that the church's authority and power doth not reach. hooker.
the new world reaches quite cross the torrid zone in one
tropick to the other. boyle.
when men pursue their thoughts of space, they are apt to
stop at the confines of body, as if space were there at an end
too, and reached no farther. locke.
if i do not ask any thing improper, let me be buried by
theodosius; my vow reaches no farther than the grave. addis.
the influence of the stars reaches to many events, which
are not in the power of reason. swift,
2. to be extended far.
great men have reaching hands.
3. to penetrate.
he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain
them in a rage, that reachesh up into heaven. 2 chr. xxviii.
we reach forward into futurity, and bring up to our thoughts
objects hid in the remotest depths of time. addison.
4. to make efforts to attain,
could a sailor always supply new line, and find the plum-
met sink without stopping, he would be in the posture of the
milton.
shakesp. henry vi.
mind, reaching after a positive idea of infinity. locke.
5. to take in the hand. -
left he reach of the tree of life, and eat. milton.
reach. n. s. [from the verb.j
1. act of touching or seizing by extension of the hand.
2. power of reaching or taking in the hand.
there may be in a man's reach a book containing pictures
and discourses, capable to delight and instruct him, which yet
he may never have the will to open. lotke.
3. power of attainment or management. o
in actions, within the reach of power in him, a man seems
as free as it is possible for freedom to make him. locke.
4. power ; limit of faculties.
our fight may be confidered as a more diffusive kind of touch,
that brings into our reach some of the most remote parts of
the universe. addison.
vol. 11.
-
be sure yourself and your own reach to know,
how far your genius, taste and learning go.
- poz.
5. contrivance; artful scheme; deep thought. ?
drawn by others,
- who had deeper reaches than themselves
to matters which they least intended. hayward.
some, under types, have affected obscurity to amuse and
make themselves admired for profound rano. howel.
6. a fetch ; an artifice to attain some distant advantage.
the duke of parma had particular reach, and os of his
own underhand, to cross the design. bacon.
7. tendency to distant consequences.
strain not my speech
to grosser issues, nor to larger reach,
than to suspicion.
8. extent.
the confines met of empyrean heav'n,
and of this world: and, on the left hand, hell o
with long reach interpos'd. a/ilton's paradis loft.
to react. v. a. [re and ai.] to return the impulse or
impression.
the lungs being the chief instrument of sanguincation,
and acting strongly upon the chyle to bring it to an animal
fluid, must be readed upon as strongly. arbuthnot.
cut off your hand, and you may do
with to other hand the work of two;
because the soul her power contracis,
and on the brother limb reaos. swft's mjolanies:
rea’ction. n.s. [readion, fr. from read?..] the recipro-
cation of any impulse or force impressed, made by the body
on which such impression is made: action and racion are
equal.
do not great bodies conserve their heat the longest, their
parts heating one another; and may not great, dense and
fixed bodies, when heated beyond a certain degree, emit
light so copiously, as, by the emission and readion of its
light, and the reflections and refrastions of its rays within its
pores, to grow still hotter till it comes to a certain period of
heat, such as is that of the sun ? mewton's o ticks,
alimentary substances, of a mild nature, ad with 'small
force upon the solids, and as the action and room are cqual,
the smallest degree of force in the solids digests them. a. b.
read. m. s. snæb, saxon ; raed, dutch.j
1. counsel.
the man is blest that hath not lent
to wicked read his ear. sternho'd.
2. saying ; saw. this word is in both senses obsolete,
this reade is rise that oftentime •
great cumbers fall unsoft,
in humble dales is footing fast,
the treade is not so tickle.
to read, v. a. pret. read; part.
1. to peruse any thing written.
i have seen her take forth paper, write upon't, read it, and
afterwards seal it. shakesp. macbeth.
the passage you must have read, though fince slipt out of
your memory. pope.
if we have not leisure to read over the book itself regularly,
then by the titles of chapters we may be directed to peruse
several sections. watts on the mind.
2. to discover by characters or marks.
an armed corse did lye,
shaksp. o.hells.
sonor.
pass read. inses, saxon.j
in whose dead face he read great magnanimity. spe's r.
3. to learn by observation.
those about her
from her shall read the perfect ways of honour. so,
4. to know fully.
o most delicate fiend |
who is't can read a woman?
to read. v. n.
1. to perform the aet of perusing writing. -
it shall be with him, and he shall read therein, that he may
learn to fear the lord. deut. xvii. 19.
2. to be studious in books.
'tis sure that fleury read.
3. to know by reading.
i have read of an eastern king, who put a judge to death
for an iniquitous sentence. swift.
read. particip, adj. [from read; the verb read is pronounced
reed; the preterite and participle red j skilful by reading.
virgil's shepherds are too well read in the philosophy of
epicurus. dryden.
we have a poet among us, of a genius as exalted as his
stature, and who is very well read in longinus his treatite
concerning the sublime. addison's guardian.
rea ding. n s. [from read.] *
1. study in books; perusal of books.
though reading and conversation may furnish us with
many ideas of men and things, yet it is our own meditation
must form our judgment. j/atts on the mind.
less reading than makes felons 'scape,
less human genius than god gives an ape,
can make a cibber.
2. a lecture; a prelection.
21 h
shaksp. cymbeline.
taylor.
- pope.
3. publick<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e a
3. publick recital. -
the jews had their weekly readings of the law. hooker.
give attendance to reading, exhortation and doctrine.
1 tim. iv. 13.
4. variation of copies. -
that learned prelate has restored some of the readings of
the authors with great sagacity. arbuthnot on coins.
reade'ption. n.j. [re and adeptus, latin.] recovery; act
of regaining. - -
will any say, that the readeption of trevigi was matter of
scruple bacon.
rea'der. m. s. [from read.]
1. one that peruses any thing written.
as we must take the care that our words and sense be clear,
so if the obscurity happen through the hearers or readers want
of understanding, i am not to answer for them. ben, johnson.
2. one studious in books.
basiris' altars and the dire decrees
of hard eurestheus, ev'ry reader sees.
3. one whose office is to read prayers in churches. .
he got into orders, and became a reader in a parish church
at twenty pounds a year. swift.
rea'der ship. n. s. [from reader.] the office of reading
prayers.
when they have taken a degree, they get into orders, and
sollicit a readership. swift's miscellanies.
readily. adv. [from ready..] expeditely ; with little hinde-
rance or delay.
my tongue obey'd, and readily could name
whate’er i saw. milton.
those very things, which are declined as impossible, are
readily practicable in a case of extreme necessity. south.
i reaaiygrant, that cne truth cannot contradict another. loc.
every one sometime or other dreams that he is reading
papers, in which case the invention prompts so readily, that
the mind is imposed upon. addison's spectator.
rea’diness. n. s [from ready.]
1. expediteness; promptitude. -
he would not forget the readines of their king in aiding
him when the duke of bretagne failed him. bacon.
he opens himself to the man of business with reluctancy,
but offers himself to the visits of a friend with facility and all
the meeting readiness of desire. south.
2. the state of being ready or fit for anything.
have you an army ready ?
—the centurions and their charges already in the enter-
tainment to be on foot at an hour's warming.
—i am joyful to hear of their readiness. shakespeare.
they remained near a month, that they might be in rea-
diness to attend the motion of the army. clarendon.
3. facility; freedom from hinderance or obstruction.
nature has provided for the readiness and easiness of speech.
holder's elements of speech.
4. state of being willing or prepared.
a pious and well-disposed mind, attended with a readines;
to obey the known will of god, is the surest means to en-
lighten the understanding to a belief of christianity. south.
their conviction grew so strong, that they embraced the
same truths, and laid down their lives, or were always in a
readiness to do it, rather than depart from them. addison.
readmi'ssion. m. s."[re and admission.] the act of admit-
ting again.
in an exhausted receiver, animals, that seem as they were
dead, revive upon the readmission of fresh air. arbuthnot.
to rea'dmit. v. a. [re and admit..] to let in again.
these evils i deserve,
yet despair not of his final pardon,
whose ear is ever open, and his eye
gracious to readmit the suppliant. milton's agonises.
after twenty minutes i readmitted the air. derham.
to reado'rn. v. a. [re and adorn.] to decorate again ;
to deck a-new.
the streams now change their languid blue,
regain their glory, and their fame renew,
with scarlet honours readorn the tide. blackmore.
reat)y. adj. [naeb, saxon; rede, swedish ; hnabe, nimble,
saxon.]
1. prompt; not delayed.
these commodities yield the readies' money of any in this
kingdom, because they never fail of a price abroad. temple.
he overlook'd his hinds; their pay was just
dryden.
and ready : for he scorn'd to go on trust. dryden,
2. fit for a purpose; not to seek.
all things are ready, if our minds be so.
perish the man whose mind is backward now ! shakesp.
make you ready your stiff bats and clubs ;
rome and her rats are at the point of battle. shakespeare.
one hand the sword, and one the pen employs,
and in my lap the ready paper lies. dryden.
the sacred priests with ready knives bereave
the beasts of life, and in full bowls receive
the streaming blood. dryden's aneis.
3. prepared ; accommodated to any design, so as that there can
be no delay.
trouble and anguish shall prevail against him, as a king
ready to the battle. job xv. 24.
death ready stands to interpose his dart, milton.
the word which i have giv'n, i’ll not revoke;
if he be brave, he's ready for the stroke. dryden.
the imagination is always restless, and the will, reason
being laid aside, is ready for every extravagant projec. locke.
4. willing; eager; quick.
men, when their actions succeed not as they would, are
always ready to impute the bloc thereof unto the heavens, so
as to excuse their own follies. spenser's state of ireland,
a cloud that is more show than moisture; a cloud that is
more ready to bestow his drops upon the sea, than on the
land. - holyday.
they who should have helped him to mend things were
readier to promote the disorders by which they might thrive,
than to set a foot frugality. davenant.
5. being at the point; not distant; near ; about to do or be.
he knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at hand. job.
satan ready now
to stoop with weary'd wings and willing feet
on this world. milton's paradise loft,
6. being at hand; next to hand.
a sapling pine he wrench'd from out the ground,
the readies weapon that his fury found. dryden.
7. facil; easy; opportune; near.
sometimes the readies way, which a wise man hath to
conquer, is to fly. hooker's preface.
the race eleet,
safe towards canaan from the shore advance -
through the wild desert, not the readies way. milton,
proud of their conquest, prouder of their prey,
they leave the camp, and take the readies way. dryden.
the ready way to be thought mad, is to contend that yout
are not so. spediator.
8. quick; not done with hesitation.
a ready consent often subjects a woman to contempt. claris.
9. expedite ; nimble; not embarrassed; not slow.
those, who speak in publick, are much better accepted,
when they can deliver their discourse by the help of a lively
genius, and a ready memory, than when they are forced to
read all. watts on the mind.
for the most part there is a finer sense, a clearer mind, a
readier apprehension, and gentler dispositions in that sex, than
in the other. law,
io. to make ready. an elliptick expression for, to make
things ready. to make preparations.
he will shew you a large upper room; there make ready
for us. mar. xiv. 15.
reaty. adv. readily; so as not to need delay.
we will go ready armed before the children of israel. num,
reaty. m. s. ready money. a low word.
lord strutt was not flush in ready, either to go to law, or
clear old debts. a buthnot's history of john bull.
reaff1'rman ce. n.s. [re and affirmance..] second confir-
mation.
causes of deprivation are a conviction before the ordinary
of a wilful maintaining any doctrine contrary to the thirty-
nine articles, or a persisting therein without revocation of his
error, or a reaffirmance after such revocation. ayliffs.
re’al. adj. [reel, fr. realis, latin.]
i. relating to things, not persons; not personal.
many are perfect in men's humours, that are not greatly
capable of the real part of business; which is the constitution
of one that hath studied men more than books. bacon.
2. not fietitious; not imaginary; true; genuine.
we do but describe an imaginary world, that is but little
a-kin to the real one. glanville's scepsis.
when i place an imaginary name at the head of a cha-
raeter, i examine every letter of it, that it may not bear any
resemblance to one that is real. addison.
imaginary distempers are attended with real and unfeigned
sufferings, that enfeeble the body, and dissipate the spirits.
blackmore.
the whole strength of the arian cause, real, or artificial;
all that can be of any force either to convince, or deceive a
reader. waterland.
3. [in law.] consisting of things immoveable, as land.
i am hastening to convert my small estate, that is personal,
into real. child on trade.
re’algar. m. s. a mineral.
realgar or sandaracha is red arsenick. farris.
put realgar hot into the midst of the quicksilver, whereby
it may be condensed as well from within as without. bacon.
rea'lity.. n.s. [realite, fr. from real.]
1. truth; verity; what is, not what merely seems.
i would have them well versed in the greek and latin
poets, without which a man fancies that he understands a
critick, when in reality he does not comprehend his meaning.
addison.
he
.
i.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. a
o
s
or
--
o
o
*
the best accounts of the appearances of nature in any
finge instance human penetration can reach, comes infinitely
thort of its reality and internal constitution ; for who can
search out the almighty's works to perfection ? cheyne.
my neck may be an idea to you, but it is a reality to me.
beattie.
2. something intrinsically important; not merely matter of show.
of that skill the more thou know'st,
the more she will acknowledge thee her head,
and to realities yield all her shows, z -
made so adorn for thy delight the more. milton.
t, realize. v. a. [realiser, fr. from real.]
1. to bring into being or act. - - -
thus we realize what archimedes had only in hypothesis,
weighing a single grain against the globe of earth. glanville.
as a diocesan, you are like to exemplify and realize every
word of this discourse. . . south.
2. to convert money into land.
re'all y. adv. [from real.]
1. with actual existence. - , - -
we shall at last discover in what persons this holiness is
inherent really, in what condition it is inherent perfectly, and
consequently in what other sense it may be truly and properly
affirmed that the church is holy. pearson.
there cannot be a more important case of conscience for
men to be resolved in, than to know certainly how far god
accepts the will for the deed, and how far he does not ; and
to be informed truly when men do really will a thing, and
when they have really no power to do, what they have
willed. south.
2. in truth ; truly; not seemingly only. -
nothing properly is his duty but what is really his interest.
- wilkins.
the understanding represents to the will things really evil,
under the notion of good. sooth.
these orators inflame the people, whose anger is really but
a short fit of madness. - swift.
they even affect to be more pleased with dress, and to be
more fond of every little ornament, than they really are. law.
3. it is a slight corroboration of an opinion. -
. . why really sixty-five is somewhat old. 1%ung.
re'alm. n.s. [roiaulme, french.]
1. a kingdom; a king's dominion. - -
is there any part of that realm, or any nation therein, which
have not yet been subdued to the crown of england spenser.
they had gather'd a wise council to them - -
of ev’ry realm, that did debate this business. shakesp.
. . . . a son whose worthy deeds
raise him to be the second in that realm. milton.
2. kingly government. this sense is not frequent.
learn each small people's genius, policies,
the ant's republick, and the realm of bees. pope.
rea'lty. m. s. [a word peculiar, i believe, to milton.]
realty means not in this place reality in opposition to show,
but loyalty; for the italian dictionary explains the adjective
reale by loyal. - - pearce on milton.
o heaven, that such resemblance of the highest
should yet remain, where faith and really
remain not l - - milton's paradise loft.
ream. n.s. [rame, fr. riem, dutch..] a bundle of paper con-
taining twenty quires.
...all vain petitions mounting to the sky,
with reams abundant this abode supply. pope.
73 rea'nimate. v. a. [re and animo, lat.] to revive; to
restore to life.
we are our reanimated ancestors, and antedate their re-
surreotion. glanville's scepsis.
the young man left his own body breathless on the ground,
while that of the doe was reanimated. spectator.
to reannex. v. a. [re and annex.] to annex again.
king charles was not a little inflamed with an ambition to
repurchase and reannex that dutchy. bacon's henry vii.
to reap. v. a. inepan, saxon.]
1. to cut corn at harvest.
from ireland come i with my strength,
and reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd. shakesp.
when ye reap the harvest, thou shalt not wholly reap the
corners of thy field. lev. xix. 9.
the hire of the labourers, which have reaped down your
fields, is kept back by fraud. ja. v. 5.
2. to gather 5 to obtain. it is once used by shakespeare in an
ill sense. -
they that love the religion which they profess, may have
failed in choice, but yet they are sure to reap what benefit the
same is able to afford. hooker.
what sudden anger's this how have i reap'd it shak.
this is a thing,
which you might from relation likewise reap,
being much spoke of. shakesp. cymbeline.
our sins being ripe, there was no preventing of god's
justice from reaping that glory in our calamities, which we
robbed him of in our prosperity. ring charles.
to reap. v. n. to harvest. -- a -
they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. psalm crxvi. k.
reaper n.s.. [from reap...] one ao corn !. harvest. 5
from hungry reapers they their sheaves withhold. sand.
... here ceres' gifts in waving prospect stand;
and nodding tempt the joyful reaper's hand. pope,
a thousand forms he wears,
and first a reaper from the field appears,
sweating he walks, while loads of golden grain --
o'ercharge the shoulders of the seeming swin. pope.
reaping hook. n: / [reaping and hook.] a hook used to out
corn in harvest.
most some are brib'd to vow it looks - -
ost plainly done by thieves with reapinghazks. r
rear, n.s. e. %rench.] ping dryden.
1. the hinder troop of an army, or the hinder line of a fleet.
the rear admiral, an arch pirate, was afterwards slaifi with
a great shot. - anglles's h/lory of the turks.
argive chiefs -
fled from his well-known face, with wonted fear,
as when his thund'ring sword and pointed spear
drove headlong to their ships, and glean'd the rear. dryd.
2. the last class; the last in order. -
coins i place in the rear, because made up of both the
other. - . * peacham.
snowy headed winter leads, i
yellow autumn brings the rear. j%aller.
rear. adj. [prene, saxon.]
1. raw ; half roasted; half sodden.
2. early. a provincial word. . -
o'er yonder hill does scant the dawn appear,
then why does cuddy leave his cot so rear 2 gay.
to rear. v. a. [ariaenan, saxon.]
1. to raise up. -
all the people shouted with a loud voice, for the rearing
up of the house of the lord. - 1 esdr. v. 62.
who now shall rear you to the sun, or rank
your tribes milton.
2. to lift up from a fall. - -
down again she fell unto the ground,
but he her quickly rear'd up again. sosr.
in adoration at his feet i feli
submiss: he rear'd me. milton;
3. to move upwards. . . -
up to a hill anon his steps he rear'd, -
from whose high top to ken the prospect round. moon.
4. to bring up to maturity. . .
o creature goeth to generate, whilst the female is busy in
fitting or rearing her young. bacon's natural hisaory.
- they were a very hardy breed, and reared their young ones
without any care. - martimer’s husbandry.
they flourish’d long in tender bliss, and rear'd -
a numerous offspring, lovely like themselves. thomson.
5. to educate; to instruct.
he wants a father to protect his youth,
and rear him up to virtue. , southern.
they have in every town publick nurseries, where all pa-
rents, except cottagers and labourers, are obliged to send their
infants to be reared and educated. swift.
6. to exalt ; to elevate. . . -
... charity decent, modest, easy, kind,
, softens the high, and rears the abject mind. prior.
7. to rouse; to stir up.
into the naked woods he goes,
and seeks the tusky boar to rear,
. . with well-mouth’d hounds and pointed spear. dryden.
8. to raise; to breed.
no flesh from market-towns our peasant sought;
he rear'd his frugal meat, but never bought. fiarte.
rea'rw ard. m. s. [from rear.]
1. the last troop. ".
he from the beginning began to be in the rearward, and
before they left fighting, was too far off. sidney.
the standard of dan was the rearward of the camp. num.
2. the end ; the tail; a train behind. .
why follow'd not, when she said tybalt's dead,
thy father or thy mother
but with a rearward following tybalt's death,
romeo is banished. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
3. the latter part. in contempt.
he was ever in the rearward of the fashion: shakesp.
rearmouse. m. s. [more properly reremouse; pnenemur, sax.]
the leather-winged bat.
some war with rearmice for their leathern wings
to make my small elves coats. shakespeare.
of flying fishes, the wings are not feathers, but a thin kind
of skin, like the wings of a bat or rearmouse. abbot.
to reasce’nd. v. n... [re and ascend.]. to climb again.
when as the day the heaven doth adorn,
i wish that night the noyous day would end;
and when as night hath us of light forlorn,
i wish that day would shortly reascend. spensor.
taught<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o r e a
r e a
taught by the heav'nly muse to venture down
the dark descent, and up to reascend.
these puistant legions, whose exile
hath empty’d heav'n, shall fail to reas end,
self rais'd, and repofless their native seat.
to reasce'nd. v. a. to mount again.
when the god his fury had allay’d,
he mounts aloft, and reascends the skies.
reason. n.f. [raison, fr. ratio, lat.]
1. the power by which man deduces one proposition from an-
other, or proceeds from premises to consequences; the 1a-
tional faculty; discursive power.
reason is the director of man's will, discovering in action
what is good; for the laws of well-doing are the dictates of
milion,
milton.
addison.
right reason. phooker.
though brutish that contest and foul,
when reason hath to deal with force; yet so
most reason is that reason overcome. milton.
i appeal to the common judgment of mankind, whether
the humane nature be not so framed, as to acquiesce in such
a moral certainty, as the nature of things is capable of ; and
if it were otherwise, whether that reason which belongs to
us, would not prove a burden and a torment to us, rather
than a privilege, by keeping us in a continual suspense, and
thereby rendering our conditions perpetually restless and un-
quiet. wilkins.
dim, as the borrow'd beams of moon and stars
to lonely, weary, wand'ring travellers,
is reason to the soul: and as on high,
those rowling fires discover but the sky,
not light us here; so reason's glimmering ray
was lent, not to assure our doubtful way,
but guide us upward to a better day. dryden.
it would be weij, if people would not lay so much weight
on their own reason in matters of religion, as to think every
thing impossible and absurd, which they cannot conceive:
how often do we contradict the right rules of reason in the
whole course of our lives: reason itself is true and just, but
the reason of every particular man is weak and wavering,
perpetually swayed and turned by his interests, his passions
and his vices. swift's miscellanies.
2. cause ; ground or principle.
what the apostles deemed rational and probable means to
that end, there is no reason, or probability to think should
ever in any produce this effect. hammond.
virtue and vice are not arbitrary things, but there is a na-
tural and eternal reason for that goodness and virtue, and
against vice and wickedness. tillotson.
3. cause efficient. -
spain is thin sown of people, partly by reason of the sterility
of the soil, and partly their natives are exhausted by so many
employments in such vast territories as they possess. bacon.
such a benefit, as by the antecedent will of christ is in-
tended to all men living, though all men by reason of their
own demerits, do not actually receive the fruit of it. jwhite.
the reason of the motion of the balance in a wheel watch,
is by the motion of the next wheel. hale.
by reason of the fickness of a reverend prelate, i have been
over-ruled to approach this place. spratt.
i have not observed equality of numbers in my verse;
partly by reason of my haste, but more especially because i
would not have my sense a slave to syllables. dryden.
4. final cause.
reason, in the english language, sometimes is taken for
true and clear principles; sometimes for clear and fair de-
ductions; sometimes for the cause, particularly the final
cause. locke.
5. argument; ground of persuasion; motive.
i mask the business from the common eye
for fundry weighty reasons. shakesp. macbeth.
if it be natural, ought we not rather to conclude, that
there is some ground and reason for these fears, and that na-
ture hath not planted them in us to no purpose tillotson.
if we commemorate any mystery of our redemption, or
article of our faith, we ought to confirm our belief of it, by
considering all those reasons upon which it is built; that we
may be able to give a good account of the hope that is in us.
nelson.
6. ratiocination; discursive act.
when she rates things, and moves from ground to ground,
the name of reason the obtains by this;
but when by reason she the truth hath found,
and standeth fixt, she understanding is. davies.
7. clearness of faculties.
lovers and madmen have their seething brains,
such shaping fantasies that apprehend
more than cool reason ever comprehends. shakespeare.
when valour preys on reason,
it eats the sword it fights with.
3. right ; justice.
i was promis'd on a time, *
to have reason for my rhyme:
shakesp. ant, and cleop.
from that time unto this season,
i receiv'd nor rhyme nor reason. spensor.
are you in earnest ?
ay, and resolv’d withal
to do myself this reason and this right. shakeshcare.
the papists ought in reason to allow them all the excuses
they make use of for themselves; such as an invincible igno-
rance, oral tradition and authority. stillingfiest.
let it drink deep in thy most vital part ;
strike home, and do me reason in thy heart. dryden.
9. reasonable claim ; just practice.
god brings good out of evil; and therefore it were but
reason we should trust god to govern his own world, and wait
till the change cometh, or the reason be discovered. taylor.
conscience, not acting by law, is a boundless presumptuous
thing; and, for any one by virtue thereof, to challenge him.
self a privilege of doing what he will, and of being unaccount-
able, is in all reason too much, either for man or angel. south.
a severe reflection montaigne has made on princes, that
we ought not in reason to have any expectations of favour from
them. dryden's dedication to aurengzebe.
we have as great assurance that there is a god, as the nal
ture of the thing to be proved is capable of, and as we could
in reason expe&amp;t to have. tillotson's preface.
when any thing is proved by as good arguments as a thing
of that kind is capable of, we ought not in regson to doubt o:
its existence. tillotson.
io. rationale ; just account.
this reason did the ancient fathers render, why the church
was called catholick. pearson.
to render a reason of an effect or phenomenon, is to de-
duce it from something else more known than itself. boyle.
11. moderation ; moderate demands. -
the most probable way of bringing france to reason, would
be by the making an attempt upon the spanish west indies,
and by that means to cut off all communication with this
great source of riches. - addison,
to rea’son. v. n. [raisonner, fr.]
1. to argue rationally ; to deduce consequences justly from
premises.
no man, in the strength of the first grace, can merit the
second ; for reason they do not, who think so; unless a beg-
gar, by receiving one alms, can merit another. south.
ideas, as ranked under names, are those, that for the most
part men reason of within themselves, and always those which
they commune about with others. locke.
every man's reasoning and knowlege is only about the ideas
existing in his own mind; and our knowlege and reasoning
about other things is only as they correspond with those our
particular ideas. locke,
love is not to be reason'd down, or lost
in high ambition. addison.
in the lonely grove,
'twas there just and good he reason'd strong,
clear'd some great truth, or rais’d some serious song. tickell.
2. to debate; to discourse ; to talk; to take or give an ac-
count. not in use.
reason with the fellow,
before you punish him, where he heard this. shakesh.
i reason'd with a frenchman yesterday,
who told me in the narrow seas,
there miscarried a vessel of our country. shakespeare.
stand still, that i may reason with you of all the righteous
acts of the lord. 1 sam. xii. 7.
3. to raise disquisitions ; to make enquiries.
jesus, perceiving their thoughts, said, what reason ye in
your hearts : luke v. 22.
they reason'd high
of providence, foreknowledge, will and fate. milton.
down reason then, at least vain reasoning down. milton.
to rfa’son. v. a. to examine rationally. this is a french
mode of speech.
when they are clearly discovered, well digested, and well
resoned in every part, there is beauty in such a theory. burnet.
rea’sonable., adj. [raison, fr.]
1. having the faculty of reason; endued with reason.
she perceived her only son lay hurt, and that his hurt was
so deadly, as that already his life had lost use of the reasonable
and almost sensible part. sidney.
2. aeting, speaking or thinking rationally.
the parliament was dissolved, and gentlemen furnished
with such forces, as were held sufficient to hold in bridle either
the malice or rage of reasonable people. hayward.
3. just ; rational; agreeable to reason.
by indubitable certainty, i mean that which doth not ad-
mit of any reasonable cause of doubting, which is the only
certainty of which most things are capable. j/iikins.
a law may be reasonable in itself, although a man does not
allow it, or does not know the reason of the lawgivers. swift.
4. not immoderate.
let all things be thought upon,
that may with reasonable swiftness add
more feathers to our wings. shakesp. henry v.
9 5. tolerable ;
.
t
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e a
r e. b.
9. tolerable; being in mediocrity. *
i could with reasonable good manner receive the salutation
of her and of the princess pamela, doing them yet no further
reverence than one princess oweth to another. sidney.
a good way distant from the nigra rupes, there are four se-
veral lands of reasonable quantity. abbot’s desc. of the world.
notwithstanding these defects, the english colonies main-
tained themselves in a reasonable good estate, as long as they
retained their own ancient laws. davies on ireland.
rfa’son able ness. n.s.. [from reasonable.]
1. the faculty of reason.
2. agreeableness to reason.
sney thought the work would be better done, if those,
who had satisfied themselves with the reasonablens of what
they wish, would undertake the converting and disposing of
other men. - clarendon.
he that rightly understands the reasonablenos, and excel-
lency of charity, will know, that it can never be excusable
to waste any of our money in pride and folly. law.
. compliance with reason.
the passive reason, which is more properly reasonablenes,
is that order and congruity which is impressed upon the thing
thus wrought; as in a watch, the whole frame and contex-
ture of it carries a reasonableness in it, the passive impression
of the reason or intelle&amp;tual idea that was in the artist. hale.
4. moderation.
rea’so nably. adv. [from reasonable.]
1. agreeably to reason.
chaucer makes arcite violent in his love, and unjust in the
pursuit of it; yet when he came to die, he made him think
more reasonably. dryden's preface to fables.
the church has formerly had eminent saints in that sex;
and it may reasonably be thought, that it is purely owing to
their poor and vain education, that this honour of their sex
is for the most part confined to former ages. law.
3. moderately ; in a degree reaching to mediocrity.
some man reasonably studied in the law, should be persuaded
to go thither as chancellor. bacon's advice to williers.
if we can by industry make our deaf and dumb persons rea-
sonaby perfect in the language and pronunciation, he may be
also capable of the same privilege of understanding by the eye
what is spoken. holder's elements of speech.
rea’son er. m. s. [raisonneur, fr. from reason.] one who rea-
sons; an arguer.
due reverence pay
to learn'd epicurus ; see the way
by which this reasoner of so high renown
moves through th' ecliptick road the rolling sun. blackm.
the terms are loose and undefined; and what less becomes
a fair reasoner, he puts wrong and invidious names on every
thing to colour a false way of arguing. addison.
those reasoners, who employ so much of their zeal for the
upholding the balance of power in chiistendom, by their
practices are endeavouring to destroy it at home. swift.
rea’so ning. m. s. [from reason.] argument.
those who weuld make use of solid arguments and strong
re's rings to a reader of so delicate a turn, would be like that
foolish people, who worshipped a fly, and sacrificed an ox to it.
addison's freeholder.
your reasonings therefore on this head, amount only to
what the schools call ignoratio elenchi ; proving before the
question, on talking wide of the purpose. waterland.
rea's on less. adj. [from reason.] void of reason. “
this proffer is absurd and reasonless. shakesp. hen. vi.
ls it
her true perfection, or my false transgression,
that makes me reasonless to reason thus : shakespeare.
that they wholly direet the reasonloss mind, i am resolved ;
for all those which were created mortal, as birds and beasts,
are left to their natural appetites. raleigh's hisł. of the world.
these reasons in love's law have past for good,
though fond and reasonless to some. milton's agonisles.
t2 re asse"mble. v. a. [re and assemble.] to collect anew.
there reassembling our afflicted pow'rs,
consult how to offend our enemy. milton.
to reassert. v. a. [re and affort.] to assert anew; to
maintain after suspension or cessation.
his steps i followed, his doctrine i reasserted. atterbury.
young orestes grown
to manly years should reassert the throne. pope.
to reassu’me. v. a. [reasumo, lat. re and assume.] to
resume; to take again.
to him the son return'd
into his blissful bosom reaffilm’d,
in glory as of old. milton.
nor only on the trojans fell this doom,
their hearts at last the vanquish'd reassume. denham.
for this he reassumes the nod,
while semele commands the god. prior.
after henry viii. had reassumed the supremacy, a statute
was made, by which all doctors of the civil law might be
made chancellors. - ayliffe's parergon.
vol. ii.
to re assu’re, ov. a. [rosarer, fr.] to free from fear; to restore
from terrour.
- they rose with fear,
till dauntles, pallas resord the rest. dryden.
reate. m. s. a kind of long small grass that grows in water,
and complicates itself together.
let them lie dry six months to kill the water-weeds; as
water-lilies, candocks, reate and bulrushes. j7asion.
to reave. v. a. pret, roft snaplan, saxon; whence to bereave.]
1. to take away by stealth or violence. an obsolete word.
dismounting from his lofty fleed,
he to him leapt, in mind to reave his life. spensor.
some make his meashy bed, but reave his rest. carew.
but these men, knowing, having heard the voyce
of god, by some meanes, that sad death hath roft
the ruler heere ; will never suffer left
their unjust wooing of his wife.
who can be bound by any solemn vow,
to do a murd’rous deed, to rob a man,
to force a spotless virgin's chastity,
to reave the orphan of his patrimony,
and have no other reason for his wrong,
but that he was bound by a solemn oath shao. hen. vi.
2. it was used as well in a good as bad sense.
they sought my troubled sense how to deceave
with talk, that might unquiet fancies reave. sponsor.
each succeeding time addeth or reaveth goods and evils,
according to the occasions itself produceth. carew.
to rebaptize. v. a. [rebaptiser, fr. ne and baptize.] to
baptize again.
understanding that the rites of the church were observed,
he approved of their baptism, and would not suffer them to
be rebaptized. ayliffe's parergon.
reraprization... m. s. [rebaptisation, fr. from rebaptize.]
renewal of baptism.
in maintainance of rebaptization, their arguments are built
upon this, that hereticks are not any part of the church of
christ. hooker.
to rebate. v. n. [rebattre, fr.] to blunt; to beat to ob-
tuseness; to deprive of keenness.
he doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
with profits of the mind, study and fast. shakespeare.
the icy goat, the crab which square the scales;
with those of aries trine consent to hate
chapman.
the scales of libra, and her rays rebate. creech.
he modifies his first severe decree ; -
the keener edge of battle to rebate,
the troops for honour fighting, not for hate. dryden.
my flagging soul flies under her own pitch,
my senses too are dull and stupify'd, o
their edge rebated. dryden's don sebastian.
their innocence unfeign'd long joys afford
to the honest nuptial bed, and, in the wane
of life, rebate the miseries of age. philies.
resbeck. m. s. [rebec, fr. ibecca, italian.] a three stringed
fiddle.
when the merry bells ring round,
and the jocund rebocks found,
to many a youth and many a maid,
dancing in the checker d shade. milton,
re'eel. m. s. [rebelle, fr. rebellis, lat..] one who opposes
lawful authority.
the merciless macdonel
worthy to be a rebel; for to that
the multiplying villanies of nature
do swarm upon him. shaky?, macbeth.
the rebels there are up,
and put the englishmen unto the sword. shakesh.
shall man from nature's sanction stray
a rebel to her rightful sway. - fenton.
to rebel. v. n. [rebello, lat..] to rise in opposition against
lawful authority.
boys, immature in knowledge,
pawn their experience to their present pleasure,
and so rebel to judgment. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
if they perceive dissention in our looks,
how will their grudging stomachs be provok'd
to wilful disobedience, and relel? shakes). henry vi.
such smiling rogues as these sooth every passion,
that in the nature of their lords rebels;
bring oil to fire. shakesp. king lear.
there was a time, when all the body's members
rebell'd against the belly. shakesp. coriolanus.
arm'd with thy might, rid heav'n of these rebel'd. mill.
how cou’d my hand rebel against my heart?
how cou’d your heart rebel against vour reason 2 dryden.
part of the angels rebelled against god, and thereby lost
their happy state. locke.
rebe’ller. n.s.. [from rebel.] one that rebels. dic.
rebe'llion. m. s. [rebellion, fr. e!elli, lat. from rebel.]
insurrection against lawful authority.
he was victorious in rebellions and seditions of people. bac.
21 i adam's<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. b
r e c
adam's fin, or the curse upon it, did not deprive him of
rule, but left the creatures to a rebellion or reluctation. bacon.
of their names in heav'nly records now
is no memorial, blotted out and raz'd
by their rebellion from the books of life. milton,
re: i. ilious, adj. [from rebel.] opponent to lawful autho-
rity.
from the day that thou didst depart out of egypt, until ye
came unto this place, ye have been relellious against the
lord. o deut. ix. 7.
this our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey
our voice. deut. xxi. 20.
bent he seems
on desperate revenge, which shall redound
upon his own rebellious head. milton.
rfre'lliously. adv. [from rebellious.] in opposition to law-
ful authority.
when one shewed him where a nobleman, that had rebel-
liously born arms against him, lay very honourably intombed,
and advised the king to deface the monument; he said, no,
no, but i would all the rest of mine enemies were as honour-
ably intombed. camden’s remains.
re bellious n ess. n. s. [from rebellious.] the quality of
being rebellious.
7% rebe l low. v. n. [re and below.] to bellow in return;
to echo back a loud noise.
he loudly bray'd with beastly yelling sound,
that all the ficles relellowed again. spenser.
the resisting air the thunder broke,
the cave relelow'd, and the temple shook. dryden.
from whence were heard, rebellowing to the main,
- the roars of lions. dryden's afneis.
repo arios. m. s. [reboo, lat..] the return of a loud bel-
lowing found.
73 rebou'n d. v. m. [rebondir, fr. re and bound..] to spring
back; to be reverberated; to fly back, in consequence of
motion impressed and resisted by a greater power.
whether it were a roaring voice of most savage wild beasts,
or a rebounding echo from the hollow mountains. wisd. xvii.
it with rebounding surge the bars affail’d. milton.
life and death are in the power of the tongue, and that
not only directly with regard to the good or ill we may do to
others, but reflexively with regard to what may relaund to
ourselves, government of the tongue.
bodies which are absolutely hard, or so soft as to be void
of elasticity, will not relound from one another: impenetra-
bility makes them only stop. newton's opticks.
she bounding from the shelfy shore,
round the descending nymph the waves rebounding roar. po.
to re bou’nd. v. a.
1. to reverberate; to beat back.
all our invectives, at their supposed errors, fall back with
a rebounded force upon our own real ones. decay of piety.
silenus sung, the vales his voice rebound,
and carry to the skies the sacred sound.
2. prior has used it improperly.
fiow’rs, by the soft south west
open'd, and gather'd by religious hands,
rebound their sweets from th’ odoriferous pavement. prior.
rf bou'nd. m. s. [from the verb..] the act of flying back in
consequence of motion resisted; resilition.
i do feel,
by the rebound of yours, a grief that shoots
my very heart. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
if you strike a ball fidelong, not full upon the surface, the
rebound will be as much the contrary way; whether there be
any such resilience in echoes may be tried. bacon.
the weapon with unerring fury flew,
at his left shoulder aim'd: nor entrance found;
but back, as from a rock, with swift rebound,
harmless return’d. dryden.
rebu'ff. n.s. [rebuffade, fr. rebuffo, italian.] repercussion;
quick and sudden resistance.
by ill chance
the strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud,
instinet with fire and nitre, hurried him
as many miles aloft. milton's parad's ioff.
to redu’f f. v. a. [stom the noun..] to beat back; to op-
pose with sudden violence.
to rebu'ild. v. a. [re and build.] to reedify; to restore
from demolition; to repair.
the fines imposed there were the more questioned, and re-
pined against, because they were assigned to the rebuilding
and repairing of st. paul's church. clarendon.
fine is the secret, delicate the art,
to raise the shades of heroes to our view,
dryden.
rebuild fall'n empires, and old time renew. 7ickel.
re eu kable. adj. [from rebuke.] worthy of reprehension.
rebukable
and worthy shameful check it were, to stand
on mere mechanick compliment. shakesp. ant. and cleop.
to rebut.e. v.a. [reboucher, fr.] to chide; to reprehend;
to repress by objurgation. -
i am asham'd : does not the stone rebuke me,
for being more stone than it shakesp. //inter's 7al.
he was rebuked for his iniquity; the dumb ass, speakin
with man's voice, forbad the madness of the prophet. 2 pet,
the proud he tam’d, the penitent he cheer’d,
nor to rebuke the rich offender fear'd. dryden.
rebu’ke, n. s. [from the verb.]
1. reprehension; chiding expression; objurgation.
why bear you these relus, and answer not? shaos.
if he will not yield,
rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
and they shall do their office. shakesp. henry iv.
thy rebuke hath broken my heart. psalm lxix. 21.
the rebukes and chiding to children, should be in grave
and dispassionate words. locke.
shall cibber's son, without rebuke,
swear like a lord pope.
should vice expe&amp;t to 'scape rebuke,
because its owner is a duke swift's miscellanies.
2. in low language, it signifies any kind of check.
he gave him so terrible a rebuke upon the forehead with his
heel, that he laid him at his length, * l’estrange.
rebu'ker. n.s.. [from rebuke.] a chider; a reprehender.
the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though i
have been a rebuker of them all. hosea v. 2.
re'bu.s. m. s. [rebus, latin.] a word represented by a picture.
some citizens, wanting arms, have coined themselves cer-
tain devices alluding to their names, which we call rebus:
master jugge the printer, in many of his books, took, to ex-
press his name, a nightingale fitting in a bush with a scrole
in her mouth, wherein was written jugge, jugge, jugge. peac.
to rebut. v. n. [rebuter, fr.] to retire back. obsolete.
themselves too rudely rigorous,
astonied with the stroke of their own hand,
do back rebut, and each to other yielded land. spensor.
rebutter. m. s. an answer to a rejoinder.
to reca'll. v. a. [re and call.] to call back; to call again;
to revoke.
they who recal the church unto that which was at the first,
must set bounds unto their speeches. hooker.
if henry were recall'd to life again,
these news would cause him once more yield the ghost.
shakesp. henry vi.
negle&amp;ted long, she let the secret rest,
till love recall"d it to her lab’ring breast. dryden.
it is strange the soul should never once recal over any of its
pure native ideas, before it borrowed any thing from the body;
never any other ideas, but what derive their original from
that union. locke.
to the churches, wherein they were ordained, they might
of right be recalled as to their proper church, under pain of
excommunication. ayliff's parergon.
it is necessary to recall to the reader's mind, the desire
ulysses has to reach his own country. broome on odys.
, if princes, whose dominions lie contiguous, be forced to
draw from those armies which act against france, we must
hourly expect having those troops recalled, which they now
leave with us in the midst of a siege. swift's miscellanies.
recat. l. m. / [from the verb...] revocation; act or power
of calling back.
other decrees
against thee are gone forth, without recall. milton.
'tis done, and since ’tis done, ’tis past recal;
and since ’tis past recal, must be forgotten. dryden.
to recant. v. a. [recanto, lat.] to retract; to recall;
to contradict what one has once said or done.
he shall do this, or else i do recant
the pardon that i late pronounced. shakoff. mer. of ven.
how soon would ease recant
vows made in pain as violent and void milton.
to recant. v. n. to revoke a position; to unsay what has
been said. -
if it be thought, that the praise of a translation consists in
adding new beauties, i shall be willing to recant. dryden.
that the legislature should have power to change the suc-
cession, whenever the necessities of the kingdom require, is
so useful towards preserving our religion and liberty, that i
know not how to recant. swift.
recantation. n.s.. [from recent.] retrastation; declara-
tion contradiciory to a former declaration.
she could not sce means to join this recantation to the
former vow. sidney-
the poor man was imprisoned for this discovery, and
forced to make a publick recantation. stillingsleer-
reca’nter. m.s.. [from recant..] one who recants.
the publick body, which doth seldom
play the recanter, feeling in itself
a lack of timon's aid, hath sense withal
of its own full, restraining aid to timon.
shakespeare-
g
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e c
r e c
to recapitulate. v. a. [re-attakr, fr. re and cat!-
tnam, lat..] to repeat agaif the fun of a former discourse.
hylobares judiciously and resentingly recapitulates your main
rea'onings. a/ore's divine dialogues.
i have been forced to recapitulate these things, because
mankind is not more liable to deceit, than it is willing to
continue in a pleasing error. dryden's dofresnoy.
recapitulation. m. s. . [from recapitulate.] distinct repe-
tition of the principal points.
he maketh a recapitulation of the christian churches; among
the rest he addeth the isle of eden by name. raleigh.
instead of raising any particular uses from the point that
has been delivered, let us make a brief recapitulation of the
whole. south.
recapitulatory. adj. [from recapitulate.] repeating again,
recapitulatory exercises. garretson.
to reca rry. v. a. [re and carry..] to carry back.
when the turks besieged malta or rhodes, pigeons car-
ried and recarried letters. j/alton's angler.
7. rece'de. v. n. [reced, latin.]
1. to fall back ; to retreat.
a deaf noise of founds that never cease,
confus’d and chiding, like the hollow roar
of tides, receding from th’ insulted shoar.
ye doubts and fears 1
scatter'd by winds recede, and wild in forests rove. prior.
all bodies, moved circularly, have a perpetual endeavour
to recede from the center, and every moment would fly out in
right lines, if they were not violently restrained by contiguous
rol atter. bently.
2. to desist; to relax any claim.
i can be content to recede much from my own interests and
personal rights. king charles.
they hoped that their general assembly would be persuaded
to depart from some of their demands; but that, for the pre-
sent, they had not authority to recede from any one propo-
sition. clarendon.
recei'pt. m. s. [receptum, latin.]
1. the aet of receiving.
villain, thou did'st deny the gold's receipt,
and told me of a mistress. shakesp. cam. of err.
it must be done upon the receipt of the wound, before the
patient's spirits be overheated. //seman's surgery.
the joy of a monarch for the news of a victory must not
be expressed like the ecstasy of a harlequin, on the receipt of
dryden.
a letter from his mistress. doydon.
2. the place of receiving.
jesus saw matthew fitting at the receipt of custom. matt.
3. [recopte, fr.]. a note given, by which money is acknow-
ledged to have been received.
4. reception; admission.
it is of things heavenly an universal declaration, work-
ing in them, whose hearts god inspireth with the due consi-
deration thereof, an habit or disposition of mind, whereby
they are made fit vessels, both for the receipt and delivery of
whatsoever spiritual perfection. hooker.
5. reception; welcome. -
the same words in my lady philoclea's mouth might have
had a better grace, and perchance have found a gentler
receipt. sidney.
jove requite
and all th’ immortall gods, with that delight
thou most desir'st, thy kind receite of me;
of friend, to humane hospitality. chapman.
6. (from recipe, j prescription of ingredicnts for any compo-
fition.
on 's bed of death
many receipts he gave me, chiefly one
of his old experience th' only darling. shak's care,
i'll teach him a receipt to make
words that weep, and tears that speak. cowley.
that medea could make old men young again, was no-
thing clfe, but that, from knowledge of simples, she had
a re.ipt to make white hair black. brown's pulgar errours.
wise lecches will not vain receipts obtrude,
while growing pains pronounce the humours crude. dryd.
some dryly plain, without invention's aid,
write dull receipts, how poems may be made. pope.
scribonius found the receipt in a letter wrote to tiberius,
and was never able to procure the receipt during the empe-
ror's life. arbuthnot on coins.
rf cer'vable. adj. [recevable, fr. from receive j capable of
being received. dicf.
to recetve. v. a. [recevoir, fr. recisio, lat.]
1. to take or obtain any thing as due.
if by this crime he owes the law his life,
why, let the war receive 't in valiant gore. shakesp.
a certain nobleman went into a far country, to receive for
himself a kingdom, and return. luke xiv. 12.
2. to take or obtain from another, whether good or evil.
though 1 should receive a thousand shekels of silver in mine
yet would i not put forth mine hand against the king’s
- 2 sam. xviii. i2.
what shall we receive good at the hands of god, and
shall we not receive evil? job o so
to them hast thou poured a drink-offering :
ceive comfort in these ? p rink-offering *y. ".
he that docth wrong, shall race;
and there is no respect ; o for the wo
put all in writing that thou givest out, and recio in. --&gt; *
they o wo the friendship and o:
received no laws from one another, but li - -
3. o, take anything communicated. ut lived separately. locke.
raw general conclusions from every part;
with : these make little true benefit . fo
of forward and active spirits, receive more harm sy o }.
the idea of solidity we receive by our touch. - .
the same inability will every one find, who shall go is:
to fashion in his understanding any simple idea, not rol
in by his senses or by reflection. ilocke
to conceive the ideas we receive from sensation, confid:
them, in reference to the different ways, whereby they make
their approaches to our minds. locke
4. to embrace intellectually. -
we have set it down as a law, to examine things to the
bottom, and not to receive upon credit, or reject upon impro-
babilities. baron's natural hijiory.
in an equal indifferency for all truth; i mean the recovic,
it, in the love of it, as truth; and in the examination of our
principles, and not receiving any for such, till we are fully
convinced of their certainty, consists the freedom of the un-
derstanding. - locke.
5. to allow. -
long received custom forbidding them to do as they did,
there was no excuse to justify their act; unless, in the scrip.
ture, they could shew some law, that did licence them thus
to break a received custom. hazker.
will it not be receiv'd,
when we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two,
and us’d their very daggers; that they have don’t
—who dares receive it other * shakesp. macbeth.
lest any should think that any thing in this number eight
creates the diapason; this computation of eight is rather a
thing received, than any true computation.
6. to admit.
when they came to jerusalem, they were received of the
church. do?: xv. 4.
thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward ro-
ceive me to glory. psalm ixxiii. 24.
let her be shut out from the camp seven days, and after
that received in again. numb. xii. 14.
free converse with persons of different sects will enlarge
our charity towards others, and incline us to receive them
into all the degrees of unity and affection, which the word of .
god requires. //atts's improvement of the a/ind.
7. to take as into a vessel.
he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their
fight. acts i. 9.
8. to take into a place or state.
after the lord had spoken, he was received up into hea-
ven, and sat on the right hand of god. asare xvi. 19.
9. to conceive in the mind; to take intelle&amp;ually.
to one of your receiving,
hand,
son.
bacon.
frough is shewn. shakespeare.
io. to entertain as a guest.
abundance fit to honour, and receive
our heav'nly stranger. milton.
recei've dness. m. s. [from received.] general allowance.
others will, upon account of the receivedness of the pro-
posed opinion, think it rather worth to be examined, than
acquiesced in. boyle.
rece 1 v er. m. s. [receveur, fr. from receive.]
i. one to whom anything is communicated by another.
all the learnings that his time could make him receiver of,
he took as we do air. shakesp. cymbeline.
she from whose influence all impression came,
but by receivers impotencies lame. donne.
what was so mercifully designed, might have been im-
proved by the humble and diligent receivers unto their greatest
advantages. ihammond.
2. one to whom any thing is given or paid.
in all works of liberality, something more is to be consi-
dered, besides the occasion of the givers; and that is the oc-
casion of the receivers. spratt.
gratitude is a virtue, disposing the mind to an inward
sense, and an outward acknowledgement of a benefit received,
together with a readiness to return the same, as the occasions
of the doer shall require, and the abilities of the receiver ex-
tend to. south,
if one third of the money in trade were locked up, land-
holders must receive one third less for their goods; a less quan-
tity
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. c
r. e. c
tity of money by one third being to be distributed amongst
an equal number of receivers. locke.
wood's halfpence will be offered for six a penny, and the
necessary receivers will be losers of two thirds in their pay. sw.
3. an officer appointed to receive publick money.
there is a receiver, who alone handleth the monies. bacon.
4. one who partakes of the blessed sacrament.
the signification and sense of the sacrament dispose the spi-
rit of the receiver to admit the grace of the spirit of god there
consigned. taylor's i/orthy communicant.
. one who co-operates with a robber, by taking the goods
which he steals.
this is a great cause of the maintenance of thieves, know-
ing their receivers always ready; for were there no receivers,
there would be no thieves. spenser's state of ireland.
6. the vessel into which spirits are emitted from the still.
these liquors, which the wide receiver fill,
prepar'd with labour, and refin'd with skill,
another course to distant parts begin. blackmore.
alkaline spirits run in veins down the sides of the receiver
in distillations, which will not take fire. arbuthnot.
. the vessel of the air pump, out of which the air is drawn,
and which therefore receives any body on which experiments
are tried.
the air that in exhausted receivers of air pumps is exhaled
from minerals, is as true as to elasticity and density or rare-
faction, as that we respire in. bentley.
to rece’le brate. v. a. [re and celebrate.] to celebrate anew.
french air and english verse here wedded lie:
who did this knot compose,
again hath brought the lilly to the rose;
and with their chained dance,
recelebrates the joyful match. - ben. johnson.
re'cency. n.s. [recens, lat.] newness; new state.
a schirrhus in its recency, whilst it is in its augment, re-
quireth milder applications than the confirmed one. wiseman.
rece nsion. m. s. [recensio, lat.] enumeration; review.
in this recension of monthly flowers, it is to be understood
from its first appearing to its final withering. evelyn.
re cent. adj. [recens, latin.] -
1. new ; not of long existence.
the ancients were of opinion, that those parts, where
egypt now is, were formerly sea, and that a confiderable por-
tion of that country was recent, and formed out of the mud
discharged into the neighbouring sea by the nile. woodward.
2. late; not antique. -
among all the great and worthy persons, whereof the
memory remaineth, either ancient or recent, there is not one
that hath been transported to the mad degree of love. bacon.
3. fresh; not long dismissed, released or parted from.
ulysses moves,
urg’d on by want, and recent from the storms,
the brackish ouze his manly grace deforms. pope.
re'cently. adv. [from recent.] newly; freshly.
those tubes, which are most recently made of fluids, are
most flexible and most easily lengthened. arbuthnot.
rescentnfss. m. s. [from recent.] newness; freshness.
this inference of the recentness of mankind from the re-
centness of these apotheoses of gentile deities, seems too weak
to bear up this supposition of the novitas humani generis, hale.
rece'ptacle. n. s. [receptaculum, lat..] a vessel or place
into which any thing is received. this had formerly the ac-
cent on the first syllable.
when the sharpness of death was overcome, he then
opened heaven, as well to believing gentiles as jews: heaven
till then was no receptacle to the souls of either. hooker.
the county of tipperary, the only county palatine in
ireland, is by abuse of some bad ones made a receptacle to rob
the rest of the counties about it. spenser's state of ireland.
as in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
where for these many hundred years, the bones
of all my buried ancestors are packt. shakespeare.
the eye of the soul, or receptacle of sapience and divine
knowledge. raleigh's history of the iworld.
lest paradise a receptacle prove
to spirits foul, and all my trees their prey. milton.
their intelligence, put in at the top of the horn, shall
convey it into a little receptacle at the bottom. addison.
these are conveniencies to private persons; instead of being
receptacles for the truly poor, they tempt men to pretend po-
verty, in order to share the advantages. alterbury.
though the supply from this great receptacle below be con-
tinual and alike to all the globe; yet when it arrives near the
surface, where the heat is not so uniform, it is subject to
vicissitudes. j/32dward.
receptibi'lity, n. s. [receptus, lat.] possibility of receiving.
the peripatetick matter is a pure una&amp;tuated power; and
this conceited vacuum a mere receptibility. glanville.
resceptary. n. s. [receptus, lat.] thing received. not in use.
they, which behold the present state of things, cannot
condemn our sober enquiries in the doubtful appertenancies of
arts and receptaries of philosophy. brown.
6
6. treatment at first coming; welcome; entertainment.
rece'ption... n.s.. [receptus, latin.]
1. the act of receiving.
both serve completely for the reception and communica:
of learned knowledge. holder's element; ors.
in this animal are found parts official unto nutrition, wo
were its aliment the compty reception of air, provisions i
been superfluous. brown's pugar brrour,
2. the state of being received.
causes, according still
to the reception of their matter, act;
not to th' extent of their own sphere. milon’, par. lo/?
3. admifion of anything communicated.
in some animals, the avenues, provided by nature for the
reception of sensations, are few, and the perception, they are
received with, obscure and dull.
4. readmission. locke.
all hope is lost
of my reception into grace. a4ilton's par. 12%
- 4.
5. the act of containing.
. i cannot survey, this world of fluid matter, without think-
ing on the hand that first poured it out, and made a proper
channel for its reception. %.
this succession of so many powerful methods being fa
prescribed by god, have so so discouraging a ;
that nothing but the violence of storming or battery can pre:
tend to prove successful. hammond's fundamental,
pretending to consult -
about the great reception of their king,
thither to come. milion.
7. opinion generally admitted.
philosophers, who have quitted the popular do&amp;rines of
their countries, have fallen into as **travagant opinions, as
even common reception countenanced. locke
8. recovery. not in use.
he was right glad of the french king's reception of those
towns from maximilian. bacon's henry vii.
rece'ptive. adj. [receptus, lat.] having the quality of ad-
mitting what is communicated.
- the soul being, as it is a&amp;ive, perfeoted by love of that
infinite good, shall, as it is recoptive, be also perfected with
those supernatural passions of joy, peace and delight. - hooker.
to advance the spiritual concerns of all that could in any
kind become recoptive of the good he meant them, was his
unlimited designment and endeavour. fell.
. the pretended first matter is capable of all forms, and the
imaginary space is receptive of all bodies. glanville.
rege'ptory, adj. [recoptus, lat.] generally or popularly
admitted.
although therein be contained many excellent things, and
verified upon his own experience, yet are there many also
receptory, and will not endure the test. brown.
rece'ss. n.s. [receffus, latin.]
1. rctirement; retreat; withdrawing; secession.
what tumults could not do, an army must; my reces, bath
given them confidence that i may be conquered. k. chare.
fair thames she haunts, and ev’ry neighb'ring grove
sacred to soft reces; and gentle love. so poor.
2. departure.
we come into the world, and know not how ; we live in
it in a self-nescience, and go hence again, and are as igno-
rant of our recess. glanville's scopsis.
3. place of retirement; place of secrecy; private abode.
this happy place, our sweet
recess, and only consolation left. azilton's par. lo/?.
the deep recesses of the grove he gain'd. do.
i wish that a crowd of bad writers do not rush into the
quiet of your recesses. dryden's don sebasiian.
4. (reco, fr.] perhaps an abstract of the proceedings of an
imperial diet.
in the imperial chamber, the proetors have a florin taxed
and allowed them for every substantial recos, ayliffo.
5. departure into privacy.
the great seraphick lords and cherubim,
in closs recess, and secret conclave sat, amilton.
in the recess of the jury, they are to consider their evil
dence. hale.
6. remission or suspension of any procedure.
on both sides they made rather a kind of reces, than a
breach of treaty, and concluded upon a truce. bacon.
i conceived this parliament would find work, with conve-
nient recoso, for the first three years. king charles.
7. removal to distance.
whatsoever fign the sun possessed, whose reces; or vicinity
definesh the quarters of the year, those of our seasons were
actually existent. brown's pulgar erreurs.
8. privacy; secrecy of abode.
good verse, reces, and solitude requires;
and case from cares, and undisturb’d desires. dryden.
9. secret part.
in their mysteries, and most secret recess, and adyta
of their religion, their heathen priests betrayed and lei
their
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. c.
r e c
-
*
their votaries into all the most horrid unnatural fins.
hammond.
every scholar should acquaint himself with a superficial
scheme of all the sciences, yet there is no necessity for every
man of learning to enter into their difficulties and ;
rtresses. watts on the mind.
rece'ssion. m. s. [recessio, lat.] the aet of retreating.
7. recha'nge. v. a. [rechanger, fr. re and change.] to
change again.
those endued with forefight, work with facility; others are
perpetually changing and rechanging their work. dryden.
t. rich a'ro e. v. a. [recharger, fr. re and charge.]
1. to accuse in return. -
the fault, that we find with them, is, that they over-
much abridge the church of her power in these things: where-
upon they recharge us, as if in these things we gave the church
a liberty, which hath no limits or bounds. hooker.
2. to attack anew.
they charge, recharge, and all along the sea
they drive, and squander the huge belgian fleet. dryden.
rechea r. n.s. among hunters, a lesson which the hunts-
man winds on the horn, when the hounds have lost their
game, to call them back from pursuing a counterscent. bail.
that a woman conceived me, i thank her; but that i will
have a recheat winded in my forehead, or hang my bugle in
an invisible baldrick, all women shall pardon me. shakesp.
recrpivation. m. s. [recidivus, lat..] backsliding ; falling
again.
*. renewed obedience is still most indispensably required,
though mixed with much of weakness, frailties, recidivations,
to make us capable of pardon. hammond's praci. cat.
recipi"vous. adj. [recidivus, lat..] subject to fall again.
re'cipe. m. s. [recipe, lat, the term used by physicians, when
they direct ingredients.] a medical fo
should enjoin you travel; for absence doth in a kind re-
move the cause, and answers the physicians first recipe, vo-
miting and purging; but this would be too harsh. sucklings
th’ apothecary train is wholly blind,
from files a random recipe they take,
and many deaths of one prescription make. dryden.
recipient. n. s. [recipiens, latin.]
1. the receiver; that to which anything is communicated.
though the images, or whatever else is the cause of sense,
may be alike as from the object, yet may the representations
be varied according to the nature of the recipient. glanville.
2. the vessel into which spirits are driven by the still.
the form of sound words, dissolved by chymical prepara-
tion, ceases to be nutritive; and after §: labours of the
alembeck, leaves in the recipient a fretting corrosive. d. of pie.
reci'procal. adj. [reciprocus, lat. reciprogue, fr.]
1. acting in vicishtude; alternate.
corruption is reciprocal to generation; and they two are as
nature's two boundaries, and guides to life and death. bacon.
- what if that light,
to the terrestrial moon be as a star,
enlight'ning her by day, as she by night,
this earth 2 reciprocal, if land be there,
fields and inhabitants.
2. mutual; done by each to each.
where there's no hope of a reciprocal aid, there can be no
reason for the mutual obligation. l’estrange.
in reciprocal duties, the failure on one side justifies not a
failure on the other. clarissa.
3. mutually interchangeable.
these two rules will render a definition reciprocal with the
thing defined; which, in the schools, signifies, that the de-
finition may be used in the place of the thing defined. watts.
4. in geometry, reciprocal proportion is, when, in four num-
bers, the fourth number is so much lesser than the second, as
the third is greater than the first, and vice versa. harris.
according to the laws of motion, if the bulk and activity
of aliment and medicines are in reciprocal proportion, the ef-
fe&amp;t will be the same. arbuthnot on aliments.
reci procally, adv. [from reciprocal.] mutually; inter-
changeably,
his mind and place
infecting one another reciprocally. shakesp. henry viii.
make the bodies appear enlightened by the shadows which
bound the fight, which cause it to repose for some space of
time; and reciprocally the shadows may be made sensible by
enlightening your ground. dryden.
if the distance be about the hundredth part of an inch,
the water will rise to the height of about an inch; and if the
distance be greater or less in any proportion, the height will
be reciprocally proportional to the distance very nearly: for the
attractive force of the glasses is the same, whether the distance
between them be greater or less; and the weight of the wa-
ter drawn up is the same, if the height of it be reciprocally
proportional to the height of the glasses. newton's opticks.
those two particles do reciprocally affect each other with
the same force and vigour, as they would do at the same di-
stance in any other situation. bentley.
vol. ii.
milton.
reciprocalness. n. j. [from reciprocal.] mutual return;
alternateness.
the reciprocalness of the injury ought to allay the displea-
sure at it. - decay of piety.
to reciprocate. v. n. [reciprocus, lat. reciproguer, fr.]
to act interchangeably; to alternate.
one brawny smith the puffing bellows plies,
and draws, and blows reciprocating air. dryden.
from whence the quick reciprocating breath,
the lobe adhesive, and the sweat of death. sewel.
reciprocation... m. s. [reciprocatio, from reciprocus, latin.]
alternation; aclion interchanged.
bodies may be altered by heat, and yet no such reciproca-
tion of rarefaction, condensation and separation. bacon.
that aristotle drowned himself in euripus, as despairing
to resolve the cause of its reciprocation or ebb and flow seven
times a day, is generally believed. brown.
where the bottom of the sea is owze or sand, it is by
the motion of the waters, so far as the reciprocation of the sea
extends to the bottom, brought to a level. ray.
the systole resembles the forcible bending of a spring, and
the diastole its flying out again to its natural site: what is the
principal efficient of this reciprocation * ... ray.
recision. m. s. [recisus, lat..] the act of cutting off.
recital. n.s.. [from recite.]
1. repetition ; rehearsal. -
the last are repetitions and recital of the first. denham.
2. narration.
this often sets him on empty boasts, and betrays him into
vain fantastick recitals of his own performances. addison.
3. enumeration.
to make the rough recital aptly chime,
or bring the sum of gallia's loss to rhime, -
ls mighty hard. prior.
recitation. m. s. [from recite.] repetition ; rehearsal.
if menaces of scripture fall upon men's persons, if they are
but the recitations and descriptions of god's decreed wrath,
and those decrees and that wrath have no respect to the ac-
tual sins of men; why should terrors restrain me from fin,
when present advantage invites me to it hammond.
he used philosophical arguments and recitations. temple.
recitative. }* f. [from recite.] a kind of tuneful pro-
recitati'vo. w. nunciation, more musical than common
speech, and less than song; chaunt.
he introduced the examples of moral virtue, writ in verse,
and performed in recitative musick. dryden.
by singing peers upheld on either hand,
then thus in quaint recitative spoke. dunciad.
to recite. v. a. [recita, lat. reciter, fr.] to rehearse;
to repeat; to enumerate; to tell over. -
while telephus's youthful charms,
his rosy neck, and winding arms,
with endless rapture you recite,
and in the tender name delight. -
the thoughts of gods let granville's verse recite,
and bring the scenes of op'ning fate to light.
if we will recite nine hours in ten,
you lose your patience. pope's epistles of horace,
recite. m. s. [recit, fr. from the verb.] recital. not in use.
this added to all former recites or observations of long-
liv'd races, makes it easy to conclude, that health and long
life are the blessings of the poor as well as rich. temple.
reci te.r. m. s. [from recite.] one who recites.
to reck. v. n. [necan, saxon j
1. to care ; to heed; to mind; to rate at much ; to be in
care. out of use. reck is still retained in scotland: it has
of before the thing.
thou's but a lazy loorde,
and recks much of thy swinke,
that with fond terms and withess words,
addison.
pope.
to bleer mine eyes do'st think. spenser.
good or bad,
what do i reck, fith that he dy'd entire. spensor.
i reck as little what betideth me, -
as much i wish all good befortune you. shałespeare.
with that care lost
went all his fear; of gdd, or hell or worse -
he reck'd not. milton.
2. it recks. v. impersonal. to care. -
of night or loneliness it recks me not;
i fear the dread events that dog them both,
lest some ill-greeting touch attempt the person
of our unowned sister.
to reck. v. a. to heed ; to care for.
this son of mine, not recking danger, and negleaing the
present good way he was in of doing himself good, came
milton.
hither to do this kind office to my unspeakable gricf. sidney.
if i do lose thee, i do lose a thing,
that none but fools would reck. shakespeare.
do not you as ungracious parsons do,
who shew the steep and thorny way to heav'n ;
yet like unthinking reckless libertines,
21 k that<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e c.
r. e. c
that in the soft path of dalliance treads,
recks not his own rede. . shakespeare.
reckless. adj. [from reck; reccelear, saxon.] careless;
heedless; mindless; untouched. see reck. this is written
by dryden, retchloss in the article wretchloss; reckls is most
etymological. * * * - - - - - -
it made the king as reckles, as them diligent, sidney.
i'll after, more to be reveng'd of eglamour "
than for the love of reckles; silvia. - shakesp.
he apprehends death no more dreadfully, but as a drunken
sleep; careless, reckles, and fearless of what's past, present
or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately mortal. sha.
next this was drawn the reckles, cities flame,
when a strange hell pour’d down from heaven there came.
* cowley.
re'ckle's ness. n.s.. [from reck. this word in the seventeenth
article is erroneously written wretchleshes...] carelessness;
negligence. -
over many good fortunes began to breed a proud reckles-
* nes; in them. o sidney.
t. re'ckon. v. a. [reccan, saxon; reckenen, dutch j
i. to number ; to count.
the priest shall reckon unto him the money according to
the years that remain, and it shall be abated. lev. xxvii. 18.
numb'ring of his virtues praise,
death lost the reckoning of his days. crashaw.
when are questions belonging to all finite existences by us
reckoned from some known parts of this sensible world, and
from some certain epochs marked out by motions in it locke.
the freezing of water, or the blowing of a plant, return-
ing at equidistant periods, would as well serve men to reckon
their years by, as the motions of the sun. locke.
i reckoned above two hundred and fifty on the outfide of the
church, though i only told three sides of it. addison.
a multitude of cities are reckoned up by the geographers,
particularly by ptolemy. arbuthnot on coins.
2. to esteem ; to account.
where we cannot be persuaded that the will of god is,
we should so far reject the authority of men, as to reckon it no-
, thing. hooker.
varro's aviary is still so famous, that it is reckoned for one
of those notables, which men of foreign nations record. wotton,
for him i reckon not in high estate;
but thee, whose strength, while virtue was her mate,
might have subdu'd the earth. milton's agonistes.
.” people, young and raw, and soft-natured, are apt to think
it an easy thing to gain love, and reckon their own friendship
a sure price of another man's : but when experience shall have
shewn them the hardness of most hearts, the hollowness of
others and the baseness of all, they will find that a friend is
the gift of god, and that he only, who made hearts, can
unite them. -- south's sermons.
would the dutch be content with the military government
and revenues, and reckon it among what shall be thought ne-
cessary for their barrier * - swift's miscellanies.
3. to assign in an account. *
to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace,
but of debt. - romans iv. 4.
to re'ckon. v. n.
1. to compute; to calculate.
we may fairly reckon, that this first age of apostles, with
that second generation of many who were their immediate
converts, extended to the middle of the second century. add.
2. to state an account: it has with before the other party.
we shall not spend a large expence of time,
before we reckon with your several loves,
• and make us even with you.
3. to charge to account: with on.
i call posterity
into the debt, and reckon on her head.
4. to pay a penalty: with for before the crime.
if they fail in their bounden duty, o shall reckon for it
one day. anderson's judgment.
. to call to punishment: it has with.
god suffers the most grievous fins of particular persons to
go unpunished in this world, because his justice will have an-
other opportunity to meet and reckon with them. tillotson.
6. (compter sur, fr. j . to lay stress or dependance upon.
you reckon upon losing your friends kindness, when you
have sufficiently convinced them, they can never hope for
any of yours. temple's miscellanies.
reckon er. m. s. [from reckon.] one who computes ; one
who calculates cost. ' -
reckoners without their host must reckon twice.
re'ckon ing.. n.s.. [from reckon.] - -
1. computation; calculation.
2. account of time. o
can'st thou their reck’nings keep f the time compute 2
when their swoln bellies shall enlarge their fruit. sandys.
3. accounts of debtor and creditor.
they that know how their own reck’ning goes,
account not what they have, but what they lose. daniel.
shakesp.
ben. johnson.
camden.
it is with a man and his conscience, as with one maro ana
another ; even reckoning makes lasting friends; and the way
to make reckonings even, is to make them often. south.
4. money charged by an host.
his industry is up stairs and down; his eloquence the parcel
of a reckoning. shakesp. henry iv.
when a man's verses cannot be understood, it flrikes 4
man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room. shaw,
a coin would have a nobler use than to pay a reckoning.
addison.
5. account taken. -
there was no reckoning made with them of the money de-
livered into their hand. 2 kings.
6. esteem; account; estimation. -
beauty, though in as great excellency in yourself as in any,
yet you make no further reckoning of it, than of an outward
fading benefit nature bestowed. sidney.
were they all of as great account as the best among them,
with us notwithstanding they ought not to be of such reckon.
ing, that their opinion should cause the laws of the church to
give place. hooker's preface.
a re'cko ning-book. n, s. [from reckoning and look.] a book
in which money received and expended is set down.
to reclai’m. v. a. [reclamo, latin.]
1. to reform ; to corre&amp;t.
he spared not the heads of any mischievous prastices, but
shewed sharp judgment on them for ensample sake, that all the
meaner sort, which were infected with that evil, might, by
terror thereof, be reclaimed and saved. spenser.
this errour whosoever is able to reclaim, he shall save more
in one summer, than themison destroyed in any autumn.
brown's wugar errours.
reclaim your wife from strolling up and down
to all assizes. dryden's juvenal.
'tis the intention of providence, in all the various expres-
fions of his goodness, to reclaim mankind, and to engage their
obedience. rogers'; sermons.
the penal laws in being against papists have been found
ineffectual, and rather confirm than reclaim men from their
crn ors, - swift.
2. [ reclamer, fr. j. to reduce to the state desired.
it was for him to hasten to let his people see, that he meant
to govern by law, howsoever he came in by the sword; and
fit also to reclaim them, to know him for their king, whom
they had so lately talked of as an enemy. bacon.
much labour is requir’d in trees, to tame
their wild disorder, and in ranks reclaim.
minds she the dangers of the lycian coast 2
or is her tow’ring flight reclaim'd,
by seas from icarus's downfal nam'd :
vain is the call, and useless the advice.
3. to recall ; to cry out against.
the head, strong horses hurried oetavius, the trembling
charioteer, along, and were deaf to his reclaiming them. dryd.
oh tyrant love
wisdom and wit in vain reclaim,
and arts but soften us to feel thy flame.
4. to tame.
upon his fist he bore
an eagle well reclaim'd. dryden's knight's tale.
are not hawks brought to the hand, and lions, tygers and
bears reclaimed by good usage 2 l'a/irange.
recla imant. n.s [from reclaim ] contradicter.
in the year 325, as is well known, the arian doctrines
were proscribed, and anathematized in the famous council of
nice, consisting of 318 bishops, very unanimous in their re-
solutions, excepting a few reclaimants. !/aterland.
to recli'n.e. v. a. [recino, lat, recliner, fr.] to lean back;
to lean sidewise. -
the mother
reclin'd her dying head upon his breast.
while thus she rested, on her arm reclin'd,
the purling streams that through the meadow stray'd,
dryden.
prizr.
pope.
dryden.
in drowsy murmurs lull'd the gentle maid. addison.
to recli’ne. v. n. to rest; to repose; to lean.
recli'ne. adj. [reclinis, lat..] in a leaning posture.
they sat recline
on the soft downy bank, damask'd with flow'rs. milton.
to reclo's e. v. a. [re and close.] to close again.
the silver ring she pull'd, the door recio.'d;
the bolt, obedient to the silken cord,
to the strong staple’s inmost depth restor'd, -
secur'd the valves. pope's odyssey.
to reclu'de. v. a. [recludo, lat..] to open. -
the ingredients absorb the intestinal superfluities, reclude
oppilations, and mundify the blood. harvey.
reclu's e. adj. [reclus, fr. reclusus, lat.] shut up; retired.
this must be the inference of a mere contemplative; a
recluse that converses only with his own meditations. d. of p.
the nymphs -
melissan, sacred and recluse to ceres, -
pour streams seleci, and purity of waters. prior.
i all
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">* * * t --. "
o,
o
o
r e c
i all the live-long day
consume in meditation deep, recluse
from human converse.
reclu'se. m. s. a retired person.
it seems you have not lived such an obstinate recluse from
the disputes and transactions of men. hammond.
recoagulation, n.s. [re and coagulation.] second coagulation.
this salt, dissolved in a convenient quantity of water, does
upon its recoagulation dispose of the aqueous particles among
its own saline ones, and shoot into crystals. boyle.
reco'gnis a nce. m. s. [recognisance, fr.] -
1. acknowledgment of person or thing.
2. badge.
apparent it is, that all men are either christians or not ; if
by external profession they be christians, then are they of the
visible church of christ; and christians by external profession
they are all, whose mark of recognizance hath in it those
things mentioned, yet although they be impious idolaters and
philipi.
wicked hereticks. hooker.
she did gratify his amorous works
with that recognizance and pledge of love,
which i first gave her ; an handkerchief. shakespeare.
3. a bond of record testifying the recognisor to owe unto the
recognisee a certain sum of money ; and is acknowledged in
some court of record; and those that are mere recognisances
are not sealed but enrolled : it is also used for the verdict of
the twelve men empannelled upon an assize. cowel.
the english should not marry with any irish, unless bound
by recognisance with sureties, to continue loyal. davies.
to recogni's e. v. a. [recognosco, lat.]
1. to acknowledge; to recover and avow knowledge of any
person or thing.
he brought several of them, even under their own hands,
to recognize their sense of their undue procedure used by them
unto him. fell.
the british cannon formidably roars,
while starting from his oozy bed,
th'asserted ocean rears his reverend head,
to view and recognise his ancient lord. dryden.
then first he recognis'd th’ aethereal guest,
wonder and joy alternate fire his breast. pope.
speak, o, recognize thy sov’reign queen :
haft thou ne'er seen me? know'st thou not me seen harle.
2. to review ; to reexamine.
however their causes speed in your tribunals, christ will
recognize them at a greater. , south.
recognisee'. n.s. he in whose favour the bond is drawn.
reco"gnisor. n.s. he who gives the recognisance.
recog ni'tion. m. s. [recognitio, latin.] o
1. review ; renovation of knowledge.
the virtues of some being thought expedient to be annually
had in remembrance, brought in a fourth kind of publick
reading, whereby the lives of such saints had, at the time of
their yearly memorials, solemn recognition in the church of
god. hooker.
2. knowledge confessed. - - -
every species of fancy hath three modes; recognition of a
thing, as present; memory of it, as past; and forefight of it,
2s to coitc. grew's cosmol.
. acknowledgment; memorial. -
the israelites in moses’ days were redeemed out of egypt;
in memory and recognition whereof they were commanded to
observe the weekly sabbath. jwhite.
if the recognition or acknowledgment of a final concord,
upon any writ of covenant finally, be taken by justice of as-
fize, and the yearly value of those lands be declared by asfi-
davit made before the same justice; then is the recognition and
value signed with the hand-writing of that justice. bacon.
to recoi'l. v. n. [reculer, fr.]
1. to rush back in consequence of resistance, which cannot be
overcome by the force impressed. . . -
the very thought of my revenges that way
recoil upon me; in himself too mighty.
revenge, at first though sweet,
bitter ere long, back on itself recoils.
amazement seiz'd
all th’ host of heav'n, back they recoil'd, afraid .
at first. milton's paradise lost.
evil on itself shall back recoil, . . . . . milton.
who in deep mines for hidden knowledge toils,
shakespeare.
milton.
like guns o'ercharg’d, breaks, misses or recoils. denham,
my hand's so soft, his heart so hard, . . . . ;
the blow recoils, and hurts me while i strike' dryden.
whatever violence may be offered to nature, by endea-
vouring to reason men into a contrary persuasion, nature will
still recoil, and at last return to itself. tillotson.
2. to fall back. - - o
ye both forcwearied be ; therefore a while -
i read you rest, and to your bowers recoil. spenser.
ten paces huge
he back recoil'd; the tenth on bended knee, -
his massy spear upstay’d. milton's paradise loft.
r. e. c
3. to sail; to shrink.
a good and virtuous nature may recoil - * * *
in an imperial charge. - shakesp. madik
recor l. m. s. [from the verb.] a falling back.
to recor’n. v. a. [re and coin] to coin over again.
among the romans, to preserve great events upon their
coins, when any particular piece of money grew very scarce,
it was often recoined by a succeeding emperor. addison,
recol nag £. n.s. [re and coinage.] the act of coining anew.
the mint gained upon the late statute, by the recoinage of
groats and half-groats, now twelvepences and sixpences. bacon.
to recolleyct. v. a. [recollecius, lat.]
1. to recover to memory.
it did relieve my passion much ;
more than light airs and recolecied terms - -
cf these .# brisk and giddy paced times. shakespeare.
recollec7 every day the things seen, heard, or read, which
made any addition to your understanding. watts's logick.
2. to recover reason or resolution. -
the tyrian queen
admir’d his fortunes, more admir'd the man; - - -
then recollecied stood. . . . dryden's afneis.
3. to gather what is scattered 5. to gather again. -
now that god hath made his light radiate in his word,
men may recolle&amp; those scattered divine beams, and kindling
with them the topicks proper to warm our affections, enflame
holy zeal. -- - * * * * * - boyle.
recollection. n.j. [from recalled?..] recovery of notion;
revival in the memory. ** * * * * * * *
recollecion is when an idea is sought after by the mind, and
with pain and endeavour found, and brought again in view.
locke.
finding the recollegion of his thoughts disturb his sleep, he
remitted the particular care of the composition. fell.
let us take care that we sleep not without such a recollec-
tion of the aelions of the day as may represent any thing that
is remarkable, as matter of sorrow or thanksgiving. taylor.
* . the last image of that troubled heap,
when sense subsides, and fancy sports in sleep,
though past the recolle&amp;ion of the thought, --
becomes the stuff of which our dream is wrought... pope.
to reco'mfort. v. a. [re and comfort.]
1. to comfort or console again. -
what place is there left, we may hope our woes to re-
, consort p. - * sidney.
ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tides,
as the recomforted through th' gates. shakesp. coriolanus."
as one from sad dismay
recomforted, and, after thoughts disturb’d,
submitting to what seem'd remediless.
2. to give new strength.
in strawberries, it is usual to help the ground with muck;
and likewise to recomfort it sometimes with muck put to the
roots ; but to water with muck water is not prastised. bacon.
to recomme'n ce. v. a. [recommencer, fr. re and commence.]
to begin anew. - -
to recomme'nd. v. a. [recommender, fr. re and commend.]
i. to praise to another; to advance by praise to the kindness
of another. - - - -
mecenas recommended virgil and horace to augustus,
whose praises helped to make him popular while alive, and,
after his death have made him precious to posterity. dryden.
2. to make acceptable. - - -
a decent boldness ever meets with friends,
succeeds, and ev’n a stranger recommends.
3. to commit with prayers. - * -
they had been recommended to the grace of god. ai xiv.
recomme'ndable. adj. [recommendable, fr. from recommend.]
worthy of recommendation or praise. f
though these pursuits should make out no pretence to ad-
vantage, yet, upon the account of honour, they are recom-
mendable. - glanville's preface to scepsis.
recom mendation. m. s. [recommendation, fr. from recommend. j
1. the aet of recommending. -
2. that which secures to one a kind reception from another.
poplicola's doors were opened on the outside, to save the
people even the common civility of asking entrance; where
misfortune was a powerful recommendation; and where want
itself was a powerful mediator. , - dryden.
recomme'ndatory, adj. [from recommend..] that which
commends to another. . . . . . . - o
verses recommendatory they have commanded me to prefix
before my book. - swift.
recommender. m. s. [from recommend..] one who recom-
mends." --
st. chrysostom, as great a lover and recommender of the
solitary state as he was, declares it to be no proper school for
those who are to be leaders of christ's flock. atterbury.
to recommit. v. a. [re and commit.) to commit anew.
when they had bailed the twelve bishops, who were in
the tower, the house of commons expostulated with them,
and caused them to be recommitted. clarendon.
to
• * * o
milton.
po,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e c . . .
r e. c.
to recompa’ct. v. a. o and compad.] to join anew.
epair
and recompaci my so body.
to recompense. v.a. [recompenser, fr. re and compense, lat.]
1. to repay 5 to requite.
continue faithful, and we will recompense you. 1 mac. x.
hear from heaven, and requite the wicked, by recompensing
his way upon his own head. 2 chron. vi. 23.
2. to give in requital.
thou was begot of them, and how cans thou recompense
them the things they have done for thee! ecclus. viii. 28.
recompense to no man evil for evil. ram. xii. 17.
3. to compensate; to make up by something equivalent.
french wheat, which is bearded, requireth the best soil,
recompensing the same with a profitable plenty. carew.
solyman, willing them to be of good cheer, said, that he
would in short time find occasion for them to recompense that
disgrace, and again to shew their approved valour. knolles.
he is long ripening, but then his maturity, and the com-
plement thereof, recompenseth the flowness of his maturation.
- hale's origin of mankind.
4. to redeem ; to pay for.
lf the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto,
let it be recompensed unto the lord. num. v. 8.
recompense. n.s. [recompense, fr. from the verb.]
1. reward; something given as an acknowledgment of merit.
thou'rt fo far before,
that swiftest wing of recompense is slow
to overtake thee.
2. equivalent; compensation. -
wise men thought the vast advantage from their learning
and integrity an ample recompense for any inconvenience from
shakespeare.
their passion. clarendon.
your mother's wrongs a recompense shall meet,
i lay my sceptre at her daughter's feet. dryden.
recom pi'l ement. n. s. [re and compilement.] new com-
pilement.
although i had a purpose to make a particular digest or re-
compilement of the laws, i laid it aside. bacon.
to recompo'se. v. a. [reconsposer, fr. re and compose.]
1. to settle or quiet anew.
elijah was so transported, that he could not receive answer
from god, till by musick he was recomposed. taylor.
2. to form or adjust anew.
we produced a lovely purple, which we can destroy or
recompose at pleasure, by severing or reapproaching the edges
of the two irises. boyle on colours.
recomposition. m. s. [re and composition.] composition re-
newed. -
to reconci’le. v. a. [reconcilier, fr. reconcilio, lat.]
1. to make to like again.
this noble passion,
child of integrity, hath from my soul
wip'd the black scruples, reconcil'd my thoughts
to thy good truth and honour. shakespeare.
submit to caesar;
and reconcile thy mighty soul to life. addison's cato.
he that has accustomed himself to take up with what easil
offers itself, has reason to fear he shall never reconcile himself
to the fatigue of turning things in his mind, to discover their
more retired secrets. - locke.
2. to make to be liked again.
many wise men, who knew the treasurer's talent in re-
moving prejudice, and reconciling himself to wavering affec-
tions, believed the loss of the duke was unseasonable. claren.
3. to make any thing consistent.
the great men among the ancients understood how to re-
concile manual labour with affairs of state. locke.
questions of right and wrong
which though our consciences have reconciled,
my learning cannot answer. southern's spartan dame.
some figures monstrous and mishap'd appear,
consider'd fingly, or beheld too near ;
which but proportion'd to their light or place,
due distance reconciles to form and grace.
4. to restore to favour. *
so thou shalt do for every one that erreth and is simple,
so shall ye reconcile the house. ezek. xlv. 20.
let him live before thee reconcil’d. milton.
reconci'leable. adj. [reconciliable, fr. from reconcile, j
1. capable of renewed kindness.
2. consistent; possible to be made consistent.
what we did was against the dictates of our own con-
science; and consequently never makes that act reconcileable
with a regenerate estate, which otherwise would not be so.
hammond.
the different accounts of the numbers of ships are recon-
cileable, by supposing that some spoke of the men of war
only, and others added the transports. arbuthnot.
the bones, to be the most convenient, ought to have been
as light, as was reconcileable with sufficient strength. cheyne.
worldly affairs and recreations may hinder our attendance
pope.
donne. reconcis learleness... n.s.. [from reconcilable.]
upon the worship of god, and are not reconcilable with so-
lemn assemblies. nelson,
1. consistence; posibility to be reconciled. -
the cylinder is a lifeless trunk, which hath nothing of
choice or will in it; and therefore cannot be a fit resemblance
to shew the reconcileableness of fate with choice. hammond.
discerning how the several parts of scripture are fitted to
several times, persons and occurrences, we shall discover not
only a reconcileableness, but a friendship and perfect harmony
betwixt texts, that here seem most at variance. boyk.
2. disposition to renew love.
reconci'lement. n.s. [from reconcile.]
i. reconciliation ; renewal of kindness; favour restored.
injury went beyond all degree of reconcilement.
creature so fair his reconcilment seeking,
whom she had displeas'd. 44ilton's parais, lao.
on one side great reserve, and very great resentment on the
other, have enflamed animosities, so as to make all reconcil-
sidney.
ment impracticable. swift.
2. friendship renewed.
no cloud -
of anger shall remain; but peace assur'd
and reconcilement. 4milton's paradis. loft.
reconci'l er. n.s.. [from reconcile.]
1. one who renews friendship between others.
he not only attained his purpose of uniting distant parties
unto each other, but contrary to the usual fate of recancilers,
gained them to himself. foll.
2. one who discovers the consistence between propositions.
part of the world know how to accommodate st. james
and st. paul, better than some late reconcilers. norris.
reconciliation. m. s. [reconciliatio, from re and concilio;
lat, reconciliation, fr.]
1. renewal of friendship.
2. agreement of things seemingly opposite; solution of seemi-
ing contrarieties.
these distinetions of the fear of god give us a clear and
easy reconciliation of those seeming inconsistencies of scripture,
with respect to this affection. . rogers.
3. atonement; expiation. -
he might be a merciful and faithful high priest to make re-
conciliation for sin. - heb. ii. 17.
to recon de'nse. v. a. [re and condense.j. to condense anew.
in the heads of stills and necks of eolipiles, such vapours
quickly are by a very little cold recondensed into water. boyle.
reco'ndit e. adj. [reconditus, lat.) secret; profound; abstruse.
a disagreement between thought and expresfion seldom
happens, but among men of more recondite studies and deep
learning. felton on the clafficki.
to recondu"ct. v. a. [reconduit, fr. recondudus, lat. re
and conduc.] to conduct again.
wander'st thou within this lucid orb,
and stray’d from those fair fields of light above,
amid'st this new creation want's a guide,
to reconduct thy steps ? dryden's state of innocence.
to reconjoi'n. v. a. [re and conjoin.]. to join anew.
some liquors, although colourless themselves, when ele-
vated into exhalations, exhibit a conspicuous colour, which
they lose again when reconjoined into a liquor. boyle.
ta reco'nquer. v. a. [reconquerir, fr. re and conquer.] to
conquer again.
chatterton undertook to reconquer ogier. davies.
to reconve. ne. v. n. [re and convene.] to assemble anew.
a worse accident fell out about the time of the two houses
reconvening, which made a wonderful impression. clarendon.
to reco'nsecr ate. v. a. [re and consecrate.] to consecrate
anew.
if a church should be consumed by fire, it shall, in such a
case, be reconsecrated. - ayliffe's parergon.
to reconvey. v. a... [re and convoy..] to convey again.
as rivers lost in seas, some secret vein
thence reconvoys, there to be lost again.
to record. v. a. [recorder, lat, recorder, fr.]
1. to register any thing so that its memory may not be lost.
i made him my book, where my soul recorded
denham.
the history of all my secret thoughts. shakespeare.
he shall record a gift
here in the court, of all he dies possess'd,
unto his son lorenzo. shakespeare.
those things that are recorded of him and his impiety, are
written in the chronicles. 1 esdr. i. 42.
i call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that
i have set before you life and death. deut. xxx. 20.
they gave complex ideas names, that they might the more
easily record and discourse of those things they were daily con-
versant in. locke.
2. to celebrate; to cause to be remembered solemnly.
so ev’n and morn recorded the third day. milton.
3. to recite ; to repeat ; perhaps, to tune. out of use.
they long’d to see the day, to hear the lark,
record her hymns, and chant her carrols blest. fairfax.
re cord.
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e c
r e c
record. n.s... [record, fr. from the verb. the accent of the
noun is indifferently on either syllable ; of the verb always
on the last.] register ; authentick memorial.
is it upon record p or else reported
successively, from age to age 3
it cannot be
the volscians dare break with us.
—we have record that very well it can ;
and three examples of the like have been. shakesp.
the king made a record of these things, and mardocheus
wrote thereof. - e/th. xii. 4.
an ark, and in the ark his testimony,
shakesp. richard iii.
the records of his covenant. milton,
of such a goddess no time leaves record,
who burn'd the temple where she was ador'd. dryden.
if he affirms such a monarchy continued to the flood, i
would know what records he has it from. locke.
though the attested copy of a record be good proof, yet
the copy cf a copy never so well attested will not be admitted
as a proof in judicature. - locke.
thy cljer look, great janus ! cast
into the long record of ages past ; -
review the years in fairest action drest. prior.
recor dation. m. s. [recordatio, lat..] remembrance. not
in use.
i never shall have length of life enough,
to rain upon remembrance with mine eyes,
that it may grow and spout as high as heav'n
for recordation to my noble husband. shakesp. henry iv.
make a recordation to my soul •.
of cwery syllable that here was spoke. shakespeare.
a man of the primitive temper, when the church by low-
liness did flourish in high examples, which i have inserted
as a due recordation of his virtues, having been much obliged
to hion for many favours. - jp'otion.
reco'r. der. m. s. [from record.]
1. one whose business is to register any events.
i but your recorder am in this,
or mouth and speaker of the universe,
- a ministerial notary ; for 'tis -
not i, but you and fame that make the verse. donne.
2. the keeper cf the rolls in a city.
i ask'd, what meant this wilful silence 2
his answer was, the people were not us'd
to be spoke to except by the recorder. shakesp. rich. iii.
the office of recorder to this city being vacant, five or fix
persons are folliciting to succeed him. swift.
3. a kind of flute; a wind instrument.
the shepherds went among them, and sang an eclogue,
while the other shepherds, pulling out recorders, which pos-
sest the place of pipes, accorded their musick to the others
voice. sidney.
in a recorder, the three uppermost holes yield one tone,
which is a note lower than the tone of the first three. bacon.
the figures of recorders, and flutes and pipes are straight;
but the recorder hath a less bore and a greater above and below.
bacon's natural history.
to reco o'ch. v. m. [re and couch..] to lie down again.
thou mak’st the night to overvail the day ;
then lions whelps lie roaring for their prey,
and at thy powerful hand demand their food ;
who when at morn they all recouch again,
then toiling man till eve pursues his pain. l?%tton,
to recover. v. a. [recouvrer, fr. recupero, lat.]
1. to restore from sickness or disorder.
would my lord were with the prophet; for he would re-
cover him of his leprosy. 2 kings v. 3.
the clouds dispell'd, the sky resum’d her light,
and nature stood recover'd of her fright. dryden.
2. to repair.
should we apply this precept only to those who are con-
cerned to recover time they have lost, it would extend to the
whole race of mankind. rogers.
even good men have many failings and lapses to lament
and recover. rogers.
3. to regain ; to get again. -
every of us, each for his self, laboured how to recover him,
while he rather daily sent us companions of our deceit, than
ever return'd in any sound and faithful inanner. sidney.
stay a while ; and we'll debate,
by what safe means the crown may be recover'd shakesp.
the spirit of the lord is upon me, to preach the gospel to
the poor, and recovering of fight to the blind. luke iv. 18.
once in forty years cometh a pope, that casteth his eye
upon the kingdom of naples, to recover it to the church. bacon.
these italians, in despight of what could be done, reco-
wered tiliaventum. knoles's hylory of the turks.
i who e'er while the happy gaiden sung,
by one man's disobedience fost, now sing
recover'd paradise to all mankind,
by one man's firm obedience. milton's paradise regain'd.
any other person may join with him that is injured, and
vol. ii.
asso him in recovering from the offender so much, as may
make satisfaction. locke.
4. to release.
that they may recover themselves out of the share of the
devil, who are taken captive by him. - 2 tim, ii. 26.
5. to attain; to reach; to come up to. not in use.
the forest is not three leagues off;
if we recover that, we're sure enough. shakespeare.
to over. v. m. to grow well from a disease, or any
cw11.
adam, by this from the cold sudden damp
recovering, his scatter'd spirits return'd. milton,
reco'v erable. adj. [recouvrable, fr. from recover.]
i. possible to be restored from sickness.
2. possible to be regained.
a prodigal's course
is like the sun's, but not like his, recoverable, i fear.
o shakespeare,
they promised the good people ease in the matter of pro-
tections, by which the debts from parliament men and their
followers were not recoverable. clarendon.
recover y. m. s. [from recover.]
1. restoration from sickness.
your hopes are regular and reasonable, though in tempo- -
ral affairs; such as are deliverance from enemies, and reco-
very from sickness. taylor's rule of living h.a.
... the sweat sometimes acid, is a sign of recovery after acute
disłempers. 4, buthnot on aliments.
2. power or a 3 of regaining.
what should move me to undertake the recovery of this,
being not ignorant of the imposibility ? shac's).
these counties were the keys of normandy:
but wherefore weeps warwick -
for grief that they are past recovery. shakesp. henry vi.
mario sanudo lived about the fourteenth age, a man full of
zeal for the recovery of the holy land. arbuthnot on coins.
3. the aet of cutting off an entail,
the spirit of wantonness is sure scared out of him; if the
devil have him not in fee simple, with fine and recovery. shak.
to recou′n f. v. a. [reconser, fr.] to relate in detail ;
to tell distinctly.
bid him recornt the fore recited practices. shakso.
how i have thought of these times,
i shall recount hereafter. - shakesp. julius cæsar.
plato in timaeo produces an egyptian priest, who recounted
to solon out of the holy books of egypt the story of the flood
universal, which happened long before the grecian inunda-
tion. raleigh's history of the soorld.
the talk of worldly affairs hindereth much, although re-
counted with a fair intention : we speak willingly, but seldom
return to silence. taylor's guide to devotion.
say, from these glorious seeds what harvest flows,
recount our blessings, and compare our woes.
recou'ntment. n.s.. [from recount.) relation; recital.
when from the first to last, betwixt us two,
tears our recountinents had most finely bath'd;
as how i came into that desart place. shakespeare,
recou'red, for rf cover ed, or recured. spenser.
recou'rse. n.s. [recursus, lat. recours, fr.]
1. frequent passage. obsolete.
not priamus and hecuba on knees, -
their eyes o'ergalled with recourse of tears. shafft.
2. return ; new attack.
preventive physick, by purging noxious humours and the
causes of diseases, preventeth sickness in the healthy, or the
recourse thereof in the valetudinary. brown's wulgar errours.
3. [recours, fr.] application as for help or protection. this
is the common use.
thus died this great peer, in a time of great recours, unto
him and dependance upon him, the house and town full of
servants and suiters. //otton's buckingham.
the council of trent commends the making recourse, not
only to the prayers of the saints, but to their aid and assis-
tance, - stillingfieet.
can any man think, that this privilege was at first con-
ferred upon the church of rome, and that christians in all
ages had constant recourse to it for determining their differ-
ences ; and yet that that very church should now be at a loss
where to find it tillotson.
all other means have fail'd to wound her heart,
our last recourse is therefore to our art. dryden,
4. access. -
the doors be lockt,
that no man hath recourse to her by night. shakespeare:
recou'rseful. adj. [from recourse.] moving alternately.
in that recourseful deep. drayton.
re'creant. adj. [recriant, fr.]
1. cowardly; meanspirited; subdued; crying out for mercy;
recanting out of fear.
let be that lady debonaire,
thou recreamt knight, and soon thyself prepare
to battle. spenser.
21 l dost
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e c
r e c -
jdost
thou wear a lion's hidc? doff it for shame,
ard hang a cali's skin on those ecreant limbs. shakesh.
here soardeth thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk,
co paid to be found false and recreant. shakesp.
the knight, whom sate and happy chance shall grace
from out the bars to force his opposite,
or kill, or make him recreant on the plain,
the prize of valour and of love shali gain. drydon.
2. apostate; false.
who for so many benefits receiv'd,
turn’d recreast to god, ingrate and false,
and so of all true good him: if despoil’d, milton.
7% re create. v. a. [recro, lat. recreer, fr.]
1. to refresh after toil; to amuse or divert in weariness.
w he hath left you all his walks,
and to your heirs for ever ; common pleasures,
to walk abroad and recreate yourselves, shak, p.
nccessity and the example of st. john, who recreated him-
self with sporting with a tame partridge, teach us, that it is
lawful to relax our bow, but not suffer it to be unstrung. tayl.
painters, when they work on white grounds, place before
them colours mixt with blue and green, to recreate their eyes,
white wearying and paining the fight more than any. dryden.
2. to delight ; to gratify. -
these ripe fruits retreate the nostrils with their aromatick
scent. more's divine dialogues.
he walked abroad, which he did not so much to recreate
himself, as to obey the prescripts of his physician. fell.
3. to relieve; to revive.
take a walk to refresh yourself with the open air, which
inspired fresh doth exceedingly recreate the lungs, heart and
vital spirits. harvey on cons: motions.
recr ea tion. m. s. [from recrease.]
1. relief after toil or pain ; amusement in sorrow or distress.
the chief recreation she could find in her anguish, was
sometime to visit that place, where first she was so happy as
to see the cause of her unhap. sidney.
i’ll visit
the chapel where they lie, and tears, shed there,
shall be my recreation. shaksp. //inter's tale.
the great men among the antients, understood how to re-
concile manual labour with affairs of state; and thought it no
lessening to their dignity to make the one the recreation to the
other. locke on education.
2. refreshment; amusement; diversion.
you may have the recreation of surprizing those with ad-
miration, who shall hear the deaf person pronounce whatso-
ever they shall desire, without your seeming to guide him.
hodor's elements of speech.
nor is that man less deceived, that thinks to maintain a
constant tenure of pleasure, by a continual pursuit of sports
and recreations : for all these things, as they refresh a man
when weary, so they weary him when refreshed. sooth.
re'creative. adj. [from recreate. j refreshing ; giving re-
lief after labour or pain ; amusing ; diverting.
let the musick be recreative, and with some strange
changes. bacon.
let not your recreations be lavish spenders of your time;
but chute such as are healthful, recreative and apt to refresh
you : but at no has d dwell upon thcm. taylor.
the access these trifles gain to the closets of ladies, seem
to promise such easy and recreative expcriments, which re-
quire but little time or charge. boyle.
recreat 1 v en ess. m. s. [from recreative.] the quality of
being recreative.
re/crement, n. s. [recrementum, lat..] dross; spume ;
superfluous or useless parts.
the vital fire in the heart requires an ambient body of a
yielding nature, to receive the superfluous serosities and other
recrements of the blood. boyle,
- t a l. -
#ov. }od. [from recrement.] drosy.
t, recriminate. v. n. [recriminer, fr. re and criminor,
latin j to return one accusation with another.
it is not my business to recriminate, hoping sufficiently to
clear myself in this matter. stillings’eet.
how shall such hypocrites reform the state,
on whom the brothels can recriminate * dryden.
t, re cri'm in at e. v. a. to accuse in return. unusual.
• did not joseph lie under black infamy he scorned so much
as to clear himself, or to recriminate the strumpet. sci.th,
re crimi na’t ion. n.s. [recrimination, fr. from recriminate.]
return of one accusation with another.
publick defamation will seem disobliging enough to pro-
voke a return, which again begets a rejoinder, and so the
quarrel is carried on with mutual recriminations. gov. of tong.
recrimina"tor. m. s. [from recriminate.] he that returns
on charge with another.
recrude'sce n.t. adj. [recrudoscons, lat.] growing
or violent again. o
to recruit. v. a. [recruter, fr.]
painful
1. to repair anything was cd by new supplies.
he was longer in recoiting his ...}, town was usual ; but
by a milk diet he recovered it. f isolar's surgery.
increase thy care to save the flooking kind ; soy.
with greens and floors recruit toeir opty lives,
and seek fresh forage, to sustain their lives. dryden
her cheeks glow the brighter, recruiting their colous, -
as flowers by rinkiing revive with fresh odour. granville
this fun is set, but see in bright array -
what hosts of heavenly fights recruit the day !
love in a shining galaxy appears - -
triumphant still. granville
seeing the variety of motion, which we find in the wooij
is always decreasing, there is a necessity of conserving and
recruiting it by active principles; such as are the cause of
gravity, by which planets and comets keep their motions in
their orbs, and bodies acquire great motion in falling. n.
2. to supply an army with new men. c
he trusted the call of holland with the command of that
army, with which he was to be recruited and assisted. clar.
to recruit. v. n. to raise new soldiers.
the french have only switzerland besides their own coun-
try to recruit in ; and we know the difficulties they meet with
in getting thence a single regiment. addison.
recr u1 r. m. s. [from the verb.] */
1. supply of any thing wasted ; pope has used it less properly
for a substitute to something wanting.
whatever nature has in worth deny'd,
she gives in large recruits of necdful pride. pope.
the endeavour to raise new men for the recruit of the
tot.
army found opposition. clarendon.
2. new soldiers.
the pow'rs of troy
with fresh recruits their youthful chief sustain:
not theirs a raw and unexperienc'd train,
but a film body of embattel'd men. dryden.
recta’ngle. m. s. [reciangle, fr. reelangulus, latin.j a
figure which has one angle or more of ninety degrees.
if all athens should decree, that in relangle triangles the
square, which is made of the side that subtendeth tie right
angle, is cqual to the squares which are made of the so
containing the right angle, geometricians would not receive
satisfaction without demonstration. brown's sugar errours.
the mathematician considers the truth and properties be-
longing to a recangle, only as it is in idea in his own mind.
z - - locke.
rect a'ngular. adj. [rcelangulaire, fr. recius and angulus,
latin.] right angled ; having angles of ninety degrees.
bricks moulded in their ordinary reclangular form, if they
shall be laid one by another in a level row between any sup.
porters sustaining the two ends, then all the pieces will re-
ccssarily sink. j%tton's architeffaire.
rectangularly. adv. i from relangular, j with right
angles. - -
at the equator, the needle will sland reisangularly; but ap-
proaching northward toward the tropic, it will regard the
stone obliquely. brown's pugar errors.
re'ctif1a b.e. adj. [from re?iff.] capable to be set right.
the natural heat of the parts being insufficient for a perfect
and thorough digestion, the errors of one concoetion are not
rectifiable by another. brown's julgar errours.
recrification... n.s.. [recification, fr. from resis).]
1. the act of setting right what is wrong.
it behoved the deity to renew that revelation from time to
time, and to rectify abuses with such authority for the re-
newal and recification, as was sufficient evidence of the truth
of what was revealed. forbes.
2. in chynistry, reefiftation is drawing any thing over again
by distillation, to make it yet higher or fiscr. quincy.
- - ~
at the first reciifcation of some spirit of salt in a resort, a
single pound afforded no less than six ounces of phlegm. boyle.
to rec iify. v. a. [rectifier, fr. reous and facio, la: j
- 1. to make right; to resorm ; to redress.
that wherein unsounder times have done amiss, the better
ages ensuing must reelify as they may. hooker.
it shall be bootless
that longer you defer the court, as well
for your own quiet, as to reoisy
what is unsettled in the king. shakes. henry viii.
where a long course of picty has purged the heart, and
ofted the will, knowledge will break in upon such a soul,
like the sun shining in his full might. south.
the substance of this theory i mainly depend on, being
willing to suppose that many particularities may be resis: i
upon farther thoughts. burrorf.
- if those men of parts, who have been employed in vitiat-
ing the age, had endeavoured to reoisy and amend it, they
neoded not have sacrificed their good sense to their fame. a., i.
the false judgment he made of things are owned; and the
methods pointed out by which he re.7ified them.
2. to exalt and improve by repeated distillation.
the skin bath been kept white and smooth for above fif-
- to to : *
oterbory-
- s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. c
r. e. d
recu'le, for record. [reculer, fr.]
recu'mbency. n.s.. [from recumbent.]
1. the posture of lying or leaning.
tecn wear, by being included with reosed spi, it of wine in
a cy, oival glass. grow', ofteum.
reco to near. !". [rous and linea, lat..] confilting of
recruit 1's eot's v right lines.
there are only three reconous and ordinate figures, which
can serve to this purpose; and in ordinate or unlike ones must
have secn not only loss ciegant, but unequal. ray.
this image was oblong and not oval, but terminated with
two recoilinear and parallel sides and two semicircular ends.
mowton's opticks.
the rays of light, whether they be very small bodies pro-
joded, or only motion and force propaga.ed, are moved in
right lines; and whenever a ray of light is by any obstacle
turned out of its recoilinear way, it will never return into the
same reolinear way, unless perhaps by very great accident.
- newton's opticks.
re'ct it up e. m. s. [re:titude, fr. from reeus, lat.]
1. straitness; not curvity.
2. rightness; uprightness; freedom from moral curvity or ob-
liquity.
faith and repentance, together with the reelitude of their
present engagement would fully prepare them for a better life.
king charles.
calm the disorders of thy mind, by refle&amp;ting on the wis-
dom, equity and absolute reetitude of all his proceedings. att.
rec tor. m. s. [recfeur, fr. reelor, latin.]
1. ruler i lord ; governour.
god is the supreme reflor of the world, and of all those
subordinate parts thereof. hale’s origin of mankind.
when a rector of an university of scholars is chosen by the
corporation or university, the election ought to be confirmed
by the superior of such university. ayliffe's parergon.
2. parson of an unimpropriated parish.
re'cror ship. n.s. [reciorat, fr. from re?or.] the rank or
office of rector.
had your bodies
no heart among you? or had you tongues to cry
against the rectorship of judgment. shakespeare.
re'crory. m. s. [rectorerie, fr. from redor.] -
a restory or parsonage is a spiritual living, composed of
land, tithe and other oblations of the people, separate or de-
dicate to god in any congregation for the service of his
church there, and for the maintenance of the governor or mi-
nister thereof, to whose charge the same is committed. spelman.
recu bat ion. n.s. [recubo, latin.] the act of lying or
learning.
vwhereas our translation renders it sitting, it cannot have
that illation, for the french and italian translations express
neither position of session or recubation. brown.
spenser.
in that memorable shew of germanicus, twelve elephants
danced unto the found of musick, and after laid them down
in tricliniums, or places of festival recumbency. brown.
2. rest ; repose.
when the mind has been once habituated to this lazy re-
cumbency and satisfaction on the obvious surface of things, it
is in danger to reit satisfied there. locke.
recu’m bent. adj. [recumbens, lat..] lying ; leaning.
the roman recumbent, or more properly accumbent, po-
fture in eating was introduced after the first punick war.
arbuthnot.
recupe ration. r. s. [recuperatio, lat.] the recovery of
a thing lost.
recu'perative, or recuperatory. adj. [from recupera-
tion. j belonging to recovery.
to recu'r. v. n. [recurro, lat.]
1. to come back to the thought; to revive in the mind.
the idea, i have once had, will be unchangeably the same,
as long as it recurs the same in my memory. locke.
in this life, the thoughts of god and a future state often
offer themselves to us; they often spring up in our minds,
and when expelled, recur again. - calamy.
a line of the golden verses of the pythagoreans recurring
on the memory, hath often guarded youth from a temptation
to vice. //atts.
when any word has been used to signify an idea, that old
idea will recur in the mind when the word is heard. jwatts,
2. [recourir, fr.] to have recourse to ; to take refuge in.
if to avoid succession in eternal existence, they recur to the
punetum stans of the schools, they will thereby very little
help us to a more positive idea of infinite duration. locke.
the second cause we know, but trouble not ourselves to
recur to the first. wake's preparation for death.
to recu're. v. a. [re and cure.] to recover from fickness
or labour. not in use.
through wise handling and fair governance,
i him recured to a better will,
purged from drugs of foul intemperance. spenser.
phoebus pure
in western waves his weary wagon did recure. sponsor.
with one look she doth my life dismay,
and with another doth it straight recure. sponsor.
the wanton boy was shortly well record
of that his malady. sponsor.
thy death’s wound
which he who comes thy saviour shall recure,
not by destroying satan, but his works
in thee and in thy seed. azion's parad's loft.
recu re. m. s. recovery; remedy.
whatsoever fell into the enemies hands, was lost without
recure : the old men were slain, the young men led away into
captivity. knoles's hylory of the turks.
recu'rrence. f -- r
recu'rrenc y. § n: s [from recurrent.] eturn.
although the opinion at present be well suppressed, yet,
from some strings of tradition and fruitful recurrence of error,
it may revive in the next generation. brown's wu'g. errours.
recu'rrent. adj. [recurrent, fr. recurrens, lat., return-
ing from time to time.
next to lingering durable pains, short intermittent or swift
recurrent pains precipitate patients unto consumptions. harv.
recu’rsion, n.s. [recursus, lat..] return.
one of the assistants told the recursions of the other pen-
dulum hanging in the free air. boyle.
recur v ation.
recu'rvity { n. s. [recurvo, lat.] flexure backwards.
ascending first into a capsulary reception of the breast bone
by a serpentine recurvation, it ascendeth again into the neck.
brown's wugar errours.
recu'rvous, adj. [recurvus, lat.] bent backward.
i have not observed tails in all; but in others i have ob-
served long recurvous tails, longer than their bodies. derham.
recu's ant, n. s. [recusans, lat.] one that refuses any terms
of communion or society.
they demand of the lords, that no recusant lord might
have a vote in passing that act. clarendon.
all that are recusants of holy rites. holyday.
vere all corners ransacked, what a multitude of recusants
should we find upon a far differing account from that of
conscience decay of piety.
to recu's e. v. n. [recuser, fr. recus, lat.] to refuse. a
juridical word.
the humility, as well of understanding as manners of the
fathers, will not let them be troubled, when they are recused
as judges. - digby.
. a judge may proceed notwithstanding my appeal, unless i
recuse him as a suspected judge. ay, f's parergon.
red, adj. [from the old saxon, reb; rhud, ‘josh. as the
town of hertford, mr. camden, in his b. stannia, noteth,
first was called, by the saxons, heruuford, the rud ford, or
the red ford or water; high dutch, rot; from the greek,
#93;29; french, range ; italian, rubro ; from the latin,
ruber. peacham j. of the colour of blood, of one of the
primitive colours, which is subdivided into many; as scarlet,
vermilion, crimson.
look i so pale.
-ay, and no man in the presence,
but his red colour hath forsock his cheeks.
bring me the fairest creature northward born,
to prove whose blood is reddy!. shakesp. march. of wen.
his eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with
milk. gen. xlix. 12.
his eyes dart forth red flames which scare the night,
and with worse fires the tremoling ghosts affright. cowley.
th' angelick squadron turn'd fiery red. 4/ilton.
if red lead and white paper be placed in the red light of the
coloured spectrum, made in a dark chamber by the refraction
of a prism, the paper will appear more lucid than the red
lead, and therefore rese&amp;ts the red making rays more co-
piously than red lead doth. newton's opticks,
the sixth red was at first of a very fair and lively scarlet,
and soon after of a brighter colour, being very pure and brisk,
and the best of all the red;. mewton's o ticks.
why heavenly truth,
and moderation fair, were the red marks
of superstition’s scourge. thomson's ii inter.
to reda'rgue. v. a. [radarguo, lat.] to refute. not in use.
the last wittily redargues the pretended finding of coin,
graved with the image of augustus cæsar, in the american
mines. hakewill on providence.
red berr ied shrub casia. m. s. a plant. it is male and female in
different plants: the male hath flowers consisting of many sta-
mina or threads, without any petals; these are always steris :
the female plants, which have no conspicuous power, produce
spherical berries, in which are included nuts of the same
form. millor.
re'dbreast, n. s. a small bird, so named from the colour
of its breast.
no burial this pretty babe
of any man receives,
but robin redbreaft painfully
did cover him with leaves.
shaks).
children in the iod.
the
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">1- e d
r f d
the redbreas?, sacred to the houshold gods,
pays to trusted man his annual visit. -
reo dcoa.t. m. s. a name of contempt for a soldier.
the fearful passenger, who travels late,
shakes at the moonshine shadow of a rush,
and sees a redcoat rise from ev’ry bush.
to re dden. v. «. [from red.] to make red.
in a heav'n serene, refulgent arms appear
redn'ing the skies, and glitt'ring all around, s
the temper'd metals clash. dryden's ancis.
t: re’dden. v. n. to grow red.
with shame they redden'd, and with spight grew pale.
dryden's juvenal.
thomson.
dryden.
turn upon the ladies in the pit,
and if they redden, you are sure 'tis wit. addison.
the poor inhabitant beholds in vain -
the red"ning orange and the swelling grain. addison.
for me the balm shall bleed, and amber flow,
the coral redden, and the ruby glow. pope.
appius reddens at each word you speak,
and stares, tremendous, with a threat'ning eye,
like some fierce tyrant in old tapestry. pope.
re'ddis h. adj. [from red.] somewhat red.
a bright spot, white and somewhat reddish. lev.
redd1sh n ess. n.s. [from rednish..] tendency to redness.
two parts of copper and one of tin, by fusion brought
into one mass, the whiteness of the tin is more conspicuous
than the reddishness of the copper. boyle.
redd1"f ion. n.s.. [from reddo, lat.] restitution.
she is reduced to a perfect obedience, partly by voluntary
reddition and desire of protection, and partly by conquest.
howei's pocal fores?.
re'dd1tive. adj. [redditivus, lat.] answering to an interro-
gative. a term of grammar.
red ble. n. s. a sort of mineral.
reddle is an earth of the metal kind, of a tolerably close
and even texture: its surface is smooth and somewhat glossy,
and it is soft and unetuous to the touch, staining the fingers
very much: in england we have the finest in the world.
hill's materia alsodica.
redf. n.s. snab, saxon.] counsel; advice. not used.
do not as some ungracious pastors do,
shew me the steep and thorny way to heav'n ;
whilst he a puft and reckless libertine,
himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,
and recks not his own rede. ' shakoff. hamlet.
t, rede. v. a. [raban, saxon.] to advise.
i rede thee hence to remove,
lest thou the price of my displeasure prove. spensor.
t, redee. m. v. a. [redimo, j.at.]
1. to ransom; to relieve from forfeiture or captivity by paying
a prl c.c.
o: kinsman said, i cannot redeem it for myself, lest i mar
mine inheritance. ruth. iv. 6.
2. to rescue ; to recover.
lf, when i am laid into the tomb,
i wake before the time that romeo
comes to redeem me, there's a fearful point.
thy father
levied an army, weening to redeem
and re-instal me in the diadem.
th' almighty from the grave
hath me redeem’d ; he will the humble save. sandys.
redeem israel, o god, out of all his troubles. ps. xxv.
redeem from this reproach my wand'ring ghost. dryden.
3• to recompense ; to compensate ; to make amends for.
waywardly proud; and therefore bold, because extremely
faulty ; and yet having no good thing to redeem these. sidney.
this feather stirs, she lives; if it be so,
it is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
that ever i have felt. shakesp. king lear.
having committed a fault, he became the more obsequious
and pliant to redeem it. wotton.
think it not hard, if at so cheap a rate
you can secure the constancy of fate,
whose kindness sent what does your malice seem
by lesser ills the greater to redeem.
4. to free by paying an atonement.
thou hast one daughter,
who redeems nature from the general curse,
which twain have brought her to.
5. to pay the penalty of.
which of you will be mortal to redeem
man's mortal crime. milton.
6. to perform the work of universal redemption; to confer the
inestimable benefit of reconciliation to god.
christ redeemed us from the curse. gal. iii. 13.
redee/mable. adj. [from redeem.] capable of redemption.
redf e'mableness. n.s.. [from redeemable.] the state of being
redeemable.
red ee'mer. m. s. [from redeem.]
1. one who ransoms or redeems ; a ransomer.
shakesp.
shakesp. henry vi.
dryden.
shakespeare.
*
she inflamed him so,
that he would algates with pyrocles fight,
and his redeemer challeng'd for his foe,
because he had not well maintain'd his right. stensor.
2. the saviour of the world.
i every day expect an embassage
from my redremier to redeem me hence;
and now in peace my soul shall part to heav'n. shałos).
man's friend, his mediator, his design'd
both ransom and rederiner voluntary. 41 hoo's par, iss.
when saw we thee any way distressed, and relieved the
will be the question of those, to whom heaven itself will be
at the last day awarded, as having ministed to their re-
deemer. boyle.
to redeli'v er. v. a. [re and deliver.] to deliver back.
i have remembrances of yours,
that i have longed long to red, liver. shakespeare.
instruments judicially exhibited, are not of the aats of
courts; and therefore may be redelivered on the demand of
the person that exhibited them. aoiffe's parorgan.
repfilov ery. m.s.. [from redeliver.] the 26 of delivering back.
72 redemand. v. a. [redemander, fr. re and demana.] to
demand back.
threcscore attacked the place where they were kept in
custody, and rescued them : the duke red mand; his prisoners,
but receiving excuses, resolved to do himself iustice. addison.
repe'mpt 10n. m. s. [redemption, fr. redemptio, lat.]
i. ransome 3 release.
- utter darkness his place
ordain’d without redemption, without end. milton.
2. purchase of god's favour by the death of christ.
i charge you, as you hope to have redemption,
that you depart, and lay no hands on me. shakes.
the saviour son be glorify’d,
who for lost man's red, mption dy’d. dryden.
the salvation of our souls may be advanced, by firmly
believing the mysteries of our redemption; and by initating
the example of those primitive patterns of piety. nelson.
redemp of y. adj. [siom redemptus, lat.j paid for ran some.
- onega sings the exeguies,
and hector's redemptory price. chopran's iliads.
rf pop m. a. s. [from red and gum.] a disease of children
newly born.
re'dhot. adj. [red and lot..] heated to redness.
iron reohot buincth and consumeth not. bacon.
is not fire a body heated so hot as to emit light copiously?
for what cle is a redhot iron than fire and what else is a
burning coal than redhof wood : newton's cpticis.
the redht metal hists in the lake. pope.
red!"ntegrate. adj. [redintegratus, latin.] restored;
renewed ; made new.
charles viii. received the kingdom of france in flourish-
ing estate, being edintegrate in those principal members,
which anciently had been portions of the crown, and were
after diffevered: so as they remained only in homage, and
not in sovereignty. bacon's henry vii.
redintegra"fios. m. s. [from redintegrate j
i. renovation ; restoration.
they kept the feast indeed, but with the leven of malice,
and absurdly commemorated the redintegration of his natural
body, by mutilating and dividing his mystical. dec. of pity.
2. redintegration chymists call the resioring any mixed body or
master, whose form has been destroy cd, to its former nature
and constitution. &amp;ming.
he but prescribes as a bare chymical purification of nitre,
what i teach as a philosophical redintegration of it. boy'z.
re'ble ad. m. s. [red and lead..] minium; lead calcined.
to draw with dry colours, make long pastils, by grinding
redlead with strong wort, and so roll them up into long rolls
like pencils, drying them in the sun. peacham.
re'dness. m. s. [from red.] the quality of being red.
there was a pretty redness in his lips. shakespears.
in the red, sea most apprehend a material redness, from
whence they derive its common denomination. brown.
the glowing rednji of the berries vies with the verdure of
their leaves. speciator.
#:::::: { n. s. [from redolent.] sweet scent.
we have all the redolence of the perfumes we burn upon
his altars.
their slowers attract spiders with their red, ency.
retxolent. adj. [redolens, lat..] sweet of scent.
thy love excels the joys of wine;
thy odours, o how redolent / sando's paraph, oft.
to redou’ble. v. a. [redoubler, fr. re and double.]
1. to repeat in return.
so ended she ; and all the rest around
to her redoubled that her undersong.
2. to repeat often.
they were -
as cannons overcharg’d with double cracks,
so they redoubled strokes upon the foc. shakes?. macłeto.
3. to
poyie,
martim.
sponsor.
*-
o
9
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. d
r e. d -
3. to encrease by addition of the same quantity over and over.
mimas and parnassus sweat,
and aetna rages with redoubled heat.
t, redou’ble...o. n. to become twice as much.
if we consider, that our whole eternity is to take its co-
lour from those hours which we here employ in virtue or vice,
the argument redoubles upon us, for putting in practice this
method of passing away our time. addison's speciator.
redou'bt. m. s. [reduit, redoute, fr. ridotta, italian.] the
outwork of a fortification ; a fortress.
every great ship is as an impregnable fort, and our safe and
commodious ports are as redoubts to secure them. bacon.
redou'bta ble. adj. [redoubtable, fr.] formidable; terrible
to foes.
the enterprising mr. lintot, the redoubtable rival of mr.
tonson, overtook ine. pope.
redou'bted. adj. [redoubte, fr. j dread; awful; formid-
able. not in use.
his kingdom's seat cleopolis is red,
there to obtain some such redoubted knight,
that parents dear from tyrant's power deliver might. spensor.
so far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
as my true service shall deserve your love.
to redou'n d. v. n. [redundo, latin.]
1. to be sent back by reaction,
the evil, soon
driv'n back, redounded, as a flood, on those
from whom it sprung. milton's paradis. loft.
nor hope to be myself less miserable
by what i seek, but others to make such
as i, though thereby worse to me red und.
2. to conduce in the consequence.
as the care of our national commerce redounds more to
the riches and prosperity of the publick, than any other act
of government, the state of it should be marked out in every
particular reign with greater distinction. addison.
he had drawn many observations together, which very
much redund to the honour of this prince. add/on.
the honour done to our religion ultimately red unds to
god the author of it. - rogers's serm.nj.
3. to proceed in the consequence.
as both these monsters will devour great quantities of paper,
there will no small use redound from them to that manu-
facture. adaison's guardian.
to redre'ss. v. a. [redros. r, fr.]
1. to set right; to amend.
in yonder spring of roses,
find what to redress till noon. milton.
2. to relieve ; to 1.emedy : to ease. it is sometimes used of
persons, but more properly of things.
she felt with me, what i felt of my captivity, and streight
laboured to redress my pain, which was her pain. sidney.
'tis thine, o king' th' afflicted to redress. dryden.
lighter affronts and injuries christ commands us not to
redress by law, but to bear with patience. kettlewell.
in countries of freedom, princes are bound to protect their
subjects in liberty, property and religion, to receive their pe-
titions, and redress their grievances. swift.
redre'ss. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. reformation ; amendment.
to seek reformation of evil laws is commendable, but for
addison.
shakesp.
milton.
us the more necessary is a speedy redross of ourselves. hooker.
2. relief; remedy.
no humble suitors press to speak for right;
no, not a man comes for redress to thee. shakespeare.
such people as break the law of nations, all nations are
interested to suppress, considering that the particular states,
being the delinquents, can give no redress. bacon.
grief, finding no redress, ferment and rage,
nor less than wounds immedicable,
rankle, and fester, and gangrene
to black mortification. milton.
a few may complain without reason; but there is occasion
for redress when the cry is universal. davenant.
3. one who gives relief.
fair majesty, the refuge and redros;
of those whom fate pursues, and wants oppress. dryden.
redre'ssive. adj. [from redress.] succouring; affording re-
medy. a word not authorised.
the generous band,
who, touch'd with human woe, redressive search'd
into the horrors of the gloomy jail. thomson.
t. redsra r. v. n. [red and scar.] a term of workmen-
if iron be too cold, it will not feel the weight of the ham-
mer, when it will not batter under the hammer; and, if it be
too hot, it will reds ar, that is, break or crack under the
hammer. moxon's mechanical exorcises.
redshank. n.s. [red and shank.]
1. this seems to be a contemptuous appellation for some of the
people of scotland. -
he sent over his brother edward with a power of scots
*:::::: unto ireland, where they got footing, spots r.
ol. ii.
2. a bird. ainsworth.
repstart, or re'ptail: n. s. sphanicurus, lat.] %.
re'pstreak. n.s. [red and /freak.]
1. an apple.
the red/lreak, of all cyder fruit, hath obtained the prefe-
rence, being but a kind of wilding, and though kept long,
yet is never pleasing to the palate; there are several'sorts of
red/reak; some forts of them have red veins running through
the whole fruit, which is esteemed to give the cyder the
richest tincture. also, timer
2. cyder pressed from the redstreak.
red/reak he quaffs beneath the chianti vine,
gives tuscan yearly for thy scudmore's wine.
to reduce. v. a. [roduco, lat. reduire, fr.]
1. to bring back. obsolete.
abate the edge of traitors, gracious lord
that would reduce these bloody days again.
2. to bring to the former state.
it were but just
and equal to reduce me to my dust,
desirous to resign and render back
all i receiv'd.
3. to reform from any disorder.
that temper in the archbishop, who licensed their most
pernicious writings, left his successor a very difficult work to
do, to reform and reduce a church into order, that had been
so long negle&amp;ted, and so ill filled. clarendon.
4. to bring into any state of diminution. -
a diaphanous body, reduced to very minute parts, thereby
smith.
shakoff.
4 soton.
acquires many little surfaces in a narrow compass. boyle.
his ire will quite consume us, and reduce
to nothing this essential. milton.
the ordinary smallest measure is looked on as an unit in
number, when the mind by division would reduce them into
less fractions. locke.
5. to degrade; to impair in dignity.
there is nothing so bad, but a man may lay hold of
something about it, that will afford matter of excuse; nor
nothing so excellent, but a man may fasten upon something
belonging to it, whereby to reduce it. tillotson.
6. to bring into any state of misery or meanness.
the most prudent part was his moderation and indulgence,
not redocing them to desperation. arbuthnot on coins.
7. to subdue. -
under thee, as head supreme,
thrones, princedons, pow'rs, dominions i reluce.
azilton's paradise los’.
8. to bring into any state more within reach or power.
to have this project reduced to practice, there seems to
want nothing.
9. to reclaim to order.
there left desert utmost hell,
reduc’d in careful watch round their metropolis. a silion.
io. to subject to a rule; to bring into a class: as, the infects
are reduced to tribes; the variations of language are reduced
to rules.
r f duoc ement. n. s. [from reduce.] the agt of bringing
back, subduing, reforming or diminishing: reduction.
the navy received blesfing from pope sixtus, and was as-
signed as an apostolical mission for the reducement of this
kingdom to the obedience of rome. bacon.
redu’c er. m. s. [from reduce.] one that reduces.
they could not learn to digest, that the man, which they
so long had used to mask their own appetites, should now be
the reducer of them into order. - sidney.
re duoc ip le. adj. [from reduce.] possible to be reduced.
all law that a man is obliged by, is reducible to the law of
nature, the positive law of god in his word, and the law of
man enacted by the civil power. south.
actions, that promote society and mutual fellowship, seem
reducible to a pronencss to do good to others, and a ready
sense of any good done by others. south.
all the parts of painting are reducible into these mentioned
by our author. dryden's dufresnoy.
if minerals are not convertible into another species, though
of the same genus, much less can they be surmised reducible
into a species of another genus. harvey on consumptions.
our damps in england are reducible to the suffocating or
the fulminating. //oodward.
redu’c.15len ess. m. s. [from reducible.] quality of being
reducible.
spirit of wine, by its pungent taste, and especially by its
reducibleness, according to helmont, into alcali and water,
seems to be as well of a saline as a sulphureous nature. boyle.
re du’ction. m. s. [reduction, fr. from reauctus, lat.]
1. the act of reducing ; state of being reduced.
some will have these years to be but months ; but we have
no certain cwidence that they used to account a month a year;
and if we had, yet that reduction will not serve. - hale.
every thing visibly tended to the reduction of his sacred
majesty, and all persons in their several stations began to
make way and prepare for it. foll,
21 m 2. in
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. e.
r e. e.
2. in arithmetick, reduction brings two or more numbers of
different denominations into one denomination. cocker.
fedu’ctive. adj. [reductif, fr. reducius, latin.] having
the power of reducing. it is used as a substantive by hale.
thus far concerning these reduclives by inundations and
conflagrations. hale's origin of mankind.
repusci i v ely. adv. [from reduclive..] by reduction ; by
consequence.
if they be our superiors, then 'tis modesty and reverence to
all such in general, at least reduclively, hammond.
other niceties, though they are not matter of conscience,
singly and apart, are yet so reductively; that is, though they
are not so in the abstract, they become so by affinity and
connection. l’estrange's fables.
redu'ndan ce. q. m. s. [redundantia, lat from redundant.) su-
§o: perfluity; superabundance; exuberance.
the cause of generation seemeth to be fulness"; for gene-
ration is from redundancy: this fulness ariseth from the na-
ture of the creature, if it be hot, and moist and sanguine ;
or from plenty of food. bacon.
it is a quality, that confines a man wholly within him:
self, leaving him void of that principle, which alone should
dispose him to communicate and impart those redundancies of
good, that he is possessed of: south.
i shall show our poets redundance of wit, justness of com-
parisons, and elegance of descriptions. garth.
labour ferments the humours, casts them into their proper
channels, and throws off redundancies. addison.
redu’ndant. adj. [redundans, latin.]
1. superabundant : exuberant; superfluous.
his head,
with burnish’d neck of verdant gold, erect
amidst his circling spires, that on the grass
floated redundant. milton's par. loft.
notwithstanding the redundant oil in fishes, they do not
encrease fat so much as flesh. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. using more words or images than are useful.
where the author is redundant, mark those paragraphs to be
retrenched; when he trifles, abandon those passages. watts.
redu'nd antly. adv. [from redundant.] superfluously; su-
perabundantly.
to redu'pl: cate. v. a. [re and duplicate.] to double.
reduplication. m. s. [from reduplicate ) the act of doubling.
this is evident, when the mark of exclusion is put ; as
when we speak of a white thing, adding the reduplication,
as white; which excludes all other considerations. digby.
redu'plicative. adj. [reduplicatif, fr. from reduplicate. j
double. -
some logicians mention reduplicative propositions; as men,
considered as men, are rational creatures; i.e. because they
are men. //atts's logick.
re'dw1n g. m. s. [turdus il.acus.] a bird. ainsworth.
to re e. v. a. [i know not the etymology.] to riddle; to sift.
after malt is well rubbed and winnowed, you must then
ree it over in a fieve. mortimer's husbandry.
t, ree'cho. v. n. [re and echo..] to echo back.
around we stand, a melancholy train, -
and a loud groan reechoes from the main. pope.
ree'chy. adj. [ from reech, corruptly formed from reek. i
smoky ; footy; tanned.
let him, for a pair of retchy kifles,
make you to ravel all this matter out. shakes. hamlet.
the kitchen malkin pins
her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck. shakesp.
reed. m. s. [neob, saxon; ried, german; arundo, lat.]
1. an hollow knotted stalk, which grows in wet grounds.
a reed is distinguished from the grades by its magnitude,
and by its having a firm stem : the species are, the large ma-
nured cane or reed, the sugar cane, the common reed, the
variegated reed, the bambu cane, and dark red reed. miller.
this derceta, the mother of semiramis, was sometimes
a recluse, and falling in love with a goodly young man, she
was by him with child, which, for fear of extreme punish-
ment, she conveyed away and caused the same to be hidden
among the high needs which grew on the banks of the lake.
raleigh's history of the i/orld.
the knotty bulrush next in order flood,
and all within of eeds a trembling wood. dryden.
2. a small pipe, made anciently of a reed.
i’ll speak between the change of man and boy
with a reed voice. shakespeare.
arcadian pipe, the pastoral reed
of hermes. milton,
3. an arrow ; as made of a reed headed.
when the parthian turn’d his fleed,
and from the hostile camp withdrew ;
with cruel skill the backward reed
he sent ; and as he fled, he flew.
ree ded. adj. [from reed.] covered with reeds.
where houses be reeded,
- now pare off the moss, and go beat in the reed.
ree den. adj. [siom reed.] consisting of reeds.
*
pr.or.
toffer.
honey in the sickly hive infuse
through reeden pipes. dryden's virgi's georgia,
reed-grass. m. s. [from reed and grass, sarganion, lat.j a
plant, bur-reed.
to ree dify. v. a. [reedifier, fr. re and edis).] to rebuilds.
to build again. 2
the ruin’d walls he did reedify. spen
this monument five too. hath stood, pensor.
which i have sumptuously reedified. shakespear.
the aeolians, who repeopled, reedified ilium. $no.
the house of god they first reediff. milo.
ree'dless, adj. [from reed.] being without reeds. e
youth's tomb'd before their parents were,
whom foul cocytus' reedless banks enclose. may.
ree'dy. adj. [from reed.] abounding with reeds.
the sportive flood in two divides,
and forms with erring streams the reedy isles. blackmore.
th’ adjoining brook, now fretting o'er a rock,
now scarcely moving through a reedy pool. thomson.
reek. n.s. [rec, saxon; reuke, dutch.]
1. smoke , steam ; vapour.
'tis as hatesul to me as the reek of a lime kiln. shakesp.
2. [reke, german, any thing piled up..] a pile of corn or hay,
commonly pronounced, rick.
nor barns at home, nor reeks are rear'd abroad. dryden.
the covered reek, much in use westward, must needs
prove of great advantage in wet harvests. artimer.
to reek. v. n, [necan, saxon.] to smoke 5 to steam; to emit
vapour.
to the battle came he ; where he did
run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if
*twere a perpetual spoil. shakesp. coriolanus.
dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
they shall be fam'd ; for there the sun shall greet them,
and draw their honours reeking up to heav'n. shakesp.
i found me laid
in balmy sweat ; which with his beams the sun
soon dry'd, and on the reeking moisture fed.
love one descended from a race of tyrants,
whose blood yet reeks on my avenging sword.
ree'ky. adj. [from reek.] smoky ; tanned; black.
shut me in a charnel house,
o'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones, “ . .
with reaky shanks and yellow chapless skulls. shakesp.
re e l. m. s. [reol, saxon.] a turning frame, upon which
yarn is wound into skeins from the spindle.
to reel. v. a. [from the noun.] to gather yarn off the spindle.
it may be useful for the reeling of yarn. //r/oins.
to reel. v. n. [rollen, dutch; ragla, swedish.] to stagger;
to incline in walking, first to one side and then to the other.
spensor has applied it to the feet.
him when his mistress proud perceiv'd to fall,
while yet his feeble feet for faintness reel'd,
she 'gan call, help orgoglio! spenser's f. queen.
what news in this our tott'ring state?
—it is a reeling world,
and i believe will never sland upright,
till richard wear the garland. -
it is amiss to sit
and keep the turn of tipling with a slave,
to reel the streets at noon. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man. ps.
grope in the dark, and to no seat confine
their wandring feet ; but reel as drunk with wine. sandys.
he with heavy fumes opprest,
milton.
shakesp. rich. iii.
reel'd from the palace, and retir'd to rest. pope:
should he hide his face,
th’extinguish'd stars would loosening reel
wide from their spheres. thomson.
reele"ction. m. s. [re and elee7ion.] repeated ele&amp;tion.
several acts have been made, and rendered ineffectual, by
leaving the power of reelecion open. swift.
to re ena"ct. v. a. [re and enact.] to enaet anew.
the construction of ships was forbidden to senators, by a
law made by claudius the tribune, and reenađed by the julian
law of concessions. arbuthnot on coins.
to rees force. v. a. [re and enforce.] to strengthen with
new assistance or support.
the french have reenforc'd their scatter'd men. shakes?.
they used the stones to reenforce the pier. hayward.
the presence of a friend raises fancy, and reenforces
reason. - collier.
reen forcement. [re and enforcement.] * -
1. fresh assistance; new help. -
alone he enter'd
the mortal gate o' th' city, which he painted
with shunless destiny; aidless came off,
and with a sudden reenforcement struck -
corioli like a planet. shakesp. coriolanur.
they require a special reenforcement of sound endo&amp;trinat-
ing to set them right. miltar.
what reenforcement we may gain from bope. mitcz.
- - 2. iterated
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e f
2. iterated enforcement. - - . . . .
the words are a reiteration or reenforcement of a corol-
lary. - j//ard.
7, reenjoy. v. a. [re and enjoy.] to enjoy anew or a se-
cond time. •. -
the calmness of temper achilles reenjoyed, is only an ef-
fe&amp;t of the revenge which ought to have preceded. pope.
t, ree'nter. v. a. [re and enter.] to enter again; to en-
ter anew. -
with opportune excursion, we may chance
reenter heav'n. milton.
the fiery sulphurous vapours seek the centre from whence
they proceed; that is, reenter again. mortimer's husbandry.
t, reenthro’ne. v. a. to replace in a throne.
he disposes in my hands the scheme
to reenthrone the king. southerm.
ree'n trance. n.s. [re and entrance.] the act of entring
again.
their repentance, although not their first entrance, is not-
withstanding the first step of their reentrance into life. hooker.
the pores of the brain, through the which the spirits be-
fore took their course, are more easily opened to the spirits
which demand reentrance. glanville's scepsis.
ree'rmouse. n.s.. [hnenemur, saxon j a bat. see rear-
mouse.
t, reestatblish. v. a. [re and establish.] to establish
and w.
to reestablish the right of lineal succession to paternal go-
vernment, is to put a man in possession of that government,
which his fathers did enjoy. locke.
peace, which hath for many years been banished the chris-
tian world, will be speedily restablished. smalridge.
reest a'blis h.e.r. m. s. [fiom reestablish.j one that reesta-
blishes.
reest a blis hment. n.s.. [from rees?ablish..] the agt of re-
establishing; the state of being reestablished; restauration.
the jews made such a powerful effort for their re-slablish-
ment under barchocab, in the reign of adrian, as shook the
whole roman empire. addison.
reeve. m. s. [3enera, saxon.] a steward. obsolete.
the reeve, miller and cook are distinguished. dryden.
to reexa min e. v. a. [re and examine.] to examine anew.
spend the time in reexamining more duly your cause. hook.
t, refect. v. a. s. sodius, lat..] to refresh; to restore
after hunger or fatigue. not in use.
a man in the morning is lighter in the scale, because in
sleep some pounds have perspired; and is also lighter unto
himself, because he is refre!ed. brown's wugar e! rours.
refection. m. s. [refection, fr. from refectio, lat..] re-
freshment after hunger or fatigue.
after a draught of wine, a man may seem lighter ir"' on-
self from sudden rese?ion, though he be heavier in the va-
lance, from a ponderous addition. brown.
fasting is the diet of angels, the food and resolin of souls,
and the richest aliment of grace. south.
for sweet refection due,
the genial viands let my train renew. pope.
refe/crory. m. s. [ref:cłore, fr. from ref.o.] room of
refreshment; eating room.
he cells and resołories did prepare,
and large provisions laid of winter fare. dryden.
t, refe'l. v. a. [refello, lat..] to refute ; to repress,
friends not to ref:l ye,
or any way quell ye,
ye aim at a mystery,
worthy a history. ben johnson's gosses.
it instructs the scholar in the various methods of discovering
and roselling the subtile tricks of sophisters. j/atts.
t, refer. v. a. [refero, lat. reforer, fr.]
1. to dismiss for information or judgment.
those causes the divine historian refers us to, and not to
any productions out of nothing. burnet's theory of the earth.
2. to betake for decision.
the heir of his kingdom hath roserred herself unto a poor,
but worthy gentleman. shakesp. cymbeline.
3. to reduce to, as to the ultimate end.
you profess and practise to refer all things to yourself. bac.
4. to reduce, as to a class,
the salts, predominant in quick lime, we refer rather to
lixiviate, than acid. boyle on colours.
to refe’r. v. n.
1. to respect; to have relation.
of those places, that refer to the shutting and opening the
abyss, i take notice of that in job. barnet.
2. to appeal. -
in suits it is good to refer to some friend of trust. bacon.
referee'. m. s. [from refer.] oue to whom any thing is
referred. -
referees and arbitrators seldom forget themselves. l'e/or.
reference. n.s.. [from resor.]
1. relation; respe&amp;t; view towards; allusion to.
the knowledge of that which man is in reference unto him-
4.
self and other things in relation unto man, i may term the
mother of all those principles, which are decrees in that law
of mature, whereby human actions are framed. hooker.
jupiter was the son of æther and dies; so called, because
the one had reference to his celestial conditions, the other dis-
covered his natural virtues. raleigh's hisłory of the world.
d o religion commands sobriety, temperance and mo-
eration, in reference to our appetites : o; ..... illotson.
2. dismission so o ites and pations. tillotson
it passed in england without the least reference hither. sw.
refere'ndary. n.s. [referendus, lat..] one to whose deci-
sion any thing is referred.
in suits, it is good to refer to some friend of trust; but let
him chuse well his referendaries. bacon's essays.
to referme'n'r. v. a. [re and forment.] to ferment anew.
th’ admitted nitre agitates the flood,
revives its fire, and referments the blood. blackmore.
referr1ble. adj. [from refer.] capable of being considered,
as in relation to something else.
unto god all parts of time are alike, unto whom none are
referrible, and all things present, unto whom nothing is past
or to come, but who is the same yesterday, to day and to-
morrow. brown's vulgar errouri.
to refi’ne. v. a. [raffner, fr.]
1. to purify ; to clear from dross and recrement.
i will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as
gold is tried. zech. xiii. 9.
weigh ev'ry word, and ev'ry thought refine. anon.
the red dutch currant yields a rich juice, to be diluted
with a quantity of water boiled with refined sugar. a sortimer.
2. to make elegant; to polish; to make accurate.
queen elizabeth's time was a golden age for a world of re-
fined wits, who honoured poesy with their pens. peacham.
love refines the thoughts, and hath his seat
in reason. milton.
the same traditional sloth, which renders the bodies of
children, born from wealthy parents, weak, may perhaps
refine their spirits. swift.
to ref 1'n e. v. n.
1. to improve in point of accuracy or delicacy.
chaucer refined on boccace, and mended his stories. dryden.
let a lord but own the happy lines;
how the wit brightens, how the sense refines / pope.
2. to grow pure.
the pure limpid stream, when foul with stains,
works itself clear, and as it runs refines. addison.
3. to affect nicety.
he makes another paragraph about our refining in controver-
sy, and coming nearer still to the church of rome. alterbury.
ref1'nedly. adv. [from refine.] with affected elegance.
will any dog
rofinedly leave his bitches and his bones,
to turn a wheel dryden.
ref1'n e mrs r. n.s.. [from refore.] -
1. the act of purifying, by clearing any thing from dross and
recrementitious matter,
2. the state of being pure.
the more bodies are of kin to spirit in subtilty and rosne-
ment, the more diffusive are they. norris.
3. improvement in elegance or purity.
from the civil war to this time, i doubt whether the cor-
ruptions in our language have not equalled its refinements. sw.
the religion of the gospel is only the refinement and ex-
altation of our best faculties. law.
4. artificial practice. -
the rules religion prescribes are more successful in publick
and private affairs, than the refinements of irregular cunning.
rogers.
5. affedation of elegant improvement.
the flirts about town had a design to leave us in the lurch,
by some of their late refinements. addison's guardian.
ref1'ner. m. s. [from refine.]
1. purifier; one who clears from dross or recrement.
the riftners of iron observe, that that iron stone is hardest
to melt, which is fullest of metal; and that easiest, which
hath most dross: bacon's physical remains,
2. improver in elegance. -
as they have been the great refiners of our language, so it
hath been my chief ambition to imitate them. swift.
3. inventor of superfluous subtilties. -
no men see less of the truth of things, than these great
refiner, upon incidents, who are so wonderfully subtle, and
over wise in their conceptions. addison's spectator.
some refiners pretend to argue for the usefulness of parties
in such a government as ours. swift.
t, refi’t. tw. a. [refait, fr. re and fit..] to repair; to re-
store after damage. - - !--
he will not allow that there are any such signs of art in the
make of the present globe, or that there was so great care
taken in the refitting of it up again at the deluge. //oodw.
permit our ships a shelter on your shoars,
refitted from your woods with planks and oars. pro
4.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. f
r e f
to reflect. v. a. [reflechir, fr. reflecio, lat. j. to
throw back.
we, his gather'd beams
refteaed, may with matter sere foment.
bodies close together reflect their own colour.
t, refle"ct. v. m.
1. to throw back light.
in dead men's sculls, and in those holes,
where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
as 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems.
2. to bend back. -
inanimate matter moves always in a straight line, and never
refleos in an angle, nor bends in a circle, which is a conti-
nual refle&amp;tion, unless either by some external impulse, or by
an intrinsick principle of gravity. bentley's sermons.
3. to throw back the thoughts upon the past or on themselves.
the imagination casts thoughts in our way, and forces the
understanding to refied upon them. duppa.
in every action reflect upon the end; and in your under-
milton.
dryden.
shakespeare.
taking it, consider why you do it. taylor.
who saith, who could such ill events expe&amp;t
with shame on his own counsels doth reflect. denham.
when men are grown up, and rose: on their own minds,
they cannot find any thing more ancient there, than those
opinions which were taught them before their memory began
to keep a register of their actions. locke.
it is hard, that any part of my land should be settled upon
one who has used me so ill; and yet i could not see a sprig
of any bough of this whole walk of trees, but i should re-
fied upon her and her severity. addison's spediator.
let the king dismiss his woes,
refteaing on her fair renown;
and take the cypress from his brows,
to put his wonted laurels on. prior.
4. to consider attentively.
into myself my reason's eye i turn’d ;
and as i much reflected, much i mourn'd. . prior.
5. to throw reproach or censure.
neither do i refied in the least upon the memory of his
late majesty, whom i entirely acquit of any imputation. sw.
6. to bring reproach.
errors of wives refle? on husbands still. dryden.
refle'ctent. adj. [roficiens, lat.] bending back; flying
back.
the ray descendent, and the ray refleasent, flying with so
great a speed, that the air between them cannot take a formal
play any way, before the beams of the light be on both sides
of it; it follows, that, according to the nature of humid
things, it must first only swell. digby on the soul.
reflection. m. s. [from reflect: thence i think reflexion less
proper: reflexion, fr. reflexus, lat.]
1. the aet of throwing back.
the eye sees not itself,
but by reflection from other things. shakesp. julius cæsar.
if the sun's light consisted but of one sort of rays, there
would be but one colour, and it would be impossible to pro-
duce any new by reflections or refractions. cheyne.
2. the act of bending back.
inanimate matter moves always in a straight line, nor ever
reflects in an angle or circle, which is a continual reflection,
unless by some external impulse. bentley's sermons.
3. that which is reflected.
she shines not upon fools, lest the refle?ion should hurt
her. shakesp. cymbeline.
as the sun in water we can bear,
yet not the sun, but his rosie&amp;lion there;
so let us view her here, in what she was,
and take her image in this watry glass. dryden.
4. thought thrown back upon the past, or the absent, on
itself.
the three first parts i dedicate to my old friends, to take
off those melancholy reflections, which the sense of age, in-
firmity and death may give them. denham,
this dreadful image so possess'd her mind,
she ceas'd all farther hope ; and now began
to make reflection on th’ unhappy man. dryden.
job's reflections on his once flourishing estate, did at the
same time afflict and encourage him. atterbury.
what wounding reproaches of soul must he feel, from the
reflections on his own ingratitude. rogers's sermons.
5. the action of the mind upon itself.
reflection is the perception of the operations of our own
minds within us, as it is employed about the ideas it has
got. - - locke.
6, attentive consideration. -
this delight grows and improves under thought and re-
fled?ion; and while it exercises, does also endear itself to the
mind ; at the same time employing and inflaming the medi-
tations. south's sermons.
7. censure.
he dy’d; and oh! may no reflection shed
its pois'nous venom on the royal dead,
prior.
refle"ctive, adj. [from reflea.]
1. throwing back images.
when the weary king gave place to night,
his beams he to his royal brother lent,
and so shone still in his reflective light. drydon.
in the reflective stream the fighing bride,
viewing her charms impair'd, abash'd shall hide
her pensive head. prior.
2. confidering things past; considering the operations of the
mind.
forc’d by refleclive reason i confess,
that human science is uncertain guess.
refle"ctor. n.s.. [from reflect.] considerer.
there is scarce any thing that nature has made, or that
men do suffer, whence the devout refle&amp;ar cannot take an oc-
casion of an aspiring meditation. boyle on colours.
refle'x. adj. [reflexus, lat..] direeted backward.
the motions of my mind are as obvious to the reflex act
of the soul, or the turning of the intellectual eye inward upon
its own actions, as the passions of my sense are obvious to m
sense; i see the object, and i perceive that i see it. hale.
the order, and beauty of the inanimate parts of the world,
the discernible ends of them do evince by a refl &amp; argument,
that it is the workmanship, not of blind mechanism or blinder
chance, but of an intelligent and benign agent. bently.
reflex. n. s. [reflexus, lat..] reflection.
there was no other way for angels to fin, but by reflex of
their understandings upon themselves. #.
i'll say yon gray is not the morning's eye, -
'tis but the pale reflex of cynthia's brow. shakes.
refi exibility, n.s.. [from rift.xible.] the quality of being
reflexible.
reft.xibility of rays is their disposition to be refle&amp;ted or
turned back into the same medium from any other medium,
upon whose surface they fall; and rays are more or less re.
flexible, which are turned back more or less easily. newton.
route. adj. [from reflexus, lat.] capable to be thrown
ack.
sir isaac newton has demonstrated, by convincing experi-
ments, that the light of the sun consists of rays differently
refrangible and reflexible; and that those rays are differently
reflexible, that are differently refrangible. cheyne.
roxxi. adj. [roftewus, lat.] having respect to something
past. -
that assurance reflexive cannot be a divine faith, but at the
most an human, yet such as perhaps i may have no doubt-
ing mixed with. hammond's pracical catechism.
refle xively. adv. [from reflexive..] in a backward direction.
solomon tells us life and death are in the power of the
tongue, and that not only directly in regard of the good or ill
we may do to others, but roffexively also, in respect of what
may rebound to ourselves. overnment of the tongue.
ref lo a^t. m. s. [re and float.j ebb; reflux.
the main float and refloat of the sea, is by consent of the
universe, as part of the diurnal motion. bacon.
to rh f lou'r is h. v. a. [re and flourish j to flourish anew.”
virtue given for lost
revives, riflourishes, then vigorous most, -
when most unactive deem’d. milton's agonisłes.
to reflow. v. n. [roftuer, fr. re and flow.] to flow back.
refluent, adj. [rosiuens, lat.) running back; flowing
back.
the liver receives the refluent blood almost from all the
parts of the abdomen. arbuthnot on alinents.
tell, by what paths,
back to the fountain's head the sea conveys
the refluent rivers, and the land repays. blackmore.
reflu'x. m. s. [roftux, fr. refluxus, lat...] backward course
of water.
besides
mine own that 'bide upon me, all from me
shall with a fierce o: on me redound. milton.
the variety of the flux and reflux of euripus, or whether
the same do ebb and flow seven times a day, is incontra-
vertible, brown's pulgar errours.
refocillation, n. s. [refoillo, lat.] restoration of strength
by refreshment.
to refo'r.m. v. a. [reformo, lat. reformer, fr.] to change
from worse to better.
a sect in england, following the very same rule of policy,
seeketh to reform even the french reformation, and purge out
prior.
*
from thence also dregs of popery. hooker.
seat worthier of gods, was built
with second thoughts, reforming what was old. milton.
may no such storm
fall on our times, where ruin must reform. denham.
now low'ring looks presage approaching storms,
and now prevailing love her face reforms. bryden.
one cannot attempt the perfect reforming the languages of
the world, without rendering himself ridiculous. locke-
the example alone of a vicious prince will corrupt an age;
but that of a good one will not ryorm it. swift.
7
- ts
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e f
r e f
1, refo'r.m. v. n. to make a change from worse to better.
was his doctrine of the mass struck out in this con-
flia or did it give him occasion of reforming in this point :
atterbury,
reform. n.s. [french..] reformation.
reform a^tion. n.s.. [reformation, fr. from reform.]
1. change from worse to better; commonly used of human
. manners.
} | - never came reformation in a flood
with such a heady current, scow'ring faults;
nor ever hydra-headed wilfulness
so soon did lose his seat, as in this king. shakesp. henry v.
} satire lashes vice into reformation. dryden.
- the pagan converts mention this great reformation of those
- - who had been the greatest finners, with that sudden and sur-
prising change, which the christian religion made in the lives
- of the most profligate. addison.
2. [by way of eminence.] the change of religion from the cor-
ruptions of popery to its primitive state.
the burden of the reformation lay on luther's shoulders.
atterbury.
refo'rmer. m. s. [from reform.]
1. one who makes a change for the better; an amender.
publick reformers had need first practise that on their own
hearts, which they purpose to try on others. king charles.
the complaint is more general, than the endeavours to
redress it: abroad every man would be a reformer, how very
few at home. spratt's sermons.
it was honour enough, to behold the english churches
reformed; that is, delivered from the £. south.
2. those who changed religion from popish corruptions and in-
novations.
our first reformers were famous confessors and martyrs all
over the world. bacon.
t, refract. v. a. [refracius, lat.] to break the na-
tural course of rays.
if its angle of incidence be large, and the refractive power
of the medium not very strong to throw it far from the per-
pendicular, it will be refracied. cheyne's phil. prin.
rays of light are urged by the refracting media. cheyne.
--- refracied from yon eastern cloud,
- the grand ethereal bow shoots up. thomson.
refra’ction. n.s. [refraction, fr.]
refraction, in general, is the incurvation or change of de-
termination in the body moved, which happens to it whilst
* - it enters or penetrates any medium : in dioptricks, it is the
* * variation of a ray of light from that right line, which it would
have passed on in, had not the density of the medium turned
it aside. harris.
acefraction, out of the rarer medium into the denser, is
made towards the perpendicular. newton's opticks.
refra’ctive. adj. [from refrac.] having the power of re-
fraction.
those superficies of transparent bodies refle&amp; the greatest
quantity of light, which have the greatest refracting power;
that is, which intercede mediums that differ most in their
refrađive densities. newton's opticks.
refra’ctor iness. n. s. [from refrađory..] sullen obstinacy.
i did never allow any man's refracioriness against the pri-
ls.
vileges and orders of the houses. king charles.
great complaint was made by the presbyterian gang, of my
refrađorings to obey the parliament's order. saunderson.
refractory. adj. [refraciaire, fr. refractarius, lat, and
so should be written refragiary. it is now accented on the
first syllable, but by shakespeare on the second..] obstinate;
perverse; contumacious.
there is a law in each well-ordered nation,
to curb those raging appetites that are
most disobedient and refrađory. shakespeare.
a rough hewn seaman, being brought before a wise justice
for some misdemeanor, was by him ordered to be sent away
to prison, and was refraiory after he heard his doom, inso-
much as he would not stir a foot from the place where he
flood; saying, it was better to stand where he was, than go to
a worse place. bacon's apophthegms.
vulgar compliance with any illegal and extravagant ways,
like violent motions in nature, soon grows weary of itself,
and ends in a refraciory sullenness, king charles.
refrađory mortal 1 if thou will not trust thy friends, take
what follows; know assuredly, before next full moon, that
thou wilt be hung up in chains. arbuthnot's his of jo. bull.
these atoms of theirs may have it in them, but they are
refraciory and sullen; and therefore, like men of the same
tempers, must be banged and buffetted into reason. bentley.
r e fragable. adj. [refragabilis, lat..] capable of confuta-
tion and conviction.
t2 r efra1'n. v. a. [rofrener, fr. re and franum, lat.] to
hold back ; to keep from action.
hold not thy tongue, o god, keep not still silence; re-
frain not thyself. psalm lxxxiii. 1.
my son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy
nor from the holy one of heav'n
refrain'd his tongue.
milton,
neptune aton'd, his wrath shall now refrain,
or thwart the synod of the gods in vain. pope.
to refra1'n. v. n. to forbear; to abstain; to spare.
in what place, or upon what confideration soever it be,
they do it, were it in their own opinion of no force being
done, they would undoubtedly rosain to do it. hooker.
for my name's sake will i defer mine anger, and refrain
for thee, that i cut thee not off. ij. xlviii. 9.
that they fed not on flesh, at least the faithful party be-
fore the flood, may become more probable, because they re-
frained therefrom some time after. brown's vulgar errours.
refrangibi'lity. m. s. [from refrangible.
refrangibility of the rays of light, is their disposition to be
refracted or turned out of their way, in passing out of one
transparent body or medium into another.
refrangible, adj. [re and frango, lat.]
as some rays are more refrangible than others; that is, are
more turned out of their course, in passing from one medium
to another ; it follows, that after such refraction, they will
be separated, and their distinet colour observed. locke.
refrena’tion. m. s. [re and frano, lat.] the act of re-
straining.
to refre'sh. v. a. [refrasher, fr. refrigero, lat.]
1. to recreate ; to relieve after pain, fatigue or want.
service shall with steeled finews toil;
newton.
and labour shall refresh itself with hope. shakespeare.
musick was ordain'd to refresh the mind of man,
after his studies or his usual pain. shakespeare.
he was in no danger to be overtaken; so that he was
content to refresh his men. clarendon.
his meals are coarse and short, his employment warrantable,
his sleep certain and refreshing, neither interrupted with the
lashes of a guilty mind, nor the aches of a crazy body. south.
if you would have trees to thrive, take care that no plants
be near them, which may deprive them of nourishment, or
hinder refreshings and helps that they might receive. mortim.
2. to improve by new touches anything impaired.
the rest refresh the scaly snakes, that sold
the shield of pallas, and renew their gold. dryden.
3. to refrigerate; to cool.
a dew coming after heat refresheth. ecclus. xliii. 22.
refre's her... n. s. [from refresh.] that which refreshes,
the kind refresher of the summer heats. thomson.
refre's hment. n.s.. [from refresh.]
1. relief after pain, want or fatigue.
2. that which gives relief, as food, rest.
he was full of agony and horrour upon the approach of a
dismal death, and so had most need of the refreshments of so-
ciety, and the friendly assistances of his disciples. south.
such honest refreshments and comforts of life, our christian
liberty has made it lawful for us to use. spratt.
re fret. n.s. the burden of a song. ixic7.
reeri'gerant. adj. [refrigerant, fr. from refrigrate.] cool-
ing; mitigating heat.
in the cure of gangrenes, you must beware of dry heat,
and resort to things that are refrigerant, with an inward
warmth and virtue of cherishing. bacon.
if it arise from an external cause, apply refrigerants, with-
out any preceding evacuation. ///eman's surgery.
to refri'gerate. v. a. [refrigero, re and frigus, lat.]
to cool.
the great breezes, which the motion of the air in great
circles, such as the girdle of the world produceth, do re-
frigerate; and therefore in those parts noon is nothing so hot,
when the breezes are great, as about ten of the clock in the
forenoon. - bacon's natural hislory.
whether they be refrigerated inclinatorily or somewhat
equinoxically, though in a lesler degree, they discover soine
verticity. brown's sugar errours.
refkigeration. n.s. [refrigeratio, lat, refrigeration, fr.]
the aet of cooling ; the state of being cooled. .
divers do sout; the cause may be the refrigeration of the
tongue, whereby it is less apt to move. bacon.
if the mere refrigeration of the air would fit it for breathing,
this might be somewhat helped with bellows: //?lkins.
refrig erative. w. adj. [refrigeratif, fr. refrigeratorius, lat.]
refr1'geratory. w. cooling; having the power to cool.
refr1'g era ror y. m. s.
1. that part of a distilling vessel that is placed about the head
of a still, and filled with water to cool the condensing va-
pours; but this is now generally done by a worm or spiral
pipe, turning through a tub of cold water. *uincy.
2. any thing internally cooling.
a delicate wine, and a durable refrigeratory. martimer.
refrige(rium. n.s. [latin.] cool refreshment; refri-
geration. -
it must be acknowledged, the ancients have talked much
of annual refrigeriums, respites or intervals of punishment to
the damned ; as particularly on the festivals. south.
ref.t. part, pret, of reave.
foot from their path. prov, i. 15.
vol. ii. -
2 i n. 1. de-
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. f.
r e g
1. deprived; taken away. , obsolete.
thus we well left, he better rest,
in heaven to take his place,
that by like life and death, at last,
we may obtain like grace.
i, in a desperate bay of death,
like a poor bark, of sails and tackling rost,
astham's schoolmaster.
rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom. shakespeare.
another ship had seiz'd on us,
and would have rest the fishers of their prey. shakesp.
our dying hero, from the continent
ravish'd whole towns, and forts from spaniards rest,
as his last legacy to britain left. waller.
2. preterite of reave. took away. obsolete.
so 'twixt them both, they not a lamkin left,
and when lambs fail'd, the old sheeps lives they rest:
- spenser.
about his shoulders broad he threw
an hairy hide of some wild beast, whom he
in savage forest by adventure slew,
and rest the spoil his ornament to be.
re'fuge. m. s. [refuge, fr. refugium, lat.]
1. shelter from any danger or distress; protection.
rocks, dens and caves but i in none of these
find place or refuge. milton's par. loft.
spensere
the young vipers supposed to break through the belly of
the dam, will, upon any fright, for protection run into it;
for then the old one receives them in at her mouth, which
way, the fright being past, they will return again; which is
a peculiar way of refuge. brown's vulgar errours.
those, who take refuge in a multitude, have an arian
council to answer for. atterbury.
2. that which gives shelter or protection.
the lord will be a refuge for the oppressed; a refuge in
times of trouble. psalm ix. 9.
they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood. fos.
fair majesty, the refuge and redress
of those whom fate pursues. dryden,
3. expedient in distress.
this last old man,
whom with a crack'd heart i have sent to rome,
lov’d me above the measure of a father:
their latest refuge was to send him. shakesp. coriolanus.
4. expedient in general.
light must be supplied, among graceful refuges, by terracing
any story in danger of darkness. //otton.
to refu ge. v. a. [refugier, fr. from the noun..] to shelter;
to protect.
silly beggars, -
who sitting in the stocks, refuge their shame,
that many have, and others must, fit there. shakesp.
dreads the vengeance of her injur’d lord;
ev’n by those gods, who refug’d her, abhorr'd. dryden.
refu gee’. m. s. [refugie, fr.] one who flies to shelter or
protection.
poor refugees, at first they purchase here; -
and soon as denizen'd, they domineer. dryden.
this is become more necessary in some of their govern-
ments, since so many refugees settled among them. addison.
refu lgence. m. s. [from refulgent.] splendour; brightness.
refut.gent. adj. [refulgens, latin.] bright; shining;
glitttering ; splendid.
he neither might, nor wish'd to know
a more refugent light. waller.
so conspicuous and refulgent a truth is that of god's being
the author of man's felicity, that the dispute is not so much
concerning the thing, as concerning the manner of it. boyle.
agamemnon's train,
when his refulgent arms flash'd through the shady plain,
fled from his well-known face. dryden’s afneis.
refu lgently. adv. [from refulgent.] in a shining manner.
to refund, v. n. [refundo, lat.]
1. to pour back.
were the humours of the eye tinetured with any colour,
they would refund that colour upon the object, and so it
would not be represented as in itself it is. ray.
2. to repay what is received; to restore.
a governor, that had pillaged the people, was, for receiving
of bribes, sentenced to refund what he had wrongfully taken.
l’estrange.
such wise men as himself account all that is past, to be
also gone; and know, that there can be no gain in refunding,
nor any profit in paying debts. south.
how to icarius, in the bridal hour,
shall i, by waste undone, refund the dow’r. pope.
3. swift has somewhere the absurd phrase, to refund himself, for
to reimburse.
refu's al. n.s.. [from refuse.]
i • o act of refusing; denial of any thing demanded or soli-
clted. -
god has born with all his weak and obstinate refusals of
grace, and has given him time day after day. fogers,
2. the preemption ; the right of having anything before an-
other ; option.
when employments go a begging for want of hands, they
shall be sure to have the refusal. swift.
to refuse. v. a. [refuser, fr.]
1. to deny what is solicited or required; not to comply with.
if he should chuse the right casket, you should refuse to
perform his father's will, if you should refuse to accept him.
shakesp. merchant of wenice.
having most affe&amp;tionately set life and death before them,
and conjured them to chuse one, and avoid the other, he still
leaves unto them, as to free and rational agents, a liberty to
refuse all his calls, to let his talents lye by them unprofitable.
- hammond,
wonder not then what god for you saw good
if i refuse not, but convert, as you,
to proper substance. milton.
common experience has justly a mighty influence on the
minds of men, to make them give or refuse credit to any
thing proposed. f locke.
2. to reject ; to dismiss without a grant.
i may neither chuse whom i would, nor refuse whom i dis-
like. shakesp. merchant of venice.
to refu'se. v. n. not to accept; not to comply.
women are made as they themselves would choose ;
too proud to ask, too humble to refuse. garth.
re"fuse, adj. [from the verb. the noun has its accent on
the first syllable, the verb on the second..] unworthy of re-
ception ; left when the rest is taken.
every thing vile and refuse they destroyed. sam. xv. 9.
he never had vexatious law-disputes about his dues, but
had his tithes fully paid, and not of the most refuse parts, but
generally the very best. £il.
please to bestow on him the refuse letters; he hopes by
printing them to get a plentiful provision. spediator.
re'fuse... n.s. that which remains disregarded when the rest
is taken, -
we dare not disgrace our worldly superiours with offering
unto them such refuse, as we bring unto god himself. hook.
many kinds have much refuse, which countervails that
which they have excellent. bacon.
i know not whether it be more shame or wonder, to see
that men can so put off ingenuity, as to descend to so base a
vice; yet we daily see it done, and that not only by the scum
and refuse of the people. government of the tongue.
down with the falling stream the refuse run,
to raise with joyful news his drooping son. dryden.
this humourist keeps more than he wants, and gives a vast
refuse of his superfluities to purchase heaven. addison.
refu's er. m. s. [from refuse..] he who refuses.
some few others are the only refusers and condemners of
this catholick practice. taylor.
refu’tal. m. s. [from refute.] refutation. dic7.
refutation. m. s. [refutatio, lat. refutation, fr. from re-
fute.] the act of refuting; the act of proving false or er-
ron cou.s.
'tis such miserable absurd stuff, that we will not honour
it with especial refutation. beatley.
to refute. v. a. [refuta, lat. refuter, fr.] to prove
false or erroneous. applied to persons or things.
self destruction sought, refutes
that excellence thought in thee. milton's par. loft.
he knew that there were so many witnesses in these two
miracles, that it was impossible to refute such multitudes.
addison.
to reg ai'n. v. a. [regagner, fr. re and gain..] to recover ;
to gain anew.
hopeful to regain,
thy love, from thee i will not hide
what thoughts in my unquiet breast are ris'n. milton.
we've driven back
these heathen saxons, and regain'd our earth,
as earth recovers from an ebbing tide. dryden.
as soon as the mind regains the power to stop or continue
any of these motions of the body or thoughts, we then con-
sider the man as a free agent. locke.
re"gal. adj. [regal, fr. regalis, lat.] royal ; kingly.
edward, duke of york,
usurps the regal title and the seat
of england's true anointed lawful heir. shakespeare.
why am i sent for to a king,
before i have shook off the regal thoughts
wherewith i reign'd? shakesp. richard ii.
with them comes a third of regal port,
but faded splendour wan, who by his gait
and fierce demeanour seems the prince of hell. milton.
when was there ever a better prince on the throne than
the present queen i do not talk of her government, her
love of the people, or qualities that are purely regal ; but her
piety, charity, temperance and conjugal love. swift.
reg al. n. s. [regale, fr.] a musical instrument. -
the sounds, that produce tones, are ever from such bodies
t
o
2s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e g
r e g
|
**
*
as are in their parts and ports equal; and such are in the
nightingale pipes of regal, or organs. bacon.
rega le. m. s. [latin.]. the prerogative of o:
7, regat.e. v. a. [regaler, fr. regalare, italian.] o re-
fresh; to entertain; to gratify.
i with warming puff regal’d chill'd fingers.
rega'le. m. s. an entertainment ; a treat.
rega'lement. n.s. [regalement, fr.] refreshment; enter-
tainment.
philips.
the muses still require
humid regalement, nor will aught avail
imploring phoebus with unmoisten’d lips.
rega lia. n.s. [latin.] ensigns of royalty.
rega'lity.. n.s. [ regalis, latin. j royalty; sovereignty;
kingship.
behold the image of mortality,
and feeble nature cloth'd with fleshly 'tire,
when raging passion with fierce tyranny,
robs reason of her due regality. spenser.
he neither could, nor would, yield to any diminution of
the crown of france, in territory or regality. bacon.
he came partly in by the sword, and had high courage in
all points of regality. bacon’s henry vii.
the majesty of england might hang like mahomet's tomb
by a magnetick charm, between the privileges of the two
houses, in airy imagination of rogality. king charles.
t, rega’rd. v. a. [regarder, fr.]
1. to value ; to attend to as worthy of notice.
this aspect of mine,
the best regarded virgins of our clime
have lov’d. shakesp. merchant of venice.
philips.
he denies
to know their god, or message to regard. milton.
2. to observe ; to remark. -
if much you note him,
you offend him ; feed and regard him not. shakesp.
3. to mind as an object of grief or terrour.
the king marvelled at the young man’s courage, for that
he nothing regarded the pains. 2 mac. vii. 12.
4. to observe religiously.
he that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the lord; and
he that regardeth not the day, to the lord he doth not regard
it. rom. xiv. 6.
5. to pay attention to, -
he that observeth the wind shall never sow, and he that
regardeth the clouds shall never reap. proverbs.
6. to respect; to have relation to.
7. to look towards.
it is a peninsula, which regardeth the mainland. sandys.
re g a r d. n.s. [regard, fr. from the verb.]
i. attention as to a matter of importance,
the nature of the sentence he is to pronounce, the rule of
judgment by which he will proceed, requires that a particular
regard be had to our observation of this precept. atterbury.
2. respect ; reverence.
to him they had regard, because long he had bewitched
them. ae's viii. 1 i.
* with some regard to what is just and right,
they’ll lead their lives.
3. note; eminence.
mac ferlagh was a man of meanest regard amongst them,
neither having wealth nor power. spenser on ireland.
4. respect ; account.
change was thought necessary, in regard of the great hurt
which the church did receive by a number of things then in
milton.
use. phooker.
5. relation; reference.
how best we may
compose our present evils, with regard
of what we are and where. milton.
their business is to address all the ranks of mankind, and
persuade them to pursue and persevere in virtue, with regard
to themselves; in justice and goodness, with regard to their
neighbours ; and piety towards god. watts.
6. [regard, fr.] look; aspect directed to another.
soft words to his fierce passion she assay’d ;
but her with stern regard he thus repell’d. milton.
he, surpriz'd with humble joy, survey’d
one sweet regard, shot by the royal maid. dryden.
7. prospect; object of fight. not proper, nor in use.
throw out our eyes for brave othello,
even till we make the main and th’ aerial blue
an indistinet regard. shakesp. othello.
rega r dable. adj. [from regard.]
1. observable. not used.
i cannot discover this difference of the badger's legs, al-
though the regardable side be defined, and the brevity by most
imputed unto the left. brown's wulgar errours.
2. worthy of notice. not used.
tintogel, more famous for his antiquity, than regardable
for his present estate, abutteth on the sea. carew.
rega'rder. n.s.. [from regard.] one that regards.
9
rout. adj. [regard and full.] attentive; taking na
tice of.
bryan was so regardsul of his charge, as he never disposed
any matter, but first he acquainted the general. hayward.
let a man be very tender and regardful of every pious mo-
tion made by the spirit of god to his heart. south.
rega/rdfully, adv. [from regarjulj
1. attentively; heedfully.
2. respectfully. -
is this th’ athenion minion, whom the world
voic’d so regardfully * shakesp. timon of athens,
regard less. adj. [from regard.] heedless; negligent; in-
attentlve.
he likest is to fall into mischance,
that is regardless of his governance. spenser,
regardless of the bliss wherein he sat,
second to thee, offer'd himself to die
for man’s offence. milton's par. loft.
we must learn to be deaf and regardlys of other things,
besides the present subject of our meditation. jwatts.
rega'rdlesly. adv. [from regardless.] without heed.
rega'rdlesness, n. s. [from regards...] heedlessness; neg-
ligence; inattention. -
re"gency. n.s.. [from regent.]
1. authority ; government.
as christ took manhood, that by it he might be capable of
death, whereunto he humbled himself; so because manhood
is the proper subject of compassion and feeling pity, which
maketh the scepter of christ's regency even in the kingdom of
heaven amiable. hooker.
men have knowledge and strength to fit them for action:
women affection, for their better compliance; and here with
beauty to compensate their subjection, by giving them an equi-
valent regency over men. grew.
2. vicarious government.
this great minister, finding the regency shaken by the fac-
tion of so many great ones within, and awed by the terror of
the spanish greatness without, durst begin a war. temple.
3. the district governed by a vicegerent.
regions they pass'd, the mighty regencies
of seraphim. milton.
4. those colle&amp;tively to whom vicarious regality is intrusted:
as, the regency transacted affairs in the king's absence.
to regenerate. v. a. [regenero, lat.]
1. to reproduce ; to produce anew. . -
albeit the son of this earl of desmond, who lost his head,
were restored to the earldom; yet could not the king's grace
regenerate obedience in that degenerate house, but it grew ra-
ther more wild. davies on ireland.
through all the soil a genial ferment spreads,
regenerates the plants, and new adorns the meads. blackm.
an alkali, poured to that which is mixed with an acid,
raiseth an effervescence, at the cessation of which, the salts,
of which the acid is composed, will be regenerated arbuthnot.
2. to make to be born anew ; to renew by change of carnal
nature to a christian life.
no sooner was a convert initiated, but by an easy figure
he became a new man, and both acted and looked upon him-
self as one regenerated and born a second time into another
state of existence. addison on the christian religion.
regeonerate, adj. [regeneratus, lat.]
1. reproduced. -
thou ! the earthly author of my blood,
whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
doth with a twofold vigor lift me up
to reach at victory. -
2. born anew by grace to a christian life.
for from the mercy-seat above,
prevenient grace descending, had remov’d
the stony from their hearts, and made new flesh
regenerate grow instead. - milton.
if you fulfil this resolution, though you fall sometimes by
infirmity; nay, though you should fall into some greater act,
even of deliberate sin, which you presently retract by con-
fession and amendment, you are nevertheless in a regenerate
estate, you live the life of a christian here, and shall inherit
the reward that is promised to such in a glorious immortality
hereafter. - wake's preparation for death.
regeneration. m. s. [regeneration, fr.]... new birth; birth
by grace from carnal affections to a christian life.
he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing
of the holy ghost. tit. iii. 5.
rege'nerate ness. n. s. [from regenerate.] the state of
being regenerate.
re"gent. adj. [regent, fr. regens, lat.]
1. governing ; ruling.
the operations of human life flow not from the corporeal
moles, but from some other active regent principle that resides
shakesp. richard ii,
in the body, or governs it, which we call the soul. hale.
2. exercising vicarious authority.
he together calls the regent pow'rs
under him regent. milton's paradis, loft.
reg ent.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e g
r e g
re"gent. n. s.
1. governour ; ruler.
now for once beguil'd -
uriel, though regent of the sun, and held
the sharpest-fighted spirit of all in heav'n. milton.
neither of these are any impediment, because the regent
thereof is of an infinite immensity. hale.
but let a heifer with gilt horns be led
. to juno, regent of the marriage bed. dryden.
2. one invested with vicarious royalty.
lord regent, i do greet your excellence
with letters of commission from the king. shakespeare.
re’g ents hip. n.s.. [from regent.]
1. power of governing.
2. deputed authority.
if york have ill demean'd himself in france,
then let him be deny'd the regentship. shakespeare.
regermina'tion. n.s.. [re and germination.] the act of
sprouting again.
regible, adj. governable.
re'gicide. n.s. [regicida, lat.]
1. murderer of his king.
i through the mazes of the bloody field,
hunted your sacred life; which that i miss'd
was the propitious error of my fate,
not of my soul; my soul's a regicide.
2. [regicidium, lat.] murder of his king.
were it not for this amulet, how were it possible for any
to think they may venture upon perjury, sacrilege, murder,
regicide, without impeachment to their saintship. d. of piety.
did fate or we, when great atrides dy'd,
urge the bold traitor to the regicide. pope's odyssey.
regimen. n.s. [latin.]. that care in diet and living, that
is suitable to every particulur course of medicine, or state of
body.
*yet should some neighbour feel a pain,
just in the parts where i complain,
how many a message would he send ?
what hearty prayers, that i should mend?
enquire what regimen i kept,
what gave me ease, and how i slept.
regiment. n.s. [regiment, old fr.] -
1. established government; polity; mode of rule. not in use.
we all make complaint of the iniquity of our times, not
unjustly, for the days are evil; but compare them with those
times wherein there were no civil societies, with those times
wherein there was as yet no manner of publick regiment esta:
blished, and we have surely good cause to think, that god
hath blessed us exceedingly. hooker.
the corruption of our nature being presupposed, we may
not deny, but that the law of nature doth now require of ne-
cessity some kind of regiment. hocker.
they utterly damn their own confistorian regiment, for the
same can neither be proved by any literal texts of holy scrip-
ture, nor yet by necessary inference out of scripture. white.
2. rule; authority. not in use. -
the regiment of the soul over the body, is the regiment of
the more active part over the passive. hale.
3. [regiment, fr.] a body of soldiers under one colonel.
higher to the plain we’ll set forth,
in best appointment, all our regiments.
the elder did whole regiments afford,
dic7.
dryden.
swift.
shakesp.
the younger brought his conduct and his sword. waller.
the standing regiments, the fort, the town,
all but this wicked sister are our own. waller.
now thy aid
eugene, with regiments unequal prest, -
awaits. philips.
reg ime’ntal. adj. [from regiment.] belonging to a regi-
ment; military.
re"gion. m. s. [region, fr. regio, lat.]
1. tract of land; country; tract of space.
all the regions
do seemingly revolt; and, who resist,
are mock'd for valiant ignorance.
her eyes in heav'n
would through the airy region stream so bright,
that birds would fing, and think it were not night. shak.
the upper regions of the air perceive the collection of the
shakspeare.
matter of tempests before the air below. bacon.
they rag'd the goddess, and with fury fraught,
the restless regions of the storms she sought. dryden.
2. part of the body.
the bow is bent and drawn, make from the shaft.
—let it fall rather, though the fork invade
the region of my heart. shakesp. king lear.
3. place; rank. -
the gentleman kept company with the wild prince and
poins: he is of too high a region; he knows too much. shak.
register. m. s. [regislre, fr. registrum, lat.]
1. an account of anything regularly kept.
6
joy may a. have, and everlasting fame,
qf late most hard atchievement by you done,
for which inrolled is your glorious name
in heavenly registers above the sun. spenser.
sir john, as you have one eye upon my follies, as you hear
them unfolded, turn another into the regifter of your own. shas
this island, as appeareth by faithful regislers of those times
had ships of great content. bacon's new aioi.
of these experiments, our friend, pointing at the regisser
of this dialogue, will perhaps give you a more particular
account, boyle.
for a conspiracy against the emperor claudius, it was 6.
dered that scribonianus's name and consulate should be ef-
faced out of all publick registers and inscriptions. addison.
2. [registrarius, law lat..] the officer whose business is to
write and keep the register.
to regist er. v. a. [regislrer, fr. from the noun.]
1. to record ; to preserve from oblivion by authentick accounts.
the roman emperors registered their most remarkable
buildings, as well as actions, addison on italy.
2. to enrol; to set down in a list. so taly
such follow him, as shall be regisler'd;
part good, part bad: of bad the longer scrowl. milton.
re"gistry. m. s. [from regisler.]
1. the act of inserting in the register.
a little fee was to be paid for the registry. graunt,
2. the place where the register is kept.
3. a series of facts recorded.
i wonder why a registry has not been kept in the college of
physicians of things invented. - temple.
re'glement, n.s. [french.] regulation. not used.
to speak of the reformation and reglement of usury, by the
balance of commodities and discommodities thereof, two
things are to be reconciled. bacon's essays,
re'glet. m. s. . [reglette, from regle, fr.] ledge of wood
exactly planed, by which printers separate their lines in pages
widely printed.
reso nant, adj. [french.]
1. reigning; having regal ".
princes are shy of their successors, and there may be rea-
sonably supposed in queens regnant a little proportion of ten-
derness that way, more than in kings. watton.
2. predominant; prevalent; having power.
the law was regnant, and confin'd his thought,
hell was not conquer'd, when the poet wrote. waller.
his guilt is clear, his proofs are pregnant, -
a traytor to the vices regnant. swift's miscellanies.
to rego'rge. v. a. [re and gorge.]
1. to vomit up; to throw back.
it was scoffingly said, he had eaten the king's goose, and
did then regorge the feathers. hayward.
2. to swallow eagerly.
drunk with wine,
and fat regorg'd of bulls and goats. milton's agonister.
3. [regorger, fr.] to swallow back.
as tides at highest mark regorge the flood,
so fate, that could no more improve their joy,
took a malicious pleasure to destroy. dryden.
to regra'ft. v. a. [regreffer, fr. re and graft.] to graft
again. - !
oft regraftingthe same cions, may make fruit greater. bac.
to regra'nt. v. a. [re and grant..] to grant back.
he, by letters patents, incorporated them by the name of
the dean and chapter of trinity-church in norwich, and re-
granted their lands to them. ayliffe's parergon.
to regrate. v. a.
i. to offend; to shock. * * -
the cloathing of the tortoise and viper rather regrateth,
than pleaseth the eye. derhan's physico-theology.
2. [regratter, fr.] to engross; to forestal.
neither should they buy any corn, unless it were to make
malt thereof; for by such engrossing and regrating, the dearth,
that commonly reigneth in england, hath been caused.
spenser.
regrater. m. s. [regrattier, fr. from regrate.] forestaller;
engrosser.
to regreet. v. a. [re and greet.] to resalute; to greet a
second time.
hereford, on pain of death,
till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields,
shall not regreet our fair dominions,
but lead the stranger paths of banishment. shakespeare.
regree"t. n.s.. [from the verb.] return or exchange of sa-
lutation. not in use.
and shall these hands, so newly join’d in love,
unyoke this seizure, and this kind regreet p
play fast and loose with faith ? shakesp. king john.
regre'ss. n.s. [regres, fr. regrosus, latin.] passage back;
power of passing back.
'tis their natural place which they always tend to ; and
from which there is no progress nor regress. burnet.
t2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e. g.
r e j
*
7, recre'ss. v. n. [regressus, lat.] to go back; to return ;
to pass back to the former state or place.
all being forced unto fluent consistencies, naturally regress
unto their former solidities. brown.
regre'ssion. n. s. [regressus, lat.] the act of returning or
going back.
to desire there were no god, were plainly to unwish their
own being, which must needs be annihilated in the subtrac-
tion of that effence, which substantially supporteth them, and
restrains from regression into nothing. brown.
regret. n.s. [regret, fr. regretto, italian.]
1. wexation at something past; bitterness of refle&amp;tion.
i never bare any touch of conscience with greater regret.
- king charles. .
a passionate regret at sin, a grief and sadness at its memory,
enters us into god's roll of mourners. decay of piety.
though fin offers itself in never so pleasing a dress, yet
the remorse and inward regrets of the soul, upon the com-
mission of it, infinitely overbalance those faint gratifications
it affords the senses. south's sermons.
2. grief; sorrow.
never any prince expressed a more lively regret for the loss
of a servant, than his majesty did for this great man; in all
offices of grace towards his servants, and in a wonderful soli-
citous care for the payment of his debts. clarendon.
that freedom, which all sorrows claim,
she does for thy content resign ;
her piety itself would blame,
if her regrets should waken thine. prior,
3. dislike; aversion. not proper.
is it a virtue to have some ineffective regrets to damnation,
and such a virtue too, as shall balance all our vices :
decay of piety.
to regret. v. a. [regretter, fr. from the noun.]
1. to repent ; to grieve at.
i shall not regret the trouble my experiments cost me, if
they be found serviceable to the purposes of respiration. boyle.
calmly he look'd on either life, and here
saw nothing to regret, or there to fear;
from nature's temp'rate feast rose satisfy'd,
thank'd heav'n that he had liv'd, and that he dy’d. pope.
2. to be uneasy at. not proper.
those, the impiety of whose lives makes them regret a
deity, and secretly wish there were none, will greedily listen
to atheistical notions. - glanville's scepsis.
recue r don. n. s. [re and guerdon.] reward; recompense.
stoop, and set your knee against my foot;
and in reguerdon of that duty done, -
i gird thee with the valiant sword of york. shakesp.
to regue’rdon. v. a. [from the noun..] to reward. the
verb and noun are both obsolete.
long fince we were resolved of your truth,
your faithful service and your toil in war;
yet never have you tasted your reward, -
or been reguerdon'd with so much as thanks. shakesp.
re'cular. adj. [regulier, fr. regularis, lat.]
1. agreeable to rule; consistent with the mode prescribed.
the common cant of criticks is, that though the lines are
good, it is not a regular piece. guardian.
the ways of heav'n are dark and intricate,
puzzled in mazes, and perplex’d with errors ;
our understanding traces them in vain,
lost and bewilder'd in the fruitless search ;
nor sees with how much art the windings run,
nor where the regular confusion ends. addison.
so when we view some well-proportion'd dome,
no monstrous height or breadth or length appear ;
the whole at once is bold and regular. pope.
2. governed by strict regulations.
so just thy skill, so regular my rage. pope.
3. in geometry, regular body is a solid, whose surface is composed
of regular and equal figures, and whose solid angles are all equal,
and of which there are five sorts, viz. i. a pyramid compre-
hended under four equal and equilateral triangles. 2. a cube,
whose surface is composed of six equal squares. 3. that
which is bounded by eight equal and equilateral triangles.
4. that which is contained under twelve equal and equilate:
ral pentagons. 5. a body consisting of twenty equal and
equilateral triangles: and mathematicians demonstrate, that
there can be no more regular bodies than these five. muschenbr.
there is no universal reason, not confined to human fancy,
that a figure, called regular, which hath equal sides and
angles, is more beautiful than any irregular one. bentley.
4. instituted or initiated according to established forms or disci-
pline: as, a regular docior ; regular troops.
5. methodical; orderly. - - -
more people are kept from a true sense and taste of reli-
gion, by a regular kind of sensuality and indulgence, than
by gross drunkenness. law.
regular. n. s. [regulier, fr.]
in the romish church, all persons are said to be regulars,
that do profess and follow a certain rule of life, in latin
vol. ii.
filed regula; and do likewise observe the three approved vows
of poverty, chastity and obedience. aoiff's parergon.
regula'rity. m. s. [regularite, fr. from regular.]
1. agreeableness to rule.
2. method; certain order.
regularity is certain, where it is not so apparent, as in all
- fluids; for regularity is a similitude continued. grew.
he was a mighty lover of regularity and order; and ma-
naged all his affairs with the utmost exactness. atterbury.
regularly. adv. [from regular..] in a manner concordant
to rule; exactly.
if those painters, who have left us such fair platforms, had
rigorously observed it in their figures, they had indeed made
things more regularly true, but withal very unpleasing. dryd.
- with one judicious stroke,
on the plain ground apelles drew
a circle regularly true.
strains that neither ebb nor flow,
corre&amp;tly cold and regularly low. pope.
to regulate. v. a. [regula, latin.]
1. to adjust by rule or method.
nature, in the production of things, always designs them
to partake of certain, regulated, established essences, which
are to be the models of all things to be produced ; this, in
that crude sense, would need some better explication. locke.
2. to direct. .
regulate the patient in his manner of living.
ev’n goddesses are women ; and no wife
has pow'r to regulate her husband's life. dryden.
regulation. m. s. [from regulate.]
1. the act of regulating.
being but stupid matter, they cannot continue any regular
and constant motion, without the guidance and regulation of
some intelligent being. ray on the creation.
2. method ; the effect of being regulated.
regulator. m.s.. [from regulate.]
1. one that regulates.
the regularity of corporeal principles sheweth them to
come at first from a divine regulator. grew's cosmol.
2. that part of a machine which makes the motion equable.
re"gulus. m. s. [lat, regule, fr.]
regulus is the finer and most weighty part of metals, which
settles at the bottom upon melting. &amp;uincy.
to regu rgitate. v. n. [re and gurges, lat. regorger,
fr.] to throw back; to pour back.
the inhabitants of the city remove themselves into the
country so long, until, for want of receipt and encourage-
ment, it regurgitates and sends them back. graunt.
arguments of divine wisdom, in the frame of animate
bodies, are the artificial position of many valves, all so situate,
as to give a free passage to the blood in their due channels,
but not permit them to regurgitate and disturb the great cir-
culation. bentley.
to regu'rgitate. v. n. to be poured back.
nature was wont to evacuate its vicious blood out of these
veins, which passage being stopt, it regurgitates upwards to
the lungs. harvey on consumptions.
regurgitation. n.s.. [from regurgitate.] resorption ; the
act of swallowing back.
regurgitation of matter is the constant symptom. sharp.
to rf hea'r. v. a. [re and hear.] to hear again.
my design is to give all persons a rehearing, who have
suffered under any unjust sentence. addison's examiner.
re hea'rsa l. m. s. [from rehearse.]
1. repetition ; recital.
twice we appoint, that the words which the minister pro-
nounceth, the whole congregation shall repeat after him; as
first in the publick confession of fins, and again in rehearsal
of our lord's prayer after the blessed sacrament. hooker.
what dream'd my lord tell me, and i’ll requite it
with sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream. shakesp.
what respected their actions as a rule or admonition, ap-
plied to yours, is only a rehearsal, whose zeal in asserting the
ministerial cause is so generally known. south.
2. the recital of anything previous to publick exhibition.
the chief of rome,
with gaping mouths to these rehearsals come. dryden.
to re hea'rse. v. a. [from rehear. skinner.]
i. to repeat ; to recite.
rehearse not unto another that which is told. ecclus.
of modest poets be thoujust,
to filent shades repeat thy verse,
*till fame and echo almost burst,
yet hardly dare one line rehearse. swift.
2. to relate; to tell.
great master of the muse ! inspir'd
the pedigree of nature to rehearse,
and found the maker's work in equal verse. dryden.
3. to recite previously to publick exhibition.
all rome is pleased, when statius will rehears,
and longing crouds expect the promis'd verse. dryden.
to rej eocor. v. a. [rjicio, rejecius, latl
21 o 1. to
prior.
wiseman.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e i
r e j
1. to dismiss without compliance with proposal or acceptance
of offer.
barbarossa was rejeced into syria, although he perceived
that it tended to his disgrace. knolles's hji, of the turks.
have i rejecied those that me ador'd
to be of him, whom i adore, abhor'd
2, to cast off; to make an abject.
thou hast rejecied the word of the lord, and the lord
hath rejecled thee from being king. 1 sam. xv. 26.
give me wisdom, and reject me not from among thy chil-
dren. wisd. ix. 4.
he is despised and rejeffed of men, a man of sorrows. is.
3. to refuse; not to accept.
because thou hast rejected knowledge, i will rejec7 thee,
that thou shalt be no priest. hosea iv. 6.
whether it be a divine revelation or no, reason must judge,
which can never permit the mind to rejecf a greater evidence,
to embrace what is less evident. locke.
how would such thoughts make him avoid every thing
that was finful and displeasing to god, lest when he prayed
for his children, god should reject his prayers ? law.
4. to throw aside, as useless or evil.
in the philosophy of human nature, as well as in physicks
and mathematics, let principles be examined according to the
standard of common sense, and be admitted or rejected accord-
ing as they are found to agree or disagree with it. beattie.
rf je"ction. n.s. [rejecio, lat.] the act of casting off or
throwing aside. -
the rejection i use of experiments, is infinite ; but if an ex-
periment be probable and of great use, i receive it. bacon.
medicines urinative do not work by rejection and indiges-
tion, as solutive do. bacon.
re 1gle. m. s. [regle, fr.] a hollow cut to guide any thing.
a flood gate is drawn up and let down through the reigles
in the side posts. carew's survey of cornwall.
to reign. v. n. [regno, lat. regner, fr.]
1. to enjoy or exercise sovereign authority.
this, done by them, gave them such an authority, that
though he reigned, they in effect ruled, most men honouring
them, because they only deserved honour. sidney.
tell me, shall banquo's issue ever
reign in this kingdom? shakesp. macbeth.
a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes rule in
brown.
judgment. is, xxxi. i.
did he not first sev'n years, a life-time, reign. cowley.
this right arm shall fix
her seat of empire; and your son shall reign. a. philips.
2. to be predominant; to prevail.
now did the sign reign, under which perkin should ap-
pear. bacon.
more are sick in the summer, and more die in the winter,
except in pestilent diseases, which commonly reign in summer
or autumn. bacon.
great secrecy reigns in their publick councils. addison.
3. to obtain power or dominion.
that as fin reigned unto death, even so might grace reign
through righteousness unto eternal life by jesus christ, romans.
re1gn. m. s. [regne, fr. regnum, lat]
1. royal authority ; sovereignty.
he who like a father held his reign,
so soon forgot, was just and wise in vain.
2. time of a king's government.
queer country puts extol queen bess's reign,
and of lost hospitality complain.
the following licence of a foreign reign,
did all the dregs of bold socinus drain.
russel's blood
stain'd the sad annals of a giddy reign.
3. kingdom ; dominions.
saturn's sons receiv'd the threefold reign
of heav'n, of ocean and deep hell beneath.
that wrath which hurl’d to pluto's gloomy reign,
the souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain.
4. power; influence.
the year againe
was turning round; and every season's raigne
renew’d upon us. chapman.
73 reimbody. v. n. [re and imbody, which is more frequently,
but not more properly, written embody..] to embody again.
quicksilver, broken into little globes, the parts brought to
touch immediately reimbody. boyle.
to reimbu'r's e. v. a. [re, in and bourse, fr. a purse.] to re-
pay 5 to repair loss or expence by an equivalent.
hath he saved any kingdom at his own expence, to give
him a title of reimbursing himself by the destruction of ours ?
- swift's miscellanies.
reimbu'r's ement. n.s.. [from reimburse.] reparation or
repayment.
if any person has been at expence about the funeral of a
scholar, he may retain his books for the reimbursement. ayliff.
73 reimpre'gnate. v. a. [re and impregnate.] to impreg-
jhate all cw.
pope.
bramson.
popeo
thomson.
prior.
pope.
the vigor of the loadstone is destroyed by fire, nor will it
be reimpregnated by any other magnet than the earth. brown,
re impre'ssion. n.s. [re and impression.] a second or rel
peated impression.
rei n. m. s. [resnes, fr.]
1. the part of the bridle, which extends from the horse's head
to the driver's or rider's hand.
every horse bears his commanding rein
and may dire&amp;this course as please himself. shakesp.
take you the reins, while i from cares remove,
and sleep within the chariot which i drove. dryden.
with hasty hand the ruling reins he drew;
he lash'd the coursers, and the coursers flew. pope.
2. used as an instrument of government, or for government.
the hard rein, which both of them have borne
against the old kind king. shakesp. king lear.
3. to give the reins. to give license.
war to disorder'd rage let loose the reins. milton,
when to his lust aegisthus gave the reim,
did fate or we th’ adulterous act constrain. pope.
to rein. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to govern by a bridle. -
he mounts and reines his horse. chapman.
he, like a proud steed rein'd went haughty on. milton.
his son retain’d
his father's art, and warriour steeds he rein'd,
2. to restrain; to control.
and where you find a maid,
that, ere she sleep, hath thrice her pray'rs said,
rain up the organs of her fantasy;
sleep she as sound as careless infancy.
being once chaft, he cannot
be rein’d again to temperance; then he speaks
what's in his heart. shakesp. coriolanus.
reins. n. s. [renes, lat. rein, fr.] the kidneys; the lower
part of the back.
whom i shall see for myself, though my reins be con-
sumed. job xix. 27.
to reinse'rt. v. a. [re and insert.] to insert a second time.
to reinspi'r.e. v. a. [re and inspire.] to inspire anew.
time will run
on smoother, till favonius reinspire
the frozen earth, and cloath in fresh attire
the lilly and rose.
the mangled dame lay breathless on the ground,
when on a sudden reinspir'd with breath,
dryden.
shakespeare,
milton.
again she rose. dryden,
to reinsta’l. v. a. [re and instal.]
1. to feat again.
that alone can truly reinstall thee
in david's royal feat, his true successor. milton.
2. to put again in possession. this example is not very proper.
thy father
levied an army, weening to redeem
and reinstal me in the diadem. shakesh. henry vi.
to reinstate. v. a. [re and instate.] to put again in possession.
david, after that fignal victory, which had preserved his
life, rein/lated him in his throne, and restored him to the ark
and sanctuary 5 yet suffered the loss of his rebellious son to
overwhelm the sense of his deliverance. gov. of the tongue-
modesty reinslates the widow in her virginity. addison.
the reinslating of this hero in the peaceable possession of
his kingdom, was acknowledged. pope.
to re1'n tecrate. v. a. [reinteger, fr. re and integer, lat.
it should perhaps be written redintegrate.] to renew with
regard to any state or quality; to repair; to restore.
this league drove out all the spaniards out of germany,
and reintegrated that nation in their ancient liberty. bacon.
the falling from a discord to a concord hath an agreement
with the affections, which are reintegrated to the better after
ome dislikes. bacon's natural history.
to reinve'st. v. a. [re and inves?..] to invest anew.
to rejoice. v. n. [rejeuir, fr.] to be glad; to joy; to
exult ; to receive pleasure from something past.
this is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelesly, that said,
there is none beside me. zeph. ii. 15-
i will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their
sorrow. jer. xxxi. 13-
let them be brought to confusion, that rejoice at mine hurt:
psalm xxxv. 26.
jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the lord had done:
exodus xviii. 9.
they rejoice each with their kind. miltaz:
we should particularly express our rejoicing by love and
charity to our neighbours. nelson-
to rejoice. v. a. to exhilarate; to gladden; to make
joyful ; to glad.
alone to thy renown 'tis giv'n,
unbounded through all worlds to go;
while she great saint rejoices heav'n,
and thou sustain'st the orb below. prior--
i shou'd give cain the honour of the invention; were he
- alive,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. l.
live, it would rejoice his soul to see what mischief it had
made.
rejoicer, n.s.. [from rejoice.] one that rejoices.
whatsoever faith entertains, produces love to god; but
he that believes god to be cruel or a rejoicer in the unavoid-
able damnation of the greatest part of mankind, thinks evil
thoughts concerning god. taylor's rule of living holy.
7, rejoi’n. v. a. [rejoindre, fr.]
1. to join again.
the grand signior conveyeth his gallies down to grand
cairo, where they are taken in pieces, carried upon camels
backs, and rejoined together at sues. brown's vulg. err.
2. to meet one again. -
thoughts, which at hyde-park-corner i forgot,
meet and rejoin me in the pensive grot.
t, re joi'n. v. n. to answer to an answer.
it will be replied, that he receives advantage by this lop-
ping of his superfluous branches; but i rejoin, that a tran-
slator has no such right. dryden's preface to ovid.
rejoi'nder. m. s. [from rejoin.]
1. reply to an answer.
the quality of the person makes me judge myself obliged
to a rejoinder. - glanville to albius.
2. reply ; answer.
injury of chance rudely beguiles our lips
of all rejoindure. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
rejo'lt. n.s. [rejcilir, fr.] . shock; succussion.
the sinner, at his highest pitch of enjoyment, is not pleased
with it so much, but he is affl &amp;ted more; and as long as these
inward rejolts and recoilings of the mind continue, the sinner
will find his zccounts of pleasure very poor. south.
reit. m. s. sedge or sea weed. bailey.
to reiterate. v. a. [re and itero, lat, reiterer, fr.]
to repeat again and again.
you never spoke what did become you less
pope.
than this; which to reiterate, were sin. shakespeare.
with reiterated crimes he might
heap on himself damnation. milton.
although christ hath forbid us to use vain repetitions when
we pray, yet he hath taught us, that to reiterate the same re-
quests will not be vain. smalridge.
reiter aotion. m. s. [reiteration, fr. from reiterate.] repe-
titlosle
it is useful to have new experiments tried over again; such
reiterations commonly exhibiting new phenomena. boyle.
the words are a reiteration or reinforcement of an applica-
tion, arising from the consideration of the excellency of
christ above moses. //ard of infidelity.
to r.e ju'dge. v. a. [re and judge.] to reexamine; to re-
view ; to recal to a new trial.
the muse attends thee to the silent shade;
'tis hers the brave man's latest steps to trace,
rojudge his acts, and dignify disgrace. pope.
to reki'ndle. v. a. [re and kindle.] to set on fire again.
these disappearing, fixed stars were actually extinguished,
and would for ever continue so, if not rekindled, and new re-
cruited with heat and light. cheyne's phil. principles.
rekindled at the royal charms,
tumultuous love each beating bosom warms.
t, rela'pse. v. n. [relapsus, lat.]
1. to slip back; to slide or fall back.
2. to fall back into vice or errour.
the oftner he hath relapsed, the more significations he
ought to give of the truth of his repentance. taylor.
3. to fall back from a state of recovery to sickness.
he was not well cured, and would have relapsed.
rela"pse. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. fall into vice or errour once forsaken.
this would but lead me to a worse relapse
and heavier fall. milton.
we see in too frequent instances the relapses of those, who,
under the present smart, or the near apprehension of the di-
vine pleasure, have resolved on a religious reformation. rog.
2. regression from a state of recovery to sickness.
it was even as two physicians should take one sick body in
hand; of which, the former would purge and keep under the
body, the other pamper and strengthen it suddenly; whereof
what is to be looked for, but a most dangerous relapse. spens.
3. return to any state. the sense here is somewhat obscure.
mark a bounding valour in our english;
that being dead like to the bullet's grazing,
breaks out into a second course of mischief,
killing in relapse of mortality. shakesp. henry v.
t. relate. v. a. [relatus, lat.]
s. to tell; to recite.
your wife and babes
savagely slaughter'd; to relate the manner, -
were to add the death of you. shakesp. macbeth.
here i could frequent
with worship place by place, where he vouchsaf'd , .
presence divine; and to my sons relate. milton.
the drama represents to view, what the poem only does
relate. dryden.
pope.
wism.
9.
arbuthnot on coins. .
2. to vent by words. unauthorised.
a man were better relate himself to a statue, than suffer
his thoughts to pass in snother. bacon,
3. to ally by kindred.
- avails thee not,
to whom related, or by whom begot;
a heap of dust alone remains. pope.
4. to bring back; to restore. a latinism. speyers
z r
to re lat e. v. n. to have reference; to have respe&amp;.
all negative or privative words relate to positive ideas, and
signify their absence. locke,
as other courts demanded the execution of persons dead
in law, this gave the last orders relating to those dead in
reason. tatlers
relater. n.s.. [from relate.] teller; narrator; historian.
we shall rather perform good offices unto truth, than any
disservice unto their relaters. brown's sugar errours.
her husband the relater she prefer'd -
before the angel. milton's paradise loff.
the best english historian, when his style grows antiquated,
will be only considered as a tedious relater of facts. swift.
rela't to n. m. s. [relation, fr. from relate.]
1. manner of belonging to any person or thing.
under this stone lies virtue, youth,
unblemish’d probity and truth;
just unto all relations known,
a worthy patriot, pious son. wwaller,
so far as service imports duty and subjection, all created
beings bear the necessary relation of servants to god. south,
our necessary relations to a family, oblige all to use their
reasoning powers upon a thousand occasions. watts.
our intercession is made an exercise of love and care for
those amongst whom our lot is fallen, or who belong to us
in a nearer relation: it then becomes the greatest benefit to
ourselves, and produces its best effects in our own hearts. law.
2. respect; reference; regard.
i have been importuned to make some observations on this
art, in relation to its agreement with poetry. dryden.
relation consists in the consideration and comparing one
idea with another, locke.
3. connexion between one thing and another. -
of the eternal relations and fitnesses of things we know no-
thing; all that we know of truth and falsehood is, that our cor-
stitution determines us in some cases to believe, in others to
disbelieve. beattie.
4. kindred; alliance of kin.
relations dear, and all the charities
of father, son and brother first were known. milton.
be kindred and relation laid aside, *
and honour's cause by laws of honour try’d. dryden.
are we not to pity and supply the poor, though they have
no relation to us? no relation * that cannot be: the gospel
stiles them all our brethren; nay, they have a nearer relation
to us, our fellow-members; and both these from their rela-
tion to our saviour himself, who calls them his brethren. spratt.
5. person related by birth or marriage; kinsman; kinswoman.
a she-cousin, of a good family and small fortune, passed
months among all her relations. swift.
dependants, friends, relations,
savag’d by woe, forget the tender tie. thomson.
6. narrative; tale; account; narration; recital of facts.
in an historical relation, we use terms that are most
proper. burnet's theory of the earth.
the author of a just fable, must please more than the
writer of an historical relation. dennis's letter.
re'lative. adj. [relativus, lat. relatif, fr.]
1. having relation; respoeting.
not only simple ideas and substances, but modes are posi-
tive beings; though the parts of which they consist, are very
often relative one to another. locke.
2. considered not absolutely, but as belonging to, or respecting
something else.
though capable it be not of inherent holiness, yet it is
often relative. holyday.
the ecclesiastical, as well as the civil governour, has
cause to pursue the same methods of confirming himself; the
grounds of government being founded upon the same bottom
of nature in both, though the circumstances and relative con-
siderations of the persons may differ. south.
every thing sustains both an absolute and a relative capa-
city: an absolute, as it is such a thing, endued with such a
nature; and a relative, as it is a part of the universe, and so
stands in such relation to the whole. south.
wholesome and unwholesome are relative, not real qua-
lities. arbuthnot on aliments.
3. particular ; positive; close in conneetion. not in use.
i'll have grounds
more relative than this.
re'l ative. n. s.
1. relation ; kinsman. -
'tis an evil dutifulness in friends and relatives, to suffer one
shakesp. ma. both,
to perish without reproof. taylor.
confining our care either to ourselves and relatives. fell.
2. pronoua<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e l
r e l
2. pronoun answering to an antecedent. - - -
learn the right joining of substantives with adjectives, and
the relative with the antecedent. ascham's schoolmaster.
3. somewhat respecting something else. -
\vhen the mind so considers one thing, that it sets it by
another, and carries its view from one to the other, this is
relation and respect; and the denominations given to positive
things, intimating that respest, are relatives. locke.
relati v ly. adu. [from relative..] as it respects something
else ; not absolutely.
all those things, that seem so foul and disagreeable in na-
ture, are not really so in themselves, but only relatively. more.
these being the greatest good or the greatest evil, either
absolutely so in themselves, or relatively so to us; it is there-
fore good to be zealously affected for the one against the
other. - spratt.
consider the absolute affections of any being as it is in it-
self, before you consider it relatively, or survey the various
relations in which it stands to other beings. j/atts.
re'lativ eness. n. s. [from relative.] the state of having
relation.
to rela'x. v. a. [relaxo, lat.]
1. to slacken ; to make less tense.
the finews, when the southern wind bloweth, are more
relax. bacon's natural history.
adam, amaz'd,
astonied stood, and black, while horrour chill
ran through his veins, and all his joints relax'd. milton.
2. to remit; to make less severe or rigorous.
the statute of mortmain was at several times relaxed by
the legislature. swift.
3. to make less attentive or laborious.
nor praise relax, nor difficulty fright. vanity of j/ishes.
4. to ease; to divert: as, conversation relaxes the student.
5. to open; to loose.
it serv'd not to relax their serried files. milton.
to rela'x. v. n. to be mild; to be remiss ; to be not rigorous.
- if in some regards she chose
to curb poor paulo in too close;
in others she relax'd again,
and govern'd with a looser rein.
relaxa tion. m. s. [relaxation, fr. relaxatio, lat.]
1. diminution of tension; the act of loosening.
cold sweats are many times mortal; for that they come by
a relaxation or forsaking of the spirits. bacon.
many, who live healthy in a dry air, fall into all the dis-
eases that depend upon relaxation in a moist one. arbuthnot.
2. cessation of restraint.
the sea is not higher than the land, as some imagined the
sea stood upon heap higher than the shore; and at the deluge
a relaxation being made, it overflow'd the land. burnet.
3. remission ; abatement of rigour.
they childishly granted, by common consent of their whole
senate, under their town seal, a relaxation to one bertelier,
whom the eldership had excommunicated. hooker.
the relaxation of the statute of mortmain, is one of the
reasons which gives the bishop terrible apprehensions of po-
pery coming on us. swift.
4. remission of attention or application.
as god has not so devoted our bodies to toil, but that he
allows us some recreation: so doubtless he indulges the same
relaxation to our minds. government of the tongue.
there would be no business in solitude, nor proper relax-
ations in business. addison's freeholder.
rela’y. m. s. [relais, fr.] horses on the road to relieve others.
to relea's e. v. a. [relascher, relaxer, fr.]
i. to set free from confinement or servitude.
prior.
pilate said, whom will ye that i release unto you? mat.
you releas'd his courage, and set free
a valour fatal to the enemy. dryden.
why should a reasonable man put it into the power of for-
tune to make him miserable, when his ancestors have taken
care to release him srom her dryden.
2. to set free from pain.
3. to free from obligation, or penalty.
too secure, because from death releas'd some days.
4. to quit; to let go. -
every creditor that lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall
release it. deuteronomy.
he had been base, had he releas'd his right,
for such an empire none but kings should fight.
5. to relax; to slacken. not in use.
it may not seem hard, if in cases of necessity certain pro-
fitable ordinances sometimes be released, rather than all men
always strictly bound to the general rigor thereof. hocker.
relea's e. m. s. [relosche, fr. from the verb.]
1. dismission from confinement, servitude or pain.
2. relaxation of a penalty.
o fatal search 1 in which the lab’ring mind,
still press'd with weight of woe, still hopes to find
a shadow of delight, a dream of peace,
from years of pain, one moment of release.
milt.
dryden.
prior.
3. remission of a claim.
the king made a great feast, and made a releas to the
provinces, and gave gifts. esth. ii. 18.
the king would not have one penny abated, of what had
been granted by parliament; because it might encourage other
countries to pray the like release or mitigation.
4. acquittance from a debt signed by the creditor.
to re legate. v. a. [reloguer, fr. relogo, lat.] to banish;
to exile.
relegation, n. s. [relegation, fr. relegatio, lat.] exile;
judicial banishment. o
according to the civil law, the extraordinary punishment
of adultery was deportation or relegation. ayliffe.
to relent. v. n. [ralentir, fr.]
1. to soften ; to grow less rigid or hard; to give.
in some houses, sweetmeats will relent more than in
bacon,
others. bacon.
in that soft season, when descending show’rs
call forth the greens, and wake the rising flow’rs;
when opening buds salute the welcome day,
and earth relenting feels the genial ray. pope.
2. to melt; to grow moist.
crows seem to call upon rain, which is but the comfort
they seem to receive in the relenting of the air. bacon.
salt of tartar, brought to fusion, and placed in a cellar,
will, in a few minutes, begin to resent, and have its surface
softened by the imbibed moisture of the air, whercin, if it be
left long, it will totally be dissolved. boyle.
all nature mourns, the skies relent in show’rs,
hush'd are the birds, and clos'd the drooping flow’rs;
if delia smile, the flow'rs begin to spring,
the skies to brighten, and the birds to sing.
3. to grow less intense.
i have marked in you a relenting truly, and a slacking of
the main career, you had so notably begun, and almost
performed. sidney.
the workmen let glass cool by degrees in such relentings of
fire, as they call their nealing heats, lest it should shiver in
pieces by a violent succeeding of air. digby on bodies.
4. to soften in temper; to grow tender; to feel compassion.
can you behold -
my tears, and not once resent * shaksp. henry vi,
i’ll not be made a soft and dull-ey'd fool,
to shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
to christian intercessors. shakesp. merch. of penice.
undoubtedly he will relent, and turn
from his displeasure. milton.
he sung, and hell consented
to hear the poet's pray'r;
stern proserpine relented,
and gave him back the fair.
to re lent. v. a.
1. to slacken; to remit. obsolete.
apace he shot, and yet he fled apace,
and oftentimes he would relent his pace,
that him his foe more fiercely should pursue.
2. to soften; to mollify. obsolete.
air hated earth, and water hated fire,
till love relented their rebellious ire.
rel ent less. adj. [from relent.]
1. unpitying ; unmoved by kindness or tenderness.
for this th’ avenging pow'r employs his darts;
thus will persist, relentles, in his ire,
till the fair slave be render'd to her sire,
why should the weeping hero now
relentless to their wishes prove : prior.
2. in milton, it perhaps signifies unremitted; intensely fixed upon
disquieting objects.
only in destroying, i find ease -
to my relentles, thoughts. milton's par. loff.
re lewant. adj. [french..] relieving. dic.
releva’tion. n.s. [relevatio, lat.] a raising or lifting up.
reli’ance. n. s. [from rely..] trust; dependance; confi-
dence; repose of mind: with on before the object of trust.
his days and times are past,
and my reliance on his fracted dates
has smit my credit. w shakesh. timon.
that pellucid gelatinous substance, which he pitches upon
with so great reliance and positiveness, is chiefly of animal
constitution. woodward.
he secured and encreased his prosperity, by an humble be-
haviour towards god, and a dutiful reliance on his provi-
dence. atterbury.
they afforded a sufficient conviction of this truth, and a
firm reliance on the promises contained in it. rogers-
resignation in death, and reliance on the divine mercies,
give comfort to the friends of the dying. clariffz.
misfortunes often reduce us to a better reliance, than that
we have been accustomed to fix upon. clarija.
re lick. m. s. [reliquiae, lat. relique, fr.]
1. that which remains; that which is left after the loss or de-
cay of the rest. it is generally used in the plural,
pope.
pope.
spensor.
speoser.
dryden.
8 -
up
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o o r e l
r e l
i.
o up dreary dame of darkness queen,
* go gather up the reliques of thy race,
* or else go them avenge. sponsor.
l, shall we go see the relicks of this town. shakesp.
. the fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy reliques
of her o’ereaten faith are bound to diomede. shakesp.
nor death itself can wholly wash their stains,
but long contracted filth ev’n in the soul remains;
the relicks of inveterate vice they wear,
and spots of fin. dryden's aeneis.
3. it is often taken for the body deserted by the soul.
what needs my shakespeare for his honour’d bones,
the labour of an age in piled stones
or that his hallow'd reliques should be hid
under a star-ypointed pyramid
in peace, ye shades of our great grandsires, rest;
eternal spring, and rising flow’rs adorn
milf0//e
the relicks of each venerable urn. dryden.
shall our relicks second birth receive?
~ sleep we to wake, and only die to live prior.
- thy relicks, rowe, to this fair shrine we trust,
o and sacred place by dryden's awful dust;
- beneath a rude and nameless stone he lies,
- to which thy tomb shall guide enquiring eyes. pope.
: 3. that which is kept in memory of another, with a kind of
- religious veneration.
r: cowls flutter'd into rags, then reliques leaves
the sport of winds. milton,
this church is very rich in relicks; among the rest, they
fhow a fragment of thomas a becket, as indeed there are
o very few treasuries of relicks in italy, that have not a tooth or
to . a bone of this saint. addison on italy.
* re'lickly. adv. [from relick.] in the manner of relicks. a
... : word not used, nor elegantly formed.
-- thrifty wench scrapes kitchen stuff,
1:... and barreling the droppings and the snuff
~ of wasting candles, which in thirty year
relicky kept, perhaps buys wedding cheer: donne.
f: re’lict. n. s. [relicle, old fr. relicia, lat.] a widow ; a
wife desolate by the death of her husband.
if the fathers and husbands were of the houshold of faith,
fi then certainly their relic's and children cannot be strangers in
this houshold. spratt's sermons.
! chaste relis' s
honour’d on earth, and worthy of the love
of such a spouse, as now resides above.
rel ef. m. s. [relief, fr.]
1. alleviation of calamity; mitigation of pain or sorrow.
thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
tending to some relief of our extremes.
2. that which frees from pain or sorrow.
he found his designed present would be a relief, and then
he thought it an impertinence to consider what it could be
garth.
:
jmilton.
called besides. fell.
so should we make our death a glad relief
from future shame. dryden's knight's tale.
nor dar'd i to presume, that press'd with grief,
my flight should urge you to this dire relief; -
stay, stay your steps. dryden's aemeis.
3. dismission of a sentinel from his post.
for this relief, much thanks; 'tis bitter cold,
and i am sick at heart. shakesp. hamlet.
4. [relevium, law lat..] legal remedy of wrongs. -
:- 3. the prominence of a figure in stone or metal ; the seeming
prominence of a picture. -
the figures of many ancient coins rise up in a much more
o: beautiful relief than those on the modern ; the face sinking
by degrees in the several declensions of the empire, till about
constantine's time, it lies almost even with the surface of the
medal. addison on medals.
not with such majesty, such bold relief,
the forms august of kings, or conqu'ring chief,
e’er swell'd on marble, as in verse have shin'd, -
in polish’d verse, the manners and the mind. pope.
6. the exposure of any thing, by the proximity of something
different,
relievable. adj. [from relieve..] capable of relief. . . .
neither can they, as to reparation, hold plea of thingo,
wherein the party is relievable by common law. hale.
t, relieve. v. a. [relevo, lat, relever, fr.]
1. to ease pain or sorrow.
2. to succour by asfistance.
from thy growing store,
now lend assistance, and relieve the poor ;
a pittance of thy land will set him free. dryden.
to set a sentinel at rest, by placing another on his post.
honest soldier, who hath relieved you ?
—bernado has my place, give you good night. shakesp.
relieve the centries that have watch'd all night. dryden.
4. to right by law. - - - - - -
5. to recommend by the interposition of something disfimilar.
vol. ii.
as the great lamp of day,
through diff'rent regions, does his course pursue,
and leaves one world but to revive a new ;
while, by a pleasing change, the queen of night
relieves his lustre with a milder light. stepney.
since the inculcating precept upon precept will prove tire-
some, the poet must not encumber his poem with too much
business; but sometimes relieve the subject with a moral re-
flection. addison on the georgicks.
6. to support; to assist; to recommend to attention.
parallels, or like relations, alternately relieve each other;
when neither will pass asunder, yet are they plausible to-
gether. brown’s pulgar erreurs:
relie’ver. n. s. [from relieve..] one that relieves.
he is the protector of his weakness, and the reliever of his
wants. - - rogers's sermons.
*sso n. s. [italian.] the prominence of a figure or
picture.
a convex mirrour makes the objects in the middle come
out from the superficies: the painter must do so in respect of
the lights and shadows of his figures, to give them more re-
lievo and more strength. dryden's dufresnoy.
to relioght. v. a. [re and light.] to light anew.
his pow'r can heal me, and relight my eye.
religion. m. s. [religion, fr. religio, lat.]
1. virtue, as founded upon reverence of god, and expectation
of future rewards and punishments.
he that is void of fear, may soon be just,
and no religion binds men to be traitors.
one spake much of right and wrong,
of justice, of religion, truth and peace
and judgment from above. milton.
by religion, i mean that general habit of reverence towards
the divine nature, whereby we are enabled and inclined to
worship and serve god after such a manner as we conceive
most agreeable to his will, so as to procure his favour and
blessing. //ilkins.
if we confider it as direeted against god, it is a breach of
religion ; if as to men, it is an offence against morality. south.
by her inform’d, we best religion learn,
its glorious object by her aid discern. blackmore.
religion or virtue, in a large sense, includes duty to god
and our neighbour; but in a proper sense, virtue signifies
duty towards men, and religion duty to god. //atts.
i never once in my life confidered, whether i was living
as the laws of religion direct, or whether my way of life was
such, as would procure me the mercy of god at this
hour. - law.
2. a system of divine faith and worship as opposite to others.
the image of a brute, adorn’d
with gay religions, full of pomp and gold. milton,
the christian religion, rightly understood, is the deepest
and choicest piece of philosophy that is. more.
the doctrine of the gospel proposes to men such glorious
rewards and such terrible punishments as no religion ever did,
and gives us far greater assurance of their reality and cer-
tainty than ever the world had. tillotson.
reli'gionist. n. s. [from religion.] a bigot to any religious
persuasion. -
the lawfulness of taking oaths may be revealed to the
quakers, who then will stand upon as good a foot for prefer-
ment as any other subject; under such a motly administra-
tion, what pullings and hawlings, what a zeal and biass there
will be in each religionist to advance his own tribe, and de-
press the others. swift.
religious. adj. [religieux, fr. religiosus, lat.]
1. pious; disposed to the duties of religion.
... it is a matter of sound consequence, that all duties are by
so much the better performed, by how much the men are
more religious, from whose habilities the same proceed. hooker.
when holy and devout religious christians
are at their beads, ’tis hard to draw them from thence;
so sweet is zealous contemplation 1 shakespeare.
their lives -
religious titled them the sons of god. milton.
2. teaching religion.
he god doth late and early pray,
more of his grace than gifts to lend;
and entertains the harmless day -
with a religious book or friend. i/ottin.
3. among the romanists, bound by the vows of poverty, cha-
stity and obedience.
certain fryars and religious men were moved with some zeal,
to draw the people to the christian faith. abbot.
france has vast numbers of ecclesiasticks, secular and re-
ligious. addison's state of the j/ar.
what the protestants would call a fanatick, is in the ro-
man church a religious of such an order; as an english mer-
chant in lisbon, after some great disappointments in the
world, resolved to turn capuchin. addison.
4. exact 3 strict.
21 p 5. ap-
pope:
ben. johnson.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. l.
r. e. l.
5. appropriated to strict observance of holy duties.
her family has the same regulation as a religious house, and
all its orders tend to the support of a constant regular devo-
tion. daw.
reli'giously. adv. [from religious.]
1. piously; with obedience to the dictates of religion.
for, who will have his work his wished end to win,
let him with hearty pray’r religiously begin. drayton.
2. according to the rites of religion.
these are their brethren, whom you goths behold
alive and dead, and for their brethren slain
religiously they ask a sacrifice. shakesp. titus andron.
3. reverently ; with veneration.
dost thou in all thy addresses to him, come into his pre-
sence with reverence, kneeling and religiously bowing thyself
before him. duppa's rules to devotion.
4. exactly; with strict observance.
the privileges, justly due to the members of the two houses
and their attendants, are religiously to be maintained. bacon.
reli‘gious n ess. n.f. [from religious.] the quality or state
of being religious.
to rell’nquish. v. a. [relinquo, lat.]
1. to forsake; to abandon ; to leave; to desert.
the habitation there was utterly relinquished. abbot.
the english colonies grew poor and weak, though the
english lords grew rich and mighty; for they placed irish
tenants upon the lands relinquished by the english. davies.
2. to quit; to release; to give up.
the ground of god’s sole property in any thing is,
the return of it made by man to god; by which agt he re-
finquishes and delivers back to god all his right to the use of
that thing, which before had been freely granted him by
god. - south's sermons.
3. to forbear; to depart from.
in case it may be proved, that amongst the number of rites
and orders common unto both, there are particulars, the use
whereof is utterly unlawful, in regard of some special bad
and noisom quality; there is no doubt but we ought to relin-
quish such rites and orders, what freedom soever we have to
retain the other still. hooker.
reli‘nog is hment. n.s.. [from relinquish.] the aet of forsaking.
government or ceremonies, or whatsoever it, be, which is
popish, away with it: this is the thing they require in us,
the utter relinquishment of all things popish. hooker.
that natural tenderness of conscience, which must first
create in the soul a sense of sin, and from thence produce a
sorrow for it, and at length cause a relinquishment of it, is
took away by a customary repeated course of sinning, south.
retash. m. s. [from relecher, fr. to lick again. minshew,
skinner.]
1. taste; the effect of any thing on the palate: it is commonly
used of a pleasing taste. e
under sharp, sweet and sour, are abundance of immediate
peculiar relishes or tastes, which experienced palates can easily
discern. boyle on colours.
these two bodies, whose vapours are so pungent, spring
from saltpetre, which betrays upon the tongue no heat nor
corrofiveness, but coldness mixed with a somewhat languid
relish retaining to bitterness. boyle.
much pleasure we have lost, while we abstain'd
from this delightful fruit, nor known till now
true relish, tasting. milton.
could we suppose their relishes as different there as here,
yet the manna in heaven suits every palate. locke.
sweet, bitter, sour, harsh and salt are all the epithets we
have to denominate that numberless variety of relishes to be
found distinet in the different parts of the same plant. locke.
2. taste; small quantity just perceptible. -
the king becoming graces;
as justice, verity, temp'rance, stableness,
devotion, patience, courage, fortitude;
i have no relish of them.
3. liking ; delight in any thing.
we have such a relsh for faction, as to have lost that of
wit. - addison's freeholder.
good men after death are distributed among these several
islands with pleasures of different kinds, suitable to the relishes
and perfections of those settled in them. addison's speciator.
. sense; power of perceiving excellence; taste. addison uses
it both with of and for before the thing.
a man, who has any relish for fine writing, discovers new
beauties, or receives stronger impressions from the masterly
strokes of a great author every time he peruses him. addison.
some hidden feeds of goodness and knowledge give him a
relish of such reflections, as improve the mind, and make
the heart better. addison's speciator.
the pleasure of the proprietor, to whom things become
familiar, depends, in a great measure, upon the relish of the
spectator. seed's sermons.
5. delight given by any thing; the power by which pleasure is
given. -
shakesp. macbeth.
expectation whirls me round;
th’ imaginary relish is so sweet,
that it enchants my sense. shakes. troilus and croftia.
when liberty is gone,
life grows insipid, and has lost its relish. addison's cato.
6. cast; manner.
it preserves some relish of old writing.
to re'lish. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to give a taste to any thing.
on smoaking lard they dine;
a sav’ry bit that serv'd to relish wine.
2. to taste; to have a liking.
i love the people;
though it do well, i do not relish well
their loud applause.
how will dissenting brethren rels, it?
what will malignants say ? hudibrar.
men of nice palates would not relish aristotle, as drest up
by the schoolmen. baker's reflections on learning.
he knows how to prize his advantages, and relish the ho-
nours which he enjoys. atterbury.
you are to nourish your spirit with pious readings, and
holy meditations, with watchings, fastings, and prayers, that
you may taste, and relish, and desire that eternal state, which
is to begin when this life ends. law.
to re"lish. v. m.
1. to have a pleasing taste.
the ivory feet of tables were carved into the shape of lions,
without which, their greatest dainties would not relish to their
palates. hakewill on providence.
2. to give pleasure.
had i been the finder-out of this secret, it would not have
relished among my other discredits. shakesp. winter’s tale.
3. to have a flavour.
a theory, which how much soever it may relish of wit and
invention, hath no foundation in nature. woodward.
reli's hable. adj. [from relish.] gustable; having a taste.
to reli've. v. n. [re and live..] to revive; to live anew.
not used.
the thing on earth, which is of most avail,
any virtue's branch and beauty's bud,
reliven not for any good. - spensor.
to relove. v. a. [re and love.] to love in return. not
used.
to own for him so familiar and levelling an affection as
love, much more to expect to be relived by him, were not
the least saucy presumption man could be guilty of, did not
his own commandments make it a duty. boyle.
relocłnt. adj. [relucens, latin.] shining ; transparent;
pellucid.
in brighter mazes, the relucent stream -
plays o'er the mead. thomson's summer.
to relu’ct. v. n. [reludor, lat.] to struggle again.
... we, with studied mixtures, force our reluding appetites,
and with all the spells of epicurism, conjure them up, that we
may lay them again. decay of piety.
reluctance. un. s. [reluctor, latin.] unwillingness; re-
§:...; pugnance; struggle in opposition: with to
or agains?.
a little more weight, added to the lower of the marbles,
is able to surmount their reluctancy to separation, notwith-
'standing the supposed danger of thereby introducing a
vacuunn, - boyle.
it savours -
reluciance against god, and his just yoke
pope.
dryden.
shakespeare.
laid on our necks. milton.
bear witness, heav'n, with what reluđancy
her hapless innocence i doom to die. dryden.
æneas, when forced in his own defence to kill lausus,
the poet shows compassionate, and tempering the severity of
his looks with a reludiance to the action; he has pity on his
beauty and his youth ; and is loth to destroy such a master-
piece of nature. dryden's dufresnoy-
how few would be at the pains of acquiring such an habit,
and of conquering all the reluctancies and difficulties that lay
in the way towards virtue atterbury.
many hard stages of discipline must he pass through, before
he can subdue the relusances of his corruption. rogers.
with great reluciancy man is persuaded to acknowledge
this necessity. rogers's sermons.
relu'ctant. adj. [relucians, lat.] unwilling; acting with
repugnance.
reluciant; but in vain a greater pow'r
now rul’d him. milton's paradise loft.
some refuge in the muse's art i found;
reluctant now i touch'd the trembling string -
bereft of him, who taught me how to fing. tickel.
to relu'ctate. v. n. [reluctor, lat..] to resist; to struggle
against."
e. violation of god’s patrimony, the first sacrilege is looked
on with some horrour, and men devise colours to delude their
reludating
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e m
r e m -
o,
so &amp;
h
%
o
o
o
is
r
* 31,
-2. the body left by the soul.
roating consciences; but when they have once made the
breach, their scrupulosity soon retires. decay of piety.
relucration. n.s. [reluctor, latin.] repugnance; resis-
tance.
the king prevailed with the prince, though not without
some reluciation. bacon's henry vii.
adam’s fin, or the curse upon it, did not deprive him of
his rule, but left the creatures to a rebellion or reluciation. bac.
to relu'me. v. a. to light anew ; to rekindle.
relume her ancient light, nor kindle new.
to relu'm ine. v. a. to light anew.
once put out thy light;
i know not where is that promethean heat,
that can thy light relomine. shakes. othello.
t, rely”. v. n. [re and lye.] to lean upon with coni-
dence; to put trust in ; to rest upon ; to depend upon : with
6/7.
go in thy native innocences rely
on what thou hast of virtue; summon all!
for god tow'rds thee hath done his part, do thine. milton.
egypt does not on the clouds rely,
pope.
but to the nile owes more than to the sky. waller.
thus solon to pisistratus reply'd,
demanded, on what succour he rely'd,
when with so few he boldly did engage 2
he said, he took his courage from his age. denham.
though reason is not to be relied upon, as universally
sufficient to direct us what to do; yet it is generally to be
relied upon and obeyed, where it tells us what we are not
to do.
fear relies upon a natural love of ourselves, and is com-
plicated with a necessary desire of our own preservation: till.
such variety of arguments only distract the understanding
that relies on them. locke.
the pope was become a party in the cause, and could not
be relied upon for a decision. - atterbury.
do we find so much religion in the age, as to rely on the
general practice for the measures of our duty : rogers.
no prince c_n ever rely on the fidelity of that man, who is
a rebel to his creator. rogers.
to remain...w.. n. [remanco, lat.]
1. to be left out of a greater quantity or number.
that that remains, shall be buried in death. job xxvii. 15.
bake that which ye will bake to day; and that which re-
maineth over, lay up until the morning. ex. xvi. 23.
2. to continue; to endure; to be left.
he for the time remain'd stupidly good. milton.
if what you have heard, shall remain in you, ye shall con-
tinue in the son. 1 jo. ii. 24.
3• to be left after any event.
childless thou art, childless remain. milton.
in the families of the world, there remains not to one
above another the least pretence to inheritance. ilocke.
4. not to be lost.
now somewhat fing, whose endless souvenance
among the shepherds may for aye remain. spenser.
i was increased more than all that were before me, also my
wisdom remained with me. ecclus. ii. 9.
5. to be left as not comprised,
that a father may have some power over his children, is
easily granted; but that an elder brother has so over his bre-
thren, remains to be proved. locke.
6. to continue in a place.
to remain. v. a. to await; to be left to.
such end had the kid; for he would weaned be
of craft, coloured with simplicity;
and such end, pardie, does all them remain
that of such falsers friendship shall be fain. ."
with oaken staff
i'll raise such outcries on thy clatter'd iron,
which long shall not withhold me from thy head,
that in a little time, while breath remains thee,
thou oft shalt wish thyself at gath to boast,
but never shalt see gath.
if thence he 'scape, what remains him less
than unknown dangers.
the easier conquest now
remains thee, aided by this host of friends,
back on thy foes more glorious to return.
rf ma 1'n. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. relock; that which is left. generally used in the plural.
i grieve with the old, for so many additional inconvenien-
cies, more than their small remain of life seemed destined to
undergo. pope.
spenser.
milton.
milton.
milton.
but fowls obscene dismember'd his remains,
and dogs had torn him. pope's odyssey.
oh would'st thou fing what heroes windsor bore,
or raise old warriors, whose ador'd remains,
in weeping vaults, her hallow'd earth contains, pope.
3. abode; habitation. not in use. -
2.
a most miraculous work in this good king,
which, often fince my here remain in england,
i’ve seen him do. - shakes). macbeth.
remainder. adj. [from remain..] remaining; refuse; left.
his brain
is as dry as the remainder bisket
after a voyage. shakes). a 1%u like it.
we turn not back the silks upon the merchant,
when we have spoil'd them ; nor the remainder viands
we do not throw in unrespective place,
because we now are full. shakesh. troilus and crossida.
remai'nder. m. s.
1. what is left; remnant; relicks.
the gods protect you,
and bless the good remainders of the court shakes.
it may well employ the remainder of their lives to perform
it to purpose, i mean, the work of evangelical obedience.
hammond.
mahomet's crescent by our feuds encreast,
blasted the learn’d remainders of the east. denham.
could bare ingratitude have made any one so diabolical,
had not cruelty came in as a second to its affistance, and
cleared the villain's breast of all remainders of humanity? south.
there are two restraints which god hath put upon human
nature, flame and fear; shame is the weaker, and hath place
only in those in whom there are some remainders of virtue.
- tillotson.
what madness moves you, matrons, to destroy
the last remainders of unhappy troy dryden.
if he, to whom ten talents were committed, has squan-
dered away five, he is concerned to make a double improve-
ment of the remainder. rogers.
if these deco&amp;tions be repeated till the water comes off
clear, the remainder yields no salt. arbuthnot.
of six millions raised every year for the service of the pub-
jck, one third is intercepted through the several subordina-
tions of artful men in office, before the remainder is applied to
the proper use. swift.
2. the body when the soul is departed; remains.
shew us
the poor remainder of andronicus. shakespeare.
3. [in law.] the last chance of inheritance.
- a fine is levied to grant a reversion or remainder, expectant
upon a lease that yieldeth no rent. bacon.
to rema'ke. v. a. [re and make.] to make anew.
that, which she owns above her, must perfeotly remake us
after the image of our maker. glanville's apology.
to rema'nd. v. a. [re and mando, lat..] to send back; to
call back. -
the better sort quitted their freeholds and fled into eng-
land, and never returned, though many laws were made to
remand them back. jjavies on i cland.
philoxenus, for despising some dull poetry of dionysius,
was condemned to dig in the quarries; from whence being
remanded, at his return dionysius produced some other of his
verses, which as soon as philoxenus had read, he made no
reply, but, calling to the waiters, said, carry me again to the
quarries. - government of the tongue.
re'man ent. m. s. [remanens, lat. remanant, old fr. it is
now contracted to remnant.] the part remaining.
her majesty bought of his executrix the remiament of the last
term of three years. bacon.
rook. n. s. [remarque, fr.] observation; note; notice
taken.
he cannot distinguish difficult and noble speculations from
trifling and vulgar remarks. collier on pride.
to rema'rk. v. a. [remarquer, fr.]
1. to note; to observe.
it is easy to observe what has been remarked, that the
names of simple ideas are the least liable to mistakes. locke.
2. to distinguish; to point out; to mark. not in use.
the pris'ner samson here i seek.
—his manacles remark him, there he sits. milton.
rema'rkable. adj. [remarkable, fr.] observable ; worthy of
in ote,
so did orpheus plainly teach, that the world had begin-
ning in time, from the will of the most high god, whose re-
markable words are thus converted. raleigh.
'tis remarkable, that they -
talk most, who have the least to say. prior.
what we obtain by conversation soon vanishes, unless we
note down what remarkables we have found. watts.
rema r kable ness. m. s. [f om remarkable.] observable-
ness ; worthiness of observation.
they signify the remarkablenes of this punishment of the
jews, as signal revenge from the crucified christ. hammond.
rem a'rkably. adv. [from remarkable.] observably; in a
manner worthy of observation.
chiefly assur’d,
remarkably so late, of thy so true,
so faithful love. milton.
such
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. m.
such parts of these writings, as may be remarkably stupid,
should become subjects of an occasional criticism. watts.
rema'rker. n.s. [remarkeur, fr.] observer; one that re-
marks.
if the remarker would but once try to outshine the author
by writing a better book on the same subject, he would soon
be convinced of his own insufficiency. watts.
reme'diable. adj. [from remedy..] capable of remedy.
reme'diate, adj. [from remedy..] medicinal; affording a
remedy. not in use.
all you, unpublish’d virtues of the earth,
spring with my tears; be aidant and remediate
in the good man's distress. shakesp. king lear.
reme"dil ess. adj. [from remedy..] not admitting remedy;
irreparable; cureless ; incurable.
sad aesculapius
imprison'd was in chains remediles. spenser.
the war, grounded upon this general remediles, necessity,
may be termed the general, the remediles, or the necessary
war, raleigh's essays.
we, by rightful doom remediless,
were lost in death, till he that dwelt above
high-thron'd in secret bliss, for us frail dust
emptied his glory. milton.
flatter him it may, as those are good at flattering, who are
good for nothing else; but in the mean time, the poor man
is left under a remediles, delusion. south.
reme'diless ness. n.s.. [from remediles...] incurableness.
re/medy. m. s. [remedium, lat. remede, fr.] **
1. a medicine by which any illness is cured. :
the difference between poisons and remedies is easily known
by their effects; and common reason soon distinguishes be-
tween virtue and vice. swift.
2. cure of any uneasiness.
here hope began to dawn; resolv'd to try,
she fix’d on this her utmost remedy. dryden.
o how short my interval of woel
our griefs how swift, our remedies how slow. prior.
3. that which counteracis any evil: with to, for, or against;
for is most used. -
- what may be remedy or cure
to evils, which our own misdeeds have wrought. milton.
... civil government is the proper remedy for the inconve-
niencies of the state of nature. locke.
attempts have been made for some remedy against this evil.
- - swift.
4. reparation; means of repairing any hurt.
things, without all remedy,
should be without regard. shakesh. macbeth.
in the death of a man there is no remedy. wisd. ii. 1.
to reme'dy. v. a. [remedier, fr.]
1. to cure; to heal.
sorry we are, that any good and godly mind should be
grieved with that which is done; but to remedy their grief,
lieth not so much in us as in themselves. picoker.
2. to repair or remove mischief. -
to remember. v. a. [remembrer, old fr. remembrare, ital.]
1. to bear in mind anything; not to forget.
remember not against us former iniquities.
remember thee!
ay thou poor ghost, while memory holds a place
in this distracied brain. remember thee
2. to recollect; to call to mind.
he having once seen and remembered me, even from the be-
ginning began to be in the rierward. sidney.
we are said to remember any thing, when the idea of it
arises in the mind with a consciousness that we have had this
idea before. watts on the mind.
3. to keep in mind; to have present to the attention.
. . remember what i warn thee, shun to taste;
and shun the bitter consequence, - milton.
this is to be remembered, that it is not possible now to
keep a young gentleman from vice by a total ignorance of
it; unless you will all his life mew him up. locke.
4. to bear in mind, with intent of reward or punishment.
cry unto god; for you shall be remembered of him. bar.
he brings them back, . .
milton.
ps. lxxix. 8.
shakesp.
rememb'ring mercy and his covenant sworn.
5. to mention; not to omit.
. a citation ought to be certain, in respect of the person
cited; for, if such certainty be therein omitted, such citation
is invalid, as in many cases hereafter to be remembered. ayliff.
6. to put in mind; to force to recolle&amp;t ; to remind.
his hand and leg commanding without threatning, and ra-
ther remembering than chastising. • sidney.
joy, being altogether wanting,
it doth remember me the more of sorrow. , shakespeare.
it grieves my heart to be remember'd thus
by any one, of one so glorious. chapman.
these petitions, and the answer of the common council of
london, were ample materials for a conference with the lords,
who might be thereby remembered of their duty. clarendon.
3'
3, honourable memory.
4. transmission of a fact from one to another.
5. account preserved.
8. notice of something absent.
- i would only remember them in love and prevention, with
the docirine of the jews, and the example of the grecians,
- - - holydoy.
7. to preserve from being forgotten.
let them have their wages duly paid,
and something over, to remember me. shakespeare.
rememberer. n.s.. [from remember.] one who remembers.
a brave master to servants, and a rememberer of the least
good office; for his flock he transplanted most of them into
plentiful soils. j/ation.
reme'mbrance. m. s. [remembrance, fr.]
1. retention in memory; memory.
, though cloten then but young, time has not wore him
from my remembrance. shakespeare's cymbeline,
had memory been lost with innocence,
we had not known the sentence north’ offence;
'twas his chief punishment to keep in store
the sad remembrance what he was before.
sharp remembrance on the english part,
and shame of being match'd by such a foe,
rouse conscious virtue up in every heart. dryden.
this ever grateful in remembrance bear
. . to me thou ow'st, to me the vital air. pope's odyssey,
2. recollection; revival of any idea; reminiscence.
i hate thy beams,
that bring to my remembrance from what state
i fell; how glorious once above thy sphere. milton.
remembrance is when the same idea recurs, without the ope.
ration of the like objeci on the external sensory. locke.
out of use.
rosemary and rue keep
seeming and savour all the winter long,
grace and remembrance be unto you both.
denham.
siako.
titan,
. . among the heavens, th’ immortal fad display'd,
lest the remembrance of his grief should fail,
and in the constellations wrote his tale. addison.
those proceedings and remembrances are in the tower, be-
ginning with the twentieth year of edward i. halo:
6. memorial. - - -
but in remembrance of so brave a deed,
a tomb and funeral honours i decreed. dryden.
7. a token by which any one is kept in the memory.
i have remembrances of yours, *.
that i have longed to redeliver. shakesp. hamlet.
keep this remembrance for thy julia's sake. shakesp.
let your remembrance still apply to banquo;
... present him eminence, both with eye and tongue. shakoff.
9. power of remembering.
thee i have heard relating what was done,
ere my remembrance. • milton,
reme'mbrancer. m. s. [from remembrance.] - s
1. one that reminds; one that puts in mind. . . . . .
a fly knave, the agent for his master, - o
and the remembrancer of her, to hold * * * * *
the hand fast to her lord. shakesp. cymbeline.
god is present in the consciences of good and bad; he is
there a remembrancer to call our actions to mind, and a wit-
ness to bring them to judgment, taylor.
would i were in my grave;
for, living here, you're but my curs’d remembrancers: :
i once was happy. otway's venice preserv'd.
2. an officer of the exchequer.
all are digested into books, and sent to the remembrancer of
the exchequer, that he make processes upon them. bacon.
to reme'rcie. v. a. [remercier, fr.] to thank. obsolete.
offring his service and his dearest life
for her defence, against that earle to fight;
she him remercied, as the patron of her life.
sosr.
to re/migrate. v. n. [remigro, lat..] to remove back
again.
some other ways he proposes to divest some bodies of their
borrowed shapes, and make, them remigrate to their first
simplicity. boyle.
remigration. m. s. [from remigrate.] removal back again.
the scots, transplanted hither, became acquainted with
our customs, which, by occasional remigrations, became dif-
fused in scotland. płale.
to remi'nd. v. a. [re and mind.] to put in mind; to force
to remember.
when age itself, which will not be defied, shall begin to
arrest, seize and remind us of our mortality by pains and dul-
ness of senses; yet then the pleasure of the mind shall be in
its full vigour. south's sermons.
the brazen figure of the consul, with the ring on his
finger, reminded me of juvenal's majoris pondera gemmae.
addison on italy.
remini'scence. n.s. [reminisceni, latin.] recollection 5 re-
covery of ideas.
i cast
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e m
r. e. m.
i.
*
cast about for all circumstances that may revive my me-
mory or reminiscence. hale's origin of mankind.
for the other part of memory, called reministence, which
is the retrieving of a thing at present forgot, or but confusedly
remembered, by setting the mind to ransack every little cell
of the brain ; while it is thus busied, how accidentally does
the thing sought for offer itself to the mind south.
rem.inisce’ntial. adj. [from reminiscence..] relating to re-
miniscence.
would truth dispense, we could be content with plato,
that knowledge were but remembrance, that intellectual ac-
quisition were but reministential evocation. brown.
remi'ss. adj. [remis, fr. remissils, lat.]
1. not vigorous; slack.
the water deserts the corpuscles, unless it flow with a pre-
cipitate motion; for then it hurries them out along with it,
till its motion becomes more languid and remis. woodward.
2. not careful; slothful.
mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep,
that thus we die, while remis, traitors sleep, shakesp.
lf when by god's grace we have conquered the first diffi-
culties of religion, we grow careless and remiss, and neglect
our guard, god's spirit will not always strive with us. tillots.
"your candour, in pardoning my errors, may make me more
remis; in correcting them. lryden.
3. not intense.
these nervous, bold, those languid and remis; ;
here cold salutes, but there a lover's kiss. roscommon.
remi'ssible, adj. [from remit..] admitting forgiveness.
remi'ssion. m. s. [remission, fr. remissio, lat.]
1. abatement; relaxation; moderation.
error, misclaim and forgetfulness do now and then be-
come suitors for some remission of extreme rigour. bacon.
2. cessation of intenseness.
in september and o&amp;tober these diseases do not abate and
remit in proportion to the remission of the sun's heat. woodw.
this difference of intention and remission of the mind in
thinking, every one has experimented in himself. locke.
3. in physick, remission is when a distemper abates, but does
not go quite off before it returns again.
4. release ; abatement of right or claim.
not only an expedition, but the remission of a duty or tax,
were transmitted to posterity after this manner. addison.
another ground of the bishop's fears is the remission of the
first fruits and tenths. swift,
5. forgiveness; pardon.
my pennance is to call lucetta back, **
and ask remission for my folly past. . shakesp.
that plea
with god or man will gain thee no remission. milton.
many believe the article of remission of fins, but they be-
lieve it without the condition of repentance or the fruits of
holy life. taylor's rule of living holy.
remi'ssly. adv. [from remiss.]
1. carelesly ; negligently ; without close attention.
how should it then be in our power to do it coldly or re-
misily so that our desire being natural, is also in that degree
of earnestness whereunto nothing can be added. hooker.
2. not vigorously; not with ardour or eagerness; slackly.
there was not an equal concurrence in the prosecution of
this matter among the bishops; some of them proceeding
more remissly in it. clarendon.
re m1'ssness. m. s. [from remis...] carelessness; negligence;
coldness; want of ardour ; inattention.
future evils,
or new, or by remissness new conceiv'd,
are now to have no successive degrees. shakesp.
no great offenders 'scape their dooms;
small praise from lenity and remissness comes. denham.
jack, through the remissness of constables, has always found
means to escape. arbuthnot's history of jobn bull.
the great concern of god for our salvation, is so far from
an argument of remisiness in us, that it ought to excite our
utmost care. roger,’s sermons.
to remit. v. a. [remitto, lat.]
1. to relax ; to make less intense.
so willingly doth god remit his ire.
our supreme foe may much remit
his anger; and perhaps thus far remov’d,
not mind us not offending, satisfy'd
with what is punish'd.
2. to forgive a punishment.
with suppliant pray'rs their pow'rs appease ;
the soft napaean race will soon repent
their anger, and remit the punishment. dryden.
the magistrate can often, where the publick good demands
not the execution of the law, remit the punishment of crimi-
nal offences by his own authority, but yet cannot remit the
milton.
milton.
satisfaction due to any private man. locke.
3. [remettre, fr.] to pardon a fault.
at my lovely tamora's intreats,
i do remit these young men's heinous faults. shakesp.
vol. ii.
whose soever fins ye remil, they are remitted unto them ;
and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. jo. xx. 23.
4. to give up ; to resign. .
in grievous and inhuman crimes, offenders should be re-
thitted to their prince to be punished in the place where they
have offended. hayward.
th’af.gyptian crown i to your hands remit;
and, with it, take his heart who offers it.
heaven thinks fit
thee to thy former fury to remit.
5. [rewettre, fr.] to defer; to refer.
the bishop had certain proud instructions in the front,
though there were a pliant clause at the foot, that remitted aii
to the bishop's discretion. bacon's henry vii.
i remit me to themselves, and challenge their natural inge-
nuity to say, whether they have not sometimes such shiverings
within them. government of the tongue.
6. to put again in custody.
this bold return with seeming patience heard,
the pris’ner was remitted to the guard,
7. to send money to a distant place. -
they obliged themselves to remit after the rate of twelve
hundred thousand pounds sterling per annum, divided into so
many monthly payments. addison on italy.
8. to restore. not in use.
the archbishop was retained prisoner, but after a short time
remitted to his liberty. hayward.
to re mit. v. n.
1. to slacken; to grow less intense.
when our passions remit, the vehemence of our speech
remits too. broome's notes on the odyssey.
2. to abate by growing less eager.
as; by degrees, they remitted of their industry, loathed
their business, and gave way to their pleasures, they let fall
those generous principles, which had raised them to worthy
thoughts. south's sermons.
3. [in physic.] to grow by intervals less violent, though not
wholly intermitting. : -
rem, tment. n. s. [from remit.] the aa of remitting to
custody.
remittance. m. s. [from remit.]
i. the act of paying money at a distant place.
2. sum sent to a distant place.
a compact among private persons furnished out the several
remittances. addison on italy.
remi’tt er. m. s. [remettre, fr.]
1. qne who remits, or procures the conveyance and payment
of money. -
2. [in common law.] a restitution of one that hath two titles to
ands or tenements, and is seized of them by his latter title,
unto his title that is more ancient, in case where the latter is
dryden.
dryden's tyran. love.
dryden.
defective. cowel.
you said, if i return’d next size in lent,
i should be in remitter of your grace;
in th' interim my letters should take place
of affidavits. - donne.
re'mnant. n. s. [corrupted from remanent.] residue ; that
which is left; that which remains.
poor key-cold figure of a holy king !
thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood,
be’t lawful that i invocate thy ghost shakes). rich. iii.
bear me hence
from forth the noise and rumour of the field,
were i may think the remnant of my thoughts.
about his shelves
remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses
were thinly scatter'd. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
i was entreated to get them some respite and breathing by
a cellation, without which they saw no probability to preserve
the remnant that had yet escaped. king charles.
it seems that the remnants of the generation of men were in
such a deluge saved. bacon.
the remnant of my tale is of a length
to tire your patience. dryden's knight's tale,
a feeble army and an empty senate,
shaksp.
remnants of mighty battles fought in vain. addison.
see the poor remnants of these slighted hairs 1
my hands shall rend what e'en thy rapine spares. pope.
the frequent use of the latter was a remnant of po-
pery, which never admitted seripture in the vulgar tongue.
swift.
re'mnant, adj. [corruptly formed from remanent.] remain-
ing; yet left.
it bid her feel
no future pain for me; but instant wed
a lover more proportion'd to her bed; .
and quiet dedicate her remnant life
to the just duties of an humble wife. prior.
remo’lt en. part. [from remelt j meltcq again.
it were good to try in glass works, whether the crude ma-
terials, mingled with glass already made and remolten, do not
facilitate the making of glass with less heat. bacon.
21 q- remo'nst ran ce.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. m.
r. e. m.
remoonstrance. n.s...[remonstrance, fr. from remonstrate.]
1. show ; discovery. not in use. - - - - - -
you may marvel, why i would not rather
make rash remonstrance of iny hidden power, -
than let him be so lost." shakesp. moos for megs.
2. strong representation. -- . - -
the same god, which revealeth it to them, would also
give them power of confirming it unto others, either with
miraculous operation, or with strong and invincible re/7/071-
france of found reason. . . . . . a hooker.
a large family of daughters have drawn up a remonstrance,
in which they set forth, that their father, having refused. to
take in the spectator, they offered to 'bate him the article of
bread and butter in the tea-table. addison's spectator.
importunate passions surround the man, and will not suffer
him to attend to the remonstrances of justice. - rogers:
to remo'nstrate. v. n. [remonstro, lat. remonsorer, fr.]
to make a strong representation; to show reasons on any
side in strong terms.
remora. m.s.. [latin.]
1. a let or obstacle. - - ».
2. a fish or a kind of worm that sticks to ships, and retards
their passage through the water. -
of fishes you shall find in arms the whale, herring, roach
and remora. peacham on blazoning.
the remora is about three quarters of a yard long; his
body before three inches and a half over, thence tapering to
the tail end; his mouth two inches and a half over; his
chops ending angularly ; the nether a little broader ; and
produced forward near an inch ; his lips rough with a great
number of little prickles, , , , , grew.
to re'morate. v. a. [remorar, latin.] to hinder; to
delay. pic7.
remorse. m. s. [remorsus, lat.]
i • pain of guilt. -
not that he believed they could be restrained from that
impious at by any remorse of conscience, or that they had
not wickedness enough to design and execute it. clarendon.
2. tenderness; pity; sympathetick sorrow.
many little esteem of their own lives, yet, for remors of
their wives and children, would be withheld. spensor.
shylock, thou lead'st this fashion of thy malice
to the last hour of act; and then 'tis thought,
thou'lt shew thy mercy and remorse more strange,
than is thy strange apparent cruelty. shakesp. mer. of ven.
the rogues slighted me into the river, with as little remors,
as they would have drowned a bitch's blind puppies.
- shakespeare.
curse on th’ unpard’ning prince, whom tears can draw
to no remorse; who rules by lion's law. dryden.
remo‘rseful. adj. [remorse and full.]
1. tender; compassionate.
o eglamour, think not i flatter,
valiant and wise, remorseful, well accomplish'd.
love, that comes too late,
like a remorseful o slowly carried,
to the great sender turns a sowre offence.
the gaudy, blabbing, and remorsful day
is crept into the bosom of the sea. shakes, henry vi.
2. it seems to have had once the sense of pitiable.
eurylochus, straight hasted the report -
of this his fellowes most remorceful fate. chapman.
remo'rs e less, adj. [from remorse.] unpitying; cruel; savage.
where were the nymphs, when the remorsoles, deep.
clos'd o'er the head of your lov'd lycidas. amilton.
o the inexpressible horrour that will seize upon a sinner,
when he stands arraigned at the bar of divine justies when
he shall see his accuser, his judge, the witnesses, all his re-
morsles; adversaries. - south's sermons.
remote. adj. [remotus, lat.]
1. distant; not immediate.
in this narrow scantling of capacity, it is not all remote and
* - , *
ow
shakesp.
shakespeare.
even apparent good that affects us. lake.
2. distant; not at hand.
their rising all at once was as the found -
of thunder heard remote. milton.
3. removed far off; placed not near.
the arch-chymick sun, so far from us remote,
produces with terrestrial humour mixed
here in the dark so many precious things. milton.
remote from men with god he pass'd his days,
pray’r all his bus'ness, all his pleasure, praise. parnel.
in quiet shades, content with rural sports, -
give me a life, remote from guilty courts. granville.
4. foreign.
5. distant; not closely conneeted.
an unadvised transiliency from the effect to the remotes?
cause. glanville.
syllogism serves not to furnish the mind with intermediate
ideas, that shew the conneetion of remote ones. docke.
6. alien ; not agreeing.
all those propositions, how remote soever from reason, are
so sacred, that men will sooner part with their lives, than
suffer themselves to doubt of them. " ' " " locke.
7. abstracted. * - , or , o
wherever the mind places itself by any thought, either
amongst, or remote from all bodies, it can, in this uniform
idea of space, no where find any bounds. locke.
rem9 tely. adv. [from remote.] not nearly; at a distan.
it is commonly opinioned, that the earth was thinly inha-
bited, at least not remately planted before the flood. 'brzoz.
two lines in mezentius and laufus are indeed remotely allied
to virgil's sense, but too like the tenderness of ovid. dryden.
how while the fainting dutch remately fire,
and the fam'd eugene's iron troops retire,
in the first front amidst a slaughter'd pile, -
high on the mound he dy'd, smith.
remoteness. m. s. [from remots.] state of being remate;
disłance; not nearness. --
the joys of heaven are like the stars, which by reason of
our remoteness appear extremely little. boyle.
titian employed brown and earthly colours upon the fore.
part, and has reserved his greater light for remotents, and the
back part of his landscapes. “ dryden.
if the greatest part of bodies escape our notice by their rol
motents, others are no less concealed by their minuteness. lock.
his obscurities generally arise from the remateness of the
customs, persons and things he alludes to. addison.
rfmotion, n.s. [from remotus, lat.] the aa of removing;
the state of being removed to distance.
all this safety were remotion, and thy defence absence. shah.
the consequent strictly taken, may be a fallacious illation,
in reference to antecedency or consequence; as to conclude
from the position of the antecedent unto the position of the
consequent, or from the remotion of the consequent to ther.
motion of the antecedent. brown’s /ulgar errours.
remo'y able, adj. [from remove..] such as may be removed.
the irish bishops have their clergy in such subjection, that
they dare not complain of them; for knowing their own in-
capacity, and that they are therefore removeable at their bishop's
will, yield what pleaseth him. spenser.
in such a chapel, such curate is removeable at the pleasure
of the rector of the mother church. ” ayliffe's parergon.
remooval. n. j. [from remove.] - *
1. the act of putting out of any place. , or... as
by which removal of one extremity with another, the
world, seeking to procure a remedy, hath purchased a rese
exchange of the evil before felt. - hooker.
2. the aet of putting away.
the removal of such a disease is not to be attempted by
active remedies, no more than a thorn in the flesh is to 54
taken away by violence. -- arbuthnot.
3. dismission from a post. -
if the removal of these persons from their posts has produced
fuch popular commotions, the continuance of them might
have produced something more fatal. addison.
whether his removal was caused by his own fears or other
men's artifices, supposing the throne to be vacant, the body
of the people was left at liberty to chuse what form of go-
vernment they pleased. ' ' ' swift.
4. the state of being removed. . .
the fitting still of a paralytick, whilst he prefers it to a
removal, is voluntary. locke.
to remotve. v. a. [removeo, lat. remuer, fr.]
1. to put from its place; to take or put away.
good god remove
the means that makes us strangers shakesp. macbeth.
he removeth away the speech of the trusty,’ and taketh
away the understanding of the aged. job xii. 20.
so would he have removed thee out of the straight into a
broad place. - job xxxvi. 16.
he longer in this paradise to dwell
permits not; to remove thee i am come,
and send thee from the garden forth to till
the ground. afikon's parad's loft.
whether he will remove his contemplation from of eiee,
to another, is many times in his choice. * eacke.
you, who fill the blissful seats above -
let kings no more with gentle mercy sway,
but every monarch be the scourge of god,
if from your thoughts ulysses you remove,” “ .
who rul’d his subjects with a father's love. pete', odosy.
2. to place at a distance. 22 -
they are farther removed from a title to be innate, and the
doubt of their being native impressions on the mind, is stronger
against these moral principles than the other. * * zacie,
to rf mo'y e. v. n. * , i. 1 -
1. to change place. e - " -
2. to go from one place to another. or -, -
a short exile must for show precede; o:: * ~ *
the term expir'd, from candia they remove,
and happy each at home enjoys his love. drydon.
how oft from pomp and state did i rers we ... -
to feed despair ' ' ' ' ' ''''' - prizr.
rexfoove.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e m
r e n
*
* -
remove. m. f. [from the verb.]
1. chango of place. - - - - . . - +.
- to heare, from out the high-hair'd oake of jove,
counsaile from him, for means to his remove
to his lov'd country.
2. susceptibility of being removed. not in use.
what is early received in any confiderable strength of im-
press, grows into our tender natures; and therefore is of diffi-
cult remote- glanville's scepsis.
translation of one to the place of another.
3. rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear;
hold, take you this, my sweet, and give me thine,
so shall biron take me for rosaline:
and change your favours too; so shall your loves
woo contrary deceiv'd by these removes.
4. state of being removed. - &gt;
this place should be both school and university, not need-
ing a remove to any other house of scholarship. milton.
he that considers how little our constitution can bear a
remove into parts of this air, not much higher than that we
breathe in, will be satisfied, that the allwise architect has
suited our organs, and the bodies that are to affect them, one
chapman.
shakesp.
to another. locke.
5. act of moving a chesman or draught.
6. departure; act of going away.
so look’d astrea, her remove design'd,
on those distressed fiends she left behind. waller.
7. the aa of changing place.
let him, upon his removes from one place to another, pro-
cure retommendation to some person of quality residing in
the place whither he removeth. bacon's essays.
8. a step in the scale of gradation.
in all the visible corporeal world, quite down from us, the
descent is by easy steps, and a continued series of things, that
in each remove differ very little one from the other. locke.
a freeholder is but one remove from a legislator, and ought
to stand up in the defence of those laws. addison.
9. a small distance.
the fiercest contentions of men are between creatures equal
in nature, and capable, by the greatest distinction of circum-
stances, of but a very small remove one from another. rogers.
io. aet of putting a horse's shoes upon different feet.
his horse wanted two removes, your horse wanted nails. sw.
11. a dish to be changed while the rest of the course remains.
removed. particip, adj. [from remove..] remote ; separate
from others. -
your accent is something finer, than you could purchase in
so removed a dwelling. . shakesp. a rou like it.
removed ness. m. s. [from removed.] the state of being
removed; remoteness. -
i have eyes under my service, which look upon his re-
movedness. shakespeare.
remo’ve r. n. s. [from remove..] one that removes. -
the mislayer of a meritone is to blame ; but the unjust
judge is the capital remover of landmarks, when he defineth
amiss. bacon.
hasty fortune maketh an enterpriser and remover, but the
exercised fortune maketh the able man. bacon.
t, re mou'nt. v. n. [remonter, fr.] to mount again.
stout cymon soon remounts, and cleft in two
his rival's head. dryden.
the rest remounts with the ascending vapours, or is washed
down into rivers, and transmitted into the sea. j/02award.
rexru's erable. adj. [from remunerate.] rewardable.
* remu nerate. v. a. [remunero, lat. remune, er, fr.]
to reward; to repay 5 to requite ; to recompense.
is she not then beholden to the man,
that brought her for this high good turn so far?
yes; and will nobly reminerate. shakesp. titus andron.
money the king thought not fit to demand, because he had
received satisfaction in matters of so great importance; and
because he could not remunerate them with any general par-
don, being prevented therein by the coronation pardon. bacon.
in another parable he represents the great condescentions,
wherewith the lord shall remunerate the faithful servant. boyle.
remunera'tion. m. s. [remuneration, fr. remuneratio, lat.]
reward; requital; recompense ; repayment:
bear this fignificant to the country maid, jaquenetta; there
is remuneration; for the best ward of mine honour is reward-
ing my dependants. shakesp. love's labour loft.
he begets a security of himself, and a careless eye on the
last remunerations. brown's vulgar erraurs.
a collation is a donation of some vacant benefice in the
church, especially when such donation is freely beflowed
without any prospect of an evil remuneration. . . . . a}liff.
rerio's era+ ove. adj. [from remunerate.] exercised in giving
rewards. -
the knowledge of particular agions seems requisite to the
attainment of that great end of god, in the manifestation of
his punitive and remunerative justice. boyle.
t, remu r muz. v. a. [re and murmur.] to utter back in
murmurs; to repeat in low hoarse sounds.
her fate is whisper'd by the gentle breeze,
and told in fighs to all the trembling trees;
the trembling trees, in ev'ry plain and wood,
her fate rentornur to the silver flood. - pote:
to remu'rm ur. v. n. [remarnaro, lat.] to murmur back;
to echo a low hoarse sound.
- her fellow nymphs the mountains tear
with loud laments, and break the yielding air;
the realms of mars remurmur'd all around,
and echoes to th' athenian shoars rebound. dryden.
his untimely fate, th’ angitian woods
in fighs remurmur'd to the fucine floods. dryden,
roo. * / [renard, a fox, fr.] the name of a fix in
a dic.
before the break of day,
benard through the hedge had made his way. dryden.
rena'scent: adj. [renascens, lat..] produced again, rising
again into being. c
rena scible. adj. [renasor, lat.] posfible to be produced
again.
to renavigate. v. a. [re and navigate.] to sail again.
rencou'n ter. m. s. [rencentre, fr.]
1. clash; collision.
you may as well expect two bowls should grow sensible by
rubbing, as that the rentounter of any bodies should awaken
them into perception. collier.
2. personal opposition. -
virgil's friends thought fit to alter a line in venus's speech,
that has a relation to the rencounter. addison.
so when the trumpet sounding gives the fign,
the justling chiefs in rude rentounier join:
so meet, and so renew the dextrous fight;
their clattering arms with the fierce shock resound. gran.
. loose or casual engagement.
the confederates should turn to their advantage their appa-
rent odds in men and horse; and by that means out-number
the enemy in all rencounters and engagements. addison.
4. sudden combat without premeditation.
to rencogont er. v. n. [rencontrer, fr.]
1. to clash; to collide.
2. to meet an enemy unexpe&amp;tedly.
3. to skirmish with another.
4. to fight hand to hand.
to rend. v. a. pret. and part, pass rent. [nenban, saxon.]
to tear with violence; to lacerate.
will you hence
before the tag return, whose rage doth rend
like interrupted waters, and o'erbear
what they are used to bear 2 shakesp. coriolanur.
he rent a lion as he would have rent a kid, and he had no-
thing in his hand. jud. xiv. 4.
i will not rend away all the kingdom, but give one tribe to
thy son. i kings xi. 13.
by the thund’rer's stroke it from th’ root is rent,
sosure the blows, which from high heaven are sent. cowley.
what you command me to relate,
renews the sad remembrance of our fate,
an empire from its old foundations rent. dryden,
look round to see
the lurking gold upon the fatal tree;
then rend it off. dryden's aeneit;
is it not as much reason to say, when any monarchy was
shattered to pieces, and divided amongst revolted subjects,
that god was careful to preserve monarchical power, by
rending a settled empire into a multitude of little govern-
in ents. - locke.
when its way th’ impetuous passion found, -
i rend my tresses, and my breast i wound. pope.
render. m.s.. [from rend..] one that rends; a tearer.
to render. v. a. [rendre, fr.]
1. to return; to pay back.
they that render evil for good are adversaries. ps. xxxviii.
will ye render me a recompense 2 joel iii. 4.
let him look into the future state of bliss or misery, and
see there god, the lighteous judge, ready to render every man
according to his deeds. - locke.
2. to restore; to give back: commonly with the adverb
back.
hither the seas at stated times resort,
and shove the loaden vessels into port;
then with a gentle ebb retire again,
and render back their cargo to the main.
3. to give upon demand. -
the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than seven men
that can render a reason. proverbs xxvi. 16.
saint augustine renders another reason, for which the a-
posłles observed some legal rites and ceremonies for a time.
- white.
addison.
4. to invest with qualities; to make.
because the nature of man carries him out to agtion, it is
no wonder if the same nature renders him solicitous about the
issue. sauth's sermons.
4. loyz<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. n
r. e. n.
love
can answer love, and render bliss secure. thomson.
5. to represent; to exhibi; -
i heard him speak of that same brother,
and he did render him the most unnatural
that liv'd 'mongst men. shakespeare.
6. to translate.
ronor it in the english a circle; but 'tis more truly ren-
dred a sphere. burnet's theory of the earth.
he has a clearer idea of strigil and fistrum, a curry-comb
and cymbal, which are the english names dictionaries render
them by. locke.
he uses a prudent disfimulation; the word we may almost
literally render master of a great presence of mind. broome.
7. to surrender; to yield; to give up.
i will call him to so strict account,
that he shall render every glory up,
or i will tear the reck'ning from his heart. shakesp.
my rend'ring my person to them, may engage their affec-
tions to me. king charles.
one, with whom he used to advise, proposed to him to
render himself upon conditions to the earl of essex. clarendon.
would he render up hermione, -
and keep astyanax, i should be blest a. philips.
8. to afford; to give to be used. -
logick renders its daily service to wisdom and virtue. watts.
re'nder. m. s. [from the verb.] surrender.
newness
of cloten's death, we being not known, nor muster'd
among the bands, may drive us to a render. soakspeare.
rendezvou's. n.s. [rendezvous, fr.]
1. assembly; meeting appointed.
2. a sign that draws men together.
the philosophers-stone and a holy war are but the rendez.
vous of cracked brains, that wear their feather in their head
instead of their hat. bacon.
3. place appointed for assembly.
a commander of many ships should rather keep his fleet
together, than have it severed far asunder; for the attendance
of meeting them again at the next rendezvous would consume
time and victual. raleigh's apology.
the king appointed his whole army to be drawn together
to a rendezvous at marlborough. clarendon.
this was the general rendezvous which they all got to,
and, mingling more and more with that oily liquor, they
sucked it all up, burnet's theory of the earth.
to rendezvou's. v. n. [from the noun..] to meet at a place
appointed. -
roo. n. s. [from render.] surrendering; the aet of
yie ing.
#. {". s. [renegade, spanish ; renegat, fr.]
1. one that apostatises from the faith; an apostate.
there lived a french renegado in the same place, where
the castilian and his wife were kept prisoners. addison.
2. one who deserts to the enemy ; a revolter.
some straggling soldiers might prove renegadoes, but they
would not revolt in troops. decay of piety.
if the roman government subsisted now, they would have
had renegade seamen and shipwrights enough. arbuthnot.
to rene’ge. v. a. [renego, lat. remier, fr.] to disown.
his captain's heart,
which, in the scuffles of great fights, hath burst
the buckles on his breaft, reneges all temper. shakesp.
such smiling rogues as these sooth every passion,
renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
with every gale and vary of their masters. shakespeare.
the design of this war is to make me renege my conscience
and thy truth. king charles,
t, rene. w. v. a. [re and new; renovo, lat.]
1. to renovate; to restore to the former state.
in such a night
medea gather'd the enchanted herbs,
that did renew old hoson. shakesp. merch, of venice.
let us go to gigal, and renew the kingdom there, 1 sam.
the eagle casts its bill, but renews his age. holyday,
renew'd to life, that she might daily die,
i daily doom'd to follow. dryden's theo. and honor.
2. to repeat; to put again in act.
thy fan, ous grandfather
doth live again in thee; long may’st thou live,
to bear his image, and renew his glories' shakespeare.
the body percussed hath, by reason of the percussion,
a trepidation wrought in the minute parts, and so reneweth
the percussion of the air. bacon's natural history.
the bearded corn ensu’d
from earth unask'd, nor was that earth renew'd.
3. to begin again.
the last great age, foretold by sacred rhymes,
fenews its finish’d course, saturisian times
rowl round again. dryden's wirgil's pastorals.
4. in theology, to make anew ; to transform to new life.
dryden.
it is impossible for those that were once enlightened—if
they shall fall away to renew them again unto repentance.
- hebrews vi. 6.
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye
may prove what is that perfect will of god. ram-xii. 2.
rene wagle. adj. [from renew.] capable to be renewed.
the old custom upon many estates is to let for leases of
lives, renewable at pleasure. swift's miscellanies.
rene wal. n.s.. [from renew.] the act of renewing ; reno-
watson.
it behoved the deity, persisting in the purpose of mercy to
mankind, to renew that revelation from time to time, and to
rectify abuses, with such authority for the renewal and redi-
fication, as was sufficient evidence of the truth of what was
revealed. forbes.
re'n1t ency. m. s. [from renitent.] the resistance in solid
bodies, when they press upon, or are impelled one against
another, or the resistance that a body makes on account of
weight. &amp;uincy.
renatent. adj [renitens, lat..] a&amp;ing against any im-
pulse by elastick power.
by an inflation of the muscles, they become soft, and yet
renitent, like so many pillows dislipating the force of the
pressure, and so taking away the sense of pain. ray.
re'nnet. n.s. see runnet.
a putredinous ferment coagulates all humours, as milk with
rennet is turned. flyer on the humours,
re'nnet. . . m. s [properly reinette, a little queen.] a kind
r eneting. § of apple.
a golden rennet is a very pleasant and fair fruit, of a yel-
low flush, and the best of bearers for all sorts of soil; of
which there are two sorts, the large sort and the small. mort.
ripe pulpy apples, as pippins and renuetings, are of a
syrupy tenacious nature. mortimer's husbandry.
to re/novate. v. a. [renovo, lat.] to renew ; to restore
to the first state.
all nature feels the renovating force
of winter, only to the thoughtless eye
in ruin seen. thomson's jointer.
renow at ion. m. s. [renovation, fr. renovatio, lat...] renewal;
the act of renewing; the state of being renewed.
sound continueth some small time, which is a renovation,
and not a continuance ; for the body percussed hath a trepi-
dation wrought in the minute parts, and so reneweth the per-
cussion of the air. bacon's natural history.
the kings entered into speech of renewing the treaty;
the king saying, that though king philip's person were the
same, yet his fortunes were raised ; in which case a renovation
of treaty was used. bacon's henry vii.
to second life,
wak’d in the renovation of the just,
resigns him up, with heav'n and earth renew'd. milton,
to renou’nce. v. a. [renoncer, fr. renuncio, lat.]
1. to disown ; to abnegate. -
from thebes my birth i own ; and no disgrace
can force me to renounce the honour of my race.
2. to quit upon oath.
- this world i do renounce; and in your fights
shake patiently my great affliction off. shakesp. king lear.
pride and passion, and the opinions of the world, must not
be our counsellors; for we renounced them at our baptism.
kettlewell.
to re nou'nce. v. m. to declare renunciation. the follow-
ing passage is a mere gallicism: renoncer a mon sang.
on this firm principle i ever stood;
he of my sons, who fails to make it good,
by one rebellious act renounces to my blood. dryden.
renou'ncemen r. n.s. [from renounce..] act of renouncing;
renunciation.
i hold you as a thing enskied and sainted ;
by your renouncement, an immortal spirit,
renown. m. s. [renommee, fr.]
widely spread.
dryden.
shakesp.
fame; celebrity; praise
she
is daughter to this famous duke of milan,
of whom so often i have heard renown. shakespeare,
'tis of more renown *
to make a river, than to build a town. js’aller.
nor envy we
thy great renown, nor grudge thy victory. dryden.
to renown. v. a. [renommer, fr. from the noun..] to
make famous.
let us satisfy our eyes
with the memorials and the things of fame,
that do renown this city. shakesp. twelfth night.
soft elocution does thy style renown,
gentle or sharp according to thy choice,
to laugh at follies, or to lash at vice. dryden.
in solemn silence stand -
stern tyrants, whom their cruelties renown,
and emperors in parian marble flown. addison.
a bard, whom pilfer'd pastorals renown. poze.
re noow ned.
o
0
.
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e p
r e p
the
he ot
+
renowned, particip. adj. [from renown.] famous; cele-
brated; eminent 5 famed.
these were the renowned of the congregation, princes of
the tribes, heads of thousands. num. i. 16.
that thrice renowned and learned french king, finding pe-
trarch's tomb without any inscription, wrote one himself;
saying, shame it was, that he who sung his mistress's praise
seven years before her death, should twelve years want an
epitaph. peacham on poetry.
the rest were long to tell, though far renown'd. milton.
of all the cities in romanian lands,
the chief and most renown'd ravenna stands,
adorn'd in ancient times with arms and arts. dryden.
ilva
an isle renown'd for steel and unexhausted mines. dryden.
rent. n. s. [from rend..] a break; a laceration.
this council made a schism and rent from the most an-
cient and purest churches which lived before them. white.
thou viper
hast cancell'd kindred, made a rent in nature,
and through her holy bowels gnaw'd thy way,
through thy own blood to empire. dryden.
he who sees this vast rent in so high a rock, how the con-
vex parts of one side exactly tally with the concave of the
other, must be satisfied, that it was the effect of an earth-
quake. addison's remarks on italy.
7, rent. v. a. [rather to rend..] to tear; to lacerate.
a time to rent, and a time to sew. ecclus, iii. 7.
12 rent. v. n. [now written rant..] to roar; to bluster:
we fill say, a tearing fellow, for a noisy bully.
he ventur'd to dismiss his fear,
that partings wont to rent and tear,
and give the desperatest attack
to danger still behind its back.
rent. n.f. [rente, fr.]
1. revenue; annual payment.
idol ceremony,
what are thy rents p what are thy comings in
o ceremony shew me but thy worth ! shakesp. hen. v.
i bought an annual rent or two, -
and live just as you see i do. pope's epiff. of horace.
2. money paid for anything held of another.
| such is the mould, that the blest tenant feeds
hudibras.
on precious fruits, and pays his rent in weeds, waller.
folks in mudwall tenement, -
present a peppercorn for rent, prior.
te rent. v. a. [renter, fr.]
* to hold by paying rent.
when a servant is called before his master, it is often to
know, whether he passed by such a ground, if the old man,
who rents it, is in good health. addison's spedator.
2. to set to a tenant.
re'ntable. adj. [from rent.] that may be rented.
re'n'ral. n.s.. [from rent.] schedule or account of rents.
re’nter. m. s. [from rent.] he that holds by paying rent.
the estate will not be let for one penny more or less to the
renter, amongst whomsoever the rent he pays be divided. locke.
ren versed. adj. [renverse, fr.] overturned. spenser.
renu.nciation. n.s. [renunciatio, from renuncio, lat.] the
act of renouncing.
he that loves riches, can hardly believe the doctrine of
overty and renunciation of the world. taylor.
to reordatn. v. a. [reordiner, fr. re and ordain..] to
ordain again, on supposition of some descoł in the commission
granted to a minister. - - - - -
reordis ation. m. s. [from reordain.] repetition of ordi-
inatsos).
he proceeded in his ministry without expe&amp;ing any new
mission, and never thought himself obliged to a reordination.
atterbury.
73 repa'cify. v. a. [re and pacify.]. to pacify again.
henry, who next commands the state,
seeks to repacify the people's hate.
repai'd. part. of repay.
te repair. v. a. [reparo, lat. reparer, fr.]
1. to restore after injury or dilapidation. -
let the priests repair the breaches of the house. 2 kings.
the fines imposed were the more repined against, because
they were assigned to the rebuilding and repairing of st.
daniel.
paul's church. clarendon.
heav'n soon repair'd her mural breach, milton.
2. to amend any injury by an equivalent.
he justly hath driv'n out his rebel foes
to deepest hell; and to repair their loss ...
created this new happy race of men. . milton's par, loft.
3. to fill up anew, by something put in the place of what is
lost.
to be reveng’d, -
and to repair his numbers thus impair'd. milton.
repasir. n.s.. [from the verb.] reparation; supply of loss;
restoration after dilapidation.
vol. ii.
before the curing of a strong disease,
ev’n in the instant of repair and health,
the fit is strongest. shakespeare's king lear.
he cast in his mind for the repair of the cathedral church.
fell.
temperance, in all methods of curing the gout, is a re-
gular and fimple diet, proportioning the daily repairs to the
daily decays of our wasting bodies. temple's miscellanies.
all automata need a frequent repair of new strength, the
causes whence their motion does proceed, being subject to
fail. wilkins's mathematical agick.
to repai'r. v. n. [repairer, fr.] to go to; to betake himself.
may all to athens back again repair. shakespeare.
depart from hence in peace,
search the wide world, and where you please repair. dryd.
'tis fix’d; th’ irrevocable doom of jove:
haste then, cyllenius, through the liquid air,
go mount the winds, and to the shades repair.
repair. m. s. [repaire, fr. from the verb.]
1. resort ; abode.
he saw ulysses; at his ships repaire,
that had been brusht with the enraged aire.
so 'scapes th’ insulting fire his narrow jail,
and makes small outlets into open air;
there the fierce winds his tender force assail,
and beat him downward to his first repair.
2. act of betaking himself any whither.
the king sent a proclamation for their repair to their
houses, and for a preservation of the peace. clarendon.
repairer, n. s. [from repair.] amender; restorer.
he that governs well, leads the blind, but he that teaches,
gives him eyes; and it is a glorious thing to have been the
repairer of a decayed intelle&amp;. south’s sermont.
o sacred rest |
q peace of mind i repairer of decay,
whose balms renew the limbs to labours of the day. dryd.
repa(ndous. adj. [repandus, lat.] - bent upwards.
though they be drawn repandous or convexedly crooked in
one piece, yet the dolphin that carrieth arion is concavously
inverted, and hath its spine depressed in another. brown.
re parable. adj. [reparable, fr. reparabilis, lat..] capable
of being amended, retrieved, or supplied by something
equivalent.
the parts in man's body easily reparable, as spirits, blood
and flesh, die in the embracement of the parts hardly repa-
rable, as bones, nerves and membranes. bacon.
when its spirit is drawn from wine, it will not, by the
re-union of its constituent liquors, be reduced to its pri-
stine nature; because the workmanship of nature, in the dif-
position of the parts, was too elaborate to be imitable, or re-
parable by the bare apposition of those divided parts to each
other. boyle.
an adulterous person is tied to restitution of the injury, so
far as it is reparable, and can be made to the wronged person;
to make provision for the children begotten in unlawful em-
braces. taylor's rule of living holy.
re'parably. adv. [from reparable.] in a manner capable of
remedy by restoration, amendment or supply.
reparation. n.s. [reparation, fr. reparatio, from reparo, lat.]
1. the act of repairing; instauration.
antonius philosophus took care of the reparation of the
highways. arbuthnot on coins.
2. supply of what is wasted.
when the organs of sense want their due repose and neces.
sary reparations, the soul exerts herself in her several faculties.
addison.
in this moveable body, the fluid and solid parts must be
consumed ; and both demand a constant reparation. arbuthnot.
3. recompense for any injury; amends.
the king should be able, when he had cleared himself, to
make him reparation. bacon,
i am sensible of the scandal i have given by my loose wri-
tings, and make what reparation i am able. dryden.
repa(rative. m. s. [from repair.] whatever makes amends
for loss or injury.
new preparatives were in hand, and partly reparatives of
the former beaten at sea. wotton's buckingham.
suits are unlawfully entered, when they are vindictive,
not reparative; and begun only for revenge, not for repa-
ration of damages. kettlewell.
repartee'. n.s. [repartie, fr.] smart reply.
the fools overflowed with smart repartees, and were only
distinguished from the intended wits, by being called cox-
combs. dryden's dufresnoy.
cupid was as bad as he ;
hear but the youngster's repartee.
to repartre'. v. n. to make smart replies.
high flights she had, and wit at will,
and so her tongue lay seldom still ;
for in all visits who but she,
to argue, or to repartee? - prior,
21 r to
pope.
chapman,
dryden.
prior.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. p
r. e. p
to repa'ss. v. a. [repasser, fr.] to pass again; to pass or
travel back.
well we have pass'd, and now repas'd the seas,
and brought desir'd help. shakesp. henry vi.
we shall find small reason to think, that abraham passed
and repassed those ways more often than he was enforced so to
do, if we consider that he had no other comforter in this wea-
risome journey, than the strength of his faith in god. ral.
if his soul hath wing'd the destin'd flight,
homeward with pious speed repas, the main,
to the pale shade funereal rites ordain.
to repa'ss. v. n. to go back in a road.
five girdles bind the skies, the torrid zone
glows with the passing and repassing sun.
repa'st. n.s. [repas, fr. re and posius, lat.]
1. a meal; act of taking food.
from dance to sweet repast they turn
desirous; all in circles as they stood,
tables are set. milton's paradise loft.
what neat repas' shall feast us, light and choice,
dryden.
of attick taste, with wine. milton.
sleep, that is thy best repost,
* yet of death it bears a taste, }
and both are the same thing at last. denham.
the day
had summon'd him to due repas' at noon.
keep regular hours for repast and sleep.
2. food ; victuals.
- go, and get me some repas';
i care not what, so it be wholsome food. shakesp.
to repa's r. v. a. [repaisire, fr. from the noun..] to feed;
to feast.
to his good friends i’ll ope my arm,
and, like the kind life rend'ring pelican,
repas them with my blood. shakespeare.
repa's ture. m. s. [re and pas'ure.] entertainment. not in
use.
dryden.
arbuthnot.
he from forage will incline to play;
but if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then
food for his rage, repasture for his den. shakespeare.
to repay. v. a. [repayer, fr. re and pay.]
1. to pay back in return, in requital, or in revenge.
according to their deeds he will repay recompense to his
enemies ; to the islands he will repoy recompense. is lix. 18.
2. to recompense.
he clad
their nakedness with skins of beasts; or slain,
or as the snake with youthful coat repaid.
3. to compensate.
the false honour, which he had so long enjoyed, was
milton.
plentifully repaid in contempt. bacon.
... 4. to requite either good or ill.
the poorest service is repaid with thanks. shaos?.
fav'ring heav'n repaid my glorious toils
with a fack'd palace and barbarick spoils. pope.
i have fought well for persia, and repaid
the benefit of birth with honest service. rowe.
5. to reimburse with what is owed.
if you repay me not on such a day,
such sums as are express'd in the condition,
let the forfeit be an equal pound of your fair flesh. shak.
repa'yment. n.s.. [from repay.]
1. the act of repaying.
2. the thing repaid. -
the centesima usura it was not lawful to exceed; and what
was paid over it, was reckoned as a repayment of part of the
principal. arbuthnot on coins,
t, repea'l. v. a. [rappeller, fr.]
1. to recall. out of use.
i will repeal thee, or be well assur’d,
adventure to be banished myself.
i here forget all former griefs;
cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again.
2. to abrogate; to revoke.
laws, that have been approved, may be again repealed, and
shakesp. henry vi.
shakesp.
disputed against by the authors themselves. hooker's prof.
adam soon repeal’d
the doubts that in his heart arose. milton's par. loft.
statutes are silently repealed, when the reason ceases for
which they were enaeted. dryden's preface to fables.
repea’l. n.s. [from the verb.]
1. recal from exile. not in use.
- if the time thrust forth
a cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
o'er the vast world to seek a single man.
2. revocation; abrogation.
the king being advertised, that the over-large grants of
lands and liberties made the lords so insolent, did absolutely
resume all such grants; but the earl of desmond above all
found himself grieved with this resumption or repeal of liber-
ties, and declared his dislike. davies on ireland.
shakesp.
pope's odyssey. -
if the presbyterians should obtain their ends, i could not
e sorry to find them mistaken in the point which they have
most at heart, by the repeal of the test; i mean the benefit
of employments. swift's presbyterian pea.
to repeat. v. a. [repeto, lat. rapeter, fr.]
1. to iterate; to use again ; to do again.
he, though his power
creation could repeat, yet would be loth
us to abolish. milton.
where sudden alterations are not necessary, the same effect
may be obtained by the repeated force of diet with more safety
to the body. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. to speak again.
the psalms, for the excellency of their use, deserve to be
oftner repeated; but that their multitude permitteth not any
oftner repetition. hooker.
3. to §. again. -
eglecting for creusa's life his own,
repeat; the danger of the burning town. waller.
beyond this place you can have no retreat,
stay here, and i the danger will repeat. dryden.
4. to recite; to rehearse.
these evils thou repeat's upon thyself, -
have banish'd me from scotland. shakesp. macbeth.
thou their natures know'st, and gav'st them names,
needless to thee repeated. milton.
he repeated some lines of virgil, suitable to the occasion.
- - waller's life.
repeatedly. adv. [from repeated.]. over and over; more
than once.
and are not these vices, which lead into damnation, re-
featedly, and most forcibly cautioned against stephens.
repeater. m. s. [from repeat.]
1. one that repeats; one that recites.
2. a watch that strikes the hours at will by compression of a
spring. -
to repe'l, v. a. [repello, lat. i
1. to drive back anything.
neither doth tertullian bewray this weakness in striking
only, but also in repelling their strokes with whom he con:
tendeth. hooker.
with hills of slain on ev'ry fide,
hippomedon repell'd the hostile tide. pope.
2. to drive back an affailant.
stand fast; and all temptation to transgress repel. milt.
repel the tuscan foes, their city seize,
protect the latians in luxurious ease. dryden's zntis.
your foes are such, as they, not you, have made,
and virtue may repel, though not invade. dryden.
to repe’l. v. m.
1. to act with force contrary to force impressed.
from the same repelling power it seems to be, that flies
walk upon the water without wetting their feet. newton.
2. in physick, to repel in medicine, is to prevent such an afflux
of a fluid to any particular part, as would raise it into a
tumour. - 3uincy.
repe'llent. m. s. [repellens, lat.] an application that has
a repelling power.
in the cure of an erysipelas, whilst the body abounds with
bilious humours, there is no admitting of refellents, and by
discutients you will encrease the heat. //seman.
repe'll er... n.s...[from repel.] one that repels.
to repent. v. n. [repentir, fr.]
1. to think on any thing past with sorrow.
nor had i any reservations in my own soul, when i passed
that bill; nor repentings after. king charles.
upon any deviation from virtue, every rational creature so
deviating, should condemn, renounce, and be sorry for eve
such deviation; that is, repent of it. south.
first she relents:
with pity, of that pity then repents. dryden.
still you may prove the terror of your foes;
teach traitors to repent of faithless seagues. a. philips.
2. to express sorrow for something past.
poor enobarbus did before thy face repent. shakes?.
3. to change the mind from some painful motive.
god led them not through the land of the philistines, left
peradventure the people repent, when they see war and they
return. exodus xiii. 17.
4. to have such sorrow for sin, as produces amendment of life.
nineveh repented at the preaching of jonas. matt. xii. 41.
i will clear their senses dark
what may suffice, and soften stony hearts
to pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
to re pe'nt. v. a. -
1. to remember with sorrow.
if desdemona will return me my jewels, 1 will give over
my suit, and repent my unlawful solicitation. shakesp.
2. to remember with pious sorrow.
thou, like a contrite penitent
charitably warn'd of thy sins, dost refont
milton.
these
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e p
s
o
these vanities and giddinesses, lo
i shut my chamber-door; come, let us go. donne.
his late follies he would late repent. dryden.
3. [s. repentir, fr.]. it is used with the reciprocal pronoun:
i repent me, that the duke is slain. shakesp. rich. iii.
no man repented him of his wickedness; saying, what have
i done jeremiah viii. 6.
judas, when he saw that he was condemned, repented
himself. matthew xxvii. 3.
my father has repented him ere now,
or will repent him when he finds me dead. dryden.
each age sinn'd on ;
till god arose, and great in anger said,
lo! it repenteth me, that man was made. prior.
repe'ntance. m. s. [repentance, fr. from repent.]
1. sorrow for any thing past.
the first step towards a woman's humility, seems to require
a repentance of her education. law.
2. sorrow for fin, such as produces newness of life ; penitence.
ropentance so altereth a man through the mercy of god,
be he never so defiled, that it maketh him pure. whitgifte.
who by repentance is not satisfied,
is nor of heav'n nor earth ; for these are pleased;
by penitence th' eternal's wrath’s appeas'd. shakesp.
repentance is a change of mind, or a conversion from fin to
god: not some one bare act of change, but a lasting durable
... state of new life, which is called regeneration. hammond.
in regard of secret and hidden faults, unless god should
accept of a general repentance for unknown fins, few or none
at all could be saved. perkins.
this is a confidence, of all the most irrational ; for upon
what ground can a man promise himself a future repentance,
who cannot promise himself a futurity. south.
repe’nt ant. adj. [repentant, fr. from repent.]
1. sorrowful for the past.
2. sorrowful for fin. -
thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood. milton.
3. expresfing sorrow for sin. - -
after i have interr'd this noble king, o
and wet his grave with my repentant tears, -
i will with i expedient duty see you. shakesp. rich. iii.
there is no malice in this burning coal;
the breath of heav'n hath blown its spirit out, *
and strew'd repentant ashes on its head. shakesp. k. john.
relentless walls' whose darksome round contains p
repentant fighs and voluntary pains. ope.
t2 rj. o a. [re and people; repeupler, fr.] to stock
with people anew. - - *
an occurrence of such remark, as the universal flood and
the repeopling of the world, must be fresh in memory for about
eight hundred years; especially considering, that the peopling
of the world was gradual. hale's origin of mankind.
te repercu'ss. v. a. [repercutio, repercuffus, lat.] to
beat back; to drive back; to rebound. not in use.
air in ovens, though it doth boil and dilate itself, and is
repercussed, yet it is without noise. bacon.
reper cu'ssion. m. s. [from repercuss; repercussia, lat. reper-
cussion, fr.] the act of driving back; rebound.
in echoes, there is no new elision, but a repercussion. bacon.
by repercussion beams ingender fire,
shapes by refle&amp;tion shapes beget; -
the voice itself when stopp'd does back retire,
and a new voice is made . it. cowley.
they various ways recoil, and swiftly flow
by mutual repercussions to and fro.
reper cu'ssive. adj. [repercussif, fr.]
1. having the power of driving back or causing a rebound. -
and repercussive rocks renew'd the sound. pattison.
2. repellent.
blackmore.
blood is stanched by astringent and repercussive medicines.
bacon's natural history.
defluxions, if you apply a strong repercussive to the place
affected, and do not take away the cause, will shift to an-
other place. bacon.
3. driven back; rebounding. not proper.
amid carnarvon's mountains rages loud
the repercussive roar: with mighty crush
tumble the smitten cliffs. thomson.
reperti'tious, adj. [repertus, fr.] found ; gained by find-
ing- - dic7.
reopertory. n.s. [ropertoire, fr. repertorium, lat.]. a trea-
sury; a magazine; a book in which anything is to be found,
repe'ri'tion. m. s. [repetition, fr. repetitio, lat.]
1. iteration of the same thing. -
- the frequent repetition of aliment is necessary for repair-
ing the fluids and solids. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. recital of the same words over again.
the psalms, for the excellency of their use, deserve to be
oftener repeated; but that the multitude of them permitteth
not any oftner repetition. hooker.
3. the act of reciting or rehearfing.
if you conquer rome, the benefit,
which you shall thereby reap, is such a name,
whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses. shakoso,
4. recital.
i love such tears,
as fall from fit notes, beaten through mine cars,
with repetitions of what heaven hath done.
5: recital from memory, as distinct from reading.
to repi'ne. v. n. [re and pine.
1. to fret; to vex himself; to be discontented: with at or
against.
of late,
when corn was given them gratis, you repin'd. shakosh.
the fines imposed were the more repined agains, because
they were affigned to the rebuilding of st. paul’s church. clar.
if you think how many diseases, and how much poverty
there is in the world, you will fall down upon your knees,
and instead of repining at one affliction, will admire so many
blesfings received at the hand of god. temple.
2. to envy.
the ghosts repine at violated night;
and curse th’ invading sun, and sicken at the fight. dryd.
just in the gate
dwell pale diseases and repining age. dryden.
repi'ner. m. s. [from repine.] one that frets or murmurs.
to repla’ce. v. a. [replacer, fr. re and place.]
1. to put again in the former place,
the earl being apprehended, upon examination cleared
himself so well, as he was replaced in his government. bacon.
the bowls, remov’d for fear,
the youths replac'd; and soon restor'd the chear. dryden.
2. to put in a new place.
his gods put themselves under his protection, to be replaced
in their promised italy. dryden's ded. to virgil.
to replant. v. a. ireplanter, fr. re and plant..] to plant
anew.
small trees being yet unripe, covered in autumn with dung
until the spring, take up and replant in good ground. bacon.
replantation. n.s.. [from replant..] the aet of planting again.
to replait. v. a. [re and plait..] to fold one part often
over another.
in raphael's first works, are many small foldings often
replaited, which look like so many whip-cords. dryden.
to refle nish. v. a. [repleo, from re and plenus, lat. repleni,
old fr.]
i. to stock; to fill.
multiply and replenish the earth. gen. i. 28.
the woods replenished with deer, and the plains with fowl.
- heylyn,
chapman.
the waters
with fish replenish'd, and the air with fowl. milton,
2. to finish; to consummate ; to complete. not proper, nor
in use.
we smother'd
the most replenished sweet work of nature,
that from the prime creation e'er she fram’d. shakesp.
to reple'nish. v. n. to recover the former fulness. not
in use.
the humours in men's bodies encrease and decrease as the
moon doth ; and therefore purge some day after the full; for
then the humours will not replenish so soon. bacon.
replete. adj. [replet, fr. repletus, lat.] full; completely
filled; filled to exuberance.
the world's large tongue
proclaims you for a man replete with mocks;
full of comparisons and wounding flouts. shakespeare.
this mordication, if in over high a degree, is little better
than the corrosion of poison; as sometimes in antimony, if
given to bodies not replete with humours; for where humours
abound, the humours save the parts. bacon's nat. hist.
his words, replete with guile,
into her heart too easy entrance won. milton.
in a dog, out of whose eye being wounded the aqueous
humour did copiously flow, yet in six hours the bulb of the
eye was again replete with its humour, without the applica-
tion of any medicines. ." ray on the creation.
repletion. n.s. [repletion, fr.] the state of being overfull.
the tree had too much repletion, and was oppressed with
its own sap ; for repletion is an enemy to generation. bacon.
all dreams
are from repletion and complexion bred;
from rising fumes of undigested food. dryden.
thirst and hunger may be satisfy'd;
but this repletion is to love deny'd. dryden.
the action of the stomach is totally stopped by too great
repletion. arbuthnot on aliments.
reple'viable. adj. [replegiabilis, barbarous latin.] what
may be replevined.
to reple'vin. r. v. a. spenser. [replagio, low lat. of re and
to reple'vy. { plevir or plagir, fr. to give a pledge.] to
take back or set at liberty, upon security, anything **i.
- af<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. p
r e p
that you're a beast, and turn'd to grass,
is no strange news, nor ever was ;
at least to me, who once, you know,
did from the pound replevin you.
replication. m. s. [replico, lat.]
1. rebound; repercussion. not in use.
tyber trembled underneath his banks,
to hear the replication of your sounds,
made in his concave shores. shakesp. julius caesar.
a. reply; answer. - - -
to be demanded of a spunge, what replication should be
made by the son of a king shakesp. hamlet.
this is a replication to what menelaus had before offered,
concerning the transplantation of ulysses to sparta. broome.
t, reply”. v. n. [repliquer, fr.] to answer; to make a
return to an answer. -
oman who art thou that replies against god? rom. ix.
would we ascend higher to the rest of these lewd persons,
we should find what reason castalio's painter had to reply upon
the cardinal, who blamed him for putting a little too much co-
lour into st. peter and paul’s faces: that it was true in their
life-time they were pale mortified men, but that since they
were grown ruddy, by blushing at the fins of their succes-
fors. atterbury's sermons.
to reply", v. a. to return for an answer.
perplex’d
the tempter stood, nor had what to reply.
his trembling tongue invok'd his bride;
with his last voice eurydice he cry'd:
eurydice the rocks and river-banks reply'd, dryden:
reply'. n.s. [replique, fr.] answer; return to an answer.
but now return,
and with their faint reply this answer join. shakespeare.
if i sent him word, it was not well cut; he would send
me word, he cut it to please himself: if again, it was not
well cut, this is called the reply churlish. shakespeare.
one rises up to make replies to establish or confute what has
hudibras,
milton,
been offered on each side of the question. , watts.
to whom with sighs, ulysses gave reply;
ah, why ill-suiting pastime must i try pope.
reply'er. n.s.. [from reply..] he that answers; he that makes
a return to an answer.
at an act of the commencement, the answerer gave for
his question, that an aristocracy was better than a monarchy:
the replyer did tax him, that, being a private bred man, he
would give a question of state: the answerer said, that the
replyer did much wrong the privilege of scholars, who would
be much streightened if they should give questions of nothing,
but such things wherein they are practised ; and added we
have heard yourself dispute of virtue, which no man will say
you put much in pracice. bacon's apophthegms.
to rep o'lish. v. a. [ropolir, fr. re and polish.] to polish
39(3.111,
§ a sundred clock is piecemeal laid
not to be lost, but by the maker's hand
repolish'd, without error then to stand.
t, repo'rt. v. a. [rapporter, fr.]
1. to noise by popular rumour.
is it upon record? or else reported successively from age to
age 2 shakesp. richard iii.
donne,
it is reported,
that good duke humphry traiterously is murther'd. shak.
report, say they, and we will report it. jer. xx.1o.
2. to give repute.
timotheus was well reported of by the brethren. aft/s xvi.
a widow well reported of for good works. 1 tin. v. io.
to give an account of.
there is a king in judah; and now shall it be reported to
the king. neh. vi. 7.
4. to return ; to rebound ; to give back.
in ticinum is a church with windows only from above,
that reporteth the voice thirteen times, if you stand by the
close end wall over against the door. bacon.
repo"rt. n.s.. [from the noun.]
1. rumour; popular fame.
2. repute; publick character.
my body's mark'd
with roman swords; and my report was once
first with the best of note. shakesp. cymbeline.
in all approving ourselves as the ministers of god, by ho-
nour and dishonour, by evil report and good report. 2 cor. iv.
3. account returned.
sea nymphs enter with the swelling tide;
from thetis sent as spies to make report,
and tell the wonders of her sov’reign's court.
4. account given by lawyers of cases.
after a man has studied the general principles of the law,
reading the reports of adjudged cases, will richly improve his
mind. watts on the mind.
5. sound; loud noise; repercussion.
the stronger species drowneth the lesser; the report of an
ordnance, the voice. bacon's natural history.
waller.
the lashing billows make a long report,
and beat her sides. dryden's cyx and aly.
repo’ater. m. s. [from report.) relater; one that gives on
2ccount,
there she appear'd 3 or my reporter devis'd well for her.
shakoff. 4ntony and cleopatra.
rumours were raised of great discord among the nobility;
for this cause the lords assembled, gave order to appreheft
the reporters of these surmises. hayward.
if i had known a thing they concealed, i should never be
the reporter of it. pope.
repo'rtingly, adv. [from reporting.] . by common fame.
others say thou dost deserve; and i
believe it better than reportingly. shakespeare,
reposal. n.s.. [from repose.] the aa of reposing.
dost thou think,
if i would stand against thee, would the reposal
of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee,
make thy words faith'd shakoft. king lear,
to repose. v. a. [repono, lat.]
1. to lay to rest.
rome's readiest champions, repose you here,
secure from worldly chances and mishaps;
here lurks no treason, here no envy swells. shakespeare.
have ye chos’n this place,
after the toil of battle, to repose
your wearied virtue. milton's parads: loft.
2. to place as in confidence or trust: with on or in.
i repose upon your management, what is dearest to me,
my fame. dryden's preface to ann. mirab,
that prince was conscious of his own integrity in the ser-
vice of god, and relied on this as a foundation for that trust
he reposed in him, to deliver him out of his distresses. rogers.
. to lodge ; to lay up.
pebbles, reposed in those cliffs amongst the earth, being
not so dissoluble and more bulky, are left behind.
woodward.
to reposse. v. n. [reposer, fr.]
i. to sleep; to be at rest.
within a thicket i repos'd; when round
i ruffl'd up fal'n leaves in heap; and found,
let fall from heaven, a sleep interminate.
2. to rest in confidence: with on.
and, for the ways are dangerous to pass,
i do desire thy worthy company,
upon whose faith and honour i repose.
repose. n.s. [repos, fr.]
1. sleep; rest; quiet.
merciful pow'rs!
restrain in me the cursed thoughts, that nature
gives way to in repose. shakesp. macbeth.
th’ hour
of night, and of all things now retir'd to rest,
mind us of like repose. milton's paradis, loft.
i all the livelong day
consume in meditation deep, recluse
from human converse; nor at shut of eve
enjoy repose.
2. cause of rest.
after great lights must be great shadows, which we call
repose: ; because in reality the fight would be tired, if attracted
by a continuity of glittering objects. dryden's dufresnoy.
repo's edness. n. s. [from reposed.] state of being at rest.
to reposite. v. a. [reposius, lat.] to lay up; to lodge
as in a place of safety.
others reposite their young in holes, and secure themselves
also therein, because such security is wanting, their lives
being sought. derham's physico-theology.
reposition. n. s. [from reposite.] the act of replacing.
being satisfied in the reposition of the bone, take care to
keep it so by deligation. wiseman's surgery.
repository, n.s. [repositoire, fr. repositorium, lat..] a place
where anything is safely laid up.
the mind of man, not being capable of having many ideas
under view at once, it was necessary to have a repositary to
lay up those ideas. locke.
he can take a body to pieces, and dispose of them, to us
not without the appearance of irretrievable confusion, but
with respect to his own knowledge into the most regular and
methodical repositories. rogers's sermons.
to reposse'ss. v. a. [re and posses;..] to possess again.
how comes it now, that almost all that realm is repossessed
of them? spenser's state of ireland.
her suit is now to repoffs; those lands,
chapman.
shakespeare.
philips.
which we in justice cannot well deny. shakespeare.
nor shall my father reposes; the land,
the father's fortune never to return. pope's odyssey.
to reprehe'nd. v. a. [reprehendo, lat.]
1, to reprove; to chide. -
all as before his fight, whose presence to offend with any
the least unseemliness, we would be surely as loth as they,
who most reprehend or deride that we do. hooker.
2. - pardon<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. p.
:*
s
&gt; -
-
-
.
pardon me for reprehending thee,
for thou hast done a charitable deed.
they, like dumb statues star'd;
which, when i saw, i reprehended them ;
and ask'd the mayor, what meant this wilful silence sha,
2. to blame ; to censure.
he could not reprehend the fight, so many strew'd the
ground. chapman.
i nor advise, nor reprehend the choice
of marcley-hill.
3. to detect of fallacy. -
this colour will be reprehended or encountered, by impu-
ting to all excellencies in compositions a kind of o
aroo.
shakespeare.
philips.
4. to charge with as a fault: with of before the crime.
aristippus, being reprehended of ..". by one that was
not rich, for that he gave six crowns for a small fish, an-
swered, why, what would you have given the other said,
some twelve pence: aristippus said again, and six crowns is
no more with me. bacon's apophthegms.
reprehe'nder. m. s. [from reprehend..] blamer; censurer.
these fervent reprehenders of things, established by publick
authority, are always confident and bold-spirited men; but
their confidence for the most part riseth from too much credit
given to their own wits, for which cause they are seldom free
from errours. hooker.
reprehe'nsible, adj. [reprehensible, fr. reprehensus, lat.]
lameable; culpable; censurable.
reprehe'nsibleness. n. s. [from reprehensible.] blameable-
ness; culpableness.
reprehe'nsibly. adv.
culpably. -
reprehe’nsion. m. s. [reprehenso, latin.] reproof; open
blame.
to a heart fully resolute, counsel is tedious, but reprehension
is loathsome. bacon.
there is likewise due to the publick a civil reprehension of
advocates, where there appeareth cunning counsel, gross neg-
lect, and slight information. bacon's essays.
the admonitions, fraternal or paternal of his fellow chri-
stians, or the governors of the church, then more publick
reprehensions and increpations. hammond.
what effect can that man hope from his most zealous re-
prehensions, who lays himself open to recrimination. gov. of t.
reprehe’nsive. adj. [from reprehend..] given to reproof.
to represetnt. v. a. [represent, lat. representer, fr.]
s. to exhibit, as if the thing exhibited were present.
before him burn
seven lamps, as in a zodiac representing
the heav'nly fires. milton's paradis, loft.
2. to describe; to show in any particular character.
this bank is thought the greatest load on the genoese,
and the managers of it have been represented as a second kind
of senate. addison's remarks on italy.
3. to fill the place of another by a vicarious character; to
personate: as, the parliament represents the people. -
4. to exhibit to show: as the tragedy was represented very skil-
fully.
5- #how by modest arguments or narrations.
one of his cardinals admonished him against that unskilful
piece of ingenuity, by representing to him, that no reforma-
tion could be made, which would not notably diminish the
rents of the church. decay of piety.
represent ation. m. s. [representation, fr. from represent.)
1. image; likeness. -
if images are worshipped, it must be as gods, which cel-
sus denied, or as representations of god; which cannot be,
because god is invisible and incorporeal. stillingfeet.
2. act of supporting a vicarious character.
3. respectful declaration.
4. publick exhibition.
representative. adj. [representatis, fr. from represent.]
1. exhibiting a fimilitude. - - - - - - -
they relieve themselves with this distinetion, and yet own
the legal sacrifices, though representative, to be proper and
real. atterbury.
2. bearing the chara&amp;ter or power of another. -
this counsel of four hundred was chosen, one hundred
out of each tribe, and seems to have been a body representa-
tive of the people; though the people collective reserved a
share of power. swift.
represe/ntative. n.s.
1. one exhibiting the likeness of another. -
a statue of rumour whispering an idiot in the ear, who
was the representative of credulity. addison's freeholder.
2. one exercising the vicarious power given by another.
i wish the welfare of my country; and my morals and
politicks teach me to leave all that to be adjusted by our re-
presentatives above, and to divine providence. blount to pope.
3. that by which any thing is shown. -
difficulty must cumber this doctrine, which supposes that
vol. ii.
[from reprehensible.] blameably ;
the perfections of god are the reprosentative, to us, of what-
ever we perceive in the creatures. locke:
representer. m. s. (from reprosent.]
1. one who shows or exhibits.
where the real works of nature, or veritable aas of story,
are to be described, art, being but the imitator or secondary
representer, must not vary from the verity. brown.
2. one who bears a vicarious character; one who acts for an-
other by deputation.
my muse officious ventures
on the nation's representers. swift.
represe'ntment, n. j. [from represent.] image or idea
proposed, as exhibiting the likeness of something.
when it is blessed, some believe it to be the natural body
of christ; others, the blesfings of christ, his passion in re-
presentment, and his grace in real exhibition. taylor.
we have met with some, whose reals made good their
representments. brown's vulgar errours.
to repress. v. a. [repressus, lat, reprimer, fr.] to crush;
to e down; to subdue.
iscontents and ill blood having used always to repres; and
appease in person, he was loth they should find him beyond
sea. bacon's henry vii.
some, taking dangers to be the only remedy against
dangers, endeavoured to set up the sedition again, but they
were, speedily repressed, and thereby the sedition suppressed
wholly. hayward.
such kings
favour the innocent, repres; the bold,
and, while they flourish, make an age of gold.
how can i
repres; the horror of my thoughts, which fly
the sad remembrance #
thus long succeeding criticks justly reign'd,
licence repress'd, and useful laws ordain'd.
learning and rome alike in empire grew. pope:
repre'ss. n.s. [from the verb.] repression; aca of crushing.
not in use. -
loud outcries of injury, when they tend nothing to the re-
press of it, is a liberty rather assumed by rage and impatience,
than authorised by justice. government of the tongue.
repre'ssion. m. s. [from repres;..] a&amp; of repressing.
no declaration from myself could take place, for the due
repression of these tumults. king charles.
repo'ssive. adj [from repres;..] having power to repress ;
acting to repress.
to reprisov f. v. a. [reprendre, repris, fr.] to respite after
sentence of death; to give a respite.
he cannot thrive, w
unless her prayers, whom heav'n delights to hear,
and loves to grant, reprieve from the wrath
of greatest justice. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
company, though it may reprieve a man from his melan.
choly, yet cannot secure him from his conscience. south.
having been condemned for his part in the late rebellion,
his majesty had been pleased to reprieve him, with several of
his friends, in order to give them their lives. addison.
he reprieves the finner from time to time, and continues
and heaps on him the favours of his providence, in hopes
that, by an act of clemency so undeserved, he may prevail
on his gratitude and repentance. rogers's sermons.
reprie’ve m.s.. [from the verb.] respite after sentence of
death.
in his reprieve he may be so fitted,
that his soul sicken not. shakesp. meas for meas:
i hope it is some pardon or reprieve
for claudio. shakesp. measure for measure.
the morning sir john hotham was to die, a reprievo was
sent to suspend the execution for three days. clarendon.
all that i ask, is but a short reprieve,
till i forget to love, and learn to grieve. denham.
to reprimand. v. a. [reprimander, fr. reprimo, lat..] to
chide; to check; to reprehend; to reprove.
germanicus was severely reprimanded by tiberius, for tra-
velling into egypt without his permisfion. arbuthnot.
they saw their eldest sister once brought to her tears, and
her perverseness severely reprimanded. law.
repriman d. m. s. [reprimande, reprimende, fr. from the verb.]
reproof; reprehension. -
he inquires how such an one's wife or son do, whom he
does not see at church; which is understood as a secret re-
primand to the person absent. addison's spectator.
to repr1'nt. v. a. [re and print.]
1. to renew the impresfion of any thing.
the business of redemption is to rub over the defaced copy
of treation, to reprint god's image upon the soul, and to
waller.
denham,
set forth nature in a second and a fairer edition. south.
2. to print a new edition.
my bookseller is reprinting the essay on criticism. pope.
repri's al. m. s. [represalia, low lat. represaille, fr.] some-
thing seized by way of retaliation for robbery or injury.
21 s the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. p
r e p
the english had great advantage in value of reprisal, as
being more strong and active at sea. hayward.
sense must sure thy safest plunder be,
since no reprisals can be made on thee. dorset,
repr1's e. n.s. [reprise, fr.] the aet of taking something in
retaliation of injury.
your care about your banks infers a fear
of threat'ning floods and inundations near ;
if so, a just reprise would only be
of what the land usurp'd upon the sea.
t, reproa'ch. v. a. [reprocher, fr.]
1. to censure in opprobrious terms, as a crime.
mezentius, with his ardour warm'd
his fainting friends, reproach'd their shameful flight, , ,
repell'd the victors. dryden's aemeis,
the french writers do not burden themselves too much
with plot, which has been reproached to them as a fault. dry.
2. to charge with a fault in severe language.
if ye be reproached for the name of christ, happy are ye.
1 peter iv. 14.
that shame
there sit not, and reproach us as unclean.
3. to upbraid in general. -
the very regret of being surpassed in any valuable quality,
by a person of the same abilities with ourselves, will reproach
our own laziness, and even shame us into imitation. rogers.
reproach. n.s. [reproche, fr. from the verb.] censure; in-
famy shame. -
with his reproach and odious menaces,
the knight emboiling in his haughty heart,
dryden.
milton.
knit all his forces. spenser.
if black scandal or foul-fac’d reproach
attend the sequel of your imposition,
your mere enforcement shall acquittance me. shakesp.
thou, for the testimony of truth, hast borne -
universal reproach. milton.
reproa'chable. adj. [reproachable, fr.] worthy of reproach.
repro asch fu l. adj. [from reproach.]
1. scurrilous; opprobrious.
o monstrous! what reproachful words are these. shakesp.
i have sheath’d
my rapier in his bosom, and withal
thrust these reproachful speeches down his throat. shakesp.
an advocate may be punished for reproachful language, in
respect of the parties in suit. ayliffe's parergon.
2. shameful; infamous; vile. -
to make religion a stratagem to undermine government,
is contrary to this superstructure, most scandalous and re-
proachful to christianity; flammond's fundamentals.
• thy punishment
he shall endure, by coming in the flesh
to a reproachful life and cursed death.
reproachfully. adv. [from roproach.]
1. opprobriously ; ignominiously; scurrilously.
shall i then be us’d reproachfully * shakesp. hen. vi.
i will that the younger women marry, and give none oc-
casion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. 1 tim. v. 14.
2. shamefully; infamously. -
re'probate. adj. [reprobus, lat.] lost to virtue; lost to
grace; abandoned. - - - -
they profess to know god, but in works deny him, being
abominable, and to every good work reprobate. tit. i. 16.
strength and art are easily outdone -
by spirits reprobate. - milton.
god forbid, that every single commission of a fin, though
great for its kind, and withal, acted against conscience, for
its aggravation, should so far deprave the soul, and bring it
to such a reprobate condition, as to take pleasure in other
- men's sins. south’s sermons.
if there is any poor man or woman, that is more than ordi-
narily wicked and reprobate, miranda has her eye upon
them. law.
re'probate. m. s. a man lost to virtue; a wretch abandoned
to wickedness.
milton's par. loft.
what if we omit
this reprobate, till he were well inclin'd. shakes.
i acknowledge myself for a reprobate, a villain, a traytor
to the king, and the most unworthy man that ever lived. ral.
all the saints have profited by tribulations; and they that
could not bear temptations, became reprobates. taylor.
to re"probate. v. a. [reprabo, lat.]
1. to disallow ; to reject. -
such an answer as this is reprobated and disallowed of in
law; i do not believe it, unless the deed appears. ayliffe.
2. to abandon to wickedness and eternal destruction.
what should make it necessary for him to repent and
amend, who either without respect to any degree of amend-
ment is supposed to be elected to eternal bliss, or without re-
spect to fin, to be irreversibly reprobated, hammond.
a reprobated hardness of heart does them the office of phi-
losophy towards a contempt of death. . l’estrange.
3. to abandon to his sentence, without hope of pardon.
drive him out
to reprobated exile round the world,
a caitive, vagabond, abhorr'd, accurs'd. southerne,
resproba teness. n.s.. [from reprobate.] the state of being
reprobate. -
reproba'rion, n.s. [reprobation, fr. from reprobate.]
1. the act of abandoning or state of being abandoned to eternal
destruction; the contrary to election.
this sight would make him do a desperate turn;
yea curse his better angel from his side,
and fall to reprobation. shakesp. othell.
this is no foundation of discriminating grace, or conse.
quently fruit of ele&amp;tion and reprobation. hammond,
though some words may be accommodated to god's pre-
destination, yet it is the scope of that text to treat of the re-
probation of any man to hell-fire. bramhall against hobbes.
god, upon a true repentance, is not so fatally tied to the
spindle of absolute reprobation, as not to keep his promise,
and seal merciful pardons. 44aine.
2. a condemnatory sentence.
you are empower'd to give the final decision of wit, to put
your stamp on all that ought to pass for current, and set a
brand of reprobation on clipt poetry and false coin. dryden.
to reprodu’ce. v. a. [re and produce; reproduire, fr.j
to produce again; to produce anew.
if horse dung reproduceth oats, it will not be easily deter-
mined where the power of generation ceaseth. brown:
those colours are unchangeable, and whenever all those
rays with those their colours are mixed again, they reproduce
the same white light as before. newton's opticks.
reprodu’ction. m. s. [from reproduce.] the aet of pro-
ducing anew.
i am about to attempt a reproduction in vitriol, in which it
seems not unlikely to be performable. boyle.
reproo f. m. s. [from reprove.]
1. blame to the face; reprehension. - -
good sir john, as you have one eye upon my follies, turn
another into the register of your own, that i may pass with
a reproof the easier. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
fear not the anger of the wise to raise;
those best can bear reproof, who merit praise.
2. censure; slander. out of use. -
why, for thy sake, have i suffer'd reproof? shame hath
covered my face. psalm lxix. 7.
repro v able. adj. . [from reprove. j culpable; blamable;
worthy of reprehension. -
if thou dost find thy faith as dead after the reception of
the sacrament as before, it may be thy faith was not only
little, but reproveable. taylor's worthy communicant.
to reprove. v. a. [reprouver, fr.] - -
1. to blame; to censure. * :
i will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices. psalm 1.8.
this is the sin of the minister, when men are called to re-
prove sin, and do not. - perkins.
2. to charge to the face with a fault; to check; to chide; to
reprehend.
what if they can better be content with one that can wink
at their faults, than with him that will reprove them. iwhitg.
there is no slander in an allow'd fool, though he do no-
thing but rail; nor no railing in a known discreet man,
though he do nothing but reprove. shakesp. twelfth night.
what if thy son
prove disobedient, and reprov’d retort,
wherefore didst thou beget me? milton.
if a great personage undertakes an action passionately, let
it be acted with all the malice and impotency in the world,
he shall have enough to flatter him, but not enough to reprove
him. . taylor's rule of living holy.
he reproves, exhorts, and preaches to those, for whom he
first prays to god. law.
3. to refute ; to disprove.
my lords,
reprove my allegation if you can.
4. to blame for: with of.
to reprove one of laziness, they will say, dost thou make
idle a coat? that is a coat for idleness. carew-
repro'ver. a. s. [from reprove..] a reprehender; one that
reproves. * . . .
let the most potent finner speak out, and tell us, whether
he can command down the clamours and revilings of a guilty
conscience, and impose filence upon that bold reprover. south.
this shall have from every one, even the reprovers of vice,
the title of living well. locke on education.
to repru'n.e. v. a. [re and prune.] to prune a second
tl inc. - -
reprune apricots and peaches, saving as many of the young
likeliest shoots as are well placed. evelyn's kal-ma’ar.
pope.
shakesp. henry vi.
reptile, adj. [reptile, lat.] creeping upon many feet. in
the following lines reptile is confounded with serpent.
cleanse baits from filth, to give a tempting gloss,
cherish the sully'd reptile race with moss. . gay.
reptile, n.s. an animal that creeps upon many feet.
terrestrial
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. p
.
o
o
terrestrial animals may be divided into quadrupeds or rep-
fills, which have many feet, and serpents which have no
feet. locke's elements of natural philosophy.
holy retreat! sthence no female hither,
conscious of social love and nature's rites,
must dare approach, from the inferior reptile, -
to woman, form divine. * . . . prior.
repu'blican. adj. [from ripublick.] placing the government
- ople. -
f. n.s.. [from republick.] one who thinks a com-
monwealth without monarchy the best government.
these people are more happy in imagination than the rest
of their neighbours, because they think themselves so; though
such a chimerical happiness is not peculiar to republicans.
- addi 0?!e
repu’blick. m. s. [respublica, lat. republique, fr.]
1. commonwealth; state in which the power is lodged in more
than one. * *
they are indebted many millions, more than their whole
republick is worth. addison's state of the war.
2. common interest; the publick. . . .
those that by their deeds will make it known,
whose dignity they do sustain; .
and life, state, glory, all they gain, , ,
count the republick's, not their own. , ben, johnson,
repu‘diable. adi, [from repudiate.] . fit to be rejected. . . . .
t, reputyiate. v. a. [repudio, lat. repudier, fr.] to
divorce; to reject; to put away. - - -
let not those, that have repudiated the more inviting sins,
show themselves philtred and bewitched by this. g. of tongue.
here is a notorious instance of the folly of the atheists,
that while-they repudiate all title to the kingdom of heaven,
merely for the present pleasure of body, and their boasted
tranquillity of mind, besides the extreme madness in running
such a desperate hazard after death, they unwittingly deprive
themselves here of that very pleasure and tranquility they
seek for. - bently s sermons.
repudiation. n.s. [repudiation, fr. from repudiate.] di-
vorce; rejection. - - -
it was allowed by the athenians, only in, case of repudia-
tion of a wife. arbuthnot on coins.
rz pu‘gn ance.
repu'gn ancy. trari
nsistency; contrariety. -
i. ins. o is &amp;idou repugnancy, that which hath
been can be no prejudice to that which is. hooker.
it is no affront to omnipotence, if, by reason of the formal
incapacity and repugnancy of the thing, we aver that the world
could not have been made from all eternity. bentley.
2. relustance; resistance.
why do fond o . to battle,
and let the foes quietly cut their throats, -
without o y shakesp. timon.
- uggle of opposite passions. - - - -
3 so did .. act without any of their present jars,
combats or repugnances, all moving with the beauty of uni-
formity and the stilness of composure. south's sermons.
aversion; unwillingness. - -
that which causes us to lose most of our time, is the re-
ugmance which we naturally have to labour. dryden.
repugnant, adj. [repugnant, fr. repugnani, lat.]
1. disobedient; not obsequious.
his * o: it fall
rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, -
repugnant to command. shakesp. i.
2. contrary; opposite; inconsistent; with to, sometimes with.
there is no breach of a divine law, but is more or less re-
pugnant unto the will of the law-giver, god himself. perkins.
why i reject the other conjectures is; because they have
not due warrant from observation, but are clearly repugnant
ihereunto. woodward's natural history.
your way is to wrest and strain some principles maintained
both by them and me, to a sense repugnant with their other
known doctrines. - paterland.
repu'gn antly. adv. [from repugnant.] contradiogrily.
they speak not repugnantly thereto. brown's wulg. err.
t. repu’llula te. v. n. [re and pullulo, lat, repululer, fr.]
bud again. - - -
*...; tares repululate, there is wheat still left in the
field. ... howel's pocal foros.
repu'lse. n.s. [repulse, fr. repulsa, latin.]. the condition
of being driven off or put aside from any attempt. -
my repulse at hull seemed an act of so rude disloyalty, that
my enemies had scarce confidence enough to abet it. k. cha.
nor much expect
a foe so proud will first the weaker seek; -
so bent, the more shall shame him his repulse. milton.
- by fate repell'd, and with repulses tir’d. denham.
to repu'ls e. v. a. [repulsus, lat.] to beat back; to drive
“the christian defendants still repulsed them with greater
courage than they were able to assail them. knoller.
9
{". f. [repugnance, fr. from repugnant.]
-----
this fleet, attempting st. minoes, were repulsed, and
without glory or gain, returned into england. hayward.
man complete to have discoverd and repuls'd -
whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend. milton.
epu'lsion. m. s. [repulsius, lat.] the act or power of driv-
ing off from itself.
air has some degree of tenacity, whereby the parts attrađt
one another; at the same time, by their elasticity, the par-
ticles of air have a power of repulsion or flying off from one
another. - - - arbuthn:t.
repu'lsive. adj. [from repuls.] driving off; having the
power to beat back or drive off.
the parts of the salt or vitriol recede from one another,
and endeavour to expand themselves, and get as far asunder
as the quantity of water, in which they float, will allow,
and does not this endeavour imply, that they have a repulsive
force by which they fly from one another, or that they attract
the water more strongly than one another? newton'; opticks.
to repu‘rchase. v. a. [re and purchase.] to buy again.
once more we fit on england's royal throne,
repurchas'd with the blood of enemies;
what valiant foe-men, like to autumn's corn,
have we mow’d down in top of all their pride? shakesp.
if the son alien those lands, and repurchose them again in
foe, the rules of descents are to be observed, as if he were
the original purchaser. hale's law of england.
re'p9table. adj. [from repute.] honourable; not infamous,
if ever any vice shall become reputable, and be gloried in as
a mark of greatness, what can we then expect from the man
of honour, but to signalize himself. rogers's sermons.
in the article of danger, it is as reputable to elude an enemy
as defeat one. broome. .
reputable n ess. n. s. [from reputable.] the quality of a
thing of good repute. o
re'putably. adv. [from reputable.] without discredit.
...to many such worthy magistrates, who have thus reputably
filled the chief seats of power in this great city, i am now
addressing my discourse. - atterbury's sermons.
reputation. m. s. [reputation, fr. from repute.]
1. character of good or bad.
versoy, upon the lake of geneva, has the reputation of
being extremely poor and beggarly. addison.
2. credit; honour.
&amp;putation is an idle and most false imposition; oft got
without merit; and lost without deserving; you have lost no
reputation at all, unless you repute yourself such a loser. shah.
a third interprets motions, looks and eyes;
. . at ev'ry word a reputation dies. pope's rape of the lock.
to repute. v. a. [reputo, lat. reputer, fr.] to hold;
to account; to think.
the king was reputed a prince most prudent. shakesp.
- - i do repute her grace
the rightful heir to england's royal seat, shakespeare.
i do know of those,
that therefore only are reputed wise, -
for saying nothing." shakesh. merchant of penice.
- men, such as chuse -
law praslice for mere gain, boldly repute
worse than embrothel’d strumpets prostitute. donne.
if the grand vizier be so great, as he is reputed, in politicks,
he will never consent to an invasion of hungary. temple.
repute. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. character; reputation.
2. established opinion.
t he who reigns -
monarch in heav'n, till then as one secure,
sat on his throne, upheld by old repute. milton.
repu teless, adj. [from repute.] disreputable; disgraceful.
a word not inelegant, but out of use.
opinion, that did help me to the crown,
had left me in reputeles; banishment,
a fellow of no mark nor livelihood.
request, n. s. [requese, fr.]
1. petition; entreaty.
but ask what you would have reform’d,
i will both hear and grant you your requests. shakespeare.
haman stood up to make reques for his life to esther. esth.
all thy reques for man, accepted son |
shn&amp;sp. hen. v.
obtain; all thy request was my decree. milton's par. loss.
ask him to lend
to this, the last requji that i shall send,
a gentle ear. - denham.
2. demand; repute; credit; state of being desired.
aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer
coriolanus being now in no reques of his country. shakest.
whilst this vanity of thinking, that men are obligedo
write either systems or nothing, is in request, many excellent
notions are suppressed. boyle.
knowledge and same were in as great reques as wealth
among us now. tempse.
to reque'st. v. a. [requester, fr.] to ask; to solicite; to
cints cat,
--
to night
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e s
night we hold a solemn supper, sir,
aoi reques your presence. . shakesp. macbeth.
it was to be requested of almighty god by prayer, that
those kings would seriously fulfil all that hope of peace. knoller.
the virgin quire for her reques,
the god that sits at marriage feast;
he at their invoking came, -
but with a scarce well-lighted flame. milton.
in things not unlawful, great persons, cannot be properly
said to reques, because all things confidered, they must not
be denied. south's sermons.
reque'ster. n.s.. [from request.] petitioner; soliciter.
to requi'cken. v. a. [re and quicken.] to reanimate.
by and by the din of war 'gan pierce - -
his ready sense, when straight his doubled spirit
requicken'd what in flesh was fatigate,
and to the battle came he.
e’9uie.m. m. s. [latin.
; §: in : they ho for the dead requiem or rest.
we should profane the service of the dead,
to fing a requiem and such peace to her,
as to peace-parted souls.
2. rest; quiet; peace. not in use.
the midwife kneel'd at my mother's throes,
with pain produc'd, and nurs'd for future woes;
else had i an eternal requiem kept,
and in the arms of peace for ever slept. -
requi'rable. adj. [from require.] fit to be required. .
it contains the certain periods of times, and all circum-
stances requirable in a history to inform. . hale.
to requi’re. v. a. [requiro, lat. requerir, fr.]
i. to demand; to ask a thing as of right.
ye me require
a thing without the compass of my wit;
for both the lineage and the certain fire,
from which i sprung, are from me hidden yet. spenser.
we do require them of you, so to use them, -
as we shall find their merits. shakesp. king lear.
this, the very law of nature teacheth us to do, and this
shakesp. coriolanus.
shakespeare.
sandys:
the law of god requireth also at our hands. spelman.
this imply'd -
subjection, but requir’d with gentle sway. milton.
oft our alliance other lands desir’d,
and what we seek of you, of us requir’d. dryden.
2. to make necessary; to need. -
the king's business required haste. 1 sam. xxi. 8.
high from the ground the branches would require
thy utmost reach. - milton.
but why, alas! do mortal men complain *.
god gives us what he knows our wants require,
and better things than those which we desire. dryden.
god, when he gave the world in common to all mankind,
commanded men also to labour; and the penury of his con-
dition required it. locke.
requisite. adj. [requisitus, lat.] necessary; needful;
required by the nature of things. - -
when god new modelled the world by the introduction
of a new religion, and that in the room of one set up by him-
self, it was requisite, that he should recommend it to the rea-
sons of men with the same authority and evidence that en-
forced the former. south's sermons.
cold calleth the spirits to succour, and therefore they can-
not so well close and go together in the head, which is ever
requisite to sleep. bacon's natural history.
prepare your soul with all those necessary graces, that are
more immediately requisite to this performance. wake.
re"quisite. m. s. anything necessary.
res non parta labore, sed relicia, was thought by a poet to
be one of the requisites to a happy life. dryden.
for want of these requisites, most of our ingenious young
men take up some cried up english poet, adore him, and imi-
tate him, without knowing wherein he is defe&amp;tive. dryden.
god on his part has declared the requisites on ours; what
we must do to obtain blesfings, is the great business of us all
to know. - , wałe,
requisitely. adv. [from requisite.] necessarily; in a re-
quisite manner. -
we discern how requisitely the several parts of scripture are
fitted to several times, persons, and occurrences. boyle.
requisite ness. n. s. [from requisite.] necessity; the state
of being requisite. -
discerning how exquisitely the several parts of scripture
are fitted to the several times, persons and occurrences in-
tended, we shall discover not only the sense of the obscurer
passages, but the requisitenes of their having been written so
obscurely. boyle.
requi"tal. m. s. [from requite.] - - -
1. return for any good or bad office; retaliation.
should we take the quarrel of sermons in hand, and re-
venge their cause by requital, thrusting prayer in a manner
out of doors under colour of long preaching? hooker.
- since you
wear out your gentle limbs in my affairs,
be bold, you do so grow in my requital, -
as nothing can unroot you. shak. all's well that end, well,
we hear
such goodness of your justice, that our soul
cannot but yield you forth to publick thanks,
forerunning your requital. shakesp. meas for mas:
2. return; reciprocal action.
no merit their aversion can remove,
nor ill requital can efface their love.
3. reward; recompense.
he ask'd me for a song,
and in requital op'd his leathern scrip,
and shew'd me simples of a thousand names,
telling their strange and vigorous faculties.
i have ta'en a cordial,
sent by the king or haly, in requital
of all my miseries, to make me happy. denham.
in all the light that the heavens bestow upon this lower
world, though the lower world cannot equal their benefac.
tion, yet with a kind of grateful return it reflects those rays,
that it cannot recompense; so that there is some return how.
ever, though there can be no requital. south's sermons.
to requite. v. a. [requiter, fr.]
1. to repay 5 to retaliate good or ill; to recompense.
if he love me to madness, i shall never requite him. shak:
when joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead,
they said, joseph will requite us all the evil we did. genesi; l.
an avenger against his enemies, and one that shall requite
kindness to his friends. ecclus, xxx. 6.
him within protect from harms;
he can requite thee, for he knows the charms
that call fame on such gentle ads as these.
great idol of mankind, we neither claim
the praise of merit, nor aspire to fame 1
'tis all we beg thee to conceal from fight
those acts of goodness which themselves requite:
o let us still the secret joy partake,
to follow virtue ev’n for virtue's sake.
unhappy wallace,
great patriot heroe! ill requited chiefs
2. to do or give in reciprocation.
he hath requited me evil for good. i sam. xxv. 21.
qpen not thine heart to every man, lest he requite thee
with a shrewd turn. ecclus. viii. 19.
re'remouse. n.s.. [hnenemur, saxon.] a bat. see a'earmouse.
resale. n.s. [re and sale.] sale at second hand.
monopolies and coemption of wares for rosale, where they
are not restrained, are great means to enrich. bacon.
to resalute. v. a. [rosaluto, lat, resaluer, fr.] to salute
or greet anew.
we drew her up to land,
waller.
milton,
milton.
pope.
thomson:
and trod ourselves the resaluted sand. chapman.
to resalute the world with sacred light,
leucothea wak'd. milton.
to resai'l. v. a. [re and sail.] to sail back.
from pyle resailing, and the spartan court,
horrid to speak i in ambush is decreed. pope's odyssy.
to resci'nd. v. a. [rescinda, lat, rescinder, fr.] to cut off;
to abrogate a law.
it is the imposing a sacramental obligation upon him, which
being the condition, upon the performance whereof all the
promises of endless bliss are made over, it is not possible to
rescind or disclaim the standing obliged by it. afiammond.
i spake against the test, but was not heard;
these to rescind, and peerage to restore. dryden.
rescr'ssion: n, s. [rescission, fr. rescissus, lat.] the act of
cutting off; abrogation. -
if any infer resission of their estate to have been for idola-
try, that the governments of all idolatrous nations should be
also dissolved, it followeth not. bacon.
rescr'ssory. adj. [rescissoire, fr. restiffs, lat.] having the
power to cut off.
to rescri'be. v. a. [rescribo, lat. rescrire, fr.]
1. to write back.
whenever a prince on his being consulted rescribes or writes
back toleramus, he dispenses with that act otherwise un-
lawful. ayliffe's parergon.
2. to write over again.
calling for more paper to rescribe them, he shewed him
the difference betwixt the ink-box and the sand box. howel.
re'script. m. s. [rescrit, fr. rescriptum, lat..] edict of an
emperour.
one finding a great mass of money digged under ground,
and being somewhat doubtful, signified it to the emperor,
who made a rescript thus ; use it. bacon's apophthegms.
the popes, in such cases, where canons were silent, did,
after the manner of the roman emperors, write back their
determinations, which were stiled rescripts or decretal epistles,
having the force of laws. ayliffe's parergon.
7 *
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e s
r e s
1.
o
it.
:
t, rescue. v. &amp;. [rescorre, old fr j. to set free from any
violence, confinement, or danger.
sir scudamore, after long sorrow, in the end met with
britomartis, who succoured him and resewed his love. spenser.
my uncles both are slain in rescuing me. shaksp.
we're beset with thieves ;
rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man. shakespeare,
dr. bancroft understood the church excellently, and had
almost rescued it out of the hands of the calvinian party. clar.
he that is so sure of his particular election, as to resolve
he can never fall, if he commit those acts, against which
scripture is plain, that they that do them shall not inherit
eternal life, must necessarily resolve, that nothing but the re-
roving his fundamental error can rescue him from the super-
itructive. hammond’s fundamentals.
who was that just man, whom had not heav'n
rescu'd, had in his righteousness been lost : milton.
riches cannot rescue from the grave,
which claims alike the monarch and the slave. dryden.
we have never yet heard of a tumult raised to rescue a
minister whom his master desired to bring to a fair account.
davenant.
re'scue. n. s. [rescouse, restoff, old fr. rescuffus, low lat.]
deliverance from violence, danger, or confinement.
how comes it, you
have holp to make this rescue * shakesh. coriolanus.
re'scu er. m. f. [from rescue j one that rescues.
research. m. s. [reche che, fr.] enquiry; search.
by a skilful application of those notices, may be gained in
such researches the accelerating and bettering of fruits, empty-
ing mines and draining fens. glanville's sceps.
§ submit those mistakes, into which i may have fallen, to
the better consideration of others, who shall have made re-
arch into this business with more felicity.
a felicity adapted to every rank, such as the researches of
human wisdom sought for, but could not discover. rogers.
to rese arch. v. a. [rechercher, fr.] to examine; to enquire.
it is not easy to research with due distinction, in the actions
of eminent personages, both how much may have been ble-
mished by the envy of others, and what was corrupted by
their own felicity. j%tton's buckingham.
to rese a^t. v. a. [re and sat.] to seat again.
when he's produc'd, will you roseat him
upon his father's throne : dryden's spanish fryar,
rese 12e.r. m. s. one that seizes again.
rese 1/zu re. m. s. [re and seizure.] repeated seizure ; seizure
a second time.
here we have the charter of foundation ; it is now the
more easy to judge of the forfeiture or roseizure : deface the
image, and you divest the right. bacon.
rese"mblance, n. s. [resemblance, fr.]
1. likeness; similitude; representation.
one main end of poetry and painting is to please; they
bear a great resemblance to each other. dryden's dufresnoy.
the quality produced hath commonly no resemblance with
the thing producing it; wherefore we look on it as a bare
effect of power. locke.
so chymists boast they have a pow'r,
from the dead ashes of a flow'r,
some faint resemblance to produce,
but not the virtue. swift's miscellanies.
i cannot help remarking the resemblance betwixt him and
our author in qualities, fame, and fortune. pope.
2. something resembling. -
these sensible things, which religion hath allowed, are
resemblances formed according to things spiritual, whereunto
they serve as a hand to lead, and a way to direct. hooker.
fairest resemblance of thy maker fair,
thee all things living gaze on. milton.
they are but weak resemblances of our intentions, faint and
imperfeot copies that may acquaint us with the general design,
but can never express the life of the original. addison,
to rese(m.ble. v. a. [resimbler, fr.] -
1. to compare; to represent as like something else
most safely may we resemble ourselves to god, in respect of
that pure faculty, which is never separate from the love of
god. raleigh's history of the //orld.
the torrid parts of africk are resembled to a libbard's skin,
the distance of whose spots represent the disperseness of ha-
bitations. brerewood on languages.
2. to be like; to have likeness to.
if we see a man of virtues, mixed with infirmities, fall
into misfortune, we are afraid that the like misfortunes may
happen to ourselves, who resemble the character. addison.
to rese'nd. v. a. [re and send..] to send back; to send
again. not in use. -
i sent to her, by this same coxcomb,
tokens and letters, which she did resend.
to rese/nt. v. a... [resentir, fr.]
1. to take well or ill.
- a serious consideration of the mineral treasures of his ter-
ritories, and the practical discoveries of them by way of my
vol. ii.
shakesp.
holder. .
philosophical theory, he then so well resented, that afterwards,
upon a mature digestion of my whole design, he commanded
one to let your lordships understand, how great an inclination
he hath to further so hopeful a work. bacon.
to be absent from any part of publick worship he thus
deeply resented. - fell.
2. to take ill; to confider as an injury or affront. this is
now the most usual sense.
thou with scorn
and anger would'st resent the offer'd wrong. milton.
such proceedings have been always resented, and often
punished in this kingdom. davenant.
rese nter. m. s. [from resent.] one who feels injuries deeply.
the earl was the wortt philosopher, being a great resenter,
and a weak dissembler of the least disgrace. wotton.
resent ful. adj. [resent and full.] malignant; easily pro-
voked to anger, and long retaining it.
rese’ntingly. adv. [from resenting.]
1. with deep sense; with strong perception.
hylobares judiciously and resentingly recapitulates your main
reasonings. more's divine dialogues.
2. with continued anger.
rese ntment. m. s. [resentiment, fr.]
1. strong perception of good or ill.
he retains vivid resentments of the more solid morality.
more's divine dialogues.
some faces we admire and doat on ; others, in our impar-
tial apprehensions, no less deserving, we can behold without
resentment; yea, with an invincible disregard. glanville.
what he hath of sensible evidence, the very grand work
of his demonstration, is but the knowledge of his own re-
sentment; but how the same things appear to others, they
only know that are conscious to them ; and how they are in
themselves, only he that made them. glanville's sceps.
2. deep sense of injury; anger long continued ; sometimes
simply anger.
can heav'nly minds such high resentment show,
or exercise their spight in human woe dryden.
i cannot, without some envy, and a just resentment against
the opposite conduct of others, reflect upon that generosity,
wherewith the heads of a struggling faction treat those who
will undertake to hold a pen in their defence. swift.
though it is hard to judge of the hearts of people, yet
where they declare their resentment, and uneasiness at any
thing, there they pass the judgment upon themselves. law.
reservation. m. s. [reservation, fr.]
1. reserve ; concealment of something in the mind.
nor had i any reservations in my own soul, when i passed
that bill, nor repentings after. king charles.
we swear with jesuitical equivocations and mental resor-
vations. sanderson against the covenant.
2. something kept back; something not given up.
ourself by monthly course,
with reservation of an hundred knights,
by you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
make with you by due turns. shakesp. king lear.
this is academical reservation in matters of easy truth, or
rather sceptical infidelity against the evidence of reason. bro.
these opinions steele and his faction are endeavouring to
propagate among the people concerning the present ministry;
with what reservation to the honour of the queen, i cannot
determine. swift's miscellanies.
3. custody; state of being treasured up. -
he will'd me,
in heedful'st reservation, to bestow them
as notes, whose faculties inclusive were,
more than they of note. shakespeare.
rese r v atory. m. s. [reservoir, fr.] place in which any
thing is reserved or kept.
how i got such notice of that subterranean reservatory as to
make a computation of the water now concealed therein,
peruse the propositions concerning earthquakes. woodward.
to rese’rve. v. a. [reserver, fr. reservo, lat.]
1. to keep in store; to save to some other purpose.
1 could add many probabilities of the names of places; but
they should be too long for this, and i reserve them for ano-
ther. spenser's state of ireland.
hast thou seen the treasures of the hail, which i have re-
ferved against the day of trouble job xxxviii. 23.
david houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them
for an hundred chariots. 2 sam. viii. 4.
flowers
reserv'd from night, and kept for thee in store. milton.
2. to retain; to keep ; to hold.
reserve thy state, with better judgment check
this hideous rashness. shakespeare.
will he reserve his anger for ever ? will he keep it to the
end ? jer. iii. 5.
3. to lay up to a future time.
the lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temp-
tations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to
be puni d. 2. peter ii. 9.
sh: 21 t the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e s
r e s
the breach seems like the scissures of an earthquake, and
threatens to swallow all that attempt to close it, and reserves
its cure only for omnipotence. decay of piety.
conceal your esteem and love in your own breast, and re-
ferve your kind looks and language for private hours. swift.
reserve. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. store kept untouched, or undiscovered.
the assent may be withheld upon this suggestion, that i
know not yet all that may be said: and therefore, though i
be beaten, it is not necessary i should yield, not knowing
what forces there are in reserve behind. locke.
2. something kept for exigence.
the virgins, besides the oil in their lamps, carried likewise
a reserve in some other vessel for a continual supply. tilletson.
things are managed by advocates, who oftentimes seek
conquest, and not justice, and ransack all reserves of law to
support an unrighteous cause. rettlewell.
3. something concealed in the mind. - -
however any one may concur in the general scheme, it is
ftill with certain reserves and deviations, and with a salvo to
his own private judgment. addison's freeholder.
4. exception; prohibition.
is knowledge so despis'd :
or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste
5. exception in favour.
each has some darling lust, which pleads for a reserve, and
which they would fain reconcile to the expectations of reli-
gion. rogers's sermons.
6. modesty; caution in personal behaviour.
ere guardian thought cou’d bring its scatter'd aid,
my soul surpriz'd, and from herself disjoin'd,
left all reserve, and all the sex behind.
res e. rv ed. adj. [from reserve.]
1. modest; not loosely free.
to all obliging, yet reserv'd to all,
none could himself the favour'd lover call.
fame is a bubble the reserv'd enjoy,
who strive to grasp it, as they touch, destroy.
2. sullen; not open; not frank.
nothing reserv'd or sullen was to see,
but sweet regards.
rese'rve dly. adv. [from reserved.]
1. not with frankness; not with openness; with reserve.
i must give only short hints, and write but obscurely and
reservedly, until i have opportunity to express my sentiments
with greater copiousness and perspicuity. woodward.
2. scrupulously ; coldly.
he speaks reserv'dly, but he speaks with force;
nor can a word be chang'd but for a worse. pope.
rese'r've dness. m. s. [from reserved.] closeness ; want of
frankness; want of openness. - -
observe their gravity
and their reservedness, their many cautions
fitting their persons. ben. johnson's catiline.
by formality, i mean something more than ceremony and
complement, even a solemn reservedness, which may well
confist with honesty. wotton.
there was great wariness and reservedness, and so great a
jealousy of each other, that they had no mind to give or re-
ceive visits. clarendon.
disfimulation can but just guard a man within the compass
of his own personal concerns, which yet may be more effec-
tually done by that filence and reservedness, that every man
may innocently practise. south's sermons.
rese’rv er. m. s. [from reserve.] one that reserves.
reservoi'r. m. s. [reservoir, fr.] place where any thing is
kept in store.
there is not a spring or fountain, but are well provided
with huge cisterns and reservoirs of rain and snow-water. add.
who sees pale mammon pine amidst his store,
sees but a backward steward for the poor;
this year a reservoir, to keep and spare;
the next, a fountain spouting through his heir.
to resettle. v. a. [re and settle.] to settle again.
will the house of austria yield the least article, even of
usurped prerogative, to resettle the minds of those princes in
the alliance, who are alarmed at the consequences of the
emperor's death. swift.
rese"rtlement. n. s. [from resettle.]
1. the act of settling again.
to the quieting of my passions, and the resettlement of my
discomposed soul, i consider that grief is the most absurd of
all the passions. norris's miscellanies.
2. the state of settling again.
some roll their cask to mix it with the lees, and, after a
resettlement, they rack it. mortimer's husbandry.
resi"ance. n.s.. [from resant..] residence; abode 5 dwelling.
restance and restant are now only used in law.
the king forthwith banished all flemings out of his king-
dom, commanding his merchant adventurers, which had a
restance in antwerp, to return. bacon's henry vii.
resiant. adj. [roseant, fr.] resident; present in a place.
milton.
prior.
walsh.
1%ung.
dryden.
pope.
solyman was come as far as sophia, where the turks great
lieutenant in europe is always resiant, before that the hunga-
rians were aware. knolles's history of the turks.
the allobroges here restant in rome.
to resit) e. v. n. [resideo, lat. resider, fr.]
1. to have abode ; to live ; to dwell; to be present.
how can god with such reside 2 milton.
in no fix’d place the happy souls reside;
in groves we live, and lie on mossy beds. dryden's aenei.
2. [reside, lat.] to sink; to subside; to fall to the bottom.
oil of vitriol and petroleum, a drachm of each, turn into
a mouldy substance; there residing in the bottom a fair cloud
and a thick oil on the top. boyle.
re'sidence. m. s. [residence, fr.]
1. act of dwelling in a place.
something holy lodges in that breast,
and with these raptures moves the vocal air,
to testify his hidden residence. milton.
there was a great familiarity between the confessor and
duke william ; for the confessor had often made confiderable
residences in normandy. hale's law of england.
2. place of abode; dwelling.
within the infant rind of this small flower,
poison hath residence, and medicine power.
understand the same
qf fish within their wat'ry residence, milton's par. left.
caprea had been the retirement of augustus for some time,
and the residence of tiberius for several years. addison.
3. rosido, lat.] that which settles at the bottom of
1quors.
separation is wrought by weight, as in the ordinary ros.
dence or settlement of liquors. bacon.
our clearest waters, and such as seem simple unto sense,
are much compounded unto reason, as may be observed in
the evaporation of water, wherein, besides a terreous res-
dence, some salt is also found. brown's vulgar erroir.
re's ident: adj. [roffdens, lat, resident, fr.] dwelling or ha-
ving abode in any place. •
i am not concerned in this objection; not thinking it ne-
cessary, that christ should be personally present or resident on
earth in the millenium. burnet's theory of ihe earth.
he is not said to be resident in a place, who comes thither
with a purpose of retiring immediately ; so also he is said to
be absent, who is absent with his family. ayliff's parergon.
resident. n. s. [from the adj.] an agent, minister, or officer
residing in any distant place with the dignity of an ambassador.
the pope fears the english will suffer nothing like a ros-
dent or consul in his kingdoms. addison.
reside'ntiary. adj. [from resident.j holding residence.
christ was the conductor of the israelites into the land of
canaan, and their residentiary guardian. more.
resi"dual. {* [from residuum, lat..] relating to the re-
resi buary. $, fidue # relating to the part remaining.
'tis enough to lose the legacy, or the residuary advantage
of the estate left him by the deceased. ayliff.
shakesp.
re'sidue. m. s. [residu, fr. residuum, lat.] the remaining
part; that which is left.
the causes are all such as expel the most volatile parts of
the blood, and fix the residue. arbuthnot on aliments.
to resse'ge. v. a.[re and siege, fr.] to seat again. obsolete.
in wretched prison long he did remain,
till they outreigned had their utmost date,
and then therein resieged was again,
and ruled long with honourable state. spensor.
to resign. v. a... [resgner, fr. resigno, lat.]
i. to give up a claim or possession.
resign
your crown and kingdom, indirealy held. shakes.
i'll to the king, and signify to him,
that thus i have resign'd to you my charge. shakes.
to her thou didst resign thy place. miłon
phoebus resigns his darts, and jove -
his thunder, to the god of love. denham.
ev'ry ismena would resign her breast;
and ev'ry dear hippolytus be blest. prior.
2. to yield up.
whoever shall resign their reasons, either from the root of
deceit in themselves, or inability to resist such trivial ingana-
tions from others, although their condition may place them
above the multitude, yet are they still within the line of
vulgarity. brown's vulgar erreurs.
defirous to resign and render back
all i receiv'd. milton.
those, who always resign their judgment to the last man
they heard or read, truth never finks into those men's minds;
but, cameleon-like, they take the colour of what is laid be.
fore them, and as soon lose and resign it to the next that
comes in their way. locke.
3. to give up in confidence: with up emphatical.
what more reasonable, than that we should in all things
resign up ourselves to the will of god. tilleson.
4. to submit; particularly to submit to providence.
happy
ben. johnson.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e s
r e s
jr.
*... .
o
&amp;
3.
o,
happy the man, who studies nature's laws,
his mind possessing in a quiet state,
fearless of fortune, and resign'd to fate. dryden.
a firm, yet cautious, mind,
sincere, though prudent; constant, yet resign'd. pope.
5. to submit without resistance or murmur.
what thou art, resign to death. ..., shakesp. henry vi.
resignation. n.s. [rosignation, fr.] . . . . . .
1. the act of resigning or giving up a claim or possession.
do that office of thine own good will;
the resignation of thy state and crown. shakesp. rich. ii.
he intended to procure a resignation of the rights of the
king's majesty's sisters and others, entitled to the possession of
the crown. bayward.
2. submission; unresisting acquiescence.
we cannot expect, that any one should readily quit his own
opinion, and embrace ours, with a blind resignation to an au-
thority, which the understanding acknowledges not. locke.
there is a kind of sluggish resignation, as well as poorness
and degeneracy of spirit, in a state of slavery, that very few
will recover themselves out of it. addison,
submission without murmur to the will of god.
esi"gner. n. s. [from resign.] one that resigns.
resi"gnment. n.f. [from resign.] aet of resigning.
resi'lience. r m. s. [from resilio, lat..] the aet of starting
resi"liency. } or leaping back.
if you strike a ball fidelong, the rebound will be as much
the contrary way; whether there be any such resilience in
echoes, that is, whether a man shall hear better if he stand
aside the body repercussing, than if he stand where he speaketh,
may be tried. bacon's natural history.
resslie nt. adj. [resiliens, lat.] starting or springing back.
resili'tion. n.s. [resilio, lat.] the act of springing back ;
resilience.
re'sin. m. s. [resne, fr. resina, lat.] the fat sulphurous
parts of some vegetable, which is natural or procured by art,
and will incorporate with oil or spirit, not an aqueous men-
struum. those vegetable substances that will dissolve in
water are gums, those that will not dissolve and mix but with
spirits or oil are resins.
re’s inous. adj. [from resin refineux, fr.] containing resin ;
consisting of resin. so-
resinous gums, dissolved in spirit of wine, are let fall again,
if the spirit be copiously diluted. boyle on colours.
resinous ness. n. s. [from resinous.] the quality of being
resinous.
res 1p1’scence. m. s. [respiscence, fr. respistentia, low lat.]
wisdom after the fact; repentance.
ta resist. v. a. [ressio, lat. resister, fr.]
1. to oppose; to act against.
submit to god; rest the devil, and he will flee.
to do ill our sole delight
as being the contrary to his high will
ja. iv.
whom we resis?. milton.
not more almighty to resis our might
than wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles. milton.
some forms, tho’ bright, no mortal man can bear,
some, none resis, tho’ not exceeding fair. toung.
2. to not admit impression or force.
nor keen nor solid could resis that edge. milton.
to make opposition.
all the regions
do seemingly revolt; and, who resis,
are mock'd for valiant ignorance,
and perish constant fools. shakesp. coriolanus.
resi's tance. q n.s. [ressiance, fr. this word, like many others,
resi's ten ce. } is differently written, as it is supposed to have
come from the latin or the french.]
1. the aet of resisting; opposition. \
demetrius, seeing that the land was quiet, and that no re-
fiftance was made against him, sent away all his forces. 1 mac.
2. the quality of not yielding to force or external impression.
the ressiance of bone to cold is greater than of flesh; for
that the flesh shrinketh, but the bone resteth, whereby the
to resi'st. v. n.
cold becometh more eager. bacon.
musick so softens and disarms the mind,
that not an arrow does resistance find. waller.
the idea of solidity we receive by our touch, and it arises
from the resistance which we find in body to the entrance of
any other body into the place it possesses. locke.
. but that part of the resistance, which arises from the vis
inertiae, is proportional to the density of the matter, and can-
not be diminished by dividing the matter into smaller parts,
- nor by any other means, than by decreasing the density of the
medium. newton's opticks.
resist ibi'lity, n.s.. [from ressible.]
1. quality of resisting.
whether the resissibility of adam's reason did not equiva-
lence the facility of eve's seduction, we refer unto school-
tnen. brown's vulgar errours.
the name body, being the complex idea of extension and
8
rossibility, together, in the same subject, these two ideas are
not exactly one and the same, locke.
2. quality of being resistible. -
it is from corruption, and liberty to do evil, meeting with
the resistibility of this sufficient grace, that one resists it. ham.
resn's rible. adj. [from resisi.j. that may be resisted.
that is irresistible; this, though potent, yet is in its own
nature rossible by the will of man; though it many times pre-
vails by its efficacy. . . . . . hall's origin of mankind.
resi's tless. adj. [from ross?..] irresistable; that cannot be
opposed. . . . . .”
qur own eyes do every where behold the sudden and re-
//lift assaults of death, ... raleigh's history of the i/orls.
all at once to force restless way. ". milton.
since you can love, and yet your error see,
the same restles, power may plead for me. dryden.
she chang'd her state; -
rossiles; in her love, as in her hate. dryden.
though thine eyes resistles; glances dart, logi
ogtes
a stronger charm is thine, a generous heart.
reso'lvable. adj. [from ...#
1. that may be referred or reduced.
pride is of such intimate connection with ingratitude, that
the actions of ingratitude seem directly resolvable into pride,
as the principal reason of them. - south.
2. dissoluble; admitting separation of parts.
as the serum of the blood is resolvable by a small heat, a
greater heat coagulates, so as to turn it horny like parchment.
- arbuthnot on aliments.
3. capable of solution or of being made less obscure.
the effect is wonderful in all, and the causes best resolvable
from observations made in the countries themselves, the parts
through which they pass. brown's wulgar errours.
resoluble... adj. [resoluble, fr. re and solubilis, lat.] that
* be melted or dissolved. -
hree is not precisely the number of the distinel elements,
boyle.
- .
whereinto mixt bodies are resoluble by fire.
to resolve. v. a. [resolvo, lat, resoudre, fr.]
1. to inform; to free from a doubt or difficulty.
in all things then are our consciences best resolved, and in
most agreeable sort unto god and nature resolved, when they
are so far persuaded, as those grounds of persuasion will bear.
hooker.
give me some breath,
before i positively speak in this;
i will resolve your grace immediately:
i cannot brook delay, resolve me now ; * *
and what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me. . . shakesp?
resolve me, strangers, whence and what you are * dryd.
2. to solve ; to clear.
examine, fift, and resolve their alleged proofs, till you
come to the very root whence they spring, and it shall clearly
appear, that the most which can be inferred upon such plenty
of divine testimonies, is only this, that some things, which
they maintain, do seem to have been out of scripture not ab-
surdly gathered. hooker.
i resolve the riddle of their loyalty, and give them oppor-
tunity to let the world see, they mean not what they do, but
what they say. king charles.
he always bent himself rather judiciously to resolve, than
by doubts to perplex a business. hayward.
the gravers, when they have attained to the knowledge
of these reposes, will easily resolve those difficulties which per-
plex them. dryden's dufresnoy.
the man, who would resolve the work of fate,
may limit number. prior.
happiness, it was resolved by all, must be some one uniform
end, proportioned to the capacities of human nature, attain-
able by every man, independent on fortune. rogers.
3. to settle in an opinion. -
good or evil actions, commanded or prohibited by laws
and precepts simply moral, may be resolved into some dictates
and principles of the law of nature, imprinted on man's heart
shakesp. rich, iii.
at the creation. white.
long since we were resolved of your truth,
your faithful service, and your toil in war. . shakesp.
4. to fix in a determination. this sense is rather neutral,
though in these examples the form be passive.
good proof
this day affords, declaring thee resolv’d -
milton:
to undergo with me one guilt.
i run to meet th' alarms,
resolv'd on death, resolv'd to die in arms. dryden.
resolv'd for sea, the slaves thy baggage pack;
nothing retards thy voyage, unless
thy other lord forbids voluptuousness. dryden's persus.
5. to fix in constancy; to confirm.
quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
for more amazement:
i'll make the statue move. shakespeare.
6. to melt; to dissolve,
fesolving<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. s
r e s
r.s.lving is bringing a fluid, which is new concreted, into
the state of fluidity again. arbuthnot on aliments.
vegetable salts resolve the coagulated humours of a human
body, and attenuate, by stimulating the solids, and dissolving
the fluids. arbuthnot on aliments.
. to analise; to reduce.
into what can we resolve this strong inclination of mankind
to this error? it is altogether unimaginable, but that the rea-
son of so universal a consent should be constant. tillotson.
ye immortal souls, who once were men,
and now resolv'd to elements agen. dryden.
the decretals turn upon this point, and resolve all into a
monarchical power at rome. baker on learning.
to resolve. v. n.
1. to determine; to decree within one's self.
confirm’d, then i resolve
adam shall share with me. milton.
covetousness is like the sea, that receives the tribute of all
rivers, though far unlike it in lending any back; therefore
those, who have resolved upon the thriving fort of piety,
have seldom embarked all their hopes in one bottom. d. of p.
2. to melt ; to be dissolved.
have i not hideous death within my view
retaining but a quantity of life,
which bleeds away, ev’n as a form of wax
resolveth from its figure 'gainst the fire.
no man condemn me, who has never felt
a woman's power, or try’d the force of love ;
all tempers yield and soften in those fires,
our honours, interests, resolving down,
run in the gentle current of our joys. southern's oroonoko.
when the blood stagnates in any part, it first coagulates,
then resolves and turns alkaline. arbuthnot on aliments,
. to be settled in opinion.
let men resolve of that as they please: this every intelli-
gent being must grant, that there is something that is himself,
shakesp.
that he would have happy. locke.
resolve. n.s.. [from the verb.] resolution; fixed determination.
i'm glad, you thus continue your roselve,
to suck the sweets of sweet philosophy. shakespeare.
- when he sees
himself by dogs, and dogs by men pursu'd,
he straight revokes his bold resolve, and more
repents his courage, than his fear before. denham.
caesar's approach has summon'd us together,
and rome attends her fate from our resolves. addis. cato.
reso'lved ly. adv. [from resolved.] with firmness and con-
stancy.
a man may be resolvedly patient unto death; so that it is
not the mediocrity of resolution, which makes the virtue;
nor the extremity, which makes the vice. grew's cosmol.
resolv edness. n. s. [from resolved.] resolution; constancy;
firmness.
this resolvedmes, this high fortitude in sin, can with no
reason be imagined a preparative to its remission. d. of piety.
reso'lven t. m. s. [resolvens, latin.] that which has the
power of causing solution.
in the beginning of inflammation, they require repellents ;
and in the increase, somewhat of resolvents ought to be
mixed. wisman's surgery.
laetescent plants, as lettuce and endive, contain whole-
some juice, resolvent of the bile, anodyne and cooling. arbuth.
reso'lve r. n.s.. [from resolve.] -
1. one that forms a firm resolution.
thy resolutions were not before sincere; consequently god
that saw that, cannot be thought to have justified that unfin-
cere resolver, that dead faith. hammond's pracf. catech.
2. one that dissolves; one that separates parts.
it may be doubted, whether or no the fire be the genuine
and universal resolver of mixed bodies. boyle.
re'solute. adj. [resolu, fr.] determined; fixed; con-
stant; steady; firm.
be bloody, bold, and resolute; laugh to scorn
the pow'r of man; for none of woman born
shall harm macbeth. shakesp. macbeth.
edward is at hand
ready to fight; therefore be resolute. shakesp. hen. vi.
re’solutely. adv. [from resolute.] determinately; firmly ;
constantly; steadily.
we resolutely must,
to the few virtues that we have, be just. roscommon.
a man, who lives a virtuous life, despises the pleasures of
fin, and notwithstanding all the allurements of sense persists
resolutely in his course. tillotson.
some of those facts he examines, some he resolutely denies;
others he endeavours to extenuate, and the rest he distorts
, with unnatural turns. swift.
re’solute ness. n.s.. [from resolute.] determinateness; state
of being fixed in resolution.
all that my resoluteness to make use of my ears, not tongue,
could do, was to make them acquiesce. boyle,
5
resolution... n.s.. [resolutio, lat. resolution, fr.]
i. act of clearing difficulties.
in matters of antiquity, if their originals escape due rela
tion, they fall into great obscurities, and such as future, o
seldom reduce into a resolution. brown's vulgar #r.
visits, whether of civility, or for resolution of conscience.
or information in points of difficulty, were numerous. a.
the unravelling and resolution of the difficulties, that are
met with in the execution of the design, are the end of .
action. dryden's oedipus
2. analysis; act of separating any thing into constitient
parts.
to the present impulses of sense, memory and instina all
the sagacities of brutes may be reduced ; though witty men
by analytical resolution, have chymic.lly extracted an arts.
ciologick out of all their actions. hale's orig. of azaniini
3. dissolution. -
in the hot springs of extreme cold countries, the first heats
are unsufferable, which proceed out of the resolution of hi.
midity congealed. dighy or bodies.
4. [from resolute.] ... fixed determination; settled thought.”
i' th' progress of this business,
ere a determinate resolution, -
the bishop did require a respite. shakesp. henry viii.
... o lord, resolutions of future reforming do not always fa-
tisfy thy justice, nor prevent thy vergeance for former mis-
carriages. kin
we spend our days in deliberating, and we end :*:::::
out coming to any resolution, i’estrange.
how much this is in every man's power, by making reso-
lutions to himself, is easy to try. tot.
the mode of the will, which answers to dubitation may
be called suspension ; that which answers to invention. ress-
lution * , and that which, in the phantastick will, is obstinacy;
is constancy in the intelle&amp;tual. - - grew's cosmol.
5. constancy; firmness; steadiness in good or bad. y
the rest of the helots, which were otherwise scattered
bent thitherward, with a new life of ro olution; as if their
captain had been a root, out of which their courage had
sprung, -
i would unstate myself to be in a due restion.
they, who governed the parliament,
act those monstrous things.
what reinforcement we may gain from hope,
if not what resolution from despair.
6. determination of a cause in courts of justice.
nor have we all the acts of parliament or of judicial reso-
lutions, which might occasion such alterations. a sa 'z.
re’solutive: adj. [resolutus, lat, resolutis, fr.] having the
power to dissolve or relax. -&gt;
resonance. n.s.. [from resono, lat.] sound ; resound.
an ancient musician informed me, that there were some
famous lutes that attained not their full seasoning and best re-
fonance, till they were about four score years old. boyle.
rr'sonant. adj. [rosannant, fr. resonans, lat j resounding.
his volant touch c
fled and pursu'd transverse the resonant fugue.
to resort. v. n. [resortir, fr.]
1. to have recourse.
the king thought it time to resort to other counsels, and
to provide force to chastise them, who had so much despised
sidney.
shakes; -
had the resolution to
clarendon.
aaf...ton.
amilton.
all his gentler remedies. f
2. to o clarendon.
thither shall all the valiant youth resort,
and from his memory inflame their breasis
• to matchless valour. 44ilton's agoni/?es.
hither the heroes and the nymphs resort. pope.
3. to repair to.
in the very time of moses' law, when god's special com-
mandments were most of all required, some festival days were
ordained, and duly observed among the jews, by authority
of the church and state, and the same was not superstitious =
for our saviour himself resorted unto them. jozize.
the sons of light
hasted, resorting to the summons high. milton-
to argos' realms the victor god resorts,
and enters cold crotopus' humble courts. pope.
4. to fall back. in law.
the inheritance of the son never resorted to the mother or
to any of her ancestors, but both were totally excluded from
the succession. hale's law of engia?:
reso'rt. n. s. [from the verb.] ‘p of englaziz's
1. frequency; assembly; meeting.
unknown, unquestion'd in that thick resort.
2. concourse; eonsluence.
the like places of resort are frequented by men out of
place. . . . swift's 44;scellazzies-
3. act of visiting.
join with me to forbid him her resort. shakespeare-
4. o fr.l movement; active power; spring: a galli-
cliss's
dryadezzo.
scorne
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e s
r. e. s
some know the resorts and falls of busines, that cannot
sink into the main of it. bacon's essays.
in fortune's empire blindly thus we go,
we wander after pathless destiny,
whose dark resorts since prudence cannot know,
in vain it would provide for what shall be. dryden.
reso'rter. m. s. [from resort.] one that frequents, or visits.
to resou'n d. v. a. [resno, lat. resinner, fr.]
1. to echo; to sound back; to return as found.
with other echo late i taught your shades,
to answer and resound far other song. milton.
and albion's cliffs resound the rural lay. pope,
2. to celebrate by sound.
the sweet singer of israel with his psaltery loudly ros. unded
the innumerable benefits of the almighty creator. peacham.
the sound of hymns, wherewith thy throne
incompass'd shall resound thee ever blest, milton.
3. to sound; to tell so as to be heard far.
the man, for wisdom's various arts renown'd,
long exercis'd in woes, oh muse! resound. pope.
t, rf so u'nd. v. n.
1. to be echoed back,
what is common fame, which sounds from all quarters of
the world, and resounds back to them again, but generally a
loud, rattling, impudent lye? south's sermons.
2. to be much and loudly mentioned.
what resounds in fable or romance of uther's sons. milt.
resou'rce, n s. [it is commonly written resource, which see:
riffource, fr. skinner derives it from rescudre, fr. to spring up.]
some new or unexpected means that offer; resort ; expedient.
pallas view’d
his foes pursuing, and his friends pursu'd :
us'd threatnings, mix’d with pray'rs, his last resource;
with these to move their minds, with those to fire their
force. dryden.
to resow. v. a. [re and sow j to sow anew.
over wet at sowing time breedeth much dearth, insomuch
as they are forced to resow summer corn. bacon.
to respeak. v. n. [re and speak.) to answer. *
the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
and the king's rowse the heav'n shall bruit again, -
respeaking earthly thunder. shakesp. hamlet.
t, respect. v. a. [resped sus, lat.]
1. to regard; to have regard to.
claudio, i quake,
lest thou should'st seven winters more respe?
than a perpetual honour. shakesp. meas for meas.
the blest gods doe not love - -
ungodly actions; but respect the right,
and in the workes of pious men delight. chapman,
in orchards and gardens we do not so much resheet beauty,
as variety of ground for fruits, trees, and herbs. bacon.
in judgment-seats, not mens qualities, but causes only
ought to be respesied. kettleworth.
2. l'especier, fr.] to consider with a lower degree of reve-
rtnce.
there is nothing more terrible to a guilty heart, than the
eye of a respecied friend. sidney.
whoever tastes, let him with grateful heart
resped that ancient loyal house. philips.
i always loved and respecied sir william. swift to gay.
3. to have relation to: as, the allusion rospects an ancient custom.
4. to look toward.
the needle doth vary, as it approacheth the pole; whereas,
were there such direction from the rocks, upon a nearer ap-
proachment, it would more direetly respect them. brown.
palladius adviseth, the front of his house should so respect
the south, that in the first angle it receive the rising rays of
the winter sun, and decline a little from the winter setting
thereof. brown's vugar errours.
respect. n, s. [respeao, fr. respecias, lat.]
1. regard; attention. -
you have too much respect upon the world;
they lose it, that do buy it with nuch care. shaksp.
i love
my country's good with a rospect more tender
than mine own life. shakes. coriolanus.
2. reverence; honour. - - -
you know me dutiful, therefore
let me not shame respect; but give me leave
to take that course by your consent and voice. shakes.
aeneas must be drawn a suppliant to dido, with respect in
his gestures, and humility in his eyes. dryden’s disrosnoy.
i found the king abandon'd to negle&amp;t;
seen without awe, and serv’d without respe?. prior.
the same men treat the lord's-day with as little respect,
and make the advantage of rest and leisure from their worldly
affairs only an instrument to promote their pleasure and diver-
fions. neljon.
3. awful kindness.
he, that will have his son have a respes for him, must
have a great reverence for his son. locke.
4. goodwill. *
a thousand pembroke has got
thousand pounds a year, for ‘est, to
no other ... y 2 pure respes ;
that promises more thousands. shakesh. henry viii.
the lord had respe: unto abel and his offering. gen. iv.
5. partial regard.
it is not good to have resoe: - - -
6. reverend ao. 'sed of persons in judgment. prov.
many of the best resco in rome,
groaning under this age's yoke,
have wish'd, that noble brutus had his eyes. shaft.
7. manner of treating others.
you must use them with fit roseos, according to the bonds of
nature; but you are of kin to their persons, not errors. bacon.
the duke's carriage was to the gentlemen of fair respe?,
and bountiful to the soldier, according to any special value
which he spied in any. ikotton's buckingham.
8. consideration; motive. - -
whatsoever secret resols were likely to move them, for
contenting of their minds, calvin returned. hocker.
the love of him, and this respoe beside;
for that my grandfire was an englishman,
awakes my conscience to confess all this. shakesp.
since that respec/s of fortune are his love,
i shall not be his wife. shakesp. king lear.
9. relation; regard.
. in respect of the suitors which attend you, do them what
right in justice, and with as much speed as you may. bacon.
there have been always monsters amongst them, in respeci
of their bodies. // ilkins.
i have represented to you the excellency of the christian
religion, in respect of its clear discoveries of the nature of
god, and in respes of the perfestion of its laws. 7illotson.
every thing which is imperfect, as the world must be ac-
knowledged in many rospects, had some cause which pro-
duced it. 7 islatson.
they believed but one supreme deity, which, with respect
to the various benefits men received from him, had several
titles. - - 7iloson.
respecter. m. s. [from rese?..] one that has partial regard.
neither is any condition more honourable in the fight of
god than another; otherwise he would be a respec.; of per-
sons: for he hath proposed the same salvation to all. swift.
respectful. adj. [rospect and sull.] ceremonious; full of
outward civility. -
will you be only, and for ever mine
from this dear bosom shall i ne'er be torn ?
or you grow cold, rospedo/u', or forsworn ? prior.
with humble joy, and with rosposal fear,
the list ning people shall his story hear. prior.
respe"ctfully. adv. [from respecisill.] with some degree of
rew trell ce.
to your glad genius sacrifice this day,
let common meats restofully give way. dryden.
respe'ctf uln ess. m. s. [from respeciful..] the quality of
being respectful.
respective, adj. [from respe?..]
1. particular; relating to particular persons or things.
moses mentions the immediate causes, and st. peter the
more remote and fundamental causes, that constitution of the
heavens, and that constitution of the earth, in reference to
their rospeciive waters, which made that world obnoxious to
a deluge. bornet's theory of the earth.
when so many present themselves before their respective
magistrates to take the oaths, it may not be improper to awaken
a due sense of their engagements. - addison.
2. [ respejis, fr.] relative; not absolute. o/
- he medium intended is not an absolute, but a resoeffive
medium : the proportion recommended to all is the same ;
but the things to be desired in this proportion will vary. rag.
3. worthy of reverence. not in use.
what should it be, that he respects in her,
but i can make respesive in myself. - shakespeare.
4. careful; cautious; attentive to consequences. obsocic.
reft offive and wary men had rather seek quietly their own,
and wish that the world may go well, so it be not long of
them, than with pain and hazard make themselves advisers
for the common good. płocker.
he was exceeding resoeffive and precise. raleigh.
respe’ct 1 v ely. adv. [from respective. j o
1. particularly ; as each belongs to each.
the interruption of trade between the english and flemish
began to pinch the merchants of both nations, which moved
them by all means to dispose their sovereigns respeciively to
open the intercourse again. bacon.
the impressions from the objects of the senses domingle
respoively every one with his kind. bacon's natural history.
good and evil are in morality, as the east and west are in
the frame of the world, founded in and divided by that fixed
and unalterable situation, which they have respeciively in the
whole body of the universe. south's sermons.
vol. ii.
21 u. the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. s
r e s
the principles of those governments, ase resciively dis-
tlaimed and abhorred by all the men of sense and virtue in
both parties. addison's freeholder.
elatively; not absolutely.
2. *; to had been no o, choice, but that adam had been
left to the universal, moses would not then have said, east-
ward in eden, seeing the world hath not east nor west, but
respectives). raleigh's history of the world.
3. partially; with respe&amp;t to private views. obsolete. . -
among the ministers themselves, one being so far in esti-
nation above the rest, the voices of the rest were likely to
be given for the most part rospectively with a kind of secret
dependency. hooker's preface.
4. with great reverence. not in use.
honest flaminius, you are very respeaively welcome. shak.
respe rsion. n.s. [roffers, lat.]. the act of sprinkling.
roo. m. s. [respiration, fr. respiratic, from respiro,
at.
i. o act of breathing. - -
apollonius of tyana affirmed, that the cbbing and flow-
ing of the sea was the respiration of the world, drawing in
water as breath, and putting it forth again. bacon.
syrups or other expectoratives do not advantage in coughs:
by slipping down between the epiglottis; for, as i instanced
before, that must necessarily occasion a greater cough and
difficulty of respiration. harvey on consumptions:
the author of nature foreknew the necessity of rains and
dews to the present structure of plants, and the uses of respi-
ration to animals; and therefore created those correspondent
properties in the atmosphere. bentley's sermons.
2. relief from toil.
till the day . . .
appear of respiration to the just, -
and vengeance to the wicked. milton's par. loft.
t, resp, r.e. v. n. [respiro, lat. rospirer, fr.]
1. to breathe.
- the ladies gasp'd, and scarcely could respire;
the breath they drew, no longer air, but fire,
the fainty knights were scorch'd.
2. to catch breath.
till breathless both themselves aside retire,
where foaming wrath, their cruel tusks they whet,
and trample th' earth the whiles they may respire. spens.
i, a pris’ner chain'd, scarce freely draw
the air imprison'd also, close and damp,
unwholesome draught; but here i feel amends,
the breath of heav'n fresh blowing, pure, and sweet,
with day-spring born; here leave me to rospire. milton.
3. to rest; to take rest from toil.
hark! he strikes the golden lyre;
and see the tortur'd ghosts respire,
see shady forms advance 1
rfspite. m. s. [respit, fr.]
1. reprieve; suspension of a capital sentence.
i had hope to spend
quiet, though sad, the respite of that day,
that must be mortal to us both.
wisdom and eloquence in vain would plead
one moment’s respite for the learned head;
judges of writings and of men have dy'd.
2, pause; interval. -
the fox then counsel'd th’ ape, for to require
rospite till morrow to answer his desire. spensor.
this customary war, which troubleth all the world, giveth
jittle respite or breathing time of peace, doth usually borrow
pretence from the necessary, to make itself appear more
honest. * * raleigh's essays.
some pause and respite only i require,
dryden.
pope's st. cecilia.
milton.
prior.
till with my tears i shall have quench'd my fire. denham.
to respi'te. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to relieve by a pause. -
in what bow'r or shade
thou find'st him, from the heat of noon retir’d,
to respite his day-labour with repast, **
or with repose. - milton's paradise loft.
2. [ respiter, old fr.] to suspend; to delay.
an act passed for the satisfaction of the officers of the king's
army, by which they were promised payment, in november
following; till which time they were to respite it, and be con-
- tented that the common soldiers and inferior officers should
be satisfied upon their disbanding. clarendon.
res ple'nd ence. { m. s. [from ros, lendent.] lustre; bright-
resple'n den cy. $ ness; splendour. -
son thou in whom my glory i behold
in full resplendence, heir of all my might.
to neglect that supreme resplendency, that shines in god,
for those dim represcntations of it in the creature, is as absurd
as it were for a persian to offer his sacrifice to a parhelion in-
stead of adoring the sun. - - boyle.
resple'nden f. adj. [rospendins, lat..] bright; shining;
having a beautiful lustre.
milton.
rich in commodities, beautiful in situation, resplendent in
all glory. camden's remain.
there all within full rich array'd he found,
with royal arras and resplendent gold. - spensor.
the ancient electrum had in it a fifth of silver to the gold
and made a compound metal, as fit for most uses as gold, and
more resplendent. bacon's natural hoy.
empress of this fair world, resplendent eve 1 44ilion.
every body looks most splendid and luminous in the hght
of its own colour: cinnaber in the homogeneal light is most
resplendent, in the green light it is manifestly less resplendent,
in the blue light still less. . . mewton's optici.
resplendent brass, and more resplendent dames. pope.
resple'nd ently. adv. [from resplendent. j. with lustre;
brightly; splendidly. -
to respond. v. n. [respondeo, lat. respondre, fr.]
1. to answer. little used. -
2. to correspond ; to suit.
to ev'ry theme responds thy various lay;
here rowls a torrent, there meanders play.
respondent. n.s. [respondens, lat.]
1. an answerer in a suit.
in giving an answer, the respondent should be in court, and
personally admonished by the judge to answer the judge's in-
terrogation. ayliffe's parergon.
2. one whose province, in a set disputation, is to refute ob-
jections. o
how becomingly does philopolis exercise his office, and
seasonably commit the opponent with the respondent, like a
long practised moderator more's divine dialogues.
the respondent may easily shew, that though wine may do
all this, yet it may be finally hurtsul to the soul and body of
him. //atts’s logick.
respo'nse, n. s. [responsum, lat.] -
1. an answer ; commonly an oraculous answer
mere natural piety has taught men to receive the rosoft,
of the gods with all possible veneration. gov. of the jogue.
the oracles, which had before flourished, began to droop,
and from giving responses in verse, descended to prose, and
within a while were utterly silenced. hammond.
2. [respons, fr.] answer made by the congregation, speaking
alternately with the priest in publick worship.
to make his parishioners kneel and join in the responses, be
gave every one of them a hassock and common prayer book.
o addison's spediator.
3. reply to an objection in a formal disputation.
brooms.
let the respondent not turn opponent; except in retorting.
the argument upon his adversary after a direct responso 5 and
even this is allowed only as a confirmation of his own re-
sponse. j/atts on the a4ind.
respo'nsible, adj. [from responsus, lat.]
i. answerable; accountable.
heathens, who have certainly the talent of natural know-
ledge, are responsible for it. hammond.
he as much satisfies the itch of telling news; he as much
persuades his hearers; and all this while he has his retreat
secure, and stands not responsible for the truth of his re-
lations. government of the zongue.
2. capable of discharging an obligation. o
the necessity of a proportion of money to trade depends
on money as a pledge, which writing cannot supply the place
of ; fince the bill, i receive from one man, will not be ac-
cepted as security by another, he not knowing that the bill is
legal, or that the man bound is honest or responsible. locke.
respossibleness. n. / [from responsole.j state of being
obliged or qualified to answer.
responsion. n.s. [responso, lat.] the ad of answering.
re:posssty e. adj. [responsis, fr. from respojas, lat.]
i. answering; making answer. -
f a certificate is a responsive letter, or letter by way of an-
wer.
ayliff's parergon.
2. correspondent; suited to something else.
sing of love and gay desire,
responsive to the warbling lyre. fenton.
be there demodocus the bard of fame,
taught by the gods to please, when high he fings
the vocal lay responsive to the strings. pope's odyssey.
rooks. adj. [responsorius, lat. j containing tan-
wer. -
rest. m. s. snere, saxon; rufte, dutch..]
1. sleep; repose.
all things retir'd to rest,
mind us of like repose. o milton.
mytost limbs are wearied into rest. pope.
2. the final sleep; the quietness of death.
oft with holy hymns he charm'd their ears;
for david left him, when he went to ros,
his lyre.
3. stilness; cessation or absence of motion.
, purefaction asketh res'; for the subtle motion, which pu-
tfcfaction requireth, is disturbed by any agitation. boon.
. . . . . - what
dryden's parson.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e s
r e s
what cause mov'd the creator, in his holy rost, -
so late to build. - milicn.
all things past are equally and perfeotly at res'; and to
this way of consideration of them are all one, whether they
were before the world, or but yesterday. locke.
4. quiet; peace; cessation from disturbance. -
learn of me, for i am meek and lowly in heart; and ye
shall find res' unto your souls. alsat. xi. 29.
he giveth you rest from all your enemies. deut. xii. 10.
'scap'd from such storms of pow'r, holding it best -
to be below herself to be at res. daniel's civil war.
the root cut off, from whence these tumults rose,
he should have rest, the commonwealth repose. daniel.
thus fenc'd, but not at rest or ease of mind. milton.
where can a frail man hide him in what arms
shall a short life enjoy a little rest. fanshaw.
with what a load of vengeance am i prest,
yet never, never, can i hope for res';
for when my heavy burden i remove,
the weight falls down, and crushes her i love. dryden.
like the sun, it had light and agility; it knew no rest but
in motion, no quiet but in 2etivity. south’s sermons.
thither, where sinners may have rest, i go. pope.
the grave, where ev'n the great find res. pope.
5. cessation from bodily labour. ---
there the weary be at rest. job iii. 17.
the christian chuseth for his day of rest, the first day of the
week, that he might thereby profess himself a servant of god,
who on the morning of that day vanquished satan. nelson,
6. support; thot on which any thing leans or rests.
forth prick'd clorinda from the throng, - - -
and 'gainst tancredie set her spear in rest. fairfix.
a man may think, that a musket may be shot off as well
upon the arm, as upon a res?; but when all is done, good
counsel setteth business straight. bacon.
their vizors clos'd, their lances in the res?,
or at the helmet pointed, or the crest; -
they speed the race. dryden's knight's 7 a.k.
take the handle in your right hand, and clasping the blade
of it in your left, lean it steady upon the rost, holding the
edge a little asant over the work, so as a corner of the thin
side of the chissel may bear upon the res?, and the flat side
of the chiffel may make a small angle with the rest. moxon.
. place of repose.
7 sustain’d by him with comforts, till we end -
in dust, our final rest and native home. milton.
8. final hope. - - t
sea fights have been final to the war, but this is, when
princes set up their rest upon the battle. bacon.
this answer would render their counsels of less reverence
to the people, if upon those reasons, they should recede from
what they had, with that confidence and disdain of the house
of peers, demanded of the king; they therefore resolved to
set up their rest upon that stake, and to go through with it, or
rish in the attempt. clarendon.
9. [rese, fr. quod rostat, latin.] remainder; what remains.
religion gives part of its reward in hand, the present com-
fort of having done our duty; and for the rest, it offers us
the best security that heaven can give. tiloson.
the pow'r in glory shone,
by her bent bow and her keen arrows known
the rest a huntress. dryden's knight's tale.
resor. adj. [restes, fr. good rosłat, lat..] others; those not
included in any proposition.
by description of their qualities, many things may be
jearned concerning the rest of the inhabitants. abbot.
they had no other consideration of the publick, than that no
disturbance might interrupt their quiet in their own days; and
that the rest, who had larger hearts and more publick spirits,
would extend their labour, activity, and advice only to secure
the empire at home by all peaceable arts. clarendon.
plato, and the rest of the philosophers, acknowledged the
unity, power, wisdom, goodness, and providence of the su-
preme god. - stillingfleet.
arm'd like the rest, the trojan prince appears,
and by his pious labour urges theirs. dryden.
upon so equal terms did they all stand, that no one had a
fairer pretence of right than the ros'. woodward.
72 r est. v., n. [from the noun.]
1. i’o sleep; to be asleep; to slumber.
fancy then retires
into her private cell, when nature res's,
milton.
2. to sleep the final sleep; to die.
'iseo, jorvov
kolozzro. 39%rxiv. o aoys re; dy238;.
glad i’d lay me down,
as in my mother's lap; there i should rest
and sleep secure. milton.
3. to be at quiet ; to be at peace; to be without disturbance.
thither let us tend
from off the tossing of these fiery waves,
there rest, if any rest can harbour there. milton,
4. to be without motion; to be still.
over the tent a cloud shall rost by day.
5. to be fixed in any state or opinion, . .
he will not rost content, though thou gives: many gifts.
-- prov. vi. 35.
every creature has a share in the common blessings of pro-
vidence ; and every creature ibould re/? well satisfied with its
proportion in them. l'ashange.
after such a lord i res! secure,
thou wilt no foreign reins or trojan load endure. drydon.
there yet survives the lawful heir
of sancho's blood, whom, when i shall produce,
! rost assur'd to see you pale with fear.
6. to cease from labour. - - -
six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day
thou shalt resi. - exodus xxiii. 12.
the ark went before, to search out a resting place for
them. aumb. x. 33.
zoław.
dylan.
from work -
refting, he bless'd the seventh day. a slizn.
- when you enter into the regions of death, you ro/? from all
your labours and your fears. taylor's rule of living hoy.
7. to be satisfied; to acquiesce. -
to urge the foe to battle,
prompted by blind revenge and wild despair,
were to refuse th’ awards of providence,
and not to res? in heaven's determination. allson,
8. to lean; to recline for support or quiet.
on him i re/ed, -
and, not without consid'ring, fix'd my fate. pryden.
sometimes it rests upon testimony, when testimony of right
has nothing to do; because it is easier to believe, than to be
scientifically instructed. locke.
the philosophical use of words conveys the precise notions
of things, which the mind may rest upon, and be satisfied
with, in its search after knowledge. locke.
9. [rosło, lat. offer, fr.] to be left; to remain.
ałł'n he is ; and now
what res's, but that the mortal sentence pass * *
on his transgression. azilton's par. l3/?.
there re/leth the comparative; that is, its being grantea,
that it is either lawful or binding, yet whether other things be
not preferred before it, as extirpation of heresies. bacon.
to rest. v. a.
i. to lay to rest. .
your piety has paid * - - -
all needful rites, to rest my wand'ring shade. dryden.
2. to place as on a support.
- as the vex'd world, to find repose, at last
itself into augustus’ arms did cast;
so england now doth, with like toil opprest, -
her weary head upon your bosom rest. j/aller.
the protestants having well studied the fathers, were now
willing to rest their cause, not upon scripture only, but fa-
thers too; so far at least as the three first centuries. waterland.
here resis his head upon the lap of earth,
a youth to fortune and to fame unknown.
rest a gn ant.
flow or motion.
upon the tops of high mountains, the air, which bears
against the rostagnant quicksilver, is less pressed by the less
onderous incumbent air. boyle.
73 restagnate. v. m. [re and stagnate. ) to stand
without flow.
the blood returns thick, and is apt to reflagnate. i/iseman.
restagnation. m. s. [from rostagnate.] the state of stand-
ing without flow, course, or motion.
restauration. m. s. [rosauro, lat j the agt of recover-
ing to the former state.
adam is in us an original cause of our nature, and of that
corruption of nature which causeth death; christ as the
cause original of restauration to life. - płocker.
o my dear father! rosauration hang
thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiss
repair those violent harms, that my two sisters -
have in thy reverence made. shakesp. king lear.
spermatical parts will not admit a regeneration, much less
will they receive an integral restauration. - brown.
to rest e. m. v. a. [re and stem.] to force back against the
current.
gray.
adj. [rostagnans, lat..] remaining without
how they reftem
their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
toward cyprus. shakesp. othel's.
re'stful, adj [reft and ful.j. quiet; being at rest.
is not my arm of length,
that reacheth from the resifil english court,
as far as calais to my uncle's head? shakesp. rich. iii.
rest ha'rrow. n. s. a plant. -
resti'ff, adj. [rosis, fr. resivo, ital.]
1. unwilling to stir; resolute against going forward; obstinate;
stubborn. it is originally used of an horse, that, though not
wearied, will not be driven forward.
all,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. s
r. e. s
all, who before him did ascend the throne,
labour'd to draw three restive nations on. rasoommon.
this restiff stubborness is never to be excused under any
-
pretence whatsoever. l’estrange.
some, with studious care,
their restiff steeds in sandy plains prepare. dryden.
the archangel, when discord was restive, and would not
be drawn from her beloved monastery with fair words, drags
her out with many stripes. dryden's dedication to juvenal.
so james the drowsy genius wakes
of britain, long entranc'd in charms,
restiff, and slumb’ring on its arms. dryden.
the pamper’d colt will discipline disdain,
impatient of the lash, and rostiff to the rein. dryden.
2. being at rest; being less in motion. not used.
palsies oftenest happen upon the left side; the most vigo-
rous part protecting itself, and protruding the matter upon the
weaker and re/live side. brown's wulgar errours.
rest i'fn ess. m. s. [from restiff.] obstinate reluctance.
overt virtues bring forth praise; but secret virtues bring
forth fortune: certain deliveries of a man’s self, which the
spanish name desemboltura, partly expresseth, where there be
not stands nor rosłiveness in a man's nature; but the wheels
of his mind keep way with the wheels of his fortune. bacon.
that it gave occasion to some men's further rosiivens, is
imputable to their own depraved tempers. king charles.
rest1'nction. m. s. [restinctus, lat..] the act of extin-
guishing.
rest itu tio n. m. s. [restitutio, lat.]
1. the act of restoring what is lost or taken away.
to subdue an usurper, should be no unjust enterprise or
wrongful war, but a restitution of ancient rights unto the
crown of england, from whence they were most unjustly ex-
pelled and long kept out. speoser an ireland.
he would pawn his fortunes
to hopeless rostitution, so he might
be call'd your vanquisher. shak sp. coriolanus.
he resiitution to the value makes; -
nor joy in his extorted treasure takes. sandys.
whosoever is an effective real cause of doing a neighbour
wrong, by what instrument soever he does it, is bound to
make restitution. taylor's rule of living holy.
in case our offence against god hath been complicated
with injury to men, it is but reasonable we should make re-
jiitution. tillotson's sermons.
a great man, who has never been known willingly to pay
a just debt, ought not all of a sudden to be introduced, mak-
ing re/litution of thousands he has cheated: let it suffice to
pay twenty pounds to a friend, who has lost his note. arbuth.
2. the aet of recovering its former state or posture. -
in the woody parts of plants, which are their bones, the
principles are so compounded, as to make them flexible with-
out joints, and also elastick; that so their roots may yield to
ftones, and their trunks to the wind, with a power of rosti-
tution. grew's cymel.
re'st less. adj. [from res.]
1. being without sleep.
* resiles, he pass'd the remnants of the night,
till the fresh air proclaim'd the morning nigh:
and burning ships, the martyrs of the fight,
with paler fires beheld the eastern sky.
2. unquiet; without peace.
ease to the body some, none to the mind
from resiloss thoughts, that like a deadly swarm
of hornets arm’d, no sooner found alone,
but rush upon me thronging, and present
times past, what once 1 was, and what i’m now. milton.
* could we not wake from that lethargick dream,
but to be restless in a worse extreme denham.
we find our souls disordered and restless, tossed and dis-
quieted by passions, ever secking happiness in the enjoyments
of this world, and ever missing what they seek. atterbury.
what tongue can speak the restless monarch's woes,
when god and nathan were declar'd his foes : prior.
3. unconstant; unsettled.
he was stout of courage, strong of hand,
bold was his heart, and resiles was his spright.
he's proud, fantastick, apt to change,
reftles; at home, and ever prone to range.
4. not still ; in continual motion.
how could nature on their orbs impose
such restless revolution, day by day
repeated. milton.
ressor lesly, adv. [from reslls...] without rest; unquietly.
when the mind casts and turns itself resilesly from one thing
to another, strains this power of the soul to apprehend, that to
judge, another to divide, a fourth to remember: thus tracing
out the nice and scarce observable difference of some things,
and the real agreement of others; at length it brings all the
ends of a long hypothesis together. south.
re's tlesness. m. s. [from resoloss.]
h. want of sleep.
dryden.
fairfax.
dryden.
reftisn's and intermission from sleep, grieved persons are
molested with, whereby the blood is dried. harvey.
2. want of rest; unquietness. -
let him keep the rest,
but keep them with repining resilsness t
let himabe rich and weary, that at least,
if goodness lead him not, yet weariness
may toss him to my breast.
i sought my bcd, in hopes relief to find,
but restlessness was mistress of my mind.
3. motion; agitation.
the trembling refliesness of the needle, in any but the north
point of the compass, manifests its inclination to the pole;
which its wavering and its rest bear equal witness to. boyle.
restor able. adj. [from restore..] what may be restored.
by cutting turf without any regularity, great quantities of
restorable land are made uttely desperate. swift.
restor aotion. n.s.. [from restore; re/lauration, fr.]
1. the act of replacing in a former state. this is properly re-
jłauration. -
hail, royal albion, hail to thee,
thy longing people's expectation 1
sent from the gods to set us free
from bondage and from usurpation:
behold the different climes agree,
rejoicing in thy restoration. dryden’s albion,
the athenians, now deprived of the only person that was
able to recover their losses, repent of their rashness, and en-
deavour in vain for his rosłoration. swift.
2. recovery.
the change is great in this restoration of the man, from a
state of spiritual darkness, to a capacity of perceiving divine
truth.
res to"rative, adj. [from rosłcre.j
power to recruit life.
their taste no knowledge works at least of evil;
but life preserves, destroys life's enemy,
hunger, with sweet reflorative delight. a4ilton.
resto rative. m. s. [from resore.] a medicine that has the
power of recruiting life. .
i will kiss thy lips;
haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
to make medie with a resorative. shakesp. rom, and yul.
god saw it necessary by such mortifications to quench the
boundless rage of an insatiable internperance, to make the
weakness of the flesh, the physick and resiorative of the
spirit. south's sermons.
asses milk is an excellent restorative in consumptions.
- alfortionar.
he prescribes an english gallon of asses milk, especially as
a restorative. arbuthnot,
to restore. v. a. [restaurer, fr. rosławro, lat.]
1. to give back what has been lost or taken away.
restore the man his wife. gen. xx. 7.
he shall rytore in the principal, and add the fifth part
herbert,
harte,
rogers.
that which has the
in oic. - lev. vi. 5.
she lands him on his native shores,
and to his father's longing arms rosiores. dryden.
2. to bring back.
the father banish’d virtue shall resore,
and crimes shall threat the guilty world no more. dryd.
thus pencils can, by one slight touch, restore
smiles to that changed face, that wept before. dryden.
3. to retrieve ; to bring back from degeneraticn, declension,
or ruin, to its former state.
loss of eden, till one greater man
rosłos e it, and regain the blissful seat. milton.
th’ archangel paus'd
between the world destroy'd and world resor’d, milton.
these artificial experiments are but so many essays, whereby
men attempt to restore themselves from the first gencial curse
inflicted upon their labours. j/ilins's afathem. a sigick.
in his odysses, homer explains, that the hardest difficulties
may be overcome by labour, and our fortune rosłored after the
severest affictions. prizr.
4. to cure; to recover from disease.
garth, faster than a plague destroys, refores. granville.
5. to recover passages in books from corruption.
resto'rer. m. s. [from reflore..] one that restores; one that
recovers the lost; or repairs the decayed.
next to the son,
destin’d restorer of mankind, by whom
new heav'n and earth shall to the ages rise. amilton.
i foretel you, as the re/lorer of poetry. dryden.
here are ten thousand persons reduced to the necessity of a
low diet and moderate exercise, who are the only great re-
storers of our breed, without which, the nation would in an
age become one great hospital. - swift.
to restratn. v. a. [rosłreindre, fr. rosłring, lat.]
1. to withhold; to keep in.
if she restrain'd the riots of your followers,
'tis to such wholesome end as clears her. shakesp.
the
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- r e s r e s
the gods will plague thee, to restri'ct. v. a. [re/?ricfus, lat.] to limit; to con-
that thou restrain's from me the duty, which fine. a word scarce english.
to a nother's part belongs. shakesp. coriolanui. in the enumeration of constitutions in this chapter, there
2. to repress; to keep in awe.
is not one that can be limited and resiricied by such a distinc-
the law of nature would be in vain, if there were no tion, nor can perhaps the same person, in different circum-
body that, in the state of nature, had a power to execute stances, be properly confined to one or the other. arbuthnot.
that law, and thereby preserve the innocent and restrain restruction; n.s. [rofiriction, fr.] confinement; limitation.
offenders. locke.
this is to have the same restriction with all other recreations, -
that all men may be restrained from doing hurt to one an- that it be made a divertisement not a trade. gov. of ton.
other, the execution of the law of nature is in that state put iron manufacture, of all others, ought the least to be en-
into every man's hand, whereby every one has a right to couraged in ireland; or, if it be, it requires the most restrioion
punish the transgressors to such a degree as may hinder its to certain places. temple's miscellanies:
violation. locke.
all duties are matter of conscience; with this rosłriction,
that a superior obligation suspends the force of an inferior.
- - l'estrange.
reftrain in me the cursed theughts, that nature each other gift, which god on man bestows,
gives way to in repose. shakespeare's macbeth. its proper bounds and due restric?ion knows;
compassion gave him up to tears to one fix’d purpose dedicates its power. prior.
a space, till firmer thoughts restrain’d excess. milton. celsus's rule, with the proper rosłriciions, is good for people
4. to abridge. in health. s arbuthnot.
me of my lawful pleasure she refrain'd, rest ri'ctive. adj. [from restrict.]
and pray'd me oft forbearance. shakesp. cymbeline. 1. expresfing limitation.
though they two were committed, at least restrained of they, who would make the rostriciive particle belong to
their liberty, yet this discovered too much of the humour of the latter clause, and not to the first, do not attend to the
the court.
clarendon. reason. stillingfleet.
5. to pull tight. 2. [rostriclis, fr.] styptick; astringent.
his horse, with a half checked bit, and a headstall of i applied a plaister over it, made up with my common re-
sheep's leather, which being restrained to keep him from stricfive powder. wiseman's surgery.
{tumbling, hath been often burst, and now repaired with restri'ctively. adv. [from refrictive..] with limitation.
knots. o shakespeare. all speech, tending to the glory of god or the good of
6. to limit; to confine. man, is aright dire&amp;ted; which is not to be understood so re-
we restrain it to those only duties, which all men, by striciively, as if nothing but divinity, or necessary concerns of
force of natural wit, understand to be such duties as concern life, may lawfully be brought into discourse. gov. of tan.
all men. hooker. to restri'nge. v. a. [restringo, lat.] to confine; to con-
upon what ground can a man promise himself a future re- tract; to astringe.
pentance, who cannot promise himself a futurity 2, whose life rest ri'ng ent. n. s. [reffringens, lat. restringent, fr.] that
depends upon his breath, and is so restrained to the present, which hath the power of contracting; styptick.
that it cannot secure to itself the reversion of the very next the two latter indicate phlebotomy for revulsion, resorin-
minute. south’s sermons. gents to stench, and incrassatives to thicken the blood. harv.
not only a metaphysical or natural, but a moral universa-
re'sty. adj. [rostiff, fr.] obstinate in standing still. see
lity also is to be restrained by a part of the predicate ; as all restiff.
the italians are politicians; that is, those among the italians,
. to suppress ; to hinder; to repress,
3 w. pow'rs 2.
come, our stomachs
who are politicians, are subtle politicians; i. e. they are ge- will make what's homely favoury, weariness
nerally so. watts's logick. can snore upon the flint, when resly sloth
rest rai’nable. adj. [from rostrain.) capable to be re- finds the down pillow hard. shakesp. cymbeline.
strained.
have not other hands been tried and found risly; but we
therein we must not deny a liberty; nor is the hand of flick at nothing. -
- - davenant.
the painter more restrainable, than the pen of the poet. bro.
men of discretion, whom people in power may with little
rest rai’nedly. adv. [from reflrained.] with restraint ; ceremony load as heavy as they please, find them neither rosy
without latitude. nor vicious. swift.
that christ's dying for all is the express doctrine of the
to resubli'me. v. a. [re and sublime.] to sublime another
scripture, is manifested by the world, which is a word of the
time.
widest extent, and although it be sometimes used more re- when mercury sublimate is resullimed with fresh mercu o
strainedly, yet never doth signify a far smaller disproportionable
it becomes mercurius dulcis, which is a white tasteless earth
part of the world. hammond's fundamentals. scarce dissolvable in water, and mercurius dulcis res..blimed
restrai'n er. m. s. [from rostrain..] one that restrains ; one with spirit of salt returns into mercury sublimate. newton.
that withholds. to result. win. [resulter, fr. resulto, lat.]
if nothing can relieve us, we must with patience submit 1. to fly back.
unto that restraint, and expe&amp;t the will of the restrainer. with many a weary step, and many a groan,
- brown's vulgar erraurs. up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone;
rest ra1(nt. n. s. [from rosłrain; rosłreint, fr.] the huge round stone, resulting with a bound,
1. abridgement of liberty. - thunders impetuous down, and smoaks along the ground.
she will well excuse, pope's odyssey.
why at this time the doors are barr'd against you ; 2. [ resulter, fr.] to rise as a conscquence; to be produced
depart in patience, as the effect of causes jointly concurring.
and about evening come yourself alone, rue prospers much, if set by a fig tree; which is caused,
to know the reason of this strange rostraint. shakesp. not by reason of friendship, but by extraction of a contrary
i request - juice ; the one drawing juice fit to result sweet, the other
th’ enfranchisement of arthur, whose restraint bitter. bacon's natural history.
doth move the murm'ring lips of discontent. shakesp.
- - such huge extremes, when nature doth unite,
it is to no purpose to lay restraints or give privileges to men,
wonder from thence results, from thence delight. denh.
in such general terms, as the particular persons concerned upon the dissolution of the first earth, this very face of
cannot be known by. locke.
things would immediately result. burnet's theory of the earth.
i think it a manifest disadvantage, and a great rostraint ... pleasure and peace do naturally result from a holy and good
upon u.s. felton goz the classicks. life. tillotson's sermons.
2. prohibition. - - the horror of an object may overbear the pleasure resulting
what mov’d our parents to transgress his will from its greatness. addison.
for one restraint, lords of the world besides : milton. their effects are often very disproportionable to the prin-
3. limitation ; restriction. ciples and parts that result from the analysis.
baker.
if all were granted, yet it must be maintained within any 3. to arise as a conclusion from premises.
bold restraints, far otherwise than it is received. - brown. resu'lt. n. s. [from the verb.]
4. repression; bindrance of will; act of withholding ; state of 1. resilience; act of flying back.
being withheld. sound is produced between the string and the air, by the
there is no rostraint to the lord to save, by many or by return or the result of the string, which was strained by the
few. 1 sam. xiv. 6. touch to his former place.
thus it shall befal
him who, to worth in women overtrusting, -
lets her will rule; restraint she will not brook. milton.
ls there any thing, which reflects a greater lustre upon a
- bacon's natural history.
2. consequence; effect produced by the concurrence of co-
operating causes.
did my judgment tell me, that the propositions sent to me
were the results of the major part of their votes, 1 should then
man's person, than a severe temperance and a rostraint of not suspect my own judgment for not speedily concurring
himself from vicious pleasures? south. with them, ring charles.
vol. ii. 21 x as
- - --------
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. t
r e to
as in perfumes, compos'd with art and cost,
'tis hard to say what scent is uppermost,
nor this part musk or civet can we call,
or amber, but a rich result of all :
so she was all a sweet, whose ev'ry part,
in due proportion mix’d, proclaim'd the maker's art. dry.
buying of land is the result of a full and satiated gain :
men in trade seldom lay out money upon land, till their profit
has brought in more than trade can employ. docke.
, inference from premises.
these things are a result or judgment upon faet. south.
4. resolve 5 decision. improper.
rude, passionate, and mistaken results have, at certain
times, fallen from great assemblies. swift.
resu'lt an ce. n.s. [resultance, fr.] the aet of resulting.
resu'mable. adj. [from resume.] what may be taken back.
this was but an indulgence, and therefore resumable by
the victor, unless there intervened any capitulation to the
contrary. hale.
to resu’me. v. a. [resumo, lat.]
1. to take back what has been given.
the sun, like this, from which our fight we have,
gaz'd on too long, resumes the light he gave. denham.
sees not my love, how time resumes
the glory which he lent these flow’rs;
though none shou'd taste of their perfumes,
yet must they live but some few hours:
time, what we forbear, devours. waller.
2. to take back what has been taken away.
that opportunity,
which then they had to take from's, to resume
we have again. shakespeare's cymbeline.
they resume what has been obtained fraudulently, by sur-
prise and upon wrong suggestions. davenant.
3. to take again. -
he'll enter into glory, and resume his seat. milton.
at this, with look serene, he rais'd his head;
reason resum'd her place, and passion fled. dryden.
4. dryden uses it with again, but improperly, unless the resump-
tion be repeated.
to him our common grandsire of the main
had giv'n to change his form, and chang'd, resume again. dry.
5. to begin again what was broken off; as, to resume a discourse.
resu'mption. m. s. [resomption, fr. resumptus, lat..] the aet
of resuming.
if there be any fault, it is the resumption or the dwelling
too long upon his arguments. denham.
the universal voice of the people seeming to call for some
kind of resumption, the writer of these papers thought it might
not be unseasonable to publish a discourse upon grants. dav.
resu’mptive, adj. [resumptus, lat.] taking back.
resupination. n. s. [resupino, lat.] the act of lying on
the back.
to resu r v e^x. v. a. [re and survey..] to review; to sur-
vey again. -
i have, with cursory eye, o'erglanc'd the articles;
appoint some of your council presently
to sit with us, once more with better heed
to resurvey them. shakesp. henry v.
resur resction. n. s. [resurrection, fr. resurrecium, lat..] :
revival from the dead; return from the grave.
the sadduces were grieved, that they taught, and preached
through jesus the resurreołion from the dead. act; iv. 2.
nor after resurrection shall he stay -
longer on earth, than certain times to appear
to his disciples. milton.
he triumphs in his agonies, whilst the soul springs forward to
the great object which she has always had in view, and leaves
the body with an expectation of being remitted to her in a
glorious and joyful resurreaion, addison's spectator.
perhaps there was nothing ever done in all past ages, and
which was not a publick fact, so well attested as the resur-
- rediion of christ. watts. .
t, resu/scitate. v. a. [resuscito, latin.] to stir up
anew ; to revive.
we have beasts and birds for dissections, though divers
parts, which ?. account vital, be perished and taken forth,
resuscitating of some that seem dead in appearance. bacon.
resuscit ation. m. s. [from resuscitate.] the aet of stirring
up anew ; the aet of reviving, or state of being revived.
your very obliging manner of enquiring after me, at your
resuscitation, should have been sooner answered ; i fincerely
rejoice at your recovery. pope.
t, retai"l. v. a. [retailler, fr.]
1. to sell in small quantities; in consequence of selling at
second hand.
all encouragement should be given to artificers; and those,
who make, should also vend and retail their commodities, locke.
2. to sell at second hand.
the sage dame,
. by names of toasts, retails each batter'd jade, pope.
3. to tell in broken parts, or at second hand.
he is furnish'd with no certainties,
more than he haply may retail from me. shakesh,
bound with triumphant garlands will i come,
and lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
to whom i will retail my conquest won,
and she shall be sole victress, caesar's caesar. shakes.
ret a1 l. n.s.. [from the verb.] sale by small quantities, or
at second hand.
the author, to prevent such a monopoly of sense, is re-
solved to deal in it himself by retail. addison.
we force a wretched trade by beating down the sale,
and selling basely by retail. swift's miscellanies.
retai'i. er. m. s. [from retail.] one who sells by small
quantities.
from these particulars we may guess at the rest, as retailer:
do of the whole piece, by taking a view of its ends.
- hakewill.
to retai'n. v. a. [retineo, lat. retenir, fr.]
1. to keep; not to lose.
where is the patience now,
that you so oft have boasted to retain p. shakesp. k. lear,
though th' offending part felt mortal pain,
th’ immortal part its knowledge did retain. denham,
the vigor of this arm was never vain;
and that my wonted prowess i retain,
witness these heaps of slaughter. dryden,
a tomb and fun'ral honours i decreed;
the place your armour and your name retains. dryden.
whatever ideas the mind can receive and contemplate
without the help of the body, it is reasonable to conclude, it
can retain without the help of the body too. locke.
2. to keep ; not to lay aside.
let me retain
the name and all the addition to a king;
the sway, beloved sons, be yours. shakesp. king lear,
as they did not like to retain god in their knowledge,
god gave them over to a reprobate mind. rom. i. 22.
be obedient and retain
unalterably firm his love entire. milton.
although they retain the word mandrake in the text, yet
they retract it in the margin. brown's vulgar errours.
they, who have restored painting in germany, not having
seen any of those fair reliques of antiquity, have retained much
of that barbarous method, dryde.
3. to keep; not to dismiss. -
receive him that is mine owh bowels; whom i would
have retained with me. philem. 13.
hollow rocks retain
the sound of blustring winds. milton,
4. to keep in pay; to hire. r -
a benedictine convent has now retained the most learned
father of their order to write in its defence. addison.
*to retai'n. v. m.
1. to belong to ; to depend on. -
these betray upon the tongue flo heat nor corrosiveness,
but coldness mixed with a somewhat languid relish retaining
to bitterness. - boyle.
in animals many actions depend upon their living form, as
well as that of mixtion, and though they wholly seem to re-
tain to the body, depart upon disunion. brown.
2. to keep; to continue. not in use. perhaps it should be
freshat??. -
no more can impure man retain and move
in the pure region of that worthy love,
than earthly substance can unforc'd aspire,
and leave his nature to converse with fire. donne.
ret a1'ner. m. s. [from retain.]
i. an adherent ; a dependant; a hanger-on.
you now are mounted,
where pow'rs are your retainers. shakesp. henry viii.
one darling inclination of mankind affeds to be a retainer
to religion; the spirit of opposition, that lived long before
christianity, and can easily subsist without it. swift.
a combination of honest men would endeavour to extir-
pate all the profligate immoral retainers to each side, that have
nothing to recommend them but an implicit submission to
their leaders, addison's spediator.
2. in common law, retainer signifieth a servant not menial nor
familiar, that is not dwelling in his house; but only using or
bearing his name or livery. cowel.
3. the aet of keeping dependants, or being in dependance.
by another law, the king's officers and farmers were to for-
feit their places and holds, in case of unlawful retainer, or
partaking in unlawful assemblies. bacon's henry vii.
to ret aske. v. a. [re and take.] to take again.
a day should be appointed, when the remonstrance should
be retaken into confideration. clarendon.
to reta(liate. v. a. [re and talio, lat.] to return by
giving like for like; to repay; to requite: it may be used of
good or evil.
i,
6 it
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e t
r e t
it is very unlucky, to be obliged to retaliate the injuries of
authors, whose works are so soon forgotten, that we are in
diliger of appearing the first aggressors. swift.
if a first minister of state had used me as you have done,
rtaliating would be thought a mark of courage. swift.
rftaliation. m. s. [from retaliate.] requital; return of
like for like. -
they thought it no irreligion to prosecute the severest re-
taliation or revenge; so that at the same time their outward
man might be a saint, and their inward man a devil. south.
god, graciously becoming our debtor, takes what is done
to others as done to himself, and by promise obliges himself
to full retaliation. calamy's sermons.
t, retard. v. a... [retardo, lat. retarder, fr.]
i. to hinder ; to obstruct in swiftness of course.
how iphitus with me, and pelias
slowly retire; the one retarded was
. by feeble age, the other by a wound. denham.
2. to delay; to put off.
nor kings nor nations -
one moment can retard th’ appointed hour. dryden.
it is as natural to delay a letter at such a season, as to re-
tard a melancholy visit to a person one cannot relieve. pope.
to reta'rd. v. n. to stay back. -
some years it hath also retarded, and come far later, than
usually it was expe&amp;ted. brown's wulgar errours.
retarda’tion. m. s. [retardation, fr. from retard.] hin-
drance; the act of delaying. -
out of this a man may devise the means of altering the
colour of birds, and the retardation of hoary hairs. bacon.
reta'rder. m. s. [from retard.] hinderer; obstruster.
this disputing way of enquiry, is so far from advancing
science, that it is no inconsiderable retarder. glanville.
t, ret.ch. v. n. [hnaecan, saxon.] to force up something
from the stomach. it is commonly written §.
ret chless. adj. [sometimes written wretchloss, properly reck-
soft. see reckless.]. careless. . . .
he struggles into breath, and cries for aid;
then helpless in his mother’s lap is laid:
he creeps, he walks, and issuing into man,
grudges their life, from whence his own began; , , ,
reichloss of laws, affects to rule alone. dryden.
retesction. m. s. [retectus, lat..] the act of discovering
to the view. - - - -
this is rather a restoration of a body to its own colour;
, or a retection of its native colour, than a change. boyle.
ret ention. n.s. [retention, fr. retentio, from retentus, lat.]
1. the act of retaining; the power of retaining.
no woman's heart
so big to hold so much; they lack retention. shakesp.
a froward retention of custom is as turbulent a thing, as
an innovation; and they that reverence too much old things,
are but a scorn to the new. bacon’s natural history.
2. retention and retentive faculty is that state of contraction in
the solid parts, which makes them hold fast their proper
contents. quincy.
3. memory. . . - -- - -
the backward learner makes amends another way, ex-
piating his want of docility with a deeper and a more rooted
retention. south's sermons.
retention is the keeping of those simple ideas, which from
sensation or refle&amp;tion the mind hath received. locke.
4. the act of withholding any thing.
- his life i gave him, and did thereto add
my love without retention or restraint; - -
all his. shakespeare's twelfth night.
3. custody; confinement; restraint.
i * the old and miserable king -
to some retention ahd appointed guard. shakesp. k. lear.
rete’ntive. adj. [retentus, lat. retentif, fr.]
1. having the power of retention.
it keepeth sermons in memory, and doth in that respect,
although not feed the soul of man, yet help the retentive force
of that stomach of the mind. hooker.
have i been ever free, and must my house
be my retentive enemy, my goal?
- from retentive cage
when sullen philomel escapes, her notes
she varies, and of past imprisonment
sweetly complains. - -
in tot'nam fields the brethren with amaze
prick all their ears up, and forget to graze;
long chancery-lane retentive rolls the sound,
and courts to courts return it round and round.
shakespeare:
philips.
pope.
-2. having memory.
to remember a song or tune, our souls must be an har-
mony continually ruhning over in a filent whisper those mu-
fical accents, which our retentive faculty is preserver of glan.
rete'n'riveness. n.f. [from retentive..] having the quality of
retention. - -
reor icence. n.s. [reticence, fr. reticentia, foom reticco, lat.]
concealment by filence. dici.
reticle. n.s. (reticulum, lat..] a small net. . -
retscular, ad. [from reticulum, lat..] having the form of
a small net.
reti'cula's ep. adj. [reticulatus, lat.] made of network;
formed with interstitial vacuities.
the intervals of the cavities, rising a little, make a pretty
kind of reticulated work. //oodward on fossils.
retifor m. adj. [retiformis, lat.] having the form of a met.
the uveous coat and inside of the choroides are blackened,
that the rays may not be refle&amp;ted backwards to confound the
sight; and if any be by the retiform coat reflected, they are:
soon choaked in the black inside of the uvea. ray.
ret1'nge; n. s. [retenue, fr.] a number attending upon a
principal person 3 a train; a meiny. -
not only this your all licens'd fool,
but other of your insolent retinue, - -
do hourly carp and quarrel. shakesp. king lear.
what followers, what retinue can's thou gain, -
or at thy heels the dizzy multitude,
longer than thou can'st feed them on thy cost? mision.
there appears
the long retinue of a prosperous reign, -
a series of successful years. dryden.
neither pomp nor retinue shall be able to divert the great,
hor shall the rich be relieved by the multitude of his trea-
sures. rogers's sermons.
to reti’re. v. n. [retirer, fr.]
1. to retreat ; to withdraw; to go to a place of privacy.
the mind contracts herself, and shrinketh in,
and to herself she gladly doth retire. davies.
the less i may be blest with her company, the more i will
retire to god and my own heart. king charles.
- thou open'st wisdom's way,
and giv'st access, though secret she retire. milton.
the parliament dissolved, and gentlemen charged to retire
to their country habitations. hayward.
perform'd what friendship, justice, truth require
what could he more but decently retire.
2. to retreat from danger.
set up the standard towards zion, retire, stay not. jer.
from each hand with speed retir’d,
where erst was thickest plac'd, th’ angelick throng. milton.
3. to go from a publick station.
while you, my lord, the rural shades admire,
and from britannia's public posts retire,
me into foreign realms my fate conveys.
. to go off from company. -
the old fellow skuttled out of the room, and retired. arb.
5. to withdraw for safety. -
he, that had driven many out of their country, perished
in a strange land, retiring to the lacedemonians. 2 amac. v.
to reti'r.e. v. a. to withdraw; to take away.
he brake up his court, and retired himself, his wife, and
swift.
addison.
children into a forest thereby. sidney.
he; our hope, might have retir’d his power,
and driven into despair an enemy's hate. shakesp.
i will thence retire me to my milan. shakesp. tempes'.
there may be as great a variety in retiring and withdrawing
men's conceits in the world, as in obtruding them. bacon.
as when the sun is present all the year,
and never doth retire his golden ray,
needs must the spring be everlasting there,
and every season like the month of may.
these actions in her closet, all alone,
retir’d within herself, she doth fulfill. davies.
after some slight skirmishes, he retired himself into the
davies.
castle of farnham. clarendon.
hydra-like, the fire
lifts up his hundred heads to aim his way;
and scarce the wealthy can one half retire, -
before he rushes in to share the prey. drydew.
ret1'r.e. n.s.. [froin the verb.]
1. retreat; recession. not in use.
i heard his praises in pursuit,
but ne'er, till now, his scandal of retire. shakesp.
thou hast talk’d
of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents. shakespeare.
the battle and the retire of the english succours were the
causes of the loss of that dutchy. bacon's henry vii.
2. retirement; place of privacy. not in use.
- eve, who unseen
yet all had heard, with audible lament
discover'd soon the place of her retire.
ret1'red. part. adj. [from retire.]
1. secret; private.
language most shews a man; speak that i may see thee: it
springs out of the most retired and inmost parts of us. b. johns.
some, accustomed to retired speculations, run natural phi-
losophy into metaphysical notions and the abstract generalities
of logick. locke.
milton.
he was admitted into the most secret and retired thoughts .
and counsels of his royal master king willian. addison.
2. withdrawn,
die?. -
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e to
2. withdrawn.
you find the mind in sleep retired from the senses, and out
of these motions made on the organs of sense. locke.
reti'repness. n.s.. [from retired.] solitude; privacy; secrecy.
like one, who in her third widowhood doth profess
herself a nun, ty'd to retiredness, }
so affects my muse now a chaste fallowness. donne.
how could he have the leisure and retiredness of the cloister,
to perform all those acts of devotion in, when the burthen of
the reformation lay upon his shoulders ? atterbury.
ret1're ment. m. s. [from retire.]
i. private abode; secret habitation.
caprea had been the retirement of augustus for some time,
and the residence of tiberius for many years. addison.
he has sold a small estate that he had, and has erected a
charitable retirement for ancient, poor people to live in prayer
&gt; and piety. law.
2. private way of life.
my retirement there tempted me to divert those melancholy
thoughts. denham's dedication.
an elegant sufficiency, content,
retirement, rural quiet, friendship, books,
progressive virtue, and approving heaven. thomson.
3. aet of withdrawing.
short retirement urges sweet return. amilton.
4. state of being withdrawn.
in this retirement of the mind from the senses, it retains a
yet more incoherent manner of thinking, which we call
dreaming. locke.
retool d. part, pass of retell. related or told again.
whatever harry percy then had said
at such a time, with all the rest retold,
may reasonably die.
upon his dead corpse there was such misuse
by those welchwomen done, as may not be
without much shame retold or spoken of.
to reto'rt. v. a. [retortus, lat.]
1. to throw back; to rebound.
his virtues, shining upon others,
heat them, and they retort that heat again
to the first giver. shakesp. troilus and crossida.
2. to retorn any argument, censure, or incivility.
his proof will easily be retorted, and the contrary proved,
by interrogating; shall the adulterer inherit the kingdom of
god? if he shall, what need i, that am now exhorted to re-
form my life, reform it? if he shall not, then certainly i,
that am such, am none of the elect; for all, that are eleet,
shakespeare.
shakesp.
shall certainly inherit the kingdom of god. hammond.
he pass'd through hostile scorn;
and with retorted scorn his back he turn'd. milton.
the respondent may shew, how the opponent's argument
may be retorted against himself. //atts.
3. to curve back.
it would be tried how the voice will be carried in an horn,
which is a line arched; or in a trumpet, which is a line re-
torted; or in some pipe that were sinuous. bacon.
reto'rt. m. s. [retorte, fr. retortum, lat.]
1. a censure or incivility returned.
i said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it
was ; this is called the retort courteous. shakesp.
2. a chynical glass vessel with a bent neck to which the re-
ceiver is fitted.
in a laboratory, where the quick-silver is separated by fire,
i saw an heap of fixteen thousand retorts of iron, every one of
which costs a crown at the best hand from the iron furnaces in
corinthia. brown's travels.
recent urine distilled yields a limpid water; and what re-
mains at the bottom of the retort, is not acid nor alkaline. arb.
r eto'rter. m. s. [from retort.] one that retorts.
re ro'rt ion. m. s. [from retort.] the act of retorting.
to reto'ss. v. a. [re and toss.]. to toss back.
tost and retoft the ball incessant flies. pope's odyssey.
to re rou'ch. v. a. [retoucher, fr.] to improve by new
touches.
he furnished me with all the passages in aristotle and ho-
race, used to explain the art of poetry by painting; which,
if ever i retouch this essay, shall be inserted. dryden.
lintot, dull rogue ! will think your price too much:
“ not, sir, if you revise it and retouch.” pope.
to re tra ce. v.a. [retracer, fr.] to trace back; to trace
dosal il-
* then if the line of turnus you retrace,
he springs from inachus of argive race.
to retract. v. a. [retractus, lat. retracter, fr.]
1. to recall ; to recant.
were i alone to pass the difficulties,
paris should ne'er retract what he hath done,
nor faint in the pursuit. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
if his subtilities could have satisfied me, i would as freely
have retracted this charge of idolatry, as i ever made it. still.
2. to take back ; to resume.
a great, art of that time, which the inhabitants of the
7
dryden.
former earth had to spare, and whereof they made so ill use
was employed in making provisions for bread; and the exces.
of fertility, which contributed so much to their miscarriages
was retracted and cut off. woodward's natural ho.
to retract. v. n. to unsay; to withdraw concession.
she will, and she will not, she grants, denies,
consents, retraffs, advances, and then flies. granville.
retracta'tion, n. s. [retradiation, fr. retradiatio, lat.] re-
cantation; change of opinion declared.
these words are david's retradation, or laying down of a
bloody and revengeful resolution. south's sermons.
retra’ction; n.j. [from retraff.]
1. aet of withdrawing something advanced, or changing some-
thing done. - o
they make bold with the deity, when they make him do
and undo, go forward and backwards by such countermarches
and retraelions, as we do not repute to the almighty. wood,
2. recantation; declaration of change of opinion.
there came into her head certain verses, which if she had
had present commodity, she would have adjoined as a retra.
tion to the other. sidney.
3. aet of withdrawing a claim.
qther men's insatiable desire of revenge hath wholly be-
guiled both church and state, of the benefit of all my either
retractions or concessions. ring charles.
retrai"ct. }n.s. spenser. [retraitte, fr.]
retrai’t.
1. retreat. obsolete.
the earl of lincoln, deceived of the country's concourse
unto him, and seeing the business past retraici, resolved to
make on where the king was, and give him battle. bacon.
2. [retrait, fr. ritratto, i. a cast of the countenance.
obsolete.
upon her eyelids many graces sat,
under the shadow of her even brows,
working bellgards and amorous retraite,
and every one her with a grace endows.
retr ea't. n.s. [retraitte, fr.]
1. act of retiring.
but beauty's triumph is well-tim'd retreat
as hard a science to the fair as great.
2. state of privacy; retirement.
here in the calm still mirror of retreat,
i studied shrewsbury the wise and great.
3. place of privacy; retirement.
he built his son a house of pleasure, and spared no cost to
spensors
popt,
pope.
make a delicious retreat. l’estrange.
holy retreat, sithence no female thither
must dare approach, from the inferiour reptile
to woman, form divine. prior,
4. place of security.
this place our dungeon, not our safe retreat,
beyond his potent arm.
that pleasing shade they sought, a soft retreat
from sudden april showers, a shelter from the heat. dryd.
there is no such way to give defence to absurd doctrines,
as to guard them round with legions of obscure and undefined
words; which yet make these retreats more like the dens of
robbers, than the fortresses of fair warriors. locke.
5. #. of retiring before a superiour force. retreat is less than
ight.
honourable retreats are no ways inferior to brave charges;
as having less of fortune, more of discipline, and as much of
valour. bacon.
milton;
milton,
milton:
unmov’d
with dread of death to flight or foul retreat.
no thought of flight
none of retreat.
to retr east. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to go to a private abode.
others more mild
retreated in a silent valley, fing
their own heroick deeds.
2. to take shelter; to go to a place of security.
milton,
3. to retire from a superiour enemy.
4. to go back out of the former place.
the rapid currents drive
towards the retreating sea their furious tide. milton.
my subject does not oblige me to look after the water, or
point forth the place whereunto it is now retreated. woodw.
having taken her by the hand, he retreated with his eye
fixed upon her. arbuthnot and pope.
retreated, part, adj. [from retreat..] retired; gone to pri-
vacy.
others more mild
retreated in a private valley, fing. amilton,
to retre’nch. v. a. [retrancher, fr.]
1. to cut off; to pare away.
the pruner's hand must quench -
thy heat, and thy exub'rant parts retrench. penham.
nothing can be added to the wit of ovid's metamorphoses;
but manythings ought to have been retrenched, poc.
- we
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. t r. e. t.
o,
s
h
*
o
;
o
we ought to retrench those superfluous expences to qualify 2. contrary; opposite.
ourselves for the exercise of charity. atterbury. - your intent
2. to confine. improper. i n going back to school to wittenberg, - ! - -
in some reigns, they are for a power and obedience that is it is most retrograde to our defire. shakesp. hanlet.
unlimited ; and in others, are for retrenching within the nar- 3. in astronomy, planets are retrograde, when by their proper
rowest bounds, the authority of the princes, and the alle- motion in the zodiack, they move backward, and con-
giance of the subject. addison's freeholder. trary to the succession of the signs; as from the second de-
t, ret re'nch. v. n. to live with less magnificence or gree of aries to the first : but this retrogradation is only ap-
expence.
parent and occasioned by the observer's eye being placed on
the earth; for to an eye at the sun, the planet will appear al-
ways direct, and never either stationary or retrograde. harris.
their wand'ring course, now high, now low, then hid,
can i retrench * yes mighty well
shrink back to my paternal cell,
a little house, with trees a-row,
and like its master, very low. pope's epist. of horace. progreslive, retrograde, or standing still,
retre'nch ment. m. s. [retranchement, fr. from retrench. j in six thou see'st. milton's paradise los’.
1. the act of lopping away. two geomantick figures were display’d; -
i had studied virgil's design, his judicious management of one when direct, and one when retrograde. dryden:
the figures, the sober retrenchments of his sense, which always 72 retrog rade. v. n. [retrograder, fr. retro and graaior,
leaves somewhat to gratify our imagination, on which it may lat.) to go backward.
enlarge at pleasure. dryden's dedication to virgil. the race and period of all things here is to turn things
the want of vowels in our language has been the general more pneumatical and rare, and not to retrograde from pneu-
complaint of our politest authors, who nevertheless have made matical to that which is dense. bacon.
these retrenchments, and consequently encreased our former retrog re'ssion. n.s. [retro and grossus, lat..] the act of
scarcity. addison. going backwards.
i would rather be an advocate for the retrenchment, than the account, established upon the rise and descent of the
the encrease of this charity. atterbury.
2. fortification.
to retribute. v. a. [retribuo, lat. retribuer, fr.] to
stars, can be no reasonable rule unto distant nations, and by
reason of their retrogression, but temporary unto any one.
brown.
pay back ; to make repayment of. ret ross 1'ngency. m. s. [retro and mingo, lat.] the quality
both the will and power to serve him are his upon so many of staling backwards.
scores, that we are unable to retribute, unless we do restore; the last foundation was retromingency, or pissing back-
and all the duties we can pay our maker are less properly re- wards; for men observing both sexes to utine backwards, or
quitals than restitutions. boyle. aversly between their legs, they might conceive there were fe-
in the state of nature, a man comes by no arbitrary power minine parts in both. brown's wulgar errours.
to use a criminal, but only to retribute to him, so far as calm retr om 1'ng ent. adj. [retro and mingens, lat..] staling
reason and conscience dictate, what is proportionate to his backward.
transgression. locke. by reason of the backward position of the feminine parts
retributer. m. s. [from retribute.] one that makes re- of quadrupeds, they can hardly admit the substitution of mas-
tribution. culine generations, except it be in retramingents. brown.
retribution. n. s. [retribution, fr. from retribute.] re- re. trospect. n. s. [retro and specio, lat..] look thrown
payment; return accommodated to the aetion. upon things behind or things past.
the king thought he had not remunerated his people suf- as you arraign his majesty by retrospe:l, so you condemn
ficiently with good laws, which evermore was his retribution his government by second fight. addison's freeholder.
for treasure. bacon's henry vii. ret rospection. m. s. [from retrospeci j act or faculty of
in good offices and due retributions, we may not be pinch- looking backwards.
ing and niggardly : it argues an ignoble mind, where we have can'st thou take delight in viewing
wronged to higgle and dodge in the amends. hall. this poor isle's approaching ruin,
all who have their reward on earth, the fruits when thy retrospection vast
of painful superstition, and blind zeal, sees the glorious ages past 2
nought seeking but the praise of men, here find happy nation were we blind,
fit retribution, empty as their deeds. milton's par. loft. or had only eyes behind. swift.
there is no nation, though plunged into never such gross retrospective. adj. [from retrospect.] looking backwards.
idolatry, but has some awful sense of a deity, and a persua- in vain the grave, with retrospective eye,
sian of a state of retribution to men after this life. south. would from the apparent what conclude the why. pope.
it is a strong argument for a state of retribution hereafter, to retu’nd, v. a. [retundo, lat.] to blunt; to turn.
that in this world virtuous persons are very often unfortunate, covered with skin and hair keeps it warm, being naturally
and vicious persons prosperous. addison's speciator. a very cold part, and also to quench and diffipate the force of
ret ri'butory. ! adj. [from retribute.] repaying ; making any stroke that shall be dealt it, and retund the edge of any
retri'butive. v repayment. weapon. ray on the creation.
something strangely retributive is working. clarissa. to retu’rn. v. n. [retourner, fr.]
retrie’v abl. e. adj. [from retrieve..] that may be retrieved. 1. to come again to the same place.
to retrie’ve. v. a. [retrouver, fr.] whoso rolleth a stone, it will return upon him. prov, xxvi.
1. to recover; to restore.
on their embattel'd ranks the waves return. milton.
by this conduct we may retrieve the publick credit of reli- 2. to come back to the same state.
gion, reform the example of the age, and lessen the danger if they returned out of bondage, it must be into a state of
we complain of. rogers's sermons. freedom. - locke.
2. to repair. 3. to go back.
o reason l once again to thee i call; i am in blood
accept my sorrow, and retrieve my fall. prior. stept in so far, that should i wade no more,
3. to regain. returning were as tedious as go o’er. shakesp. macbeth.
* with late repentance now they would retrieve to return to the business in hand, the use of a little in-
the bodies they forsook, and wish to live. dryden. fight in those parts of knowledge, is to accustom our minds
philomela's liberty retriev'd, to all forts of ideas. locke.
cheers her sad soul. philips. 4. to make answer.
4. to recall; to bring back. the thing of courage,
if one, like the old latin poets, came among them, it would as rouz'd with rage, with rage doth sympathize;
be a means to retrieve them from their cold trivial conceits, and with an accent tun'd in self-same key,
to an imitation of their predecessors. berkeley to pope. returns to chiding fortune. shakesp. troil, and crossia.
retroaction. n. s. action backward. he said; and thus the queen of heaven return’d;
retroce'ssion. n.s. [retrocessum, lat.] the aet of going back. must 1, oh jove, in bloody wars contend popes
r strocopulation. m. s. [retro and copulation.] post-coition. 5. to come back; to come again; to revisit.
from the nature of this position, there ensueth a necessity thou to mankind
of retrocopulation. brown’s vulgar errours. be good, and friendly still, and oft return. milton.
retrograpatrio n. m. s. [retrogradation, fr. from retrograde.] 6. after a periodical revolution, to begin the same again.
the act of going backward. with the year
as for the revolutions, stations, and retrogradations of the seasons return, but not to me returns
planets, observed constantly in most certain periods of time, day, or the sweet approach of ev'n or morn. milton.
sufficiently demonstrates, that their motions are governed by 7. to retort; to recriminate.
counsel. - ray on the creation. if you are a malicious reader, you return upon me, that i
retrograde. adj. [retrograde, fr. retro and gradior, lat.] affect to be thought more impartial than i am. dryden.
1. going backward. to return. v. a.
princes, if they use ambitious men, should handle it so, 1. to repay 5 to give in requital.
as they be still progressive, and not retrograde. bacon. return him a trespass offering. 1 sam. vi. 3.
vol. 11. * - 2 i y thy<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. v
r e v.
thy lord shall return thy wickedness upon thine own
head. - 1 kings ii. 44.
"what peace can we return,
but to our power, hostility, and hate mision.
when answer none return'd, i set me down. 41ilton.
2. to give back.
what counsel give ye to return answer to this people. 2 chr.
3. to send back. - ... • * * * -
reject not then what offer'd means, who knows
but god hath set before us, to return thee
| home to thy country and his sacred house. milton's agon.
. to give account of... . -
probably one fourth part more died of the plague than are
return'd. - - , graunt's bills of mortality.
5. to transmit.
instead of a ship, he should levy money, and return the
same to the treasurer for his majesty's use. clarendon.
return. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. act of coming back to the same place.
the king of france so suddenly gone back!
something since his coming forth is thought of,
that his return was now most necessary. shakesp.
when forc'd from hence to view our parts he mourns;
takes little journies, and makes quick returns, idryden.
2. retrogression.
3. act of coining back to the same state.
at the return of the year, the king of syria will come up.
i kings xx. 22.
4. revolution ; vicissitude.
weapons hardly fall under rule; yet even they have returns
and vicissitudes; for ordnance was known in the city of the
oxidraces in india, and, is what the macedonians called
thunder and lightning. bacon's essays.
5. repayment of price laid out in commodities for sale.
as for any merchandize you have bought, ye shall have
your return in merchandize or gold. bacon.
as to roots accelerated in their ripening, there is the high
price that those things bear, and the swiftness of their returns;
for, in some grounds, a radish comes in a month, that in others
will not come in two, and so make double returns. bacon.
* 6. profit; advantage.
the fruit, from many days of recreation, is very little;
but from these few hours we spend in prayer, the return is
great. taylor's rule of living holy.
7. remittance; payment from a distant place.
within these two months, i do expe&amp;t return
of thrice three times the value of this bond. shakesp.
brokers cannot have less money by them, than one twen-
tieth part of their yearly returns. locke.
8. repayment; retribution; requital.
you made my liberty your late request,
is no return due from a grateful breast :
i grow impatient, 'till i find some way, -
great offices, with greater to repay. dryden.
since these are some of the returns which we made to god
after obtaining our successes, can we reasonably presume, that
we are in the favour of god atterbury.
nothing better becomes a person in a publick character,
than such a publick spirit; nor is there any thing likely to
procure him larger returns of esteem. atterbury.
returns, like these, our mistress bids us make,
when from a foreign prince a gift her britons take. prior.
ungrateful lord
would'st thou invade my life, as a return
for proffer'd love rowe.
9. aet of restoring or giving back; restitution.
the other ground of god's sole property in any thing, is
the gift, or rather the return of it made by man to god. south.
1c. relapse.
this is breaking into a constitution to serve a present ex-
pedient; the remedy of an empirick, to stifle the present
pain, but with certain prospect of sudden returns. swift.
1 1. [retour, fr.]
either of the adjoining sides of the front of an house, or
ground-plot, is called a return side. moxon's mech. exer.
both these sides are not only returns, but parts of the front,
and a stately tower in the midst of the front. bacon.
retu’rnable. adj. allowed to be reported back. a law
term, *
it may be decided in that court, where the verdict is re-
turnable. - hale.
he shall have an attachment against the sheriff, direeted to
the coroner, and returnable into the king's bench. ayliffe.
retu’rner. m. s. [from return..] one who pays or remits
money. *
the chapmen, that give highest for this, can make most
profit by it, and those are the returners of our money. locke.
retu’rnless, adj. admitting no return; irremeable.
but well knew the troth o, *
of this thine owne returne, though all my friends,
i knew as well should make returnlesse ends. chapman.
rev e. m. s. the bailiff of a franchise or manour.
the reve, the miller, and the mincing lady prioress speak
in character. - a ra
to revea l. v. a. [reves, lat. reveler, fr.]
1. to show ; to discover; to lay open; to disclose a secret.
be ashamed; speaking again that which thou hast heard
and revealing of secrets. ecclus. xli. 23.
light was the wound, the prince's care unknown, o'
she might not, would not yet reveal her own. jvaller
the answer to one who asked what time was, fi non ro,
intelligo that is, the more i think of time, the less i und.
stand it; might persuade one, that time, which reveal, a!!
other things, is itself not to be discovered. locke
thy throne is darkness in th’ abyss of light, -
a blaze of glory that forbids the fight;
o teach me to believe thee thus conceal’d,
and search no further than thyself reveal’d. dryden
2. to impart from heaven. - -
the sufferings of this life are not to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us, roman; viii. 18
reve a'le r. n.s. [from reveal.] -
1. discoverer; one that shows or makes known.
the habit of faith in divinity is an argument of things un-
seen, as a stable assent unto things inevident, upon authority
of the divine revealer. brown's vulgar errours.
the lives of the revealers may be justly set over against the
12-yden.
revelation, to find whether they agree. 4tterbury.
2. one that discovers to view. !, “ .
he brought a taper; the revealer light . . . .
expos'd both crime and criminal to fight. dryden.
to re'vel. v. m. [skinner derives it from reveillr, fr. to
awake; mr. lye from raveelen, dutch, to rove loosely about
which is much countenanced by the old phrase, ro-rouj
to feast with loose and clamorous merriment.
my honey love,
will we return unto thy father's house, -
and revel it as bravely as the best. - shakes,
we'll keep no great ado—a friend or two.
tybalt being slain so late,
it may be thought we held him carelessly,
being our kinsman, if we revel much. shakespeare.
antony, that revels long o'nights,
is up. - shakesp. 7ulius caesar.
we shall have revelling to-night; so 7 * far
i will assume thy part in some disguise. shakespeare.
he can report you more odd tales
of our outlaw robin hood,
that revell'd here in sherewood,
though he ne'er shot in his bow.
- were the doctrine new,
that the earth mov’d, this day would make it true;
for every part to dance and revel goes,
they tread the air, and fall not where they rose. donne.
whene'er i revel"d in the women's bow’rs;
for first i sought her but at looser hours: n . , 's
the apples she had gather'd smelt most sweet. . . . . prior.
revel. n.f. [from the verb.] a feast with loose and noisy
ben. johnson.
jollity. - is * -
let them pinch th' unclean knight, . . . . .
and ask him, why, that hour of fairy revel, -
in their so sacred paths he dares to tread shakesp.
they could do no less but, under your fair conduct,
crave leave to view these ladies, and intreat
an hour of revels with them. - shakespeare.
to re'vel. v. a. [revello, lat.] to retract; to draw back.
those, who miscarry, escape by their flood, revelling the
humours from their lungs. o harvey.
venese&amp;tion in the left arm does more immediate revel, yet
the difference is minute. friend's hył. of physick.
revel-rout. n. s. **
1. a mob; an unlawful assembly of a rabble. ainsworth.
2. tumultuous festivity.
for this his minion, the revel-rout is done. -
rowe's jane shore.
revel aotion. m. s. [from revelation, fr.]
i. discovery; communication; communication of sacred and
mysterious truths by a teacher from heaven.
when the divine revelations were committed to writing,
the jews were such scrupulous reverers of them, that they
numbered even the letters of the old testament. d. of pie.
as the gospel appears in respect of the law to be a clearer
revelation of the mystical part, so it is a far more benign dis-
pensation of the practical part. - spratt.
2. [revelations.] the apocalypse ; the prophecy of st. john,
revealing future things. ** * *
revelisk, n.s.. [from revel.] one who feasts with noisy jollity.
fairies black, grey, green and white, -
you moonshine revellers attend your office. shakes?.
unwelcome revellers, whose lawless joy
pains the sage ear, and hurts the sober eye. pope.
revelr y. m. s. [from revel.] loose jollity; festive mirth.
forget this new-fall’n dignity,
and fall into our rustick revelry. shakespeare.
there
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. v.
r e v
there let hymen oft appear
in saffron robe with taper clear,
and pomp, and feast, and revelry,
with mask and antick pageantry.
7, revenge. v. a. [revencher, revancher, fr.]
1. to return an injury.
- not unappeas'd, he pass'd the stygian gate,
who leaves a brother to revenge his fate.
2. to vindicate by punishment of an enemy.
if our hard fortune no compassion draws,
the gods are just, and will revenge our cause.
the reciprocal pronoun, or in a passive sense.
come, antony and young o&amp;tavius,
revenge yourselves alone on casius.
it is a quarrel most unnatural,
to be reveng'd on him that loveth thee.
northumberland flew thy father;
and thine, lord clifford; and you vow'd revenge:
js 1 be not, heav'ns be reveng'd on me! shakesp.
edom hath revenged himself upon judah. ezek. xxv. 12.
o lord, visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors. jer.
who shall come to stand against thee, to be revenged for
the unrighteous men ? jwisdom xii. 12.
your fury of a wife,
not yet content to be reveng'd on you,
th' agents of your passion will pursue.
reve'n'ge. n.f. [reventhe, revanche, fr.]
1. return of an injury.
may we, with the witness of a good conscience, pursue him
with further revenge. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
i will make mine arrows drunk with blood; from the be-
ginning of revenges upon the enemy. deut. xxxii. 42.
deformed persons are commonly even with nature ; for as
nature has done ill by them, so they do by nature; being void
of natural affection, they have their revenge of nature. bacon.
what will not ambition and revenge descend to. milton.
the satyr in a rage
forge's his bus'ness is to laugh and bite,
• and will of death and dire revenges write. dryden.
draco, the athenian lawgiver, granted an impunity to any
person that took revenge upon an adulterer. broome.
2. the passion of vengeance; desire of hurting one from whom
hurt has been received.
revenges burn in them: for their dear causes
would, to the bleeding and the grim alarm,
excite the mortified man. shakes. macbeth.
3. revenge is an act of passion; vergiance of justice. injuries
are revenged, crimes are avenged. this distinction is perhaps
not always preserved.
rev e. no efu l. adj. [from revenge.] vindictive; full of re-
venge; full of vengeance.
may my hands
never brandish more revengeful steel
over the glittering helmet of my foe. shakesp. rich. ii.
if thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
1. of here i lend thee this sharp-pointed sword,
which hide in this true breaft. shakesp. richard iii.
into my borders now jarbas falls,
and my revengeful brother scales the walls.
repenting england, this revengeful day,
to philip's manes did an off'ring bring. dryden.
reve'ng e fully. adv. [from revengeful..] vindictively.
he smil’d revengefully, and leap'd
upon the floor; thence gazing at the skies,
his eye-balls fiery red, and glowing vengeance;
gods i accuse you not. dryden and lee's oedipus.
reve'nger. n. s. [from revenge.]
1. one who revenges; one who wreaks his own or another's
injuries. -
may be, that better reason will asswage
the rash revenger's heat; words, well dispos'd,
have secret pow'r to appease enflamed rage.
i do not know,
wherefore my father should revengers want,
having a son and friends. - shakesp. ant, and cleop.
so shall the great revenger ruinate
him and his issue, by a dreadful fate.
morocco's monarch
had come in person, to have seen and known
the injur'd world's revenger and his own.
2. one who punishes crimes. - - - -
what government can be imagined, without judicial pro-
ceedings? and what methods of judicature, without a reli-
gious oath, which supposes an omniscient being, as conscious
to its falsehood or truth, and a revenger of perjury. bently.
reve'ngement, n.s.. [from revenge.] wengeance; return of
an injury.
-,
dryden.
denham.
spensor.
sandys's paraphrase.
wwaller.
it may dwell
in her son's flesh to mind revengement,
and be for all chaste dames an endless monument. speoser.
- 8
milton.
pope. rf v enu e. m. s. [revenu, fr.
dryden.
3. to wreak one's wrongs on him that 'inflicted them. with
shakoff.jul. casar.
shakesp. rich. iii.
to reve’rberate. v. n.
by the perclose of the same verse, vagabond is understood
for such a one as travelleth in fear of revengement. rasoigh.
rev esq., ngly. adv. [from riverging j with vengeance 3
vindictively. |
i've bely’d a lady, - -
the princess of this country; and the air on't
revengingly enfeebles me. shakesp. cymbeline.
its accent is uncertain..] in-
come ; annual profits received from lands or other funds.
they privily send over unto them the revenues, where with
they are there maintained. spoffor’s state of ireland.
she bears a duke's revenues on her back, ' ' ' '
and in her heart scorns out poverty. shakesp. hon. vi.
only i retain -
the name and all th’ addition to a king; -
the sway, revenue, beloved sons, be yours. shaftsheare.
many offices are of so small revenue, as not to furnish a
man with what is sufficient for the support of his life. temple.
if the woman could have been contented with golden eggs,
she might have kept that revenue on still. l'//irange.
his vassals easy, and the owner blest,
they pay a trifle, and enjoy the rest:
not so a nation's revenues are paid ;
the servant's faults are on the master laid.
when men grew great from their revenue spent,
and fly from bailiffs into parliament. 1%ung.
to reve'rb. v. a. [reverbero, lat.] to resound; to reverbe-
rate. not in use.
reserve thy state, with better judgment check"
this hideous rashness : -
the youngest daughter does not love thee least; . . .
nor are those empty hearted, whose loud sound
reverbs no hollowness. shakosh, king lear.
rev e r berant. adj. [reverberans, lat.] resounding; beat-
ing back. the reading in the following passage should be, i
think, reverberant. * * * * * - -, * * * * *
hollow your name to the reverberate hills,” ". .
and make the babbling gossip of the air -
cry out, olivia shakes). twelfth night.
to reverberate. v. a. [reverberg, lat. reverberer, fr.]
1. to beat back. -
nor doth he know them for aught,
till he behold them formed in th' applause
where they're extended ; which, like an arch, reverb'rates
the sound again. shakespeare.
as the fight of the eye is like a glass, so is the ear a
finuous cave, with a hard bone, to stop and reverberate the
sound. *_ bacon.
as we, to improve the nobler kinds of fruits, are at the ex-
pence of walls to receive and reverberate the faint rays of the
sun, so we, by the help of a good soil, equal the production
of warmer countries. - swift.
2. to heat in an intense furnace, where the flame is reverbe-
rated upon the matter to be melted or cleaned.
crocus martis, that is steel corroded with vinegar or sul-
phur, and after reverberated with fire, the loadstone will not
attract. brown's vulgar errours.
swift.
1. to be driven back; to bound back.
the rays of royal majesty reverberated so strongly upon
villerio, that they dispelled all clouds.
howel.
2. to resound.
start
an echo with the clamour of thy drum, * *
and ev’n at hand a drum is ready brac'd,
that shall reverberate all as well as thine. shakoff. k. john.
reverber a rios. m. s. [reverberation, fr. from reverberate.]
the act of beating or driving back.
to the reflection of visibles, small glasses suffice; but to
the reverberation of audibles, are required greater spaces. bac.
the first repetitions follow very thick; for two parallel
walls beat the sound back on each other, like the several re-
verberations of the same image from two opposite looking-
glasses. addison.
rev e’reer atory. adj. [reverberatoire, fr. j returning ;
beating back.
good lime may be made of all kinds of flints, but they are
hard to burn, except in a reverberatory kiln. moxon.
to reve'r.e. v. a. [reverer, fr. revereor, lat.] to reve-
rence; to honour; to venerate; to regard with awe.
an emperor often stamp'd on his coins the face or orna-
ments of his collegue, and we may suppose lucius vetus
would omit no opportunity of doing honour to marcus
aurelius, whom he rather revered as his father, than treated
as his partner in the empire. addison's remarks on italy.
jove shall again revere your pow'r,
and rise a swan, or fall a show’r.
taught 'em how clemency made pow'r rever'd,
and that the prince belov’d was truly fear'd.
re’v eren ce. n. s. [reverence, fr. reverentia, lat.]
1. veneration; respect; awful regard.
prior.
prior.
when
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e v
r e v
when quarrels and factions are carried openly, it is a sign
the reverence of government is lost.
higher of the genial bed,
and with mysterious reverence i deem. milton.
in your prayers, use reverent postures and the lowest ge-
stures of humility, remembring that we speak to god, in our
reverence to whom we cannot exceed. taylor.
a poet cannot have too great a reverence for readers. dryd.
the fear, acceptable to god, is a filial fear; an awful re-
werence of the divine nature, proceeding from a just esteem of
his perfestions, which produces in us an inclination to his
service, and an unwillingness to offend him. rogers.
2. act of obeisance; bow; courtesy.
a. ** now lies he there,
and none so poor to do him reverence. shakesp. jul. cats.
he led her eas’ly forth,
where godfrey sat among his lords and peers,
she rev'rence did, then blush'd as one dismay’d. fairfax.
had not men the hoary heads rever'd, -
or boys paid reverence, when a man appear'd,
both must have dy’d. dryden's juvenal.
upstarts the bedlam,
...and reverence made, accosted thus the queen. dryden.
the monarch -
commands into the court the beauteous emily:
so call’d, she came ; the senate rose and paid
becoming rev'rence to the royal maid. dryden.
3. title of the clergy.
many now in health
shall drop their blood, in approbation
of what your reverence shall incite us to. shakesp. hen. v.
4. poetical title of a father.
o my dear father let this kiss
repair those violent harms, that my two sisters
* have in thy reverence made. shakesp. king lear.
to rev er ence. v. a. [from the noun..] to regard with re-
verence; to regard with awful respect.
those that i rev'rence, those i fear, the wise;
at fools i laugh, not fear them. shakesp. cymbeline.
while they pervert pure nature's healthful rules
to loathsome fickness, worthily since they
god’s image did not reverence in themselves. milton,
he slew aetion, but despoil'd him not;
nor in his hate the funeral rites forgot;
arm'd as he was, he sent him whole below,
and reverenc'd thus the manes of his foe. dryden.
as his goodness will forbid us to dread him as slaves, so his
majesty will command us to reverence him as sons. rogers.
he presents every one so often before god in his prayers,
that he never thinks he can esteem, reverence, or serve those
enough, for whom he implores so many mercies from god.
law.
re’ver encer. n.s.. [from reverence..] one who regards with
reverence.
the athenians quite sunk in their affairs, had little com-
merce with the rest of greece, and were become great reve-
rencers of crowned heads. swift.
re’ve rend. adj. [reverend, fr. reverendus, lat.]
1. venerable ; deserving reverence; enforcing respect by his
appearance.
let his lack of years be no impediment, to let him lack a
reverend estimation. shakesp. merchant of penice.
reverend and gracious senators. shakesp.
onias, who had been high priest, reverend in conversation,
and gentle in condition, prayed for the jews. 244ac. xv. 12.
a parish priest was of the pilgrim train,
an awful, reverend, and religious man,
his eyes diffus’d a venerable grace,
w
and charity itself was in his face. dryden.
a reverend fire among them came,
who preach'd conversion and repentance. milton.
rev'rend old man lo here confest he stands. pope.
2. the honorary epithet of the clergy. we stile a clergyman,
reverend; a bishop, right reverend; an archbishop, most reverend.
reverent. adj. [reverens, lat..] humble; expressing sub-
mission; testifying veneration.
they forthwith to the place
repairing where he judg'd them, prostrate fell
before him reverent. milton's paradise loft.
meet then the senior, far renown'd for sense,
with rev'rent awe, but decent confidence. pope.
revere'ntial. adj. [reverentielle, fr. from reverent.] ex-
presfing reverence; proceeding from awe and veneration.
that oaths made in reverential fear
of love and his wrath may any forswear. donne.
the least degree of contempt weakens religion; it properly
consisting in a reverential esteem of things sacred. south.
the reason of the institution being forgot, the after-ages
perverted it, supposing only a reverential gratitude paid to the
earth as the common parent. woodward's nat. hist.
all look up, with reverential awe,
at crimes that 'scape, or triumph o'er the law.
*
pope.
bacon's essays."
revere'stially. adv. [from reverential.] with show of
rewest ince.
the jews, reverentially declining the fituation of their
temple, place their beds from north to south. brown.
reverently. adv. [from reverent.] respeafully; with awe.
with reverence. r
chide him for faults, and do it reverently.
his disciples here,
by their great master sent to preach him every where,
most reverently receiv'd.
to nearest ports their shatter'd ships repair,
where by our dreadful cannon they lay aw’d ;
so reverently men quit th' open air,
when thunder speaks th’ angry gods abroad. dryder,
then down with all thy boasted volumes, down;
only reserve the sacred one:
low, reverently low,
make thy stubborn knowledge bow :
to look to heav'n be blind to all below. prior.
rev e rer. n. s. [from revere.] one who venerates; one who
re wert s.
when the divine revelations were committed to writing,
the jews were such scrupulous reverers of them, that it was the
business of the masorites, to number not only the sections
and lines, but even the words and letters of the old testa-
in cilt. government of the zongue.
reve'ssal. n.s.. [from revers...] change of sentence.
the king, in the reversal of the attainders of his partakers,
had his will. bacon's henry vii.
to reve/rse. v. a. [reversus, lat.]
1. to turn upside down.
a pyramid reversed may stand upon his point, if balanced
by admirable skill. temple's 44;scellanies.
2. to overturn ; to subvert.
these now controul a wretched people's fate,
shakes).
12rayton,
these can divide, and these reverse the state. pope.
3. to turn back.
michael's sword stay’d not;
but with swift wheel reverse, deep entring shar'd
satan's right side. asistan.
4. to contradict; to repeal.
better it was in the eye of his understanding, that some-
time an erroneous sentence definitive should prevail, till the
same authority, perceiving such oversight, might afterwards
correct or reverse it, than that strifes should have respite to
grow, and not come speedily unto some end. hooker's prof.
a decree was made, that they had forfeited their liberties;
and albeit they made great moans, yet could they not pro-
cure this sentence to be reversed. hayward.
death, his doom which i
to mitigate thus plead, not to reverse,
to better life shall yield him. milton's par. loft.
though grace may have reversed the condemning sentence,
and sealed the finner's pardon before god, yet it may have left
no transcript of that pardon in the sinner's breast. south.
those seem to do best, who, taking useful hints from
facls, carry them in their minds to be judged of, by what
they shall find in history to confirm or reverse these imperfeo:
observations. locke-
5. to turn to the contrary.
these plain characters we rarely find,
though itrong the bent, yet quick the turns of mind;
or puzzling contraries confound the whole,
or affectations quite reverse the soul.
6. to put each in the place of the other.
with what tyranny custom governs men; it makes that
reputable in one age, which was a vice in another, and re-
pope.
verses even the distinctions of good and evil. rogers.
7. to recall; to renew. obsolete. -
well knowing true all he did rehearse,
and to his fresh remembrance did reverse
the ugly view of his deformed crimes. spensor.
to reve'rse. v. n. [revertere, reversus, lat..] to return. spens.
reve'rse. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. change; vicifsitude.
the strange reverse of fate you see;
i pity'd you, now you may pity me. dryden’s a. reroz.
by a strange reverse of things, justinian's law, which for
many ages was negle&amp;ted, does now obtain, and the theo-
dosian code is in a manner antiquated. bazer.
2. a contrary; an opposite. this is a sense rather colloquial
than analogous.
count tariff appeared the reverse of goodman fact. add.
the performances, to which god has annexed the promises
of eternity, are just the reverse of all the pursuits of sense. rog.
3. [revers, fr.] the side of the coin on which the head is
not impressed. -
as the romans set down the image and inscription of the
consul, afterward of the emperor on the one side, so they
changed the reverse always upon new events. camden-
our guard upon the royal side;
on the reverse our beauty's pride. wasser.
several
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r. e. v.
r. e. v.
*.
o several reverses are owned to be the representations of an-
l to tique figures. addison on ancient medals.
revo'rs1ble. adj. [reversible, fr. from reverse.] capable of
* being reversed.
o reversion. m. s. [reversion, fr. from reverse.]
1. the state of being to be possessed after the death of the pre-
o sent possessor.
o as were our england in reversion his,
and he our subjects next degree in hope. shakesp. rich. ii.
o a life in reversion is not half so valuable, as that which
may at present be entered on. hammond's fundamentals.
2. succession to ; right of succession to.
f he was very old, and had out-lived most of his friends;
.." many persons of quality being dead, who had, for recompence
of services, procured the reversion of his office. clarendon.
. upon what ground can a man promise himself a future re-
pentance, who cannot promise himself a futurity ? whose life
depends upon his breath, and is so restrained to the present,
that it cannot secure to itself the reversion of the very next
minute. south's sermons.
so many candidates there stand for wit,
a place at court is scarce so hard to get:
in vain they croud each other at the door;
for e'en reversions are all begg'd before. dryden.
fame's a reversion in which men take place,
o late reversion 1 at their own decease. 1%ung.
reve'rsionary. adj. [from reversion.] to be enjoyed in
succession.
*there are multitudes of reversionary patents and reversionary
promises of preferments. arbuthnot.
t: reve'rt. v. a. [reverto, lat.]
1. to change; to turn to the contrary.
wretched her subjects, gloomy sits the queen,
till happy chance revert the cruel scene;
and apish folly, with her wild resort
of wit and jest, disturbs the solemn court. prior.
2. to reverberate,
- the stream boils
around the stone, or from the hollow'd bank
o reverted plays in undulating flow. thomson.
to reve'rt. v. n. [revertir, old fr.] to return; to fall back.
*::: my arrows, -
*- too slightly timbred for so loud a wind,
ters. would have reverted to my bow again. shakesp. hamlet.
efore if his tenant and patentee shall dispose of his gift without
r’s his kingly assent, the lands shall revert to the king. bacon.
o: reve'rt. n. s. [from the verb..] return; recurrence. a mu-
o: sical term.
... " hath not musick her figures the same with rhetorick what
- is a revert but her antistrophe peacham on musick.
reve'rtible. adj. [from revert.] returnable.
* . reverx’. m. s. [resverie, fr.] loose musing ; irregular thought.
o revery is when ideas float in our mind, without any re-
flestion or regard of the understanding. locke.
if the minds of men were laid open, we should see but
- - little difference between that of the wise man and that of the
- fool; there are infinite reveries and numberless extravagancies
,--o
pass through both. addison.
i am really so far gone, as to take pleasure in reveries of
- this kind. pope.
to reve's t. v. a. [reves?ir, revetir, fr. revoffio, lat.]
1. to clothe again.
her, nathless,
th’ enchanter finding fit for his intents,
did thus revesi, and deckt with due habiliments. spenser.
when-thou of life renewest the seeds,
the withered fields reves? their chearful weeds. wotton.
2. to reinvest; to vest again in a possession or office.
reve's tiary. n.s. [reve/liaire, fr. from revosio, lat..] place
where dresses are reposited. .
the effectual power of words the pythagoreans extolled;
the impious jews ascribed all miracles to a name, which was
ingraved in the reves?iary of the temple. camden's remains.
reviction. n.s. [revicium, lat..] return to life.
if the rabines prophecy succeed, we shall conclude the
days of the phenix, not in its own, but in the last and general
flames, without all hope of revicion. brown.
to rev.1"ctual. v. a. [re and viciual.] to stock with vic-
tuals again.
it hath been objected, that i put into ireland, and spent
much time there, taking care to reviciual myself, and none
of the rest. raleigh's apology.
t2 review. v. a. [re and view.]
1. to look back.
so swift he flies, that his reviewing eye
has lost the chasers, and his ear the cry. denham.
2. to see again. -
i shall review sicilia; for whose fight
; : - i have a woman's longing. shakesp. winter's tale.
3. to consider over again; to re-examine.
segrais says, that the aneis is an imperfeot work, and that
vol. ii.
-
*
death prevented the divine poet from reviewing it; and, for
that reason, he had condemned it to the fire. dryden.
4. to retrace.
shall i the long laborious scene review,
and open all the wounds of greece anew pope.
5. to survey 3 to overlook; to examine.
review, n.s. [reveue, fr. from the verb.] survey; re-ex-
asslination. -
he with great indifference confidered his reviews and sub-
sequent editions. asell.
we make a general review of the whole work, and a ge-
neral review of nature; that, by comparing them, their full
correspondency may appear. burnet's theory of the earth.
the works of nature will bear a thousand views and re-
views; the more narrowly we look into them, the more occa-
fion we shall have to admire. atterbury's sermons.
to revit.e. v. a. [re and vile.] to reproach; to vilify 3
to treat with contumely.
asked for their pass by every squib,
that list at will them to revile or snib: spenser.
. i read in's looks -
matter against me; and his eye revil'd
me as his abject object. shakesp. henry viii.
fear not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their
revilings. isaiah li. 7.
. she still beareth him an invincible hatred, revisith him to
his face, and raileth at him in all companies. swift.
rev isle. m. s. [from the verb.] reproach; contumely; ex-
probration. not used, but elegant.
i heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice
afraid, being naked, hid myself-to whom
the gracious judge, without revile, reply'd. milton.
revroler n. s. strom revil...] one who reviles; one who
treats another with contumelious terms.
the bitterest revilers are often half-witted people. g. of t.
revi'lingly, adv. [from revile.] in an opprobrious manner;
with contumely.
the love i bear to the civility of expression will not suffer
me to be revilingly broad. maine.
revi's al. m. s. [from revise.] review; re-examination.
the revisal of these letters has been a kind of examination
of conscience to me; so fairly and faithfully have i set down
- in them the undisguised state of the mind. pope.
to revise. v. a. [revisus, lat..] to review ; to overlook.
lintot will think your price too much;
not, sir, if you revise it, and retouch. pope,
revi’s e. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. review ; re-examination.
the author is to be excused, who never, in regard to his
eyes and other impediments, gives himself the trouble of cor-
rections and revises. boyle.
2. among printers, a second proof of a sheet corre&amp;ted.
his sending them sheet by sheet when printed, and survey-
ing the revises. fell.
revi's er. m. s. [reviseur, fr. from revise.] examiner; super-
intendant.
revision. m. s. [revision, fr. from revise.] review.
to revi'sit. v. a. [revisiter, fr. reviso, revisito, lat.] to
visit again.
** thee i revisit safe,
and feel thy sov’reign vital lamp; but thou
revisit's not these eyes, that rowl in vain,
to find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn. milton.
let the pale fire revisit thebes, and bear
these pleasing orders to the tyrant's ear. pope's statius.
reviv al. m. s. [from revive..] recall from a state of lan-
guor, oblivion, or obscurity; recal to life.
to revi've. v. n. [revivre, fr. revivo, lat.]
1. to return to life.
the lord heard elijah, and the soul of the child came
unto him again, and he revived. 1 kings xvii. 22.
so he dies;
but soon revives: death over him no power
shall long usurp. milton.
2. to return to vigour or fame; to rise from languor, oblivion,
or obscurity. -
i revive
at this last fight, assur'd that man shall live. milton.
to rev i've. v. a.
1. to bring to life again.
spot more delicious, than those gardens feign'd
of reviv'd adonis. - -
2. to raise from languor, insensibility, or oblivion.
noise of arms, or view of martial guise,
might not revive desire of knightly exercise. spensor.
3. to renew ; to recollect; to bring back to the memory.
the memory is the power to revive again in our minds
those ideas, which after imprinting have been laid aside out
milton.
of sight. locke.
the mind has a power in many cases to revive perceptions,
which it has once had. locke.
21 z. 4. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r e v
r. e. v.
uicken ; to rouse. -
4. to mould rvive the soldiers hearts; * *. - -
because fever found them as myself. shakespeare.
what first afneas in this place beheld,
reviv'd his courage, and his fear expell’d. dryden.
egeus only could revive his son, -
wo: ao of the world had known. dryden.
s: to recomfort; to restore to hope. - . . . . .
god lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our
bondage. . - . . . o ezra ix. 8.
6. to bring again into notice, or * : * *
... he'll use me as he does my betters,” -
-- publish my life, my will, my letters,
revive the libels born to die, . . . . . . . . . .
... which pope must bear as well as h. . . -1
7. [in chymistry.]_to recover from a mixed state.
reviv er, n.os [from revive, jo that which invigorates or
revives. “. . . . . ." . .
t, revivi'ficate. v. a. [revivifier, fr. re and vivifico,
. lat.]. to recall to life. . . . - - a to t !.
revivi ficat1on, n, s, [from revivificate.] the aet of re-
recalling to life. . . . . o. . . . -
. as long as an infant is in the womb of its parent, so long
are these medicines of revivification in preparing. speciator.
reviv 1 scency, n. f. [revivisco, reviviscentia, lat.] renewal
- c. , i.e : * ~ * - -
: of * makes mention of a restitution and rviviscency of
all things at the end of the world. . . . burnet.
reu’nion. m. s. [reunion, fr. re and union.] return to a state
of juncture, cohesion, or concord. .
she, that should all parts to reunion bow,
she that had all magnetick force alone,
to draw and fasten fundred parts in one.
*to reunite. v. a. [re and unite.] - - -
1. to join again ; to make one whole a second time ; to join
what is divided.
by this match the line of charles the great
was reunited to the crown of france. shakesp. henry v.
2. to reconcile; to make those at variance one,
to reunior e. v. n. to cohere again. ---
revocable. adj. [revocable, fr. revoco, revocabilis, lat.]
1. that may be recalled. . - -
howsoever you shew bitterness, do not act any thing that
is not revorable. led - bacon's essays.
. that may be repealed.
£o. o: [from revocable.] the quality of being
revocable.
t. re(vocate, v. a. [revoco, lat..] to recall; to call back.
his successor, by order, nullifies
many his patents, and did revocate - - -
and re-assume his liberalities. daniel’s civil war.
re'vocation, n.s. [revocation, fr. revocatio, lat.]
--" recalling. . . *
i. *: that . the people bent for the revocation of calvin,
gave him notice of their affection. plooker.
2. state of being recalled. -
elaiana's king commanded chenandra to tell him that he
had received advice of his revocation. howel's wocal fores.
3. repeal; reversal. - -
a law may cease to be in force, without an express revoca-
tion of the lawgiver. “ • * * jwhite.
if a grievance be inflicted on a person, he may appeal, it is
not necessary to pray a revocation of such a grievance. ayliffe.
to revoke. v. a. [revoquer, fr. revoco, lat.]
1. to repeal; to reverse, - -
when we abrogate a law as being ill made, the whole
cause for which it was made still remaining, do we not herein
revoke our very own deed, and upbraid ourselves with folly, yea
all that were makers of it with oversight and error.
what reason is there, but that those grants and privileges
swift.
donne.
should be revoked, or reduced to the first intention spenser.
without my aurengzebe i cannot live ; -
revoke his doom, or else my sentence give. dryden.
2. to check; to repress. - * : *
she strove their sudden rages to revoke,
that at the last suppressing fury mad,
they 'gan abstain. spenser.
3. to draw back.
shame were to revoke
the forward footing for an hidden shade. spenser.
- seas are troubled, when they do revoke
their flowing waves into themselves again. davies.
revo'kement. m. s. [from revoke.]… revocation; repeal;
recall. little in use. - -
- let it be nois'd, a -
that through our interceflion, this revolement * *
and pardon comes. shakesp. henry viii.
to revolt. v. n. [revolter, fr. revoltare, italian.]
1. to fall off from one to another. it denotes something of
pravity or rebellion. * = .
all will revolt from me, and turn to him. shaish.
hooker.
our discontented counties do revolt, -
our people quarrel with obedience. shakesp. k. join.
this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; the
are revolted and gone. jer. v. 5 3-
2. to change. not in use. -
you are already love's firm votary, -
and cannot soon revolt and change your mind,
revo'lt. m. s. [revolte, fr. from the verb.]
1. desertion; change of fides. -
he was greatly strengthened, and the enemy as much en-
feebled by daily revolts. raleigh's history of the world.
if all our levies are made in scotland or ireland, may not
those two parts of the monarchy be too powerful for the rest,
in case of a revolt. addison's state of the war.
2. a revolter; one who changes fides. not in use.
--- 'you ingrate revolts,
* you bloody neros, ripping up the womb
of your dear mother england. shakesp. king john.
3. gross departure from duty. -
- your daughter hath made a gross revolt;
tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
to an extravagant and wheeling stranger. shakes,
revolt ed. part. [from revolt i having swerved from duty.
thou single hast maintain'd
against revolted multitudes the cause of truth. 4milton.
reyott e.r. m. s. [from revolt..] one who changes sides; a
deserter; a renegade.
fair honour that thou dost thy god, in trusting
he will accept thee to defend his cause,
a murderer, a revolter, and a robber. milton's agonisłes.
he was not a revolter from the truth, which he had once
embraced, atterbury's sermons.
those, who are negligent or revolters, shall perish. swift.
to revolve. v. n. [revolvo, lat.]
1. to roll in a circle; to perform a revolution.
they do not revolve about any common center. cheyne.
if the earth revolve thus, each house near the equator must
move a thousand miles an hour. it'att's impr. of the mind.
each revolving year,
the teeming ewes a tripse offspring bear.
2. to fall back.
on the desertion of an appeal,
jure revolve to the judge a quo.
to revolve. v. a. [revolvo, lat.]
1. to roll any thing round. .
then in the east her turn she shines,
revolv'd on heav'n's great axis.
2. to consider; to meditate on.
you may revolve what tales i told you
of courts, of princes, of the tricks of war.
reyolu rion. n.s. [revolution, fr. revolutus, lat.]
1. course of anything which returns to the point at which it
began to move. -
on their orbs impose
such restless revolution, day by day
shakesp.
a pope.
the jurisdiction does ipso
4liff's parergon.
44ilton.
shafft.
repeated. milton's paradiso l27.
they will be taught the diurnal revolution of the heavens.
- a'arts.
2. space measured by some revolution. "
- - --~11, .
at certain revolutions are they brought, i
and feel by turns the bitter change. miltan.
meteors have no more time allowed them for their mount-
ing, than the short revolution of a day. dryden.
the persian wept over his army, that within the revolution
of a single age, not a man would be left alive. wake.
3. change in the state of a government or country. it is used
among us x&amp;l ox”, for the change produced by the admis-
fion of king william and queen mary.
the late revolution, justified by its necessity, and the good
it had produced, will be a lasting answer. davenant.
4. rotation; circular motion.
5. motion backward.
fear
comes thund'ring back with dreadful revolution
on my defenceless head. milton.
to revo'mit. v. a. [revomir, fr. re and vomit.] to vomit;
to vomit again. -
they might cast it up, and take more vomiting and retre-
miting what they drink. hakewill on providence.
revu'lsios. n.s. [revulsion, fr. revulsus, lat..] the act of
revelling or drawing humours from a remote part of the
body. -
fination differs from revulsion only in the measure of the
distance, and the force of the medicines used : if we draw it
to some very remote or contrary part, we call it revulsion =
if only to some neighbouring place, and by gentle means, we
call it derivation. ///eman of tumours.
* there is a way of revulsion to let blood in an adverse part.
- bacon's natural history-
i had heard of some strange cures of frenzies, by casual
applications of fire to the lower parts, which seems reasonable
enough,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r h e
r h o
enough, by the violent revulsion it may make of humours from
the head. temple's miscellanies.
reyu'lsive. adj. having the power of revulsion.
his flux of blood breaking forth again with greater violence
than it had done before, was not to be stopped by outward
applications, nor the revulsives of any kind. fell.
t, reward. v. a. [re and award, to give in return.
skinner.]
1. to give in return.
thou hast rewarded me good, whereas i have rewarded
thee evil. 1 sam. xxiv. 17.
they rewarded me evil for good. psalm xxxv. 12.
2. to repay; to recompense for something good. .
god rewards those that have made use of the fingle talent, rhe
that lowest proportion of grace, which he is pleased to give ;
and the method of his rewarding is by giving them more
grace. - - e mmond.
to judge th’ unfaithful dead, but to reward
his faithful, and receive them into bliss. milton.
there is no more reason to reward a man for believing
that four is more than three, than for being hungry or sleepy;
because these things do not proceed from choice, but from
natural necessity. a man must do so, nor can he do other-
wise. - wilkins.
2. the power of persuasion ; oratory.
... does not come under our senses.
thoughts, and who knew all the rules of rhetorique, if he had
not acquired the art of using them. dryden's dufresnoy.
of the passions, and how they are moved, aristotle, in
his second book of rhetorick, hath admirably discoursed in a
little compass. locke's thoughts on reading.
grammar teacheth us to speak properly, rhetorict instructs
to speak elegantly. baker on learning.
* the heart's still rhetorick, disclos'd with eyes. shakesp.
his sober lips then did he softly part,
whence of pure rhetorick whole streams outflow. fairfax.
enjoy your dear wit and gay rhetorick,
that hath so well been taught her dazling fence. milton.
to rical. adj. [rhetoricus, lat, from rhetorick.] pertain-
ing to rhetorick; oratorial; figurative.
the apprehension is so deeply riveted into my mind, that
rhetorical flourishes cannot at all loosen it, more.
because brutus and caffius met a blackmore, and pompey
had on a dark garment at pharsalia, these were presages of
their overthrow, which notwithstanding are scarce rhetorical
sequels; concluding metaphors from realities, and from con-
ceptions metaphorical inferring realities again. brown.
the subject may be moral, logical, or rhetorical, which
watts on the mind.
the supreme being rewards the just, and punishes the un- rheto'rically. adv. [from rhetorical. j. like an orator;
just. broome on the odyssey.
rewa'r.d. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. recompense given for good performed.
rewards and punishments do always presuppose something
willingly done well or ill; without which respect, though we
may sometimes receive good, yet then it is only a benefit and
not a reward. płoker.
to myself i owe this due regard,
not to make love my gift, but my reward. dryden.
men have consented to the immortality of the soul and the
recompenses of another world, promising to themselves some
rewards of virtue after this life. tillotson.
2. it is sometimes used with a mixture of irony, for punishment
or recompense of evil.
rewa'apable. adj. [from reward.] worthy of reward.
men's actions are judged, whether in their own nature re-
wardable or punishable. hooker.
the aetion that is but indifferent, and without reward, if rhetorician. adj.
done only upon our own choice, is an act of religion, and
rewardable by god, if done in obedience to our superiors,
rhetor 1'c1an. m. s. [rhetoricien, fr. rhetor, lat.]
i. one who teaches the science of rhetorick.
2. an orator.
figuratively; with intent to move the passions.
to rheto ricate. v. n. [rhetoricor, low lat. from rhetorick.]
to play the orator; to attack the passions.
'twill be much more seasonable to reform, than apologize
or rhetoricate; not to suffer themselves to perish in the midst
of such solicitations to be saved. decay of piety.
the ancient sophists and rhetoricians, which ever had young
auditors, lived till they were an hundred years old. bacon.
'tis the business of rhetoricians to treat the characters of
the passions. dryden's dufresnoy.
a man may be a very good rhetorician, and yet at the same
time a mean orator. baker on learning.
less proper.
he play'd at lions a declaiming prize,
at which the vanquish’d rhetorician dies. dryden.
suiting a master of rhetorick.
boldly presum'd with rhetorician pride,
to hold of any question either side. blackmore.
taylor's rule of living holy, rheum. n.s. [etup.2; rheume, fr.] a thin watery matter
rewa'rder. n.s.. [from reward.] one that rewards; one
that recompenses. -
a liberal rewarder of his friends, shakesp. rich. iii.
as the supreme being is the only proper judge of our per-
fe&amp;tions, so is he the only fit rewarder of them. addison.
ill judges, as well as rewarders, have popular assemblies
been, of those who best deserved from them. swift.
to reword. v. a. [re and word.] to repeat in the same words.
bring me to the test,
and i the matter will reward; which madness
would gambol from. shakesp. hamlet.
rhaba(rbarate. adj. [from rhabarbara, lat..] impregnated
or tinetured with rhubarb.
the salt humours must be evacuated by the senate, rha-
oozing through the glands, chiefly about the mouth. quincy.
trust not those cunning waters of his eyes;
for villainy is not without such a rheum;
and he long traded in it, makes it seem
like rivers of remorse.
you did void your rheum upon my beard.
each changing season does its poison bring,
rheums chill the winter, agues blast the spring. to
shakespeare,
shakespeare.
prior.
rheu’matick. adj. [esugarix6 from rheum.j." proceeding
from rheum or a peccant watry humour.
__ the moon, the governess of floods, - * - -
pale in her anger, washes all the air,
that rheumatick diseases do abound. shakespeare.
the blood taken away looked very sizy or rheumatick. floy.
barbarate, and sweet manna purgers, with acids added, or the rheu'matism. m. s. [esupolitats; rheumatisme, fr. rheuma-
purging waters. floyer on the humours.
rha's domancy, n. s. [#233gp and passiz.] divination by
a wand.
of peculiar rhabdomancy is that which is used in mineral
discoveries, with a forked hazel, commonly called moses's
rod, which, freely held forth, will stir and play if any mine
be under it. brown's vulgar errours.
rha"psopist. n. s. [from rhapsody..] one who writes without
regular dependence of one part upon another.
ask our rhapsodiff, if you have nothing but the excellence rheu'my. adj. [from rheum.] full of sharp moisture.
and loveliness of virtue to preach, and no future rewards or
punishments, how many vicious wretches will you ever, re;
claim. watts's improvement of the mind.
rha'psody. m. s. (#2), weia; forla, to sew, and don, a
song.] any number of parts joined together, without ne-
cessary dependence or natural connection.
such a deed, as sweet religion makes
a rhapsody of words. shakesp. hamlet.
this confusion and rhapsody of difficulties was not to be sup-
posed in each single finner.
he, that makes no reflexions on what he reads, only loads
his mind with a rhapsody of tales fit for the entertainment of
others. - locke.
the words slide over the ears, and vanish like a rhapsody
of evening tales, - watts on the mind.
yo-he is ben ry. m. s. [spina cervina, lat..] buckthorn, a
lant.
p -
rhetorick. m. s. soloexo; rhetorique, fr.]
1. the act of speaking not mercly with propriety, but with art rhomb. n.s. [rhombe, fr. rhombus, lat. §1332.] in geo-
and elegance.
we could not allow him an orator, who had the best
i
hammond. rhino'ceros., n. s. [es, and xioz; ; rhinocerot, fr.]
tismus, lat.]. a painful distemper supposed to proceed from
acrid humours.
rheumatism is a distemper affecting chiefly the membrana
communis musculorum, which it makes rigid and unfit for
motion; and it seems to be occasioned almost by the same .
causes, as the mucilaginous glands in the joints are rendered
stiff and gritty in the gout. &amp;uincy.
the throtling quinsey, 'tis my star appoints,
and rheumatisms i send to rack the joints. * dryden,
ls brutus sick
and will he steal out of his wholesome bed, .
to dare the vile contagion of the night 2
and tempt the rheumy and unpurged air,
to add unto his sickness. shakesp. julius caesar,
the south he loos'd, who night and horror brings,
and fogs are shaken from his flaggy wings:
from his divided beard two streams he pours;
his head and rheamy eyes distil in show’rs. dryden.
a vast
beast in the east indies armed with a horn on his nosel.
approach thou like the rugged russian bear,
the arm'd rhinoceros, or hyrcanian tyger;
take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
shall never tremble. shakes?. macbeth.
lf you draw your beast in an emblem, shew a landscape of
the country natural to the beast; as to the rhinoceros an east
indian landscape, the crocodile, an egyptian. peacham.
metry, a parallelogram or quadrangular figure, having its four
sides equal, and consisting of parallel lines, with two opposite
angles<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r i b
r i b
angles acute, and two obtuse: it is formed by two equal and
right cones joined together at their base. trevoux and harris.
save the sun his labour, and that swift -
nociurnal and diurnal rhomb suppos'd
invisible else above all stars, the wheel
of day and night.
see how in warlike muster they appear,
in rhombs and wedges, and half moons and wings. milton.
rhom'bick. adj. [from rhomb.] shaped like a rhomb.
many other sorts of stones are regularly figured; the asteria
in form of a star, and they are of a rhombick figure. grew.
rho'mboid. m. s. [foo}}&lt;sions; rhomboide, fr.] a figure
approaching to a rhomb.
many other sorts of stones are regularly figured ; and they
are of a rhombick figure; talk, of such as are rhomboid. grew.
rhomboi'dal. adj. [from rhomboid.] approaching in shape
to a rhomb. ... . -
another rhomboidal selenites of a compressed form, had
many others infixed round the middle of it. woodward.
rhu'barb. m. s. [rhabarbara, lat...] a medicinal root slightly
purgative, referred by botanists to the dock.
what rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug
would scour these english hence. shakesp. macbeth.
having fixed the fontanel, i purged him with an infusion
milton.
ef rhubarb in small ale. wiseman's surgery.
rhyme. m. s. [ov$oo;; rhythme, fr.] -
1. a harmonical succession of sounds.
the youth with songs and rhimes :
some dance, some hale the rope. denham.
2. the consonance of verses; the correspondence of the last
sound of one verse to the last sound or syllable of another.
for rhyme the rudder is of verses,
with which like ships they steer their courses. hudibras.
such was the news, indeed, but songs and rhymes
prevail as much in these hard iron times;
as would a plump of trembling fowl, that rise
against an eagle soufing from the skies.
if cupid throws a single dart,
we make him wound the lover's heart;
but if he takes his bow and quiver,
'tis sure he must transfix the liver;
for rhime with reason may dispense,
and sound has right to govern sense. prior.
3. poetry; a poem. - - - -
all his manly power it did disperse,
as he were warmed with inchanted rhines,
that oftentimes he quak'd.
who would not sing for lycidas? he knew
dryden.
fairy queen.
himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme. milton.
now sportive youth, -
carol incondite rhythms with suiting notes,
and quaver inharmonious. -
philips.
4. a word of sound to answer to another word. -
what wise means to gain it hast thou chose
know, fame and fortune both are made of prose.
is thy ambition sweating for a rhyme, .
thou unambitious fool, at this late time : toung.
rhy me or reason. number or sense.
i was promis'd on a time,
to have reason for my rhyme ;
but from that time unto this season,
i had neither rhyme nor reason. spenser.
the guiltiness of my mind drove the grossness of the fop-
pery into a received belief, in despight of the teeth of all
;hime and reason, that they were fairies. shakespeare.
to rhym e. v. n.
1. to agree in sound.
he was too warm on picking work to dwell,
but fagotted his notions as they fell, }
and, if they rhim.'d and rattled, all was well. dryden.
2. to make verses.
these fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhime themselves
into ladies favours, they do always reason themselves out
again. shakesp. henry v.
there march'd the bard and blockhead, side by side,
who rhym'd for hire, and patroniz'd for pride. pope.
rhy'me r. n. s. [from rhyme..] one who makes rhymes;
#::::::...; a versifier; a poet in contempt.
o scall'd rhimers will ballad us out o' tune. shakespeare.
it was made penal to the english, to permit the irish to
graze upon their lands, to entertain any of their minstrels,
rhimers, or news-tellers. davies on ireland.
rhymer come on, and do the worst you can;
i fear not you, not yet a better man. dryden.
milton's rhime is constrained at an age, when the passion
of love makes every man a rhimer, though not a poet. dryd.
i speak of those who are only rhimsiers. dennis.
rhythmical. adj. [v3/ozo; ; rythnique, fr. from rhyme
or rhythm.] harmonical; having one sound proportioned to
another. -
rib. m. s. snibbe, saxon.]
1. a bone in the body. .
8
-
of these there are twenty-four in number, viz, twelve on
each side the twelve vertebrae of the back; they are segments
of a circle ; they grow flat and broad, as they approach the
sternum; but the nearer they are to the vertebrae, the rounder
and thicker they are; at which end they have a round head,
which, being covered with a cartilage, is received into the
sinus in the bodies of the vertebrae : the ribs, thus articulated,
make an acute angle with the lower vertebrae: the ribs have
cach a small canal or sinus, which runs along their under
sides, in which lies a nerve, vein, and artery: their extre-
mities, which are fastened to the sternum, are cartilaginous,
and the cartilages make an obtuse angle with the bony part
of the ribs; this angle respects the head: the cartilages are
harder in women than in men, that they may better bear the
weight of their breasts: the ribs are of two sorts; the seven
upper are called true ribs, because their cartilaginous ends are
received into the finus of the sternum: the five lower are
called false ribs, because they are softer and shorter, of which
only the first is joined to the extremity of the sternum, the
cartilaginous extremities of the rest being tied to one another,
and thereby leaving a greater space for the dilatation of the
stomach and intrails: the last of these short ribs is shorter
than all the rest: it is not tied to them, but sometimes to the
musculus obliquus descendens. &amp;uincy.
why do i yield to that suggestion ?
whose horrid image doth upfix my hair,
and make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
against the use of nature! shakes. macbeth.
he open'd my left fide, and took
from thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm
and life blood streaming fresh. millon's par. loft.
sure he, who first the passage try’d,
in harden'd oak his heart did hide, }
and ribs of iron arm'd his side. - dryden's horace.
2. any piece of timber or other matter which strengthens the side.
i should not see the sandy hour glass run,
but i should think of shallows and of flats;
and see my wealthy andrew dock'd in sand,
vailing her high top lower than her ribs,
to kiss her burial. shakesp. merchant of penice.
the ships with shatter'd ribs scarce creeping from the seas.
drayton.
3. any prominence running in lines; as, the stalks of a leaf.
ritbald. m. s. [ribauld, fr. ribaldo, italian.] a loose, rough,
-
more to support it than bare-faced ribaldry.
mean, brutal wretch.
that lewd ribbald, with vile luft advanced, .
laid first his filthy hands on virgin clean,
to spoil her dainty corse so fair and sheen.
your ribauld nag of egypt,
the breeze upon her, like a cow in june,
hoists sails, and flies. shakesp. antony and cleopatra:
the busy day, .
wak'd by the lark, has rous’d the ribald crows,
and dreaming night will hide our joys no longer. shais.
ne'er one sprig of laurel grac'd these ribbalds, -
from flashing bentley down to pidling tibbalds. pope.
spensor.
ribaldry. n.s.. [from ribald; ribaudie, old fr.] mean,
lewd, brutal language.
mr. cowley asserts, that obscenity has no place in wit:
buckingham says, 'tis an ill sort of wit, which has nothing
dryden.
the ribaldry of the low chara&amp;ters is different; the reeve,
milier, and cook are distinguished from each other. dryden.
in the same antique loom these scenes were wrought,
embellish'd with good morals and just thought,
true nature in her noblest light you see,
e’er yet debauch'd by modern gallantry
to trifling jests and fulsom ribaldry. granville.
if the outward profession of religion were once in prastice
among men in office, the clergy would see their duty and
interest in qualifying themselves for lay-conversation, when
once they were out of fear of being choaked by ribaldry or
prophaneness. - swi/?.
r1 band. m. s. [rulande, ruban, fr. this word is sometimes
written ribon.] a filet of silk; a narrow web of silk, which
is worn for ornament.
quaint in green, she shall be loose enrob'd,
* with ribbands pendent, flaring 'bout her head.
a ribband did the braided tresses bind,
the rest was loose. dryden's inight's tale.
see in the lists they wait the trumpet's found ;
some love device is wrought on ev'ry sword,
and ev'ry riband bears some mystick word.
shaky?.
granville.
r1/bbed., adj. [from rib.]
1. furnished with ribs.
was i by rocks engender'd; rib'd with fleel ?
such tortures to resist, or not to feel ?
hung on each bough a single leaf appears,
which shrivell'd in its infancy remains,
like a clos'd fan, nor stretches wide its veins,
but as the seasons in their circle run,
opes its ribb'd surface to the nearer sun. g...y.
2. inc. c.ed
saroys.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r i c
s
o
2. inclosed as the body by ribs.
remember -
the nat'ral brav'ry of your isle, which stands
as neptune's park, ribbed and paled in,
with rocks unsca'eable, and roaring waters.
... marked with protuberant lines.
#1'sson, n. s. see riband.
1, ri'pro ast. v. n. [rib and roast.] to beat soundly. a
burlesque word.
that done, he rises, humbly bows,
and gives thanks for the princely blows;
departs not meanly proud, and boasting - -
of his magnificent rib, oasing. . butler.
i have been pinched in flesh, and well ritreased under my
former masters; but i'm in now for skin and all. l’estrange.
ribwort. m. s. splantago.] a plant. -
ric. m. s. ric denotes a powerful, rich, or valiant man; as
in these verses of fortunatus: -
hiper ice potens, / interpres barbarus aoftt,
ajutor fortis hoc quoque nomen habet.
hil’pric barbarians a stout helper term,
so alfric is altogether strong; aothelric, nobly strong or
powerful: to the same sense as polycrates, crato, plutar-
chus, opimius. gibson’s camden.
rice. n. s. [oryza, lat.] one of the esculent grains: it hath
its grains. disposed into a panicle, which are almost of an
oval figure, and are covered with a thick husk, somewhat
like barley : this grain is cultivated in most of the eastern
countries. miller.
rice is the food of two thirds of mankind; it is kindly to
human constitutions, proper for the consumptive, and those
subject to haemorrhages. a, buthnot,
if the snuff get out of the snuffers, it may fall into a dish
of rice milk. swift's directions to the butler.
rich, adj. [riche, fr. ricco, italian; nica, saxon.]
1. wealthy; abounding in wealth; abounding in money or
possessions; opulent: opposed to poor.
i am as rich in having such a jewel,
as twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl. shaksp.
the rich shall not give more, and the poor no less. exod.
a thief bent to unhoard the cash
shakoff care.
of some rich burgher. milton.
rich was his soul, though his attire was poor,
as heav'n had cloath'd his own embassador. dryden.
several nations of the americans are rich in land, and poor
in all the comforts of life. locke.
he may look upon the rich as benefactors, who have beau-
tified the prospect all around him. seed.
2. valuable; estimable ; precious ; splendid; sumptuous.
earth, in her rich attire,
consummate lovely finil'd, milton.
matilda never was meanly dress'd in her life; and nothing
pleases her in dress, but that which is very rich and beautiful
to the eye. law.
3. having any ingredients or qualities in a great quantity or degree.
so we th’arabian coast do know
at distance, when the spices blow,
by the rich odour taught to fleer,
though neither day nor star appear. //aller.
if life be short, it shall be glorious,
each minute shall be rich in some great acion. rzwe.
sauces and rich spices are fetched from india. baker.
4. fertile; fruitful.
there are, who fondly studious of increase,
rich foreign mold on their ill natur'd land * -
induce. philips.
5. abundant; plentiful. -
the gorgeous east with riches hand
pours on her sons barbarick pearl and gold. milton.
6. abounding; plentifully stocked: as, pastures rich in flocks.
7. having something precious.
groves whose rich trees wept odorous gums and balm. milt.
ri'ched, a j. [from riff. enriched. obsolete.
of all these bounds,
with shadowy foresis, and with champions rich'd,
with plenteous rivers and wide skirted mcads,
we make thee lody. shakesp, king lear.
ri'ches. n. s. [rich.j., fr.]
1. wealth ; money or possessions.
the instrumentalness of ribes to charity has rendered it
necessary by laws to secure propriety. hammond.
chemists seek righes by transmutation and the great
elixir. - spratt.
riches do not consist in having more gold and filver, but
in having more in proportion than our neighbours, whereby
we are enabled to procure to curselves a greater plenty of the
conveniencies of life, than comes within their reach, who,
sharing the gold and silver of the world in a less proportion,
want the means of plenty and power, and so are poorer. locke.
what riches give us, let us first enquire,
meat, fire, and cloaths; what more ? meat, cloaths, and
fire. pope.
vol. ii,
2. splendid sumptuous appearance: - -
the riches of heav'ns pavement, trodden gold. milton.
ri'chly, adv. [from rich.]
1. with riches; wealthily; splendidly; magnificently.
in belmont is a lady richly left,
and she is fair, of wondrous virtues. shakespeari.
women richly gay in gems. ilton.
2. plentedusly; abundantly. o
in animals, some smells are found more richly than in
plants. - - - - brown's wulgar erraurs.
after a man has studied the laws of england, the reading
the reports of adjudged cases will richly improve him. watts.
3. truly; abundantly. an ironical use.
there is such licentiousness among the basest of the people,
that one would not be sorry to see them bestowing upon one
another a chastisement, which they so richly deserve. addison,
ri'chness. n. s. [from rich.) - - -- * - * --
1. opulence; wealth. o
of virtue you have left proof to the world; o
and virtue is grateful with beauty and richns; adorn'd. sid.
2. finery; splendour. *
3. fertility; fecundity; fruitfulness.
this town is famous for the richness of the soil.
4. abundance or perfection of any quality.
i amused myself with the richness and variety of colours in
addison.
the western parts of heaven. spectator.
5. pampering qualities. w -
the lively tineture of whose gushing blood
shou'd clearly prove the richn's, of his food. dryden.
rick. m. s. see ref k.
1. a pile of corn or hay regularly heaped up in the open field,
and sheltered from wet.
- an inundation
o'erflowed a farmer's barn and stable;
whole ricks of hay and stacks of corn
were down the sudden current born. swift.
mice and rats do great injuries in the field, houses, barns,
and corn ricks. , mortimer's husbandy.
2. a heap of corn or hay piled by the gatherer.
in the north they bind them up in small bundles, and make
small ricks of them in the field. mortimer’s husbandry.
ri'ckets. m. s. [rachitis, lat. a name given to the di-
itemper at its first appearance by gison.]
the rickets is a distemper in children, from an unequal di-
stribution of nourishment, whereby the joints grow knotty,
and the limbs uneven: its cure is performed by evacuation
and friction. &amp;ointy.
in some years, liver-grown, spleen, and rickets are put al-
together, by reason of their likeness. graunt's bill of mort.
o were my pupil fairly knock'd o' th' head,
i should possess th” estate, if he were dead;
he's so far gone with the rickets and th’ evil,
that one small dose will send him to the devil.
so when at school we first declaim,
old busby walks us in a theme,
whose props support our infant vein,
and help the rickets in the brain;
but when our fouls their force dilate,
our thoughts grow up to wit’s estate. prior.
ri'ck ety. adj. [from rickets.] diseased with the rickets.
in a young animal, when the solids are too lax, the case
of rickety children, the diet should be gently astringent. a 8.
ri'ct ure. m. s. [ricura, lat.] a gaping. dich.
rid. pret. of ride.
to rid. v. a. [from hyeoban, saxon.]
1. to set free; to redeem.
it is he that delivereth me from my cruel enemies; thou
shalt rid me from the wicked man. psalm xviii. 49.
rid me, and deliver me out of great waters. psalm cxliv.
i will bring you out from under their burthens, and rid
you out of their bondage. exodus vi. 6.
2. to clear; to disencumber.
they were not before so willing to be rid of their learned
pastor, as now importunate to obtain him again from them,
who had given him entertainment. hooker.
i must rid all the seas of pirates. shakespeare.
we'll use his countenance; which being done,
let her, who would be rid of him, devise
his speedy taking off. shakesh. king lear.
upon the word, stept forth
three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care. b. johnson.
- i can put on
thy terrors, as i put thy mildness on,
image of thee in all things; and shall soon,
arm'd with thy might, rid heav'n of these rebell’d. milton.
did saints for this bring in their plate;
for when they thought the cause had need on't,
dryden,
happy was he that could be rid on't. hudibrar.
the god uneasy till he slept again,
resolv’d at once to rid himself of pain. dryden.
the greater visible good does not always raise men's desire,
in proportion to the greatness it appears to have ; though
22 a - every<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r i d
r i d
every little trouble moves us, and sets on work to get rid of
it. -- locke.
the ladies asked, whether we believed that the men of any
town would, at the same conjuncture, have loaden themselves
with their wives; or rather, whether they would not have been
glad of such an opportunity to get rid of them : addison.
3. to dispatch, - - -
having the best at barnet field,
we’ll thither straight; for willingness rids away. shakesp.
4. to drive away; to remove by violence; to destroy. t
ahdeathsmen' you have rid this sweet young prince. sha.
r1'pp.a.nce. n. s. [from rid.]
i. deliverance. s , ,
deliverance from sudden death, riddance from all adversity,
* , and the extent of saving mercy towards all men. hooker.
2. disencumbrance; loss of something one is glad to lose.
i have too griev'd a heart
to take a tedious leave: thus losers part.
—a gentle riddance. shakoff. merchant of penice.
by this, the cock had a good riddance of his rival. l'asir.
3. act of clearing away any encumbrances.
those blossoms, and those dropping gums,
that lie bestrown, unfightly and unsmooth,
ask riddance, if we mean to tread with case. .
ri'd den. the participle of ride.
he could never have ridden out an eternal period, but it
must be by a more powerful being than himself. hales
rit).d.l.e. n. s. inabelr, saxon; from nabe, counsel, perhaps
a trial of wit..]
1. an enigma; a puzzling question; a dark problem.
how did you dare
to trade and traffick with macbeth,
in riddles and in charms of death.
the theban monster, that propos'd
her riddle, and him, who solv’d it not, devour’d ;
that once found out and solv’d, for grict and spight
cast herself headlong from the ismenian steep, alzilton.
2. any thing puzzling.
'twas a strange riddle of a lady;
not love, if any lov'd her: heyday !
so cowards never use their might,
but against such as will not fight.
3. throbble, saxon.] a coarse or open sieve.
horse-beans and tares, sown together, are easily parted
with a riddle. mortioner's 11usbandry.
t. ri'ddle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to solve; to unriddle. there is something of whimsical
analogy between the two senses of the word ridule: as, we
fay, to fift a question: but their derivations differ.
riddle me this, and guess him if you can,
who bears a nation in a single man drydn's juvenal.
2. to separate by a coarse sieve.
the finest fifted mould must be riddled in. mortimer.
1, ri'ddle. v. n. [from the noun..] to speak ambiguously
or obscurely. *
be plain, good son, and homely in thy drist;
riddling confession finds but riddling shrist. shakesp.
r1 dolin gly. adv. [from riddle.j in the manner of a riddle;
secretly.
though like the pestilence and old-fashion'd love,
riddingly it catch men, and doth remove -
never, till it be starv'd out, yet their state
is poor. donne.
7, ride. v. m. preter, rid or rode; part. rid or ridden, [niban,
saxon; rijden, dutch..]
1. to travel on horseback.
brutus and cassius
are rid, like madmen, through the gates of rome,
were you but riding forth to air yourself,
such parting were too petty. shakesp. cymbeline.
am not i thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden p. numb.
through storms of smoke and adverse fire he rides,
while ev'ry shot is levell'd at his fides. smith.
let your master ride on before, and do you gallop after
him. - - swift's direaions to the groom.
2. to travel in a vehicle; to be borne, not to walk.
infected be the air whereon they ride. shakesp.
upon this chaos rid the distressed ark, that bore the small
remains of mankind. burnet's theory of the earth.
3. to be supported in motion.
as venerable nestor, hatch'd in filver,
should with a bond of air, strong as the axle-tree,
on which heav'n rides, knit all the grecian ears
to his experienc'd tongue. shakesp. troilus and cressida.
4. to manage an horse.
skill to ride seems a science,
proper to gentle blood ; some others feign,
to manage steeds, as did this vaunter; but in vain. spens.
the horses i saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished. shak.
inspir’d by love, whose business is to please,
he rode, he fenc'd, he mov’d with graceful case.
al/ilton.
shakesp. macbeth.
h. dibrar.
shak.
dryden.
5. to be on the water.
on the western coast
rideth a puissant army, shakes. rich. iii
the sea was grown so rough, that the admiral was no
able longer to ride it out with his gallies; but was enforced to
slip his anchors, and run his gallies on ground. anoll.,
they were then in a place to be aided by their ships, who,
rode near in edinburgh frith. hayward
waiting him his royal fleet did ride, ".
and willing winds to their low'r'd sails deny'd. dryden
men once walk'd where ships at anchor ride, , d.
now on their coasts our conquering navy rides, -
. . way-lays their merchants, and their land besets. dryden -
6. to be supported by something subservient. -
a credulous father, and a brother noble,
whose nature is so far from doing harms,
that he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
my practices rid easy. shakesp. king lear
to ride. v. a. - -
1. to fit on so as to be carried.
they ride the air in whirlwind.
2. to manage insolently at will.
humility does not make us servile or insensible, nor oblige
us to be ridden at the pleasure of every coxcomb. collier
the nobility could no longer endue to be ridden by often
coblers and brewers. swift's presbyterian pi.
r1'der. m. s. [from ride.] -
1. one who is carried on a horse or in a vehicle.
the strong camel and the gen’rous horse,
restrain’d and aw’d by man's inferior force,
do to the rid.: 's will their rage submit,
and answer to the spur, and own the bit.
2. one who manages or breaks horses.
as horses are bred better; and to that end riders dearly
hired. - * so-off. as rou like it;
, i would with jockies from newmarket jine,
and to rough riders give my choicest wine.
3. an inserted leaf.
ridge. m. s. ibnic3, saxon; rig, danish; rugge, dutch,
the back.]
1. the top of the back. -
he thought it was no time to stay;
but in a trice advanc'd the knight
upon the bare ridge bolt upright. . hudibrat,
2. the rough top of anything, resembling the vertebrae of the back.
as wifen a vulture on jmaus bred, -
whose snowy ridge the roving tartar bounds,
milton,
prior.
bramffan.
dislodges from a region scarce of prey. assion,
- his sons -
shall dwell to seir, on that long ridge of hills milton.
the highest ridges of those mountains serve for the main-
tenance of cattle for the inhabitants of the vallies. rey.
3. a steep protuberance.
part rife in crystal wall, or ridge direct,
for haste. milton,
about her coasts unruly waters roar,
and, rising on a ridge, insult the shore, dryden,
4. the ground thrown up by the plow.
thou visitest the earth; thou waterest the ridges thereof
abundantly; thou settlest the furrows thereof. psalm lxv. 10.
the body is smooth on that end, and on this 'tis set with
ridges round the point. j/3odward.
wheat must be sowed above furrow fourteen days before
michaelmas, and laid up in round high warm ridges. mort.
5. the top of the roof rising to an acute angle.
ridge tiles or roof tiles, being in length thirteen inches,
and made circular breadthways like an half cylinder, whose
diameter is about ten inches or more, and about half an inch
and half a quarter in thickness, are laid upon the upper part
or ridge of the roof, and also on the hips. moxon.
6. ridges of a horse's mouth are wrinkles or risings of the
flesh in the roof of the mouth, running across from one side
of the jaw to the other like fleshy ridges, with interjacent
furrows or sinking cavities. farrier's dict.
to ridge. v. a. strom the noun..] to form a ridge.
thou from heav'n
feign'dst at thy birth was given thee in thy hair,
where strength can least abide, though all thy hairs
were bristles rang'd like those that ridge the back
of chaf'd wild boars, or ruff'd porcupines. milton.
r1'do ling. }". s. sovis rejicula, lat. ains.] a ram half
ri'dcil. castrated.
tend my herd, and see them fed;
to morning pastures, evening waters led:
and 'ware the libyan ridgil's butting head.
and 'ware the ridgling with his butting head.
ri'do y. adj. [from ridge..] rising in a ridge.
far in the sea against the foaming shore,
there stands a rock, the raging billows roar
above his head in storms; but when 'tis clear,
uncurl their ridgy backs, and at his feet appear. drydo.
ridicu’le.
dryden.
dryden.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r i f
r i g
o
#
o
o
ridicu'le. m. s. [ridicule, fr. ridiculum, lat..] wit of that
pecies that provokeslaughter.
sacred to ridicule his whole life long,
and the sad burthen of some merry song. pope.
those, who aim at ridicule,
should fix upon some certain rule, - -
which fairly hints they are in jest. swift's miscellanies.
3, ridicuole. v. a. [from the noun..] to expose to laughter;
to treat with contemptuous merriment. -
i wish the vein of ridiculing all that is serious and good
may have no worse effect upon our state, than knight errantry
had on theirs, temple.
he often took a pleasure to appear ignorant, that he might
the better turn to ridicule those that valued themselves on
their books. addison on 44 edals.
rapicuoler. n.s. one that ridicules.
the ridicular shall make only himself ridiculous.
earl of chesterfield.
riproculous, adj. iridicule, fr. ridiculus, lat.] worthy of
laughter; exciting contemptuous merriment.
thus was the building left
ridiculous; and the work confusion nan'd. milton.
it was not in titus's power not to be derided; but it was
in his power not to be ridiculous. south.
rid1'culously. adv. [from ridiculous.] in a manner worthy
of laughter or contempt. - -
epicurus's discourse concerning the original of the world is
so ridiculously merry, that the design of his philosophy was
pleasure and not instruction. - south.
r1b1"culous ness. n.s.. [from ridiculous.] the quality of icing
ridiculous. -
what sport do tertullian, minucius and arnobius make
with the images consecrated to divine worship from the
meanness of the matter they are made, the casualties of fire,
and rottenness they are subject to, on purpose to represent the
ridiculousness of worshipping such things. stillingfeet.
r1/ding, particip. adj. employed to travel on any oocasion.
it is provided by another provincial constitution, that no
suffragan bishop shall have more than one riding apparitor,
and that archdeacons shall not have so much as one riding ap-
paritor, but only a foot messenger. a liffe's parerson.
ri’ding. m. / [from ride j
1. a district visited by an officer.
2. one of the divisions of yorkshire, answering to hundreds in
other counties: corrupted from tritoing. -
ri'dingco at. m. s. [riding and coat.] a coat made to keep
out weather. -
when you carry your master's ridingcoat in a journey, wrap
your own in it. swift's directions to the groom.
riding hood. n.s. [riding and hool j a hood used by wo-
men, when they travel, to bear off the rain.
the palliolum was like our ridinghoods, and served both
for a tunick and a coat. arbuthnot on coins.
good housewives all the winter's rage despise,
defended by the ridinghold's disguise. gay.
rie. n. s. an esculent grain. this differs from wheat in
having a flatter spike, the corn larger and more naked. a filler.
august shall bear the form of a young man of a fierce
aspect, upon his head a garland of wheat and rie. peacham.
rlfe. adj. [rype, saxon; if, dutch..] prevalent; prevail-
ing ; abounding. it is now only used of epidemical distempers.
while those restless desires, in great men rift,
to visit so low folks did much disdain,
his while, though poor, they in themselves did reign. sid.
guyon closely did await
avantage; whilst his foe did rage most rise;
sometimes athwart, sometimes he stook him straight,
and falsed oft his blows. syensor.
the plague was then is in hungary. an oiles.
blessings then are plentiful and rise,
more plentiful than hope. herbert.
space may produce new worlds; whereof so rise
there went a fame in heav'n, that he ere long
intended to create. azilton's paradise loft.
this is the place,
whence ev'n now the tumult of loud mirth
was rise, and perfect in my list'ning car. 41st.n.
that grounded maxim
so rife and celebrated in the mouths
of wisest men, that to the publick good
private respects must yield. milton.
before the plague of london, inflammations of the lungs
were rife and mortal. arbuthnot on air.
ri'fely. adv. [from rift. j prevalently ; abundantly.
it was risely reported, that the turks were coming in a
great fleet. knolley's history.
ri'fen ess. n. f: [from rose..] prevalence; abundance.
he ascribes the great risens of carbuncles in the summer,
to the great heats. arbuthnot on air.
or. n. s. [recrementum, lat j the refuse of any
thing.
t. rifle. v. a. [riffer, rifter, fr. riftien, dutch.]
r. to rob; to pillage; to plunder. s •
stand. sir, and throw us what you have about you ; if
flot, we'll make you, sir, and rifle you. , shakofteare.
men, by his suggestion taught, - -
ransock'd, the centre, and with impious hands
rifted the bowels of their mother earth
for treasures better hid. * * milton's paradis, lost.
you have rifted my master, who shall maintain me? l’eff.
a commander in the parliament's rebel army rifted and de-
faced the cathedral at lichfield. south.
2. to take away; to seize as pillage. - -
mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain,
and pray'rs, and tears, and bribes shall plead in vain,
till time shall rifle every youthful grace. pope.
ri'fle r. m. s. [from rifte.] §. plunderer; pillager.
rift. m. s. [from rive, j a cleft; a breach; an opening.
he pluckt a bough, out of whose rift there come
small drops of gory blood. - spenser.
she did confine thee
into a cloven pine, within which rift
imprison'd, thou didst painfully remain. shakespeare,
in st. james's fields is a conduit of brick, unto which
joineth a low vault; at the end of that is a round house, with
a small slit or rift; and in the conduit a window : if you cry
out in the rift, it makes a fearful roaring at the window. bac.
they have an idle tradition, that a missel bird, feeding
upon a seed she cannot digest, expeleth it whole; which,
falling upon a bough of a tree that hath some rift, putteta
forth the misseltoe. .. - bacon.
either tropick
"gan thunder, and both ends of heav'n ; the clouds
from many a horrid rift abortive pour’d
fierce rain, with lightning mixt. - - milton:
some pick out bullets from the vessels sides,
some drive old oakum through each seam and rist. dryd.
to rift. v. a. [from the noun..] to cleave; to split. to
rive is perhaps more proper.
to the dread rattling thunder
have i giv'n fire, and rifted joyc's stout oak -
with his own bolt. shakso. temps?.
at fight of him the people with a shout
milton's agoniser.
risted the air.
pope's mosiah.
... •
-
o
-
on rifted rocks, the dragon's late abodes,
the green reed trembles.
to rift. v. n.
1. to burst; to open.
i'd shriek, that even your ears
should rift to hear me. shałoff. ip'inter's tale.
some trees are best for ship timber, as oaks that grow in
moist grounds; for that maketh the timber tough, and not
apt to rift with ordnance. bacon's natural hy?ory.
when ice is congealed in a cup, it will swell instead of
contracting, and sometimes ris?. bacon's nat. hist.
2. [ rover, danish..] to belch ; to break wind.
rig. m. s. rig, ridge, seem to fignify the top of a hill falling
on eaco si'e ; from the saxon, hp 35; and the islandick,
h', or, both figuiying a back. gilson's camden.
72 r g. v. a. if om rig or ridge, the back.] -
1. to dress ; to accoutre. cloaths are proverbially said to be
for the back, and victuals for the belly.
j or was rigged out in his gold and silver lace, with a
featler in his cap ; and a pretty figure he inade in the
world. - l'estrange.
2. to fit with tackling.
my minde for egypt floode;
when nine faire ships, i rig'd forth for the flood. chapman.
he, like a foolish pilot, hath shipwreck'd
my vessel gloriously rigg’d. a silton's agoni/?es.
the finner shall set forth like a ship launched into the wide
sea, not only well built and rigged; but also carried on with
full wind. - south's sermons.
he bids them rig the flect. - denham.
he rigged out another small fleet, and the achaeans engaged
him with theirs. - a buthnot on coins.
r. g a doo n. m. s. [rigaden, french..] a dance.
riga rios. m. s. [rigatio, lat j the act of watering. dic7.
rigger. n. s. [from rig...] one that rigs or dresses.
rico ing.. n. s. [from rig..] the sails or tackling of a ship.
to plow the deep, -
to make fit rigging, or to build a ship. creech.
his batte‘’d igging their whole war receives;
all bare, like some old oak with tempests beat,
he stands, and sees below his scatter'd leaves. dryden.
ri'cg1s h. adj. [from rig, an old word for a widre..] wanton;
whorish.
vilest things
become themselves in her, that the holy priests
bless her, when she is riggish. shakesp. ant, and cleop.
to ri'cole. v. a. [properly to wriggle.] to move backward
and forward, as shrinking from pain : properly wriggle.
r!ght. adj. [nigz, saxon; recht, dutch ; rito, italian ;
recius, latin.]
i , fit ;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- -- * *
* - * , , , .
r i g
:* - ; becoming; suitable. - - - -
}. fior. of my #. are plain to him that under-
standeth, and right to them that find knowledge. prov. viii.
a time there will be, when all these unequal distributions
of good and evil shall be set right, and the wisdom of all his
transactions made as clear as the noon-day. . . . atterbury.
the lord god led me in the right way. gen. xxiv. 48.
. rightful; justly claiming. {-, } -
2 rio. to: #. law of nature, nor positive law of god,
that determines which is the right heir in all cases, the right
of succession could not have been certainly determined. looke.
. true; not erroneous; not wrong. * . . *. -
if there be no prospect beyond the grave, the inference is
certainly right, let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we %.
o - - - , or o *a*.
our calendar wants to be reformed, and the equinox rightly
computed; and being once reformed and set right, it may be
kept so, by omitting the additional day at the end of every
hundred and thirty-four years. . . . . . halder on time:
if my present and past experience do exactly coincide, i
shall then be disposed to think them both right. . beattie.
4. not mistaken ; passing a true judgement ; passing judgement
according to the truth of things. - -
you are right, justice, and you weigh this well;
therefore still bear the balance and the sword. .
5. just; honest 5 equitable; not criminal.
their heart was not right with him, neither were they sted-
fast in his covenant. psalm lxxviii. 37.
... happy; convenient. ~. .
6 *:::::: has been disappointed on the right side, and sound
nothing more disagreeable in the husband, than she discovered
in the lover. addison's spediator.
7. not left. - - -
it is not with certainty to be received, concerning the
right and left hand, that men naturally make use of the right,
and that the use of the other is a digression. brown.
the left foot naked, when they march to fight,
but in a bull’s raw hide they sheathe the right.
8. strait; not crooked. - - - - - -
the idea of a right lined triangle necessarily carries with it
an equality of its angles to two right ones. locke.
. perpendicular; direct. * . .
ight. interjeci. an expression of approbation.
right, cries his lordship, for a rogue in need
to have a taste, is insolence indeed:
in me ’tis noble, suits my birth and state.
right. adv. - - - -
1. properly; justly; exactly; according to truth, or justice.
then shall the right aiming thunder-bolts go abroad, and
from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly to
the mark. joslam v - 2 i •
to understand political power right, and derive it from its
original, we must consider what state all men are naturally in,
and that is a state of perfect freedom to order their actions,
and dispose of their possessions and persons. locke.
2. according to art or rule. -
you with strict discipline instructed right,
have learn'd to use your arms before you fight. roscommon.
take heed you steer your vessel right, my son,
this calm of heaven, this mermaid's melody,
into an unseen whirlpool draws you fast,
and in a moment sinks you. dryden's spanish fryar.
3. in a direet line; in a streight line. - -
let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look
straight before thee. proverbs iv. 25.
ye shall be driven out right forth, and none shall gather
up him that wandereth. - - jor. xlix. 5.
the people passed over right against jericho. i jos. iii. 16.
inse&amp;ts have voluntary motion, and therefore imagination;
for ants go right forwards to theif hills, and bees know the
way from a flowery heath to their hives. - bacon.
this way, right down to paradise descend. milton.
4. in a great degree; very. now obsolete.
i gat me to my lord right humbly. ..
… . . right noble princes, - . -
i'll acquaint our duteous citizens. shakesp. rich. iii.
pardon us the interruption -
of thy devotion and right christian zeal. shakspeare.
i cannot joy, until j be resolv’d - -
where our right valiant is become, *i- shakesp. henry vi.
- . . when i had climb’d a height ".
rough and right hardly accessible; i might
behold from circe's house, that in a grove ,
set thicke with trees stood, a bright vapor move. chapman.
the senate will smart deep . . . . .
for your upbraidings: i should be right sorry *
to have the means so to be veng'd on you, ... .
as i shall shortly on them. ... . . . . ben. johnson.
right many a widow his keen blade, -
and many fatherless, had made. . . hudibras.
5. it is still used in titles: as, right honourable ; right reverend.
.*
shais.
dryden.
pope.
... psalm xxx. 8.
-
. . . . ;
r i g
i mention the right honourable thomas howard lord high
marshal. - - - - peacham on drawing.
; right. n.s.
+ t - -
1. not wrong.
- : - ** - -
- - - - - - - --
- -
one rising
g, eminent
in wise deport, spake much of right and wrong,
qf justice, of religion, truth, and peace, - -
and judgement from above. ... milton's par. loft.
- - o - - - --
2. justice; not injury, 's 2-o -
persons of noble blood are less envied in their rising; for
it seemeth but right done to their birth. bacon.
in the midst of your investives, do the turks this right,
as to remember that they are no idolaters. - bacon.
long love to her has borne the faithful knight, , or
and well deserv'd, had fortune done him rigoto, dryden.
he, that would do right to reiigion, cannot take a more
effectual course, than by reconcilog it with the happiness of
-- - - - - - - - *. tillosas."
mankind. " --- -
3. freedom from guilt; goodness. . .
his faith perhaps in some nice tenets might - . . .
* be wrong, his life i’m sure was in the right. ... cowly.
4. freedom from errour. -
seldom your opinions err; * - -
your eyes are always in the right. prior.
5. just claim. . . . . . . . .
the roman citizens were, by the sword,
knowledge the pope their lord, though they knew not by
what right. . . raleigh's esys.
the proud tyrant would many times say, that whatsoever
belonged unto the empire of rome, was of right his, for as
much as he was possessed of the imperial scepter, which his
great grandfather mahomet had by law of arms won from
constantine. . . . . . . " " knolley's hoffery of the tarks.
subdue by force, all who refuse
right reason for their law; and for their king
taught to ac-
messiah, who by right of merit reigns. a filton.
my right to it appears,
by long possession of eight hundred years. dryden.
might and right are inseparable in the opinion of the
world. - l’estrange.
descriptions, figures, and fables must be in an heroi:
poems; every poet hath as much right to them, as every man
hath to air. 12 ryden.
judah pronounced sentence of death against thamar "our
author thinks it is very good proof, that because he did it,
therefore he had a right to do it. - - looe.
agrippa is generally ranged in sets of medals among the
emperors 3 as some among the empresses have no other right.
- - ziddison.
6. that which justly belongs to one. -
to thee doth the right of her appertain, seeing thou only
art of her kindred. tob. vi. 11.
the custom of employing these great persons in all great
offices, passes for a right. . * temple.
the prisoner freed himself by nature's laws,
born free, he sought his right. dryden's knight'; 7ale.
7. property; interest. --
a subject in his prince may claim a right, " o *-
nor suffer him with strength impair'd to fight." dryden.
8. power; prerogative. - -
god hath a severeign right over us, as we are his creatures,
and by virtue of this right, he might, without injustice, have
imposed difficult tasks: but in making laws, he hath not
made use of this right.' " . -- tillotson.
9. immunity; privilege. -
. . the citizens, " -
let them but have their rights, are ever forward
in celebration of this day with shews. ... shaks).
their only thoughts and hope was to defend their oo,
right; and liberties, due to them by the law. clarendon.
io. the side not left. ... " ... n. -
- on his right . . . .
the radiant image of his glory sat, *
his only son. -
ii. to rights. in a direet line; straight. -
these strata failing, the whole tract finks down to right,
into the abyss, and is swallowed up by it. . . . no.
12. to rights. deliverance from errour. ". . . . -
several have gone about to inform them, and set them to
right: ; but for want of that knowledge of the present system
of nature, have not given the satisfaction expecied. soda.
to risht. v. a. to do justice to ; to establish in possessions'
justly claimed; to relieve from wrong. ~. -
... . how will this grieve you, - -
when you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
you thus have publish'd me? gentle my lord,
you scarce can right me throughly. shakes care.
... if the injured person be not righted, every one of them is
wholly guilty of the injustice, and bound to restitution. taylor.
- t cou’d not expedient see, -
on this fide death, to right our family.
" " milton.
* --
-- jpallar.
some
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r i g
r i g
some seeking unto courts, and judicial endeavours to right
ourselves are still innocent. kettlewell.
make my father known, -
to right my honour, and redeem your own. dryden.
righteous. adj. [nthepire, saxon; whence rightwise in
old authours, and rightwisely in bishop fisher: so much are
words corrupted by pronunciation.]
1. just; honest; virtuous; uncorrupt.
that far be from thee, to slay the righteous with the
wicked; and that the righteous should be as the wicked. gen.
2. equitable ; agreeing with right.
kill my rival too; for he no less
deserves; and i thy righteous doom will bless. dryden.
ri'chteously. adv. [from righteous.] honestly; virtuously.
athens did righteously decide,
when phocion and when socrates were try’d;
as righteously they did those dooms repent,
still they were wise, whatever way they went. dryden.
ri'chteousness. n.s.. [from righteous.j. justice; honesty;
virtue ; goodness; integrity.
the scripture, ascribing to the persons of men righteousness,
in regard of their manifold virtues, may not be construed, as
though it did thereby clear them from all faults. hooker.
here wretched phlegias warns the world with cries,
cou’d warning make the world more just or wise; }
learn righteousness, and dread th’ avenging deities. dry.
good men often suffer, and that even for the sake of righte-
cusness. nelson.
rightful. adj. [right and full.]
1. having the right; having the just claim.
as in this haughty great attempt,
they laboured to supplant the rightful heir ;
i lost my liberty, and they their lives. shakesp. hen. vi.
some will mourn in ashes, some coal black,
for the deposing of a rightful king. shaxsp. rich. ii.
2. honest; just ; agreeable to justice. -
nor would, for gold or fee,
be won, their rightful causes down to tread. spenser.
gather all the smiling hours;
such as with friendly care have guarded
patriots and kings in rightful wars. prior.
ri'cht fully. adv. [from rightful..] according to right;
according to justice. -
henry, who claimed by succession, was sensible that his
title was not sound ; but was rightfully in mortimer, who had
married the heir of york. dryden's preface to fables.
right-h and. n. s. not the left.
the rank of osiers, by the murmuring stream,
left on your right-hand brings you to the place. shakesp.
r1's htfulness. n. s. [from rightful..] moral reetitude.
but still although we fail of perfea rightfulness,
seek we to tame these superfluities,
nor wholly wink though void of purest fightfulness. sid.
ri'chtly. adv. [from right ]
1. according to truth or justice; properly; suitably; not er-
roneously. -
each of his reign allotted, rightlier call’d
pow’rs of fire, air, water, and earth beneath. milton.
descend from heav'n, urania by that name
if rightly thou art call’d. milton's paradise loft.
for glory done
of triumph, to be styl'd great conquerors,
patrons of mankind, gods, and sons of gods;
destroyers rightlier call’d, and plagues of men. milton.
a snan can never have so certain a knowledge, that a pro-
position, which contradicts the clear principles of his own
knowledge, was divinely revealed, or that he understands the
words rightly, wherein it is delivered; as he has, that the
contrary is true. locke.
is this a bridal or a friendly feast
or from their deeds i rightlier may divine,
unseemly flown with insolenge or wine.
2. honestly; uprightly.
let not my jealoufies be your dishonour;
you may be rightly just, whatever i shall think. shakesp.
3. exactly.
should i grant, thou didst not rightly see;
then thou wert first deceiv'd. dryden.
4. straitly ; directly.
we wish one end; but differ in order and way, that leadeth
rightly to that end. ascham's schoolmaster.
r1'ghtness. n.s.. [from right ]
1. conformity to truth; exemption from being wrong; reeti-
tude; not errour.
it is not necessary for a man to be assured of the rightnes;
of his conscience, by such an infallible certainty of persuasion,
as amounts to the clearness of a demonstration; but it is suf-
ficient if he knows it upon grounds of such a probability, as
shall exclude all rational grounds of doubting. south.
like brute beasts we travel with the herd, and are never
so solicitous for the rightness of the way, as for the number or
figure of our company. rogers's sermons.
vol. il.
pope's odyssey.
2. straitness.
sounds move strongest in a right line, which nevertheless
is not caused by the rightness of the line, but by the shortness
of the distance. bacon's natural history.
rigid. adj. [rigide, fr. rigidus, latin.] * *
1. stiff; not to be bent; unpliant.
a body, that is hollow, may be demonstrated to be more
rigid and inflexible, than a solid one of the same substance
... and weight. ray on the creation.
2. severe; inflexible. -
his severe judgment giving law,
his modest fancy kept in awe;
as rigid husbands jealous are,
when they believe their wives too fair. denham.
3. unremitted; unmitigated. - - - - - -
queen of this universe ! do not believe - *
those rigid threats of death; ye shall not die. milton,
4. sharp; cruel. it is used somewhat harshly by philips.
crefly plains
and agincourt, deep ting'd with blood, confess
what the silures vigour unwithstood
could do in rigid fight. philips,
rigi'pity. n.s. [rigidite, fr. from rigid.]
1. stiffness.
rigidity is said of the solids of the body, when, being stiff
or impliable, they cannot readily perform their respective of.
fices; but a fibre is said to be rigid, when its parts so strongly
cohere together, as not to yield to that action of the fluids,
which ought to overcome their resistance in order to the pre-
servation of health: it is to be remedied by fomentations.
rigidity of the organs is such a state as makes them resist
that expansion, which is necessary to carry on the vital func-
tions; rigidity of the vessels and organs must necessarily fol-
low from the rigidity of the fibres. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. stiffness of appearance; want of easy or airy elegance.
this severe observation of nature, by the one in her com-
monest, and by the other in her absolutest forms, must needs
produce in both a kind of rigidity, and consequently more
naturalness than gracefulness.
ri'gidly. adv. [from rigid.]
1. stiffly; unpliantly.
2. severely; inflexibly; without remisfion; without mitiga-
tlon.
rigidness. n.s.. [from rigid.]. stiffness; severity; inflexi-
bility.
ror. n, f [regulet, fr.] a flat thin square piece of wood.
the pieces that are intended to make the frames for pic-
tures, before they are molded, are called riglets. mox.
ri'col. n.s. a circle. used in shakespeare for a diadem.
this sleep is sound; this is a sleep,
that, from this golden rigol, hath divorc’d
so many english kings. shakesp. henry iv.
ri'gour. m. s. [rigor, latin.] -
1. cold; stiffness.
the rest his look
bound with gorgonian rigour, not to move. milton.
2. a convulsive shuddering with sense of cold.
rigors, chilness, and a fever attend every such new sup-
puration. blackmore.
a right regimen, during the rigor or cold fit in the begin-
ning of a fever, is of great importance; a long continued
rigor is a sign of a strong disease: during the rigor, the cir-
culation is less quick, and the blood actually stagnates in the
extremities, and, pressing upon the heart, may produce con-
cretions ; therefore a rigor increaseth an inflammation.
arbuthnot.
3. severity; sternness; want of condescension to others.
nature has got the victory over passion, all his rigour is
turned to grief and pity. denham's sophy.
rigour makes it difficult for sliding virtue to recover. claris.
4. severity of life ; voluntary pain; austerity. * *
he resumed his rigors, esteeming this calamity such a one as
should not be outlived, but that it became men to be martyrs to.
fell.
does not looseness of life, and a want of necessary sobriety
in some, drive others into rigors that are unnecessary? spratt.
this prince lived in this convent, with all the rigor and
austerity of a capuchin. addison on italy.
5. strictness; unabated exactness. -
it may not seem hard, if in cases of necessity certain pro-
fitable ordinances sometimes be released, rather than all men
always strictly bound to the general rigor thereof. hooker.
heat and cold are not, according to philosophical rigour,
the efficients; but are names expressing our passions. glanv,
the base degenerate age requires
severity and justice in its rigour:
this awes an impious bold offending world. addison,
6. rage; cruelty; fury.
* he at his foe with furious rigour smites,
that strongest oak might seem to overthrow ;
the stroke upon his shield so heavy lights,
that to the ground it doubleth him full low. spensor.
- 22 b driven
* *
wotton's architecture.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r i. n
r. i n
driven by the necessities of the times and the temper of to rind. v. n. [from the noun..] to decorticate; to bark;
the people, more than led by his own disposition to any height
and rigour of actions. king charles.
7. hardness; not flexibility; solidity; not softness,
the stones the rigor of their kind expel, .
and supple into softness as they fell. .” - “
ri'corous. adj. [from rigour.] " ; , a
i. sever ‘; allowing no abatement.
he shall be thrown down the tarpeian rock,
with rigorous hands ; he hath resisted law, -
and therefore law shall scorn him further trial,
than the severity of publick power. shakesp. coriolanus.
are these terms hard and rigorous, beyond our capacities to
perform 2 rogers's sermons.
2. exact ; , scrupulously nice: as, a rigorous demonstration; a
rigorous definition. '- . -
r1 gorously. adv. [from rigorous.]
1. severely; without tenderness or mitigation.
lest they faint
at the sad sentence rigorously urg’d, - *
for i behold them fosten’d, and with tears
bewailing their excess, all terror hide. '" milton.
the people would examine his works more rigorously than
himself, and would not forgive the least mistake. dryden.
2. exactly; scrupulously; nicely. ** o
rill. n.s. [rivulus, lat..] a small brook; a little streamlet.
may thy brimmed waves from this *
their full tribute never miss, a
from a thousand petty rills,
dryden.
that tumble down the snowy hills. milton.
on every thorn delightful wisdom grows,
in every rill a sweet instruction flows;
but some untaught, o'erhear the whisp'ring rill,
in spite of sacred leisure blockheads still. 1%ung.
to ril.l. v. n. [from the noun..] to run in small streams.
io! apollo, mighty king, let envy,
ill-judging and verbose, from lethe's lake,
draw tuns unmeasurable; while thy favour
administers to my ambitious thirst
the wholesome draught from aganippe's spring
genuine, and with soft murmurs gently rilling
adown the mountains where thy daughters haunt.
ri'll et. n.s.. [corrupted from rivulet.] a small stream.
a creeke of ose, between two hills, delivering a little fresh
rillet into the sea. carew's survey of cornwall.
th’ industrious muse thus labours to relate
those rillets that attend proud tamer and her state.
drayton.
prior.
rim. m. s. [nima, saxon.]
1. a border; a margin. " - a
it keeps off the same thickness near its centre; while its
figure is capable of variation towards the rim. grew.
2. that which encircles something else.
we may not affirm, that ruptures are confinable unto one
side, as the peritoneum or rim of the belly may be broke;
or its perforations relaxed in either. brown's vugar errours.
the drum-maker uses it for rimbs. mortimer's husbandy.
rime. m. s. [hnim, saxon.]
1. hoar frost.
breathing upon a glass giveth a dew ; and in rime frosts
you shall find drops of dew upon the inside of glass windows.
bacon's natural history.
in a hoar frost, a rime, is a multitude of quadrangular
prisms piled without any order one over another. grew.
2. [ rima, lat..] a hole; a chink. not used.
though birds have no epiglottis, yet can they contract the
rine or chink of their larinx, so as to prevent the admission of
wet or dry indigested. brown's pulgar errours.
to rime. v. n. [from the noun..] to freeze with hoar frost.
to r1 mple. v. a. to pucker ; to contract into corrugations.
see crum ple and rum ple. !
the skin was tense, also rimpled and blistered. wiseman.
ri'my. adj. [from rime.] steamy ; foggy; full of frozen mist.
the air is now cold, hot, dry, or moist; and then thin,
thick, foggy, rimy, or poisonous. harvey.
rin d. m. s. [runb, saxon; rinde, dutch..] bark; husk.
there with a piteous yelling voice was heard,
crying, o spare with guilty hands to tear
my tender fides in this rough rind embar'd. spenser:
within the infant rind of this small flower -
poison hath residence, and medicine power. shakesp.
these plants are neither red nor polished, when drawn out
of the water, till their rind have been taken off. boyle.
others whose fruit, burnish’d with golden rind,
hung amiable. milton's paradise loft.
thou can'st not touch the freedom of this mind
with all thy charms, although this corporal rind
thou hast immanacl’d. milton,
this monument, thy maiden beauty's due,
high on a plane-tree shall be hung to view ;
on the smooth rind the passenger shall see :
thy name engrav'd, and worship helen's tree. dryden.
-
to husk. --&gt; . . . .
ring. n s. shrun;, saxon.] ** * * *
1. a circle; an orbicular line. - *
in this habit -
met i my father with his bleeding rings,
their precious gems new lost.
bubbles of water, before they began to exhibit their colours
to the naked eye, have appeared through a prism girded about
with many parallel and horizontal rings, newton.
* 2. a circle of gold or some other matter worn as an ornament.
a quarrel.
—about a hoop of gold, a paltry ring. shakespeare.
i have seen old roman rings so very thick about, and with
such large stones in them, that 'tis no wonder a fop should
reckon them a little cumbersome in the summer. addison.
3. a circle of metal to be held by, ** o
the rings of iron, that on the doors were hung,
sent out a jarring found, and harshly rung. , , , , , dryden.
some eagle got the ring of my box in his beak, with an
intent to let it fall, and devour it. . . . swift.
4. a circular course. - . . . . . . . .
a r chaste diana,
goddess presiding o'er the rapid race,
place me, o place me in the dusty ring, -
where youthful charioteers contend for glory. . . smith.
5. a circle made by persons standing round.
- make a ring about the corps of caesar, -
and let me shew you him, that made the will. shakes.
the italians, perceiving themselves almost environed, cast
themselves into a ring, and retired back into the city.
hayward.
'o - is .
* *
round my arbour a new ring they made,
and footed it about the secret shade.
6. a number of bells harmonically tuned.
a squirrel spends his little rage,
in jumping round a rowling cage; , , ,
the cage as either side turn'd up, 1. or,
striking a ring of bells a-top.
7. the sound of bells or any other sonorous body.
stop the holes of a hawk's bell, it will make no ring, but
a flat noise or rattle. bacon.
hawks bells, that have holes, give a greater ring, than if
the pellet did strike upon brass in the open air. bacon.
sullen moloch fled, o :
hath left in shadows dread .
his burning idol all of blackest hue;
in vain with cymbals ring,
they call the grisly king.
8. a sound of any kind. -
the king, full of confidence, as he had been victorious in
battle, and had prevailed with his parliament, and had the
ring of acclamations fresh in his cars, thought the rest of his
reign should be but play. bacon's henry vii.
to ring. v. a. pret and part, pass. rung. shrungan, saxon.]
1. to strike bells or any other sonorous body, so, as to make
it sound. o -
ring the alarum bell.
2. [from ring.] to encircle.
talbot,
who, ring'd about with bold adversity,
cries out for noble york and somerset.
3. to fit with rings.
death, death; oh amiable lovely death !,
thou odoriferous stench, sound rottenness,
arise forth from thy couch of lasting night,
thou hate and terrour to prosperity,
and i will kiss thy detestable bones,
and put my eye-balls in thy vaulty brows,
and ring these fingers with thy houshold worms.
4. to restrain a hog by a ring in his nose.
to ring. v. n.
1. to sound as a bell or sonorous metal.
ring out ye crystal spheres,
and let your silver chime *
move in melodious time;
and let the base of heav'n's deep organ blow.
no funeral rites nor man in mournful weeds,
nor mournful bell shall ring her burial.
easy it might be to ring other changes upon the same bells.
norris's miscellanies.
at latagus a weighty stone he flung; ,
his face was flatted, and his helmet rung. dryden.
2. to practise the art of making musick with bells.
signs for communication may be contrived at pleasure: four
bells admit twenty-four changes in ringing ; each change
may, by agreement, have a certain signification. hilder.
3. to sound; to resound. -
hercules, missing his page, called him by his name aloud,
that all the shore rang of it. bacon.
the particular ringing sound in gold, distinet from the
sound of other bodies, has no particular name. locki.
- with
dryden,
prior.
- *
. . . aaiken.
sha %. macleth.
shakesp. hen. vi.
shakos.
milton.
s *soar.
shakes.
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r i o
r i p
o:
to
no
o
sate
3 -
o,
o:
with sweeter notes each rising temple rung;
a raphael painted and a vida sung!
immortal vida!
4. to utter as a bell.
ere to black hecat's summons
the shard-born beetle, with his drowsy hums,
hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
a deed of dreadful note. - * shakesp. macbeth.
5. to tinkle. --
my ears still ring with noise; i’m vext to death :-
tongue-kill'd, and have not yet recover'd breath. dryden,
6. to be filled with a bruit or report. “
that profane, atheistical, epicurean rabble, whom the
whole nation so rings of, are not indeed, what they vote
themselves, the wisest men in the world. . . . south.
ring bon e. m. s. ' ' ' ' ' -- * * * : -, or .
ring-bone is a hard callous substance growing in the hollow
circle of the little pastern of a horse, just above the coronet:
it sometimes goes quite round like a ring, and thence it is
... called the ring-bone. o' to farrier's dielionary.
r1'ng dov e. m. s. [rhingelduyve, german.]
pigeons are of several sorts, wild and tame; as wood
pigeons, dovecote pigeons, and ringdoves. mortimer.
ri'nger. m. s. [from ring.] he who rings.
ringlea der. n.s. [ring and leader.] the head of a riotous
pope.
he caused to be executed some of the ringleaders of the
- cornish men, in sacrifice to the citizens. . . bacon's henry vii.
the nobility escaped ; the poor people, who had been de-
. luded by these ring leaders, were executed. - addison.
r1's gle r. m. s. [ring, with a diminutive termination.]
1. a small ring.
silver the lintals, deep projecting o'er ;
and gold the ringlets that command the door.
2. a circle. ,
pope.
you demy puppets, that
by moon-shine do the green ringlets make,
whereof the ewe not bites. shakesp. tempest.
never met we,
jpon the beached margent of the sea,
to dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
. but with thy brawls thou hast disturb’d our sport. shakesp.
3. a curl. - -
with ringlets quaint, and wanton windings wove. milt.
her golden tresses in wanton ringlets wav'd,
as the vine curls her tendrils.
these in two sable ringlets taught to break,
once gave new beauties to the snowy neck. pope.
r1'ng streaked. adj. [ring and //reaked. j circularly streaked.
he removed the he goats that were ring/treaked and spotted,
and all the she goats that were speckled. gen. xxx. 35.
r1'ngtail. m. s. [ring and tail.] a kind of kite with a
whitish tail. re bailey.
r1'ngworm. m. s. [ring and worm.] a circular tetter.
it began with a serpigo, making many round spots, such
as is generally called ringworms. j/iseman's surgery.
to rinse. v. a. [from rein, german, pure, clear.]
1. to wash; to cleanse by washing. -
this last costly treaty
swallow’d so much treasure, and like a glass
did break i' th' rinsing. shakesp. henry viii.
whomsoever he toucheth, and hath not rinsed his hands in
water, he shall be unclean. lev. xv. ii.
this must move us humbly to sue unto god, and earnestly
to entreat him, to wash us throughly from our wickedness,
and cleanse us from our fins ; yea to purge and rinse the foun-
- tain thereof, our unclean and polluted hearts. perkins.
2. to wash the soap out of cloaths.
they cannot boil, nor wash, nor rinse, they say, }
king.
milton.
with water sometimes ink, and sometimes whey,
according as you meet with mud or clay.
r1'nse r. n.s. [from rins...}. one that washes or rinses; a wather.
ri’ot. n.s. [riotte, old fr. riotto, italian ] o
1. wild and loose festivity.
when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
when rage and hot blood are his counsellors,
when means and lavish manners meet together,
oh! with what wings shall his affection fly
tow’rd fronting peril and oppos'd decay. shakesp. hen. iv.
so senseless of expence,
that he will neither know how to maintain it,
nor cease his flow of riot. * shakesp. timon of athens.
all now was turn'd to jollity and game,
to luxury and riot, feast and dance. milton.
2. a sedition; an uproar. . … o
transform'd to serpents all, as accessories •
to his bold riot. - * * milton.
3. to run rior. to move or act without controll or restraint.
one man's head runs riot upon hawks and dice. l'esir.
you never can defend his breeding,
who, in his satyre's running riot,
could never leave the world in quiet.
3. to banquet luxuriously.
swift's miscel,
70 root. o. o. [riattor, old fr.], , , , -- -
1. to revels to be dissipated in luxurious enjoyments.
lot us walk honestly as in the day; iot in rioting and
drunkenness. - * * roman, xiii. 13.
now he exacts of all, wastes in delight,
kot in pleasure, and neglects the law. daniel.
2. to luxuriate; to be tumultuous. * *
thy life a long dead calm of fix’d repose; ". . .
no pulse that iots, and no blood that glows. . . .
o
pope.
4. to raise a sedition or “proar. . . . . .
ri'ot er. m. / [from riot..] . . . .
1. qne who is diffipated in luxury. . .
2. one who raises an uproar or sedition. - - - -
risotiss. n.s.. [from riot..] dissoluteness; luxury. obsolete.
from every work he challenged essuin
for contemplation sake; yet otherwise -
his life he led in lawless riotise. . . . . spensor.
ri'otous. adj. [riotteux, fr. from riot.] " -
1. luxurious; wanton; licentiously festive, . . .
what needs me tell their feast and goodly guise,
in which was nothing riotous nor vain. spensor.
when all our offices have been opprest
with riotous feeders, - -
i have retir'd me to a wasteful cock,
and set mine eyes at flow. shakesp. timon of athens.
john came neither cating nor drinking, that is far from
the diet of jerusalem and other riotous places, but fared
coarsely. brown's wugar errours.
with them no riotous pomp nor asian train,
t’infect a navy with their gaudy fears; o
but war severely like itself appears. . . dryden.
2. seditious; turbulent. . . . .
ri'otously. adv. [from riotous...] ...
i. luxuriously; with licentious luxury. . . . . . . .
he that gathereth by defrauding his own soul, gathereth
for others that shall spend his goods riotously. ecclus. xiv. 4.
2. seditiously; turbulently.
r19 rous ness. n. / [from riotous.]. the state of being riotous.
to rip. v. a. [hnypan, saxon.] . . . .
1. to tear; to lacerate; to cut asunder by a continued aa of
the knife, or of other force. - - -
you bloody neros, ripping up the womb." " o
qf your dear mother england, blush for shame. shakesp.
. . wilt thou dash their children, and rip up their women with
child 2 2 king; viii. 12.
.." on - ;
the beast prevents the blow, -
and upward rips the groin of his audacious foe.
2. to take away by laceration or cutting. . . . .
macduff was from his mother's womb
untimely ripp'd. ... . . . . shakespeare's macbeth.
esculapius, begause ripped from his mother's womb, was
feigned to be the son of apollo. hayward.
… . . . rip this heart of mine
out of my breast, and shew it for a coward's. otway.
the conscious husband, whom like symptoms seize,
charges on her the guilt of their disease; " '
affecting fury acts a madman's part, * * * * *
he'll rip the fatal secret from her heart. granville.
3. to disclose ; to search out; to tear up; to bring to view.
let it be lawful for me to rip up to the very bottom, how
and by whom your discipline was planted, at such time as this
age we live in began to make first trial thereof. hooker.
you rip up the original of scotland. spensor on ireland.
this ripping of ancestors is very pleasing unto me, and in-
deed savoureth of some reading. spensor on ireland.
they ripped up all that had been done from the beginning
of the rebellion. - * = - clarendon.
o the relations confidering that a trial would rip up old fores,
... and discover things not so much to the reputation of the de-
ceased, they dropt their design, . * arbuthnot.
ripe. adj. [rupe, saxon; rijp, dutch..] o
1. brought to perfection in growth; mature.
macbeth -
… is ripe for shaking, and the pow'rs above
put on their instruments. shakespeare.
their fruit is improfitable, not ripe to eat. , wisd. iv. 5,
so may'st thou live, till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
into thy mother's lap, or be with ease * * *
gather'd, not harshly pluck'd, for death mature.
2. resembling the ripeness of fruit. a
| those happiest smiles, " ".
that play'd on her rife lip, seem'd not to know
what guests were in her eyes, which parted thence,
. as pearls from diamonds dropt. - shakoffeare.
3. complete; proper for use. t - -
i by letters shall direct your course, , ...
when time is ripe. shakes, henry iv.
4. advanced to the perfection of any quality.
there was a pretty redness in his lips,...". . .
a little riper and more susty red * * * * * *
than that mix’d in his checks. shakespeare.
- o early
dryden.
- - -
. . . . . .
milton.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r 1 p
r. is
o,
r1'pen ess. n.s.. [from ripe.] ... .
1. the state of being ripe; maturity.
2. full growth. . .
3. perfection; completion.
4. fitness; qualification.
to r1'pen. v. a. to mature; to make ripe.
-
o early ripe / to thy abundant flore,
what could advancing age have added more?
5. finished; consummate. -
beasts are in sensible capacity as ripe, even as men them-
selves, perhaps more ripe. hooker.
he was a scholar and a ripe and good one. . . shakesp.
6. brought to the point of taking effect; fully matured. --
he thence shall come, * - . . . .
when this world's dissolution shall be ripe. * * milton.
while things were just ripe for a war, the cantons, their
protectors, interposed as umpires in the quarrel, addison.
7. fully qualified by gradual improvement. . . . .
... at thirteen years old he was ripe for the university. fell,
- ripe for heav'n, when fate aeneas calls,
**then shalt thou bear him up, sublime, to me. .
to ripe. v. n. [from the adj.] to ripen; to grow ripe; to
be matured. - - - ---to
"... shaksp.
ripen is now used. -
from hour to hour we ripe and ripe, " .
. and then from hour to hour we rot and rot. ...
slubber not business for my sake, bassario;
but stay the very riping of the time,
dryden, f - - .b ey.
- to rise. v. n. pret. rose; part, risen. cowley has ris, for rose; t
†- - -
2. to get up from rest.
dryden. "
3. to get up from a fall.
- sosar..."4. to spring; to grow up. - -
. . . .” -
ri'p'towell. n. s. a gratuity, or reward given to tenants,
after they had reaped their lord’s corn.
so has johnson. intran, saxon; reison, dutch joo
1. to change a jacent or recumbent, to an erect posture. - a
* “i have seen her rise from her bed, and throw her night-
gown upon her. - --- . shakesp. maceth,
o archbishop received him fitting, for, said fie; i am too
oid to rise. - o: *** -- at privoro. o
... never a wife leads a better life than she does; do what
she will; go to bed when she fist; ris, when she list. shak,
as wild asses in the desert, -
rising betimes for a prey.
that is to live,
to rest secure, and not rise up to grieve. daniel's co. oor,
thy mansion wants thee, adam, rift. *milton.
go they forth to their woo,
job xxiv. 5::
'-'. to 2-
ui -oo ot. - .
-- - -
- *** ----- -----
- -- - - - -
true in our fall,” -------&gt;
false in our promis'd rising. -- so- milton's par. loft.
* † --to
-
* * * *-*.
- - - - -
though no stone tell thee what i was, yet thou,... . --&gt;they imagine: - - - - - - - -
in my grave's infide, see what thou art isow; of . 2. for one forbidden tree a multitude, ------------ a
yet thou’rt not yet so good, till us death lay. --~ * now ris'n to work them farther woe: - - , , , hon.
... to ripe and mellow there, wo are stubborn clay. , donne. 5. to gain elevation of rank or fortune. - ** ---&gt;
to ripe. v. a. to mature; to make ripe. . 4-3 some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall. shakespeare. i
he is retir'd, to ripe his growing fortunes,.… . . . . . . . . if they rise not with their service, they will makoheir
to scotland. shak sheare. service fall with them. ------------ * * * bacon. &lt;
ri'pely, adv, [from ripe.j. maturely; at the fit time.”
- it fits us therefore ripely; . . . . . . .
our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness. shakesp.
to r1'pen. v. n. [from ripe.] to grow ripe. -
this is the state of man; to-day he puts forth
the tender leaves of hopes, to-morrow blossoms,
and bears his blushing honours thick upon him;
the third day comes a frost, a killing frost;
and when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
his greatness is a ripening, nips his root;
and then he falls as i do. shakesp. henry viii.
afore the sour grape is ripening in the flower. is xviii. 5.
the pricking of a fruit, before it ri; oneth, ripens the fruit
more suddenly. bacon's natural history.
6. to swell.
7. to ascend; to move upwards. * **-
-- toris, i' th' world; - * *... .
* no wife man that's honest should exped. . . . . . otway.
* those, that have been raised by some great minister, trample
upon the steps by which they rise, to rival him.” south.
- ~ 2 * : *
* -- i.
... if the bright spot stay in his place, it is a rising of the
burning. –lev. xiii. 21.
- -
the sap in old trees is not so frank as to rise all to the
boughs, but tireth by the way, and putteth out moss. bacon,
if two plane polish'd plates of a polish'd looking-glass be
laid together, so that their sides’ be parallel, and at a very,
small distance from one another, and then their lower edges
be dipped into water, the water will rise up between them. now.
trees, that ripen latest, blossom soonest; as peaches and .8. to break out from below the horizon; as the suno
cornelians; and it is a work of providence that they blossom"
so soon; for otherwise they could not have the sun long enough
to ripen. - - bacon's natural history.
- melons on beds of ice are taught to bear,
and strangers to the sun yet ripen here. granville.
my father was no traitor;
and that i'll prove on better men than somerset,
were growing time once ripen'd to my will. .” shakesp.
- when to ripen'd manhood he shall grow,
the greedy sailor shall the seas forego.
- . that i settled * -
your father in his throne, was for your sake,” "
i left th' acknowledgment for time to ripen. dryden.
the genial sun . . . . . .
has daily, since his course begun, " " ' " ' " : *.
:
rejoiced the metal to refine, co-o. *
... and ripen'd the peruvian mine. , . . . . addison. *
'' be this the cause of more than mortal hate," " -
** the rest succeeding times shall ripen into fate. - pope.
here elements have lost their uses; * - -
* air ripens not, nor earth produces. ' * *- : * swift.
* * * * * *-*.
. . . . *- : * * a.
they have compared it to the ripenes of fruits. : hofman.”
little matter is deposited in the abscess, before it arrives
towards its ripeness. --- * . * sharp's surgery.
p 's -i &gt; --&gt; sharp - &amp; j.
- -
- * -
- - - - -
, - - - - -
time, which made them their fame out-live,” "
to cowley scarce did ripens; give. o * , denham.
-----
to this purpose were those harmonious tunes of psalms
devised for us, that they, which are either in years but young,
or touching perfection of virtue as yet not grown to ripens,.
might, when they think they fing, learn. "," "hoofer."
. . . . this royal infant promises o, to
. upon this land a thousand thousind blesfings, to o
" which time shall bring to ripenos. o shakesp. hen. vih.
1 to manhood am arriv'd so near, - to a
and inward ripenes; doth much less appear, to " " ' "
that some more timely happy spirits indu'th.” “milton.
-- - - - - -** **- * * *** ----, i.
a ..., , , , , , men must endure "yo i
* their going hence, ev’n as their coming hither: ***
ripens is all. . . . . . . . . . . * * shafeff. king lear.
ropes. n.s. [from rip.]. one who firs; one who tears; one
- o **** *-.
who lacerates. .
to ripple, v. n. to fret on the surface, as water swiftly run-
- - - * * * ---&gt; -- " - " -- - - - -
ning- ‘. . . . * 4 :: * * * * *
--- - - - - - - - --&gt; -- ** **** - - - - - -
… " - *** - - - -- -
*** * * * ~ * ~ * : * * * &gt; . . . . . . . ... y : i , ,
- … j. * - -
io. to begin to agt.
o -: dryden.: -
** ** 11. to appear in view.
12. to change a station; to quit a fiege. * * *
13. to be excited; to be produced, to .
15.
* i
18. to increase in
the maketh the fun to rise on the evil and the good. morriv,
he affirmeth; that tinny is fat upon the rising of the
pleiades, and departs upon areturus. “brown's puig, errours.
- *** - whether the suno-e- * * **, *.
rise on the earth, or earth rise on the sun. :: * &gt; *
- - -
- - -
mohen.
* 9. to take beginning; to come into existence, or notice.*, * -*
only he spoke, and everything that is, to asso
qut of the fruitful womb of nothing ris. * * to cowley.
* * * ~ * * * * * * * * *...*-ī-, ---&gt; * &gt;
high winds began to ris. oo is co- milton.
with vulcan's rage the rising winds conspire, wo
and near our palace rolls the flood of fire.o.o ou bryden.
- * * * * &gt; *g oil on of
the poet must layout all his strength, that his words may
be glowing, and that every thing he describes may immediately r
present itself, and rise up to the reader's view. 's so 'son. 3
&amp; poco,
* he, rising with finall honour from gunza, and fearing
the power of the christians, was gone.” * o knolles.
* * * * * on .
*\ . indeed you thank'd me; but a nobler gratitude
rose in her soul; for from that hour she lov'd me.--otway.-
* a thought rose in me, which often perplexes men of con-
templative natures.” . * * * * * : * : *spefator,
14. to break into military commotions; to make insurrections.
*"...at our heelsall hesi should rift, ozo . . . . . .
"with blackest insurrection.* or w to * * : * **stion.
* numidia's spacious kingdom lies' os- ones.
to ready to rise at its young prince's call. on addison's cate.
* no more shall nation against nation rift, .…”.… ...:
nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes. noir. popes:
... to be roused; to be excited toiaaion, onio, -o-o:
* who will rise up for me against evil-doers for who will
stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? --rs. xciv. =
gather together, come against, and rise up to the battle.jer."
** 16. to make hostile attack. a of six , so of -olo
if any man hate his neighbour; he in wait, and ris up
against him, and smite”him mortally, and fleethanto one of
these cities, the elders of his city shall fetch him thence. deut. 3
7. to grow more or greater in any respect.… roto-, - …;
* a hideous-gabble rises loud on 1, .… a ... …. .
“”among the builders. * * * *d no on v. …” “am item.
*the great duke’rifts on them in his demands, and will
not be satisfied with:less than a hundred thousand crowns, and
a solemn embassy te beg pardon. ~ * * * * : addisonian italy. i
- price. to o owes, ou 3: - ; on ... :
*.*bullion is risen to six shillings and five pence the ounce;
*i.e. that an ounce of uncoined filver will exchange for an
ounce and a quarter of coined silver.--&gt; * * * * . lecoe.
-*.*.* * *** ** ***** --&gt; i9. to
*:::::::: **** *** : zoo--&gt; - i -r
ji ---, -
:
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">to be improved.
#9. from i.an untainted couple, we can hope to have our
family rise to its ancient splendour of face, air, countenance,
and tatler.
zo. toesevate the stile. - -
your author always will the best advise, -
fall when he falls, and when he rises, rise. roscommon.
ar. to be revived from death. . -
after i am risen again, i will go before you. mat. xxvi.
the stars of morn shall see him rise -
out of his grave- milton.
come by chance.
22- to: they o: his library to view,
and antique registers for to avife, -
there chanced to the prince's hand to rise
an ancient book. - spenser.
23. to be elevated in fituation.
he bar'd an ancient oak of all her boughs;
then on a rising ground the trunk he plac'd,...,
which with the spoils of his dead foe he grac'd. dryden.
a house we saw upon arising- addison.
on banks or rising grounds near rivers, will thrive
-*. gly. jmartimer's husbandry.
rise. n.s.. [from the verb.] -
1. the act of rising, locally or figuratively.
2. the aa of mounting from the ground.
in leaping with weights, the arms are first cast backwards
and then forwards, with so much the greater force; for the
hands go backward before they take their rise. bacon.
ion; ascent.
3- *: the candle's going out, there is a sudden rise of wa-
ter; for the flame filling no more place, the air and water
succeed. - - - - bacon.
the hill submits itself * ,
in small descents, which do its height beguile;
and sometimes mounts, but so as billows play,
whose rise not hinders, but makes short our way. dryden.
4. place that favours the aa of mounting aloft.
rais’d so high, from that convenient rise . .
she took her flight, and quickly reach'd the skies. creech.
since the arguments against them o . o re-
ived opinions, it happens, in controversial discourses, as it
. the *: or. where, if the ground be but
firm, whereon the batteries are erected, there is no farther
inquiry of whom it is borrowed, so it affords but a fit rise for
the present purpose. locke.
5. elevated place - -
such a rise, as doth at once invite
a pleasure, and a reverence from the fight.
6. appearance as of the sun in the east.
phoebus ! stay;
the world to which you fly so fast,
from us to them can pay your haste .
with no such object, and salute your rise
with no such wonder, as de mornay's eyes.
7. encrease in any respea.
8. encrease of price.
upon a o: with spain, must be confidered the present
flate of the king's treasure, the rise or fall that may happen
denham.
waller.
in his constant revenue by a spanish war. ... temple.
o #. bishops have had share in the gradual rise of .
wift.
. beginning; original. -
9 * has #o. #. the lazy admonitions of those who give
rules, and propose examples, without joining practice with
their instructions. locke on education.
all wickedness taketh its rise from the heart, and the de-
fign and intention with which a thing is done, frequently dis-
criminates the goodness or evil of the action. . . nelson.
his reputation quickly peopled it, and gave rise to the re-
publick, which calls itself after his name. addison.
ro. elevation; encrease of sound. -
in the ordinary rises and falls of the voice, there fall out to
be two beenolls between the unison and the diapason. bacon.
riosen. part. ifrom rise.] -
r1's er. : e. % one that rises.
the isle aeaca, where the palace stands
of th” early riser, with the rosy hands,
a&amp;ive aurora; where she loves to dance. chapman.
risini'lity. n.f. [from riftle.] the quality of laughing.
how comes lowness of stile to be so much the propriety of
fatyr, that without it a poet can be no more a satyrist, than
without risibility he can be a man- ... dryden.
whatever the philosophers may talk of their risibility,
neighing is a more noble expression than laughing. arbuth.
rksible, adj. [risible, fr. risibilis, lao )
i. having the faculty or power of laughing. o -
we are in a merry world, laughing is our business; as if
because it has been made the definition of man, that he is
rifttle, his manhood consisted in nothing else.
o government of the tongue.
2. ridiculous; exciting laughter,
vol. ii.
risk: ". j., [riffue, fr. rigg, spanish.] hazard; danger;
chance of harm.
some run the risk of an absolute ruin for the gaining of a
present supply. - l’estrange.
her an insolent despiser of discipline, nurtured into con-
tempt of all order by a long risk of licence, shall appear be-
fore a church governor, severity and resolution are that gover-
il or's virtues, - south's sermons.
by allowing himself in what is innocent, he would run the
risk of being betrayed into what is not so. aftterbury.
an innocent man ought not to run an equal risk with a
guilty one. * - - clariffa.
to risk. v. a. [risuer, fr.] to hazard; to put to chance;
to endanger. -
who would hope new fame to raise,
or risk his well established praise,
that, his high genius to approve,
had drawn a george or carvoda jove. 4ddison.
r1'sker. n.s.. [from risk.] he who risks.
he thither came, t’observe and smoak
what courses other riffers took. - butler,
riss. the obsolete preterite of rise.
riss not the consular men and left their places,
so soon as thou sat'st down; and fled thy fide. ben. johns.
rite. m. s. [rit, fr. ritus, lat.] solemn aa of religion,
external observance.
the ceremonies, we have taken from such as were before
us, are not things that belong to this or that sea, but they
are the ancient rites and customs of the church. płocker.
it is by god consecrated into a sacrament, a holy rite, a
means of conveying to the worthy receiver the benefits of the
body and blood of christ. hammond's fundamentals.
when the prince her fun'ral rites had paid, *
he plow'd the tyrrhene seas. o dryden.
ritual. adj. [rituel, fr.] solemnly ceremonious; doncac.
cording to some religious institution. a- *
instant i bade the priests prepare
the ritual sacrifice, and solemn pray’r. prior.
lf to tradition were added, certain constant ritual and em-
blematical observances, as the emblems were expressive, the
memory of the thing recorded would remain. forbes.
ritual. n.s.. [from the adj.] a book in which the rites and
observances of religion are set down.
an heathen ritual could not instruct a man better than these
several pieces of antiquity in the particular ceremonies, that
attended different sacrifices. addison's remarks on italy.
ri’tualist. n.s.. [from ritual.] one skilled in the ritual.
ri'wage, n.s. [french.] a bank; a coast. not in use.
think
you stand upon the rivage, and behold
a city on th' inconstant billows dancing; -
for so appears this fleet. shakesp. henry w.
ritval. m. s. [rivalis, lat.]
1. one who is in pursuit of the same thing which another man
pursues; a competitour. *
oh loves thou sternly dost thy pow'r maintain,
and wilt not bear a rival in thy reign; }
tyrants and thou all fellowship disdain.
2. a competitour in love.
she saw her father was grown her adverse party, and yet.
dryden.
her fortune such as she must favour her rival. sidney.
france and burgundy,
great rivals in our younger daughter's love. shakesp.
your rival's image in your worth i view;
and what i lov’d in him, esteem in you. granville.
* ri'yal, adj. standing in competition; making the same
claim ; emulous.
had i but the means
to hold a rival place with one of them,
i should be fortunate. shakesp. merchant of venice.
equal in years, and rival in renown
with epaphus, the youthful phaeton,
like honour claims. dryden.
you bark to be employ'd,
while venus is by rival dogs enjoy'd. dryden.
to ri'val. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to stand in competition with another; to oppose.
those, that have been raised by the interest of some great
minister, trample upon the steps by which they rise, to rival
him in his greatness, and at length step into his place. south.
2. to emulate; to endeavour to equal or excel. a
ambitious fool! with horny hoofs to pass
o'er hollow arches of resounding brass;
to rival thunder in its rapid course,
and imitate inimitable force.
o thou, too great to rival or to praise,
forgive, lamented shade, these duteous lays.
lee had thy fire, and congreve had thy wit;
and copyists, here and there, some likeness hit;
but none possess'd thy graces, and thy ease;
dryden's aentis.
in thee alone 'twas natural to please ! harte.
to rival. v. n. to be competitours. out of use.
22 c burgundy,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o r, iv
ar (o a
* a ,, . borgundy, , , , , , , , , , , ,
^*\ve first address'd tow'rd you, who with this o;
have rival’d for our daughter. . . . jo. ing lear.
riv ality. a n.s. [rivalitas, lat. from rival.] competition;
r1'y alry. } emulation. ". . . . ." . . . . .
it is the privilege ... to o; between
. . the verse in fashion is, when numbers flow
o: that no fight can find ' ". .
... the rivet, where the polish'd piece was join'd.'" dryden
-- the rivets of those wings inclos'd “t”
** fit not each other. dryden's don sala, ian.
this instrument should move easy upon the rivat. o #:
those antagonists, who, by their rivalry for greatness, divided #. v. 4. [from the noun..] . . .
oo: oo
riv alship. n: s [from rival.] the state or character of a *. this man, . . . . " " '
rival. * * * * * …" of i 2 - . . . if all our fire were out, * fetch down new,
qut of the hand of jove; and rivet him " " ' ' '.
to rive. v. a. preter. rived, part, riven." [rypt, broken;
saxon; rijven, dutch; river, r. to drive. to split; to
cleave; to divide by a blunt instrument; to force in dis-
o ruption. o a 1
3 of 4, , . . .
- at his haughty helmet,
so hugely struck, that it the steel did rive,
and cleft his head. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . spensor.
the varlet at his plaint was grieved sore,
that his deep wounded heart in two did rive. spensor.
through riven clouds and molten firmament, "
the fierce three-forked engine making way,
both lofty towers and host trees hath reit.” o stensor.
- o ciceros . . . . . .' * *
i have seen tempests, when the scolding winds,
have riv'd the knotty oaks; but ne'er till now no
did i go through a tempest dropping fire. . . t; shalft.
as one he stood escap'd from g, o o
sore toil'd, his riven arms to havock hewn.'" . milton.
the neighbouring forests, formerly shaken and riven with
the thunder-bolts of war, did envy the sweet, peace of
druina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
had i not been blind, i might have seen
yon riven oak, the fairest of the green. . .
... " ' '. let it come; - -
"let the fierce light'ning blast, the thunder rive me. rowe.
to rive. v. n. to be split; to be divided by violence.
freestone rives, splits, and breaks in any dire&amp;tion. woodw.
to rive. for derive or diree?, not used.
* , , ten thousand french have ta'en the sacrament,
to rive their dangerous artiller - - -
upon no christian soul but eom talbot. shakesp.
to riovel. v. a. soon pleb, saxon, corrugated, rumpled.] to
contract into wrinkles and corrugations.
dryden.
then droop'd the fading flow’rs, their beauty fled,
and clos'd their sickly eyes and hung the head,
" and rive"d up with heat, lay dying in their bed. dryd.
"and since that plenteous autumn, now is past,
whose grapes and peaches have indulg’d your taste,
'take in good part, from our poor poet's board,
| such rivel’d fruits as winter can afford. jdryden.
alum stipticks, with contracting pow'r,
shrink his thin essence like a river'd flow'r, pope.
*
ri’v en. part. of rive. to a -
river, n.s. [riviere, fr. rivus, lat.] a land current of
water bigger than a brook. " * - - * * *
it is a most beautiful country, being flored throughout with
many goodly rivers, replenished with all sorts of fish. spe's.
the first of these rivers has been celebrated by the latin
poets for the gentleness of its course, as the other for its ra-
pidity. --- * - " --- * : addison on italy.
river-dr agos. m. s. a crocodile. a name given by milton
to the king of egypt. . . . . * * * *
... • . thus with ten wounds -
the river-dragon tam'd at length, submits ... . . -
to let his sojourners depart. milton's par. loft.
roo. h's. [diminutive of river.] a small stream a
- - - - -- - - y
bringing all their riorit. in, * * r.
... there cads; a new song to begin. . . . . . . drayton.
calls down riveret from her spring, ... ." .
to bring. . . . . drayton.
their queen upon her o -
rivf r-god. n.s. tutelary deity of a river." ".
his wig hung as strait as the hair of a river-god rising from
the water. ' ' ' ' ' arbuthnot and pope.
rly er-horse. m. s... hippopotamus. . . .
. . . .” - - o ose, * . . . . . . . ; ; ; ; *
- - . . . . . . . .
as plants ambiguous between sea and land, *** * * * * *
the rior-lose and scaly crocodile. . . . ." . milion.
river. n.s. [river, fr. to break, the point of a thing; to
drive..] a fastening pin clenched at both ends. . . . .”
the armourers accomplishing the knights, o o t
with bay homers closing rivets up, . . . . .
give drcadful note of preparation.” shakesh. henry v.
thy armour s
i’ll frush, and unlock the who, or - \ o,
but i'll be master of it...". shakoff. trailus and croffda.
though valeria's fair, and th ugh she loves me too,
'gainst her my soul is o. ; : * 't -
yet there are secret rivets to my heart, a .
where berenice's charms have found o * -- -
... subtle as lightnings. . . dryden's tyrannio love,
3 *...* * * * * : * : * ~ 2.
o
* …!
howe's pocalforest• .
'" to caucasus, should he but frown. ben. 3.}
2. to fasten firo, to make immoveable.' " " 7 "sas.
you were to blame to part with “
a thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,”
- and rivetted with faith unto your #. - *. shaft.
s woo write jowa, o, o c o,
crew'd to my mem'ry?...... ." shakesp. cymbalm
what one ot to riot to a §. .
influence of the scots, that the other rejeas. " " k. charlo.
. ... till fortune's fruitless spite had made it known,
her blows not shook but rivated his throne." drydon.
thus hath god not only rivetted the notion of himself into
our natures, but likewise made the belief of his being, neces.
sary to the peace of our minds and happiness of society zil.
f the eye sees those things rivetted, which are loose, where
will you begin to rectify the mistake f * * * * * loci,
where we use words of a loose and wandering significa-
tion, hence follows mistake and error, which those maxims
"brought as proofs to establish propositions, wherein the term:
stand for undetermined ideas, do by their authority confirm
and rivet. . . - locke.
rivet and nail me where i stand, ye pow'rs. congro.
they provoke him to the rage - *
of fangs and claws, and, stooping from your horse,
rivet the panting savage to the ground. addison's cato.
a similitude of nature, and manners, in such a degree as
we are capable of, must tie the holy knot, and riot the
friendship between us. . . . . . . . atterbury.
3. to drive or clench a rivet. t - - . . .
in rivetting, the pin you riot in should stand upright to the
plate you rivet it upon; for if it do not stand upright, you
will be forced to set it upright, after it is rivated.” ‘’ao.
rivulet. n. s. e..."...] a small river; a brook; a
streamlet. - -
by fountain or by shady rivulet,
he sought them. - alzom.
the veins, where innumerable little rivulets have their
confluence into the common channel of the blood. bento.
i saw the rivulet of salforata, formerly called albula, and
smelt the stench that arises from its water, which martial
mentions, o addison on italy.
rixdo'llar, n.s. a german coin, worth about four shi.
lings and six-pence flesling. ". . . . . * * didi.
roach. m. s. [from rutilus, lat. o! - - - - - - - d
a roach is a fish of no great reputation for his dainty taste: *
his spawn is accounted much better than any other part of
him; he is accounted the water sheep, for his fimplic ty and
foolishness; and it is noted, that roaches recover ftrength, and
* - * *
! . . . ]
grow in a fortnight after spawning. j/alton's angler.
if a gudgeon meet a roach, … . . . . . . . . .
. he dare not venture to approach;
yet still he leaps at flies. - swift.
road. n.s. [rade, fr. route, french, route is via trita.]
i. large way; path. * * * -
would you not think him a madman, who, whilst he
might easily ride on the beaten road way, should trouble him-
self with breaking up of gaps? suckling.
to god's eternal house direct the way, ‘’’ ---
a broad and ample road. amilton.
the liberal man dwells always in the road. fell.
to be indifferent whether we embrace falsehool or truth,
is the great road to error. locke.
could stupid atoms, with impetuous speed," * -
by diff'rent road; and adverse ways proceed,
that here they might rencounter, here unite. " blackmore,
there is but one road by which to climb up. addison.
2. [rade, fr.] ground where ships may anchor. - - - -
i should be still -
peering in maps for ports and roads; - " - ". . .
and every object that might make me fear “...o.
misfortune to my ventures. shaft. march. of p. nict.
about the island are many roads, but only one harbour.
- * * * * * satos's journoy."
*
• **
- * ~ *
3. inroad; incursion. -
- the volscians stand * * *
ready, when time shall prompt them, to make roao
. upon's again. . . .
cason was desirous of the spoil, for he was, by the former
road into that country, famous and rich. - knoes.
the king of scotland, seeing nose came in to perkin,
t -- a - - - - -
- • * * * * - * - " - . . . turned
shakes. coriolarus.
:
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">{r (o a r o b
. .
o
* * * . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - -
turned his enterprize into a road, and wasted northumber- roosting and boiling are t
land with fire and sword. . . . . . . . . bacon's henry vii. . . . . . " " .
4. journey. the word seems, in this sense at least, to be de- 2. to impart dry heat to flesh. - -
o "... rode, the preterite of ride: as we say, a short ride; aft: elements have lost their uses,
an easy ride. - . . . . . * * * * ,, . air ripens not, nor earth produces; "... . . . . .
- - woo o . came to lists, reft. h. yis. o: : no. i? or ". boil.’’ " " . swift.
and lodg’ in the a ey. - - a esp. mry, y. 3. o o dress at the fire without water. o, a . . o.o. '
he from the east his flaming road begins. ilton. . * in eg s boiled and royed, there is scarce difference to be
5. the act, or state of travelling. . . . . . . . . . . discerned. ... -- . bacon's natural history.
some taken from their shops and farms, others from their 4. to heat any thing violently,
elow the dignity of your office.
swift's directions to the cook.
* . . . . .
o
sports and pleasures, these at suits at law, those at gaming o .. ... to roaska in wrath and fire, o, . " ...] .
tables, some on the road, others at their own fire-sides. law. o he thus o'esized with coagulate gore, ' ' ' "
t, roam. v. n. [romigare, italian. see room.]. to wan. * old priam'seeks.” ‘’” so "shaksar.
der without * certain purpose; to ramble; to rove; to play roast. for roosted. -- or of to - ---
the vagrant. it is imagined to come from the pretences of he lost his rods beef stomach, not being able to touch a
vagrants, who always said they were going to rome. , firloin. c - ". . . . . . . . . . . . . addison.
five summers have i spent in farthest greece, and if dan congreve judges right, ' '. . !
roaming clean through the bounds of asia. ..., shakesp. roast beef and ale make britons fight. " ' ' ' prior.
daphne roaming through a thorny wood... . shakesp. it warns the cook-maid, not too,
the lonely fox roams far abroad,' ' ' ' ', the roast meat, which it cannot turn. . swift's misel.
on secret rapine bent, and midnight fraud. , prior. to rule the roas t. to govern; to manage; to preside. it
what were unenlighten’d man, , ... was perhaps originally raisi, which signified a tumuli, to
a savage roaming through the woods, and wilds direct the populace. co-
in quest of prey. * * * " thomson's summer. where champions ruleth the rost, * . . .
to roa m. v. a. to range; to wander over. their dailie disorder is most, tosor's husbandry.
now fowls in their clay nests were couch'd, * the new-made duke, that rules the roast. shakesp.
and now wild beasts came forth the woods to roam. - alma slap-dash, is aliagain " -
- milton. . . in ev'ry finew, nerve, o, o . . . . . .
roa’mer. m. s. [from roam.]. a rover; a rambler; a wan- runs here and there, like hamlet's ghost,
derer; a vagrant. - while every where she rules the roast.” ' ' ' '. prior.
roan. adj. [rouen, fr.] rob.m. s. [i believe arabick.j. inspissated juices.
roan horse is a horse of a bay, sorrel, or black colour, the infusion, being evaporated to a thicker consistence,
with grey or white spots interspersed very thick, farr, dici. passeth into a jelly, rob, extrast, which contain all the virtues
of the infusion. arbuthnot on aliments.
to roar. v. n. [nanan, saxon.] - - * * * ,
to rob. v. a. s.rober, old fr. roblare, italian.] -
1. to cry as a lion or other wild beast.
roaring bulls he would him make to tame. spensor. 1. to deprive of any thing by unlawful force, or by secret
** warwick and montague, theft; to plunder. to be robbed, according to the present
that in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion, use of the word, is to be injured by theft secret or violent;
and made the forest tremble when they roar'd. shakesp. to rob, is to take away by unlawful violence; and to steal, is
the young lions roared upon him and yelled, jer, ii. 15. to take away privately. . -
the death of daphnis woods and hills deplore, is’t not enough to break into my garden, -
they cast the found to libya's desart shore; ; and, like a thief, to come to reb my grounds, . . . . .
the libyan lions hear, and hearing roar. dryden. but thou wilt brave me with these sawcy terms?". s ałeso.
2. to cry in distress. - - our sins being ripe, there was no! preventing of god’s
at his nurse's tears justice from reaping that glory in our calamities, which we
he whin’d and roar'd away your victory, robbed him of in our prosperity. . . . . king charles.
that pages blush'd at him. shakesp. coriolanus. i have not here designed to rob him of any part of that
sole on the barren sands the suff'ring chief commendation, which he has so justly acquired from the
rear'd out for anguish, and indulg’d his grief. dryden. whole author, whose fragments only fall to my portion. dry.
3. to sound as the wind or sea. the water nymphs lament their empty urns, , ,
south, east, and west, with mix'd confusion roar, boeotia, robb'd of filver dirce, mourns. . ." allson.
and rowl the foaming billows to the shore. dryden. 2. to set free; to deprive of something bad. ironical. *
loud as the wolves on orcas’ stormy steep, our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, .
howl to the roaring of the northern deep, pope. did'st rob it of some taste of tediousness. . . . ." shakes.
4. to make a loud noise. - 3. to take away unlawfully. . . . .
- the brazen throat of war had ceas'd to roar. milton. better be #. of all, than fashion a carriage to rob
consider what fatigues i’ve known, * - love from any. . . shakspeare.
how oft i cross'd where carts and coaches roar'd. gay. ... procure, that the nourishment may not be robba and
roar. m. s. [from the verb.] o drawn away. !. ". . bacon's natural history.
1. the cry of the lion or other beast. - “... nor will i take from any man his due ;
the wonted roar is up, - but thus assuming all, he robs from you. dryden.
and hiss continual through the tedious night. thomson. oh double sacrilege on things divine,
2. an outcry of distress. - a . to rob the relick, and deface the shrine ! . dryden.
3. a clamour of merriment. - ro'bber. m. s. [from rob.] one that plunders by force, or
where be your gibes now your gambols : your songs steals by secret means; a plunderer; a thief. -
your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table in * these hairs, which thou dost ravish from my chin,
a roar * - shakesp. hamlet. will quicken and accuse thee; i'm your host;
4. the sound of the wind or sea, with rollers hands, my hospitable favour
the roar "you should not ruffle thus. * shakesp. king lear.
of loud euroclyden. - philips. * -- to had'st thou not committed
5. any loud noise. - notorious murder on those thirty men
deep throated engines belch'd, whose roar . in at ascalon;, o -
imbowel'd with outrageous noise the air. milton. "then, like a robber, strip'd'st them of their robes.
oft on a plat of rising ground, * ** * - * * * * * * * milton's agonisłes.
i hear the far-off curfew sound, -- the robber must run, ride, and use all the desperate ways
over some wide-water'd shoar, - of escape; and probably after all, his sin betrays him to the
swinging slow with sullen roar. - milton. gaol, and from thence advances him to the gibbet. south.
when cannons did diffuse, - - o bold prometheus did aspire, -
preventing posts, the terror, and the news; " and stole from heav'n the seeds of fire;
our neighbour princes trembled at their roar. //aller. a train of ills, a ghastly crew, "... "
the waters, list’ning to the trumpet's roar, the robber's blazing track pursue. " dryden's horace.
obey the summons, and forsake the shore. ... dryden. publick robbers are more criminal than petty and common
roa’rer. m. s. [from roar.] a noisy brutal man. - thieves. davenant.
the english roarers put down all. howel. robbery. m. s. [rolerie, old fr. from rob.] theft perpe-
yo a'ry, adj. [better rory; rores, lat.] dewy. trated by force or with privacy. . . . . r
on lebanon his foot he set, * * * ... thieves for their robbery have authority,
and shook his wings with roary may dews wet. fairfax. when judges steal themselves. . . .
t. roast. v. a. [roftir, rotir, fr. roslem, german ; 3enqrzoo, * * * * * o 1: shakespeare's measure for measure.
saxon, roasted; from rastrum, lat, a grate ; to roasi, being, of wo storm or robbery. . . . .
in its original sense, to broil on a gridiron.] shook down my mellow hangings. shakesp. cymbeline.
1. to dress meat, by turning it round before the fire. some more effestual way might be found, for suppressing
he reasieth not that which he took in hunting. d. of piety. common thefts and robberies. 4. temple,
robe,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o c
r o c
roer, n. s. [roble, fr. roboa, italian; rauba, low lat.] a
own of state; a dress of dignity.
through tatter'd cloaths small vices do appear;
robes and furr'd gowns hide all. shakesp, king lear.
my nan shall be the queen of all fairies,
finely attir'd in a robe of white. shakespeare.
the last good king, whom willing rome obey'd,
was the poor offspring of a captive maid;
yet he those robes of empire justly bore,
which romulus, our sacred founder, wore. dryden.
to rose. v. a. [from the noun..] to dress pompously; to
invest.
what christian soldier will not be touched with a religious
emulation, to see an order of jesus do such service for enlarg-
ing the christian borders; and an order of st. george only to
robe, and feast, and perform rites and observances bacon.
there in long robes the royal magi stand;
the sage chaldaeans rob’d in white appear'd,
and brachmans. pope's temple of fame.
robed in loose array she came to bathe. thomson.
ro'bert. n.s. [geranium ruperti, lat.] an herb; stork-bill.
ainsworth.
robe'rsman. 7 n.s. in the old statutes, a sort of bold and
robe'rts m.a.n. : out robbers or night thieves, said to be so
called from robinhood, a famous robber.
rosbin. n. s. [rubecula, lat..] a bird so named
robin-red-breast. w from his red breast a ruddock.
up a grove did spring, green as in may,
when april had been moist; upon whose bushes
the pretty robins, nightingales, and thrushes
warbled their notes. suckling.
the robin-red-breaft, till of late had rest,
and children sacred held a martin's nest. pope.
robo'reous. adj. [robur, lat.] made of oak. dic7.
§§ious. : adj. [robustus, lat. robose, fr.]
1. strong; finewy vigorous; forceful.
these redundant locks,
robustious to no purpose, clustring down,
vain monument of strength. milton's agonisles.
2. boisterous; violent; unwieldy.
the men sympathize with the mastiffs, in robustious and
rough coming on. shakesp. henry v.
it offends me to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear
a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the
groundlings. shakesp. hamlet.
while i was managing this young rebuffious fellow, that
old spark, who was nothing but skin and bone, slipt through
my fingers. dryden's don sebastian.
romp-loving miss
is haul’d about in gallantry robust.
3. requiring strength.
the tenderness of a sprain remains a good while after, and
leaves a lasting caution in the man, not to put the part quickly
again to any robus employment. ocke.
4. robyłious is now only used in low language, and in a sense
of contempt.
rosu'st ness. m. s. [from robust.] strength ; vigour.
beef may confer a robusiness on my son's limbs, but will
hebetate his intelle&amp;tuals. arbuthnot and pope.
roca mbo le. n.s. see garlick.
rocambole is a sort of wild garlick, otherwise called spanish
gatlick; the seed is about the bigness of ordinary pease. mort.
garlick, rocambole, and onions abound with a pungent vo-
latile salt. arbuthnot on aliments.
roche-alu m. m. s. [rache, fr. a rc.ck.] a purer kind of
alum.
roche-alum is also good. martimer's husbandy.
ro'che r. n.s. [rochet, fr. rochetum, from roccus, low lat. a
coat.
1. a ear. the white upper garment of the priest officiating.
what zealous phrenzy did the senate seize,
that tare the rotchet to such rags as these ?
2. [ rubellio, lat..] a fish.
rock. m.s. [roc, roche, fr. recca, italian.]
r. a vast mass of stone, fixed in the earth.
the splitting racks cow'r'd in the sinking sands,
and would not dash me with their ragged sides. shakesp.
there be rock herbs; but those are where there is some
mould. bacon's natural history.
distilling some of the tincied liquor, all that came over
was as limpid and colourless as rock water, and the liquour
remaining in the vessel deeply ceruleous, boyle.
these lesser racks, or great bulky stones, are they not ma-
nifest fragments 2 burmet's theory of the earth.
of amber a nodule, invested with a coat, called rock
amber. jwoodward on fssils.
pigeons or doves are of several sorts; as wood pigeons and
rock pigeons. mortimer's husbandry.
ye darksome pines, that o'er yon rocks reclin'd,
wave high, and murmur to the hollow wind.
3. protection; defence. a scriptural sense.
2
thomson's autumn.
cleaveland.
air!s.
pope,
though the reeds of egypt break under the hand of him
that leans on them, yet the rock of israel will be an ever.
lasting stay. king charlet.
... [rock, danish ; rocca, italian; ruzca, spanish ; spinrock
dutch..] a distaff held in the hand, from which the wool
was spun by twirling a ball below.
a learned and a manly soul
i purpos'd her; that should with even powers,
g. rock, the spindle, and the sheers, controul
f destiny, and spin her own free hours. ben.
on the rock a scanty measure place johnson,
of vital flax, and turn the wheel apace. dryden
flow from the rock my flax, and swiftly flow, -
persue thy thread, the spindle runs below. parnel
to rock, v. a. [recquer, fr.]
1. to shake; to move backwards and forwards.
if, by a quicker rocking of the engine, the smoke were
. swiftly shaken, it would, like water, vibrate to and
io. o
the wind was laid; the whispring sound boyle.
was dumb: a rising earthquake rock'd the ground. dryd.
a living tortoise, being turned upon its back, could ho
itself only by its neck and head, by pushing against the o
to rock itself as in a cradle, to find out the side towards which
theinoguality of the ground might more easily permit to rost
its shell. ray on -
2. to move the cradle, in order to procure do. the creation.
come, take hand with me,
and rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
leaning her head upon my breast,
shaloft.
my panting heart rock'd her asleep. sucklin
my bloody resolutions, o
!. sick and froward children,
'ere rock'd asleep by reason.
while his secret soul on flanders preys, denham.
he rocks the cradle of the babe of spain. dryden
high in his hall, rock'd in a chair of state, -
the king with his tempestuous council sate. dryden
3. to lull; to quict. o
sleep rock thy brain,
and never come mischance between us twain i shaloft,
fock. v. n. to be violently agitated; to reel to and
to.
the rocking town
supplants their footsteps; to and fro they reel
astonish’d.
- - - philip,
i like this rocking of the battlements. 17 reven
rock-doe. m. s. a #: of deer. oung's ge,
the rock-dae breeds chiefly upon the alps: a creature of
admirable swiftness; and may probably be that mentioned in
the book of job: her horns grow sometimes so far backward
as to reach over her buttocks. grew's .
rock-ruby. *s. a name given improperly by lapidaries and
jewellers to the garnet, when it is of a very strong, but not
deep red, and has a fair cast of the blue. hill on foss,
kock-roy is of a deep red, and the hardest of all the ko.
woodward on foot.
rock-salt. n.s. mineral salt. on roof
two pieces of transparent rock salt; one white, the other
red. woodward on fossils.
rockoo: "...s [from rock.] one who rocks the cradle.
his fellow, who the narrow bed had kept,
a was weary, and without a rocker slept. dryden,
rocket. *... s. [racchetto, italian.] an artificial firework,
being a cylindrical case of paper filled with nitre, charcoal,
and sulphur, and which mounts in the air to a confiderable
height, and there bursts.
every rocket ended in a constellation, strowing the air with
a shower of silver spangles. addison.
when bonefires blaze, your vagrant works shall rise
w in rockets, till they reach the wond'ring skies. garth.
rocket. n.s. seruca.] a plant. the whole plant hath a
peculiar fetid smell. amiller.
rocket is one of the sallet furniture. mortimer', husbandry.
rockless adj. [from rock.] being without rocks.
a crystal brook
is weedless all above, and rockls; all below. dryden.
rockrose. m. s. [reck and rose..] a plant.
rockwok k. m.s.. [rock and work.] stones fixed in mortar,
in out on of the asperities of rocks. a natural wall of
tock.
the garden is fenced on the lower end,
mound of rockwork.
rocky. adj. [from rock.]
1. full of rocks.
valde compare presenteth her rocły mountains.
make the bold prince
by a natural
asadison.
sandys.
through the cold north and rady regions run. waller.
w the vallies he restrains
ith rocky mountains. dryden.
nature lodges her treasures in rocky ground. zacke.
2. resembling a rock.
- such
o
o:
o:
*:
o
*
o
o
o
o,
o
.
i
|
:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o g
-r o i
s
o
*
tl a
o
:
such destruction to withstand, he oppos'd the rocky orb
of tenfold adamant, his ample shield. . milton.
3. hard; stony ; obdurate, -
i, like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft, -
rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom. - shaksp. rich. iii.
rop. n.s. [roede, dutch..]." - *
1. a long twig. - -
some chuse a hazel rod of the same year's shoot, and this
they bind on to another straight stick of any wood, and walk-
ing softly over those places, where they suspect the bowels of
the earth to be enriched with metals, the wand will, by bow-
ing towards it, discover it.” -
2. a kind of scepter. ** *
sh’ had all the royal makings of a queen; • *
as holy oil, edward confessor's crown, ** *
the rod and bird of peace. - shakoff. henry viii.
the past’ral reed of hermes, or his opiate rad. milton.
o gentle sleep, i cry’d, ... . . * . . . * *
why is thy gift to me alone deny'd : ,
• mildest of beings, friend to ev'ry clime, . . . .'s
where lies my error, what has been my crime? - *
beasts, birds and cattle feel thy balmy rod; . .
the drowsy mountains wave, and seem to nod:
the torrents cease to chide, the seas to roar,
and the hush'd waves recline upon the shore, harte.
. any thing long and slender.
3 - * y thing ; the fisherman
increase his tackle, and his rod retie. - gay,
haste, ye cyclops, with your forked rods,
this rebel love braves all the gods, , ,
and every hour by love is made, o
some heaven-defying encelade. o granville.
4. an instrument for measuring. • * * *
decempeda was a measuring rod for taking the dimensions
of buildings, and signified the same thing as pertica, taken as
a measure of length. - o arbuthnot on coins.
5. an instrument of correotion, made of twigs tied together.
if he be but once so taken idly roguing, he may punish him
with stocks; but if he be found again so loitering, he may
scourge him with whips or rods. . spenser on ireland.
i am whipt and scourg'd with rods, * -
. . .” nettled, and stung with pismires, when i hear
1. – of bolingbroke. - shakesp. henry iv.
in this condition the rod of god hath a voice to be heard,
and he, whose office it is, ought now to expound to the sick
man the particular meaning of the voice. hammond.
grant me and my people the benefit of thy chastisements ;
-- that thy rod, as well as thy staff, may comfort us. k. charles.
they trembling learn to throw the fatal dart,
and under rods of rough centurions smart. dryden.
- as soon as that sentence is executed, these rods, these in-
2 struments of divine displeasure, are thrown into the fire. att.
.. a wit’s a feather, and a chief a rod; -
* - an honest man’s the noblest work of god. pope.
‘rope. pret. of ride. - - - -
he in paternal glory rode. . - milton.
rodomonta'de. m. s. [from a boastful bolsterous hero of
ariosto, called rodomonte; rodomontade, fr.] an empty noisy
bluster or boast; a rant. . *
... he only serves to be sport for his company; for in these
- - - boyle.
o,
gamesome days men will give him hints, which may put him
upon his rodomontades. government of the tongue.
the libertines of painting have no other model but a redo-
montade genius, and very irregular, which violently hurries
* - them away. dryden's dufresnoy.
• * he talks extravagantly in his passion, but if i would quote
* - a hundred passages in ben johnson's cethegus, i could shew
that the rodomontades of almanzor are neither so irrational
nor impossible, for cethegus threatens to destroy nature. dry.
to robo monta'de. v. n. [from the noun..] to brag thra-
sonically; to boast like rodomonte.
roe. m. s. [ra, na-beon, saxon.] -
4. a species of deer, yet found in the highlands of scotland.
o he would him make --
-- the roe bucks in their flight to overtake. spensor.
thy greyhounds are fleeter than the rae. shakesp.
they were as swift as the roes upon the mountains. 1 chr.
procure me a troglodyte footman, who can catch a ree at
his full speed. arłuthnot and pope.
2. the female of the hart.
*- : * run like a roe or hart upon -
- the lofty hills of bitheron. - - sandys.
roz. n.os. [properly roan or rone; rann, danish: rogen, ger-
man.] the eggs of fish. -
here comes romeo - o
, without his roe, like a dried herring. . shakoff.
rod aotion: ‘n. s. [rogation, fr. from rogo, lat.] litany;
supplication. . . -- . . .
* - he perfecteth the rogations or litanies before in use, and add-
eth unto them that which the present necessity required. hook.
** * supplications, with this solemnity for appeasing of god's
*wrath, were of the greek church termed litanies, and ra-
gations of the latin. * * o taylor.
**voi., ii. . * -
- - - * - - *.
rogation-week. r. s. the week intediately. frceeding
whitsunday; thus called from three fasts observed therein,
the monday, tuesday, 2nd wedneslay, called rogation
days, because of the extraordinary prayers' and processions
then made for the fruits of the earth, of as a preparation for
...the devotion of holy thursday. . . . . . . . . . . didi.
rogue. m. s. sof uncertain etymology.] * - " -: * * * o
1. a wandering beggar; a vagrant; a vagabond. o:
for fear left we, like rogues, should be reputed,”
“and for ear-marked beasts abroad be bruited.- : * soft”.
* . the sheriff and the marshal may do the more gos, and
more terrify the idle rogue. . sponsor on ireland.
. . . the scum of people and wicked condemned' men spoileth
the plantation; for they will ever live like reguo, and not
so fall to work, but be lazy and do mischief. paton's effys.
... the troops are all scattered, and the commanders very
poor rogues. - ' ... • * * *
2. a knave; a dishonest fellow; a visłain; a thief.
thou kill'st me like a rogue and a villain. shakes.
• a rogue upon the highway may have as strong an arm, and
take off a man's head as 'cleverly as the executioner; but
then there is a vast disparity, when one action is mother,
and the other justice. . . . . .'; . * * south.
. . . . if he call rogue and rascal from the garret, ' ' ' " -
he means you no more mischief than a parrot. drydon.
the rogue and fool by fits is fair and wife,
and ev'n the best, by fits, what they despise. ***, * pope.
3. a name of slight tenderness and endearment, 3 * , *
i never knew a woman love man so, " ' ' '
—alas, poor rogue, i think indeed she loves. * * shakesp.
4. a wag. * * * =
oh, what a rogue and pleasant slave am i1 * * shakes?.
to rogue. v. m. [from the noun.] " " " ' ' ' ' ' ".
1. to wander; to play the vagabond. * * :
if he be but once so taken idly roguing; he may punish him
with the stocks. - * ~ * spenser on ireland.
he rogued away at last, and was lost. carew.
2. to play knavish tricks. ' ' ' " " ' * -
ro'o uery. m. s. [from rogue.] : “” - * * *
1. the life of a vagabond. * * * * * * . . . .
to live in one land is captivity, " ' ' ' ' '.
to run all countries a wild roguery." " ' " donne,
2. knavish tricks. - * * -
they will afterwards hardly be drawn to their wonted
lewd life in thievery and roguery. spenser on 1feland.
you rogue, here's lime in this sack too; there's nothing
but reguery to be found in villainous man. shosp.
• like the devil did tempt and sway ’em : * * * * * *
. to rogueries, and then betray 'em. * holdibrar.
the kid smelt out the roguery. " " - l'estrange.
* ... 'tis no scandal grown, * * ~ *
for debt and roguery to quit the town. dryden.
- the roguery of alchymy, * * *-* *
and we, the bubbled fools, ' ' ' ' . . . . * * *
spend all our present flock in hopes of golden rules. swift.
3. waggery; arch tricks. . . . -
rogueship. m. s. [from rogue.] the qualities or personage
of a rogue. - - - - - - * * * * *
... say, in what nasty cellar under ground, ‘’’.
-- ~ or what church porch, your roguship may be found? doy.
roog uish. adj. [from rogue..] . . . . * * *** -
1. vagrant; vagabond. . . . * * * * * *
though the persons, by whom it is usd, be of better note
than the former oguish sort; yet the fault is no less worthy of
a marshal. “ - - soon re
2, knavish ; fraudulent. . . .” -- " " " ' " " " " '
he gets a thousand thumps and kicks, -** - -
- yet cannot leave his roguish tricks. swift's ofte', nies.
3. waggish; wanton ; flightly mischievous. -
the most bewitching leer with her eyes, the most regios,
cast; her cheeks are dimpled when she *. arid her frniles
would tempt an hermit. . . . . . . pryden's spanis, fryar.
i am pleased to see my tenants pass away a whole evening
in playing their innocent tricks; our friend wimble is as
merry as any of them, and shews a thousand roguish tricks on
these occasions. -- - * * * * * a'idison.
timothy used to be playing regitish tricks; when his mi-
stress's back was turned, he would loll out his tongue. "
* * * * * * * * * * * * /-/w/o:2t.
roguishly, adv. [from roguish.] like a rogue; knavishly ;
wantonly. --- * * * *** *.* * * : * * * * * -
roguish sess. n. s. [from roguish..] the qualities of a roguc,
ro"guy. adj. [ from rogue. j - knavīsh; *wanton. a bad
word. : *** - . *… . . . . . . . . . . . . o:
- . a shepherd's boy had gotten a roguy trick of crying a wolf,
- and fooling the country with false alarms. * * l’e?rence.
to roist. a v.on. [of this word the most probable ety-
ta *::::...! omology is from riffer, "islandick, a violent
man.] to behave turbulently ; to act at discretion; to be
at free quarter; to bluster: - *-* * * * * * * • *
… o. i have a reisling challenge sent amongst
* * * *
the dull and factious nobics of the greeks, . . . . . *
will strike amazcanent to their drowsy spirits, shakes?.
22 d
among
"shakesh. ælf’s well that end, wes.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o l
r o m
2 a crew of rais!"ring fellows, -
o: ev’nings at the alehouse, swift.
ro1's tes, or raisiere", n.s.. [from the verb.] a turbulent,
brutal, lawless, blustering fellow.
7, roßl. v. a. [rouler, fr. rollen, dutch ; from rotulo, of
i . o: how thing by volutation, or successive application of
the different parts of the surface, to the ground.
who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the se-
pulchre : mark xvii. 3.
2. to move any thing round upon its axis.
3. to move in a circle.
to dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye. milton.
4. to produce a periodical revolution. -
heav'n shone and roll'd her motions. milton.
5. to wrap round upon itself.
6. to enwrap; to involve in bandage. **
by this rolling, parts are kept from joining together. wism.
7. to form by rolling into round masses.
grind red-lead, or any other colour with strong wort, and
so roll them up into long rolls like pencils. peacham.
8. to pour in a stream or waves.
a small euphrates through the piece is roll'd,
and little eagles wave their wings in gold.
to roll. v. n. -
1. to be moved by the successive application of all parts of the
surface to a plane ; as a cylinder.
fire must rend the sky,
and wheel on th' earth, devouring where it rolls. milton.
reports, like snow-balls, gather still the farther they roll.
government of the tongue.
i’m pleas'd with my own work, jove was not more
with infant nature, when his spacious hand
had rounded this huge ball of earth and seas,
to give it the first push, and see it roll
along the vast abyss.
2. to run on wheels.
he next essays to walk, but downward press'd,
on four feet imitates his brother beast;
by slow degrees he gathers from the ground
his legs, and to the rolling chair is bound.
3. to perform a periodical revolution.
thus the year rolls within itself again.
when thirty rolling years have run their race.
4. to move with the surface variously directed.
thou, light,
revisit'st not these eyes, which roll in vain,
pope.
dryden.
dryden.
dryden.
dryden.
to find the piercing ray, and find no dawn. milton.
a boar is chaf’d, his nostrils flames expire,
and his red eye-balls roll with living fire. dryden.
5. to float in rough water.
twice ten tempestuous nights i roll’d, resign'd
to roaring billows and the warring wind. pope.
6, to move as waves or volumes of water.
wave rolling after wave in torrent rapture. milton.
our nation is too great to be ruined by any but itself; and
if the number. and weight of it roll one way upon the greatest
changes that can happen, yet england will be safe. temple.
till the huge surge roll'd off, then backward sweep
the refluent tides, and plunge into the deep. pope.
storms beat, and rolls the main;
oh beat those storms, and roll the seas in vain. pope.
7. to fluetuate; to move tumultuously.
here tell me, if thou dar'st, my conscious soul,
what diff'rent sorrows did within thee roll. prior.
the thoughts, which roll within my ravish'd breast,
to me, no seer, th’ inspiring gods suggest. pope.
in her sad breast the prince's fortunes roll,
and hope and doubt alternate seize her soul. pope.
8. to revolve on an axis.
he fashion'd those harmonious orbs, that roll
in restless gyres about the artick pole. sandys's paraph.
9. to be moved with violence. -
- down they fell
by thousands, angel on archangel roll’d.
roll. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. the aet of rolling; the state of being rolled.
2. the thing rolling.
listening senates hang upon thy tongue,
devolving through the maze of eloquence
a roll of periods, sweeter than her song.
3. [rouleau, fr.] mass made round.
large rolls of fat about his shoulders clung,
and from his neck the double dewlap hung. addison.
to keep ants from trees, encompass the stem four fingers
milton.
thomson.
breadth with a circle or roll of wool newly plucked. mort.
4. writing rolled upon itself; a volume.
busy angels spread
the lasting roll, recording what we said. prior.
5. a round body rolled along; a cylinder.
where land is clotty, and a shower of rain comes that
soaks through, use a roll to break the clots. mortimer.
6. [rotulus, lat..] publick writing.
-
cromwell is made master
q' th' roll, and the king's secretary. shakesh. henry viii.
darius made a decree, and search was made in the house
of the rolls, where the treasures were laid up. ezra vi. 1.
the rolls of parliament, the entry of the petitions, answers,
and transactions in parliament are extant. aale.
7. a register ; a catalogue.
beasts only cannot discern beauty; and let them be in the
roll of beasts, that do not honour it. sidney.
these signs have mark'd me extraordinary,
and all the courses of my life do shew,
i am not in the roll of common men. shakesp. henry iv.
the roll and list of that army doth remain. davies.
of that short roll of friends writ in my heart,
there's none, that sometimes greet us not. gone,
'tis a mathematical demonstration, that these twenty-four
letters admit of so many changes in their order, and make such
a long roll of differently ranged alphabets, not two of which are
alike; that they could not all be exhausted, though a million
millions of writers should each write above a thousand alpha-
bets a-day, for the space of a million millions of years. bentl.
8. chronicle.
please thy pride, and search the herald's roll,
where thou shalt find thy famous pedigree. dryden.
his chamber all was hanged about with rolls
and old records, from antient times deriv'd. spenser.
the eye of time beholds no name
so blest as thine, in all the rolls of fame. pope.
9. [role, fr. j part; office. not in use.
in human society, every man has his roll and flation as-
signed him. i’estrange.
roller. m. s. [rouleau, fr. from roll.]
1. anything turning on its own axis, as a heavy stone to level
walks. -
when a man tumbles a roller down a hill, the man is the
violent enforcer of the first motion; but when it is once
tumbling, the property of the thing itself continues it.
hammond.
the long slender worms, that breed between the skin and
flesh in the isle of ormuz and in india, are generally twisted
out upon sticks or rollers. ray on the creation.
they make the string of the pole horizontal towards the
lathe, conveying and guiding the string from the pole to the
work, by throwing it over a roller. moxon's mech. extr.
lady charlotte, like a stroller,
sits mounted on the garden roller.
2. bandage; fillet.
fasten not your roller by tying a knot, lest you hurt your
patient. hoiseman's surgery.
bandage being chiefly to maintain the due situation of a
dressing, surgeons always turn a roller with that view. sharp.
ro'llingpin. m. s. [rolling and pin..] a round piece of wood
tapering at each end, with which paste is moulded.
the pin should be as thick as a rollingpin. moseman,
rolling-press. n.s. a cylinder rolling upon another cy-
linder by which engravers print their plates upon paper.
ro'llypooly. n.s. a sort of game, in which, when a ball
rolls into a certain place, it wins. a corruption of roll ball
into the pool.
let us begin some diversion; what d'ye think of roulypouy
or a country dance 2 arbuthnot's history of john bull.
ro'mage. n. s. [ramage, fr.] a tumult; a bustle; an active
and tumultuous search for any thing. it is commonly written
rummage, which see.
this is the main motive
of this post haste, and romage in the land.
romance, n.s. [roman, fr. romanza, italian.]
1. a military fable of the middle ages; a tale of wild adven-
tures in war and love.
what resounds
swift's miscellanies.
shakesp.
in fable or romance of uther's son. milton.
a brave romance who would exa&amp;ly frame,
first brings his knight from some immortal dame. waller.
some romances entertain the genius; and strengthen it by
the noble ideas which they give of things; but they corrupt
the truth of history. . dryden's dufresnoy.
2. a lie; a fiction. in common speech.
a staple of romance and lies,
false tears and real perjuries,
where fighs and looks are bought and sold,
and love is made but to be told. prior.
to rom a^n.co. v. m. [from the noun..] to lie; to forge.
this is strange romancing. pamela.
roma'nce r. m. s. [from romance..] a lier; a forger of tales.
the allusion of the daw extends to all impostors, vain
pretenders, and romancers. l'estrange.
shall we, cries one, permit
this leud romancer, and his bantering wit. tate's juven.
to ro'man1ze. v. a. [from roman, fr.] to latinize; to fill
with modes of the roman speech. -
he did too much romanize our tongue, leaving the words,
he translated, almost as much latin as he found them. dryd.
rom a^ntick, adj. [from romance j
1. resembling
!
o
£, v
o:
... is
2%
4t, .
: t
o:
*:::0
goal
oft
: ru
in
lose
of wo
#1;
if m .
in r
: seve
o, 71.
as th
on th
3 of
soon
wott
yo
atts;
of la
mof
o'er hal
o;
to he:
* on
afoat
ston
to-pe.
wing t
3, sax
giot!
"...t. r.
†
"...s.
rolet
*::ret
firsh
o:
t-s
ors
with
... of
so
!
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o o
o
o
-:
o
t
*
*
1. resembling the tales of romances ; wild.
philosophers have maintained opinions, more absurd than
any of the most fabulous poets or romantick writers. keil.
zeal for the good of one’s country a party of men have re-
presented, as chimerical and romantick. addison.
2. improbable ; false.
3. fanciful; full of wild scenery.
the dun umbrage, o'er the falling stream,
romantick hangs. thomson's spring.
ro'm1s h. adj. [from rome.] popish.
bulls or letters of election only serve in the romish coun-
tries. ayliffe's parergon.
romp. m. s.
1. a rude, awkward, boisterous, untaught girl.
she was in the due mean between one of your affected
courtesying pieces of formality, and your romps that have no
regard to the common rules of civility. arbuthnot.
2. rough rude play.
romp loving miss
is haul’d about in gallantry robust. thomson.
to romp. v. m. to play rudely, noisily, and boisterously.
in the kitchen, as in your proper element, you can laugh,
squall, and ramp in full security. swift's rules to servants.
men presume on the liberties taken in romping. clarissa.
ro'nde au. m. s. - a kind of ancient poetry, commonly con-
fisting of thirteen verses; of which eight have one rhyme and
five another: it is divided into three couplets, and at the end
of the second and third, the beginning of the rondeau is re-
peated in an equivocal sense, if possible. trevoux.
ront. m. s. an animal stinted in the growth: commonly pro-
nounced runt. -
my ragged ronts all shiver and shake,
as done high towers in an earthquake;
they wont in the wind, wag their wriggle tails,
peark as a peacock, but nought it avails. spenser.
ro'n dl e. m. s. [from round..] a round mass.
certain rondles given in arms, have their names according
to their several colours, peacham on blazoning.
ro'n1on, n. s. [rognon, french, the loins. i know not
certainly the meaning of this word.] a fat bulky woman.
give me, quoth i,
aroint the witch i the rump fed ronyon cries. shakesp.
room. n.s.. [from rod.]
1. the fourth part of an acre in square measure.
i’ve often wish'd that i had clear,
for life, fix hundred pounds a year,
a terras-walk, and half a rood
of land, set out to plant a wood. swift.
no stately larch-tree there expands a shade
o'er half a rood of larissean glade. harte.
2. a pole; a measure of fixteen feet and a half in long mea-
sure.
satan,
with head uplift 'bove the wave, his other parts
prone on the flood, extended long and large,
lay floating many a rood. milton.
for stone fences in the north, they dig the stones for
eighteen-pence a rood, and make the walls for the same price,
reckoning twenty-one foot to the rood or pole. martiner.
3. [nobe, saxon.] the cross; sometimes an image of a saint.
by the holy rood,
i do not like these several councils. shakespeare.
roodloft. n.s. [rood and loft.] a gallery in the church on
which reliques or images were set to view.
roof. % [hnop, saxon. in the plural sidney has rooves:
now obsolete.]
1. the cover of a house.
her shoulders be like two white doves,
perching within square royal rooves.
return to her, and fifty men dismiss'd
no, rather i abjure all roofs, and chuse
to wage against the enmity o' th' air.
2. the house in general.
i’ll tell all strictly true,
if time, and foode, and wine enough accrue
within your roof, to us; that freely we
may fit and banquet. chapman.
3. the vault; the inside of the arch that covers a building.
from the magnanimity of the jews, in causes of most ex-
treme hazard, those strange and unwonted resolutions have
rown, which, for all circumstances, no people under the
roof of heaven did ever match. hooker.
the dust
should have ascended to the roof of heav'n,
rais'd by your populous troops. shakesp. ant. and cleop.
in thy fane, the dusty spoils among,
high on the burnish'd roof, my banner shall be hung.
dryden.
sidney.
shakesp. k. lear.
4. the palate; the upper part of the mouth.
swearing till my very roof was dry -
with oaths of love. shakesp. merchant of venice.
my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the
roof of my mouth, ere i should come by a fire. shakespeare.
some fishes have rows of teeth in the roofs of their mouths;
as pikes, salmons, and trouts. bacon's natural history.
to roof. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to cover with a roof.
he enter'd soon the shade
high roof, and walks beneath, and alleys brown. millon,
large foundations may be safely laid; -
or houses roof’d, if friendly planets aid. creech.
1 have not seen the remains of any roman buildings, that
have not been roofed with vaults or arches. addison.
2. to inclose in a house.
here had we now our country's honour roof’d,
were the grac'd person of our banquo present.
roo'fy. adj. [from o having roofs. -
nakes,
whether to roofy houses they repair,
or sun themselves abroad in open air,
in all abodes of pestilential kind
to sheep.
rook. m. s. [hnoc, saxon.]
1. a bird resembling a crow: it feeds not on carrion, but grain,
augurs, that understood relations, have,
by magpies, and by choughs, and rooks, brought forth
the secret'st man of blood. shakesp. macbeth.
huge flocks of rising rooks forsake their food,
and crying seek the shelter of the wood.
the jay, the rook, the daw
aid the full concert.
2. [rocco, italian.] a common man at chess.
so have i seen a king on chess,
his rooks and knights withdrawn,
his queen and bishops in distress,
shifting about grow less and less,
with here and there a pawn.
3. a cheat; a trickish rapacious fellow.
i am, like an old rock, who is ruined by gaming, forced to
live on the good fortune of the pushing young men. wytherly.
to rook. v. m. [from the noun..] to rob; to cheat.
they rook'd upon us with design,
to out-reform and undermine. hudibras.
how any one's being put into a mixed herd of unruly boys,
and there learning to rook at span-farthing, fits him for con-
versation, i do not see. locke on education.
roo'kery. n.s.. [from rook.] a nursery of rooks.
no lone house in wales, with a mountain and a rockery,
is more contemplative than this court. pope.
roosky, adj. [from rook.]. inhabited by rooks.
light thickens, and the crow
makes wing to th’ rocky wood. shakesp. macbeth.
room. n.s. [num, saxon; rums, gothick.]
1. space : extent of place great or small.
with new wonder, now he views,
to all delight of human sense expos'd
in narrow room, nature's whole wealth. milton.
if you will have a young man to put his travels into a little
room, and in short time gather much, this he must do. bacon.
2. space or place unoccupied.
the dry land is much too big for its inhabitants; and that
before they shall want room by encreasing and multiplying,
shakesp.
dryden's georgios.
dryden,
thomson's spring,
dryden's songs.
there may be new heavens and a new earth. bentley.
3. way unobstructed.
make room, and let him stand before our face. shakes.
what train of servants, what extent of field,
shall aid the birth, or give him room to build creech.
this paternal regal power, being by divine right, leaves no
room for human prudence to place it any where. locke.
4. place of another; stead.
in evils, that cannot be removed without the manifest
danger of greater to succeed in their rooms, wisdom of necessity
must give place to necessity. hooker.
for better ends our kind redeemer dy'd,
qr the fallen angels rooms will be but ill supply'd. rostom.
by contributing to the contentment of other men, and
rendering them as happy as lies in our power, we do god's
work, are in his place and room. calamy's sermons.
5. unobstructed opportunity. -
when this princess was in her father's court, she was so
celebrated, that there was no prince in the empire, who had
room for such an alliance, that was not ambitious of gaining her
into his family. addison's freeholder.
it puts us upon so eager a pursuit of the advantages of life,
as leaves no room to refle&amp;t on the great author of them. att.
6. posfible admission; possible mode.
will you not look with pity on me?
is there no hope f is there no room for pardon 2 a. philips.
7. an apartment in a house ; so much of a house as is inclosed
within partitions.
i found the prince in the next room,
washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks.
• shaksso.
2 if
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o o
o r o p
if when she appears in th’ room,
thou dost not quake, and art struck dumb ;
know this,
thou lov'st amis; ;
and to love true,
thou must begin again, and love anew. suckling.
in a prince's court, the only question a man is to ask is,
whether it be the custom of the court, or will of the prince, to
be uncovered in some rooms and not in others. stillingfleet.
it will afford me a few pleasant rooms, for such a friend
as yourself. pope.
roo'mage. m. s. [from room..] space; place.
- man, of all sensible creatures, has the fullest brain to his
proportion, for the lodging of the intelle&amp;tive faculties: it
must be a filent character of hope, when there is good store of
roomage and receipt, where those powers are stowed. wotton.
roo'm in ess. m. s [from roomy..] space; quantity of extent.
roo'my. adj. [from room.] spacious; wide; large.
with roomy decks, her guns of mighty strength,
deep in her draught, and warlike in her length. dryden.
this sort of number is more roomy; the thought can turn
itself with greater ease in a larger compass. dryden.
roost. n. s [hnort, saxon.]
1. that on which a bird sits to sleep.
sooner than the mattin-bell was rung,
he clap'd his wings upon his roost, and sung. "dryden.
2. the aet of sleeping.
a fox spied out a cock at rooft upon a tree. l'estrange.
large and strong muscles move the wings, and support the
body at roo/?. derham's physico-theology.
to roost. v. n. [rooften, dutch; of the same etymology with
rest.] -
1. to sleep as a bird.
the cock roo/led at night upon the boughs.
2. to lodge. in burlesque.
root. m. s. [rot, swedish; rood, danish.]
1. that part of the plant which rests in the ground, and supplies
the stems with nourishment. - -
the layers will in a month strike root, being planted in a
light loamy earth. evelyn’s kalendar.
when you would have many new roots of fruit trees, take
a low tree and bow it, and lay all his branches aflat upon the
ground, and cast earth upon them, and every twig will take
roof. bacon’s natural history.
a flow'r in meadow ground, amellus call’d;
and from one root the rising stem bestows -
a wood of leaves. dryden's wirgil's georgicks.
in october, the hops will settle and strike root against
spring. mortimer’s husbandry.
2. the bottom; the lower part.
deep to the roots of hell the gather'd breach
they fasten’d. milton.
these subterraneous vaults would be found especially about
the roots of the mountains. burnet's theory of the earth.
3. a plant of which the root is esculent.
those plants, whose roots are eaten, are carrots, turnips,
l’estrange.
and radishes. watts. .
nor were the cole-worts wanting, nor the root, -
which after-ages call hybernian fruit. harte.
4. the original; the first cause.
the love of money is the root of all evil, is a truth uni-
versally agreed in. temple.
5. the first ancestor.
it was said,
that myself should be the root, and father
of many kings. shakespeare’s macbeth.
why did my parents send me to the schools,
that i with knowledge might enrich my mind
since the desire to know first made men fools,
and did corrupt the root of all mankind.
whence,
but from the author of all ill, could spring
so deep a malice, to confound the race -
of mankind in cne root, milton's parad's los.
they were the roots, out of which sprang two distinct
people, under two distinet governments. locke.
6. fixed residence. -
7. impression; durable effect. -
having this way eased the church, as they thought of su-
perfluity, they went on till they had plucked up even those
things also, which had taken a great deal stronger and deeper
roof. hooker.
that love took deepest root, which first did grow. dryden.
to root. v. n. [from the noun.]
i. to fix the root; to strike far into the earth.
her fallow leas
the darnel, hemlock and rank fumitory
doth root upon. shaoffeare', henry v.
underneath the grove of sycamour, -
that westward rooteth, did i see your son.
the multiplying brood of the ungodly shall not take deep
rooting from * slips, nor lay any fast foundation. jwisd.
davies.
t
shałos).
after a year's rooting, then shaking doth the tree good, by
loosening of the earth. 17c071.
the coulter must be proportioned to the soil, because, in
deep grounds, the weeds root the deeper. mortimer.
2. to turn up earth: as, the hog roots the garden.
3. to sink deep. -
if any irregularity chanced to intervene, and cause misap-
prehensions, he gave them not leave to root and fasten by
concealment. fell.
to roor. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fix deep in the earth.
- when ocean, air, and earth at once engage,
and rooted forests fly before their rage,
at once the clashing clouds to battle move.
where th' impetuous torrent rushing down
huge craggy stones, and rooted trees had thrown,
they left their coursers, dryden's aentis.
2. to impress deeply.
the great important end that god defigns it for, the go.
vernment of mankind, sufficiently shews the necessity of its
being rooted deeply in the heart, and put beyond the danger of
being torn up by any ordinary violence. south.
they have so rooted themselves in the opinions of their
party, that they cannot hear an objection with patience. watts.
3. to turn up out of the ground; to radicate; to extirpate:
with a particle; as, out or up.
he's a rank weed,
and we must root him out. shakes. henry viii.
soon shall we drive back alcibiades,
who, like a boar too savage, doth root up
his country’s peace. shakesp. timon of athens.
the egyptians think it fin or to root up or to bite
their lecks or onions, which they serve with holy rite.
- * raleigh's history of ihe i/orld.
root up wild olives from thy labour’d lands. dryden.
the royal husbandman appear'd,
and plough'd, and sow'd, and till'd ;
the thorns he rooted out, the rubbish clear'd,
and blest th’ obedient field.
4. to destroy ; to banish: with particles.
not to destroy, but root them out of heav'n.
in vain we plant, we build, our stores increase,
if conscience roots up all our inward peace. granville,
roo'ted. adj. [from root.] fixed; deep; radical.
pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, -
raze out the written troubles of the brain. shakos.
the danger is great to them, who, on a weaker foul-
dation, do yet stand firmly rooted, and grounded in the love
of christ. - hammond's fundamental.
you always joined a violent desire of perpetually changing
places with a rooted laziness. swift to gay,
roost ediy. adv, [from rooted.] deeply; strongly.
they all do hate him as rootedly as i. shakespeare.
rooty. adj. [from root..] full of roots. . . dic7.
rope. m. s. snap, saxon; rep, roof, dutch.j
1. a cord; a string ; a halter; a cable; a hauffer. .
thou drunken slave, i sent thee for a rope,
and told thee to what purpose. skałesp. com. of err.
an anchor, let down by a rope, maketh a sound; and yet
the rope is no solid body, whereby the sound can ascend. bacan.
who would not guess there might be hopes,
the fear of gallowses and rapes
before their eyes, might reconcile
their animosities a while. hudibras.
hang yourself up in a true rose, that there may appear no
trick in it. - arbuthnot's history of john bull.
2. any row of things depending: as, a rope of ovicns.
i cannot but confess myself mightily surprized, that, in a
book, which was to provide chains for all mankind, i should
find nothing but a rope of sand, locke.
to rope. v. n. [from the noun..] to draw out into viscosities;
to concrete into glutinous filaments. -
such bodies partly follow the touch of another body, and
partly stick to themselves: and therefore rope and draw them-
selves in threads; as pitch, glue, and birdlime. bacon,
in this close vessel place the earth accurs'd,
but fill'd brimful with wholesome water first,
then run it through, the drops will rope around. dryden.
ro'pedancer. m. s. [rope and dancer.] an artist who dances
on a rope. -
saivian, amongst publick shews, mentions the petaminarii;
probably derived from the greek terarga, to fly, and ma
refer to such kind of ropedancers. jwilfins.
statius, posted on the highest of the two summits, the
people regarded with terror, as they look upon a daring rope-
dancer, whom they expe&amp;t to fall every moment. addison.
... nic bounced up with a spring equal to that of one of your
nimbleft tumblers or ropedancers, and fell foul upon john bull,
to snatch the cudgel he had in his hand. arbuthnot.
ro'pin ess. n.s.. [from ropy.] . viscosity; glutinousness.
ro'pemaker, or roper. n. s. [rope and maker.] one who
makes ropes to sell.
dryden,
dryden,
milton.
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">§.
r o s
*
the ropemaker bear me witness,
that i was sent for nothing but a rope. - shakespeare.
ro'pery. m. s. [ from rope. j rogue's tricks. see rope-
k.
"..., saucy merchant was this... that was so full of his
ropery? shakesp. merchant of penice.
roopetrick. m. s. [rope and trick.] probably rogue's tricks;
tricks that deserve the halter.
she may perhaps call him half a score knaves, or so; an' he
begin once, he'll rail in his ropetricks. - shakespeare.
roopy. adj. [from rope.] viscous; tenacious; glutinous.
ask for what price thy venal tongue was sold;
tough, wither'd truffles, ropy wine, a dish
of shotten herrings, or stale stinking fish. dryden's juv.
take care
thy muddy bev'rage to serene, and drive ---
precipitant the baser ropy lees. philips.
the contents separated from it are sometimes ropy, and
fonmetimes only a grey and mealy, light substance. blackmore.
ro 2uelaure. m. s. [french..] a cloak for men.
within the requelaure's clasp thy hands are pent. gay.
rora’t lon. m. s. [roris, latin.] a falling of dew. dic7.
ro r1d. adj. [roridus, lat.] dewy. - - - -
a vehicle conveys it through less accessible cavities into the
liver, from thence into the veins, and so in a rorid substance
through the capillary cavities. brown's vulgar errours.
ror1 ferous. adj. [ros and fero, lat..] producing dew. dici.
ror1 fluent. adj. [ros and fluo, lat..] flowing with dew. dicł.
ro's ary. n.s. [rosarium, lat.] a bunch of beads, on which
the romanists number their prayers.
no rosary this votress needs,
her very syllables are beads. cleaveland.
every day propound to yourself a rosary or a chaplet of good
works, to present to god at night. - . . tylor.
rosci d. adj. [roscidus, lat.] dewy; abounding with dew ;
consisting of dew. - -
wine is to be forborn in consumptions, for the spirits of
wine prey upon the roscid juice of the body. bacon.
he ends of rainbows fall more upon one kind of earth
than upon another; for that earth is most roscid. bacon.
rose. m. s. [rose, fr. rosa, lat..] . a flower. -
the flower of the rose is composed of several leaves, which
are placed circularly, and expand in a beautiful order, whose
leafy flower-cup afterward becomes a roundish or oblong fleshy
fruit inclosing several angular, hairy seeds; to which may be
added, it is a weak pithy shrub, for the most part beset with
prickles, and hath pinnated leaves: the species are, 1. the
wild briar, dog rose, or hep-tree. 2. wild briar or dog rose,
with large prickly heps. 3. the greater english apple-bear-
ing ros., 4: the dwarf wild burnet-leaved ros. 5. the
dwarf wild burnet-leaved rose, with variegated leaves. 6. the
striped scotch rose. 7. the sweet briar or eglantine. 8. sweet
briar, with a double flower. all the other sorts of roses are
originally of foreign growth, but are hardy enough to endure
the cold of our climate in the open air, and produce beauti-
ful and fragrant flowers. 44iller.
make use of thy salt hours, season the slaves
for tubs and baths, bring down the rose cheek'd youth
to th’ tub fast and the diet. shakesp. timon of athens.
patience thou young and rose lipp'd cherubin. shakesp.
here without thorn the rose. milton.
this way of procuring autumnal roses will, in most rose
bushes, fail; in some good bearers, it will succeed. boyle.
for her th’ unfading rose of eden blooms. pope.
to speak under the rose... to speak anything with safety, so as
not afterwards to be discovered.
by defiring a secrecy to words spoke under the ros, we mean,
in society and compotation, from the ancient custom in sym-
posiack meetings, to wear chaplets of roses about their heads.
brown's vulgar errours.
milton.
rose. pret. of rise.
eve rose and went forth 'mong her flow’rs.
ro's eate. adj. [rosat, fr. from rose.]
1. rosy ; full of roses.
i come, ye ghosts prepare your roseate bow'rs,
celestial palms and ever blooming flow’rs.
2. blooming, fragrant, purple, as a rose.
here pride has struck her lofty sail
that roam'd the world around;
here restate beauty cold and pale
has left the pow'r to wound.
roosep. adj. [from the noun..] crimsoned; flushed. .
can you blame her, being a maid yet rosed over with the
virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the appearance of a
naked blind boy? shakesp. henry v.
rose-mallow. m. s. a plant larger than the common mal-
pope.
boyle.
low. miller.
ro's emary. m. s. [rosmarinus, latin.] a verticillate plant.
aziller.
bedlam beggars, with roaring voices,
strike in their numb’d and mortify'd bare arms
pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
vol. ii.
and with this horrible object, from low farms, -
inforce their charity. shakesp. king lear.
around their cell -
set rows of rosemary with flowering stem.
rosemary is small, but a very odoriferous shrub
cipal use of it is to perfume chambers,
washing.
dryden.
; the prin-
and in decoctions for
4/ortimer's hussanary.
the neighbours
follow’d with wistful look the damsel bier,
sprigg’d rosemary the lads and lases bore.
rose-noble... n.s. an english
fixteen shillings.
the succeeding kings coined ros-nobles and double rose-
nobles, the great sovereigns with the same inscription, jesus
autem transiens per medium eorum ibot. camden's remains.
rossow ater. m. s. [rose and water.] water distilled foom
roses.
attend him with a silver bason
full of rosewater. shakespeare.
his drink should be cooling; as fountain water wish rose-
water and sugar of roses. wiseman's sargery.
ro's e.t. n. f. [from rose.] a red colour for painters.
grind ceruss, with a weak water of gum-lake, root, and
vermillion, which maketh it a fair carnation.
rosie r. m. s. [rosier, fr.] a rosebush.
her yellow golden hair
was trimly woven, and in tresses wrought,
ne other tire she on her head did wear,
but crown'd with a garland of sweet roser. ste
gay.
gold coin, in value anciently
eachan.
tensor,
rosin... n.s. [properly resin; resine, fr. rosina, lat.] **::/
1. inspissated torpentine; a juice of the pine.
the billows from the kindling prow retire,
pitch, rosin, searwood on red wings aspire. garth.
2. any inspillated matter of vegetables that dissolves in spirit.
tea contains little of a volatile spirit; its rosin or fixed oil,
which is bitter and astringent, cannot be extracted but by
rectified spirit. arbuthnot on aliments.
73 rosis. v. a. [from the noun..] to rub with rosin.
bouzebeus who could sweetly fing,
or with the rosin'd bow torment the string. gay.
ro'oisy, adj. [from resin.] resembling rosin. the example
should perhaps be rosely. see rossel.
the best soil is that upon a sandy gravel or rosy sand. tem.
ro'ssel. n.s.
a true rosel or light land, whether white or black, is what
they are usually planted in. amortimer’s husbandry.
ro'sse li.y. adj. [from rol.]
in essex, moory land is thought to be the most proper:
that which i have observed to be the best soil is a rosely top,
and a brick earthy bottom. mortimer’s husbandry.
roar. d. adj. [rg/?ratas, lat..] adorned with beaks of
jps.
he brought to italy an hundred and ten ro?rated gallies of
the fleet of mithridates. arbuthnot.
ro struaz. m. s. [latin.]
1. the beak of a bird.
2. the beak of a ship.
3. the scaffold whence orators harangued.
vespasian erected a column in rome, upon whose top was
the prow of a ship, in latin rostrum, which gave name to the
common pleading place in rome, where orations were made,
being built of the prows of those ships of antium, which the
romans overthrew. peacham on drawing.
myself shall mount the rostrum in his favour,
and firive to gain his pardon from the people. addison:
4. the pipe which conveys the distilling liquor into its receiver
in the common alembicks; also a crooked scissars, which the
surgeons use in some cases for the dilatation of wounds. ,
$2aincy.
ro's y. adj. [roseus, lat..] resembling a rose in bloom, beau-
ty, colour, or fragrance.
when the rosy fing’red morning fair,
weary of aged tithon's saffron bed,
had spred her purple robe through dewy air.
a smile that glow’d
coelestial rosy red, love's proper hue.
fairest blossom do not slight
that age, which you may know so soon;
the rosy morn resigns her light,
and milder glory to the noon.
as thessalian steeds the race adorn,
so rosy colour’d helen is the pride
of lacedemon, and of greece beside.
while blooming youth and gay delight
sit on thy rosy cheeks confest,
thou hast, my dear, undoubted right -
to triumph o'er this destin'd breast. prior.
to rot. v. n. snozan, saxon; rotten, dutch..] to putrity;
to lose the cohesion of its parts.
spensor.
milton.
waller.
dryden.
a man may rot even here. shakespeare.
from hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
and then from hour to hour we rot and rot. shakes?.
22 e being<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o t
ro u
being more nearly exposed to the air and weather, the bo-
dies of the animals would suddenly corrupt and rat; the bones
*:would likewise all rot in time, except those which were secured
by the extraordinary strength of their parts..... " hoodward.
t. rot. v. a. to make putrid; to bring to sorruption.
* -. no wood shone that was cut ..o. as was
rotted in stock and root while it grew, . . . .o.o.o. bacon.
frowning auster seeks the southern sp - re to
and rots, with endless rain, th’ :: }*bolo.
rot. n. s. [from the verb..] . . . . . o o-o.
1. a distemper among sheep, in which their lungs are asted.
. in an unlucky grange, the sheep died ; the rat, the swine
of the mange, and not a goose or duckling throve, §.
* the cattle must of rot and murrain die. ..., milton.
the wool of ireland suffers under no defect, the country
being generally full stocked with sheep, and the soil little sub-
* ject to other rats than of hunger. . ... temple.
2. putrefaction; putrid decay..." . . . . . . . . .
"o brandy scarce prevents the sudden rot. -
** of freezing nose, and quick decaying feet... . . . . philips.
rotary: adj. [rota, latin.j. whitling as a wheel. dici.
rotared. adj. [rotatus, latin:j whirled round.
rotation. n.s. (rotation, fr. rotatio, latin.j. * ... .
1. the aa of whirling round like a wheel; the state of being
so whirled round; whirt.”" . " " ' ". . .
so of this kind is some disposition of bodies to raidiin fo
east to west; as the main float and refloat of the sea, b
o
* . . . . ~
go
so
1 consent of the universe as part of the diurnal motion. baton.
* * by a kind of circulation or rotation, arts have th o:
cessive invention, perfection, and tradaaion from one people
to another. };}. of mankind.
... the axle-trees of chariots take fire by the rapid rotation of
• the wheels. * * * * * * : "." newton's opticks.
oin the passions wild rotation tost, " so of
su, our spring of action to ourselves is lost. * pope.
* joio. in fond rotation spread the spotted wing, ... o
and fiver every foother with defire.” thomson.
2. 'vicissitude of succession. ..., , , , , , , , , zoo.o.o. . .
rotator. m.s. |...}. which gives a circular motion:
this articulation is strengthened by strong muscles; on the
inside by the triceps and the four sittle rotators, softman,
rore... n.f snoe, saxon, merry:1 ....... . . . .
of rojo airpore; obsolete.
wele couhe he fing, and playen on a role, chaucer.
worthy of great phoebus rete, o' ". . . . .
s. the triumphs of phlegrean jove he wrote, o o
• that all the gods admir'd his lofty note.” ‘’’. spensor.
2. [routine, fr.] words uttered by mere memory without
meaning ;
sense. g *1
---
* - - -
- - **, *, *- : ****
- --~ * - • . , too, or v 1.5 to so." "so
so first rehearse this song by rete, o *
… to each word a warbling note. " ' " ... ." shafe ?tars.
thy loved did read by rate, and could not speli. ,
* * * * shakespeare.
he rather faith it by rote to himself, than that it can,
throughly believe it. *** **, ' bacon's essays.
all this he understood by rote, "... ." . . . . . .
and as occasion serv'd would quote." hudibras.
to learn aristotle's rules by rare, ' ' ". . . . .
v. and at all hazards boldly quote.” ‘’ swift's miscel.
to rote. v. a. [from the noun.] to fix in the memory,
without informing the understanding. . . . . . . . .
of ooo speak to the people t; up 1 o' -- " ' ".
words rated in your tongue; bastards and syllables a y
y . of no allowance to your bosom's truth. ... shakesp.
ro'orgut. n.s. [ret and gut.]
on to 3
..] bad beer. . . ." .. ,
; : they overwhelm their panch daily with a kind of flat rat-
gut, we with a bitter dreggish small liquor. ... "..." harvey.
rorger-nails. n.os.' [a corruption of rudder.] among ship-
wrights, nails with very full heads used for fastening the rud-
der irons of ships. * . . . . . . bailey.
rotte n. adj. [from rot.j "o . . .
1. putrid; 'carious; putrescent. -
trust not to rotten planks. shakes?. mnt. and cleopatra. .
prosperity begins to mellow, - * - -
• * * ! on j. ,
“and drop into the rotten mouth of death. . . . . shakesp.
o bliss-breeding sun, draw from the carth -
rotten humidity; below thy fister's orb - - -
infect the air.o. 3 * * * * * shakoffeare's timon.
* there is by invitation or excitation ; as when a rotten apple
lieth close to ano:her apple" that is found; of when dung,
which is already putrefied, is added to other bodies. ... bacon. “
who brass is rottonwood; and steel no more ". . .
regards than recds.o. o sandys's paraphrase. "
* it groweth by a dead stub of a tree, and about the roots of
rotten trees, and takes his juice from wood putrefied. bacon.
poig they serewood from the rotten hedges took, , ,
on and seeds of latent fire from flints provoke.” ‘’’. dryden.
2. not firm; not trusty. - o --- or -- * -
hence, rotten thing, or i shall shake thy bones --
* out of thy garments. * : *** shikoffedre's coriolanus.
3. not sound 3 not hard. . . .” - a
*s*** * 3
* : *.
re
o "as reek o' th' r "..., * - *** - . . .
memory of words without comprehension of the
. . is hu . . . . . . is - 7 - 3a e - a -- * * * *-
they were left moiled with dirt and mire, by reason of the
deepness of the rotton way. , knolles's hstory of the turn.
4. fetid; stinking. o wo - to *" o * . o jo/ *
on common cry of curs whose breath. i hate,...}
- : shakesp. cariolanus.
* , li ji ti o tt -
r6 ttennass, n.s...[from ratton.] state of being rotten; ca-
flousness; patissoign. . . . . :: nir: *:
o o diseas'd ventures, w's or,
* that play with all infirmities for gold, oil -
... which rottennes, lends nature 1. shakesp. cymbeline.
"...if the matter itink, and be pily, it is a certain sign of a
*** ro ennes. ". wiseman's surgery.
rotu'nd. adj. [retende, fr. rotundu!, latin.j. round; cis-
cular; . * - . . . … " - a.
... the cross figure of *s temples is more proper for
spacious buildings than the ratund of the heathen; the eyes.
much better filled at first entering the rotund, but such as are
built in the form of a cross, gives us a greater variety. add.
rotu'nrifolious, adj. irotundus and folium, latij having
round leaves. ' o, toi."
ro'ou'nrity, ossrotunditas, lat. rotonditi, fr. from round.]
is roundnesoft joy circularity. ... " … ",
"'thou zis. ing thunder, o in
-o-, -ot,
** *strike flat the thick ratundity o' th' world. , 2 go shakes.
with the rotundity common to the atoms of all fluids, there
is some difference in buik, else all fluids would be alike in
we ht. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . grew.
* . who would part with these solid blesfings, for the little
fantastical pleasantness of a smooth convexity and rotundity of
a lobe: . . . . . -, * * bentley's sermons.
2. circularity. - ** * *
rotundity is an emblem of eternity, that has neither begin-
ning nor end. * * * * * * , addison on medal.
rotu ndo. n.s.. [rotond, italian.]. a building formed round
both in the inside and outside ; such as the pantheon at rome.
* * - i. s. - a - o, treuzux.
7, rove. v. n. [roffver, danish, to range for plunder.] to
ramble; to range; to wander. . . * * * * *
thou'st years upon thee, and thou art too full -
. of the wars surfeits, to go rove with one … . . .
that's yet unbruis'd. . . . . . . . shałoso. coriolants.
... ... faultless thou dropt from his unerring skill, so
with the bare power to sin, since free of will ; , , , , --
. yet . not with thy guilt his bounteous love, no
for who has power to walk, has power to rove. afriath.
. . if we indulge the frequent rise and roving of passions, we
thereby procure an unattentive habit. matts.
i view'd th’ effects of that disastrous flame,
which kindled by th’ imperious queen of love, of
*
*
constrain'd me from my native realm to rove. o pope.
to rove. t). 4. --- to wande over. • *.*.*, * six j. i o *
". ..., roving the field, i chanc'd . . . . . . . .
* a goodly tree far distant to behold, . . . . . .
loaden with #. of fairst colonis. ... milton's par. loft.
"'. cloacina as the town she rev'd. ... . . . . . .
* / o avenger she a.'s, loyd • a gay.
royer. w.'s; [from rove.j. * : * ~ *
i.
2.
**; sis ** 13 . . . . . . .
o
--
a wa erer; a ranger. ...,,, eld is so ... i-o, so
a fickle inconstant man, * on he ow no
3. a robber; a isoto. . . . . . . no. is a . j.; tı, no
this is the case of rover by land, as some cantons in arabia.
- - s * * o *** - so 3 - ? . : bacon's aiel jwar.
4. at rovers." without any particula: aim. - “”. o
nature shoots not at rover; even inanimates, though they
know not their perfeition, yet are, they not carried, oneby a
blind unguided impetus; but that, which direcis then,
knows it. " " ' " moes to wo glanville's scopsis.
providence never shoots at revers: there is an arrow that
flies by night at well as by day, and god is the person that
shoots it. . . . . . . ... south's sermons.
men of great reading show their talents on the meanest
subjects; this is a kind of shooting a rovers.….. on addison.
rouge. m. s. [rouge, fr.] re paint... * … ... :- - - - -
rough. adj. [hnuh, hnuhoe, saxon; rouw, dutch.]
1. not smooth; rugged ; having inequalitics on the surface.
* * * * * the fiend . . . . . . . . …it... . .
o'er bog or fleep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,” .
. . pursues his way... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4%iston.
were the mountains taken all away, the remaining parts
would be more unequal than the roughost sea;, whereas the
face of the earth should resemble that of the calmest sea, if
still in the form of its first mass. . . . burmet's theory.s.
2. austere to the taste : as, rough wine. . . . . . . . . . .
3. harsh to the ear. , - not ogo
most by the numbers judge a poet's song, .. , its 3.2
and smooth or rough with them is right or wrong. ... pope.*
4. rugged of temper; inelegant of manners; not soft; coase ; i.
not civil; severe; not mild; rude. … o. o.
a fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough, , , o, . a
a wolf; nay worse, a fellow all in buff. , , , , az shaos?.
... strait with a band of soldiers tail and rough , , …
``on him he seizes. cowley's davidis.
. . the
n
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">jrco u
r o u
*
**
:
--
# * *
:
:
, a. :
--
a **
o, o the booby phaon only was unkind, -
a surly boatman rough as seas and wind. prior.
5. not gentle; not proceeding by easy operation. * *
he gave not the king time to prosecute that gracious me-
thod, but forced him to a quicker and rougher remedy. -
hippocrates seldom mentions the doses of his medicines,
which is somewhat surprizing, because his purgatives are ge-
nerally very rough and strong. arbuthnot on coins.
6. harsh to the mind; severe. * * * * * * , ,
kind words prevent a good deal of that perverseness, which
rough and imperious usage often produces in generous minds.
**. - t * * &gt; locke.
7. hard featured; not delicate. . . . . . . . . . .
a ropy chain of rheums, a visage roug o - *
deform’d, unfeatur'd, and a skin #;" o aen.
8. not polished; not finished by art: as, a rough diamond,
9. terrible; dreadful. - *** - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
before the cloudy van, * - s - - - - -
on the rough edge of battle ere it join'd, “ . .
* * * * * * *
... onoi o 'o - *
zoo. t , 3.
satan advanc'd. * - * ... milton.
1c. rugged; disordered in appearance; coarse. lo. a
rough from the tossing surge ulysses moves, "
urg'd on by want, and recent from the storms, o
the brackish ooze his manly grace deforms.
11. tempestuous; stormy; ..
- come what come may, --- - - - -
time and the hour run through the roughest day. . shakesp.
12. hairy. - * *
to rou’ghcast. v. a. [rough and cast.] * .
1. to mould without nicety or elegance; to form with asperi-
ties and inequalities. -
nor bodily, nor ghostly negro could
roughcast thy figure in a sadder mould.
2. to form any thing in its first rudiments. - -
in merriment they were first practised, and this roughcast un-
hewn poetry was instead of stage plays for one hundred and
twenty years. dryden’s dedication to juvenal.
rou"ghcast. n.s. [rough and cost.] -, * * *
1. a rude model; a form in its rudiments. . . . . .
the whole piece seems rather a loose model and roughcast
of what i design to do, than a compleat work. digby.
2. a kind of plaister mixed with pebbles, or by some other
cause very uneven on the surface. - - - - -
someoman must present a wall; and let him have some
plaster, lome, or roughcast about him to signify wall. shakesp.
rou"ghdr aught. m. s. [rough and draught.] a draught in
its rudiments; a sketch.”
my elder brothers came
roughdraughts of nature, ill design'd and lame,
blown off, like blossoms, never made to bear;
*till i came finish'd, her last labour'd care. dryden.
to rou'ghdraw. v. a. [rough and †: to trace coarsely.
his victories we scarce could keep in view,
oropolish 'em so fast, as he roughdrew. . . . dryden.
to rou'ghen. v. a. [from rough..] to make rough.
… such difference there is in tongues, that the same figure,
which roughens one, gives majesty to another; and that was
it which virgil j. his verses. ... dryden.
ah! where must needy poet seek for aid, , , , , . * …
when dust and rain at once his coat invade 1, " "
• his only coat; when dust confus'd with rain, * *
jkoughens the nap, and leaves a mingled stain. - - - swift.
to rou’d hen. v. n. to grow rough. . . . . . .
the broken landskip . . . . . . . . . . . . . ;
ascending roughens into rigid hills. thomson's spring.
to roughhew'. v. a. [rough and hew.] to give to any thing
the first appearance of form. * . . .on a - -
there's a divinity that shapes our ends, . . . . .
roughhew them how we will. ‘shakoff, hamlet.
he whole world, without art and dress, . * r o
would be but one great wilderness, , o o "...i
and mankind but a savage herd, ‘...." .. "," a
for all that nature has conferr'd : . . to so
this does but roughhew and design, o * ... ."
leaves art to polish and refine. -- * * * * hudibras.
rou'ghhewn. particip, adj. . . . . . . . . m . . . a .., , ,
1. rugged; #. ocivil unified." o yo o
• a roughhewn seaman, being brought before a justice for some
misdemeanour, was by him ordered away to prison; and
would not stir; saying, it was better to o where he was,
than go to a worse place. . . . . bacon's apophth gmi.
2. not yet nicely finished. . . . . . *
i hope to obtain a candid construction of this roughhewn ill- -
timber'd discourse. howe's pocal fores.”
rou’ghly. adv. [from rough.j . . . .
1. with uneven surface; with asperities on the surface. " a
2. harshly ; uncivilly; rudely. - o
ne mammon would there let him long remain, ,
for terror of the torments manifold,
in which the damned souls he did behold, . . . .
but roughly him bespake, spensor.
| pope.
y
&gt;
- - - -
--- - * -
* * * * *
cleaveland.
*
2.13 - . . ."
f
-
--
rebuk'd, and roughly sent to prison, . . .
th’immediate heir of england was this casy shakes.
3. severely; without tenderness. - -
* * . . . some friends of vice pretend, -
...that i the tricks of youth too roughly blame. . . dryden.
4. austerely to the taste. - * * * * * * * *
5. boisterously; tempestuously. *-
6, harshly to the ear. -
rou'ghness."mos [from rough..] .
1. superficial asperity; unevenn'ss of surface.
the little roughness or other inequalitics of the leather
* against the cavity of the cylinder, now and then put a stop
to the descent or ascent of the sucker. boyle.
. while the steep horrid roughness of the wood ,
strives with the gentle calmness of the flood. denham.
* when the diamond is not only found, but the roughnes;
smoothed, cut into a form, and set in gold, then we cannot
but acknowledge, that it is the perfeot work of art and nature.
- dryden.
| such a persuasion as this well fixed, will smooth all the
... of the way that leads to happiness, and render all the
conflicts with our lusts pleasing. ... atterbury.
2. austereness to the taste.
ivers plants contain a grateful sharpness, as lemons; or
an austere and inconcoeted roughness, as sloes. brown.
3. taste of astringency. -
. . a tobacco-pipe broke in my mouth, and the spitting out
the pieces left such a delicious roughnes; on my tongue, that i
... champed up the remaining part. on, spetrator.
4. harshness to the ear. * * *
in the roughness of the numbers and cadences of this play,
which was so designed, you will see somewhat more masterly
than in any of my former tragedies. dryden.
the swedes, danes, germans, and dutch attain to the
pronunciation of our words with ease, because our syllables
resemble theirs in roughnes, and frequency of consonants.
- o * * swi -
5. ruggedness of temper; coarseness of manners; so
to rudeness; coarseness of behaviour and address.
roughnes, is a needless cause of discontent; severity breed-
eth fear; but roughness brecdeth hate: even reproofs from au-
thority ought to be grave and not taunting. . .
when our minds eyes are disengag’d,
they quicken sloth, perplexities unty, * . . ."
make roughnes, smooth, and hardness nojlify. ..., denham.
roughness of temper is apt to discountenance the timorous or
modest. ; : * : . . . addison.
6. absence of delicacy. , so **, ** * ... . .”
should feasting and balls once get amongst the cantons,
their military roughnes, would be quickly lost, their tempers
*
o
e
… bacon.
-, *, *, * *
* *
would grow too soft for their climate. . . . ... --&gt; addison.
* * - - - - - - -
7. severity; violence of discipline. . .
8. violence of operation in medicines. -
9. unpolished or unfinished state. * : *** * * ,
io. inelegance of dress or appearance.
11. tempestuousness; storminess.
12. coarseness of features. ---
rough-footed. adj. [from rough and foot.] feather-footed.
rought: old pret. of reach. [commonly written by spenser
raught.] reached. o 5* + \ \o
the moon was a month old, when adam was no more,
and rought not to five weeks, when he came to fivescore.
shakesp. love's labour loss.
to rou'ghwork. v. a. [rough and work.] to work coarsely
over without the least nicety. : , ;"
thus you must continue, till you have roughwrought all
your work from end to end. moxon's mech. exercises.
rou'nceval. n. s...[from rountsval, a town at the foot of the
pirenees.] see pea, of which it is a species, ... - -
* * * * dig garden, ** **, 2* (, , ,-
and set as a daintie thy runcival pease. . tuftr.
round. adj. [rond, french ; rando, italian; rund, dutch;
rotundus, latin.] -
1. cylindrical. - - -
hollow engines long and round thick ram’d. milton.
2. circular. -
- - - - - - -
**
the queen of night
... in her increasing hornes, doth rounder grow,
* till full and perfect she appeare in show. . brown.
his pond’rous shield large and round behind him. milton.
3. spherical; orbicular. - -
the outside bare of this round world. milton.
4. [rotundo ore, lat..] smooth; without defe&amp;t in sound.
in his satyrs horace is quick, round, and pleasant, and as
nothing so bitter, so not so good as juvenal. peacham.
his style, though round and comprehensive, was incumbred
sometimes by parentheses, and became difficult to vulgar un-
derstandings. ... fell.
5. not broken. -
pliny put a round number near the truth, rather than a
fraetion, arbuthnot on coins,
6. large
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o u
6. large; not inconfiderable: this is hardly used but with sum
ur of 1 to.
- f three thousand ducats! 'tis a good round sum. shakes.
they set a round price upon your head. a dison.
it is not easy to foresee what a round sum of money may do
among a people, who have tamely suffered the franche compte
to be seized on. addison's remarks on italy.
she called for a round sum out of the privy purse. hooke.
. plain ; clear; fair; candid; open.
round dealing is the honour of man's nature; and a mix-
ture of falsehood is like allay in gold and filver, which may
make the metal work the better, but it embascth it. bacon.
. quick; brisk.
painting is a long pilgrimage ; if we do not actually begin
and all the gnawing pangs of vain remorse :
what torment's this smith,
some preachers, prepared only upon two or three points,
run the same round from one end of the year to another. add.
till by one countless sum of woes opprest,
hoary with cares, and ignorant of rest,
we find the vital springs relax’d and worn ;
compell'd our common impotence to mourn,
thus through the round of age, to childhood we return.
prior.
5. rotation; succession in vicissitude.
such new utopians would have a round of government, as
some the like in the church, in which every spoak becomes
uppermost in his turn.
holyday.
the journey, and travel at a round rate, we shall never arrive
at the end of it. dryden's dufresnoy.
sir roger heard them upon a round trot ; and after pausing,
told them, that much might be said on both sides. addison.
9. plain; free without delicacy or reserve ; almost rough.
let his queen mother all alone intreat him,
to shew his griefs; let her be round with him. shakesp.
the kings interposed in a round and princely manner; not
only by way of request and persuasion, but also by way of pro-
testation and menace. bacon.
rou nd. m. s.
1. a circle; a sphere ; an orb.
hie thee hither,
that i may pour my spirits in thine ear,
6. [ronde, fr.]. a walk performed by a guard or officer, to
survey a certain district.
rou nd. adv.
1. every way; on all sides.
the terror of god was upon the cities round about. gen.
all sounds whatsoever move round; that is, on all fides,
upwards, downwards, forwards, and backwards.
in darkness and with dangers compass'd round.
2. [en rond, a la ronde, fr.] in a revolution.
at the best 'tis but cunning; and if he can in his own
fancy raise that to the opinion of true wisdom, he comes round
to practise his deceits upon himself. govern. of the tongue.
3. circularly. - t
one foot he center'd, and the other turn’d
bacon.
milton.
and chastise with the valour of my tongue round through the vast profundity obscure. milton,
all that impedes thee from the golden round, 4. not in a direct line.
which fate and metaphysick aid doth seem if merely to come in, sir, they go out;
to have crown'd thee withal. shakesp. macbeth. the way they take is strangely round about. pope.
i'll charm the air to give a sound, round. prep. -
while you perform your antick round. shaks). macbeth. i. on every side of
three or four we’ll dress like urchins, to officiate light round this opacous earth. milton.
with rounds of waxen tapers on their heads, 2. about ; circularly about.
and rattles in their hands. shakesp. mer. isives of i/inds. he led the hero round
hirsute roots are a middle sort, between the bulbous and the confines of the blest elysian ground. dryden,
fibrous; that, besides the putting forth sap upwards and down- 3. all over ; here and there in.
wards, putteth forth in round. bacon. round the world we roam,
what if the sun forc’d from our pleasing fields, and native home. dryden,
be centre to the world; and other stars to round. v. a. s.rotundo, lat. from the noun.]
by his attractive virtue and their own - 1. to surround; to encircle.
incited, dance about him various rounds. milton. would that th’ inclusive verge
knit your hands, and beat the ground of golden metal, that must round my brow,
in a light fantastick round. milton. were redhot steel to sear me to the brain. shał?,
he did foretel and prophesy of him, - we are such stuff
who to his realms that azure round hath join'd. denham. as dreams are made on, and our little life
they meet, they wheel, they throw their darts afar;
then in a round the mingled bodies run,
is rounded with a sleep.
shaiso. tempoff.
this distemper'd messenger of wet, s
flying they follow, and pursuing shun. dryden. the many coloured iris, rounds thine eyes. shakoff,
how shall i then begin, or where conclude, the vilest cockle gaping on the coast,
to draw a fame so truly circular that rounds the ample sea. prior,
for, in a round, what order can be shew’d, 2. to make spherical, circular, or cylindrical.
where all the parts so equal perfect are : dryden. worms with many feet, which round themselves into balls,
the mouth of vesuvio has four hundred yards in diameter; are bred chiefly under logs of timber. bacon.
for it seems a perfeot round. addison. when silver has been lessened in any piece carrying the
this image on the medal plac'd, publick stamp, by clipping, washing, or rounding, the laws
with its bright round of titles grac'd, have declared it not to be lawful money. locke.
and stampt on british coins shall live. addison. with the cleaving-knife and ...} split the stuff into a
2. rundle ; step of a ladder.
when he once attains the upmost round,
* he then unto the ladder turns his back,
looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
by which he did ascend. shakesp. julius caesar.
many are kick'd down ere they have climbed the two or
three first rounds of the ladder. government of the tongue.
all the rounds like jacob's ladder rise; -
the lowest hid in earth, the topmost in the skies. dryden.
this is the last stage of human perfection, the utmost round
of the ladder whereby we ascend to heaven. norris.
3. the time in which any thing has passed through all hands,
and comes back to the first : hence applied to a carousal.
a gentle round fill'd to the brink,
square piece near the size, and with the draw-knife round off
the edges to make it fit for the lathe. moxon.
can any one tell, how the sun, planets, and satellites were
rounded into their particular spheroidical orbs cheyne,
3. to raise to a relief.
the figures on our modern medals are raised and rounded to
a very great perfection. addison on ancient medals.
4. to move about any thing.
to those beyond the polar circle, day
had unbenighted shone, while the low sun,
to recompense his distance, in your fight
had rounded still th’ horizon, and not known
or east or west. milton's paradis? loft.
5. to mould into smoothness.
to this and t” other friend i drink. suckling. these accomplishments, applied in the pulpit, appear by
women to cards may be compar'd ; we play a quaint, terse, florid stile, rounded into periods and cadencies,
a round or two, when us'd, we throw away. granville. without propriety or meaning. swift's miscellanii.
the feast was serv’d; the bowl was crown'd ; to round. v. n. -
to the king's pleasure went the mirthful round. prior. 1. to grow round in form.
4. a revolution; a course ending at the point where it began. the queen, your mother, rounds apace; we shall
we, that are of purer fire,
imitate the flairy quire,
who, in their mighty watchful spheres,
lead in swift round, the months and years. milton.
no end can to this be found,
'tis nought but a perpetual fruitless round. cowley.
if nothing will please people, unless they be greater than
nature intended, what can they expect, but the ass’s round of
... vexatious changes. l'estrange.
how then to drag a wretched life beneath
an endless round of still returning woes,
2
present our services to a fine mew prince. słasff.
2, [runen, german; whence chaucer writes it better rotoj
to whisper.
being come to the supping place, one of kalander's ser-
vants rounded in his ear; at which he retired. sidney.
france,
whom zeal and charity brought to the field
as god's own soldier, rounded in the ear,
with that same purpose changes. shakespeare.
they're here with me already; whispering, rounding
sicilia is a so forth ; 'tis far gone. shakoff.
cicero
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o u
r o u
*...
o
* *-*.
f
-
-- * *
-&gt;
cicero was at dinner, where an ancient lady said she was
but forty: one that sat by rounded him in the ear, she is far
more out of question: cicero answered, i must believe her,
for i heard her say so any time these ten years. bacon.
the fox rounds the new eleet in the ear, with a piece of
secret service that he could do him. d'estrange.
3. to go rounds, as a guard. -
they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk. milton.
rou'ndabout. adj. [this word is used as an adjective, though
it is only an adverb united to a substantive by a colloquial
license of language, which ought not to have been admitted
into books.] :
1. ample; extensive.
those sincerely follow reason, but for want of having large,
sound, roundabout sense, have not a full view of all that re-
lates to the question. - locke on underslanding.
2. indireet; loose. -
paraphrase is a roundabout way of translating, invented to
help the barrenness, which translators, overlooking in them-
selves, have apprehended in our tongue. felton.
rou’ndel. { m. s.
rou'n delay. w. " ''
1. [ rondelet, french..] . a kind of ancient poetry, which
commonly consists of thirteen verses, of which eight
are of one kind of rhyme and five of another: it is di-
vided into three couplets; and at the end of the second and
third, the beginning of the roundel is repeated in an equivocal
sense, if possible. trevoux.
siker, sike a roundle never heard i none,
little lacketh perigot of the best,
and willie is not greatly over-gone, -
so weren his under-songs well addrest. spenser’s paso.
to hearthy rimes and roundelays,
which thouwert wont in wastful hills to fing,
i more delight than lark in summer days,
whose echo made the neighb'ring groves to ring. - spenser.
come now a roundel and a fairy song. shakesp.
the muses and graces made festivals; the fawns, satyrs,
and nymphs did dance their roundelays. howel.
they list’ning heard him, while he search'd the grove,
and loudly sung his roundelay of love, -
but on the sudden stop'd. . . . . . dryden's knight's tale.
2. [rendelle, fr.] a round form or figure.
the spaniards, casting themselves into roundels, and their
strongest ships walling in the rest, made a flying march to
calais. . bacon,
tou’nder. n.s. (from round.] circumference; inclosure.
if you fondly pass our proffer'd offer, -
'tis not the rounder of your old fac’d walls
can hide you from our messengers of war. shakesp.
rou’nd head. n.s. [round and head..] a puritan, so named
from the practice once prevalent among them of cropping
their hair round. - s
your petitioner always kept hospitality, and drank confu-
sion to the roundheads. spectator.
rou'ndhouse. m. s. [round and house.] the constable's pri-
son, in which disorderly persons, found in the street, are confined.
they march'd to some fam'd roundhouse. pope.
rou’ndis h. adj. [from round..] somewhat round; approach-
ing to roundness.
it is not every small crack that can make such a receiver,
as is of a roundish figure, useless to our experiment. boyle.
rou’nd 1.y. adv. [from round.] -
1. in a round form; in a round manner.
2. openly; plainly ; without reserve.
injoin gainsayers, giving them roundly to understand,
that where our duty is submission, weak oppositions betoken
pride. hooker.
you'll prove a jolly surly groom, -
that take it on you at the first so roundly. shakesp.
mr. de mortier roundly said, that to cut off all contentions
of words, he would propose two means for peace. hayward.
from a world of phoenomena, there is a principle that
acts out of wisdom and counsel, as was abundantly evidenced,
and as roundly acknowledged. more's divine dialogues.
he affirms every thing roundly, without any art, rheto-
rick, or circumlocution. * . addison's count tariff.
3. briskly; with speed. . . .
when the mind has brought itself to attention, it will be
able to cope with difficulties, and master them, and then it
may go on roundly, - locke.
4. completely; to the purpose; vigorously; in earnest. . .
i was called any thing, and i would have done any thing,
indeed too, and roundly too. shakesp. henry iv.
this lord justice caused the earl of kildare to be arrested,
and cancelled such charters as were lately resumed, and pro-
ceeded every way so roundly and severely, as the nobility did
much distaste him. davies on ireland.
rou'ndn ess. n. s. [from round.]
1. circularity; sphericity; cylindrical form. -
the same reason is of the roundness of the bubble; for the
air within avoideth discontinuance, and therefore casteth it-
self into a round figure. bacon's natural history.
- bracelets of pearl gave roundness to her arm,
and ev'ry gem augmented ev'ry charm.
vol. ii.
prior.
to rouse. v. n.
roundhos, is the primary essential mode or difference of a
bowl. watts's logick.
2. smoothness.
the whole period and compass of this speech was delight-
some for the roundness, and grave for the strangeness. spenser.
3. honesty; openness; vigorous measures.
to rouse. v. a. [of the same class of words with raise and
??/e.
i , £o. from rest.
at once the crowd arose, confus’d and high ;
for mars was early up, and rous’d the sky. dryden.
rev'rent i touch thee! but with honest zeal,
to reuse the watchmen of the publick weal,
to virtue's work provoke the tardy hall; . -
and goad the prelate slumb'ring in his stall. pope:
2. to excite to thought or action.
then rouse that heart of thine, -
and whatsoever heretofore thou hast assum'd to be,
this day be greater. - chapman:
the dane and swede, rouz'd up by fierce alarms,
bless the wise conduct of her pious arms;
soon as her fleets appear, their terrors cease,
and all the northern world lies hush'd in peace.
i'll thunder in their ears their country's cause,
and try to rouse up all that's roman in them.
- - addison's cato;
the heat, with which luther treated his adversaries, though
strained too far, was extremely well fitted by the providence
of god to rouse up a people, the most phlegmatick of any
addison.
in christendom. atterbury.
3. to put into action. -
as an eagle, seeing prey appear,
his airy plumes doth rouse full rudely dight;
so shaked he, that horror was to hear. fairy queen.
blust'ring winds had rous’d the sea. ilton.
4. to drive a beast from his laire.
the blood more stirs,
to rouze a lion, or to start a hare. shakesp. henry iv.
he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old
lion; who shall rouse him up 2 geness xlix. 9.
th’ unexpected sound
of dogs and men his wakeful ear does wound;
rous'd with the noise, he scarce believes his ear,
willing to think th’ illusions of his fear
had giv'n this false alarm. -
now cancer glows with phoebus' fiery car,
. the youth rush eager to the sylvan war;
swarm o'er the lawns, the forest-walks surround,
rouse the fleet haft, and cheer the op'ning hound.
denham.
pope.
1. to awake from slumber.
men, sleeping found by whom they dread,
rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake.
- richard, who now was half asleep,
: rouf'd , nor would longer silence keep.
melancholy lifts her head;
morpheus rouses from his bed.
m;hon.
prior.
pope's st. cecilia.
2. to be excited to thought or action:
good things of day begin to droop and drowze,
while night's black agents to their prey do rowz. shakoff.
rouse. m. s. [rusch, german, half drunk.] a dose of liquor
rather too large. not in use.
they have given me a rouse already. -
—not past a pint as i am a soldier. shakesp. othelle.
no jocund health that denmark drinks to-day,
but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell;
and the king's rouse shall bruit it back again,
respeaking earthly thunder.
rou'se r. m. s. [from rouse..] one who rouses.
rout. m. s. [rdt, dutch..] .
shakespeare:
1. a clamorous multitude; a rabble; a tumultuous croud,
besides the endless routs of wretched thralls,
which thither were assembled day by day
from all the world. - sponsor.
. a rout of people there assembled were,
of every sort and nation under sky. spenser.
if that rebellion
came like itself in base and abject routs,
led on by bloody youth, goaded with rage,
and countenanced by boys and beggary, - -
you, reverend father, then had not been there. shakesp.
farmers were to forfeit their holds in case of unlawful re-
tainer, or partaking in routs and unlawful assemblies. bacon.
such a tacit league is against such routs and showls, as have
utterly degenerated from the laws of nature. bacon,
nor do i name of men the common rout,
that wandring loose about, -
grow up and perish, as the summer fly. milton's agonisłes.
fancy, wild dame, with much lascivious pride,
by twin chameleons drawn, does gaily ride,
#. coach there follows, and throngs round about,
of shapes and airy forms an endless rout. cowley,
the mad ungovernable rout,
full of confusion and the fumes of wine, o
lov’d such variety and antick tricks. roscomman.
zz f harley
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r o y
r u b
harley spies - .
the doclor fasten’d by the eyes --
at charing-cross among the rout, .. -
where painted monsters are hung out. - swift.
2. [route, fr.] confusion of an army defeated or dispersed.
thy army, , . . . . . . . . . .
as if they could not stand when thou wer’t down, , ,
dispers'd in rout, betook them all to fly. o daniel.
their mightiest quell'd, the battle swerv'd," -
with many an inrode gor'd; deformed rout . -
enter'd, and foul disorder. milton's par. loft.
7, rout. v. a. to dissipate and put into confusion by defeat.
the next way to end the wars with him, and to reit him
quite, should be to keep him from invading of those countries
• adjoining. • * ~ * * o spenser on ireland.
that party of the king's horse, that charged the scots,
so totally routed and defeated their whole army, that they
fled. - io o 1 o' -- clarendon.
to assemble in clamorous and tumultuous
o t &lt; * * * is a a * *
o t
to rout. v. n.
crouds. --- -_ _- --- *
the meaner sort routed together, and suddenly affailing the
earl in his house, slew him. ." bacon's henry vii.
route...n, s. [route, fr.], road; way. l
wide through the furzy field their route they take,. . .
their bleeding bosoms force the thorny brake. . . . gay,
row, n, f: [reib, german.]. a rank or file; a number of
othings ranged in a line, . " . " - --
lips never part, but that they show
* - - - --- -
of precious pearl the double row. sidney.
. . ." after them all dancing on a row, -
the comely virgins came with garlands dight,
as fresh as flowres. --- spenser.
where any row
of fruit trees, overwoody, reach'd too far
their pamper'd boughs, and needed hands to check
fruitless embraces. milton's paradise loft.
a triple mounted row of pillars, laid .
on wheels. “. . milton's paradis, loft.
where the bright seraphim in burning row,
their loud uplifted angel trumpets blow. milton.
a new born wood of various lines there grows
and all the flourishing letters stand in rows. cowley.
the victor honour’d with a nobler vest,
where gold and purple strive in equal rows. dryden.
* * ~ why round our coaches crowd the white-glov’d beaux,
why bows the fidebox from its inmost rows. pope.
t. row. v. n. inopan, saxon.] to impel a vessel in the
water by oars. - -
• he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was con-
trary. -- - mark vi. 48.
some of these troughs or canoes were so great, that above
twenty men have been found rowing in one. abbot.
.*.*.* . the bold britons then securely row'd;
charles and his virtue was their facred load. ' waller.
• the watermen turned their barge, and rowed softly, that
they might take the cool of the evening. ryden,
*i, row. v. a. to drive or help forward by oars. -
the swan rows her state with oary feet. miltan.
roswel. n. s. [rouelle, fr.] -
1. the points of a spur turning on an axis, -
•. he gave his able horse the head, -- - -
and, bending forward, struck his agile heels
against the panting sides of his poor jade -
up to the rowel head. ' shakes. henry iv.
. a rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel 1.
nor iron on his heel. " " ... shakesp. cymbeline.
a mullet is the rowel of a spur, and hath never but five
points; a starhath fix: . . .” “..." placham on blazoning.
- he spurr'd his fiery steed -- * -
with goring rowels, to provoke his speed. * ... • dryden.
2. a feton; a roll of hair or silk put into a wound to hinder
it from healing, and provoke a discharge. . . . . . . . .
7, rowel. v.a. to pierce through the skin, and keep the
wound open by a roweł. - ... . . . . .
w . to: horse in the chest. . . . mortimer's hosandy.
row en. m. s. -- * , , , --
rowen is a field kept up till after michaelmas, that the corn
left on the ground may sprout into green; ,
then spare it for rowen, til michel be past, * or . .
to lengthen thy dairie, no better thou haft. toffer.
turn your cows, that give milk, into your rowens, till snow
comes. ` * * * * * martimer's husbandry.
roswer.oh. s. [from row.j. one that manages an oar. -
- *four gallies first, which equal rowers bear,
• advancing in the watry lists, appear..." . . dryden.
* the bishop of salisbury ran down with the stream thirty
miles in an hour, by the help of but one rower.” addison.
royal; adj. [roial; fr. j. * - i - ila o co o . *** * * * t -
1. kingly; belonging to a sing; becoming a king; regal.
the royal ao. of davi, ot - - - milton.
* ***... .o. \o - - the royal bow'rs - o - o o o ! . -
of great seleucia built by grecian kings.” . . " " milton.
thrice happy they, who thus in woods and groves,
from courts retired, possess their peaceful loves: --
* of royal maids how wretched is the fate lo' ' ' granville.
-- * - *. 7
notes on tuffer.
both fear afid shame, and was moved to anger."
2. noble; illustrious.
what news from venice
how doth that royal merchant, good antonio shałoff.
royalist. £6. [from royal.] . adherent to a king. -
where candish fought, the royalists prevail'd,
neither his courage nor his judgment fail’d. waller.
the old church of england royalists, another name for a
man who prefers his ao. before his interests, are the
most meritorious subjecls in the world, as having passed all
those terrible tests, which domineering malice could put them
to, and carried their credit and their conscience clear. south,
to royalize. v. a. [from royal.] to make royal,
ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king,
... to royalize his blood, i spilt mine own. shakes.
ro’yally, adv. [from royal..] in a kingly manner; regally;
-as becomes a king. -
it shall be my care, - -
to have you royally appointed, shakes. wint. tale.
his body shall be royally interr'd,
and the last funeral pomps adorn his hearse.
ro’y alty. n.s. [roialte, fr.]
1. kingship; character or office of a king. --
praw, you rascal ; you come with letters against the king,
and take vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her
father. " ' " * shakesp. king lear.
he will lose his head, ere give consent, - -
his master’s son, as worshipfully he terms it, ...,
shall lose the royalty of england's throne, - "shakes.
royalty by birth was the sweetest way of majesty: a king
and a father compounded into one, being of a temper like
unto god, justice and mercy. holyday.
* if they had held their royalties by this title, either these
must have been but one sovereign, or else every father of a
family had as good a claim to royalty as these. locke.
2. state of a king. ** -
i will, alas! be wretched to be great,
and figh in royalty, and grieve in state.
3. emblems of royalty. o
“wherefore do i assume "" -
these royalties, and not refuse to reign. amilton.
* royne. v.a...[rogner, fr. j. to gnaw; to bite. spensor.
roy nish. adj. [rogneux, fr. mangy, paltry.] paltry; softy;
mean; rude. - ". - - - -
the roynish clown, at whom so oft .
your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing. ... shais.
roy telet. n.s.. [french..] a little or petty king, “ . .
causing the american roytelets to turn all homagers to that
king and the crown of england. baylyn.
to rub. v. a. [rhubio, welsh; reiben, german, to wipe.]
i. to clean or smooth anything by passing something over it;
to scour; to wipe; to perfricate. - -
2. to touch so as to have something of that which touches
behind.
their straw-built citadel new rub'd with balm.
dryden.
, , - " - prior,
. . . . . . .
- -
milton.
- in narrow clefts, in the monument that stands over him,
catholicks rub their beads, and smell his bones, which they
" say have in them a natural perfume, though very like apo.
“ plectick balsam ; and what would make one suspect, that they
rub the marble with it, it is observed, that the scent is stronger
in the morning that at night. addison on lay.
3. to move one body upon another.
look, how she rubs her hands. -
-it is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing
her hands. shakespeare's macbeth.
the government at that time by kings, before whom the
people in the most formal expressions of duty and reverence
used to rub their noses, or stroke their foreheads. heylyn.
* the bare rubbing of two bodies violently produces heat,
and often fire. - --- locłe.
two bones, rubbed hard against one another, produce a
fetid smelf. " * * * arbuthnot on aliments.
4. to obstruct by collifion. -
s”. or 'tis the duke's pleasure, . . . .
whose disposition all the world well know: * &gt; . .
will not be rubb’d nor stop’d." . shakes. king lear.
5. to polish; to retouch. - - - * *
the whole business of our redemption is, to rui over the
defaced copy of the creation, to reprint god's image upon
the foul. ~ v. -o of south.
6. to remove by friction: with off or out. o-, .
... a forcible' object will rub out the freshest colours at a
stroke, and paint others... . . . . . . . . collier of the affiti.
* if their minds are well principled with inward civility, a
great part of the roughness, which sticks to the outside for
want of better teaching, time, and observation, will rub off,
but if ill, all the rules in the worsdwiłłngt polish them. . .
* - - - - - o: .*.* : - 1 * * * o - berks on education.
7. to touch hard. ". . . . * * * . . .
he; who before he was espied, was afraid, after being per-
ceived, was ashamed, now being hardly rubbed upon, left
"sidney.
*:::
--~~
t. c. co. 1
8. to rue down. to clean or curry a horse. . . . .
when his fellow beasts are weary grown; *.* -
he'll play the groom, give oats, and rub 'em down, dryden.
- - - - , , so -- " . .
9. to rub up. to excite; to awaken. -
you
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r u b
r u d
i.
*
o:
-
-
* -
-
*:
t
*
o
r
you will find me not to have rubbed up the memory of 3. any thing vile and worthless.
what some heretofore in the city did. south.
1c. to rub up. to polish; to refresh.
t2 ru b. v. n. - * * *--- * -
1. to fret; to make a friction. * .
this last allusion gaul'd the panther more,
because indeed it rubb’d upon the sore; - - .
yet seem'd she not to winch, though shrewdly pain'd. dry.
2. to get through difficulties. . . - lo - . . .
- no hunters, that the tops of mountaines scale, -
and rub through woods with toile seeke them all. chapman.
many a lawyer, when once hampered, rub off as well as
they can. * * * - d’estrange.
*tis as much as one can do, to rub through the world,
though perpetually a doing. - - l’estrange.
rub. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. frication; act of rubbing. - - -
2. inequality of ground, that hinders the motion of a bowl.
we'll play at bowls. - --
—"twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
* -
and that my fortune runs against the bias. shakes.
3. collision; hindrance; obstruction. * - -
the breath of what i mean to speak os. u". e.
shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub ". ****
out of the path, which shall directly lead = - 1
thy foot to england's throne. shakesp. *g john.
now every rub is smoothed in our way, shakesp.
those you make friends, - -
and give your hearts to, when they once perceive
the feast rub in your fortunes, fals away. shakesp.
upon this rub, the english embassadors thought fit to de-
mur, and sent to receive direetions. --- hayward.
he expounds the giddy wonder * -- - -
of my weary steps, and under - - - - - - *
spreads a path clear as the day, . . . .
where no churlish rub says nay. - ... croslaw.
he that once fins, like him that slides on ice, , , , , $
goes swiftly down the slippery ways of vice;
though conscience checks him, §: those rub; gone o'er,
he slides on smoothly, and looks back no more. dryden.
all sort of rubbs will be laid in the way. . -
an hereditary right is to be preferred before election; be-
cause the government is so disposed, that it almost executes
itself: and upon the death of a prince, the administration
goes on without any rub or interruption. . . . . . swift.
4. txifficulty ; cause of uneasiness. - . -
to sleep; perchance to dream; ay, there's the rub.
- * -- ~~~ shakespeare.
rub-stone. n.s. [rub and stone..] . a stone to scour or sharpen.
- a cradle for barlie, with rubylone and sand." tissor
ru’bber., n. s. [from rub.] - - - - -
1. one that rubs. -
2. the instrument with which one rubs, -
servants blow the fire with puffing cheeks, and l,
the rubbers, and the bathing sheets display. ryden.
rub the dirty tables with the napkins, for it will save your
wearing out the common rubbers. swift.
3. a coarse file. - -
the rough or coarse file, if large, is called a rubber, and
takes off the unevenness which the hammer made in the
forging. moxon's mechanical exercises.
4. a game; a contest; two games out of three. - -
the ass was to stand by, to see two boobies try their title
to him by a rubber of cuffs. - l’eslrange.
if butchers had but the manners to go to sharps, gentlemen
would be contented with a rubber at cuffs. collier on duelling.
5. a whetstone. * + . . . . . . ainsworth.
rubioca n. adj. [rubican, fr.] rubican colour of a horse is
one that is bay, sorrel, or black, with a light, grey, or white
upon the flanks, but so that this grey or white is not predomi-
nant there. - . . . . far. dic7.
ru’bbage. l. n.s.. [from rubi as perhaps, meaning, at first,
ru’bb1sh. } dust made by rubbing. rubbage is not used.]
... ruin * - - - - -
1. ruins of b what trash is rome ---...-it- ". . . . .
what rubbish, and *i. when it serves . .
or the base matter to illuminate * -o- or,” ..." -
* so vile a thing as caesar." ' shaloft. julius cesar.
such conceits seem too fine among this rubbage., , hotton.
a fabrick, though high and beautiful, if sounded on rub-
bish, is easily made the triumph of the winds... glanv. sceps.
when the foundation of a state is once loosened, the least
--
* * * *
building; fragments of matter used in building.
commotion lays the whole in rubbish. l'estrange.
th’almighty cast a pitying eye. . . . . . .
he saw the town's one half in rubbish lie. dryden.
knowledge lying under abundance of rubbish, his scope
has been o o: this rubbish, and to dress up crabbed
matters as agreeably as he can. - davenant.
the enemy hath avoided a battle, and taken a surer way
to consume us, by letting our courage evaporate against stones
and rubbish. - to-- *** * * swift.
2. confusion; mingled mass. -
that noble art of political lying ought not to lie any longer
in rubbish and confusion. arbuthnot's history of john bull.
davenant.
-
. . will be the least refracted
rubrle-stone. n. s.
rubble-stones owe their name to their being rubbed and
worn by the water, at the latter end of the deluge, departing
in hurry and with great precipitation. - howari.
ru'bicusp, adj, [rubicond, fr. rubicundu!, lat.) inclining to
redness. - * * dici.
rushmen: adj. [from ruly.] red as a ruby. -
thrice upon thy fingers tip, -
thrice upon thy rubied lip. “ milton.
angels food, and rubied neciar flows ' ' ' "
in pearl, in diamond, and in mass, gold. , . milton.
rubi'fick. adj. [ruber and facio, lat.j
while the several species of rays,
refraction separated one from another,
tions proper to each. -
to ru’eify. v. 4. ‘t
making red.
as the rubifick, are by
they retain those mo-
. . . . . . . . grew's cosmos.
o make red, -
this topically applied, becomes a phoenigmus or rubifying
medicine, and of such fiery parts as to conceive fire of e.
selves, and burn a house. brown's pulgar errour.
rubious, adj. [ruleus, lat.j riddy; red. not used.
- ** - diana's lip - . * * *
is not more smooth and rubious. shałoff. twoffo night.
rusbricated, adj. [from rubrica, lat..] smeared with red.
ru'br1ck. m. s. [rubrique, fr. rubrica, lat.] directions printed
in books of law and in prayer books, so termed, because they
were originally distinguished by being in red ink.
no date prefix'd, . . . . .
directs me in the starry rubrick set. milton's par. rog.
they had their particular prayers according to the several
days and months; and their tables or rulo, to instruct
them. * * * * stilling/leet.
the rubrick and the rules relating to the liturgy are esta-
blished by royal authority, as well as the liturgy isof, no.
ru'br1ck. adj. red. ‘’ .
the light and rays, which appear red, or rather make ob-
jects appear so, i call rubrick or red-making. newton:
what though my name stood rulrick on the walls. pop.,
* rushkick. v. 3. [from the noun..] to adorn with red.
ro'ororm, adj. [rober, lai, and £rm.j having the form of
red. - - - - - - -
of those rays, which pass close by the show, the rubiform
; and so come to the eye in the di-
reetest lines. . . . . newton's opticks;
ru’by. m. s. [from ruber, lat.] ". . . . -
1. a precious stone of a red colour, hext in hardness and value
to a diamond. * * - - - - - *
up, up, fair bride' and call . o
thy stars from out their several boxes, take “”
thy rubies, pearls, and diamonds forth, and make
thyself a constellation of them all. idonne.
melpomene would be represented like a manly lady, upon
her head a dressing of pearl, diamonds, and rubies. eacham.
crowns were on their royal scutcheons plac'd,
with saphires, diamonds, and with rubies grac'd. dryden.
2. "redness. - - o
you can behold such sights,
and keep the natural ruly of your cheeks, -
when mine is blanch'd with fear, shakesp. macbeth.
3. anything red.
desire of wine
thou could'st repress, nor did the dancing ruly
sparkling, out-pour'd, the flavour, or the smell,
or taste, that cheers the hearts of gods and men,
allure thee from the cool crystalline stream, milton.
4. a blain; a blotch; a carbuncle.
he's said to have a rich face and rubies about his nose.
capt. jones.
rushy, adj. [from the noun..] of a red colour,
wounds, like dumb mouths, do ope their ruly lips. shakes.
diana's lip " . . - - - -
is not more smooth and ruby than thy small pipe
ls at the maiden's organ shrill and sound. . . . shakoff.
ructation.nis. [rudo, lat..] a belching arising from wind
and indigestion. -
to rup. v. 4. [rubu, saxon, redness.] to make red. obsolete.
. . her cheeks, like apples, which the sun had rudded. spenser.
ru'dder. m. s. [roeder, dutch.j, -
1. the instrument at the stern of a vessel, by which its course
- is governed. - - - - - ** ***. . . . . . * .” **:
... my heart was to thy rudder ty'd by th' string, "...
and thou should'st towe me after. . . . . . shakespeare.
they loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the main-sail,
and made toward shore. . . . . aseïs oxvii. 40.
... those, that attribute unto the faculty any first or sole
power, have therein no other understanding, than such a one
hath, who, looking into the stern of a ship, and *::: it
guided by the helm and rudder, doth ascribe some absolute
virtue to the piece of wood, without all confideration of the
hand that guides it. ..., raleigh's history of the world.
fishes first to shipping did impart;
their tail the rudder, and their head the prow. dryden,
thou held'st the rudder with a steady hand,
till safely on the shore the bark did land. dryden.
2. any<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">or u d
r u e
- ing that guides or governs the course.
2 aoi. i. ... of verses. ..., hudibras.
ru’ddin ess. n. s. [from rudy..] the quality of approaching
to redness. - - - *
the ruddings; upon her lip is wet ; --
you'll mar it, if you kiss it. shakesp. winter's tale.
if the flesh lose its ruddiness, and look pale and withered,
you may suspeo it corrupting. .. wiseman's surgery.
ruopple. n. s. [rudul, islandick..] red earth, a
ruddle owes its colour to an admixture of iron; and as that
is in greater or less proportion, it is of a greater or less speci:
fick gravity, consistence, or hardness. , woodward.
ru’ddock. as [rubecula, lat.] a kind of bird. the redbreaft.
of singing birds, they have linnets, and ruddocks. carew.
ru’ddy. adj. [nubu, saxon j . . .
1. approaching to redness; pale red. "... * *-* - -
we may see the old man in a morning, o
lusty as health, come ruddy to the field, ... .
and there pursue the chase, as if he meant
* to o'ertake time, and bring back youth again, otway.
- new leaves on ev'ry bough were seen ; i. -
some ruddy colour'd, some of lighter green. dryden,
ten wildings have i gather'd for my dear ;
* how ruddy like your lips their streaks appear !. dryden.
- ceres, in her prime, - - o
seems fertile, and with ruddigs freight bedeckt. philips.
if physick, or issues, will keep the complexion from inclin-
ing to coarse, or ruddy, she thinks them well employed. law.
2. yellow. used, if to be used at all, only in poetry.
a crown of ruddy gold inclos'd her brow,
plain without pomp. - - - - -
rude, adj. [rebe, saxon; rudis, lat.] .
1. untaught; barbarous ; savage. - - - ---
nor is there any nation in the world, now accounted civil,
but within the memory of books, were utterly rude and bar-
barous. * **** * wilkins.
2. rough; coarse of manners; uncivil; brutal.
§o. let go that rude uncivil touch; - -
"thou friend of an ill fashion. - shakespeare.
vane's bold answers, termed rude and ruffian-like, fur-
dryden.
thered his condemnation. hayward.
you can with single look inflame ,
... the coldest breast, the rudoff tame. waller.
* it has been so usual to write prefaces, that a man is thought
rude to his reader, who does not give him some account
beforehand. - - * * * * walsh.
3. violent; tumultuous; boisterous; turbulent. * -
clouds push'd with winds rude in their shock. milton.
the water appears white, near the shore, and a ship; be-
cause the rude agitation breaks it into foam.
4. harsh; inclement. '- ... . . o
spring does to flow'ry meadows bring. . . . . .
what the rude winter from them tore. . . . . . waller.
. ignorant; raw ; untaught. . * * * * * •.
are
** * * * * * *
though i be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge. 2 car.
* he was yet but rude in the profession of arms, though
greedy of honour. . . - wotton's buckingham.
* uch tools as art yet rude had form'd.... . milton.
6. [rude, fo rugged; uneven ; shapeless; unformed. .
n their so rude abode, . . . . . . * * *
not the poore swineherd would forget the gods. chapm.
it was the custom to worship rud, and unpolished stones.
* * * * to or - -----
- * * -- ... stillingfleet.
7. artless : inelegant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i would know what ancient ground of authority he hath
for such a senseless fable; and if he have any of the rude
irish books. --- - - - --&gt; --&gt;
one example may serve, till you review the aencis in the
original, unblemished by my rude translation. . ... dryden.
8. such as may be done with strength without art, e.
' ' " to his country farm the fool confin'd;
rude work well suited with a rustick mind. . .
ru"dely. adv. [from rude.] * * * . . . . *
1. in a rude manner; fiercely; tumultuously. * * * *
whether to knock against the gates of rome,
or rudely visit them in parts remote, e. * ~.
to fright them ere .#. . . . shakes, coriolanus.
2. without exactness ; without nicety; coarsely. . . . . .4
i that am not shap'd for sportive tricks,. , , . "
i that am rudely stampt, and want love's majesty . .
to strut before a wanton ambling nymph... ', shaksp,
3. unskilfully. * -oo - a * * * * * *
my muse, though rudely, has resign'd, , , , -
some faint resemblance of his godlike mind. . . dryden.
4. violently ; boisterously... . . . * . . . . . * * *
- with his runohe so rudely stroke... . . . . . .
cymocles twice, that twice him forced his foot revoke. spen.
rudes ess. n.s. [rudose, fr. from rude..] … …of
1. coarseness of manners; incivility. . . . . . .
this roi, a sauce to his goodwit, . . . . . .
which gives men stomach to digest his words ... 3
with better appetite. ... ." shakesp. julius casar.
the publick will in triumphs rudely share, . . . .
and kings the rudens of their joy must bear. dryden.
i
dryden.
*
boyle. * -
2. the first part of education.
3. the first, inaccurate,
spensor. .
to rue. v. a.
... having his falfshood found too late, ’twas he
the rudents, tyranny, the oppression, and ingratitude of
the late favourites towards their mistress, were no longer to
be born. :: swift's 44;steilania,
the rudenes, ill-nature, or perverse behaviour of any of
his flock, used at first to betray him into impatience; bot it
now raises no other passion in him, than a desire of being upon
his knees in prayer to god for them. -- law.
2. ignorance; unskilfulness. -
what he did amiss, was rather through rudents; and want
of judgment, than any malicious meaning. hayward.
3. artlessness; inelegance; coarseness. * *. -
let be thy bitter scorn, . . .
and leave the rudeness of that antique age
to them, that liv'd therein in state forlorn.
4. violence; boisterousness."
- the ram, that batters down the wall,
for the great swing and rudeness of his poize,
they place before his hand that made the engine.
shakespeare.
spenser.
5. storminess; rigour,
you can hardly be too sparing of water to your housed
plants; the not observing of this, destroys more plants than
all the rudenesses of the season. evelyn's kalindar.
ru'denture. m. s. [french..] in archite&amp;iure, the figure of
a rope or staff, sometimes plain and sometimes carved, where-
with the flutings of columns are frequently filled up. baily.
ru'derary. adj. [rudera, lat.] belonging to rubbish. dia.
ruperation, n. s. in architecture, the laying of a pave-
ment with pebbles or little stones. ... haik.
ru'desby. m. s. [from rude 1 an uncivil turbulent fellow, a
low word, now little used.
i must be forced " |
to give my hand, opposed against my heart, +
unto a mad-brain rudosby, full of spleen. shakes,
- out of my fight, rudesby be gone. * shakesp.
ru’diment. n.j. [rudiment, fr. rudimentum, lat],
1. the first principles; the first elements of a science, ".
• such as were trained up in the rudiments, and were so
made fit to be by baptism received into the church, the fathers
usually term hearers. , , , . hooker.
. . to learn the order of my fingering, ". . . .
" i must begin with rudiments of art. "... . . , shakespeare.
-- thou soon shalt quit. . . . . . . . . . . .
those rudiment, and see before thine eyes" ."
the monarchies of th’ earth, their pomp, and state,
sufficient introduction to inform . . . "
thee, of thyself so apt, in regal arts. . milton's par. rog.
could it be believed, that a child should be forced to learn
the rudiments of a language, which he is never to use, and
neglect the writing a good hand, and casting atcounts i locit.
- -
* * * * * . . . * * * * *
he was nurtured where he was born in his first rudiment,
till the years of ten, and then taught the principles of
musick. * * * * * * //atton's life of williers.
the skill and rudiments austere of war. . . . . . philips.
hi unshapen beginning or original of any
thing. - - - - -- . . .
: * - moss is but the rudimint of a plant, and the mould of
earth or bark. . .
... the rudiments of nature are very unlike the gross
... pearances. . . . . . . . . . . . -
bacon's natural history.
er ap-
- * *_ _ ! :- glanvill's sceps.
so looks our monarch on this early fight,
th’ essay and rudiments of great success, -
which all-maturing time must bring to light. dryden.
shall that man pretend to religious attainments, who is de-
fective and short in moral which are but the rudiments, the
beginnings, and first draught of religion; as religion is the
perfeołion, refinement, and sublimation of morality. . . south.
god beholds the first imperfeit rudiments of virtue in the
soul, and keeps a watchful eye over it, till it has received
every grace it is capable of addison's speciator.
. . . . . the sappy boughs . . . . . .
attire themselves with blooms, sweet rudiments .
of future harvest. t
o
philips.
rupjme'stal. adj. [from rudiment.] initial; relating to
first principles.
your first rudimental essays in spectatorship were made in
my shop, where you often practised for hours. . . . sporator.
i. sneoprian, saxon.j. to grieve for 5 to regret;
to lament. .." * - - - - - - - - - - a
, thou temptest one in vain; . . . . *
to tempt the thing which daily yet i rue, . . .';
and the old cause of my continued pain, … .
with like attempts to like end to renew. . . . speoser.
you'll rue the time, . . . . . . . ... --&gt;
that clogs me with this answer... . . . . . . . shakes.
france, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears, .
if talbot but survive. . . , , , shakesp. alenry vi.
qh teacherous was that breast, to whom you
did trust our counsels, and we both may rus, -
that made me cast you guilty, and you me.
* * * thy will -
chose freely what it now so justly lies. ..
darize.
*
* * * ~ *
• * : ..of stco-
r v e.
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r u f
r u g
***
; f.
o
!
rur. n.s. frne, fr. ruta, lat.] an herb, called herb of#.
because holy water was sprinkled with it. filler.
what savor is better,
for places infected, than wormwood and rue. tussor,
here did she drop a tear; here, in this place,
i'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace;
rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
in the remembrance of a weeping queen. shakesp. rich. ii.
the weasel, to encounter the serpent, arms herself with
eating of rue. more's antidote against atheism.
rue'ful. adj. [rue and full.] mournful; woful; sorrowful.
when we have our armour buckled on,
the venom'd vengeance ride upon our swords,
spur them to rueful work, rein them from ruth. shakesp.
cocytus, nam'd of lamentation loud,
heard on the oft stream. amilton's paradis, loft.
he sigh'd, and cast a rueful eye;
our pity kindles, and our passions die. dryden.
rue'fully adv. [from rueful..] mournfully ; sorrowfully.
why should an ape run away from a snail, and very rue-
fully and frightfully look back, as being afraid more.
rue'fu lness. n. y [from rueful..] sorrowfulness; mourn-
fulness.
rue lle. n.s. [french.] a circle; an assembly at a pri-
vate house. not used. -
the poet, who flourished in the scene, is condemned in the
ruelle. dryden's preface to æneis.
ruf f. m. s.
1. a puckered linen ornament, formerly worn about the neck.
see ruffle.
you a captain; for what? for tearing a whore's ruff in a
bawdy house shakesp. henry iv.
we'll revel it,
with ruff, and cuffs, and fardingals.
like an uproar in the town,
before them every thing went down,
some tore a ruff, and some a gown. drayton.
sooner may a gulling weather spy,
by drawing forth heav'n's scheme tell certainly,
what fashion'd hats, or ruff, or suits next year,
our giddy-headed antick youth will wear. donne.
the ladies freed the neck from those yokes, those linnen
ruff; in which the simplicity of their grandmothers had en-
closed it. addison's guardian.
2. any thing collecied into puckers or corrugations.
i rear'd this flow'r,
soft on the paper ruff its leaves i spread. pope.
3. [from rough scales.] a small river fish.
a ruff or pope is much like the pearch for shape, and taken
to be better, but will not grow bigger than a gudgeon; he is
an excellent fish, and of a pleasant taste. walton.
4. a state of roughness. obsolete.
as fields set all their bristles up; in such a ruff wert thou.
chapman's iliad.
5. new state. this seems to be the meaning of this cant word,
unless it be contracted from ruffle.
how many princes that, in the ruff of all their glory, have
been taken down from the head of a conquering army to the
wheel of the victor’s chariot. l’estrange.
ru(ff1an. m. s. [ruffano, italian; ruffen, fr. a bawd; rosver,
danish, to pillage; perhaps it may be best derived from the
old teutonick word which we now write, rough..] a brutal,
boisterous, mischievous fellow ; a cut-throat; a robber; a
murderer.
have you a ruffian that will swear drink? dance 2
revel the night? rob murder * shakesp. henry iv.
sir ralph vane's bold answers termed rude and ruffan like,
falling into years apt to take offence, furthered his condem-
nation. hayward.
the boasted ancestors of these great men,
whose virtues you admire, were all such ruffant,
this dread of nations, this almighty rome,
that comprehends in her wide empire's bounds
all under heaven, was founded on a rape. addison's cato.
ru"ffian. adj. brutal; savagely boisterous.
experienc'd age
may timely intercept the ruffan rage,
convene the tribes. pope's odyssey.
to ru'ff1an. v. n. [from the noun..] to rage; to raise
tumults ; to play the ruffian. not in use. -
a fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements;
if it hath ruffan'd so upon the sea, "*.
what ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
. . can hold the mortise. " shakesp. othells.
to ru'ffle. v. a. [ruyffeln, dutch, to wrinkle.]
1. to disorder; to put out of form; to make less smooth.
naughty '.
these hairs, which thou dost ravish from my chin,
will quicken and accuse thee; i'm your host;
with robbers hands, my hospitable favour
you should not ruffie thus. shakesp. king lear.
in changeable taffeties, differing colours emerge and vanish
upon the ruffling of the same piece of silk. boyle.
wol. ii. - -
3
shakespeare.
as she first began to rise,
she smooth'd the ruffed seas, and clear'd the skies. dryden:
bear me, some god 1 oh quickly bear me hence
to wholsome solitude, the nurse of sense;
where contemplation prunes her ruffled wings,
and the free soul looks down to pity kings. pope.
*. to discompose; to disturb ; to put out of temper.
were i brutus,
and brutus antony, there were an antony
would ruffle up your spirits, and put a tongue
in every wound of caesar, that should move
the stones of rome to rise and mutiny. shakesp.
...we are transported by passions, and our minds ruffled by the
disorders of the body; nor yet can we tell, how the soul should
be affected by such kind of agitations. glanville.
3. to put out of order; to surprise.
the knight found out
th' advantage of the ground, where best
he might the ruff'd foe infest.
4. to throw disorderly together.
within a thicket i repos'd, when round
i ruff"d up fal’n leaves in heap, and found,
let fall from heaven, a fleep interminate.
5. to contract into plaits. -
a small skirt of fine ruffled linnen, running along the upper
part of the stays before, is called the modesty-piece. addison.
to ru'ffle. v. n. -
1. to grow rough or turbulent.
the night comes on ; and the high winds
do sorely ruffle, for many miles about
there's scarce a bush. shakesp. king lear.
the rising winds a ruffling gale afford. pryden.
2. to be in loose motion; to flutter.
the fiery courser, when he hears from far
the sprightly trumpets and the shouts of war,
on his right shoulder his thick mane reclin'd,
ruffles at speed, and dances in the wind. dryden.
3. to be rough to jar ; to be in contention. out of use.
a valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy;
cne fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,
to ruffle in the commonwealth of rome. shakesh.
they would ruffle with jurors, and inforce them to find as
they would dire&amp;t. bacon's henry vii.
ru'ffle, n. s. [from the verb.]
1. plaited linnen used as an ornament.
the tucker is a slip of fine linnen, run in a small ruffle
round the uppermost verge of the women's stays. addison.
2. disturbance; contention; tumult.
conceive the mind's perception of some object, and the
płudibrar.
chapman.
consequent ruffle or commotion of the blood. jwatts,
ruoreshoop. m. s. in falconry, a hood to be worn by
a hawk when she is first drawn. , baily.
rug. m. s. [rugget, rough, swedish.]
1. a coarse, nappy, woollen cloath.
january must be expressed with a horrid and fearful aspea,
clad in irish rug or coarse freeze. peacham on drawing.
the vuugus resembleth a goat, but greater and more pro-
fitable ; of the fleece whereof they make rugs, coverings and
stuffs. eylyn.
2. a coarse nappy coverlet used for mean beds.
a rug was o'er his shoulders thrown;
a rug; for night-gown he had none.
3. a rough woolly dog. not used.
mungrels, spaniels, curs,
shoughes, water rugs, and demy wolves are cleped
all by the name of dogs. shakesp. macbeth.
ru’gged. adj. [rugget, swedish.]
1. rough; full of unevenness and asperity.
nature, like a weak and weary traveller,
tir'd with a tedious and rugged way. denham.
since the earth revolves not upon a material and rugged,
but a geometrical plane, their proportions may be varied in
innumerable degrees. * bentley.
2. not meat; not regular; uneven.
his hair is sticking; * * *
his well-proportion'd beard made rough and rugged,
like to the summer's corn by tempest lodg’d. shakesp.
3. savage of temper; brutal; rough.
the greatest favours to such an one neither soften nor win
upon him; neither melt nor endear him, but leave him as
hard, rugged, and unconcerned as ever. south.
4. so rude; tumultuous; turbulent; tempestuous.
ow bind my brows with iron, and approach
the rugged/thour that time and spite dare bring,
to frown upon th’ enrag’d northumberland. shakesp.
5. rough or harsh to the ear.
wit will shine
through the harsh cadence of a rugged fine. dryden.
a monosyllable line turns verse to prose, and even that
prose is rugged and unharmonious. dryden's dedic. to æneis.
6. sour; surly; discomposed.
sleek o'er your rugged looks,
by bright and jovial 'mong your guests to-night. shakesp. .
22 g 7 violent;
swift's mistel.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r u is .
ir u l
7. violent; rude; boisterous, -o-o- ore on to so
* * * fierce taigo! ; gath'ring might, , , , , , o, . " ...
with rugged truncheon charg'd the knight...o.o. hudibrar.
. rough; shaggy. . . . hei', co of odoo "... . . .
s. re *the .# rufian bear." o ** o ont o shakespeare.
* . *.*. *** * * rough forests wild, ! to . . of “ for to z
to chase the lion, boar, or rugged bear. , , , , … fairfax.
ru’ogedly. adv. [from rugged.] in a rugged manner. i
ruggedness. n.f [from rigged.] of g o
1. the state or quality of being rugged, in any of its senses.
2. roughness; asperity... 2 + or a -
hardness and ruggedness is unpleasant to the touch. bacon,
syrups immediately abate and demulce the hoarseness and
“violence of a . by mollifying the ruggedness of the intern
tunick of the gullet. . . . . . . . . . harvey.
this softness of the foot, which yields and fits itself to the
ruggedness and unevenness of the roads, does render it less
capable of being worn. . . . ray on the creation.
ru’oin. m. s." a nappy cloth. . . .
the lips grew so painful, that she could not endure the
wiping the ichor from it with a soft rugin with her own
hand. * * -- - - - - * wiseman's surgery.
ru'gine. m. s... [rugine, fr.] a chirurgeon’s rasp.
* if new flesh sa not generate, bore little orifices into
the bone, or rasp it with the rugine. sharp.
rugo'ss. adj. [rugosus, lat..] full of wrinkles.
it is a relaxation of the sphineter to such a degree, that the
internal rugose coat of the intestine turneth out, and beareth
down. " wiseman's surgery.
ru’in. m. s. [ruine, fr. ruina, lat.]
1. the fall or destruction of cities or edifices.
loud rung the ruin, and with boistrous fear,
strait revel’d in the queen's amaz'd ear. beaumont's psyche.
2. the remains of building demolished.
the veian and the gabian tow’rs shall fall,
and one promiscuous ruin cover all; so
nor, after length of years, a stone betray
the place where once the very ruins lay. addison.
judah shall fall, oppress'd by grief and shame, o
and men shall from her ruins know her fame. prior.
. . . . such a fool was never found, a.
who pull'd a palace to the ground,
only to have the ruins made
materials for a house decay’d. swift.
-3. destruction; loss of happiness or fortune; overthrow.
- he parted frowning from me, as if ruin * *
leapt from his eyes. . . shakesp. henry viii.
those whom god to ruin has design'd,
he fits for fate, and first destroys their mind. dryden.
4. mischief; bane. , ** -
the errors of young men are the ruin of bufiness. bacon.
havock, and spoil, and ruin are my gain. milton.
-t, ru’rn. v. a. [ruiner, fr. from the noun.] -:
1. to subvert; to demolish.
a nation loving gold must rule this place, -
* *
o, den ruination of towns by the saxons.
so that dwells in ithaca; and name hath wonne : , ; 2 o'
l. :
a wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth shame.
o
. . instruct me whence this uproar;
***, *
ad to
nabis were already ruinated, and now was his turn to be
assailed. go isiys to 9:0s. bacon's war with spain.
} so o:. revenger ruinate or ... o. i
a him and his issue by a dreadfulfate, oi sandyt.
uina'tion. n.s.. [from ruinate.] subversion; demolition;
overthrow. -qbsolete. 2:s: oi: ; or:, or co, oil
roman coins were overcovered in the ground, in thes sud-
/ - - ;: camden's ramains.
usines. n.s.. [from ruin.]s cne that ruins.o.o. od svoj
* this ulysses, old laertes' sonne,
*
to chapman.
of citie ruinero is to o
ruonous, adj. [ruinosus, lat, ruineux, fr.]
1. fallen to ruin; dilapidated: demolished.
it is less dangerous, when divers parts of a tower are de-
cayed, and the foundation firm, than when the foundation is
, ruinous. . . hayward.
2, mischievous; pernicious; baneful; destructive. - -
* ..., the birds, ". . . .
- after a night of storm so ruinous, .
clear'd up their choicest notes in bush and spray, i oz.
to gratulate the sweet return of morn. mihon's par. rog.
those successes are more glorious, which bring benefit to
the world, than such ruinous ones, as are dyed in human blood.
- ** granville's preface.
a stop might be put to that ruinous practice of gaming. sw,
ru'inously. adv. [from ruinous.] . . . . . . g . i
1. in a ruinous manner. . . . . . . . . oot", of
2. mischievously; destructively. on to or of
... if real uneasinesses may be admitted to be as detening as
... imaginary ones, his own decree will retort the most ruinously
on himself. ... . ...- : * decay of piety.
rule. n.f. [regula, latin.] • * : * ~ *
1. government; empire ; sway; supreme command. ...) a
… i am asham'd, that women . . . . noi
* - should seek for rule, supremacy, or sway, 3 g : 3
… when they are bound to serve, love, and obey. shato.
- may he live ** * *
ever belov'd, and loving may his rule be shakesh.
3 * : * * * * * * proverbs xvii. 2.
adam's fin did not deprive him of his rule, but left the
creatures to a reluctation. -** * * * bacon.
there being no law of nature nor positive law of god, that
determines which is the positive heir, the right of succession;
... and consequently of bearing rule, could not have been deter-
mined. 1 - . . . . . . . . . . locke.
this makes them apprehensive of every tendency, to en-
a danger that form of rule established by the law of their
country. do so addison's freeholder.
, - - - - **
and wherefore vanoe, the sworn friend to rome
should spurn against our rule, and stir
the tributary provinces to war.
- *
y - -
4. philip's briton.
sev'n years the traytor rich mycenae sway’d; or
our temples rain, and our rites deface. dryden; ...and his stern rule the groaning land obey'd. pope.
2. to destroy; to deprive of felicity or fortune. o 2. an instrument by which lines are drawn. ... .
by thee rais'd, i ruin all my foes. . . milton. , if your influence be quite dam'd up !".
'o dispose all honours of the sword and gown, , , - with black usurping mists, some gentle taper,
** grace with a nod, and ruin with a frown. dryden. .. though a rush-candle from the wicker hole a 7.
a confident dependence ill-grounded creates such a negli- of some clay habitation, visit us r
gence, as will certainly ruin us in the end. . . . . hase. with thy long levell'd rule of streaming light. milton.
3. to impoverish.”.”. *
she would ruin me in silks, were not the quantity that goes
to a large pincushion sufficient to make her a gown and petti-
- . . . … a has - -
coat - o, o 'o . . . . . . . addison.
rols. ... no or *
- ... "... … . . . .” “… . . . .” ** j :
1. to fall in ruins. s - of ... r
his heard th’uhsiferable noise, hellow
heav'n ruining from beay’n, and would have fled
affrighted, but strict fate had fix’d too deep . . . .
her dark foundations, and too fast had bound. . . milton.
3. to run to ruin; to delapidate. . . . . . . . . .
though he his house of polish'd marble build. . .
"yet shals it rain like the moth's fail cell, , ...".
o. sheds of reeds, which summer's heat repel. sands.
3. to be brought "... or misory. . . . . . . .”
if we are idle, and disturb the industrious in their business,
we shall ruin the faster. * * * * * yo o o a locke.
to ruinate. v.a. ffrom rain. this wordis now obsolete.
s. to subvert; to demolish..., , , , , , , , , . "
i will not ruinate my father's house, " . . . . .
--
o:
who gave his blood to lime the stones ‘. ...
... and set up lancaster. . . . . . . shakesp. henry vi.
what offence of such impietie . . . **
hath priam or his sonnes done thee that with so high a
-&gt; to hate.'" - of: to . - - - -* * - - - - - - - -
thou should'st thus ceaselessly defire to raze and ruinate
so well a builded town as troy -
we'll order well the state, "..." -,
that like events may ne'er it ruinate, ...” shałoff.
2. to bring to meanness or misery irrecoverable.
the romans came to put dowa kioms; philip and
-- . . . . . * * * ** * * * * :* - - -, -- ~ *-
o, . &amp;
judging truly.
odi o see's where the reasons pinch, and where they fail, to
• *
... and perfect rule of life. ...
a rule that relates even to the smallest part of our life, is of
: iai:v a, chapman.
. a judicious artist will use his eye, but he will trust only to
his rule. ... to: south's sermons.
3. 9. ; : precept by which the thoughts oria&amp;tions are di-
rected. ord
... he lay'd this rule before him, which proved of great use;
... never to trouble himself with the forefight of future events. fell.
this little treatise will furnish you with infallible rules of
fuly-)- a 337 foot o' dryden's dafresnoy.
know'st with an equal hand to hold the scale;
* and where exceptions o'er the general rule prevail. dry.
on we profess to have embraced a religion, which contains the
most exact rules for the government of our lives, •ott tillatsen.
... we owe to christianity the discovery of the most certain
::g oyo. . . ; ; ; ; tilletson.
great benefit to us, merely as it is a rule. o woo law.
4. regularity; propriety of behaviour. not in use. ()
to . some say he's mad; others, that lesser hate him, ,
... do call
21:... out it valiant fary; but for certain, on 2
he cannot buckle his distemper'd cause of: 2 six of
#n o, - a "". * * * *
o: best of rule, co, o so. 6 shakesh. marieth.
7 a.
ulfi., v.a. ffrom the noun.]
i...to govern; to controll; to manage with power and au-
thority. .d.o.org.to so e : * * * *
- to it is a purpos'd thing, oulouci etios.
*.*.*.* to curb the will of the nobility; too sovo. • *
* suffer’t, and live with such as cannot rule, oo is
... • nor ever will be rul’d., a bog of shałon, coriolanus.
... ... margret shall, now be queen, and rule the king; i
... but i will ruleboth her, the king, and realm.” shafe?.
a greater
!
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r u m
r u m
o
o
o
---
-----
-**.*
===
so -- -
o, so
th: *4,
:a: '..
*
* a greater power how rurd him. ..."?" ** milton,
... rome 1.'tis thine alone with awful sway,..., o **
to rule mankind, and make the world obey, ". o - ;
&amp; disposing peace and war thy own majestick way." pya.
2. to manage; to conduct. . . . "
he sought to take unto him the ruling of the affairs, 1 mac.
3. to settle as by a rule. ". . . . . . . .
*… had he done it with the pope's license, his adversaries must
have been silent; for that's a ruled case with the schoolmen.
* - " " ' , "," atterbury.
to rule. van. to have power or command: with over.
oyudah yet ruleth with god, and is faithful with the saints.
- of , o, . * * * * * * hofta xi, 12.
thrice happy men! whom god hath thus advanc'd l
created in his image, there to dwell, . . . . .
. …and worship him; and in reward to rule " " ' ". . .
* - . over his works. milton’s oft loft.
we subdue and rule over all other creatures; and use for
our own behoof those qualities wherein they excel. . . . ray.
he can have no divide right to my obedience, who cannot
shew his divine right to the power of ruling over me. locke.
ru’ler. m. s. [from rule.] -
1. governour; one that has the supreme command. " '
* - soon rulers grow proud, and in their pride foolish. sidney.
---. god, by his eternal providence, has ordained kings ; and
the law of nature, leaders and rulers over others. raleigh.
the pompous mansion was design'd : " ' -
to please the mighty rulers of mankind; "| -
inferior temples use on either hand. . . . ." addison.
2. an instrument, by the dire&amp;tion of which lines are drawn.
... they know how to draw a straight line between two points
so by the side of a ruler. moxon's mechanical exercises.
rum. m. s. r - =
1. a country parson. "a cant word.
i’m grown a mere mopus; no company comes,
but a rabble of tenants and rusty dull rums. swift.
2. a kind of spirits distilled from melasses. i know not how
derived. roemer in dutch is a drinking glass. *
te rumble. v. n. [rammelin, dutch..] to make a hoarse
low continued noise. " " " ' - *** **
. . . the trembling streams, which wont in channels clear
- . . to rumble gently down with murmur soft,
* ... and were by them right tuneful taught to bear
* a base's part amongst their consorts oft,
... now forc'd to overflow with brackish tears, &gt;
-: , with troublous noise did dull their dainty ears. spenser.
. . . . . . rumble thy belly full, spit fire, spout rain ;
… norrain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters;
* - i tax not you, you elements, with unkindness. ... shakesp.
-- ... at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his
wheels, the fathers shall not look back to their children for
feebleness.o. c. ... * * * jeremiah xlvii. 3.
our courtier thinks that he's preferr'd, whom every man
… * * * * envies; - -
when love so rumbles in his pate, no sleep comes in his
-o-o: eyes. 2 * * - .." _7. 4. suckling.
apollo starts, and all parnassus shakes o' ". . . . "
at the rude rumbling baralipton makes. . . . roscommon.
the fire she fann'd, with greater fury burn’d,
rumbling within. or or
th’ included vapours, that in caverns dwell,
lab’ring with colick pangs, and close confin'd,
in vain sought issue from the rumbling wind. dryden.
on a sudden there was heard a most dreadful rumbling noise
within the entrails of the machine, after which the mountain
*
- - dryden.
burst. - addison.
- several monarchs have acquainted me, how often they have
* been shook from their respective thrones, by the rumbling of a
# wheelbarrow. --- † - - - - - spectator.
ru'mbler. m. s. [from rumble.] the person or thing that
&amp; rumbles. - - - or
xu'minant. adj. [ruminant, fr. ruminans, lat..] having the
# property of chewing the cud. -
- : ruminant creatures have a power of directing this peristal-
tick motion upwards and downwards. - ... ray.
o, --- the description, given of the muscular part of the gullet,
… is very exaet in ruminants, but not in men. derham.
*to ru'minate. v. n. [ruminer, fr. rumino, lat.]".
*...to chew the cud. - - o
others fill'd with pasture gazing sat, 7 p.
cribedward ruminating. milton's paradise lost.
the necessity of spittle to dissolve the aliment, appears
from the contrivance of nature in making the salivary dicts of
osanimals, which ruminate or chew the cud, extremely open.
- . . arbuthnot on aliments.
… …s on grassy banks herds ruminating lie. o' thomson.
2. to muse; to think again and again. - - - - - or "
alone sometimes she walk'd in secret where,
to ruminate upon her discontent. o
of ancient prudence here he ruminates, --
of rising kingdoms, and of falling states. . . . waller.
i am at a solitude, an house between hampstead and lon-
o, -ion, wherein sir charles sedley died : this circumstance sets
o-"g a.
---
fairfax.
me a thinking and ruminating is &amp;n the sm iowments in whic
no of wit exercise †† o *o
* he practises a flow meditation, and ruminal, on the so.
ject; and perhaps in two nights and days rouses those several
ideas which are necessary #. - -
- *..., , , , a_o, asatts on the mind.
to ru'minate. v. a. [rimie, lat.] o *** * * *
1. ‘rochew over again.” ”,” or *** *
- - ... von + , , , ;
2. to ouse of 3 to meditate over and over again.
loo.
e ty-r ated. "" = "shakoff. ant; ------
*"four:****
*"sit patiently, and inly riminai. to *** *
but the morning's dan #.” : o sh hoff a-
to mad with desire she riminato her fin,’’’. outan.
to and wishes all her wishes o'er again; o o o “…
zo d'now she despair; and how resolves to try; , ,
to o wou'd not, aid wbu'd again, she knows not why or d.
rumination.”h. /...[ruminatio, lat. from ruminate.] wrya.
1. the property or act of chewing the cud.
‘". "romination is given to animals, to enable them at once to
*lay up a great store of food, and afterwards to chew it. zoo.
2. meditation; reflection. , , , , , , , , a solos
it is a melancholy of mine own, extraded from many ob-
jets, in which my often rumination wraps me in a mosi hu-
^ morous sadness. . . . . . . ." "... shake a.4 yau like it.
retiring, full of rumination sad, ... . . . - -
he mourns the weakness of these atter times. sosoomson.
"to ru'mmage. w. a...[ranmen, german, to empty. skinner.
* rimari, lat.] to search; to plunder; to evacuate. . . ;
qur greedy seamen rummage every hold, , " . . .
smile on the booty of each wealthief chest...". 1 c. drydon.
to ruo mage. v. n. to search places..., "... o
. a fox was rammaging among a great many carved figures,
there was one very extraordinary piece. * * * * l'erang.
some on antiquated authors pore j, o, -
- ---
- - -
*** *r
rummage for sense. • *- : - - o dr. * p
i have often rummaged for old books in lisc
duck-lane. , - ** - - - - * ..., to swift.
ru’mmer. n.f. [reemer, dutch..]" a glass; a drinkins cup.
... [operial rhine bestow'd the generous rummer. philips.
ru'mour. m. s. [rumeur, fr. rumor, lat.j., flying or popu-
lar report; bruit; fame. . . . . … . . . . . . . .
x -o there ran a rumour . . . . . . . .
**'. of many worthy fellows that were out. shakesh. macbeth.
great is the rumour of this dreadful knight, où -
and his atchievements of no less account, o shakesp.
. . rumour next and chance - " -
and tumult and confusion all embroil'd,
she heard'an ancient rumour fly, " . . . . .
that times to come should see the trojan race. o **
*her carthage ruin. . . . . . . " dryden's znsis.
four. v, a. [from the naum.] to report abroad; to
furt. * * * * * * - -
catesby, rumour it abroad, on a.
that anne my wife is sick, and like to die..., it. shakesp.
all abroad was rumour'd that this day of , r "
samson should be brought forth. : milton's agoni #s.
he was rumor'd for the author, and as such published to
the world by the london and cambridge stationers..., fell.
--&gt; * 'twas rumour’d, , , , , a
my father'scap'd from out the citadel. ... dryden.
ru'mousek, n.s.. [from rumour.] reporter; spreader of news.
--- ave ", a - -
reports, the volscians, with two several powers, ...
;-- o, *:. into the roman territories. - to
-go fee this rumourer whipt: it cannot be. ... shakes).
rump. n.s. [rumpff, gj be. . 'so
1. the end of the back bone; used vulgarly of ini, and con-
temptuously of human beings, a
or cro r, so
… on 244ilton.
* . .
on . . .2 of 1 c 1 &amp;
**.*
o
. . . . . . . . . " " -- * * wrot
at her rump she growing had behinda o
* * * a fox's tail. - - - … to 1-1 -, -oo -i-. ... *...* spensor.
or ...if his holiness would thump ... ."
his reverend bum 'gainst horse's rump, a 1.
he might b' equipt from his own stable. , , , , , prior.
* . . . rumps of beef with virgin honey strew'd....so a king.
last trotted forth the gentle swine, , , , , , ,
*to ease her itch against the stump, , , ... ...
"...and dismally was heard to whine, , , , .
...all as she scrubb'd her meazly rump. , , , swift's miftal.
2.” the buttocks." " - {}, .o. of newoo
a sailor's wife had chesnuts in her lap, so
and mouncht, give me quoth i, , , , or ea
, , argint thee witch!-the rump fedronyon cries. shakoff,
" * ... he charg’d him first to bind a ...of
e--- crowdero's hands on rump behind. ** hudibrar.
"to ru'mple. v. a. [rompelen, dutch..] to crush or contract
into inequalities and corrugations; to crush together out of
- ape. 2. tow, or . o'-' or s , , , ,
-o-o:
***each vital speck, in which remains or
*...* th’ entire, but rumpled animal, contains
o of: perplex'd. a... …, blackmore on the creation.
, , , i rumpled petticoats, or tumbled beds,
" " or discompos'd the head-dress of a prude. pope.
2.
never
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r u n
r u n
never put on a clean apron, 'till you have made your lady's
bed, for fear of rumpling your apron. swift.
ru'mple. "w; [hnympelle, saxon.] pucker ; rude 'plait.
fair virginia would her fate bestow
on rutila, and change her faultless make
for the foul rumple of her camel-back. dryden.
t, run. v. m. pret, ran. [rinnan, gothick; ynnan, saxon;
rennen, dutch..]
1. to move swiftly ; to ply the legs in such a manner, as that
both feet are at every step off the ground at the same time ; to
make haste; to pass with very quick pace.
their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood. prov,
laban ran out unto the man unto the well. gen. xxiv. 29.
since death's near, and runs with so much force,
we must meet first, and intercept his course. dryden.
he ran up the ridges of the rocks amain. dryden.
let a shoe-boy clean your shoes and run of errands. swift.
2. to use the legs in motion.
seldom there is need of this, till young children can run
about. locke.
3. to move in a hurry.
the priest and people run about,
and at the ports all thronging out,
as if their safety were to quit
their mother.
4. to pass on the surface, not through the air.
the lord sent thunder, and the fire ran along upon the
ground. exodus ir. 25.
5. to rush violently.
let not thy voice be heard, lest angry fellows run upon
thee, and thou lose thy life. judges xviii. 25.
now by the winds and raging waves i swear,
your safety more than mine was thus my care ;
lest of the guide bereft, the rudder lost,
your ship shou'd run against the rocky coast. dryden.
they have avoided that rock, but run upon another no less
dangerous. burnet's theory of the earth.
i discover those shoals of life which are concealed in order
addison.
benj. johnson.
to keep the unwary from running upon them.
6. to take a course at sea.
running under the island clauda, we had much work to
come by the boat. ac's xxvii. 16.
7. to contend in a race.
a horse-boy, being lighter than you, may be trusted to run
races with less damage to the horses. swift.
8. to fly; not to stand. it is often followed by away in this
sense.
the difference between the valour of the irish rebels and
the spaniards was, that the one ran away before they were
charged, and the other straight after. bacon.
i do not see a face
worthy a man; that dares look up and stand
one thunder out; but downward all like beasts
running away at every flash. |ben. johnson.
the rest dispers'd run, some disguis'd,
to unknown coasts; some to the shores do fly. daniel.
they, when they're out of hopes of flying, -
will run away from death by dying. hudibras.
your child shrieks, and runs away at a frog. locke.
9. to go away by stealth.
my conscience will serve me to run from this jew, my
master. shakesp. merchant of venice.
10. to emit, or let flow any liquid.
w my statues,
like a fountain, with a hundred spouts,
did run pure blood. shakesp. julius £esar.
i command, that the conduit run nothing but claret. shak.
in some houses, wainscots will sweat, so that they will
almost run with water. bacon's natural history.
rivers run potable gold. milton.
caicus roll'd a crimson flood,
and thebes ran red with her own natives blood. dryden.
the greatest vessel, when full, if you pour in still, it must
run out some way, and the more it runs out at one side, the less
it runs out at the other. temple.
11. to flow ; to stream; to have a current ; not to stagnate.
innumerable islands were covered with flowers, and inter-
woven with shining seas that ran among them. addison.
her fields he cloath'd, and chear'd her blasted face
with running fountains and with springing grass. addison.
see daifies open, rivers run. - parnel.
12. to be liquid ; to be fluid.
in lead melted, when it beginneth to congeal, make a little
hole, in which put quicksilver wrapped in a piece of linnen,
and it will fix and run no more, and endure the hammer.
bacon's natural history.
stiff with eternal ice, and hid in snow,
the mountain stands; nor can the rising sun,
unfix her frosts, and teach 'em how to run.
as wax dissolves, as ice begins to run,
and trickle into drops before the sun,
so rocks to.e.'youth.
; : ". . . . . . . . , to melt.
addison.
addison's ovid.
her form glides through me, and my heart gives way;
this iren heart, which no impression took
from wats, melts down, and runs, if she but look. dryden.
sussex iron ores run freely in the fire. woodward,
14. to fuse; to melt.
your iron must not burn in the fire; that is, run or melt;
for then it will be brittle. moxon's mechanical exercises.
15. to pass; to proceed.
you, having run through so much publick business, have
found out the secret so little known, that there is a time to
give it over. temple's miscellanies.
if there remains an eternity to us after the short revolution
of time, we so swiftly run over here, 'tis clear, that all the hap-
piness, that can be imagined in this fleeting state, is not va-
luable in respect of the future, locke.
16. to flow as periods or metre; to have a cadence: as, the
lines run smoothly.
17. to go away; to vanish ; to pass.
as fast as our time runs, we should be very glad in most
parts of our lives that it ran much faster. addison.
18. to have a legal course; to be practised.
customs run only upon our goods imported or exported,
and that but once for all; whereas interest runs as well upon
our ships as goods, and must be yearly paid. child.
19. to have a course in any direction.
a hound runs counter, and yet draws dry foot well. shai.
little is the wisdom, where the flight
so runs against all reason. shakesp. macbeth.
that punishment follows not in this life the breach of this
rule, and consequently has not the force of a law, in coun-
tries where the generally allowed practice runs counter to it,
is evident. locke.
had the present war run against us, and all our attacks
upon the enemy been vain, it might look like a degree of
frenzy to be determined on so impracticable an undertaking.
addison.
20. to pass in thought or speech.
cou'd you hear the annals of our fate;
through such a train of woes if i should run,
the day wou'd sooner than the tale be done. dryden,
by reading, a man antedates his life; and this way of run-
ning up beyond one's nativity, is better than plato's pre-
existence. collier.
virgil, in his first georgick, has run into a set of precepts
foreign to his subject. addison.
raw and injudicious writers propose one thing for their
subject, and run off to another. felton.
21. to be mentioned cursorily or in few words.
the whole runs on short, like articles in an account, where-
as, if the subject were fully explained, each of them might take
up half a page. arbuthnot on coins.
22. to have a continual tenour of any kind.
discourses ran thus among the clearest observers: it was
said, that the prince, without any imaginable stain of his re-
ligion, had, by the fight of foreign courts, much corroborated
his judgment. wotton's buckingham.
the king's ordinary style runneth, our sovereign lord the
king. saunderson.
23. to be busied upon.
his grisly beard his pensive bosom sought,
and all on lausus ran his restless thought. dryden.
when we defire any thing, our minds run wholly on the
good circumstances of it; when 'tis obtained, our minds run
wholly on the bad ones. swift.
24. to be popularly known.
men gave them their own names, by which they run a
great while in rome. temple.
25. to have reception, success, or continuance; as, the
pamphlet ran much among the lower people,
26. to go on by succession of parts.
she saw with joy the line immortal run,
each fire io. and glaring in his son.
27. to proceed in a train of conduct.
if you suspend your indignation against my brother, till you
can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you should
run a certain course. shakesh. king lear.
28. to pass into some change.
is it really desirable, that there should be such a being in
the world as takes care of the frame of it, that it do not run
into confusion, and ruin mankind tillotson.
wonder at my patience;
have i not cause to rave, and beat my breaft,
to rend my heart with grief, and run distracted. addison.
29. to pass.
we have many evils to prevent, and much danger to run
pope.
through. taylor.
30. to proceed in a certain order.
day yet wants much of his race to run. affircr.
thus in a circle runs the peasant's pain,
and the year rolls within itself again. dryden.
this church is very rich in relicks, which run up as high
as daniel and abraham. addison on italy.
milk by boiling will change to yellow, and run through
all
!
o
.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r u n
r u n
o
:
:--
** * *
- * . - - -
all the intermediate. degrees, till it stops in an intense
red. - - - - - - arbuthnot.
31. to be in force. -* ***.
the owner hath incurred the forfeiture of eight years pro-
fits of his lands, before he cometh to the knowledge of the
process that runneth against him. o or or - - - -baron.
the time of instance shall not commence or run till after
contestation of suit. or a . . .” --&gt; ayliff's parergon.
32. to be generally received, -a -w- - -o o f : **
neither was he ignorant what report ran of himself, and
how he had lost the hearts of his subjects. -- * knolles.
33. to be carried on in any manner. * * * * *
concessions, that run as high as any, the most charitable
protestants make. **. * : * : atterbury.
in popish countries the power of the clergy runs higher, and
excommunication is more formidable. ayliffe's parergon.
34. to have a track or course. ar -
searching the ulcer with my probe, the finus run up above
* ---- a
the orifice. . . . . . . . . . wiseman's surgery.
one led me over those parts of the mines, where metalline
veins run. - * : ****** * * * : *** boyle.
35. to pass progressively. . . . . . .4 wo *
the planets do not of themselves, move in curve lines, but
are kept in them by some attractive force, which, if once sus-
pended, they would for ever run out in right lines. “ cheyne.
36. to make a gradual progress. . ... . .3, so of .
*- the wing’d colonies- - - - - -
. there settling, seize the sweets the blossoms yield,
... and a low murmur runs along the field. * . pope.
37. to be predominant. - - … * * * **** * -
this run in the head of a late writer of natural history, who
is not wont to have the most lucky hits in the conduct of his
- thoughts, ... . . . . woodward on fossils.
38. to tend in growth. . . ...- : * * * *
. a man's nature runs either to herbs or weeds; therefore let
him seasonably water the one, and destroy the other. bacon.
39. to grow exuberantly: * * : -
joseph is a fruitful bough, whose branches run over the
*** *** * *** *
****
... wall. ** * geness xlix. 22.
study your race, or the soil of your family will dwindle into
... cits, or run into wits. --- - - - tatler.
if the richness of the ground cause turnips to run to leaves,
treading down the leaves will help their rooting. mortimer.
in some, who have run up to men without a liberal educa-
tion, many great qualities are darkened. felton.
magnanimity may run up to profusion or extravagance. pope.
4o. to excern pus or matter, o
whether his flesh run with his issue, or be stopped, it is his
uncleanness. -- * . leviticus xiii. 3.
41. to become irregular; to change to something wild.
many have run out of their wits for women. 1 esdr. iv.
* * * qurking return'd, -
the muse ran mad to see her exil'd lord;
on the crack'd stage the bedlam heroes roar'd,
42. to get by artifice or fraud.
* - hath publick faith, like a young heir, -
for this taken up all sorts of ware,
and run int’ ev'ry tradesman's book, “ ”- “” . . ;
*till both turn'd bankrupts. • *-* : * hudibras.
run in trast, and pay for it out of your wages. , swift.
43. to fall by haste, passion, or folly into fault or misfortune.
- if thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly, *
that ever love did make thee run into ; * * -- *
thou hast not lov’d. shakesp. as you like it.
• solyman himself, in punishing the perjury of another, ran
into wilful perjury himself, perverting the commendation of
--justice, which he had so much desired by his most bloody and
uniust sentence. *** * : knolles's history of the turks.
from not using it right, come all those mistakes we run
into in our endeavours after happiness. " locke.
44. to fall; to pass 5 to make transition.”
in the middle of a rainbow, the colours are sufficiently dis-
. . tinguished; but near the borders they run into one another,
so that you hardly know how to limit the colours." watts.
45. to have a general tendency. ---
temperate climates run
the extremes into despotick power.
46. to proceed as on a ground or principle. * * * *
granville.
** **.
* ------- * * -
47. to go on with violence.
tarquin, running into all the methods of tyranny, after a no general truth. ”
swift.
48. to run after. to search for; to endeavour at, though
cruel reign was expelled.
out of the way.
the mind, upon the suggestion of any new notion, runs
after similies, to make it the clearer to itself; which, though --
it may be useful in explaining our thoughts to others, is no by blabbing out his own or others secrets.
" locke.
right method to settle true notions in ourselves.
49. to run away with. to hurry without consent,
thoughts will not be directed what objects to pursue, but run
away with a man in pursuit of those ideas they have in }.
- ocke.
vol. ii.
into moderate governments, and
** *
it is a confederating with him, to whom the sacrifice is
offered: for upon that the apostle's argument runs. atterbury.
56. to run in with. to close; to comply. -
though ramus run in with the first reformers of learning,
in his opposition to aristotle; yet he has given us a plausible
system. o baker.
51. to run on. to be continued. * -
if, through our too much security, the same should run on,
soon might we feel our estate brought to those lamentable
terms, whereof this hard and heavy sentence was by one of
... the ancients uttered. - płocker.
52. to run on. to continue the same course.
running on with vain prolixity.
53. to run over. to be so full as to overflow.
- he fil's his famish'd maw, his mouth runs o'er
with unchew'd morsels, while he churns the gore. dryd.
54. to run over. to be so much as to overflow.
milk while it boils, or wine while it works, run over the
vessels they are in, and possess more place than when they
were cool." so digby on bodies.
55. to run over. to recount cursorily.
i shall run them over slightly, remarking chiefly what is
obvious to the eye. - ay.
i shall not run over all the particulars, that would shew what
pains are used to corrupt children. locke.
56. to run over. to confider cursorily. o'
these four every man should run over, before he censure
the works he shall view. worton’s archite.``ure.
if we run over the other nations of europe, we shall only
pass through so many different scenes of poverty. addison.
57. to run over. to run through. - -
should a man run over the whole circle of earthly pleasures,
he would be forced to complain that pleasure was not satis-
faction. * o south.
58. to run out. to be at an end. --
when a lease had run out, he stipulated with the tenant to
resign up twenty acres, without lessening his rent, and no
great abatement of the fine. . swift.
59. to run out. to spread exuberantly. -
insectile animals, for want of blood, run all cut into legs. .
* hammond.
the zeal of love runs out into suckers, like a fruitful tree.
taylor's rule of holy living.
some papers are written with regularity; others run out into
the wildness of essays. *** spedator.
60. to run out. to expatiate. - . so
drayton.
…' nor is it sufficient to run out into beautiful digressions, un-
less they are something of a piece with the main design of the
* -
georgick. of - - - - - " - * : * -- addison.
on all occasions, she run out extravagantly in praise of
hocus. * * - * rbuthnot.
they keep to their text, and run out upon the power of the
pope, to the diminution of councils. * . baker.
he shews his judgment, in not letting his fancy run out into
* long descriptions. * broome on odyssey.
61. to run out. to be wasted or exhausted. * *
- he hath run out himself, and led forth * * *
his desp'rate party with him; blown together , , ,
** "aids of all kinds. ben. johnson’s catiline.
th' estate runs out, and mortgages are made,
their fortune ruin'd, and their fame betray'd. dryden.
62. to run out. to grow poor by expence disproportionate
to income.
from growing riches with good cheer,
to running out by starving here.
so little gets for what she gives, *... *
*we really wonder how she lives | *** * * *
* and had her stock been less, no doubt; *
* * she must have long ago run out. . dryden.
to run. v. a. * * - - -
1. to pierce; to stab.
poor romeo is already dead, run through the ear with a
* love song. * shakesp. romeo and juliet.
* - hipparchus, going to marry, consulted philander upon the
* occasion; philander represented his mistress in such strong
* “colours, that the next morning he received a challenge, and
* before twelve he was run through the body. spectator.
i have known several instances, where the lungs run thro'
* with a sword have been consolidated and healed. blackmore.
2. to force ; to drive. ” - '' .
in nature, it is not convenient to confider every difference
that is in things, and divide them into distinet classes: this
will run us into particulars, and we shall be able to establish
locke.
though putting the mind unprepared upon an unusual
stress may discourage it, yet this must not run it, by an over-
great shyness of difficulties, into a lazy sauntering about ordi-
nary things. * -- locke.
a talkative person runs himself upon great inconveniencies,
ray.
3. to force into any way or form. -
some, used to mathematical figures, give a preference to
the methods of that science in divinity or politick enquiries;
others, accustomed to retired speculations, run natural philo-
sophy into metaphysical notions. docke.
22 h–22 z what
swift.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- r u n
r u p
what is raised in the day, settles in the night; and its cold
runs the thin juices into thick sizy substances. cheyne.
the daily complaisance of gentlemen runs them into va-
ricty of expressions; whereas your scholars are more close,
and frugal of their words. felton on the clafficks.
4. to drive with violence.
they ran the ship aground. a&amp;#3 xxvii. 41.
this proud turk offered scornfully to pass by without vail-
ing, which the venetian captains not enduring, set upon him
with such fury, that the turks were enforced to run both their
gallies on shore. . . knolles's history.
5. to melt ; to fuse.
the purest gold must be run and washed.
6. to incur ; to fall into.
he runneth two dangers, that he shall not be faithfully
counseled, and that he shall have hurtful counsel given. bacon.
the tale i tell is only of a cock,
who had not run the hazard of his life,
had he believ'd his dream, and not his wife. - dryden.
confider the hazard i have run to see you here. dryden.
o that i could now prevail with any one to count up what
he hath got by his most beloved fins, what a dreadful danger
he runs. calamy.
i shall run the danger of being suspe&amp;ted to have forgot
what i am about. locke.
7. to venture; to hazard.
he would himself be in the highlands to receive them, and
run his fortune with them. clarendon.
take here her reliques and her gods, to run
with them thy fate, with them new walls expect. denh.
a wretched exil'd crew
resolv'd, and willing under my command,
to run all hazards both of sea and land.
8. to import or export without duty.
heavy impositions lessen the import, and are a strong tempt-
ation of running goods. swift.
9. to prosecute in thought.
to run the world back to its first original, and view na-
ture in its cradle, to trace the outgoings of the ancient of days
in the first instance of his creative power, is a research too
reat for mortal enquiry. south.
the world hath not stood so long, but we can still run it up
to artless ages, when mortals lived by plain nature. burnet.
i would gladly understand the formation of a soul, and run
it up to its pundium saliens. collier.
i present you with some peculiar thoughts, rather than run
a needless treatise upon the subject at length. felton.
10. to push.
some english speakers run their hands into their pockets,
others look with great attention on a piece of blank paper. add.
11. to run down. to chase to weariness.
they ran down a stag, and the ass divided the prey very
felton.
dryden,
honestly. l'asirange.
12. to run down. to crush; to overbear.
though out-number'd, overthrown,
- and by the fate of war run down,
their duty never was defeated. hudibras.
some corrupt affections in the soul urge him on with such
impetuous fury, that, when we see a man overborn and run
down by then), we cannot but pity the person, while we ab-
hor the crime. south.
it is no such hard matter to convince or run down a drunkard,
and to answer any pretences he can alledge for his sin. south.
the common cry
then ran you down for your rank loyalty. dryden.
religion is run down by the license of these times. berkley.
13. this is one of the words which serves for use when other
words are wanted, and has therefore obtained a great multi-
plicity of relations and intentions; but it may be observed
always to retain much of its primitive idea, and to imply pro-
gresion, and, for the most part, progressive violence.
run. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. act of running.
the ass sets up a hideous bray, and fetches a run at them
open-mouth. l'estrange.
2. course; motion.
want of motion, whereby the run of humours is stayed,
further putrefaction. bacon.
3. flow ; cadence.
he no where uses any softness, or any run of verses to
please the ear. broome on odyssey.
4. course; process.
5. way of management; uncontrolled course.
talk of some other subject; the thoughts of it make me
mad; our family must have their run. arbuthnot.
6. long reception ; continued success. -
it is impossible for detached papers to have a general run or
long continuance, if not diversified with humour. addison.
7. modish clamour.
you cannot but have observed, -what a violent run there is
among too many weak people against university education.
swift.
8. at the long run. in fine; in conclusion; at the end, ift
they produce ill-conditioned ulcers, for the most part mor-
tal in the long run of the disease. j/iseman
wickedness may prosper for a while, but at the long run, h:
that sets all knawes at work, will pay them. l'estrong,
shuffling may serve for a time, but truth will most ortainly
carry it at the long run. l'e/rang.
hath salihood proved at the long run more for the advan.
ment of his estate than truth : tillotson.
ru'n agate. n.s.. [corrupted from renegat, fr.] a fugitive;
rebel ; apostate. &gt;
the wretch compel'd, a runagate became,
and learn'd what ill a miser state doth breed. sidney
god bringeth the prisoners out of captivity; but lettetho.
runagates continue in scarceness. psalm lxviii. 6.
i dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
more noble than that runagate to your bed. shakes.
as cain, after he had slain abel, had no certain abidin, .
so the jews, after they had crucified the son of god, becam.
runagates. raleigh's history of the //orld.
ru'n away, n.s. [run and away.] one that flies from danger;
one who departs by stealth; a fugitive.
come at once, **
for the close night doth play the runaway, -
and we are staid for. - shakespeare.
thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
speak in some bush; where dost thou hide thy head shak.
ru'ndle, n. s. scorrupted from roundle, of round.] -
i. a round ; a step of a ladder,
the angels did not fly, but mounted the ladder by degrees;
we are to consider the several steps and rundles we are to ascend
by. duppa.
2. a peritrochium ; something put round an axis.
the third mechanical faculty, stiled axis in peritrochio, con-
sists of an axis or cylinder, having a rundle about it, wherein are
fastened divers spokes, by which the whole may be turned
round. - i/ilkins's mathematical magick.
ru'ndlet. m. s. [perhaps rumlet or roundlet.] a small barrel.
set a rundlet of verjuice overagainst the sun in summer, to
see whether it will sweeten. bacon's natural history.
rung. pret. and part. pass of ring.
the heav'ns and all the constellations rung. amilton.
ru'nnel. m. s. [from run.] a rivulet; a small brook. -
with murmur loud, down from the mountain's fide,
a little runnel tumbled neere the place. fairfax,
ru'nner. m. s. [from run.] *
1. one that runs. -
2. a racer. *
fore-spent with toil, as runners with a race,
i lay me down a little while to breathe.
here those that in the rapid course delight,
the rival runners without order stand.
3. a messenger.
to tonson or lintot his lodgings are better known than
to the runners of the post-office. swift to pope.
4. a shooting sprig.
in every root there will be one runner, which hath little
buds on it, which may be cut into. amortimer.
5. one of the stones of a mill.
the mill goes much heavier by the stone they call the run-
ner, being so large. martimer.
6. [erythropus.] a bird. ains.
ru(nnet. m. s. (serunnen, sax. coagulated.] a liquor made by
steeping the stomach of a calf in hot water, and used to coagu-
late milk for curds and cheese. it is sometimes written rennet.
the milk of the fig hath the quality of runnet to gather
cheese. bacon's natural history.
it coagulates the blood, as runnet turns milk. more.
the milk in the stomach of calves, coagulated by the run-
met, is rendered fluid by the gall in the duodenum. arbuthnot.
ru’nning. adj. kept for the race.
he will no more complain of the frowns of the world, or a
small cure, or the want of a patron, than he will complain of
the want of a laced coat, or a running-horse. law.
ru'nnion, n.s. [regnant, fr. scrubbing...] a paltry scurvy wretch.
you witch you poulcat you runnion / shakesp.
ru nt. n. s. [runte, in the teutonick diale&amp;s, signifies a bull or
cow, and is used in contempt by us for small cattle; as asīl,
the welsh term for a horse, is used for a worthless horse.]
any animal small below the natural growth of the kind.
reforming tweed
hath sent us runts even of her church's breed. cleavelznd.
of tame pigeons, are croppers, carriers, and runts. /paston.
this overgrown runt has struck off his heels, lowered his
foretop, and contracted his figure. addison.
ruption. m. s. [ruptus, lat.] breach ; solution of continuity.
the plenitude of vessels or plethora causes an extravasation
of blood, by ruption or apertion. j/i/ man.
ru'pt ure. m. s. [rupture, fr. from ruptus, lat.]
1. the act of breaking ; state of being broken ; solution of
continuity.
sha#so.
dryden.
th’ egg,
bursting with kindly rupture, forth disclos'd,
their callow young. al z ston.
a lute
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">r u s :
r u. s
*
o
s
-
--
a lute flring will bear a hundred weight without rupture,
but at the same time cannot exert its elasticity. arbuthnot.
‘i he diets of infants ought to be extremely thin, such as
lengthen the fibres without rupture. arbuthnot.
2. a breach of peace; open hostility. * - -
when the parties, that divide the commonwealth, come
to a rupture, it seems every man's duty to chuse a side. swift.
3. burstenncss; hernia; preternatural eruption of the gut.
the rupture of the groin or scrotum is the most common
species of hernia. sharp's surgery.
we ru'pture. v. a. [from the noun..] to break; to burst;
to suffer disruption. …
the vessels of the brain and membranes, if ruptured, ab-
forb the extravasated blood. sharp's surgery.
ru'pru re won t. m. s. [hermiaria, lat..] a plant.
ru’ral. adj. [rural, fr. ruralis, from rura, lat 1 country;
existing in the country, not in cities; suiting the country ;
resembling the country.
lady, reserved to do pastor company honour,
joining your sweet voice to the rural musick of desert.
here is a rural fellow,
that will not be deny'd your highness' presence;
he brings you figs. shakesp. cymbeline.
we turn
to where the filver thames first rural grows. thomson.
rur a'll ty. { m. s. [from rural.] the quality of being
sid.
ru’r al ness. rural. idic7.
ru'r1colis r. m. s. [ruricola, lat.] an inhabitant of the
country. dic7.
rur1"genous. adj. [rura, and gigno, lat..] born in the
country. dic7.
ruse. m. s. [french.]. cunning; artifice; little stratagem;
trick; wile; fraud; deceit. a french word neither elegant
nor necessary.
i might here add much concerning the wiles and ruses,
which these timid creatures use to save themselves. ray,
rush. n.s. [juncus; rurc, saxon.]
1. a plant.
a rush hath a flower composed of many leaves, which are
placed orbicularly, and expand in form of a rose; from the
centre of which rises the pointal, which afterward becomes a
fruit or husk, which is generally three-cornered, opening into
three parts, and full of roundish seeds: they are planted
with great care on the banks of the sea in holland, in
order to prevent the water from washing away the earth; for
the roots of these rushes fasten themselves very deep in the
ground, and mat themselves near the surface, so as to hold
the earth closely together. miller.
he taught me how to know a man in love; in which cage
of rushes i am sure you are not prisoner. shakesp.
man but a rush against othello's breast,
and he retites. shakes. othello.
is supper ready, the house trimm’d, rushes strew’d, cobwebs
swept 3 shakesp. taming of the shrew.
your farm requites your pains;
though rushes overspread the neighb’ring plains.
2. any thing proverbially worthless.
not a rush matter, whether apes go on four legs or two.
l’estrange.
john bull's friendship is not worth a rush. arbuthnot.
rush-candle. m. s. [rush and candle.] a small blinking
taper, made by stripping a rush, except one small stripe of the
bark which holds the pith together, and dipping it in tallow.
be it moon or sun, or what you please;
and if you please to call it a rush-candle,
dryden.
henceforth it shall be so for me. shakespeare.
if your influence be quite dam’d up
with black usurping mists, some gentle taper,
though a rush-candle from the wicker hole
of some clay habitation, visit us. milton.
to rush. v. n. [hreopan, saxon.] to move with violence;
to go on with tumultuous rapidity.
gorgias removed out of the camp by night, to the end he
might rush upon the camp of the jews. 1 mac. iv. 2.
every one that was a warrior rushed out upon them. judith.
armies rush to battle in the clouds. amilton.
why wilt thou rush to certain death, and rage
in rash attempts beyond thy tender age,
betray’d by pious love dryden's wirgil.
desperate should he rush, and lose his life,
with odds oppress'd. dryden's afneis.
they will always strive to be good christians, but never
think it to be a part of religion, to rush into the office of
princes or ministers. spratt.
- you say, the sea
does with its waves fall backward to the west,
and, thence repell’d, advances to the east;
while this revolving motion does indure,
the deep must reel, and rush from shoar to shoar. blackm.
with a rushing sound th' assembly bend
diverse their steps. - - * pope's odyssey.
now sunk the sun from his aereal height,
and o'er the shaded billows ruso'd the night.
rush. m. s. [from the verb..] violent course.
. a gentleman of his train spurred up his horse, and with a
violent rush severed him from the duke. jwetton.
him while fresh and fragrant time . . .
cherisht in his golden prime, * *
the rush of death's unruly wave • *
swept him off into his grave.
pope.
cruel auster thither hy'd him, crosław.
and with the rush of one rude blast,
sham'd not spitefully to cast
all his leaves so fresh, so sweet. crosław,
ru's hy. adj. [from rush.]
1. abounding with rushes.
in rushy grounds, springs are found at the first spit. mort.
the timid hare to some lone seat - -
retir’d; the rushy fen or rugged furze. thomson,
2. made of rushes. - -
what knight like him could toss the rushy lance. tickel.
rusk. m. s. hard bread for stores. “
the lady sent me divers presents of fruits, sugar, and
rusk. - raleigh.
ru’s m.a. m. s. a brown and light iron substance, with half as
much quicklime steeped in water, the turkish women make
their psilothron, to take off their hair, grew
ru'sset. adj. [rousset, fr. ruffus, lat.] -
1. reddishly brown. such is the colour of apples called ruffet-
angs.
the morn, in ruffet mantle clad,
walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill. shał
our summer such a ruffet livery wears, akeso.
as in a garment often dy'd appears. dryden.
2. newton seems to use it for grey; but, if the etymology be
regarded, improperly. -
this white spot was immediately encompassed with a dark
grey or rust, and that dark grey with the colours of the first
iris. newton’s opticks.
3. coarse; homespun ; rustick. it is much used in descriptions
of the manners and dresses of the country, i suppose, because
it was formerly the colour of rustick dress: in some places,
the rusticks still die cloaths spun at home with bark, which
must make them ruffet. -
taffata phrases, silken terms precise,
figures pedantical: these summer flies
have blown me full of maggot ostentation:
henceforth my wooing mind shall be exprest
in russet yeas, and honest kersy noes.
ru'sset. n.s. country dress. see russet, adj.
the dorick dialeot has a sweetness in its clownishness, like
a fair shepherdess in her country russet. dryden.
ru'sset. : m. s. a name given to several sorts of pears or
ru’sset ing. s apples from their colour.
the ruffet pearmain is a very pleasant fruit, continuin
long on the tree, and in the conservatory partakes both of the
russeting and pearmain in colour and taste; the one side
being generally ruset, and the other streaked like a pear-
słasspeare.
maln. mortimer.
rust. m. s. snure, saxon.]
1. the red desquamation of old iron.
this iron began at the length to gather rus. hooker.
rust eaten pikes and swords in time to come,
when crooked plows dig up earth's fertile womb,
the husbandman shall oft discover. 44ay's pirgi'.
but pallas came in shape of rust, -
and 'twixt the spring and hammer thrust,
her gorgon shield, which made the cock
stand stiff, as 'twere transform'd to stock. hudibras.
my scymitar got some rust by the sea water. gulliver.
2. the tarnished or corroded surface of any metal.
by dint of sword his crown he shall increase,
and scour his armour from the ruff of peace. dryden.
3. loss of power by ina&amp;tivity.
4. matter bred by corruption or degeneration.
let her see thy sacred truths cleared from all rus? and dross
of human mixtures. king charles.
to rust. v. n. [from the noun.] -
1. to gather rust; to have the surface tarnished or corroded.
her fallow leas,
the darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory
doth rest upon, while that the culter ru/ls,
that should deracinate such savagery. shakesp. hen. v.
our armours now may ruff, our idle scymitars
hang by our sides for ornament, not use. dryden.
2. to degenerate in idleness.
must i ruft in egypt, never more
appear in arms, and be the chief of greece. dryden.
72 r u st. v. a.
1. to make rusty.
keep up your bright swords, for the dew will ro/? them.
shakoff. otheio.
2. to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">f u s
r y e
2. to impair by time or o: - -
ru'stical. adj. [rufficus, lat. ruffique, fr. 1 rough 3
savage; boisterous; brutal; rude.
on he brought me unto so bare a house, that it was the
picture of miserable happiness and rich beggary, served only
by a company of rustical villains, full of sweat and dust, not
one of them other than a labourer. , sidney.
this is by a rustical severity to banish all urbanity, whose
harmless and confined condition is consistent with religion.
brown's wulgar errours.
he confounds the finging and dancing of the satires with
the rustical entertainment of the first romans, dryden.
ru'stically. adv. [from rushital.] savagely; rudely ; in-
elegantly.
my brother jaques he keeps at school,
and report speaks goldenly of his profit;
for my part he keeps me rustically at home.
quintius here was born,
whose shining plough-share was in furrows worn,
met by his trembling wife, returning home,
and rustically joy'd, as chief of rome. dryden.
ru'sticalness. m. s. [from rustical.] the quality of being
rustical ; rudeness; savageness.
to ru'sticate. v. n. [rusticor, latin.] to refide in the country.
my lady scudamore, from having ru/icated in your com-
pany too long, pretends to open her eyes for the sake of see.
ing the sun, and to sleep because it is night. pope.
to ru'sticat e. v. a. to banish into the country.
i was deeply in love with a milliner, upon which l was
sent away, or, in the university phrase, rusticated for ever. speef.
rusticity. m. s. [rusticite, fr. rufficitas, from rufficus, lat.]
1. qualities of one that lives in the country; simplicity ; art-
lessness; rudeness; savageness.
there presented himself a tall, clownish, young man, who,
falling before the queen of the fairies, desired that he might
have the atchievement of any adventure, which, during the
feast, might happen; that being granted, he rested him on
the floor, unfit for a better place by his rusticity. spenser.
the sweetness and rufficity of a pastoral cannot be so well
exprest in any other tongue as in the greek, when rightly
mixt with the dorick diale&amp;t. addison.
this so general expence of their time would curtail the
ordinary means of knowledge, as 'twould shorten the oppor-
tunities of vice; and so accordingly an universal rufficity pre-
sently took place, and stopped not till it had over-run the
whole stock of mankind. woodward's natural history.
2. rural appearance.
ru'stick. adj. [roslicus, lat.]
1. rural; country.
by lelius willing missing was the odds of the iberian side,
and continued so in the next by the excellent running of a
knight, though fostered so by the muses, as many times the
very rustick people left both their delights and profits to harken
to his songs. sidney.
2. rude; untaught; inelegant.
an ignorant clown cannot learn fine language or a courtly
behaviour, when his rustick airs have grown up with him till
the age of forty. watts's logick.
3. brutal; savage.
my soul foreboded i should find the bow'r
of some fell monster, fierce with barb'rous pow'r ;
some rustick wretch, who liv'd in heav'n's despight,
shakesp.
contemning laws, and trampling on the right. pope.
4. artless; honest; simple.
5. plain; unadorned.
an altar flood, rustick, of grassy sord. milton.
with unguents smooth the polish'd marble shone,
where ancient neleus sat, a rustick throne. pope.
ru'stick. n.s. a clown; a swain; an inhabitant of the country.
as nothing is so rude and insolent as a wealthy rustick, all
this his kindness is overlooked, and his person most unwor-
thily railed at. south.
ru's riness. m. s. [from rusly..] the state of being rusty.
to ru'stle. v. n. [hnirolan, saxon.] to make a low con-
tinued rattle ; to make a quick succession of small noises.
he is coming; i hear the straw rustle. shakesp.
this life
is nobler than attending for a check;
richer, than doing nothing for a bauble;
prouder, than ruffling in unpaid-for silk. shakesp.
thick swarm’d, both on the ground, and in the air
brush'd with the hiss of ruffling wings. milton.
as when we see the winged winds engage,
rustling from ev’ry quarter of the sky,
north, east, and west, in airy swiftness vy. granville.
- all begin the attack;
fans clap, filks rustle, and tough whalebones crack. pope.
not less their number than the milk-white swans,
that o'er the winding of cyaster's springs,
stretch their long necks, and clap their ruffling wings. po.
ru'sty. adj. [from ruff.]
1. covered with rust; infected with rust.
after a long calm of peace, he was left engaged in a war
with a ruffy sword and empty purse. howel
part scour the rusly shields with seam, and part -
new grind the blunted ax. dryden's ænei.
2. impaired by inactivity.
hector, in his dull and long continued truce,
is rusly grown. shakesp. troilus and croft,
to rut. v. m. [ruit, fr.] to desire to come together. osel
of deer.
rut. n. j. [rst, fr.]
1. copulation of deer.
the time of going to rat of deer is in september; for that
they need the whole summer's feed to make them fit for ge-
neration: and if rain come about the middle of september
they go to rut somewhat the sooner. boo.
the ground hereof was the observation of this part in deer
after immoderate venery, and about the end of their 71st,
brown.
2, [route, fr.] the track of a cart wheel. .
from hills raine waters headlong fall,
that o eat huge ruts, which, met in one bed fill
a val
with such a confluence of streames, that on the mountaine
grounds
farre off, in frighted shepheards eares the bustling noise
rebounds, chapman,
ruth. n.s.. [from rue.]
1. mercy ; pity; tendeiness; forrow for the misery of another,
out of use.
o wretch of guests, said he, thy tale hath stirred
my mind to much ruth. chapman.
all ruth, compassion, mercy he forgot. fairfax.
she fair, he full of bashfulness and truth
lov'd much, hop'd little, and desired nought;
he durst not speak, by suit to purchase ruth. fairfax,
the better part with mary and with ruth
chosen thou hast; and they that overween,
and at thy growing virtues fret their spleen,
no anger find in thee, but pity and ruth. milton:
2. mifery; sorrow.
the britons, by maximilian laid way
with wretched miseries and woful ruth,
, were to those pagans made an open prey. spensor.
ru"th ful. adj. [ruth and full.] rueful; woful; sorrowful,
the inhabitants seldom take a ruthful and reaving expe.
rience of those harms, which infectious diseases carry with
them. carew's survey of cornwall.
ruth fully. adv. [from ruthful.]
1. wofully; sadly.
the flower of horse and foot, lost by the valour of the
enemy, ruthfully perished. anolles's history of the turf.
2. sorrowfully; mournfully.
help me, ye baneful birds, whose shrieking sound
is sign of dreary death, my deadly cries
most ruthfully to tune.
3. wofully. in irony.
by this minerva's friend berest
oileades of that rich bowl, and left his lips, nose, eyes
ruthfully smear'd. chapman’s iliad.
ruthless, adj. [from ruth.] cruel; pitiles; uncompas-
sionate; barbarous.
what is edward but a ruthies; sea
speyer's pastoral.
what clarence but a quicksand of deceit? shakesp.
the ruthles, flint doth cut my tender feet;
and when i start, the cruel people laugh. shakespeare.
his archers circle me; my reins they wound,
and ruthles; shed my gall upon the ground. sandys,
their rage the hostile powers restrain,
all but the ruthless monarch of the main. pope.
ruthlessness. n.s.. [from ruthless.] want of pity.
ruthlessly, adv. [from ruthles;..] without pity; cruelly;
barbarously.
rutti er. m. s. [routiere, fr.] a dire&amp;tion of the road or
course at sea.
ru’ttish. adj. [from rut..] wanton; libidinous; salacious;
lustful; lecherous.
that is an advertisement to one diana, to take heed of
the allurement of count rousillon, a foolish idle boy; but for
all that very ruttish. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
rye. m. s. snyxe, saxon.]
1. a coarse kind of bread corn.
between the acres of the rye,
these pretty country folks would lye. shakespeare.
rye is more acrid, laxative, and less nourishing than
wheat. a but not on aliments.
2. a disease in a hawk.
rye’o r ass. n.s. a kind of strong grass.
some sow ryegrass with the coin at michaclmas. mortimer.
s.
</p></div>

alphasectend
