
<p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">• l.
l.a. b
a liquid consonant, which preserves always the
same found in english. in the saxon it was aspi-
rated a play, leaf; plcepoix, lady.
at the end of a monosyllable it is always
6) doubled; as shall; still; full, except after a diph-
thong; as, fail; feel; veal; cool. in a word of more syl-
lables it is written single ; as, channel; canal; tendril. it is
sometimes put before e, and sounded feebly after it; as bible;
title.
l.a. interjecf. [corrupted by an effeminate pronunciation from
!o; unless it be the french la.] see; look; behold.
la you ! if you speak ill of the devil,
how he takes it at heart. shakesp. twelfth night.
la'bdanum. m. s. a resin, of a strong not unpleasant smell,
and an aromatic, but not agreeable taste. thisjuice exsudates
from a low spreading shrub in crete. hisl.
to labefy. v. a. [labofacia, latin.] to weaken; to im-
pair. dic7.
la/bel. m. s. [labellum, latin.]
1. a small flip or scrip of writing.
when wak'd, i found
this label on my bosom ; whose containing
1s so from sense in hardness, that i can
make no collection of it. shakespeare’s cymbeline.
2. any thing appendant to a larger writing. -
on the label of lead, the heads of st. peter and st. paul
are impressed from the papal seal. ayliffe's parergon.
3. [in law.] a narrow slip of paper or parchment affixed to a
deed or writing, in order to hold the appending seal. so also
any paper, annexed by way of addition or explication to any
will or testament, is called a label or codicil. harris.
god join'd my heart to romeo's; thou our hands;
and cre this hand by thee to romeo seal’d,
shall be the label to another deed,
or my true heart with treacherous revolt
turn to another, this shall slay them both. shakespeare.
la'bent. adj. [labens, lat.] sliding; gliding ; flipping. dici.
la/bial. a j. [labialis, latin.] "uttered by the lips.
the hebrews have assigned which letters are labial, which
dental, and which guttural. bacon's natural history.
some particular affection of sound in its passage to the lips,
will seem to make some composition in any vowel which is
labial. holder's elements of speech.
la/biated. adj. [labium, latin.] formed with lips.
la'biod ental. adj. [labium and dentalis.] formed or pro-
nounced by the co-operation of the lips and teeth.
the dental consonants are very easy; and first the labio-
dental; f, v, also the linguadentals, t h, d h holder.
labo'r.a.n.t. n. s. [laborans, lat.] a chemist. not in use.
i can shew you a sort of fixt sulphur, made by an indus-
trious laborant. ... boyle.
labor arory. m. s. [laboratoire, french.] a chemist's work-
ioonl.
it would contribute to the history of colours, if chemists
would in their laboratory take a heedful notice, and give us a
faithful account, of the colours observed in the steam of bodies,
either sublimed or distilled. boyle.
the flames of love will perform those miracles they of the
furnace boast of, would they employ themselves in this labo-
ratory. - decay ofpiety.
laborious. adj. [laborieux, french ; laboriosus, latin.]
1. diligent in work; assiduous. -
that which makes the clergy glorious, is to be knowing in
their professions, unspotted in their lives, active and laborious
in their charges, bold and resolute in opposing seducers, and
daring to look vice in the face ; and, lastly, to be gentle,
courteous, and compassionate to all. south.
a spacious cave within its farmost part,
was hew’d and fashion'd by laborious art,
through the hill's hollow sides. dryden.
to his laborious youth consum'd in war, -
and lasting age, adorn'd and crown'd with peace. prior.
2. requiring labour; tiresome ; not easy. -
do's thou love watchings, abstinence, and toil,
laborious virtues all learn them from cato. addison.
laboriously. adv. [from laborious.] with labour; with toil.
the folly of him, who pumps very laboriously in a ship, yet
neglects to stop the leak. decay of piety,
vol. ii.
l a b
i chuse laboriously to bear
a weight of woes, and breathe the vital air. pope,
lab9riousness. n.s. [from laborious.]
i. toilsomeness; difficulty.
the parallel holds in the gainlessness, as well as the solor:-
cusness of the work; those wretched creatures, buried in earth
and darkness, were never the richer for all the ore they dig-
ged ; no more is the insatiate miser. decay of pien.
2. diligence; affiduity.
labour. n.s. [labeur, french; labor, latin.]
1. the act of doing what requires a painful exertion of strength,
or wearisome perseverance; pains; toil; travail; work.
if i find her honest, i lose not my labour; if she be other-
wise, it is labour well bestowed. shakespeare.
i sent to know your faith, lest the tempter have tempted
you, and our labour be in vain. i thos. iii. 5.
2. work to be done. -
being a labour of so great difficulty, the exact performance
thereof we may rather wish than look for. hooker.
if you had been the wife of hercules
six of his labours you’d have done, and sav'd
your husband so much sweat. shakespeare's coriolanus.
3. exercise; motion with some degree of violence.
moderate labour of the body conduces to the preservation
of health, and curing many initial diseases; but the toil of the
mind destroys health, and generates maladies. harvey.
4. childbirth ; travail.
sith of womens alours thou hast charge,
and generation goodly doest enlarge,
incline thy will to affect our wishful vow. spensor,
not knowing 'twas my labour, i complain
of sudden shootings, and of grinding pain; ,
my throws come thicker, and my cries encreas'd,
which with her hand the conscious nurse suppress'd. dryd.
not one woman of two hundred dies in labour. graunt.
his heart is in continual labour; it even travails with the
obligation, and is in pangs ’till it be delivered. south's serm.
to l.a. bour. v. n. [laboro, latin.]
i. to toil; to act with painful effort.
when shall i come to th’ top of that same hill?
—you do climb up it now ; look how we labour. shakoff.
for your highness’ good i ever labour'd,
more than mine own. shakesp. hen. viii.
who is with him
—none but the fool, who labours to out-jest
his heart-struck injuries. shakesp. k. lear.
let more work belaid upon the men, that they may labour
therein. exod. v. 9.
he is so touch'd with the memory of her benevolence and
protection, that his soul labours for an expression to represent it.
notes on the odyssey.
epaphras saluteth you, always labouring fervently for you in
prayers, that ye may stand perfect. col. iv. 12.
2. to do work; to take pains. -
the matter of the ceremonies had wrought, for the most
part, only upon light-headed, weak men, whose satisfaction
was not to be laboured for. clarendon.
a labouring man that is given to drunkenness, shall not be
rich. ecclus xix. 1.
that in the night they may be a guard to us, and labour on
the day. neh. iv. 22.
as a man had a right to all he could employ his labour
upon, so he had no temptation to labour for more than he could
make use of. - locke.
3. to move with difficulty.
the stone that labours up the hill,
mocking the lab’rer's toil, returning still,
is love. granville,
4. to be diseased with. . [morbo laborare, latin.] not in use.
they abound with horse,
of which one want our camp doth only labour. b. johnson.
i was called to another, who in childbed laboured of an
ulcer in her left hip. wiseman.
5. to be in distress; to be pressed.
to this infernal lake the fury flies,
here hides her hated head, and frees the lab’ring skies. dryd.
trumpets and drums shall fright her from the throne,
as sounding cymbals aid the laboring moon. dryden's aur.
15 a this
;
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a c
l a c
this exercise will call down the favour of heaven upon
you, to remove those afflictions you now labour under from
you. j/ake's preparation for death.
6. to be in child-birth; to be in travail.
there lay a log unlighted on the earth,
when she was laboring in the throws of birth ;
for th' unborn chief the fatal sisters came,
and rais'd it up, and toss'd it on the flame. dryd. ovid.
here, like some furious prophet, pindar rode,
and seem'd to labour with th' inspiring god. pope.
to l.a. bou r. v. a.
1. to work at ; to move with difficulty; to form with labour;
to prosecute with effort.
to use brevity, and avoid much labouring of the work, is
to be granted to him that will make an abridgment. 2 mac.
had you requir'd my helpful hand,
th’ artificer and art you might command,
to labour arms for troy. dryden's afneid.
an eager desire to know something concerning him, has
occasioned mankind to labour the point, under these disadvan-
tages, and turn on all hands to see if there were any thing
left which might have the least appearance of information.
pope's essay on homer.
2. to beat; to belabour.
take, shepherd, take a plant of stubborn oak,
and labour him with many a sturdy stroak. dryden.
la b our e.r. m. s. [laboureur, french.]
i. one who is employed in coarse and toilsome work.
if a state run most to noblemen and gentlemen, and that
the husbandmen be but as their work-folks and labourers, you
may have a good cavalry, but never good stable foot. bacon.
the sun but seem'd the laborer of the year,
each waxing moon supply'd her wat'ry store,
to swell those tides, which from the line did bear
their brimful vessels to the belgian shore. dryden.
labourers and idle persons, children and striplings, old men
and young men, must have divers diets. arbuthnot.
not balmy sleep to laborers faint with pain,
not show’rs to larks, or sun-shine to the bee,
are half so charming, as thy fight to me. pope.
yet hence the poor are cloth'd, the hungry fed,
health to himself, and to his infants bread,
the lab’rer bears. pope.
the prince cannot say to the merchant, i have no need of
thee; nor the merchant to the labourer, i have no need of
thee. swift.
2. one who takes pains in any employment.
sir, i am a true labourer; i earn that i eat ; get that i
wear; owe no man hate; envy no man's happiness. shakesp.
the stone that labours up the hill,
mocking the lab’rer's toil, returning still,
is love. granville.
la'bou rsome. adj. [from labour.] made with great labour
and diligence. not in use.
forget
your laboursome and dainty trims, wherein
you made great jove angry. shakespeare's cymbeline.
he hath, my lord, by laboursome petition,
wrung from me my slow leave. shakspeare's hamlet.
la/bra. m. s. [spanish.] a lip. not used. hanmer.
word of denial in thy labras here;
word of denial, froth and scum thou liest. shakespeare.
la'byrinth. m. / [labyrint/as, latin.] a maze; a place
formed with inextricable windings.
- suffolk, stay;
thou may’s not wander in that labyrinth ;
there minotaurs, and ugly treasons lurk. shakespeare.
words, which would tear
the tender labyrinth of a maid's soft ear. donne.
my clamours tear
the ears soft labyrinth, and cleft the air. sandys.
the earl of essex had not proceeded with his accustomed
weariness and skill; but run into labyrinths, from whence he
could not disentangle himself. clarendon.
my soul is on her journey; do not now
divert, or lead her back, to lose herself
i' th' maze and winding labyrinths o' th' world. denham.
la c. m. s.
lac is usually distinguished by the name of a gum, but
improperly, because it is inflammabie and not soluble in water.
we have three sorts of it, which are all the product of the
same tree. 1. the stick lac. 2. the seed sac. 3. the shell
sac. authors leave us uncertain whether this drug belongs to
the animal or the vegetable kingdom. fiill.
lace. m. s. [lacet, french ; laqueus, latin.]
1. a string ; a cord.
there the fond fly entangled, struggled long,
himself to free thereout ; but all in vain :
for striving more, the more in lates strong
himself he tied, and wrapt his winges twain
in limy shares, the subtil loops among, speoser.
2. a share; a gin. -
the king had snared been in love's strong lace. fairfax.
3. a platted string, with which women fasten their clothes.
o! cut my lace, lest my heart cracking, it
break too.
doll ne'er was call'd to cut her lace,
or throw cold water in her face. swift.
4. ornaments of fine thread curiously woven.
our english dames are much given to the wearing of cost-
ly laces ; and, if they be brought from italy, they are in great
esteem.
5. textures of thread, with gold or filver.
he wears a stuff, whose thread is coarse and round,
but trimm'd with curious lace. herbert.
6. sugar. a cant word: now out of use.
if haply he the se&amp; pursues,
that read and comment upon news;
he takes up their mysterious face,
he drinks his coffee without lace. prior.
to lace. m. a. [from the noun.] -
1. to fasten with a string run through eilet holes.
i caused a fomentation to be made, and put on a laced sock,
by which the weak parts were strengthened. //seman.
at this, for new replies he did not stay,
but lar'd his crested helm, and strode away. dryden.
these glitt’ring spoils, now made the victor's gain,
he to his body suits; but suits in vain :
messapus’ helm he finds among the rest,
and laces on, and wears the waving crest. dryden.
like mrs. primly's great belly; she may lace it down be-
fore, but it burnishes on her hips. - congreve.
when jenny's stays are newly lac'd,
fair alma plays about her waist. prior.
2. to adorn with gold or filver textures sewed on.
it is but a night-gown in respect of yours; cloth of gold
and coats, and lac’d with silver. shakspeare.
3. to embellish with variegations.
look, love, what envious streaks
do lace the severing clouds in yonder east;
night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
stands tiptoe on the misty mountains tops.
then clap four slices of pilaster on't,
that, lac'd with bits of rustic, makes a front. pope.
4. to beat; whether from the form which l’e/irange uses, or
by corruption of lash.
go you, and find me out a man that has no curiosity at
all, or i'll lace your coat for ye. l'astrange.
laced mutton. an old word for a whore.
ay, sir, i, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her a lac'd
mutton, and she gave me nothing for my labour. shakop.
la’ce man. m. s. [lace and man.] one who deals in lace.
i met with a nonjuror, engaged with a laceman, whether
the late french king was most like augustus caesar, or nero.
addison's spectator.
la cer able. adj. [from lacerate.] such as may be torn.
since the lungs are obliged to a perpetual commerce with
the air, they must necessarily lie open to great damages, be-
cause of their thin and lacerable composure. harvey.
to la cerate. v. a. [lacero, latin.] to tear; to rend;
to separate by violence.
and my sons lacerate and rip up, viper-like, the womb that
brought them forth. howel's england's tears.
the heat breaks through the water, so as to lacerate and list
up great bubbles too heavy for the air to buoy up, and causeth
boiling. derham's physico theology.
here lacerated friendship claims a tear. pa. of human looshes.
laceration. m. s. [from lacerate.] the act of tearing or
rending ; the breach made by tearing.
the effects are, extension of the great vessels, compression
of the lesser, and lacerations upon small causes. arbuthnot-
la’ce rative. adj. [from laterate.] tearing; having the
power to tear.
some depend upon the intermperament of the part ulcerated,
others upon the continual afflux of lacerative humours.
harvey on consumptions.
la’c hry mal. adj. [lachrymal, french.j generating tears.
it is of an exquisite sense, that, upon any touch, the tears
might be squeezed from the lachrymal glands, to wash and
clean it. chyne's philosophical principles.
la chry mary. adj. [lachryma, latin.] containing tears.
how many dresses are there for each particular deity what
a variety of shapes in the ancient urns, lamps, and lachrymary
vessels 2 addison.
lachry mation. n.s.. [from lachryma.] the aet of weep-
ing, or shedding tears. -
la chry matory. m. s. [lachrimatoire, fr.] a vessel in which
tears are gathered to the honour of the dead.
laci'n iated. adj. [from lacinia, lat..] adorned with fringes
and borders.
to lack. v. a. [lecken, to lesson, dutch..] to want; to
need ; to be without.
every good and holy desire, though it lack the form, hath
notwithstanding in itself the substance, and with o, the
qi &amp; c
shakspeare.
bacon.
shakes care.
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a c
l a d
force of prayer, who regardeth the very moanings, groans,
and sighs of the heart. ooker.
a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness;
thou shalt not lack any thing in it. deut. viii. 9.
one day we hope thou shalt bring back,
dear bolingbroke, the justice that we lack. paniel.
intreat they may ; authority they lack. daniel.
to lack. v. n.
1. to be in want.
the lions do lack and suffer hunger.
2. to be wanting.
peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous; wilt
thou destroy all the city for lack of five genosis, viii. 28.
there was nothing lacking to them : david recovered all.
common prayer.
i sam. xxx. 19.
that which was lacking on your part, they have supplied.
i cor. xvi. 17.
lack. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. want ; need ; failure.
in the scripture there neither wanteth any thing, the lack
whereof might deprive us of life. hooker.
many that are not mad
have sure more lack of reason. shakespeare.
he was not able to keep that place three days, for lack of
victuals. knolles.
the trenchant blade, toledo trusty,
for want of fighting was grown rusty,
and eat into itself, for lack
of somebody to hew and hack. hudibras.
2. lack, whether noun or verb, is now almost obsolete.
lack brain. m. s. [lack and brain..] one that wants wit.
what a lackbrain is this ; our plot is as good a plot as ever
was laid. shakespeare's henry iv.
la'cker. m. s. a kind of varnish, which, spread upon a white
substance, exhibits a gold colour.
to la cker. v. a. [from the noun..] to smear over with
lacker.
what shook the stage, and made the people stare :
cato's long wing, fiower'd gown, and lacker'd chair. pope.
i.a.'ckey. n.s. [lacquais, fr.] an attending servant; a foot-
boy.
y they would shame to make me
wait else at door : a fellow counsellor,
'mong boys, and grooms, and sackeys / shakes. hen. viii.
though his youthful blood be fir’d with wine,
he's cautious to avoid the coach and six,
and on the lackeys will no quarrel fix. dryden's juvenal.
lacqueys were never so saucy and pragmatical as they are
now-a-days. aldison's spectator.
to la ckey. v. a. [from the noun..] to attend servilely. i
know not whether milton has used this word very properly.
this common body,
like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
goes to, and back, lacquying the varying tide,
to rot itself with motion. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
so dear to heav'n is saintly chastity, -
that when a soul is found sincerely so,
a thousand liveried angels lackey her,
driving far off each thing of sin and guilt. milton.
to la ckey. v. n. to act as a foot-boy; to pay servile at-
tendance. -
oft have i servants seen on horses ride,
the free and noble lacquey by their side. sandys.
our italian translator of the aencis is a foot poet ; he lackeys
by the side of virgil, but never mounts behind him. dryden.
la cklin en. adj. [lack and linen j waiting shirts.
you poor, base, rascally, cheating, lacklinen mate; away,
you mouldy rogue, away. shakespeare's h.nry iv.
la’cklustr e. adj. [lack and lu/?re.] wanting brightness.
and then he drew a dial from his poke,
and looking on it with lacklusore eye,
says yery wisely, it is ten a clock. shakespeare.
laconick. adj. [lacenicus, lat. laconique, fr.] short ;
brief; from lacones, the spartans, who used few words.
i grow laconick even beyond laconicism; for sometimes i re-
turn only yes, or no, to questionary or petitionary epistles of
half a yard long. pope to swift.
la con is m. m. s. slaconisine, fr. laconisinus, lat.] a concise
stile: called by pope laconicism. see laconick.
as the language of the face is universal, so it is very com-
prehensive: no laconison can reach it. it is the short-hand of
the mind, and crowds a great deal in a little room.
collier of the aspeci.
laco'n1c ali.y. adv. [from lacznick.] briefly ; concisely.
alexander nequam, a man of great learning, and desirous
to enter into religion there, writ to the abbot laconically.
camden's remains.
la’ct ary. adj. [la'īs, lat.] milky; full of juice like milk.
from laciary, or milky plants, which have a white and
lecteous juice dispersed through every part, there arise flowers
blue and yellow. brown's wulgar errouri.
lact ary. m. s. ['adarium, i at..] a dairy house.
lact ation. m. j. [iaolo, lat..] the act or time of giving
suck. .
la’ct e.a.l. adj. [from lac, lat.] milky; conveying chyle of
the colour of milk.
as the food passes, the chyle, which is the nutritive part,
is separated from the excrementitious by the local veins ; and
from thence conveyed into the blood. locke.
la cre al. m. s. the vessel that conveys chyle.
the mouths of the lacteals may permit aliment, acrino-
nious or not sufficiently attenuated, to enter in people of lax
constitutions, whereas their sphineters will shut against them
in such as have strong fibres. arbuthnot.
lacte'ous. adj. [lacieus, lat.]
1. milky. -
though we leave out the losseous circle, yet are there more
by four than philo mentions. brown's pulgar errours.
2. lacteal ; conveying chyle.
the lungs are suitable for respiration, and the latteous ves-
sels for the reception of the chyle. bently.
laci. escen ce. m. s. [lacies.o, lat.] tendency to milk, or
milky colour.
this lacicscence does commonly ensue, when wine, being
impregnated with gums, or other vegetable concretions, that
abound with sulphureous corpuscles, fair water is suddenly
poured upon the solution. boyle on colours.
lact esco nt. adj. [lacioscens, lat.] producing milk, or a
white juice.
amongst the pot-herbs are some laos:ent plants, as lettuce
and endive, which contain a wholesome juice. arbuthnot.
lact 1 ferous. adj. [lac and fero.] what conveys or brings
milk.
he makes the breasts to be nothing but glandules, made up
of an infinite number of little knots, each whereof hath its
excretory vessel, or la:/iferous duct. ray on the creation.
la d. m. s. [leobe, saxon, which commonly signifies people,
but sometimes, says mr. lye, a boy.]
1. a boy; a stripling, in familiar language.
e were
two lads, that thought there was no more behind,
but such a day to-morrow as to-day,
and to be boy eternal. shakes care’s ip inter’s tale.
the poor lad who wants knowledge, must set his inven-
tion on the rack, to say something where he knows nothing.
locke.
too far from the ancient forms of teaching several good
grammarians have departed, to the great detriment of such
lads as have been removed to other schools. ji airs.
2. a boy ; a young man, in pastoral language.
for grief whereof the lad would after joy,
but pin'd away in anguish, and self-will'd annoy. speisr.
- the shepherd lad,
whose off pring on the throne of judah sat
so many ages. milion.
lalder. m. s. [plabne, saxon.]
1. a frame made with steps placed between two upright pieces.
whose compost is rotten, and carried in time,
and spread as it should be, thrift's laddr may climb. toff.
now streets grow throng'd, and busy as by day,
some run for buckets to the hallow'd quire;
some cut the pipes, and some the engines play,
and some more bold mount leisers to the fire. dryden.
easy in words thy stile, in sense subline;
'tis like the ladder in the patriarch's dream,
its foot on earth, its height above the skies. prior.
i saw a stage erected about a foot and a half from the
ground, capable of holding four of the inhabitants with two
or three ladders to mount it. gulliver's travels.
2. any thing by which one climbs.
then took she help to her of a servant near about her
husband, whom she knew to be of a hasty ambition; and
such a one, who wanting true sufficiency to raise him, would
make a ladier of any mischief. - sidney.
i must climb her window,
the ladder made of cords. shakespeare.
northumberland, thou adder, by the which
my cousin bolingbroke ascends my throne. shak's care.
lowliness is young ambition’s ladder,
whereto the climber upward turns his face. shakespeare.
3. a gradual rise. -
endow’d with all these accomplishments, we leave him in
the full career of success, mounting fast towards the top of the
ladder ecclesiastical, which he hath a fair probability to reach.
swift.
lade. m. s.
lade is the mouth of a river, and is derived from the saxon
labe, which signifies a purging or discharging ; there being a
discharge of the waters into the sea, or into some greater river.
* gilson's camden.
to la dr. v. a. preter. laded; and part, passive, laded or ladon.
{from placen, saxon.] it is now commonly written ka "r
1. q
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- l a d
l a i
1. to load; to freight; to burthen. -
and they laded their afies with corn, and departed thence.
genesis, xlii. 26.
the experiment which sheweth the weights of several bo-
dies in comparison with water, is of use in lading of ships, and
she wing what burthen they will bear. - bacon.
the vessels, heavy laden, put to sea
with prosp’rous winds; a woman leads the way. dryden.
though the peripatetick doctrine does not satisfy, yet it is
as easy to account for the difficulties he charges on it, as for
those his own hypothesis is laden with. locke.
2. [platan, to draw, saxon.] to heave out ; to throw out.
he chides the sea that sunders him from them,
saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way. shakoffeare.
they never let blood; but say, if the pot boils too fast
there is no need of lading out any of the water, but only of
taking away the fire; and so they allay all heats of the blood
by abstinence, and cooling herbs. temple.
if there be springs in the slate marl, there must be help to
lade or pump it out. mortimer.
lading.. n. s. [from lade.] weight; burthen.
some we made prize, while others burnt and rent
with their rich lading to the bottom went. jwaller.
the storm grows higher and higher, and threatens the
utter loss of the ship: there is but one way to save it, which
is, by throwing its rich lading overboard. south.
it happened to be foul weather, so that the mariners cast
their whole lading overboard to save themselves. l’estrange.
why should he sink where nothing seem'd to press
his lading little, and his ballast less. swift.
la'dle. m. s. [placble, saxon, from plaban; leaugh, erse.]
1. a large spoon; a vessel with a long handle, used in throwing
out any liquid from the vessel containing it.
some stirr'd the molten ore with lades great. spensor.
when the materia's of glass have been kept long in fusion, .
the mixture casts up the superfluous salt, which the workmen
take off with ladles. boyle.
a ladle for our silver dish
is what i want, is what i wish. prior.
2. the receptacles of a mill wheel, into which the water falling
turns it.
la'dle-ful. m. s. ['adle and full.]
if a footman be going up with a dish of soup, let the cook
with a ladle-ful dribble his livery all the way up stairs. swift.
lat)y. m. s. [plaspb13, saxon.]
1. a woman of high rank: the title of lady properly belongs to
the wives of knights, of all degrees above them, and to the
daughters of earls, and all of higher ranks.
i am much afraid, my lady, his mother, play’d false with a
smith. shakespeare's merchant of verona.
i would thy husband were dead; i would make thee my
lady. i your lady, sir john ; alas, i should be a pitiful
lady. shakespeare's merry wives of i/indsor.
i am sorry my relation to so deserving a lady, should be an
occasion of her danger and affliction. . king charles.
2. an illustrious or eminent woman.
o foolish fairy's son, what fury mad
hath thee incens’d to haste thy doleful fate *
were it not better i that lady had,
than that thou hadst repented it too late * spensor.
before homer's time this great lady was scarce heard of. ral.
may every lady an evadne prove,
that shall divert me from aspasia's love. jwaller.
shou'd i shun the dangers of the war,
with scorn the trojans wou'd reward my pains,
and their proud ladies with their sweeping trains. dryden.
we find on medals the representations of ladies, that have
given occasion to whole volumes on the account only of a face.
addison on ancient medals.
3. a word of complaisance used of women. -
say, good caesar,
that i some lady trifles have reserv’d,
immoment toys, things of such dignity
as we greet modern friends withal. shakes. ant, and cl.
i hope i may speak of women without offence to the ladies.
guardian.
4. mistress, importing power and dominion; as, lady of the
nian or.
of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
with shadowy forests, and with champaigns rich'd,
with plenteous rivers, and wide-skirted meads,
we make thee lady. shakespeare's king lear.
la'dy-be dstraw. m. s. [gallium.] it is a plant of the stel-
late kind. miller.
la'dy-bird.
la'dy-cow. - n. s. a small red inse&amp;t vaginopennous.
la idy-fly.
fly lady-bird, north, south, or east or west,
fly where the man is found that i love best. gay.
this lady-fly i take from off the grass,
whose spotted back might scarlet red surpass. gay.
la’dy-day. m. s. [lady and day.] the day on which the an-
nunciation of the blessed virgin is celebrated.
la'dy-like. adj. [lady and like..] soft ; delicate ; elegant.
her tender constitution did declare,
too lady-like a long fatigue to bear. dryd n.
la/dy-mantl e. m. s. [alchimilia.] a plant. 44iler.
ladyship. m. s. [from lady.) the title of a lady.
madam, he sends your ladyslip this ring.
if they be nothing but mere statesmen,
your ladyship shall observe their gravity,
and their reservedness, their many cautions,
fitting their persons. ben. johnson's catiline.
i the wronged pen to please,
make it my humble thanks express
sha's care.
unto your ladyship in these. jvaller.
'tis galla; let her ladyship but peep. dryden's juv.
la'dy's-slipp er. m. s. scalceolus.] a plant. a4 ller.
lady’s-smock. m. s. [cardamine. j a plant. 41iller.
when dazies pied, and violets blue,
and lady's snock; all silver white,
do paint the meadows much bedight. shakesheare.
see here a boy gathering lilies and lady-snooks, and there a
girl cropping culverkeys and cowslips, all to make garlands.
jp alton's angler.
l.a.g. adj. [lanx, saxon, long ; lagg, swedish, the end.]
1. coming behind ; falling short.
i could be well content
to entertain the lag end of my life
with quiet hours. shakes care's henry iv.
the flowest footed who come lag, supply the show of a
rear-ward. carew's survey.
i am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
lag of a brother. shakespeare's king lear.
2. sluggish ; slow ; tardy. it is out of use, but retained in
scotland.
he, poor man, by your first order died,
and that a winged mercury did bear;
some tardy cripple had the countermand,
that came too lag to see him buried. shakes. rich. iii.
we know your thoughts of us, that laymen are
lag souls, and rubbish of remaining clay,
which heav'n, grown weary of more perfeot work,
set upright with a little puff of breath,
and bid us pass for men. dryden's don selasian.
3. last; long delayed.
pack to their old play-fellows; there i take
they may, cum privilgio, wear away
the log end of their lewdness, and be laugh’d at.
- shakosheart.
lag. m. s.
1. the lowest class; the rump; the fig end.
the rest of your foes, o gods, the senators of athens, toge-
ther with the common lag of people, what is amiss in them,
make suitable for destruction. shakespeare.
2. he that comes last, or hangs behind.
the last, the lag of all the race. dryden's jorg.
what makes my ram the lag of all the flock. pope.
to l.a.g. v. n.
1. to loiter; to move slowly.
she pass'd, with fear and fury wild;
the nurse went lagging after with the child. drydon.
the remnant of his days he safely past,
nor found they lagg'd too slow, nor flow'd too fast. prior.
2. to stay behind ; not to come in.
behind her far away a dwarf did log.
i shall not lag behind, nor err
the way, thou leading. a sistan.
the knight himself did after ride,
leading crowdero by his fide,
and tow'd him, if he lagg'd behind,
like boat against the tide and wind.
if he finds a fairy lag in light,
he drives the wretch before, and lashes into night. dryd.
she hourly press'd for something new ;
ideas came into her mind
so fast, his lessons lagg’d behind. swift.
la'gger. m. s. [from log.] a loiterer; an idler; one that
loiters behind.
la'ical. adj. [laique, fr. laicus, lat. ago..] belonging to
the laity, or people as distinet from the clergy.
in all ages the clerical will flatter as well as the laical.
camden.
fairy queen.
hudibras.
laid. preterite participle of lay.
money laid up for the relief of widows and fatherless chil-
dren. 2 mac. iii. io.
a scheme which was writ some years fince, and laid by to
be ready on a fit occasion. swift.
lain. preterite participle of lye.
mary seeth two angels in white, fitting, the one at the
head, and the other at the sect, where the body of jesus had
lain. john, xx. 12.
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a m
l a m
the parcels had lain by, before they were opened, between
four and five years. boyle.
l.a. r. m. s. [lai, in french, signifies a wild sow, or a forest :
the derivation is easy in either sense ; or from loger, dutch.
the couch of a boar, or wild beast.
out of the ground uprose,
as from his lair, the wild beast, where he wons
in forest wild, in thicket, brake or den. milton.
but range the forest, by the silver side
of some cool stream, where nature shall provide
green grass and satt'ning clover for your fare,
and mossy caverns for your noon-tide lair. dryd. wirg.
la ird. m. s. [playofib, saxon.] the lord of a manor in the
scottish diale&amp;t.
shrive but their title, and their moneys poize,
a laird and twenty pence pronounc'd with noise,
when constru’d but for a plain yeoman go,
and a good sober two pence, and well so.
la 1 ty. n.s. [2.2.62.]
1. the people, as distinguished from the clergy.
an humble clergy is a very good one, and an humble laity
too, since humility is a virtue that equally adorns every station
of life. swift.
2. the state of a layman.
the more usual cause of this deprivation is a mere laity, or
want of holy orders. ayliffe's parergon.
lake.. n. s. [lac, fr. lacus, lat.]
1. a large diffusion of inland water.
he adds the running springs and standing lakes,
and bounding banks for winding rivers makes. dryden.
2, small plash of water.
3. a middle colour, betwixt ultramarine and vermilion, yet it
is rather sweet than harsh. it is made of cochineal. dryden.
lamb. m. s. [lamb, gothick and saxon.]
1. the young of a sheep.
i'm young; but something
you may deserve of him through me, and wisdom,
to offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb,
t’appease an angry god. shakespeare's macbeth.
the lamb, thy riot dooms to bleed to day,
had he thy knowledge would he skip and play pope.
2. typically, the saviour of the world.
thou lamb of god that takest away the sons of the world,
have mercy upon us. common prayer.
la/mek in. n.s.. [from lamb.] a little lamb.
*twixt them both they not a lambkin left,
and when lambs fail'd, the old sheeps lives they rest.
hubberd's tale,
cleavesand.
pan, thou god of shepherds all,
which of our tender lamb{ins takest keep. spens. paso.
clean as young lambkins, or the goose's down,
and like the goldfinch in her sunday gown. gay.
la/m.bat 1 v e. adj. [from lamb’, to lick.] taken by licking.
in affections both of lungs and weazon, physicians make
use of syrups, and lambative medicines. brown.
la/m.b.a fiv e. m. s. a medicine taken by licking with the
tongue.
i stitch'd up the wound, and let him blood in the arm, ad-
vising a lambative, to be taken as necessity should require.
jwiseman's surgery.
1. a mbs-wool. n.s. [lamb and wool.] ale mixed with the pulp
of roasted apples.
a cup of lambs-wool they drank to him there.
song of the king and the miller.
la'mbent. adj. [lambent, lat.] playing about 3 gliding over
without harm.
from young iulus head
a lambent flame arose, which gently spread
around his brows, and on his temples fed. dryden.
his brows thick fogs, instead of glories, grace,
and lambent dulness played around his face. dryden.
lam do1'dal. m. s. [x3oz and soo’.] having the form of
the letter lamda or a.
the course of the longitudinal sinus down through the
'middle of it, makes it adviseable to trepan at the lower part
of the os parietale, or at least upon the lamdoidal future.
sharp's surgery.
jame. adj. [laam, lama, saxon; lam, dutch..]
1. crippled ; disabled in the limbs.
who reproves the lame, mutt go upright. i)aniel.
a greyhound, of a mouse colour, lame of one leg, belongs
to a lady. arbuthnot and pope.
2. hobbling; not smooth: alluding to the feet of a verse.
cur authors write,
whether in prose, or verse, ’tis all the same ;
the prose is fustian, and the numbers lame. dryden.
3. imperfect; unsatisfactory. -
shrubs are formed into sundry shapes, by moulding them
within, and cutting them without ; but they are but lame
things, being too small to keep figure. bacon.
swift, who could neither fly nor hide,
came sneaking to the chariot side 3
vol. ii.
*
and offer'd many a lame excuse,
he hever meant the least abuse. *...f6.
to lame. v. a. [from the adjective.] to make same; to
cripple.
i never heard of such another encounter, which fore report
to follow it, and undoes description to do it. soare.
the son and heir
affronted once a cock of noble kind, o
and either lam'd his legs, or struck him blind. dryden.
if you happen to let the child fall, and lame it, never con-
fess. swift.
loaro. adj. [lamella, lat..] covered with films or
plates.
the lamellated antennae of some inse&amp;ts are surprisingly beau-
tiful, when viewed through a microscope. derham.
la'mel y. adj. [from lame.]
i. like a cripple; without natural force or activity.
those muscles become callous, and, having yielded to the
extension, the patient makes shift to go upon it, though
lamely. - wiseman's surgery.
2. imperfeotly ; without a full or complete exhibition of all the
parts.
look not ev'ry lineament to see,
some will be cast in shades, and some will be -
so lamely drawn, you scarcely know 'tis she. drydei.
3. weakly ; unsteadily; poorly.
l.a. m. en ess. m. s. [from lame.
1. the state of a cripple; loss or inability of limbs.
let blindness, lameness come; are legs and eyes
of equal value to so great a prize 2 e.
lamen's kept me at home. digby to pope.
2. imperfection ; weakness. -
if the story move, or the agor help the lamenes of it with
his performance, either of these are sufficient to effect a present
liking. dryden’s spanish fryar.
to lam e/nt. v. n. [lamentor, lat. lamenter, fr. j. to mourn 3
to wail ; to grieve ; to express sorrow. -
the night has been unruly where we lay :
and chimneys were blown down: and, as they say,
lamentings heard i' th' air, strange screans of death.
o shakespeare.
ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice. john.
jeremiah lamented for josiah, and all the singing-men and
women spake of josiah in their lamentations. 2 chron,
far less i now lament for one whole world
of wicked sons destroy'd, than i rejoice
for one man found so perfeot and so just,
that god vouchsafes to raise another world
from him. milion.
7. lam etn.f. o. a. to bewail; to mourn; to bemoan ; to
express sorrow for.
as you are weary of this weight,
reft you, while i lament king henry's corse. shakespeare.
the pair of sages praise;
one pity'd, one contemn'd the woful times,
one laugh'd at follies, one lamented crimes. dryden.
lament. m. s. [lamentum, lat. from the verb.]
1. sorrow audibly expressed ; lamentation; grief uttered in
complaints or cries.
we, long ere our approaching, heard within
noise, other than the sound of dance, or song !
torment, and loud lament, and furious rage. milton.
the loud laments arise
of one distress'd, and mastiffs mingled cries. dryden,
2. expression of sorrow.
to add to your laments,
wherewith you now bedev king henry's hearse,
i must inform you of a dismal fight. shakspeare.
la'mentable, adj. [lamentabilis, lat, lamentable, fr. from
lament.] - - .
1. to be lamented; causing sorrow.
the lamentable change is from the best ;
the worst returns to laughter.
2. mournful; sorrowful; expressing sorrow.
a lamentable tune is the sweetest musick to a woful mind.
sidney.
shakespeare.
the victors to their vessels bear the prize,
and hear behind loud groans, and lamentable cries. dryden.
3. miserable, in a ludicrous or low sense ; pitiful; despicable.
this bishop, to make out the disparity between the hea-
thens and them, flies to this lamentable refuge. stillingfieet.
la'mentably. adv. [from lamentable.]
1. with expressions or tokens of sorrow ; mournfully.
the matter in itself lamentable, lamentably expressed by the
old prince, greatly moved the two princes to compassion.
- sidney.
2. so as to cause sorrow.
our fortune on the sea is out of breath,
and finks most lamentably. shakes. ant. and cleopatra.
3. pitifully ; despicably.
la mentation. m. s. [lamentatio, lat.] expression of for-
row ; audible grief.
15 b be’t
oo
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a n
l a n
:
;
.
be’t lawful that i invocate thy ghost, -
to hear the lamentations of poor anne. shakes. r. iii.
his sons buried him, and all israel made great lamentation
for him. . - i mac. ii. io.
lame'n ter. m. s. [from lament.] he who mourns or laments.
such a complaint good company must pity, whether they
think the lamenter ill or not. spe&amp;lator.
la'mentine. m. s. a fish called a sea-cow or manatee, which
is near twenty feet long, the head resembling that of a cow,
and two short feet, with which it creeps on the shallows and
rocks to get food; but has no fins : the flesh is commonly
eaten. bailey.
la mina. m. s. [lat.] thin plate; one coat laid over an-
other.
la'minated. adj. [from lamina.] plated: used of such bodies
whose contexture discovers such a disposition as that of plates
lying over one another.
from the apposition of different coloured gravel arises, for
the most part, the laminated appearance of a stone. sharp.
to lamm. v. a. to beat soundly with a cudgel. dics.
lammas. n. s. [this word is said by bailey, i know not on
what authority, to be derived from a custom, by which the
tenants of the archbishop of york were obliged, at the time
of mass, on the first of august, to bring a lamb to the altar.
in scotland they are said to wean lambs on this day. it may
else be corrupted from lattermath.] the first of august.
in 1578 was that famous lammas day, which buried the re-
putation of don john of austria. bacon.
lamp. n. s. [lampe, fr. lampas, lat.]
i. a light made with oil and a wick.
o thievish night,
why should'st thou, but for some felonious end,
in thy dark lanthorn thus ciose up the stars
that nature hung in heaven, and fill'd their lamps
with everlasting oil, to give due light
to the misled and lonely traveller milton.
in lamp furnaces i used spirit of wine instead of oil, and the
same flame has melted foliated gold. - boyle.
2. any kind of light, in poetical language, real or metapho-
rical.
thy gentle eyes send forth a quick’ning spirit,
and feed the dying lamp of life within me. rowe.
cynthia, fair regent of the night,
o may thy filver lamp from heaven's high bow'r,
direet my footsteps in the midnight hour. gay.
la'mpass. n.s. [lampas, fr.] a lump of flesh, about the
bigness of a nut, in the roof of a horse's mouth, which rises
above the teeth. farrier’s dic7.
his horse possest with the glanders, troubled with the lam-
poss, infected with the fashions. shakespeare.
la/mpblack. m. s. [lamp and black.] it is made by holding a
torch under the bottom of a bason, and as it is furred striking
it with a feather into some shell, and grinding it with gum
water. peacham on drawing.
la/mping, adj. [azur:13 ww.] shining; sparkling. not used.
happy lines, on which with starry light -
those lamping eyes will deign sometimes to look. spenser.
lampo'on. m. s. [bailey derives it from lampons, a drunken
song. it imports, let us drink, from the old french lamper,
and was repeated at the end of each couplet at carousals.
trev.] a personal satire; abuse ; censure written not to re-
form but to vex.
they say my talent is satire ; if so, it is a fruitful age:
they have sown the dragon's teeth themselves, and it is but
just they should reap cach other in lampoons. dryden.
make satire a lampoon. pope.
to lam po'on. v. a. [from the noun..] to abuse with perso-
nal satire.
lampo'o ner. n.s.. [from lampoon.] a scribbler of personal
satire.
we are naturally displeased with an unknown critick, as
the ladies are with a lampooner, because we are bitten in the
dark. dryden.
the squibs are those who are called libellers, lampooners,
and pamphleteers. tatler.
lamprey. m. s. [lamprove, fr. lampreye, dutch.]
he&amp;or beholds his jvolin fall in vain,
nor other lance, nor other hope remain ;
he calls deiphobus, demands a spear -
in vain, for no deiphobus was there. poe.
to lan ce. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to pierce ; to cut.
with his prepared sword he charges home
my unprovided body, lanc'd my aim. shocare.
in their cruel worship they lance themselves with knives.
glanville's so,ii.
th’ infernal minister advanc'd,
seiz'd the due victim, and with fury land’l
her back, and piercing through her ionout heart,
drew backward. drydon.
2. to open chirurgically; to cut in order to a cure.
we do lance
diseases in our bodics.
fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
than when it bites, but lanceth not the fore. slakos care.
that differs as far from our usual severities, as the lancings
of a physician do from the wounds of an adversary.
decay of piety.
sha's care.
lance the sore,
and cut the head; for till the core is found
the secret vice is fed. dryden.
- the she herd slands,
and when the lancing knife requires his hands,
vain help, with idle pray'rs, from heav'n demands. dryden.
la'nce ly. adj. [from lance. j suitable to a lance. not in use.
he carried his lances, which were strong, to give a lanc, ly
blow. - sidney.
lasce pe's ade. m. s. [lance sexzate, fr.] the officer under
the corpora! : not now in use among us.
to th’ indies of her arm he flies, *
fraught both with east and western prize,
which, when he had in vain essay’d,
arm'd like a dapper lancopesade
with spanish pike, he broach'd a pore. coave.and.
la'ncet. n.s.. [ancette, fr.] a small pointed, chirurgical
instrument.
i gave vent to it by an apertion with a lancet, and dis-
charged white matter. ii sonan's surgery.
a vein, in an apparent blue runneth along the body, and
if dexterously pricked with a lancet, emitteth a red drop.
- brown's jour errours.
hippocrates faith, blood-letting should be done with broad
lancets or swords, in order to make a large orifice: the man-
ner of opening a vein then was by stabbing or per usion, as
in horses. arbuthnot.
to lanch. v. a. [lancer, fr. this word is too of:cn written
launch : it is only a vocal corruption of lance. j. to dart; to
cast as a lance; to throw ; to let fly.
see whose arm can lanch the surer bolt,
and who's the better jove. 19, d. and lee's oedipus,
me, only me, the hand of fortune bore,
unblest to tread that interdicted shore :
when jove tremendous in the sable decps,
launch'd his red light'ning at our scatter'd ships. pope.
lancination. n.s. from lancino, lat j tearing ; lacera-
tion.
to lancinate. v. a. [lancino, lat.] to tear; to rend; to
lacerate.
land. m. s. [lanb, gothick, saxon, and so all the teuto-
nick dialects.]
1. a country ; a region; distinct from other countries.
the nations of scythia, like a mountain flood, did over-
flow all spain, and quite washed away whatsoever residues
there were left of the land-bred people.
spens 's state of ireland.
thy ambition,
thou scarlet fin, robb'd this bewailing land
of noble buckingham. shakespeare's ii.nry viii.
what had he done to make him fly the land 2 shao.
the chief men of the land had great authority; though the
government was monarchical, it was not despotick.
b. zone's notos on the odosy.
many fish much like the eel frequent both the sea and fresh 2. earth; distinet from water.
rivers; as, the lamprel, lamprey, and lamperne. j/alton.
lamp ron. m. s. a kind of sea fish.
these rocks are frequented by lamprons, and greater fishes,
by land they found that huge and mighty country. allot.
yet, if thou go'st by land, tho' grief posicss
my soul ev'n then, my fears would be the less:
but an be warn'd to shun the wat'ry way. dryden.
that devour the bodies of the drowned. broome on the odyssey.
lance. m. s. [lance, fr. lancea, lat.] a long spear, which,
in the heroick ages, seems to have been generally thrown
from the hand, as by the indians at this day. in later times 3. it is often used in composition, as opposed to soa.
the combatants thrust them against each other on horseback. the princes delighting their conceits with confirming their
spear; javelin. kncwledge, seeing wherein the sea-disc pline differed from
he carried his lances which were strong, to give a lancely the land-service, they had pleasing entertainment. sioev.
blow. sidney, he to-night hath boarded a land-car rack; -
plate fin with gold, if it prove lawful prize, be's made for ever. shocore.
a d the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks : with cleven thousand land-sodiers, and twenty-six ships of
they turn their heads to sea, their sterns to land,
aim it in rags, a pigmy's straw doth pierce it. shakespeare. war, we within two months have won one to win. loc n.
they shall hold the bow and the lance. jer, 1.42. nccessity makes men ingenious and hardy; and if they
* have
and greet with greedy joy th' italian stand. dryden.
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l. a n
l. a n
have but land-room or sea-room, they find supplies for their
hnuger. hale's origin of mankind.
i writ not always in the proper terms of navigation, or
land service. - dryden's aeneid.
the french are to pay the same duties at the dry ports
through which they pass by land carriage, as we pay upon
importation or exportation by sea. addison's freeholder.
the phoenicians carried on a land-trade to syria and meso-
potamia, and stopt not short, without pushing their trade to
the indies. arbuthnot on coins.
the species brought by land-carriage were much better than
those which came to egypt by sea. arbuthnot.
4. ground; surface of the place. unusual.
beneath his steely casque he felt the blow,
and roll'd, with limbs relax'd, along the land. pope.
5. an estate real and immoveable.
to forfeit all your goods, lands, and tenements,
castles, and goods whatsoever, and to be
out of the king's protection. shakespeare's henry viii.
he kept himself within the bounds of loyalty, and enjoyed
certain lands and towns in the borders of polonia. knolles.
this man is freed from servile hands,
of hope to rise, or fear to fall :
lord of himself, though not of lands,
and having nothing, yet hath all. j7%tton.
6. nation ; people; the inhabitants of the land.
these answers in the silent night receiv'd,
the king himself divulg'd, the land believ'd. dryden.
7. urine. [plomb, saxon.] as -
probably land damn was a coarse expression in the cant
strain, formerly in common use, but since laid aside and for-
gotten, which meant the taking away a man's life. for land
or lant is an old word for urine, and to stop the common pas-
sages and functions of nature is to kill. hanmer.
you are abused, and by some putter on, -
that will be damn’d for't; would i knew the villain,
i would land-damn him. shakespeare's winter tale.
t., lan p. v. c. (from the noun.j. to set on shore.
the legions, now in gallia, sooner landed -
in britain. shakespeare's cymbeline.
he who rules the raging wind, -
to thee, o sacred ship, be kind,
thy committed pledge restore,
and land him safely on the shore. dryden's horace.
another typhis shall new seas explore,
another argo land the chiefs upon th’ iberian shore. doy.
“to land. v. n. to come to shore.
let him land,
and solemnly see him set on to london. shakespeare.
land ye not, none of you, and provide to be gone from
this coast within sixteen days. bacon's new atlantis.
i land, with luckless omens; then adore
- their gods. dryden's aencid.
landed. adj. [from land.]. having a fortune, not in money
but in land ; having a real estate.
a landless knight makes thee a landed squire. shakespeare.
men, whose living lieth together in one shire, are com-
monly counted greater landed than those whose livings are
dispersed. - bacon.
cromwell's officers, who were for levelling lands while
they had none, when they grew landed fell to crying up
magna charta. temple.
a house of commons must consist, for the most part, of
landed men. addison's freeholder.
landfali. m. s. [land and fall.] . a sudden translation of pro-
perty in land by the death of a rich man. -
landflood. m. s. [land and flood.) inundation.
apprehensions of the affections of kent, and all other
places, looked like a landflood, that might roll they knew not
how far. clarendon.
land-forces. m. s. [land and force.] warlike powers not
naval; soldiers that scrve on land.
we behold in france the greatest land-forces that have ever
been known under any christian prince. temple.
landholder. n.f sland and holder.] one who holds lands.
money, as necessary to trade; may be considered as in his
hands that pays the labourer and landholder; and if this man
want money, the manufacture is not made, and so the trade
is lost. locke.
la'ndjobby r. m. s. [land and job.] one who buys and sells
lands for other men.
if your master be a minister of state, let him be at home to
none but land jobbers, or inventors of new funds. swift.
landg r a v e. m. s. [land and grave, a count, german.]. a
german title of dominion. -
honor. {m. s. [from land.] the top of stairs.
let the stairs to the upper rooms be upon a fair, open
newel, and a fair landing-place at the top. bacon.
the landing fl.c. is the uppermost step of a pair of stairs,
viz. the floor of the room you ascend upon. a/oxon.
there is a dair-, as that shangers are generally carried to
see, where the easiness of the ascent, the disposition of the
lights, and the convenient landing, are admirably well con-
trived. addison on italy.
what the romans called vestibulum was no part of the
house, but the court and landing-place between it and the
street. arbuthnot on coins.
landl ady. m. s. [ land and lady.]
1. a woman who has tenants holding from her. -
2. the mistress of an inn.
if a soldier drinks his pint, and offers payment in wood's
halfpence, the landlady may be under some difficulty. swift. *
landless. adj, [from land.] without property; without fortune.
young fortinbras
hath in the skirts of norway, here ard there,
shark'd up a list of landless resolutes. shakesh, hamlet.
a landless knight hath made a landed squire. shakesp.
land lock ed. adj. [land and lock.] shut in, or inclosed with
land.
there are few natural parts better landlocked, and closed on
all fides, than this seems to have been. addison on italy.
la'ndloper. m. s. sland and loopen, dutch..] a sandman; a
term of reproach used by seamen of those who pass their lives
on shore. -
la'ndlord. m. s. [land and lord.]
i. one who owns lands or houses, and has tenants under him.
this regard shall be had, that in no place, under any
landlord, there shall be many of them placed together, but
dispersed. spenser's state of ireland.
it is a generous pleasure in a landlord, to love to see all his
tenants look fat, sleek, and contenced. clarissa.
2. the master of an inn.
upon our arrival at the inn, my companion fetched out the
the jolly landlord, who knew him by his whistle. addison.
landmark. m. s. [land and mark.] any thing set up to pre-
serve the boundaries of lands.
i' th' midst, an altar, as the land-mark, stood,
rustick, of grassy sod. milton.
the land-marks by which places in the church had been
known, were removed. -
then land-marks limited to each his right;
for all before was common as the light. dryden.
though they are not self-evident principles, yet if they
have been made out from them by a wary and unquestion-
able deduction, they may serve as land-marks, to shew what
lies in the direct way of truth, or is quite besides it. locke.
land sca pe. m. s. [landschape, dutch. j
i. a region, the prospect of a country.
lovely seem’d,
that landscape / and of pure, now purer air,
meets his approach.
the sun scarce uprisen,
shot parallel to th’ earth his dewy ray,
discovering in wide landscape all the east
of paradise, and eden's happy plains. milton.
straight mine eyes hath caught new pleasures,
whilst the landscape round it measures
russet lawns and fallows grey,
where the nibbling flocks do stray. - milton.
we are like men entertained with the view of a spacious
landscape, where the eye passes over one pleasing prospect into
another. addison.
2. a picture, representing an extent of space, with the various
objects in it.
clarendon.
milton.
as good a poet as you are, you cannot make finer land-
scapes than those about the king's house. addison.
oft in her glass the musing shepherd spies
the wat'ry landscape of the pendant woods,
and absent trees, that tremble in the floods. pope.
land tax. m. s. [and and tax.] tax laid upon land and
houses. • .
if mortgages were registered, land-taxes might reach the
lender to pay his proportion. locke.
land-wait er. m. s. [land and waiter.] an officer of the
customs, who is to watch what goods are landed.
give a guinea to a knavish land-waiter, and he shall con-
nive at the merchant for cheating the queen of an hundred.
swift's examiner.
landw a r d. adv, [from land.] towards the land.
they are invincible by reason of the overpouring moun-
tains that back the one, and slender fortification of the other
to landward. sandys's journey.
lan e. m. s. [laen, dutch ; lana, saxon.]
1. a narrow way between hedges.
all flying
through a straight lane, the enemy full-hearted
struck down some mortally. shakespeare's cymbeline.
i know each lane, and every alley green, -
dingle or bushy dell, of this wild wood,
and every bosky burn. - milton.
through a close lane as i pursu'd my journey. otway.
a pack-horse is driven constantly in a narrow lane and
dirty road. - locke.
- 2. a<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">|i
l a n
l a n
o
i
2. a narrow street; an alley.
there is no street, not many lanes, where there does not
live one that has relation to the church. spratt's sermons.
3. a paslage between men standing on each side.
the earl’s servants stood ranged on both sides, and made
the king a lane. bacon's henry vii.
lane ret. n.s. a little hawk.
language. m. s. [language, french ; lingua, latin.]
j. human speech.
... we may define language, if we confider it more materially,
• to be letters, forming and producing words and sentences;
but if we consider it according to the design thereof, then
language is apt signs for communication of thoughts. holder.
2. the tongue of one nation as distinet from others.
o ! good my lord, no latin;
i am not such a truant since my coming,
as not to know the language i have liv'd in. shakespeare.
he not from rome alone, but greece,
like jason, brought the golden fleece;
to him that language, though to none
of th’ others, as his own was known. denham.
3. stile ; manner of expression.
though his language should not be refin'd,
it must not be obscure and impudent. roscommon.
others for language all their care express,
and value books, as women, men, for dress:
their praise is still—the stile is excellent;
the sense, they humbly take upon content. pote.
la'nguaged. adj. [from the noun..] having various lan-
guages. -
he wand'ring long a wider circle made,
and many languag'd nations has survey’d. pope.
la'nguage-master. m. s. slanguage and master.] one whose
profession is to teach languages.
the third is a sort of language-ma/?er, who is to instruct
them in the stile proper for a minister. spectator.
lang uet. n.s. (languette, french..] anything cut in the form
of a tongue.
languid. adj. [languidus, latin.]
1. faint; weak; feeble.
whatever renders the motion of the blood languid, dis-
poseth to an acid acrimony; what accelerates the motion of
the blood, disposeth to an alkaline acrimony. arbuthnot.
no space can be assigned so vast, but still a larger may be
imagined; no motion so swift or languid, but a greater velo-
city or flowness may still be conceived. bentley.
2. dull; heartless.
i'll hasten to my troops,
and fire their languid souls with cato's virtue. addison.
la'nguidly. adv. [from languid.] weakly; feebly.
the menstruum work'd as languidly upon the coral, as it
did before. boyle.
la'nguidness. m. s. [from languid.] weakness; feebleness;
want of strength. -
to la'nguis h. v. n. [languir, french ; langueo, latin.]
1. to grow feeble; to pine away; to lose strength.
let her languish
a drop of blood a-day ; and, being aged,
die of this folly. shakespeare's cymbeline.
we and our fathers do languish of such diseases. 2 esdr.
what can we expect, but that her languishings should end
in death 2 decay of piety.
his sorrows bore him off; and softly laid
his languish’d limbs upon his homely bed. dryden.
2. to be no longer vigorous in motion ; not to be vivid in ap-
pearance.
the troops with hate inspir’d,
their darts with clamour at a distance drive,
and only keep the languish’d war alive. dryden.
3. to fink or pine under sorrow, or any slow passion.
what man who knows
what woman is, yea, what she cannot chuse
but must be, will his free hours languish out
for assur’d bondage 2 shakespeare's cymbeline.
the land shall mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein
languish. hosea, iv. 3.
i have been talking with a suitor here,
a man that languishes in your displeasure. shakes). othello.
i was about fifteen when i took the liberty to chuse for
myself, and have ever fince languished under the displeasure of
an inexorable father. addison's spectator.
let leonora consider, that, at the very time in which she
languishes for the loss of her deceased lover, there are persons
just perishing in a shipwreck. addison's spectator.
4. to look with softness or tenderness.
what poems think you soft, and to be read
with languishing regards, and bending head dryden.
la'ng uish. n. s. [from the verb.] soft appearance.
and the blue languish of soft allia's eye. pope.
then forth he walks,
beneath the trembling languish of her beam,
with soften’d soul. thomson's spring.
la'nguishingly, adv. [from languishing.]
1. weakly ; feebly ; with feeble softness.
leave such to tune their own dull rhimes, and k now
what's roundly smooth, or languishingly slow. . pope,
2. dully ; tediously. -
alas! my dorus, thou seest how long and languishingly the
weeks are past over since our last talking. sidney.
languishment. n.s. [languisemment, french; from languish.]
1. state of pining.
by that count, which lovers books invent,
the sphere of cupid forty years contains;
which i have wasted in long languishment,
that seem'd the longer for my greater pains. spensor.
2. softness of mien.
humility it expresses, by the stooping or bending of the
head; languishment, when we hang it on one side. dryden.
la ngu or, n. s. [languor, latin ; langueur, french.]
1. faintness ; wearisomeness.
well hoped i, and fair beginnings had,
that he my captive languor should redeem. spensor.
for these, these tribunes, in the dust i write
my heart's deep languor, and my soul's sad tears. shakos.
2. listlessness; inattention.
academical disputation gives vigour and briskness to the
mind thus exercised, and relieves the languor of private study
and meditation. j/atts's improvement of the mind.
3. softness; laxity.
to isles of fragrance, lily-silver'd vales
diffusing languor in the panting gales. dunciad.
4. [in physick.]
languor and lassitude signifies a faintness, which may arise
from want or decay of spirits, through indigestion, or too
much exercise ; or from an additional weight of fluids, from
a diminution of secretion by the common discharges. quincy.
languorous. adj. [languoreux, fr.] tedious; melancholy.
not in use.
dear lady, how shall i declare thy case,
whom late i left in languorous constraint spensor.
to laniate. v. a. [lania, latin.] to tear in pieces; to
rend ; to lacerate.
la'nifice. n. s. ['anificium, latin.] woollen manufacture.
the moth breedeth upon cloth, and other lanfices, espe-
cially if they be laid up dankish and wet. bacon.
la nigerous. adj. [laniger, latin.] bearing wool.
lank. adj. [lancke, dutch.]
1. loose; not filled up; not stiffened out; not fat; not plump;
slender.
the commons hast thou rack'd; the clergy's bags
are lank and lean with thy extortions. shakespeare.
name not winterface, whose skin's slack,
lank, as an unthrift's purse. donne.
we let down into the receiver a great bladder well tied at
the neck, but very lank, as not containing above a pint of
air, but capable of containing ten times as much. boyle.
moist earth produces corn and grass, but both
too rank and too luxuriant in their growth.
let not my land so large a promise boast,
left the lank ears in length of stem be lost. dryden.
now, now my bearded harvest gilds the plain.
thus dreams the wretch, and vainly thus dreams on,
till his lank purse declares his money gone. dryden.
meagre and lank with fasting grown,
and nothing left but skin and bone;
they just keep life and soul together. swift.
2. milton seems to use this word for faint ; languid.
he, piteous of her woes, rear'd her lank head,
and gave her to his daughters to imbathe
in nectar'd lavers strew’d with asphodil. milton.
la'nkness. m. s. [from lank.] want of plumpness.
lanner. m. s. [lanier, fr. lannarius, lat.] a species of hawk.
lansquenet. n.s. [lance and knecht, dutch.]
1. a common foot-soldier. -
2. a game at cards.
lantern. m. s. [anterne, french; laterna, latin: it is by
mistake often written lanthorn.] a transparent case for a
candle.
god shall be my hope,
my stay, my guide, my lanthern to my fect. shakes.
thou art our admiral; thou bearest the lanthorn in the
poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee; thou art the knight of the
burning lamp. shakesp. henry iv.
a candle lasteth longer in a lanthorn than at large. bacon.
amongst the excellent acis of that king, none hath the
pre-eminence, the erection and institution of a society, which
we call solomon's house; the noblest foundation that ever
was, and the lanthorn of this kingdom. bacon's atlantis.
o thievish night,
why should'st thou, but for some felonious end,
in thy dark lanthorn thus close up the stars,
that nature hung in heav'n, and fill'd their lamps
with everlasting oil - milton.
vice is like a dark lan:horn, which turns its bright side
only
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a p
l. a p
only to him that bears it, but locks black and dismal in an-
other's hand. government of the tongue.
judge what a ridiculous thing it were, that the continued
thadow of the earth should be broken by sudden miraculous
eruptions of light, to prevent the art of the lantern-maker.
amore's divine dialogies.
our ideas succeed one another in our minds, not much
unlike the images in the inside of a lanthorn, turned round by
the heat of a candle.
locke.
2. a lighthouse; a light hung out to guide ships.
caprea, where the lanthorn fix’d on high
shines like a moon through the benighted sky, -
*- while by its beams the wary sailor steers. ald's m.
la's tern jaws.
a term used of a thin visage, such as if a
candle were burning in the mouth might transmit the light.
- being very lucky in a pair of long lanthorn-jaws, he wrung
his face into a hideous grimace. addison's speciator;
lanu gisovs, adj. [lanuginosus, latin.] downy covered
with soft hair.
lap. m. s. [laeppe, saxon; lappe, german.]
i. the loose part of a garment, which may be doubled at
pleasure. *
if a joint of meat falls on the ground, take it up gently,
wipe it with the lap of your coat, and then put it into the
dish. - swift's dire&amp;ions to a footman.
2. the part of the cloaths that is spread horizontally over the
knees as one sits down, so as any thing may lie in it.
it feeds each living plant with liquid sap,
and fills with flowers fair flora's painted lap.
. upon a day, as love lay swectly flumb'ring
all in his mother's lap,
a gentle bee, with his loud trumpet murm'ring,
about him flew ty hap. sponsor.
i’ll make my haven in a lady's lap,
and 'witch sweet ladies with my words and looks. shakosh.
she bids you
all on the wanton rushes lay you down,
and rest your gentle head upon her lap,
and she will sing the song that pleaseth you.
spensor.
shakespeare.
our stirring
can from the lap of egypt's widow pluck
the ne'er-lust-wearied antonv. shakoshcare.
- heav'n's almighty fire
melts on the bosom of his love, and pours
himself into her lap in fruitful show’rs. crashaw.
men expect that religion should cost them no pains, and
that happiness should drop into their laps. lillotson.
he struggles into breath, and crics for aid ;
then, helpless, in his mother's lap is laid.
he creeps, he walks, and issuing into man,
grudges their life from whence his own began:
retchless of laws, affects to rule alone,
anxious to reign, and restless on the throne.
to la p. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to wrap or twist round anything.
he hath a long tail, which, as he descends from a tree,
he laps round about the boughs, to keep himself from falling.
grew's museum.
about the paper, whose two halves were painted with red
and blue, and which was stiff like thin pasteboard, i lapped
several times a slender thread of very black silk.
2. to involve in any thing.
as through the flow'ring forest rash she fled,
in her rude hairs sweet flowers themselves did kif,
and flourishing frosh leaves and blossoms did enwrap. soons.
the thane of cawder 'gan a dismal conflict,
till that bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
confronted him. shakespeare's l'acbeth.
when we both lay in the field,
frozen almost to death, how he did lap me,
ev’n in his garments, and did give himself,
all thin and naked, to the numb cold night.
ever against eating cares,
lap me in soft lydian airs. -
indulgent fortune does her care employ,
and snailing, broods upon the naked boy ;
her garment spreads, and laps him in the solds,
and covers with her wings from nightly colds. drydon.
here was the repository of all the wise contentions for
power between the nobles and commons, lept up safely in
the bosom of a nero and a caligula.
to lap. v. n. to be spread or turned over any thing.
the upper wings are opacous; at their hinder ends, where
they lap over, transparent, like the wing of a fly. grew,
to lap. v. n. [lappian, saxon; latten, dutch..] to feed by
quick reciprocations of the tongue.
the dogs by the river nilus' side being thirsk, lap hastily
as they run along the shore. i?' 'y on bodies.
they had soups served up in broad dishes, and so the fox
fell to lapping himself, and bade his guest heartily welcome.
dryden.
newton.
shakes care.
milton.
swift.
lorange.
the tongue serves not only for tasting, but c. mastica-
vol. ii.
cation and deglutition, in man, by licking ; in the dog and cat
kind by lapping.
to lap. v. a. to lick up.
for all the rest - -
they'll take suggestion, as a cat laps milk. shakespeare.
upon a bull
two horrid lyons rampt, and ieiz'd, and tugg’d off, bel-
lowing still, - -
both men and dogs came ; yet they tore the hide, and
lapt their fill. chapman’s iliad.
lapdog. m. s. [lap and dog..] a fondled by ladies
in the lap. -
one of them made his court to the lap-dog, to improve
his interest with the ladv.
ray an creation.
iittle dog,
j - collier.
these if the laws did that exchange afford,
would save their lap-dog sooner than their lord. dryden.
lap-dogs give themselves the rowsing shake, -
and sleepless lovers just at twelve awake. pope.
la pful. n.f. [lap and full.] as much as can be contained
in the lap.
one found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds
his lapful, and shred them into the pot of pottage. , 2 kings.
will four per cent, increase the number of lenders if it
will not, then all the plenty of money these conjurers bestow
upon us, is but like the gold and silver which old women be-
lieve other conjurers bestow by whole lapsulls on poor credu-
lous girls. locke.
la picide. m. s. [lapicida, latin.] a stonecutter. dic.
la/pidary. m. s. [lapidaire, fr.] one who deals in stones or
eins.
g as a cock was turning up a dunghil, he espied a diamond :
well (says he) this sparkling foolery now to a lapidary would
have been the making of him ; but, as to any use of mine,
a barley-corn had been worth forty on't. l’estrange.
of all the many sorts of the gem kind reckoned up by the
iapidaries, there are not above three or four that are original.
hoodward’s nat. hisł.
[lapid, latin.] to stone; to kill by
- dzi.
lapidation. m. s. slapidatio, lat. lapidation, fr.] a stoning.
lap1 deous. adj. [lapideus, latin.] stony; of the nature of
stone.
to la'pidate. v. a.
{toning.
there might fall down into the lapideous matter, before it
was concreted into a stone, some small toad, which might
remain there imprisoned, till the matter about it were con-
densed. ray on the creation.
lapide'scence. m. s. [lapidosco, latin.] stony concretion.
of lapis ceratites, or cornu fossile, in subterraneous cavi-
ties, there are many to be found in germany, which are
but the lapid scencies, and putrefactive mutations, of hard
bodies. brown's pulgar errolors.
l.apide'scent. adj. [lapid scens, latin.] growing or turning
to stone. -
lapidif ic ation. m. s. [lapidification, french.] the act of
forming stones. -
induration or lapidification of substances more soft is an-
other degree of condensation. bacon’s natiiral hisory.
lapid1 fick. adj. [lapidifique, french.j forming stones.
the atoms of the lapidifick, as well as saline principle, be-
ing regular, do concur in producing regular stones. grew.
la pi dist. m. s. [from lapides, latin.] a dealer in stones or
conn s. -
hardness, wherein some stones exceed all other bodies,
being exalted to that degree, that art in vain endeavours to
counterfeit it, the factitious stores of chemists in imitation be-
ing easily detected by an ordinary lapidis.
lapis. m. s. [latin.] a stone.
lap is lazuli.
the lapis lazuli, or azure stone, is a copper ore, very
compact and hard, so as to take a high polish, and is worked
into a great variety of toys. it is found in detached lumps,
of an elegant blue colour, variegated with clouds of white,
and veins of a shining gold colour: to it the painters are in-
debted for their beautiful ultra-marine colour, which is only
a calcination of lapis lazuli. hill,
lapper. m. s. [from lap.] -
1. one who wraps up.
they may be lappers of linen, and bailiffs of the manor.
ray.
swift.
2. one who laps or licks.
lappft. m. s. [diminutive of lap.] the parts of a head dress
- that hang loose. -
how naturally do you apply your hands to each other's
latforts, and rufics, and mantuas
swift.
lapse. m. s. [lassis, latin.]
1. i low ; fall ; glide ; smooth course,
round i saw
hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains,
and liquid lapse of murm'ring streams. a silon.
notions of the mind are preserved in the memory, not-
withstanding lapse of time. hale's origin of azinkind,
2. petty error ; mall mistake 3 slight offence; little fault.
15 c these
o<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a. r.
l. a r
o
l
these are petty errors and minor lapses, not considerably
injurious unto truth. brown's vulgar errours.
the weakness of human understanding all will confess;
yet the confidence of most practically disowns it; and it is
easier to persuade them of it from other's lapses than their
qwi1. glanville's scepsis.
this scripture may be usefully applied as a caution to
guard against those lapses and failings, to which our infirmities
daily expose us. - rogers;
it hath been my constant business to examine whether i
could find the smallest lapse in stile or propriety through my
whole colle&amp;tion, that i might send it abroad as the most
finished piece. - swift.
3. translation of right from one to another.
in a presentation to a vacant church, a layrhan ought to
present within four months, and a clergyman within fix,
otherwise a devolution, or lapse of right, happens. ayliffe.
t. lap's e. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to glide slowly; to fall by degrees.
this disposition to shorten our words, by retrenching the
vowels, is nothing else but a tendency to lapse into the bar-
barity of those northern nations from whom we are de-
scended, and whose languages labour all under the same de-
fe&amp;t. - swift's letter to the lord treasurer.
2. to fail in any thing; to slip ; to commit a fault.
i have ever verified my friends,
of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity
would without lapsing suffer. shakespeare's coriolanus,
to lapse in fulness
is sorer than to lie for need; and falshood -
is worse in kings than beggars. shakespeare's cymbeline.
3. to slip as by inadvertency or mistake.
homer, in his characters of vulcan and thersites, has
iapsed into the burlesque chara&amp;ter, and departed from that
serious air essential to an epic poem. addison.
let there be no wilful perversion of another's meaning;
no sudden seizure of a lapsed syllable to play upon it. watts,
4. to lose the proper time.
myself stood out :
for which if i be lapsed in this place, -
i shall pay dear. shakespeare's twelfth night,
as an appeal may be deserted by the appellant's lapsing
the term of law, so it may also be deserted by a lapse of the
term of a judge. ayliffo's parergon.
5. to fall by the negligence of one proprietor to another.
if the archbishop shall not fill it up within six months en-
suing, it lapses to the king. ayliffe's parergon.
6, to fall from perfeotion, truth or faith.
once more i will renew
his lapsed pow'rs, though forfeit, and inthrall’d
by fin to foul exorbitant desires. mihon.
a sprout of that fig-tree which was to hide the nakedness
of lapsed adam, decay of piety.
as publick forms suppose it the most principal, universal,
and daily requisite to the lapsing state of human corruption.
decay of piety.
these were looked on as lapsed persons, and great severities
of penance were prescribed them, as appears by the canons
of ancyra. stillingfeet.
la'pw ing. m. s. [sap and wing.] a clamorous bird with long
wings.
*ah ! but i think him better than i say,
and yet would herein others eyes were worse:
far from her nest the lapwing cries away;
my heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse. shaft.
and how in fields the lapwing tereus reigns,
the warbling nightingale in woods complains. dryden.
la'pwork. m. s. [lap and work.] work in which one part is
interchangeably wrapped over the other.
a basket made of porcupine quills: the ground is a pack-
thread caul woven, into which, by the indian women, are
wrought, by a kind of lap-work, the quills of porcupines,
not split, but of the young ones intire; mixed with white
and black in even and indented waves. grew's museum.
la(rboard. m. s.
the left-hand side of a ship, when you stand with your
face to the head : opposed to the starboard. harris.
or when ulysses on the larboard shunn'd
charybdis, and by the other whirlpool steer'd, milton.
tack to the larboard, and stand off to sea,
veer starboard sea and land. dryden.
la'rcen.y. m. s. [larcin, fr. latrocinium, lat..] petty theft.
those laws would be very unjust, that should chastize mur-
der and petty larceny with the fame punishment. spectator.
larch. m. s. [larix, lat..] a tree.
some botanical criticks tell us, the poets have not rightly
followed the traditions of antiquity, in metamorphosing the
sisters of phaeton into poplars, who ought to have been
turned into larch trees; for that it is this kind of tree which
sheds a gum, and is commonly found on the banks of the po.
addison on italy.
lard. m. s. [lardum, latin ; lard, french.]
5
1. the grease of swine.
so may thy pastures with their flow', y scasts,
as suddenly as lard, fat thy lean beasts. donne.
2. bacon; the flesh of swine.
by this the boiling kettle had prepar’d,
and to the table sent the smoaking lard ;
on which with eager appetite they dine,
a sav'ry bit, that serv'd to relish wine.
the sacrifice they sped;
chopp'd off their nervous thighs, and next prepar’d
t’ involve the lean in cauls, and mend with lard. dryden.
to lard. v. a. [larder, french ; from the noun.]
i. to stuff with bacon.
the larded thighs on loaded altars laid.
no man lards salt pork with orange peel,
or garnishes his lamb with spitch-cockteel. king.
dryd. homer.
2. to fatten.
now falstaff sweats to death,
and lard; the lean earth as he walks along. słakoff.
brave soldier, doth he lie
larding the plain
3. to mix with something else by way of improvement.
an exact command,
larded with many several sorts of reasons. shakoff. him.t.
let no alien interpose
to lard with wit thy hungry epsom prose. drydon.
he lards with flourishes his long harangue,
'tis fine, says: thou. dryden.
swearing by heaven; the pocts think this nothing, their
plays are so much larded with it. collier's fiew of the stage.
la'rder. m. s. [lardier, old french ; from lard.] i he room
where meat is kept or salted.
this similitude is not borrowed of the larder house, but
out of the school house. afthan's schoolmg/?er.
flesh is ill kept in a room that is not cool ; whereas in
a cool and wet larder it will keep longer. bacon.
so have i seen in larder dark,
of veal a lucid loin. - dorset.
old age, -
morose, perverse in humour, diffident
the more he still abounds, the less content :
his larder and his kitchen too observes,
and now, left he should want hereafter, starves. kio.
larderer. n.s.. [from larder.] one who has the charge of
the larder. o
la rdon. m. s. [french..] a bit of bacon.
large. adj. [large, french; largos, latin.]
1. big ; bulky.
charles ii. asked me, what could be the reason, that in
mountainous countries the men were commonly larger, and
yet the cattle of all sorts smaller temple.
great theron, large of limbs, of giant height. drydon.
warwick, leicester, and buckinghain, bear a large toned
sheep of the best shape and deepest staple. 2.1.xtincr.
2. wide ; extensive.
their former large peopling was an effect of the countries
impoverishing. carew's survey of cornwall.
let them dwell in the land, and trade therein , for it is
large enough for them. gen. xxxiv. 21.
there he conquered a thousand miles wide and large.
abbot's discription of the j/orks.
3. liberal ; abundant; plentiful.
thou shalt drink of thy sister’s cup deep and large. ezek.
vernal suns and showers -
diff.st their warmest, largyl influence. thomson.
4. copious ; diffuse.
skippon gave a large testimony under his hand, that they
had carried themselves with great civility. clarendon.
i might be very large upon the importance and advan-
tages of education, and say a great many things which have
been said before. felton on the coff.3.
5. at large. without restraint; without confinemen.
if you divide a cane into two, and one speak at the one
end, and you lay your ear at the other, it will carry the voice
farther than in the air at large. daro.
thus incorporeal spirits to smallest forms
reduc’d their shapes immense; and were at large,
though without number still. alsion.
the children are bred up in their father's way; or so
plentifully provided for, that they are left at large. sprat.
your zeal becomes importunate ;
i’ve hitherto permitted it to rave
and talk at large ; but learn to keep it in,
left it should take more freedom than i'll give it. alison.
6. at large. diffusely; in the full extent. -
discover more at large what cause that was,
for i am ignorant, and cannot guess. shał soare.
it does not belong to this place to have that point debated
at large. j/atts.
la r gel y. adv. [from large.]
1. widely; extensively.
2. copiously; diffusely; amply.
&gt; 2. where
dryden's ovid.
shakes care's henry v. -
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l. a. r.
* l a s
where the author treats wore largely, it will explain the
shorter hints and brief intimations. watts on the mind.
3. liberally ; bounteously,
how he lives and eats: -
how largely gives; how splendidly he treats, dryden.
those, who in warmer climes complain,
from phoebus' rays they suffer pain,
must own, that pain is largely paid *
by gen'rous wines beneath the shade. swift.
4. abundantly ; without sparing.
they their fill of love, and love's disport -
took largely; of their mutual guilt the seal. milton.
largen ess. n.f. [from large.]
1. bigness; bulk.
. london excells any other city in the whole world, either
in largents, or number of inhabitants. sprat.
nor must bumastus, his old honours lose,
in length and largens like the dugs of cows. dryden.
2. greatness; comprehension.
there will be occasion for largens of mind and agreeable-
ness of temper. collier of friendship.
3. extension; amplitude. -
they which would file away most from the largeness of
that offer, do in more sparing terms acknowledge little less.
hodzer.
the ample proposition that hope makes,
in all designs begun on earth below,
falls in the promised largeness. shakespeare.
knowing best the largos, of my own heart toward my
people's good and just contentment. king charles.
shall grief contract the largenes of that heart, i.
on which nor fear nor anger has part. waller.
. man as far transcends the beasts in largeness of desire, as
dignity of nature and employment. glanville's apology.
if the largeness of a man's heart carry him beyond prudence,
we may reckon it illustrious weakness. l’estrange.
4. wideness. -
supposing that the multitude and largenes of rivers ought
to continue as great as now ; we can easily prove, that the
extent of the ocean could be no less. bently.
argess. n.f. [larges, fr.] a present; a gift; a bounty.
ur coffers with too great a court,
and liberal largess, are grown somewhat light. shakesp.
he assigned two thousand ducats, for a bounty to me and
my fellows: for they give great largesses where they come.
bacon's now atlantis.
a pardon to the captain, and a larges,
among the soldiers, had appeas'd their fury. jdenham.
the paltry larges too severely watch'd,
that no intruding guests usurp a share. dryden’s juv.
irus's condition will not admit of largess. addison.
largit ion. m. s. [largītio, lat.] the act of giving. dic.
lakk. m. s. [lapence, saxon; lors, danish; lavrao, scot-
tish..] a small singing bird.
it was the lark, the herald of the morn. shakespeare.
look up a height, the shrill-gorg’d lark so far -
cannot be seen or heard. shakspeare's king lear.
th’ example of the heav'nly lark,
thy fellow poet, cowley, mark. cowley.
mark how the lark and linnet sing;
with rival notes
they strain their warbling throats,
to welcome in the spring. dryden.
la'rk fr. n.s. (from lark.] a catcher of larks. dic?.
larkspur. n.s. [delphinium.] a plant. -
la r v ated. adj. [larvatus, lat.] masked. dic7.
larum. m. s. [from alarum or alarm.]
i. alarm ; noise noting danger.
his larum bell might loud and wide be heard,
when cause requir’d, but never out of time. spensor.
the peaking cornute, her husband, dwelling in a continual
larum of jealousy, comes to me in the instant of our encounter.
shakespeare's alerry i/ives of windsor.
how far off lie these armies : -
—within a mile and half.
—then shall we hear their larum, and they ours. shakes.
she is become formidable to all her neighbours, as ifie
puts every one to stand upon his guard, and have a continual
larum bell in his ears. howel's vocal fors.
2. an instrument that makes a noise at a certain hour.
of this nature was that larum, which, though it were but
three inches big, yet would both wake a man, and of itself
light a candle for him at any set hour. j/ilkins.
i see men as lusty and strong that eat but two meals a day,
as others, that have set their stomachs, like larums, to call on
them for four or five. locke on education.
the young aeneas, all at once let down,
stunn'd with his giddy larum half the town. dunciad.
larysgoromy. m. j. [xzovy; and rigo laryngotamie, fr.]
an operation where the fore-part of the larynx is divided to
assist respiration, during large tumours upon the upper parts;
as in a quinsey. &amp;ting.
larynx. m. s. [xopuye.] the upper part of the trachea,
which lies below the root of the tongue, before the pharynx.
wiftcy.
there are thirteen muscles for the motion of the fo.
lages of the larynx. derham.
lasci v1 ent. adj. [lasciviens, lat.] frolicksome ; wantoning.
lascisvious, adj. [lastivus, lat.]
1. lewd ; lustful.
in what habit will you go along
—not like a woman; for i would prevent
the loose encounters of lastivious men. shakespeare.
he on eve
began to cast lascivious eyes; she him
as wantonly repaid ; in lust they burn. milton.
notwithstanding all their talk of reason and philosophy,
and those unanswerable difficulties which, over their cups,
they pretend to have against christianity; persuade but the
covetous man not to deify his money, the lastivious man to
throw off his lewd anours, and all their giant-like objections
against christianity shall presently vanish. south.
2. wanton; soft; luxurious.
grim visag’d war hath sooth'd his wrink!’d front;
and now, instead of mounting barbed steeds,
to fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
he capers nimbly in a lady's chamber,
to the lascivious pleasing of a lute. shakes. rich. iii.
lasci'vious ness. n. f. [from lascivious.] wantonness; looseness,
the reason pretended by augustus was the lasciviousness of
his elegies, and his art of love. dryd. preface to ovid.
lasci'viously, adv. [from lastivious.] lewdly ; wantonly ;
loosely.
lash!. */ [the most probable etymology of this word seems
to be that of skinner, from schlagen, dutch, to strike; whence
flash and lash.j
1. a froke with any thing pliant and tough.
! on hence are heard the groans of ghosts, the pains
o: oundin lashes, and of dragging chains. dryden.
rous’d by the lash of his own stubborn tail,
our lion now will foreign foes affail. dryden.
2. the thong or point of the whip which gives the cut or blow.
her who of cricket's bone, her lash of film,
her waggoner a small grey-coated gnat. shakespeare.
i observed that your whip wanted a lash to it. adison.
3. a leash, or string in which an animal is held; a snare: out
of use.
the farmer they leave in the lash,
with losses on every side,
4. a stroke of satire ; a sarcasm.
the moral is a lash at the vanity of arrogating that to our-
selves which succeeds well. l’e/irange,
to las h. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to strike with any thing phant; to scourge.
let's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again,
lash hence these over-weening rags of france. shakesp.
he charg’d the flames, and those that disobey'd
he lash'd to duty with his sword of light. dryden.
and limping death, lash'd on by fate,
comes up to shorten half our date.
stern as tutors, and as uncles hard,
tissor's husandry.
dryden's horace.
we left the pupil, and defraud the ward. dryden's pers:
leaning on his lance, he mounts his car,
his fiery coursers lashing through the air. garth's ovid.
2. to move with a sudden spring or jirk.
the club hung round his ears, and batter'd brows;
he falls; and lashing up his heels, his rider throws. dryd.
3. to beat; to strike with a sharp sound.
the winds grow high,
impending tempests charge the sky;
the lightning flies, the thunder roars,
and big waves lash the frighted shores. prior.
4. to scourge with satire.
could pension'd boileau lash in honest strain,
flatt’rers and bigots ev’n in louis' reign. pope's horace.
5. to tie any thing down to the side or mast of a ship: properly
to lace.
to lash. v. m. to ply the whip.
they lash aloud, each other they provoke,
and lend their little souls at ev'ry stroke. dryden's an.
gentle or sharp, according to thy choice,
to laugh at follies, or to lash at vice. dryden's persius.
let men out of their way lash on ever so fast, they are not
at all the nearer their journey's end. south.
wheels clash with wheels, and bar the narrow street;
the lishing whip resounds. - gay's trivia.
la's her. m. s. [from fash..] one that whips or lashes.
lass. n. s. [from lad is formed laddess, by contraction loss.
hickes.j a girl; a maid; a young woman : used now only
of mean girls. -
now was the time for vigorous lads to show
what love or honour could invite them to ; 4
a goodly theatre, where rocks are sound
with reverend age, and lovely liff's crown'd. //aller.
a gill<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l as
l a t
a girl was worth forty of our widows; and an honest,
downright, plain-dealing los; it was. l'e/orange.
they sometimes an hasty kiss
steal from unwary lases; they with scorn,
and neck reclin'd, resent. phillips.
la'ssit ud e. m. s. sloftudo, latin; lastilde, french.]
1. weariness; fatigue; the pain arising from hard labour.
lositide is remedied by bathing, or anointing with oil and
warm water; for all lassitude is a kind of contusion and com-
pression of the parts; and bathing and anointing give a re-
laxation or emolition. bacon's natural history.
affiduity in cogitation is more than our embodied souls can
bear without lassitude or distemper. glanville's scepsis.
she lives and breeds in air; the largeness and lightness of
her wings and tail sustain her without laffitude.
more's antidote agains atheism.
do not over-fatigue the spirits, lest the mind be seized
with a lassitude, and thereby be tempted to nauseate, and
grow tired. watts's improvement of the mind.
from mouth and nose the briny torrent ran,
and lost in lossitude lay all the man. pope's odyssy.
2. [in physick.]
laffitude generally expresses that weariness which proceeds
• from a distempered state, and not from exercise, which wants
no remedy but rest: it proceeds from an increase of bulk, from
a diminution of proper evacuation, or from too great a con-
sumption of the fluid necessary to maintain the spring of the
solids, as in severs; or from a vitiated secretion of that juice,
whereby the fibres are not supplied. $24tncy.
la'sslor n. m. s. [loss and lorn.] forsaken by his mistress.
not used.
brown groves,
o shadow the dismissed batchelor loves,
eing /a/3/orm. s/a/e/?eare's 7:/e/7.
1,ast. n. for, saxon; laetsie, dutch.] so o/7
1. latest; that which follows all the rest in time.
why are ye the last to bring the king back? samuel.
o, may some spark of your celestial fire,
the loft, the meanest, of your sons inspires pope.
2. hindmost ; which follows in order of place.
merion persued at greater distance still,
last came admetus, thy unhappy son. pope.
3. beyond which there is no more.
i will slay the last of them with the sword. amos.
unhappy slave, and pupil to a bell,
unhappy to the last the kind releasing knell. cowley.
the swans, that on cayster often try’d
their tuneful songs, now sung their las, and dy’d. addis.
o! may fam'd brunswick be the loft,
the last, the happiest british king,
whom thou shalt paint, or i shall fing. addison.
but, while i take my last adieu,
heave thou no figh, nor shed a tear. prior.
here, last of britons, let your names be read. pope.
wit not alone has shone on ages past,
but lights the present, and shall warm the loft. pope.
4. the lowest; the meanest.
antilochus
takes the las' prize, and takes it with a jest. pope.
5. next before the present; as, loft week.
6. utmost.
fools ambitiously contend
for wit and pow'r, their last endeavours bend
to outshine each other. dryden's lucretius.
7. at last. in conclusion; at the end.
gad, a troop shall overcome him; but he shall overcome
at the last. gen. xlix. 19.
thus weather-cocks, that for a while
have turn’d about with ev'ry blast,
grown old, and destitute of oil,
rust to a point, and fix at last. freind.
8. the last ; the end.
all politicians chew on wisdom past,
and blunder on in business to the loss. pope.
last. adv.
1. the last time; the time next before the present.
- how long isot now since last you self and i
were in a mask shakspeare.
when last i dy’d, and, dear! i die -
as often as from thee i go,
i can remember yet that i -
something did say, and something did bestow. dome.
2. in conclusion.
pleas'd with his idol, he commends, admires,
adores ; and soft, the thing ador’d desires. dryden.
70 last. v. n. [la stan, saxon.] to endure; to continue;
to persevere.
all more lofting than beautiful. sidney.
i thought it agreeable to my affeołion to your grace, to
prefix your name before the essays: for the latin volume of
them, being in the universal language, may soft as long as
books lash. bacon.
with several degrees of lofting, ideas are imprinted do the
memory. locke.
these are standing marks of fails delivered by those who
were eye-witnesses to them, and which were contrived with
great wisdom to loft till time should be no more. addison.
last. m. s. [la're, saxon.)
1. the mould on which shoes are formed.
the cobler is not to go beyond his loft. l’e/orange.
a cobler produced several new grins, having been used to
cut faces over his lost. addison's spectator.
should the big loft extend the shoe too wide,
each stone would wrench th' unwary step aside. gay.
2. [la/#, german.] a load ; a certain weight or measure.
la's tery. m. s. a red colour. -
the bashful blood her snowy cheeks did spread,
that her became as polish'd ivory,
which cunning craftsman's hand hath overlaid,
with fair vermilion, or pure lastery. spensor.
la's tage, n. s. [losage, fr. lostagie, dut. placre, sax. a load.]
1. custom paid for freightage.
2. the ballast of a ship.
la's ting. participial adj. [from loft.]
1. continuing ; durable. -
every violence offered weakens and impairs, and renders
the body less durable and lasting. ray on the creation.
2. of long continuance; perpetual.
white parents may have black children, as negroes some-
times have lasting white ones. boyle on colours.
the grateful work is done,
. the seeds of discord sow'd, the war begun:
frauds, fears, and fury, have possess'd the state,
and fix’d the causes of a lasting hate. dryden's aso.
a sinew cracked seldom recovers its former strength, and
the memory of it leaves a lasting caution in the man, not to
put the part quickly again to any robust employment. locke.
la's tingly. adv. [from lasting.] perpetually; durably.
la's ting ness. n.s.. [from lasting.] durableness; continuance.
all more lasting than beautiful, but that the consideration
of the exceeding lo/lingness made thc eye believe it was ex-
ceeding beautiful. sidoy.
consider the losingnes of the motions excited in the bot-
tom of the eye by light. newton's opticks.
la's tly. adv. [from ly?..]
1. in the last place.
i will justify the quarrel; secondly, balance the forces; and,
lastly, propound variety of designs for choice, but not adviso:
the choice. bacon's j/ar with spain.
2. in the conclusion; at last; finally.
latch. m. s. [lets, dutch ; laccio, italian.] a catch of a
door moved by a string, or a handle.
the latch mov’d up. gay's pasoral.
then comes rosy health from her cottage of thatch,
where never physician had lifted the latch. smart.
to latc h. v. a. [from the noun. j . -
1. to fasten with a latch.
he had strength to reach his father's house: the door was
only latched; and, when he had the latch in his hand, he
turned about his head to see his pursuer. looe.
2. [lecher, french.) to smear.
but hast thou yet latch'd the athenian's eyes
with the love juice, as i did bid thee do? shakes.
la’rches. n.s. -
latches or askets, in a ship, are small lines like loops, fast-
ened by sewing into the bonnets and drablers of a ship, in or-
der to lace the bonnets to the courses, or the drablers to the
bonnets. - aarris.
la’rcis e.t. n.s. [lacet, fr.] the string that fastens the shoe.
there cometh one mightier than i, the latchet of whose
shoes i am not worthy to unloose. also, i. 7.
late. adj. [laez, saxon; lact, dutch; in the comparative
iatter for later, in the superiative late? or loft. last is abso-
lute and definite, more than lates?...]
1. contrary to early ; slow; tardy; long delayed.
my hasting days flie on with full career,
but my lite spring no bud nor blossom sheweth. a soon.
just was the vengeance, and to latyi days
shall long posterity resound thy praise,
2. last in any place, office, or character.
all the difference between the late servants, and those who
staid in the family, was, that those latter were finer gentle-
inlein. addison's speciator.
3. the deceased; as, the works of the late mr. pope.
4. far in the day or night.
latf. ado - -
1. after long delays; after a long time. it is used often with
too, when the proper time is past.
o boy thy father gave thee life too soon,
and hath bereft thee of thy life too late. sha off, are.
a second silvius after these appears,
silvius af neas, for thy n. me he bears;
for arms and justice equally renown'd,
who lite relior'd in alba shall be crown'd. ixryden's afa.
pope's o' sy.
8 lie
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a t
l a t
. he laughs at all the giddy turns of state,
when mortals search too soon, and fear too late. dryden.
the later it is before any one comes to have these ideas, the
later also will it be before he comes to those maxims. locke.
i might have spar'd his life,
but now it is too late. philips's distres. mother.
2. in a later season. -
to make roses, or other flowers, come late, is an experi-
ment of pleasure ; for the antients esteemed much of the rosa
sera. bacon's natural history.
there be some flowers which come more early, and others
which come more late, in the year. bacon's nat. hisł.
3. lately; not long ago.
they arrived in that pleasant isle,
where fleeping late, she left her other knight. spenser.
in reason's absence fancy wakes,
ill matching words and deeds long past or late. milton.
the goddess with indulgent cares,
and social joys, the late transform'd repairs. pope.
frgin fresh pastures, and the dewy field,
the lowing herds return, and round them throng
with leaps and bounds the late imprison'd young. pope,
4. far in the day or night.
- was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
that you do lie so late 2 -
-sir, we were carousing till the second cock. shakes.
late the nocturnal sacrifice begun,
nor ended, till the next returning sun. dryden’s aemeid.
5. of late; lately ; in times past; near the present. late in
in this phrase seems to be an adjective.
who but felt of late? milton.
men have of late made use of a pendulum, as a more
steady regulator. locke.
late b. adj. [from late.] belated; surprised by the night.
i am so lated in the world, that i
have lost my way for ever. shakesp. ant, and cleopatra.
the west glimmers with some streaks of day:
now spurs the lated traveller apace
to gain the timely inn. shakespeare's macbeth.
latfly. adv. [from late.] not long ago.
paul found a certain jew named aquila, lately come from
italy. acts, xviii. i.
'lat en ess. m. s. [srom late.] time far advanced.
latens; in life might be improper to begin the world with.
swift to gay.
lat ent. adj. [latens, latin.] hidden ; concealed ; secret.
if we look into its retired movements, and more secret
latent springs, we may there trace out a steady hand pro-
ducing good out of evil. //oodward's natural history.
who drinks, alas ! but to forget; nor sces, -
that melancholy sloth, severe disease,
mem'ry confus'd, and interrupted thought,
death's harbingers, lie latent in the draught. prior.
what were wood's visible costs i know not, and what
were his latent is variously conjectured. swift.
lateral. adj. [lateral, french; latera, latin.]
1. growing out on the side ; belonging to the side.
why may they not spread their lateral branches till their
distance from the centre of gravity depress them. ray.
the smallest vessels, which carry the blood by lateral
branches, separate the next thinner fluid or serum, the dia-
meters of which lateral branches are less than the diameters
of the blood vess: 1s. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. placed, or acting on the side.
forth rush the levant, and the ponent winds
furus and zephyr, with their lateral noise,
sirocco and libecchio. - milton.
later ality. m. s. [from lateral.] the quality of having
distinct sides.
we may reasonably conclude a right and left laterality in
the ark, or naval edifice of noah. brown.
later ally. m. s. [from lateral.] by the side; side-wise.
the days are set laterally against the columns of the golden
number. holder on time.
latf war d. adv. [late and pearb, saxon.] somewhat late.
lath. n. s. slacca, saxon; late, latte, french.) a small long
piece of wood used to support the tiles of houses. -
with dagger of lath. shakspeare's twelfth night.
penny-royal and orpin they use in the country to trim their
houses; binding it with a lath or stick, and setting it against
a wall.
lat's are made of heart of oak, for outside work, as tiling
and plaistering; and of fir for inside plaistering, and pantile
lathing. - a.'oxon's mechanical exercises.
the god who frights away,
with his lath sword, the thieves and birds of prey. dryd.
to lath. v. a. [latter, fr. from the noun..] to fit up with
laths.
a small kiln consists of an oaken frame, lathed on every
fide. mortimer's husbandry.
the plaisterers work is commonly done by the yard square
for lathing. mortimer’s husbandry.
vol. ii, -
bacon's natural history.
lath. m. s. [la's, saxon. it is explained by du cange, i
suppose from spelman, portio comitatus major tres vel plures
hundredas continens: this is apparently contrary to spenser, in
the following example..] a part of a county.
if all that tything failed, then all that lath was charged for
that tything; and if the lath failed, then all that hundred was
demanded for them; and if the hundred, then the shire, who
would not rest till they had found that undutiful fellow, which
was not amesnable to law. spenser's ireland.
the fee-farms reserved upon charters granted to cities and
towns corporate, and the blanch rents and lath silver answered
by the sheriffs. bacon's office of alienation.
lathe, n. s. the tool of a turner, by which he turns about
his matter so as to shape it by the chizel.
those black circular lines we see on turned vessels of wood,
are the effects of ignition, caused by the pressure of an edged
stick upon the vessel turned nimbly in the lathe. ray.
to lather. v. m. slephan, saxon.] to form a foam.
- chuse water pure, -
such as will lather cold with soap. baynard.
to lather. v. a. to cover with foam of water and soap.
la’t h.e.r. m. s. [from the verb.] a foam or frothe made com-
monly by beating soap with water.
latin. adj. [latinus.] written or spoken in the language
of the old romans.
augustus himself could not make a new latin word. locke.
lat in. m. s. an exercise practised by school-boys, who turn
english into latin. r
in learning farther his syntaxis, he shall not use the com-
mon order in schools for making of latins. ' aftham.
latinism. [latinisne, french; latinismus, low latin.) a
latin idiom ; a mode of speech peculiar to the latin.
milton has made use of frequent transpositions, latinisms,
antiquated words and phrases, that he might the better devi-
ate from vulgar and ordinary expressions. addison.
latinist. n.j. [from latin.] one skilled in latin.
oldham was considered as a good latins. oldham's life.
latinity. m. s. [latinite, french; datinitas, latin.] purity
of latin stile; the latin tongue. .
if shakespeare was able to read plautus with ease, nothing
in latinity could be hard to him. dennis.
to latinize. [latiniser, french ; from latin.] to use words
or phrases borrowed from the latin.
i am liable to be charged that i latinize too much. dryden.
he uses coarse and vulgar words, or terms and phrases that
are latinized, scholastick, and hard to be understood. ipatts.
latish. adj. [from late.] somewhat late.
latiroost rous. adj. [latus and rostrum, lat.] broad-beaked.
in quadrupeds, in regard of the figure of their heads the
eyes are placed at some distance; in latirosłrous and flat-billed
birds they are more laterally seated. brown.
latitancy. m. s. [from latitani, latin.] delitescence; the
state of lying hid.
in vipers she has abridged their malignity by their secession
or latitancy. - brown's vulgar errours.
latitant. adj. [latitans, latin.] delitescent; concealed;
lying hid. -
snakes and lizzards, latitant many months in the year, con-
taining a weak beat in a copious humidity, do long subsist
without nutrition. brown.
force the small latitant bubbles of air to disclose themselves
and break. boyle.
it must be some other substance latitant in the fluid matter,
and really distinguishable from it. more.
latitation. m. s. [from latito, latin.] the state of lying
concealed.
latitude. n.s. [latitude, french; latitudo, latin.]
i. breadth; width; in bodies of unequal dimensions the shorter
axis, in equal bodies the line drawn from right to left.
whether the exact quadrat, or the long square, be the
better, i find not well determined; though i must prefer the .
latter, provided the length do not exceed the latitude above
one third part. j/alton's architecture.
2. room ; space; extent.
there is a difference of degrees in men's understandings, to
so great a latitude, that one may affirm, that there is a greater
difference between some men and others, than between some
men and beasts. locke.
3. the extent of the earth or heavens, reckoned from the equa-
tor to either pole : opposed to longitude.
we found ourselves in the latitude of thirty degrees two
minutes south. swift.
4. a particular degree, reckoned from the equator.
another effect the alps have on geneva is, that the sun
here rises later and sets sooner than it does to other places of
the same latitude. addison on italy.
5. unrestrained acceptation ; licentious or lax interpretation.
in such latitudes of sense, many that love me and the
church well, may have taken the covenant. king charles.
then, in comes the benign latitude of the doctrine of good-
will, and cuts asunder all those hard, pincing cords. south.
6. freedom from settled rules; laxity.
15 d in<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a u
l. a u
in human actions there are no degrees, and precise natural
limits described, but a latitude is indulged. taylor.
i took this kind of verse, which allows more latitude than
any other. - dryden.
7. extent; diffusion.
albertus, bishop of ratisbon, for his great learning, and
latitude of knowledge, sirnamed magnus; besides divinity,
hath written many tracts in philosophy. brown.
mathematicks, in its latitude, is usually divided into pure
and mixed. wilkins's mathematical magick.
i pretend not to treat of them in their full latitude; it suf-
fices to shew how the mind receives them, from sensation and
reflection. locke.
latitudin arian. adj. [latitudinaire, french ; latitudina-
rius, low latin.] not restrained; not confined; thinking or
acting at large. -
latitudinarian love will be expensive, and therefore i would
be informed what is to be gotten by it. collier on kindness.
latitudin arian. m. s. one who departs from orthodoxy.
la trant. adj. [latrans, latin.] barking.
thy care be first the various gifts to trace,
the minds and genius of the latrant race. tickell.
latria. n.s. [azrpsiz; latrie, fr.] the highest kind of
worship: distinguished by the papists from dulia, or inferior
worship.
the pracice of the catholick church makes genuflections,
prostrations, supplications, and other acts of latria to the
cross. stillingfleet on romish idolatry.
latten. m. s. [leton, french; latoen, dutch ; lattwn, welsh.]
brass; a mixture of copper and calaminaris stone.
to make lamp-black, take a torch or link, and hold it
under the bottom of a latten bason, and, as it groweth black
within, strike it with a feather into some shell. peacham.
la tter. adj. [this is the comparative of late, though uni-
versally written with tt, contrary to analogy, and to our own
practice in the superlative latest. when the thing of which
the comparison is made is mentioned, we use later; as, this
fruit is later than the rest; but latter when no comparison is
expressed, but the reference is merely to time ; as, those are
latter fruits.
- — valet usus
$2uem penes arbitrium eff, &amp; vis, &amp; norma loquendi..]
1. happening after something else.
2. modern; lately done or past.
hath not navigation discovered, in these latter ages, whole
nations at the bay of soldania locke.
3. mentioned last of two.
the difference between reason and revelation, and in what
sense the latter is superior. //atts.
latterly. adv. [from latter.] of late; in the last part of
life: a low word lately hatched.
latterly milton was short and thick. richardson.
la ttice. m. s. [lattis, french; by junius written lettice,
and derived from letz inen, a hindring iron, or iron stop; by
skinner imagined to be derived from latte, dutch, a lath, or
to be corrupted from nettice or network : i have sometimes
derived it from let and eye; leteyes, that which lets the eye.
it may be deduced from laterculus.] a reticulated window;
a window made with sticks or irons crossing each other at
small distances.
my good window of lattice fare thee well; thy casement
i need not open, i look through thee. shakespeare.
the mother of sisera looked out at a window, and cried
through the lattes. judg. v. 28.
up into the watch-tower get,
and see all things despoil'd of fallacies:
thou shalt not peep through lattices of eyes,
nor hear through labyrinths of ears, nor learn
by circuit or colle&amp;tions to discern. - donne.
the trembling leaves through which he play’d,
dappling the walk with light and shade,
like lattice windows, give the spy
room but to peep with half an eye. cleaveland.
to lattice. v. a. [from the noun..] to decusate, or cross;
to mark with cross parts like a lattice.
lavation, n. s. [lavatio, latin.] the act of washing.
such filthy stuff was by loose lewd varlets sung before the
chariot on the solemn day of her lavasion. hakewill.
latv arory. m. s. [from lava, latin.] a wash; something in
which parts diseased are washed.
lavatories, to wash the temples, hands, wrists, and jugu-
lars, do potently profligate, and keep off the venom. harvey.
laud. n. s. [laus, latin.]
1. praise; honour paid ; celebration.
doubtless, o guest, great laud and praise were mine,
reply'd the swain, for spotless faith divine:
if, after social rites, and gifts bestow'd,
i stain'd my hospitable hearth with blood. pope's odysy.
2. that part of divine worship which consists in praise.
we have certain hymns and services, which we say daily,
of laud and thanks to god for his marvellous works, bacon,
in the book of psalms, the louds make up a very great
part of it. government of the tongue.
to laud. v. a. [laude, latin.] to praise; to celebrate.
o thou almighty and eternal creator, having considered
the heavens the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars
which thou hast ordained, with all the company of heaven,
we laud and magnify thy glorious name. bentley,
laudable. adj. [laudabilis, latin.]
1. praise-worthy; commendable. -
i’m in this earthly world, where to do harm
is often laudable; but to do good, sometime
accounted dang'rous folly. shakespeare's macbeth.
affectation endeavours to correot natural defects, and has
always the laudable aim of pleasing, though it always misses it.
locke.
2. healthy; salubrious.
good blood, and a due projectile motion or circulation, are
necessary to convert the aliment into laudable animal juices.
- arbuthnot on aliments.
la'udable ness. m. s. [from laudable.] praise-worthiness.
la upably, adv. [from laudable.] in a manner deserving
raise.
p obsolete words may be laudally revived, when either they
are sounding or significant. dryden.
la'udanum. n. s. [a cant word, from laude, latin.] a so-
porifick tineture.
to lave. v. a. [lavo, latin.]
1. to wash; to bathe.
unsafe, that we must lave our honours
in these so flatt’ring streams. shakspeare's machah,
but as i rose out of the laving stream,
heav'n open'd her eternal doors, from whence
the spirit descended on me like a dove. milton.
with roomy decks, her guns of mighty strength,
whose low-laid mouths each mounting billow laves,
deep in her draught, and warlike in her length,
she seems a sea-wasp flying on the waves. dryden.
2. [lever, french.] to throw up; to lade; to draw out.
though hills were set on hills,
and seas met seas to guard thee, i would through :
i'd plough up rocks, steep as the alps, in dust,
and lave the tyrrhene waters into clouds,
but i would reach thy head. ben. johnson's catiliar,
some stow their oars, or stop the leaky sides,
another bolder yet the yard bestrides,
and folds the sails; a fourth with labour laves
th’ intruding seas, and waves ejects on waves.
to lave. v. n. to wash himself; to bathe.
in her chaste current oft the goddess laves
and with celestial tears augments the waves. pope.
to la v eer. v. n. to change the direetion often in a course,
how easy 'tis when destiny proves kind,
with full-spread sails to run before the wind :
but those that 'gainst stiff gales laveering go,
must be at once resolv’d, and skilful too.
la v ender. m. s. [lavendula..] a plant.
it is one of the verticillate plants, whose flower consists of
one leaf, divided into two lips; the upper lip, standing up-
right, is roundish, and, for the most part, bifid; but the un-
der lip is cut into three segments, which are almost equal:
these flowers are disposed in whorles, and are colle&amp;ted into
a slender spike upon the top of the stalks. miller.
the whole lavender plant has a highly aromatick smell
and taste, and is famous as a cephalick, nervous, and ute-
rine medicine. - hill's materia medica.
and then again he turneth to his play,
to spoil the pleasures of that paradise:
the wholesome sage, and lavender still grey,
rank smelling rue, and cummin good for eyes. spensor.
la’ve r. m. s. slavoir, french; from lave..] a washing vessel.
let us go find the body where it lies
soak'd in his enemies blood, and from the stream
with lavers pure, and cleansing herbs, wash off
the clodded gore. milton's agoni/ies.
he gave her to his daughters, to imbathe
in neciar'd lavers strew’d with asphodil.
young aretus from forth his bridal bow'r
brought the full laver o'er their hands to pour. pope's odyss.
to laugh. v. n. [plajan, saxon; lachen, german and
dutch ; lach, scottish. i
1. to make that noise which sudden merriment excites.
you saw my master wink and laugh upon you. . shakesh.
there's one did laughin's sleep, and one cried, murther 1
they wak'd each other. shakespeare's macbeth.
at this fusty stuff
the large achilles, on his prest-bed lolling,
from his deep chest laughs out a loud applause. shakoff.
laughing causeth a continued expulsion of the breath with
the loud noise, which maketh the interjection of laughing,
shaking of the breast and sides, running of the eyes with
water, if it be violent.
dryden.
d ryden.
milton.
bacon's natural history. '
2. [in
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a v.
l. a u
2. [in poetry.] to appear gay, favourable, pleasant, or sertile.
entreat her not the worse, in that i pray
you use her well ; the world may laugh again,
and i may live to do you kindness, if *
you do it her.
then laughs the childish year with flowrets crown'd. dry.
the plenteous board, high-heap'd with cates divine,
and o'er the foaming bowl the laughing wine. pope.
3. to laugh at. to treat with contempt; to ridicule.
presently prepare thy grave;
lie where the light foam of the sea may beat
thy grave-stone daily : make thine epitaph, -
that death in thee at others lives may laugh. shakesp.
*twere better for you, if 'twere not known in council :
you’ll be laugh’d at. shakespeare.
the dissolute and abandoned, before they are aware of it,
are betrayed to laugh at tiemselves, and upon refle&amp;tion find,
that they are merry at their own expence.
addison.
no wit to flatter left of all his store;
no fool to laugh at, which he valued more. pope.
to lau gir. v. a. to deride ; to scorn.
be bloody, bold and resolute; laugh to scorn
the pow'r of man.
shaft are: macbeth.
a wicked soul shall make him to be laughed to scorn of his
enemies. ecclus. vi. 4.
laggh. m. s. [from the verb.] the convulsion caused by mer-
riment ; an in articulate expression of sudden, merriment.
me gen le delia beckons from the plain,
then hid in shades, eludes her eager swain;
but feigns a laugh, to see me search around,
and by that laugh the willing fair is found. pope's spring.
la'u ghable. adj. ifrom laugh.j. such as may properly excite
laughter.
nature hath fram'd strange fellows in her time:
some that will evermore peep through their eye,
and laugh like parrots at a bagpiper;
and others of such vinegar aspect,
that they’ll not show their teeth in way of smile,
though nestor swear the jest be laughable. shakespeare.
casaubon confesses persius was not good at turning things
into a peasant ridicule; or, in other words, that he was not
a laughable writer. * dryden's juvenal.
lau'gher. m. s. [from laugh..] a man fond of merriment.
am a common laugher. shakesp. julius caesar.
some sober men cannot be of the general opinion, but the
laughers are much the majority. pope.
l.a. ughingly. adv. [from laughing.] in a merry way; merrily.
laughing stock. m. s. [laugh and stock.] a butt; an object
of ridicule.
the forlorn maiden, whom your eyes have seen
the laughing stock of fortune's mockerie. spenser.
pray you let us not be laughingstocks to other mens hu-
in ours. shakespeare.
supine credulous frailty exposes a man to be both a prey
and laughingstock at once. l’estrange.
la'ughter. n. s. [from laugh..] convulsive merriment; an
inarticulate expression of sudden merriment.
to be worst,
the lowest, most dejected thing of fortune,
stands still in esperance; lives not in fear.
the lamentable change is from the best,
the worst returns to laughter. shakspeare's king lear.
the act of laughter, which is a sweet contraction of the
muscles of the face, and a pleasant agitation of the vocal or-
gans, is not merely voluntary, or totally within the jurisdic-
tion of ourselves. brown's vulgar errours.
we find not that the laughter loving dame
mourn'd for anchises. waller.
pain or pleasure, grief or laughter. prior.
lavish. adj. [of this word i have been able to find no sa-
tisfactory etymology. it may be plausibly derived from to
lave, to throw out; as profundere opes is to be lavish.]
1. prodigal; wasteful; indiscreetly liberal.
his jolly brother, opposite in sense,
laughs at his thrift; and lavish of expence,
quaffs, crams, and guttles, in his own defence. dryden.
the dame has been too lavish of her feast,
and fed him till he loaths. row's jane shore.
2. scattered in waste; profuse: as, the cost was lavish.
3. wild; unrestrained.
bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
confronted him, curbing his lavish spirit. shakespeare.
to lavish. v. a. [from the adjective.] to scatter with pro-
fusion; to waste; to squander.
should we thus lead them to a field of slaughter,
might not th’ impartial world with reason say,
we lavish'd at our deaths the blood of thousands addison.
lavisher. m. s. [from lavish..] a prodigal; a profuse man.
la'vishly... adv. [from lavish.] profusely; prodigally.
my father's purposes have been mistook ;
and some about him have too lavishly
wrested his meaning and authority. shakso. han. iv.
shakespeare's henry vi.
then laughs the childish year with flowrets crown'd,
and lavishly perfumes the fields around. dryden.
raise to a wit is like rain to a tender flower ; if it be mo-
derately bestowed, it chears and revives ; but if too lavishly,
* overcharges and depresses him. pope.
}.} m. s. [from lavish.] prodigality; profusion.
first got with guile, and then preserv'd with dread,
and after spent with pride and lavishness. fairy q::cen.
to launch. v. n. [it is derived by skinner from lance, because
a ship is pushed into water with great force.]
1. to force a vessel into the sea. - - - - - - -, -
launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a
draught.
-- - luke, v. 4.
so short a stay prevails;
he soon equips the ship, supplies the sails, . . .
and gives the word to launch. dryden.
for general history, raleigh and howel are to be had.
he who would launch farther into the ocean, may consult
whear.
- - - * locke.
2. to rove at large ; to expatiate ; to make excursions.
from hence that gen'ral care and study springs, -
that launching and progression of the mind. . davies.
whoever pursues his own thoughts, will find them launch
out beyond the extent of body into the infinity of space. locke.
spenser has not contented himself with submissive imi.
tation: he launches out into very flow'ry paths, which still
conduct him into one great road. prior’s preface to solomon:
he had not acted in the charaster of a suppliant, if he had
launched out into a long oration. broome on the odyssey.
i have launched out of my subject on this article. arbuthnot.
to launch. v. a.
1. to push to sea. -
as art is used to fink episcopacy, and launch presbytery, in
england. - - king charles.
with stays and cordage last he rigg'd the ship,
and roll'd on leavers, launch'd her in the deep. pope.
2. to dart from the hand. this perhaps, for distinction sake,
might better be written lanch or lance.
the king of heav'n, obscure on high,
bar'd his red arm, and launching from the sky
his writhen bolt, not *aking empty smoke, * . . .,
down to the deep abyss the flaming fellow strook. dryden.
laund. n. s. [lande, french ; lawn, welsh.] lawn; a plain
extended between woods. - hanmer.
under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves,
for through this laund anon the deer will come ;
and in this covert will we make our stand. shakespeare.
la'undress. n. s. [lavandiere, french: skinner imagines that
lavandaresse may have been the old word..] a woman whose
employment is to wash cloaths. - -
the countess of richmond would often say, on condition
the princes of christendom would march against the turks, she
would willingly attend them, and be their laundress. camden.
take up these cloaths here quickly; carry them to the
laundress in datchet mead. shakespeare.
the laundress must be sure to tear her smocks in the wash-
ing, and yet wash them but half. swift.
la(undry. m. s. [as if lavanderie.]
1. the room in which clothes are washed. -
the affairs of the family ought to be consulted, whether
they concern the stable, dairy, the pantry, or laundry. swift.
2. the act or state of washing.
chalky water is too fretting, as appeareth in laundry of
cloaths, which wear out apace. bacon’s natural history.
la/o lta. m. s. [la volte, french..] an old dance, in which
was much turning and much capering.
hanmer.
i cannot sing,
nor heel the high lavolt; nor sweeten talk;
nor play at subtle games. shakespeare:
la’ureate, adj. [laureatus, lat.] decked of invested
with a
laurel. -
bid amaranthus all his beauty shed,
and daffodillies fill their cups with tears, , ,
to strew the laureate hearse where lycid lies. milton,
soft on her lap her laureate son reclines. pope.
laureation. n.s.. [from laureate.] it denotes, in the scottish
universities, the act or state of having degrees conferred, as
they have in some of them a flowery crown, in imitation of
laurel among the ancients.
laurel. n.s. [saurus, lat. i̇aurier, french.] a tree, called
also the cherry bay.
the laurus or laurel of the antients is affirmed by naturalists
to be what we call the bay tree. ainsworth.
the laurel, meed of mighty conquerors,
and poets sage. fairy queen.
the laurel orcherry-bay, by cutting away the side branches,
will rise to a large tree. mortimer's husandry.
laureled. adj. [from laurel.] crowned or decorated with
laurel; laureate.
hear'st thou the news my friend th' express is come
with laurell'd letters from the camp to rome. dryden.
then
_*- -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a w
then future ages with delight shall see
how plato's, bacon's, newton's, looks agree ;
or in fair series laurell’d bards be shown
a virgil there, and here an addison. pope.
law. n.j. [laga, saxon; loi, french; lawgh, erse.
1. a rule of action. *
that which doth assign unto each thing the kind, that
which doth moderate the force and power, that which doth
appoint the form and measure of working; the same we term
a law. - hocker.
. unhappy man to break the pious laws
of nature, pleading in his children's cause. dryden.
2. a decree, edict, statute, or custom, publickly established as
a rule of justice,
ordain them laws, part such as appertain
to civil justice, part religious rites. milton.
our nation would not give laws to the lish, therefore now
the irish gave laws to them. davies on ireland.
3. a decree authoritatively annexing rewards or punishments to
certain actions.
so many laws argue so many sins. milton.
laws politique among men presuming man to be rebel-
lious. hooker.
4. judicial process.
when every case in law is right. shakspeare.
- he hath resisted law,
and therefore law shall scorn him further trial
than the severity of public power. shakes care.
tom touchy is a fellow famous for taking the law of every
body : there is not one in the town where he lives that he has
not sued at a quarter-sessions. addison's speciator.
5. a distinet edict or rule.
one law is split into two. baker on learning.
6. conformity to law; any thing lawful.
in a rebellion,
when what's not meet, but what must be, was law,
then were they chosen. shakespeare's coriolanus.
7. the rules or axioms of science ; as, the laws of mechanicks.
8. an established and constant mode or process; a fixed sor-
respondence of cause and effect: as, the laws of magnetism.
natural agents have their law. hooker.
i dy'd, whilst in the womb he stay’d,
attending nature's law. shakespeare's cymbeline.
9. the mosaical institution: distinguished from the gospel.
law can discover sin, but not remove, -
save by these shadowy expiations. milton.
10. the books in which the jewish religion is delivered: di-
stinguished from the prophets.
11. a particular form or mode of trying and judging ; as, law
martial, law mercantile: the ecclesiastical law whereby we
are governed.
12. jurisprudence; the study of law: as, a doctor of law.
la'w ful. adj. [law and full.] agreeable to law; conform-
able to law; allowed by law ; legitimate; legal.
it is not lawful for thee to have her. matt. xiv. 4.
gloster's bastard son was kinder to his father, than my
daughters got 'tween the lawful sheets. shakesp. king lear.
la'w fully. adv. [from lawful..] legally ; agreeably to law.
this bond is forfeit ; -
and lawfully by this the jew may claim
a pound of flesh. shakespeare's merchant of venice.
though it be not against strict justice for a man to do
those things which he might otherwise lawfully do, albeit his
neighbour doth take occasion from thence to conceive in his
mind a false belief, yet christian charity will, in many cases,
restrain a man. south.
i may be allowed to tell your lordship, the king of poets,
what an extent of power you have, and how lawfully you
may exercise it. dryden's dedication to juvenal.
la'w fuln ess. n.s.. [from lawful.j legality; allowance of law.
it were an error to speak further, till i may see some sound
foundation laid of the lawfulness of the action. bacon.
la wolve r. m. s. [law and giver.j legislator; one that makes
laws.
solomon we esteem as the lawgiver of our nation. bacon.
a law may be very reasonable in itself, although one does
not know the reason of the lawgivers. swift.
lawo iving. adj. [law and giving.] legislative.
lawgiving heroes, fam'd for taming brutes,
and raising cities with their charining lutes. //aller.
la'wless, adj. [from law, j
1. unrestrained by any law; not subject to law.
the necessity of war, which among human actions is the
most lawls, hath some kind of affinity with the necessity of
law. . raleigh's essays.
the lawles, tyrant, who denies -
to know their god, or message to regard,
must be compell’d. milton.
orpheus did not, as poets feign, tame savage beasis,
but men as lawles, and as wild as they. roscommon.
not the gods, nor angry jove will bear
thy lawless wand'ring walks in open air. dryd. æn.
w
blind as the cyclops, and as blind as he,
they own’d a lawless savage liberty,
like that our painted ancestors so priz’d,
ere empire's arts their breasts had civiliz'd. dryden,
he meteor-like, flames lawless through the void,
destroying others, by himself destroy’d. pope.
2. contrary to law; illegal.
take not the quarrel from his powerful arms,
he needs no indireet nor o course
to cut off those that have offended him. shakespeare.
we cite our faults,
that they may hold excus'd our lawles lives. shakeshcare.
thou the first, lay down thy lawless claim ;
thou of my blood who bear'st the julian name. dryden.
la'wlessly. adv. [from lawls...] in a manner contrary to law.
fear not, he bears an honourable mind, -
and will not use a woman lawles'y. shoshcare.
la'w maker. m. s. [law and maker.] legislator; one who
makes laws; a lawgiver. t
their judgment is, that the church of christ should ad-
mit no lawmakers but the evangelists. - h22.eer.
law n. m. s. [land, danish ; lawn, welsh ; lande, french...]
1. an open space between woods.
betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks,
grazing the tender herb, were interpos'd. assistan.
his mountains were shaded with young trees, that gra-
dually shot up into groves, woods, and forests, intermixed
with walks, and lawns, and gardens. addison.
stern beasts in trains that by his truncheon fell,
now grisly forms shoot o'er the lawns of hell. pope.
interspers'd in lawns and opening glades,
thin trees arise that shun each other's shades. pope.
2. [ linon, french.) finc linen, remarkable for being used in
the sleeves of bishops.
should'st thou bleed,
to stop the wounds my finest lawn i'd tear,
wash them with tears, and wipe them with my hair. prior.
from high life high characters are drawn,
a saint in crape is twice a saint in lawn. pete.
what awe did the slow solemn knell inspire;
the duties by the lawn rob’d prelate pay’d,
and the last words, that dust to dust convey’d to coe.''.
lawsuit. m. s. [law and suit.] a process in law; a litiga-
tion.
the giving the priest a right to the tithe would produce
lawsuits and wrangles; his attendance on the courts of justice
would leave his people without a spiritual guide. swift.
lawy e.r. m. s. [from law.] professor of law ; advocate;
pleader.
it is like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer, you gave me no-
thing for it. shao speare's king lear.
is the law evil, because some lawyers in their office swerve
from it j; hitgift.
i have entered into a work touching laws, in a middle
term, between the speculative and reverchd discourses of phi-
losophers, and the writings of marty,’rs. bacon's holy j/ar,
the nymphs with scorn beheld their foes,
when the defendant's council rose;
and, what no lawyer ever lack'd,
with impudence own’d all the fact. swift,
lax. adj. [laxus, latin.]
1. loose ; not confined.
inhabit lax, ye pow'rs of heav'n milion.
2. disunited; not strongly combined.
in mines, those parts of the earth which abound with
strata of stone, suffer much more than those which consist of
gravel, and the like laxer matter, which more easily give way.
joadward.
3. vague ; not rigidly exact.
dialogues were only lax and moral discourses. baker.
4. loose in body, so as to go frequently to stool; laxative me-
dicines are such as promote that disposition. &amp; incy.
5. slack; not tense.
by a branch of the auditory nerve that goes between the
ear and the palate, they can hear themselves, though their
outward ear be stopt by the lax membrane to all sounds that
come that way. holder's elements of speech.
lax. n. s. a looseness; a diarrhoea.
laxation. m. s. [laxatio, latin.]
1. the act of loosening or flakening.
2. the state of being loosened or slackened.
laxative, adj. [laxatif, french; laxo, latin.] having the
power to ease coitiveness.
omitting honey, which is of a laxative power itself; the
powder of loadstones doth rather constipate and bind, than
purge and loosen the belly. brown.
the oil in wax is emollient, laxative, and anodyne.
z arbuthnot on aliments.
laxative. m. s. a medicine flightly purgative; a medicine
that relaxes the bowels without stimulation.
nought profits him to save abandon'd life.
nor vomits upward aid, nor downward laxative. joryol.
la kat 1 v e-
!
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a y
l. a. y.
la’xarıven ess. m. s. [from laxative..] power of easing cos-
tiveness.
la(xity. n.f. [laxitas, latin.]
1. not compression; not close cohesion.
the former causes could never beget whirlpools in a chaos
of so great a laxity and thinness, bentley,
2. contrariety to rigorous precision; as, laxity of expression.
. looseness; not costiveness.
if sometimes it cause any laxity, it is in the same way with
iron unprepared, which will disturb some bodies, and work by
purge and vomit. brown's vulgar errours.
4. slackness; contrariety to tension. -
laxity of a fibre, is that degree of cohesion in its parts
which a small force can alter, so as to increase its length be-
yond what is natural.
- $2uincy.
in consideration of the laxity of their eyes, they are
to relapse.
5. openness; not closeness.
hold a piece of paper close by the flame of a candle, and
by little and little remove it further off, and there is upon the
paper some part of that which l see in the candle, and it grows
fill less and less as i remove ; so that if i would trust my
sense, i should believe it as very a body upon the paper as in
the candle, though infeebled by the laxity of the channel in
which it flows. digby on b:dies.
la’s n ess. m. s. laxity ; not tension; not precision; not cos-
tiveness.
j/ijeman's surgery.
for the free passage of the found into the ear, it is requi-
site that the tympanum be tense, and hard stretched; otherwise
the laxns of that membrane will certainly dead and damp the
found. holder's elements of speech.
lay. preterite of lye.
o would the quarrel lay upon cur heads. shosh.
he was familiarly acquainted with him at such time as he
day embassador at constantinople. knoller.
when ahab had heard those words he fasted, and lay in
sackcloth.
i try’d whatever in the godhead lay.
he rode to rouze the prey,
that shaded by the fern in barbour lay, -
and thence dislodged. dryden's knight's 7 a'r.
leaving rome, in my way to sienna, 1 lay the first night
at a village in the territories of the antient veii.
i kings, xxi. 27.
197; den.
addis. ?!.
how could he have the retiredness of the cloister, to per-
form all those acts of devotion in, when the burthen of the
reformation lay upon his shoulders! francis atterbury.
the presbyterians argued, that if the pretender should in-
vade those parts where the numbers and estates of the dissen-
ters chiefly lay, they would sit still. swift.
to l.a.y. v. a. [lec;an, saxon; leggen, dutch.]
1. to place ; to put ; to reposite. this word being correla-
tive to lie, involves commonly immobility or extension ; a punish-
ment laid is a punishment that cannot be shaken off; in immo-
bility is included weight. one house laid to another implies
extension.
he laid his robe from him.
jonah.
they have laid their swords under their heads. ezekiel.
soft on the flow'ry herb i found me laid. milton.
he sacrificing laid
the entrails on the wood. milton.
2. to place along. -
seek not to be judge, being not able to take away iniquity,
left at any time thou fear the person of the mighty, and lay a
stumbling-block in the way of thy uprightness. ecclus.
a stone was laid on the mouth of the den. daniel.
3. to beat down corn or grass.
another ill accident is laying of corn with great rains in
harvest. bacon's natural hylony.
let no sheep there play, -
nor frisking kids the flowery meadows lay.
4. to keep from rising ; to settle; to still.
i'll use th' advantage of my power,
and lay the summer's dust with showers of blood. shakesp.
it was a sandy soil, and the way had been full of dust; but
an hour or two before a refreshing fragrant shower of rain had
laid the dust. ray on creation.
5. to fix deep ; to dispose regularly : either of these notions may
be conceived from the following examples; but regularity
seems rather implied ; so we say, to lay bricks; to lay planks.
schismaticks, outlaws, or criminal persons, are not fit to
jay the foundation of a new colony.
i lay the deep foundations of a wall,
and enos, nam'd from me, the city call. dryden.
men will be apt to call it pulling up the old foundations of
knowledge; i persuade myself, that the way i have pursued
says those foundations surer. locke.
6: to put; to place.
then he offered it to him again; then he put it by again ;
but, to my thinking, he was very loth to lay his fingers on it.
shakespeare's julius casar.
till us death lay
to ripe and melow, we are but stubborn clay.
vol. ii.
may's virgil.
bacon.
donne.
2.
subject -
they shall lay hands on the fick, and recover. afar}.
they, who so state a question, do no more but so parate
and disentangle the parts of it, one from another, and lay
them, when so disentangled, in their due order.
locłe.
we to thy name our annual rites will pay,
and on thy altars sacrifices lay. pope's statius.
7. to bury; to inter.
david fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw
corruption, acis, xiii. 36.
8. to station or place privily.
lay thee an ambush for the city behind thee. jos. viii. 2.
the wicked have laid a snare for me. psalms.
lay not wait, o ! wicked man, against the dwelling of the
righteous.
9. to spread on a surface. -
the colouring upon those maps should be laid on so thin;
as not to obscure or conceal any part of the lines. f/atts.
10. to paint ; to enamel. -
the pictures drawn in our minds are laid in fading colours;
and, if not sometimes refreshed, vanish and disappear.
11. to put into any state of quiet.
they bragged, that they doubted not but to abuse, and
lay asleep, the queen and council of england.
12. to calm ; to still ; to quiet ; to allay.
friends, loud tumults are not laid
with half the easiness that they are rais'd. b. johnson.
thus pass'd the night so foul, till morning fair
came forth with pilgrim steps in amice grey,
who with her radiant finger still'd the roar
of thunder, chas’d the clouds and laid the winds. milton.
. after a tempest, when the winds are laid, - -
the calm sea wonders at the wrecks it made.
i fear'd i should have found
a tempest in your soul, and came to lay it. penham.
at once the wind was laid, the whisp'ring sound
was dumb, a rising earthquake rock'd the ground. dryd.
13. to prohibit a spirit to walk.
the husband found no charm to lay the devil in a petti-
coat, but the rattling of a bladder with beans in it. l’estr.
14. to set on the table. -
his xi, 4.
i laid meat unto them.
15. to propagate plants by fixing their twigs in the ground. . .
the chief time of laying gilliflowers is in july, when the
flowers are gone. 443rtioner's husbandry.
16. to wager; to stake.
but since you will be mad, and fince you may
suspe&amp;t my courage, if i should not lay;
the pawn i proffer shall be full as good.
17. to reposite any thing. -
the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest;
for herself, where she may lay her young. psal. lxxxiv. 3.
18. to exclude eggs.
after the egg lay'd, there is no further growth or nourish-
ment from the female. - bacon's natural history.
a hen mistakes a piece of chalk for an egg, and sits upon it;
she is insensible of an increase or diminution in the number of
those she lays. addison’s speciator.
19. to apply with violence ; as, to lay blows.
lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a
mount against it. ezek. iv. 2.
prov. xxiv. 15.
locke:
-
bacon.
js allor.
dryden's firgi'.
never more shall my torn mind be heal’d,
nor taste the gentle comforts of repose !
a dreadful band of gloomy cares surround me,
and lay strong siege to my distracied soul. phillips.
20. to apply nearly.
she layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the
distaff. prov. xxxi. 19.
it is botter to go to the house of mourning than to go to the
house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the
living will lay it to his heart. eccles vii. 2:
the peacock laid it extremely to heart, that, being juno’s
dailing bird, he had not the nightingale's voice. l’e/irange.
he that really lays these two things to heart, the extreme
necessity that he is in, and the small possibility of help, will
never come coldly to a work of that concernment.
21. to add ; to conjoin.
wo unto them that lay field to field. ja. v. 8.
22. to put in a state ; implying somewhat of disclosure.
if the sinus lie distant, say it open first, and cure that aper-
tion before you divide that in ano.
the wars have laid whole countries waste.
23. to scheme ; to contrive.
every breast she did with spirit inflame, -
yet still fresh projects loy'd the grey ey'd dame. cho?man.
homer is like his jupiter, has his terrors, shaking olym-
pus; virgil, like the same power in his benevoiewice, coun-
selling with the gods, laying plans for empires. pope.
don diego and we have laid it so, that before the rope is
well about thy neck, he will break in and cut thee down. aroit.
24. to charge as a payment.
dufa.
// is man.
addison.
a tax laid upon land seems hard to the landholder, because
it is so much money going out of his pocket.
15 e.
- £ocke,
25. to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a y
l a y
n
25. to impute; to charge.
preoccupied with what
you rather must do, than what you should do,
made you against the grain to voice him consul,
ilay the fault on us. shakspeare.
how shall this bloody deed be answered 2
it will be laid to us, whose providence
should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt,
this mad young man. shakespeare's hamlet.
we need not lay new matter to his charge. shakesp.
men groan from out of the city, yet god layeth not folly
to them. job, xxiv. 12.
let us be glad of this, and all our fears
lay on his providence. paradise regain'd.
the writers of those times lay the disgraces and ruins of
their country upon the numbers and fierceness of those savage
nations that invaded them. temple.
they lay want of invention to his charge ; a capital crime.
- dryden's 42noid.
you represented it to the queen as wholly innocent of those
crimes which were laid unjustly to its charge. dryden.
they lay the blame on the poor little ones. locke.
there was eagerness on both sides; but this is far from
laying a blot upon luther. atterbury.
26. to impose, as evil or punishment.
the weariest and most loathed life
that age, ach, penury, imprisonment,
can lay on nature, is a paradise
to what we fear of death. shakesp. meas for meas.
thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou
lay upon him usury. exod. xx. 25.
the lord shall lay the fear of you, and the dread of you
upon all the land. deut. xi. 25.
these words were not spoken to adam; neither, indeed,
was there any grant in then made to adam ; but a punish-
ment said upon eve. locee.
27. to enjoin as a duty, or a rule of action.
it seemed good to lay upon you no greater burden.
aeïs, xv. 28.
whilst you lay on your friend the favour, acquit him of the
debt. //ycherly.
a prince who never disobey'd,
not when the most severe commands were laid,
nor want, nor exile, with his duty weigh’d. dryden.
you see what obligation the profession of christianity lays
upon us to holiness of life. tillotson.
negle&amp;t the rules each verbal critic lays,
for not to know some trifles is a praise. pope.
28. to exhibit; to offer.
it is not the manner of the romans to deliver any man
to die, before that he which is accused have the accusers face
to face, and have licence to answer for himself concerning
the crime laid against him. aois, xxv. 16.
till he lays his indictment in some certain country, we do
not think ourselves bound to answer. atterbury.
29. to throw by violence.
he bringeth down them that dwell on high; the lofty city
he layeth it low, even to the ground. isa. xxvi. 5.
brave caeneus laid ortygius on the plain,
the victor caeneus was by turnus slain. dryden.
he took the quiver, and the trusty bow
achates us’d to bear; the leaders first
he laid along, and then the vulgar pierc’d. dryden.
30. to place in comparison.
lay down by those pleasures the fearful and dangerous
thunders and lightnings, and then there will be found no
comparison. raleigh.
31. to lay apart. to reject; to put away.
lay apart all fitthiness.
32. to lay aside. to put away; not to retain.
let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so
easily beset us. heb. xii. 1.
amaze us not with that majestic frown,
but lay assae the greatness of your crown. //aller.
roscommon first, then mulgrave rose, like light;
the stagyrite, and horace, laid aside,
inform'd by them, we need no foreign guide. granville.
retention is the power to revive again in our minds those
ideas which, after imprinting, have disappeared, or have been
said aside out of sight. locke.
when by just vengeance guilty mortals perish,
the gods behold their punishment with pleasure,
and lay the uplifted thunder-bolt aside. addison's cato.
33. to lay away. to put from one; not to keep.
queen esther laid away her glorious apparel, and put on
the garments of anguish. esther, xiv. 2.
34. to lay before. to expose to view; to shew ; to display.
i cannot better satisfy your piety, than by laying bfore you
james, i. 21.
a prospect of your labours. //e/e.
that treaty hath been laid before the commons. swift.
their office it is to lay the business of the nation before him.
addison.
35. to lay ly. to reserve for some future time.
let every one lay by him in flore, as god hath prospercd
him. i cor. xvi. 2.
36. to lay by. to put from one; to dismiss.
let brave spirits that have fitted themselves for command,
either by sea or land, not be laid by as persons unnecessary for
the time. bacon's advice to williers.
she went away, and laid by her veil. gen. xxxviii. 19.
did they not swear to live and die
with essex, and straight laid him by. hudoras.
for that look, which does your people awe,
when in your throne and robes you give 'em law,
lay it by here, and give a gentler finde. jp aller.
darkness, which faircit nymphs disarms,
defends us ill from mira's charms;
mira can lay her beauty by,
take no advantage of the eye,
quit all that lely's art can take,
and yet a thousand captives make. j/aller.
then he lays by the publick care,
thinks of providing for an heir ;
learns how to get, and how to spare. denham.
the tuscan king, -
laid 'y the lance, and took him to the sing. dryden.
where daedalus his borrow’d wings lif by,
to that obscure retreat i chuse to fly. dryin's juvenal.
my zeal for you must lay the farther hy, -
and plead my country's cause against my son. dryden.
fortune, conscious of your destiny,
e’en then took care to lay you softly by ;
and wrapp'd your fate among her precious things,
kept fresh to be unfolded with your king's. dry len.
dismiss your rage, and say your weapons ly,
know i protect them, and they shall not die. dryden.
when their doica, ure is once declared, they ought not
presently to say ‘y the severity of their brows, but restore their
children to their former grace with some difficulty. locke.
37. to lay awn. to deposite as a pledge, equivalent, or fa-
tisfaction.
i lay down my life for the sheep.
for her, my lord,
i dare my life lay down, and will dot, sir,
please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
i' th' eyes of heaven. soaks care's s/ in:er's tale.
38. to lay down. to quit; to resign.
the soldier being once brought in for the service, i will
not have him to lay down his arms any more. speyer', ireland.
ambitious conqueros, in their mad career,
check'd by thy voice, lay down the sword and spear.
blackmore's creation.
the story of the tragedy is purely fiction; for i take it up
where the history has laid it down. dryden's don sewa/lian.
9. to lay down. to commit to repose. -
i will lay mc down in peace and sleep. psal. xlviii.
and they lay themselves down upon cloths laid to pledge,
by every altar. amos, ii. 8.
we lay us down, to sleep away our cares; night shuts up the
senses. ganville's scess.
some god conduct me to the sacred shades,
or lift me high to hamus' hilly crown,
or in the plains of tempe lay me down. dryden's wirgil.
40. to lax down. to advance as a proposition.
i have laid down, in some measure, the description of the
old known world. albot.
kircher lays it down as a certain principle, that there never
was any people so rude, which did not acknowledge and wor-
ship one supreme deity. stillingfiest.
i must lay down this for your encouragement, that we are no
longer now under the heavy yoke of a perfect unfinning obe-
dience. //ake's preparation for death.
plato lays it down as a principle, that whatever is permitted
to befal a just man, whether poverty or sickness, shall, either
john, x. 15.
in life or death, conduce to his good. addison.
from the maxims laid down many may conclude, that there
had been abuses. swift.
41. 72 lay for. to attempt by ambush, or infidious prac-
tices.
he embarked, being hardly laid for at sea by cortug-ogli,
a famous pirate. knolles.
42. to lay forth. to diffuse; to expatiate.
o bird the delight of gods and of men' and so he lays
himself forth upon the gracefulness of the raven. l'eorange.
43. 72 lay farth. to place when dead in a decent posture.
embalm me,
then lay me forth; although unqueen'], yet like
a queen; and daughter, to a king, inter me. slass speara.
44. to lay hold of. to seize; to cach.
then shall his father and his mother loy hold on him, and
bring him out. deut. xxi. 19.
favourable seasons of aptitude and inclination, be heedfully
la'd hold of. locke.
45. to lay in. to store ; to treasure.
let
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l a y
l a y
let the main part of the ground employed to gardens or
corn be to a common stock; and laid in, and stored up, and
then delivered out in proportion." bacon.
a vessel and provisions laid in large
for man and beast. milton.
an equal stock of wit and valour
he had laid in, by birth a taylor. hudibras.
they saw the happiness of a private life, but they thought
they had not yet enough to make them happy, they would have
more, and laid in to make their solitude luxurious. dryden.
readers, who are in the flower of their youth, should
labour at those accomplishments which may set off their per-
sons when their bloom is gone, and to lay in timely provisions
for manhood and old age. addison's guardian.
46. to lay on. to apply with violence.
we make no excuses for the obstinate: blows are the pro-
per remedies; but blows laid on in a way different from the
ordinary. locke on education.
47. to lay open. to shew ; to expose.
teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak,
lay open to my earthy gross conceit,
smother'd in errours, feeble, shallow, weak,
the folded meaning of your word's deceit. shakes care.
a fool layeth open his folly. prov. xiii. 16.
48. to lay over. to incrust; to cover; to decorate super-
ficially.
wo unto him that faith to the wood, awake; to the dumb
stone, arife, it shall teach : behold, it is laid over with gold
and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.
habb. ii. 19.
49. to lay out. to expend.
fathers are wont to lay up for their sons,
thou for thy son are bent to lay out all. milton.
tycho brahe laid out, besides his time and industry, much
- i.' sums of money on instruments than any man we ever
card of. - boyle.
the blood and treasure that’s laid out,
is thrown away, and goes for nought. hudibras.
if you can get a good tutor, you will never repent the
charge; but will always have the satisfaction to think it the
money, of all other, the best laid out. locke.
i, in this venture, double gains pursue,
and laid out all my stock to purchase you. dryden.
my father never at a time like this
would lay out his great soul in words, and waste
such precious moments. addison's cato,
a melancholy thing to see the disorders of a houshold that
is under the conduct of an angry stateswoman, who lays out
all her thoughts upon the publick, and is only attentive to find
out miscarriages in the ministry. addison's freeholder.
when a man spends his whole life among the stars and
planets, or lays out a twelve-month on the spots in the sun,
however noble his speculations may be, they are very apt to
fall into burlesque. addison on ancient medal.
nature has laid out all her art in beautifying the face; she
has touched it with vermilion, planted in it a double row of
ivory, and made it the seat of smiles and blushes. addison.
50. to lay out. to display; to discover.
he was dangerous, and takes occasion to lay out bigotry,
and false confidence, in all its colours. atterbury.
51. to lay out. to dispose ; to plan.
the garden is laid out into a grove for fruits, a vineyard,
and an allotment for olives and herbs. notes on the odyssey.
52. to lay out. with the reciprocal pronoun, to exert ; to
put forth.
no selfish man will be concerned to lay out himself for the
good of his country. smalridge.
53. to lay to. to charge upon.
when we began, in courteous manner, to lay his unkind-
ness unto him, he, seeing himself confronted by so many, like
a resolute orator, went not to denial, but to justify his cruel
falshood. sidney.
54. to lay to. to apply with vigour.
let children be hired to lay to their bones, -
from fallow as needeth, to gather up stones. tussor.
we should now say to our hands to root them up, and can-
not tell for what. oxford reasons against the covenant.
55. to lay to. to harass; to attack.
the great master having a careful eye over every part of
the city, went himself unto the station, which was then
hardly laid to by the bassa mustapha. knolles.
whilst he this, and that, and each man's blow,
doth eye, defend, and shift, being laid to sore;
backwards he bears. - daniel's civil war.
56. to lay together. to colle&amp;t; to bring into one view.
if we lay all these things together, and consider the parts,
rise, and degrees of his sin, we shall find that it was not for
nothing. south.
many people apprehend danger for want of taking the true
measure of things, and laying matters rightly together. l'estr.
my readers will be very well pleased, to see so many useful
hints upon this subject laid together in so clear and concise a
manner. - addison's guardian.
one series of consequences will not serve the turn, but
many different and opposite deductions must be examined,
and laid together, before a man can come to make a right
judgment of the point in question.
locke.
57. to lay under. to subject to.
a roman soul is bent on higher views,
to civilize the rude unpolish'd world, - -
and lay it under the restraint of laws. addison's cato.
58. to lay up. to confine to the bed or chamber.
in the east indies, the general remedy of all subject to the
gout, is rubbing with hands till the motion raise a violent
heat about the joints : where it was chiefly used, no one was
ever troubled much, or laid up by that disease. temple.
59. to lay up. to store; to treasure; to reposite for future use.
st. paul did will them of the church of corinth, every man
to lay up somewhat by him upon the sunday, till himself did
come thither, to send it to the church of jerusalem for relief
of the poor there. hooker.
those things which at the first are obscure and hard, when
memory hath laid them up for a time, judgment afterwards
growing explaineth them. hooker.
that which remaineth over, lay up to be kept until the
morning. exod. xvi. 23.
the king must preserve the revenues of his crown without
diminution, and lay up treasures in store against a time of
extremity. bacon's advice to williers.
the whole was tilled, and the harvest laid up in several
granaries. temple.
i will lay up your words for you till time shall serve. dryd.
this faculty of laying up, and retaining ideas, several other
animals have to a great degree, as well as man. locke.
what right, what true, what fit, we justly call,
let this be all my care; for this is all :
to lay this harvest up, and hoard with haste .
what every day will want, and most, the last. pope.
to la y. v. m.
1. to bring eggs. - -
hens will greedily eat the herb which will make them lay
the better. - martimer's hisbandoy.
2. to contrive ; to form a scheme.
which mov’d the king,
by all the aptest means could be procur'd, - . .
to lay to draw him in by any train. daniel's civil war.
3. to lay about. to strike on all sides; to act with great
diligence and vigour.
at once he wards and strikes, he takes and pays,
now forc'd to yield, now forcing to invade,
before, behind, and round about him lays. spensor.
and laid about in fight more busily,
than th’ amazonian dame penthesile. hudibras.
in the late successful rebellion, how studiously did they say
about them, to cast a slur upon the king : south.
he provides elbow-room enough for his conscience to lay
about, and have its full play in. south.
4. to lay at. to strike; to endeavour to strike.
fiercely the good man did at him lay,
the blade oft groaned under the blow. speoser.
the sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold. of ob.
5. to lay in for. to make overtures of oblique invitation.
i have laid in for these, by rebating the satire, where justice
would allow it, from carrying too sharp an edge. dryden.
6. to lay on. to strike; to beat without intermission.
his heart laid on as if it try’d,
to force a passage through his fide. hudibrai.
answer, or answer not, 'tis all the same, - -
he lays me on, and makes me bear the blame. dryden.
7. to lay on. to act with vehemence: used of expences.
my father has made her mistress
of the feast, and she lays it on. shakesh. ipinter's tale.
8. to lay out. to take measures.
i made strict enquiry wherever i came, and laid out for in-
telligence of all places, where the intrails of the earth were
laid open. l/oodward.
9. to lay upon. to importune; to request with earnestness
and inceflintly. obsolete. - -
all the people laid so earnestly upon him to take that war
in hand, that they said they would never bear arms more
against the turks, if he omitted that occasion. knzllet.
l.a.y. m. s. [from the verb.] -
1. a row ; a stratum ; a layer ; one rank in a series, reckoned
upwards. - -
a vic] should have a lay of wire-strings below, as close to
the belly as the lute, and then the strings of guts mounted
upon a bridge as in ordinary viols, that the upper strings
strucken might make the lower resound. fawn.
upon this they lay a layer of stone, and upon that a lay of
wood. - mortiner's husbandry.
2. a wager. - -
it is esteemed an even ly, whether any inan lives ten years
longer :
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l. a z
l e. a
longer: i suppose it is the same, that one of any ten might die
within one year. graunt's bills of mortality.
lay. m. s. sley, leag, saxon; ly, scottish.) grassy ground;
meadow; ground unplowed, and kept for cattle; more fre-
quently, and more properly, written lea. -
a tuft of daisies on a flow'ry lay
they saw. dryden's flower and leaf.
the plowing of laye; is the first plowing up of grass ground
for corn. martimer's husbandry.
lay. m. s. slay, french. it is said originally to signify sorrow
or complaint, and then to have been transferred to poems writ-
ten to express sorrow. it is derived by the french from
lossus, latin, a funeral song; but it is found likewise in the
teutonick diale&amp;t: ley, leos, saxon; key, danish..] a song;
a poem. it is scarcely used but in poetry.
to the maiden's sounding timbrels sung,
in well attuned notes, a joyous lay.
soon he slumber'd, fearing not be harm'd,
the whiles with a loud lay, she thus him sweetly charm'd.
spensor's fairy queen.
this is a most majestic vision, and
haimonious charming lays. shakespeare's tempes?.
nor then the solemn nightingale
ceas'd warbling, but all night tun'd her soft lays, milton.
if jove's will
have link'd that amorous power to thy soft lay,
fairy queen.
now timely fing. milton.
he reach'd the nymph with his harmonious lay,
whom all his charms could not incline to stay. isailer.
on ceres let him call, and ceres praise,
with uncouth dances, and with country lays.
ev’n gods incline their ravish'd ears,
and tune their own harmonious spheres
to his immortal lys. dennis.
lay. adj. isaicus, latin; xao.] not clerical ; regarding or
belonging to the people as distinet from the clergy.
all this they had by law, and none repin'd,
the pref’rence was but due to levi’s kind:
but when some lay preferment fell by chance,
the gourmands made it their inheritance.
dryd. wirg.
dryden.
lay persons, married or unmarried, being doctors of the
civil law, may be chancellors, officials, &amp;c.
t might well startle
our lay ut learned faith.
la'yer. m. s. [from say.]
1. a stratum, or row ; a bed; one body spread over another.
a layer of rich mould beneath, and about this natural earth
to nourish the fibres. evelyn’s kalendar.
the terrestrial matter is disposed into strata or layers, placed
one upon another, in like manner as any earthy sediment,
settling down from a flood in great quantitv, will naturally
be. j/oodward's natural history.
2. a sprig of a plant.
. many tre's may be propagated by layers : this is to be per-
formed by sitting the branches a little way, and laying them
under the mould about half a foot; the ground should be first
made very light, and, after they are laid, they should have a
little water given them: if they do not comply well in the
laying of them down, they must be pegged down with a hook
or two; and if they have taken sufficient root by the next
winter, they must be cut off from the main plants, and planted
in the nursery: some twist the branch, or bare the rind; and
if it be out of the reach of the ground, they fasten a tub or
basket near the branch, which they fill with good mould,
and lay the branch in it. miller.
transplant also carnation seedlings, give your layors fresh
earth, and set them in the shade for a week. evelyn.
3. a hen that lays eggs.
the oldest are always reckoned the best fitters, and the
youngest the best layers. 41ortimer.
layman. m. s. slay and man.]
1. one of the people distinct from the clergy.
laymen will neither admonish one another themselves, nor
suffer ministers to do it. government of the tongue.
since a ti ust must be, she thought it best
to put it out of laymens pow'r at least,
and for their solemn vows prepar'd a priest. dryden.
where can be the grievance, that an eccles.astical landlord
should expect a third part value for his lands, his title as
anticnt, and as legal, as that of a layman, who is seldom guilty
of giving such beneficial bargains. swift.
2. an image used by painters in contriving attitudes.
you are to have a layman almost as big as the life for every
figure in particular, besides the natural figure before you.
ayliff's parerg.
rowe.
la'yst all. m. s. an heap of dung.
scarce could he footing find in that foul way,
for many corses, like a great lay-stall
of murdered men, which therein strewed lay. spenser.
t.a’zar. n.s. (from lazarus in the gospel.] one deformed and
nauseous with filthy and pestilential diseases.
dryden's dufresnoy.
they ever after in most wretched case, -
like loathsome lazars, by the hedges lay. foy q, co.
i'll be sworn, and sworn upon’t, she never shrowded any
but lazars. shoe peare.
i am weary with drawing the deformitics of life, and jazar,
of the people, where every figure of imperfection more resem-
bles me. dryden.
life he labours to refine
daily, nor of his little stock denies
fit alms to lazars merciful and meek. philips.
lazar-hous e. {". s: [lazaret, french ; lazzaretto, italian ;
lazar or to. from sazar.] a house for the reception of
the diseased ; an hospital.
a place
before his eyes appear'd, sad, noisome, dark,
a lazar house it seem’d, where were said
numbers of all diseas'd.
la’z. a rwo r. t. m. s. [lasorpitium.] a plant.
la’z.i.l.y. adv. [from lazy. ]. idly; sluggishly ; heavily.
watch him at play, when following his own inclinations;
and see whether he be stirring and active, or whether he lazily
4/ilton.
and listlesly dreams away his time. zocke.
the eastern nations view the rising fires,
whilst night shades us, and lazily retires. creech.
la’z.iness. m. s. (from lazy..] [dleness; sluggishness; littles.
ness; heaviness in action ; tardiness. -
that instance of fraud and lazinos, the unjust steward,
who pleaded that he could neither dig nor beg, would quickly
have been brought both to dig and to beg too, rather than
starve. south.
my sortune you have rescued, not only from the power of
others, but from my own modesty and laziness. dryden.
la’z.i.n.g. adj. [from lazy j sluggish; idle. -
the hands and the feet mutinied against the belly: they
knew no reason, why the one should be &amp;zing, and pamper-
ing itself with the fruit of the other's abour. l'e/irange.
the sot cried, utinam #26 offit laborare, while he lay lazing
and lolling upon his couch. south.
la'zt, 1.1. m. s.
the ground of this stone is blue, veined and spotted with
white, and a glistering or metallick yellow : it appears to
be composed of, first, a white sparry, or crystalline matter;
secondly, flakes of the golden or yellow tale; thirdy, a shin-
ing yellow substance; this fumes off in the calcination of the
stone, and casts a sulphurcous smell; fourthly, a bright blue
substance, of great use among the painters, under the name of
ultramarine; and when rich, is found, upon trial, to yield
about one-sixth of copper, with a very little silver. wood.card.
lazy. a j. [this word is derived by a corresponden, with
great probability, from a l’aise, french ; but it is however
teutonick; liiser in danish, and losoh in dutch, have the
same meaning ; and spelman gives this account of the word:
dividebantur antiqui saxones, ut test tur nathardus, in tres
ordines ; ednilingos, frilingos &amp; lazzos; hoc est nobiles,
ingenuos &amp; serviles: quam &amp; nos distinctionem du retinui-
mus. sed ricardo autem secundo pars servorum maxina se
in libertatem vindicavit; fic ut hodie apud a "glos rarior in-
veniatur servus, qui mancipium dicitur. restat nihilominus
antique appellationis commemoratio. ignavos cnin bodie
lazie dicinus. j
1. idle ; sluggish; unwilling to work.
our soldiers, like the night-owl's lazy flight,
or like a lazy thrasher with a flail,
fall gently down, as if they struck their friends. shaft sp.
wicked condemned men will ever live like regues, and not
fall to work, but be lazy, and spend viciu js. bacon.
whose lazy waters without motion say. roommon.
the lazy glutton safe at home will ke. p-
indulge his sloth, and batten with his !cep. dryden.
like eastern kings a lazy state they keep,
and close confin'd in their own palace sleep. pope.
or lazy lakes unconscious of a flood,
whose dull brown naiads ever sleep in mud. parnel.
what amazing slopidity is it, for men to be neogont of
salvation themselves' to fit down saz, and unactive. a gers.
2. slow ; tedious.
the ordinary method for recruiting their armies, was now
too dull and soy an expedient to reit this torrent. carendon.
ld. is a contraction of sord.
lea. m. s. sley, saxon, a follow ; 1:15, saxon, a pasture.]
ground inclosed, not open. obsoletc.
greatly agast with this pittious plea ;
him rested the good man on the low. sensor.
cercs, most bounteous lady, thy rich as
of wheat, rye, barley, fetches, oats and pes. so a sp.
her fallow as
the darnel, hemlock, and rank fun.itory
doth root upon. software'. h.; v.
dry up thy harrow'd veins, and p"o gli torn ie.,s,
whereof ingrateful man with liqu'rith draughts,
and morsels unstuous, greases his suic mind. sha'sp.
such
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e a s
s
- -- **
to .
- ony
***,
oar;
'
oven,
o or.
on;
on of
'1's:",
tions;
c o
**.
c, ech.
r
o:
word,
giokly
than
soto.
* er of
join.
they
o, er-
"...”.
o:
o!o.
with
3 to
atter;
thin-
of the
blue
oe of
yield
iors.
with
we wer
e he
word:
|a !!es
- ki,
out-
na se
is in-
minus
buds
a so
to so.
d not
ason.
tools.
jor.
pot,
rol.
it of
gari.
such court guise,
as mercury did first devise,
with the mincing dryades,
on the lawns, and on the leas. milton.
the lowing herds wind slowly over the lea. grey.
lead. m. s. [lab, saxon.]
1. lead is the heaviest metal except gold and quicksilver. lead
is the softest of all the metals, and very ductile, though less
so than gold; it is very little subject to rust, and the least
sonorous of all the metals except gold. the specifick gra-
vity of lead is to that of water as i 1322 to icoo. lead,
when kept in fusion over a common fire, throws up all other
bodies, except gold, that are mixed, all others being lighter,
except mercury, which will not bear that degree of heat: it
afterwards vitrifies with the baser metals, and carries them off,
in form of scoriae, to the sides of the vessel. the weakest
acids are the best solvents for lead : it dissolves very readily in
aqua fortis diluted with water, as also in vinegar. the
imoke of lead works is a prodigious annoyance, and subjects
both the workmen, and the cattle that graze about them, to
a mortal disease. hill.
thou art a soul in bliss, but i am bound
upon a wheel of fire; that mine own tears
i)o scald like molten lead. shakespeare's king lear.
of lead, some i can shew you so like steel, and so unlike
common lead ore, that the workmen call it steel ore. boyle.
lead is employed for the refining of gold and silver by the
cupel; hereof is made common ceruss with vinegar; of ceruss,
red lead; of plumbum ustum, the best yellow ochre; of lead,
and half as much tin, solder for lead. grew.
2. [in the plural.] flat roof to walk on ; because houses are
covered with lead.
stalls, bulks, windows,
are smother'd up, leads fill’d, and ridges hors'd
with variable complexions; all agreeing -
in earnestness to see him. shakespeare's coriolanus.
i would have the tower two stories, and goodly leads upon
the top, raised with statues interposed. bacon.
to lead. v. a. [from the noun..] to fit with lead in any
man incr.
he fashioneth the clay with his arm, he applieth himself to
lead it over ; and he is diligent to make clean the furnace.
ecclus. xxxviii. 30.
there is a traverse placed in a loft, at the right hand of the .
chair, with a privy door, and a carved window of glass leaded
with gold and blue, where the mother fitteth. bacon.
to lead. v. a. preter. i led; part. led, [laban, saxon; leiden,
dutch..]
1. to guide by the hand. -
there is a cliff, whose high and bending head
looks fearfully on the confined deep:
bring me but to the very brim of it,
and i’ll repair the misery, thou dost bear,
with something rich about me: from that place
i shall no leading need. shakesp. king lear.
doth not each on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from
the stall, and lead him away to watering : luke, xiii. 15.
they thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the
brow of the hill. luke, iv. 29.
2. to conduct to any place.
save to every man his wife and children, that they may
lead them away, and depart. i sam. xxx. 22.
then brought he me out of the way, and led me about
, the way without unto the utter gate. ezek. xlvii. 2.
he maketh me to lie down in green pastures; he leadeth me
me beside the still waters. psal. xxiii. 2.
3. to conduct as head or commander.
would you lead forth your army against the enciny, and
seek him where he is to fight : spenser on ireland.
he turns head against the lion's armed jaws;
and being no more in debt to years than thou,
leads antient lords, and rev'rcnd bishops, on
to bloody battles. shakespeare's henry iv.
if thou wilt have
the leading of thy own revenges, take
one half of my commission, and set down
as best thou art experienc'd. shakespeare's coriolanus.
he led me on to mightiest deeds,
above the nerve of mortal arm,
against the uncircumcis'd, our enemies:
but now hath cast me off. milton's agonisłes.
christ took not upon him flesh and blood, that he might
conquer and rule nations, lead armies, or possess places. south.
he might muster his family up, and lead them out against
the indians, to seek reparation upon any injury. locke.
4. to introduce by going first.
which may go out before them, and which may go in be-
fore them, and which may lead them out, and which may
bring them in. numb. xxvii. 17.
his guide, as faithful from that day,
as hesperus that leads the sun his way. fairfax.
5. to guide; to show the method of attaining.
voi. ii.
human testimony is not so proper to lead us into the know-
hodge of the effence of things, as to acquaint us with the ex-
istence of things. watts's logick,
6. to draw ; to entice; to allure.
appoint him a meeting, give him a shew of comfort, and
lead him on with a fine baited delay. shakespeare.
the lord cottington, being a master of temper, knew how
to lead him into a mistake, and then drive him into choler,
and then expose him. . clarendon,
7. to induce; to prevail on by pleasing motives.
what i did, i did in honour,
led by th’ impartial conduct of my soul. shakespeare.
he was driven by the necessities of the times, more than
led by his own disposition, to any rigour of a&amp;tions. k. charles:
what i say will have little influence on those whose ends
lead them to wish the continuance of the war. swift.
8. to pass; to spend in any certain manner.
the sweet woman leads an ill life with him. shakesp.
so shalt thou lead
safest thy life, and best prepar'd endure
thy mortal passage when it comes. milton.
him, fair lavinia, thy surviving wife -
shall breed in groves, to lead a solitary life. dryden.
luther's life was led up to the doctrines he preached, and
his death was the death of the righteous. fr. atterbury.
celibacy, as then practised in the church of rome, was
commonly forced, taken up under a bold vow, and led in all
uncleanness. francis atterbury.
this distemper is most incident to such as lead a sedentary
life. arbuthnot on aliments.
to lead. v. n. -
1. to go first, and show the way.
i will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth be-
fore me, and the children be able to endure. gen. xxxiii.
2. to conduct as a commander.
cyrus was beaten and slain under the leading of a woman,
whose wit and conduct made a great figure. temple.
3. to shew the way, by going first.
he left his mother a countess by patent, which was a new
leading example, grown before somewhat rare. wotton.
the way of maturing of tobacco must be from the heat of
the earth or sun; we see some leading of this in musk-melons
sown upon a hot-bed dunged below. bacon.
the vessels heavy-laden put to sea
with prosp’rous gales, a woman lead; the way. dryden.
lead. m. s. [from the verb.] guidance; first place: a low
despicable word.
yorkshire takes the lead of the other counties. herring,
les aden. adj. [leaben, saxon.]
1. made of lead. - -
this tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
the harm of unskann'd swiftness, will, too late,
tye leaden pounds to 's heels. shakespeare's coriolanus,
o murth’rous slumber
lay'st thou the leaden mace upon my boy,
that plays thee musick 2 shakesh. julius caesar.
a leaden bullet shot from one of these guns against a stone
wall, the space of twenty-four paces from it, will be beaten
into a thin plate. //ilkins's mathematical magick.
2. heavy; unwilling; motionless.
if thou do'st find him trastable to us,
encourage him, and tell him all our reasons:
if he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,
be thcu so too. shakespeare's rich. iii.
3. heavy ; dull. -
i'll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap ;
lest leaden slumber poize me down to morrow, -
when i should mount with wings of victory. shakesp.
le’ader. m. s. [from lead.]
1. one that leads, or conducts.
2. captain; commander.
in my tent -
i’ll draw the form and model of our battle,
limit each leader to his several charge,
and part in just proportion our small strength. shakes.
i have given him for a leader and commander to the people.
- isaiah, lv. 4.
those escaped by flight, not without a sharp jest against
their leaders, affirming, that, as they had followed them into
the field, so it was good reason they should follow them out.
hayward.
when our lycians see
our brave examples, they admiring say,
behold our gallant leaders. denham.
the brave leader of the lycian crew. drydon.
3. one who goes first.
nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were wont to be a
follower, now you are a leader. shakespeare.
4. one at the head of any party or faction: as, the detestable
wharton was the leader of the whigs. -
the understandings of a senate are enslaved by three or four
jeaders, set to get or to keep employments. swift.
15 f leading,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e a
l e. a
leading. participial adj. principal; chief; capital.
in organized bodies, which are propagated by seed, the
shape is the leading quality, and most characteristical part, that
determines the species, locke.
mistakes arise from the influence of private persons upon
great numbers stiled leading men and parties. swift.
leading-strings. m. s. [lead and siring.] strings by which
children, when they learn to walk, are held from falling.
sound may serve such, ere they to sense are grown,
like leading-strings, ’till they can walk alone. dryden,
was he ever able to walk without leading-strings, or swim
without bladders, without being discovered by his hobbling
and his sinking? swift.
leadman. m. s. [lead and man.] one who begins or leads a
dance.
such a light and mettl’d dance
saw you never,
and by leadmen for the nonce,
that turn round like grindle stones, ben, johnson,
le"a dwor.t. n.s. [lead and wort; plumbago.] a flower.
leaf. m. s. leaves, plural. [leap, saxon; leaf, dutch..]
1. the green deciduous parts of plants and flowers.
this is the state of man; to-day he puts forth
the tender leaves of hopes, to-morrow blossoms.
shakespeare,
a man shall odom fail of having cherries borne by his
graft the same year in which his incision is made, if his graft
have blossom buds; whereas if it were only leaf buds, it will
not bear fruit till the second season. - cyle.
those things which are removed to a distant view, ought
to make but one mass; as the leaves on the trees, and the bil-
lows in the sea. dryden's dufresnoy.
2. a part of a book, containing two pages.
happy ye leaves, when as those lilly hands
shall handle you. spensor.
peruse my leaves through ev'ry part,
and think thou seest my owner's heart
scrawl’d o'er with trifles. swift.
3. one side of a double door.
the two leaves of the one door were folding, 1 kings.
4. any thing foliated, or thinly beaten.
eleven ounces two pence sterling ought to be of so pure
silver, as is called leaf silver, and then the melter must add of
other weight seventeen pence halfpenny farthing. camden.
leaf gold, that flies in the air as light as down, is as truly
gold as that in an ingot. digby on bodies.
to leaf. v. m. [from the noun..] to bring leaves; to bear
leaves.
most trees fall off the leaves at autumn; and if not kept
back by cold, would leaf about the solstice. brown.
le’af less, adj. [from leaf.] naked of leaves.
bare honesty without some other adornment, being looked
on as a lofts; tree, nobody will take himself to its shelter.
- government of the tongue.
where doves in flocks, the leafts; trees o'ershade,
and lonely woodcocks haunt the wat'ry glade. pope.
leafy. adj. [from leaf.] full of leaves.
the frauds of men were ever so,
since summer was first leafy. shakespeare.
what chance, good lady, hath bereft you thus:
—dim darkness, and this leafy labyrinth. milton.
o'er barren mountains, o'er the flow'ry plain,
the leafy forest, and the liquid main,
extends thy uncontroul’d and boundless reign. dryden.
her leafy arms with such extent were spread,
that hosts of birds, that wing the liquid air,
perch'd in the boughs. dryden's flower and leaf.
so when some swelt’ring travellers retire
to leafy shades, near the cool sunless verge
of paraba, brasilian stream ; her tail
a grisly hydra suddenly shoots forth. philips.
league. m. s. [ligue, french ; liga, latin.] a confederacy;
a combination either of interest or friendship.
you peers, continue this united league :
i every day expect an embassage
from my redeemer, to redeem me hence.
and now in peace my soul shall part to heav'n,
since i have made my friends at peace on earth. shakesp.
we come to be informed by yourselves,
what the conditions of that league must be. shakoff.
thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field; and
thc beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. job.
go break thy league with baasha, that he may depart from
me. 2 chron. xvi. 3.
it is a great error, and a narrowness of mind, to think,
that nations have nothing to do one with another, except there
be either an union in sovereignty, or a conjunction in pacts
or leagues: there are other bands of society and implicit con-
federations. bacon's holy war.
i, a private person, whom my country
as a league breaker gave up bound, presum'd
single rebellion, and did hostile acts. milton's agonisłes.
oh tyrians, with immortal hate
pursue this hated race: and let there be
*twixt us and them no league nor amity. deoart.
-to league. v. n. to unite ; to confederate.
where fraud and falshood invade society, the band presently
breaks, and men are put to a loss where to league and to fatten
their dependances. south.
league. m. s. [lieue, french.]
1. a league ; leuca, latin ; from lech, welsh ; a stone that
was used to be erected at the end of every league. camden.
2. a measure of length, containing three miles.
ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
we were encount’red by a mighty rock. shakespeare.
ev’n italy, though many a league remote,
in distant echo's answer'd. addison.
leagued. adj. [from league.] confederated.
and now thus leagu'd by an eternal bond,
what shall retard the britons bold designs : philips.
le'aguer. m. s. [beleggeren, dutch..] siege ; investment of a
to "vi),
we will bind and hoodwink him so, that he shall suppose
no other but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversa-
ries, when we bring him to our own tents. shakespeare.
leak. n.f. [lack, like, dutch..] a breach or hole which lets
in water.
there will be always evils, which no art of man can cure :
breaches and leaks more than man's wit hath hands to stop.
1 hocker.
the water rushes in, as it doth usually in the leak of a ship.
joskins.
whether she sprung a leak i cannot find,
or whether she was overset with wind,
or that some rock below her bottom rent,
but down at once with all her crew she went. dryden,
to leak. v. n.
1. to let water in or out.
they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we look in your
chimney. shakespeare.
his feet should be washed every day in cold water; and
have his shoes so thin, that they might leak, and jet in water.
locke.
2. to drop through a breach, or discontinuity.
the water, which will perhaps by degrees leak into several
parts, may be emptied out again. //ilkins.
golden stars hung o'er their heads,
and seemed so crowded, that they bust upon 'cm,
and dart at once their baleful influence
in leaking fire. dryden and lee.
le'akage. m. s. [from leak.] allowance made for accidental
loss in liquid measures.
le"a ky. adj. [from leak.]
1. battered or pierced, so as to let water in or out.
thou’rt so leay,
that we must leave thee to thy sinking; for
thy dearest quit thee. shakesp. antony and cleopatro.
if you have not enjoy'd what youth could give,
but life sunk through you like a leaky sieve,
accuse yourself, you liv'd not while you might. drydon.
2. loquacious; not close. -
women are so leaky, that i have hardly met with one that
could not hold her breath longer than she could keep a secret.
l' orange.
to lean. v. m. preter, leaned or leant. [phinan, saxon ; lenen,
dutch.]
1. to incline against ; to rest against.
lean thine aged back against mine arm,
and in that case i'll tell thee my disease. shafe?rare.
security is expressed among the medals of gordianus, by a
lady leaning against a pillar, a scepter in her hand, before an
altar. peacham on drawing.
the columns may be allowed somewhat above their ordi-
nary length, because they lean unto so good supporters. isott.
upon his ivory sceptre first he kant,
then shook his head, that shook the firmament. dryon.
oppress'd with anguish, panting and o'erspent,
his fainting limbs against an oak he leaxt. dryo-".
lf god be angry, all our other dependencies will profit us
nothing; every other support will fail under us when we
come to lean upon it, and deceive us in the day when we want.
it most.
then leaning o'er the rails he musing stood.
"mid the central depth of black'ning woods,
high rais'd in solemn theatre around
leans the huge elephant. thomson.
2. to propend; to tend towards.
they delight rather to lean to their old customs, though
they be more unjust, and more inconvenient. sperfer.
trust in the }. with all thine heart; and loan not unto
thine own understanding. prov. iii. 5.
a desire leaning to either file; biases the judgment strangely.
so po atti.
rogers.
gay.
3. to be in a bending posture.
* - ol
5 slic
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e a
l e a
she leans me out at her mistress's chamber window, bids me
a thousand times good night. shakespeare.
wearied with length of ways, and worn with toil,
she laid her down; and leaning on her knees,
invok'd the cause of all her miseries: dryden.
the gods came downward to behold the wars,
sharp'ning their fights, and leaning from their stars. dryden,
lean. adj. [placne, saxon.]
1. not fat; meagre; wanting flesh; bare-boned.
you tempt the fury of my three attendants,
lean famine, quartering fleel, and climbing fire. shakesp.
lean raw-bon'd rascals who would e'er suppose,
they had such courage and audacity shakespeare.
lean look'd prophets whisper fearful change, shakesp.
i would invent as bitter searching terms,
with full as many signs of deadly hate,
as lean-fac’d envy in her loathsome cave. shakespeare.
seven other kine came up out of the river, ill-favour’d and
mean-fleshed. - gen. xli. 3.
let a physician beware how he purge after hard frosty wea-
ther, and in a lean body, without preparation. bacon.
and fetch their precepts from the cynic tub,
praising the lean, and sallow, abstinence. milton.
swear that adrastus, and the lean-look'd prophet,
are joint conspirators. dryden and lee,
lean people often suffer for want of fat, as fat people may
by obstruction of the vessels. arbuthnot on aliments.
no laughing graces wanton in my eyes;
but hagger'd grief, lean looking sallow care,
dwell on my brow. rowe's jane shore.
2. not unctuous; thin ; hungry.
there are two chief kinds of terrestrial liquors, those that
are fat and light, and those that are lean and more earthy,
like common water. burnet's theory.
3, low; poor; in opposition to great or rich.
that which combin'd us was most great, and let not
a leaner action rend us. shakoff. ant. and cleopatra.
4, jejune 3 not comprehensive; not embellished: as, a lean dis-
sertation.
lean. m. s. that part of flesh which consists of the muscle
without the fat.
with razors keen we cut our passage clean
through rills of fat, and deluges of lean. farquhar.
e’anly. adv. [from loan.] meagerly; without plumpness.
le'anness. m. s. [from loan.]
i. extenuation of body; want of flesh; meagreness.
if thy loanness loves such food,
there are those, that, for thy fake,
do enough. ben. johnson.
the symptoms of too great fluidity are excess of universal
secretions, as of perspiration, sweat, urine, liquid dejectures,
leanness, and weakness. arbuthnot.
2. want of matter; thinness; poverty.
the poor king reignier, whose large style
agrees not with the leannes of his purse. shakespeare.
to leap. v. n. [pleapan, saxon; loup, scottish,j
1. to jump; to move upward or progressively without change
of the feet.
if i could win a lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting into
my saddle with my armour on, i should quickly leap into a
wife. shakespeare's henry v.
a man leapeth better with weights in his hands than with-
out; for that the weight, if it be proportionable, strengtheneth
the finews by contracting them. in leaping with weights the
arms are first cast backwards and then forwards with so much
the greater force; for the hands go backward before they
take their rise. bacon's nat. hist.
in a narrow pit
he saw a lion, and leap'd down to it. cowley's davidois.
thrice from the ground she leap'd, was seen to wield
her brandish’d lance. dryden’s ancid.
2. to rush with vehemence.
god changed the spirit of the king into mildness, who in a
fear leaped from his throne, and took her in his arms, till she
came to herself again. f//h. xv. 8.
after he went into the tent, and found her not, he leaped
out to the people. judith, xiv. 7.
he ruin upon ruin heaps,
and on me, like a furious giant, leaps. sandys.
strait leaping from his horse he rais'd me up. rowe.
3. to bound ; to spring.
rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy. luke, vi. 23.
i am warm’d, my heart
leaps at the trumpet's voice, and burns for glory. addison.
4. to fly; to start.
he parted frowning from me, as if ruin
leap'd from his eyes : so looks the chased lion
upon the daring huntsman that has gall'd him;
then makes him nothing. shakesp. henry viii.
out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap
oult. job, xli. 19.
t. leap. tv. (7.
i. to pass over, or into, by leaping. - -
every man is not of a constitution to leap a gulf for the
saving of his country. - l’esirange.
as one condemn'd to leap a precipice,
who sees before his eyes the depth below,
stops short. dryden's spanish fryar.
she dares pursue, if they dare lead :
as their example still prevails:
she tempts the stream, or leaps the pales. prior.
2. to compress, as beasts. -
too soon they must not feel the sting of love:
let him not leap the cow. dryden's georg.
leap. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. bound; jump; act of leaping.
2. space passed by leaping. -
after they have carried their riders safe over all leaps, and
through all dangers, what comes of them in the end but to be
broken-winded ? l’estrange.
3. sudden transition.
wickedness comes on by degrees, as well as virtue; and
sudden leaps from one extreme to another are unnatural.
l’estrange.
the commons wrested even the power of chusing a king
intirely out of the hands of the nobles; which was so great a
leap, and caused such a convulsion in the state, that the con-
stitution could not bear. swift.
4. an assault of an animal of prey.
the cat made a leap at the mouse.
5. embrace of animals.
how she cheats her bellowing lovers cyes;
the rushing leap, the doubtful progeny. dryden's znaid.
6. hazard, or effect of leaping.
methinks, it were an easy leap -
to pluck bright honour from the pale-fac’d moon. shak.
you take a precipice for no leap of danger,
and woo your own destruction. shaksp. henry viii.
behold that dreadful downfal of a rock,
where yon old fisher views the waves from high
'tis the convenient leap i mean to try.
dryden's theocritus.
leap-frog. m. s. [leap and frog.] a play of children, in which
they imitate the jump of frogs.
if i could win a lady at leap frog, i should quickly leap into
a wife. shakespeare's henry v.
leap-year. m. s.
leap-year or bisextile is every fourth year, and so called from
its leaping a day more that year than in a common year: so
that the common year has 365 days, but the leap-year 366;
and then february hath 29 days, which in common years
hath but 28. to find the leap-year you have this rule:
divide by 4; what's left shall be
for leap-year o ; for past 1, 2, 3. harris.
the reason of the name of leap-year is, that a day of the
week is missed ; as, if on one year the first of march be on
monday, it will on the next year be on tucsoay, but on leap-
year it will leap to wednesday.
that the sun consisteth of 365 days and almost fix hours,
wanting eleven minutes ; which fix hours omitted will, in
process of time, largely deprave the compute; and this is the
occasion of the bisextile or leap year.
to learn. v. a. tecnnian, saxon.]
1. to gain the knowledge or skill of.
learn a parable of the fig-tree. mart. xxiv. 32.
he, in a shorter time than was thought possible, learned
both to speak and write the arabian tongue. knolles.
learn, wretches : learn the motions of the mind,
and the great moral end of humankind. dryd. persius.
you may rely upon my tender care,
to keep him far from perils of anybition:
all he can learn of me, will be to weep ! a. philips.
2. to teach. [it is observable, that in many of the european
languages the same word signifies to learn and to teach ; to
gain or impart knowledge.) this sense is now obsolete.
he would learn
the lion stoop to him in lowly wise,
a lesson hard. spensor's fairy queen.
you taught me language, and my profit on't
is, i know not how to curse: the red plague rid you,
for learning me your language. shakesp. tempes?.
a thousand more mischances than this one,
have learn'd me how to brook this patiently.
shakspeare.
l'isorange. ,
brown.
hast thou not learn'd me how
to make perfumes? shakso. cymbeline.
to learn. v. n. to take pattern : with of.
take my yoke upon you, and learn of me ; for i am meek
and lowly. asatt. xi. 29.
in imitation of sounds, that man should be the teacher is
no part of the matter; for birds will learn one of another.
bacon's natural history.
le’arned. adj. [from learn.]
i. versed in science and literature.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e a
l e a
it is indifferent to the matter in hand, which way the
learned shall determine of it. locke.
some by old words to fame have made pretence:
such labour'd nothings, in so strange a style,
amaze th’ unlearn'd, and make the learned smile. pope.
the learned met with free approach,
although they came not in a coach. swift.
the best account is given of them by their own authors:
but i trust more to the table of the searned bishop of bath.
arbuthnot on coins.
2. skilled; skilful; knowing: with in. -
though train'd in arms, and learned in martial arts,
thou chusest not to conquer men but hearts. granville.
3. skilled in scholastick, as distinet from other knowledge.
till a man can judge whether they be truths or no, his
understanding is but little improved: and thus men of much
reading are greatly learned, but may be little knowing. locke.
learnedly, adv. [from learned.] with knowledge; with
skill.
the apostle seemed in his eyes but learnedly mad. hooker.
- much
he spoke, and learned', for life; but all
was either pitied in him, or forgotten. shakesh.
ev'ry coxcomb swears as learnedy as they. swift.
learning. m. s. [from learn.]
1. literature; skill in languages or sciences; generally scho-
lastick knowledge.
learning hath its infancy, when it is almost childish; then
its youth, when luxuriant and juvenile ; then its strength of
years, when solid; and, lastly, its old age, when dry and
exhaust. bacon.
to tongue or pudding thou hast no pretence,
learning thy talent is, but mine is sense. prior.
as moses was learned in all the wisdon of the egyptians,
so it is manifest from this chapter, that st. paul was a great
master in all the learning of the greeks. bentley.
2. skill in any thing good or bad.
an art of contradiction by way of scorn, a learning where-
with we were long sithence forewarned, that the miserable
times whereunto we are fallen should abound. phooker.
learner. m. s. [from learn.] one who is yet in his rudi-
ments; one who is acquiring some new art or knowledge.
the late learners cannot so well take the ply, except it be in
some minds that have not suffered themselves to fix. bacon.
nor can a learner work so cheap as a skilful practised artist
can. graunt's bills of mortality.
lease. m. s. [laiser, french. spelman.]
1. a contract by which, in consideration of some payment, a
temporary posiession is granted of houses or lands.
why, cousin, wer’t thou regent of the world,
it were a shame to let this land by lease. shakespeare.
lords of the world have but for life their lease,
and that too, if the lessor please, must cease. denham.
i have heard a man talk with contempt of bishops leases, as
on a worse foot than the rest of his estate. swift.
2. any tenure.
our high-plac'd macbeth
shall live the lease of nature. shakespeare.
thou to give the world increase,
short'ned hast thy own life's legs. milton.
7% lease. v. a. [from the noun..] to let by lease.
where the vicar leasis his glebe, the tenant must pay the
great tithes to the rector or impropriator, and the small tithes
to the vicar. ayliff's parergon.
to leas e. v. n. [losin, dutch..] to glean; to gather what
the harvest men leave.
she in harvest us’d to lease;
but harvest done, to chare-work did aspire,
meat, drink, and two-pence, was her daily hire. dryden.
leaser. m. s. [from lease.] gleaner; gatherer after the reaper.
there was no office which a man from england might not
have ; and i looked upon all who were born here as only in
the condition of kasers and gleaners. swift.
leash. n, s. [lift, french ; lesse, dutch ; laccio, italian.]
1. a leather thong, by which a falconer holds his hawk, or a
courser leads his greyhound. hanmer.
holding corioli in the name of rome,
even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
to let him slip at will. shakespeare.
what i was, i am ;
more straining on, for plucking back; not following
my leash unwillingly. shakesp. // inter's tale.
2. a tierce; three. \,
i am sworn brother to a leash of drawers, and can call them
all by their christian names. shakop. henry iv.
some thought when he did gabble
th'ad heard to ree labourers of babel,
or cerberus himself pronounce
a leash of languages at once. hudibras.
thou art a living comedy; they are a leash of dull devils.
dennis's letters,
3. a band wherewith to tie anything in general.
the ravished soul being shewn such game, would break
those leashes that tie her to the body. poyle.
to leash. v. a. [from the noun..] to bind; to hold in a string.
then should the warlike harry, like himself,
assume the port of mars; and, at his heels,
leasht in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire,
crouch for employment. shakesp. henry v.
le"as ing. m. s. [leare, saxon.] lies; falshood.
o ye sons of men, how long will ye have such pleasure in
vanity, and seek after leasing * psal. iv. 2.
he 'mongst ladies would their fortunes read
out of their hands, and merry leasings tell.
he hates foul leasings and vile flattery,
two filthy blots in noble gentery.
that false pilgrim which that leasing told,
was indeed old archimago.
i have ever verified my friends
with all the size that verity
would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes,
like to a bowl upon a subtle ground
i've tumbl’d past the throw ; and in his praise
have almost stampt the leasing. shakesp. coriolanus.
as folks, quoth richard, prone to leasing,
say things at first, because they're pleasing;
then prove what they have once asserted,
nor care to have their lie deserted :
till their own dreams at length deceive them,
and oft repeating they believe them.
trading free shall thrive again,
nor leosings leud affright the swain. gay's pasłorals.
leas t. adj. the superlative of little. [la'rt, saxon. this word
j/allis would persuade us to write lost, that it may be analo-
gous to los; , but surely the profit is not worth the change.]
little beyond others; smallest.
i am not worthy of the least of all the mercies shewed to
thy servant. gen. xxxii. io.
a man can no more have a positive idea of the greatest than
he has of the least space. locke.
least, adv. in the lowest degree; in a degree below others;
less than any other way.
he resolv'd to wave h’s suit,
or for a while play least in sight. hudibrar.
ev’n that avert ; i chuse it not;
but taste it as the least unhappy lot. dryd. night's 72.
no man more truly knows to place a right value on your
friendship, than he who legs? deserves it on all other accounts
than his due sense of it. pope's letters.
hub. tale.
hubberd's tale.
fairy &amp;een.
prior,
at least. to say no more; not to demand or affirm
at the least. } more than is barely sufficient; at the lowest
at leastwise. degree.
he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
the tempted with dishonour. milton.
he from my side subducting, took perhaps
more than enough ; at least on her bestowed
too much of ornament, in outward show
elaborate, of inward less exact. a silton.
upon the mast they saw a young man, at leg/? if he were a
man, who sat as on horseback. sidney.
every effect doth after a sort contain, at leastwise resemble,
the cause from which it proceedeth. hooker.
honour and fame at least the thund’rer ow'd,
and ill he pays the promise of a god. pope.
the remedies, if any, are to be proposed from a constint
course of the milken diet, continued at least a year. top.
a fiend may deceive a creature of more cxcellency than
himself, at legs; by the tacit permission of the omniscient
being. dryden's dedication to juvenal.
2. it has a sense implying doubt; to say no more; to say toe
least : not to say all that might be said.
whether such virtue spent now fail'd
new angels to create, if they at lost
are his created. a siltan.
let useful observations be at least some part of the sojo:
of your conversation. watts's improvement of the aino.
leasy. adj. [this word seems formed from the same root
soft, french, or loose.] flimsy; of weak texture. not
1in lll c. -
he never leaveth, while the sense itself be left loose and
leasy. aschara's schoolmaster.
leather... n. s. (leson, saxon; lair, erse )
1. dressed hides of animals.
. he was a hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about
his loins. - 2 kings, i. 8.
and if two boots keep out the weather,
what need you have two hides of leather 2 pricr.
2. skin: ironically.
returning sound in limb and wind,
except some leather lost behind.
3. it is often used in composition for leathern.
the shepherd's homely curds,
his cold thin drink out of his leather bottle;
is far beyond a prince's delicates. shakes?. henry vi.
2 le"ather-
swist.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e a
d
k
!,
3.
4,
le’ather coat. m. s. [leather and coat.] an apple with a
tough rind.
there is a dish of leathercoats for you. shakesp.
le"ather dresser. n.f. [leather and dressor.] he who dresses
leather; he who manufactures hides for use.
he removed to cumae ; and by the way was entertained at
the house of one tychius, a leather-dresser. pope.
leathe r-mou thed. adj. [leather and mouth.]
by a leather-mouthed fish, i mean such as have their teeth
in their throat; as, the chub or cheven. !/alton’s angler.
le’athery. adj. [from leather.] resembling leather.
wormius calls this crust a leathery skin. grew's museum.
le"athern. adj. [from leather.] made of leather.
i saw her hand ; she has a leathern hand,
a free-stone colour'd hand: i verily did think
that her old gloves were on. shakesp. a you like it.
the wretched animal heav'd forth such groans,
that their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
almost to bursting. shakesp. as you like it.
in silken or in scathern purse retain
a splendid shilling. philips.
leatherseller. n. s. [leather and seller.] he who deals in
leather, and vends it.
leave. n. s. [leare, saxon ; from lyran, to grant.]
1. grant of liberty ; permission ; allowance.
by your leave, ireneus, notwithstanding all this your care-
ful forefight, methinks i see an evil lurk unespied. spenser.
when him his dearest una did behold,
disdaining life, desiring leave to dye. spenser.
i make bold to press upon you.
—you're welcome; give us leave, drawer. shakespeare.
the days
of sylla's sway, when the free sword took leave
to act all that it would. ben. johnson's catiline.
thrice happy snake that in her sleeve
may boldly creep, we dare not give
our thoughts so unconfin'd a leave. - jwaller.
no friend has leave to bear away the dead. dryden.
offended that we fought without his leave,
he takes this time his secret hate to shew. dryden.
one thing more i crave leave to offer about syllogism, be-
fore i leave it. locke.
i must have leave to be grateful to any who serves me, let
him be never so obnoxious to any party : nor did the tory
party put me to the hardship of asking this leave. pope.
2. farewel; adieu. in this sense leave is permission to depart.
take leave and part, for you must part forthwith.
shakespeare.
evils that take leave,
on their departure, most of all shew evil. shakesp.
there is further compliment of leave taking between france
and him. shakespeare's king lear.
here my father comes;
a double blessing is a double grace ;
occasion smiles upon a second leave.
but my dear nothings, take your leave,
no longer must you me deceive. suckling.
many stars may be visible in our hemisphere, that are not
so at present; and many shall take leave of our horizon, and
appear unto southern habitations. brown.
to leave. v. a. pret. i lost; i have left. [of the derivation of
this word the etymologitis give no satisfactory account.]
1. to quit; to forsake.
a man shall leave his father and his mother, and cleave to
his wife. gen. ii. 24.
if they love lees, and leave the lusty wine,
envy them not their palates with the swine. b. johnson.
2. to desert; to abandon.
he that is of an unthankful mind, will leave him in danger
that delivered him. ecclus, xxix. 17.
3. to depart foom, without action ; as, i lost things as i found
them.
when they were departed from him, they left him in great
diseases. 2 chron. xxiv. 25.
4. to have remaining at death.
there be of them that have lost a name behind them.
ecclus. xliv, 8.
shakesp. hamlet.
5. not to deprive of.
they still have left me the providence of god, and all the
promises of the gospel, and my charity to them too. taylor.
6. to suffer to remain.
if it be done without order, the mind comprehendeth less
that which is set down ; and besides, it leaveth a suspicion, as
if more might be said than is expresled. bacon.
these things must be left uncertain to farther discoveries in
future ages. abbot's description of the i/orld.
who those are, to whom this right by descent belongs, he
leaves out of the reach of any one to discover from his wri-
tings. locke.
7. not to carry away.
they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of
the earth, and lost no sustenance for israel. judg. vi. 4.
wel. ii.
he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle; which also shall not
leave thee either corn, wine, or oil. deut. xxviii. 48.
vastius gave strict commandment, that they should leave
behind them unnecessary baggage. knolles's history.
8. to reject; not to choose.
in all the common incidents of life,
i am superiour, i can take or leave. steele.
9. to fix as a token or remembrance.
this i leave with my reader, as an occasion for him to con-
sider, how much he may be beholden to experience. locke.
10. to bequeath; to give as inheritance.
that peace thou leav's to thy imperial line,
that peace, oh happy shade, be ever thine. dryden.
11. to give up ; to resign.
thou shalt not glean thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them
for the poor and stranger. lev. xix. 10.
if a wise man were left to himself, and his own choice, to
wish the greatest good to himself he could devise; the sum of
all his wishes would be this, that there were just such a be-
ing as god is. tillotson.
12. to permit without interposition.
whether esau were a vassal, i leave the reader to judge.
- locke.
13. to cease to do; to defist from.
let us return, lest my father leave caring for the asses, and
take thought for us.
14. to leave off. to defist from ; to forbear.
if, upon any occasion, you bid him leave off the doing of
anything. you must be sure to carry the point. locke.
in proportion as old age came on, he left off fox-hunting.
addison's speciator.
1 sam. ix. 5.
15. to leave off. to forsake.
he began to leave off some of his old acquaintance, his
roaring and bullying about the streets: he put on a serious air.
arbuthnot's hylory of john bull.
16. to leave out. to omit; to neglect.
i am so fraught with curious business, that
i leave cut ceremony. shakesp. winter's tale.
you may partake: i have told 'em who you are.
—i should be loth to be left out, and here too. b. johnson.
what is set down by order and division doth demonstrate,
that nothing is left out or omitted, but all is thcre, -
befriend till utmost end
of all thy dues be done, and none lost out,
ere nice morn on the indian steep
from her cabin’d loop-hole peep. milton.
we ask, if those subvert
reason's establish'd maxims, who assert
that we the world's existence may conceive,
though we one atom out of matter leave 2 blackmore.
i always thought this passage left out with a great deal of
judgment, by tucca and varius, as it seems to contradict a
part in the sixth æneid. addison on italy.
to leave. v. n.
1. to cease; to desist.
she is my effence, and i leave to be,
if i be not by her fair influence
foster'd, illumin'd, cherish'd, kept alive. shakspeare.
and since this business so far fair is done,
let us not leave till all our own be won. shakesp.
he began at the eldest, and left at the youngest. genosis.
2. to leave off. to defist.
grittus, hoping that they in the castle would not hold out,
left off to batter or undermine it, wherewith he perceived he
little prevailed. knolles's hist. of the turks.
but when you find that vigorous heat abate,
leave off, and for another summons wait. roscommon.
3. to leave off. to stop.
wrongs do not leave off there where they begin,
but still beget new mischiefs in their course. daniel.
to leav e. v. a. [from levy; lever, french.] to levy; to
raise: a corrupt word, made, i believe, by speiser, for a
rhime.
an army strong she leav'd,
to war on those which him had of his realm bereav'd.
spenser's fairy 9tween.
le'ave d. adj. [from leaves, of leaf.] pens y &amp;
1. furnished with foliage.
2. made with leaves or folds.
i will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two
leaved gates. isa. xlv. 1.
leaven. n. s. [levain, french; levare, latin.]
1. ferment mixed with any body to make it light; particularly
used of sour dough mixed in a mass of bread.
it shall not be baken with leaven. lov. vi. 17.
all fermented meats and drinks are easiest digested ; and
those unfermented, by barm or leaven, are hardly digested. flyer.
2. any mixture which makes a general change in the ma's : it
generally means something that depraves or corrupts that with
which it is mixed.
many of their propositions savour very strong of the old
leaven of innovations. aing charles.
15 g. to
bacon. .
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e e
o
l e c
1, le'aven. v. a...[fro the noun.]
. to ferment b something mix” !, she
i §. o, the leav'ning. ! sh o:
whosoever eateth leavened broad, that sou ... . 1.
&amp; have of several grains, with divers kinds of lea-
breads we hav so that some do extremely move *p*
venings, and seasonings bacon
. -
petites. -
2. to taint; to imbue. . .
that cruel something unposest, -
prior.
corrodes and leaven" all the rest.
le'aver. n.s.. [from have..] one who deserts or forsakes.
let the world rank me in register
a master-leaver, and fugitive.
leaves. n. s. the plural of leaf. -
parts fit for the nourishment of man in plants are: seeds,
ite - iononourishment at all.
roots, and fruits; for leaves they giv bacon's natural histo).
le’avinos. m. s. [from leave..] remnant; relicks; offal; re-
fuse: it has no singular.
my father has this morning call’d together,
to this poor hall, his little roman senate,
shakspeare.
the havings of pharsalia. addison's cato.
then who can think we'll quit the place,
or stop and light at cloe's head, -
with scraps and leaving to bo fed : swift.
le'avy. adj. [from leaf-l full of leaves; covered with leaves:
leasy is more used.
strephon, with leavy twigs of laurel tree,
a garland made on temples for to wear,
for he then chosen was tho dignity
of village lord that whitsontide to bear. sidney.
now, near enough : your leavy screens throw down,
and show like those you a 9. shakespeare's macbeth.
t, lech. v. a. [lecher, french..] to lick over. planner.
has thou yet leched the athenian's eyes
with the love juice shakesp. midsummer night's dream.
le'cher, n. s. [derived by skinner from luxure, cla french :
houria is used in the middle ages in the same sense..] a whore-
master.
i will now take the leather; he's at my house; he cannot
'scape me. shakesp. morry //ives of windsor.
you, like a letcher, out of whorish loins
are pleas'd to breed out your inheritors. shakespeare.
the lecher soon transforms his mistress; now -
in io's place appears a lovely cow.
the sleepy leacher shuts his little eyes,
about his churning chaps the frothy bubbles rise. dryden.
she yields her charms
to that fair latcher, the strong god of ***. pope's odys.
t. lecher. v. n. [from the noun..] to whore.
die for adultery no. the wren goos to’t, and the small
gilded fly does leicher in my fight. shakesp. king lear.
- got cats all day, and letcher; all the night. b. johnson.
lesch erous. adj. [from lecher.] leud; lustful.
the sapphire should grow foul, and lose its beauty, when
worn by one that, is iocherous; the emerald should fly to
pieces, if it touch the skin of any unchaste person. , dorham.
locoes ously. adv. [from lecherous.] leudly; lustfully.
lesch erousness. m. s. [from lecherous.] leudness.
i.joy. n.s. (from locher.] ... leutness ; lust.
the rest welter with as little shame in open lechery, as
swine do in the common mire. aftham's schoolmaster.
against such leudsters, and their lechery,
those that betray them do no treachery. shakspeare.
lection. n.s. [lectio, lat.] a reading ; a variety in copies.
every critick has his own hypothesis: if the common text
be o: * to his opinion, a various ledion shall be
made authentick. //atts's logick.
lecture. m. s. skelure, french.] is's logick
1. a discourse pronounced upon any subject.
mark him, while dametas reads his rustick ledure unto
him, how to feed his beasts before noon, and where to shade
dryden,
them in the extreme heat. sidney
- wrangling pedant,
when in musick we have spent an hour,
your leflure shall have leisure for as much. shakes).
when letters from caesar were given to rusticus, he re-
fused to open them till the philosopher had done his losures.
- - taylor’s holy livi
virtue is the solid good, which tutors so so o
lours and talk of, but the labour and art of education i.
furnish the mind with, and fasten there. lock
2. the act or practice of reading; perusal. 0&amp;a't.
in the leołure of holy scripture, their apprehensions are com-
monly confined unto the literal sense of the tex
- - - t.
3. a msgillol reprimand ; a pedantick discourse. brown.
numidia will be blest by cato's leisures. addison
to locto r e. v. a. ifrom the noun.]
i . to instruct formally.
2. so infliua insolently and dogmatically.
to leco ure. v. n. to read in publick; to instruct an audi-
l explanation or discourse; as, wallis losured
ence by a forma
on geometry.
lescor ur er: n. s. [
... [from ledure.]
o,c} 11 ra -
... an instructor ; * ...cher by way of le&amp;ture.
. a preacher in a church hired by the parish to assist the rector
or vicar. - - -
if any minister refused to admit into his church a leđurer.
recommended by them, and there wo not one orthodox ol'
learned man recommended, he wo presently required to at-
tend upon the committee. clarendon.
le^ct uresłł ip. n. s. [from leflure.] the office of a lecturer.
he got a leđuroshik in town of sixty pounds a year, where
he preached constantly in person. swift.
led. part pre; of dead.
o shall they know that i am the lord your god, which
caused them to be led into captivity among to heathen.
ezek. xxxix. 28.
the leaders of this people caused them to err, and they
that are led of them aro destroyed. isa. ix. 16.
as in vegetables and ...mais, so in most other bodies, not
propagated by seed, it i. colour we most fix on, and are
most led by. - locke.
ledge, n. s. slogg”, dutch, to lie.]
1. a row ; layer 3 stratum.
t. loodge or row should be merely of stone, closely
laid, without mortar * * general caution for all parts in build-
ing contiguous to board. son's architecture.
2. a ridge rising above the rest; or projesting beyond the rest.
the four parallel sticks rising above five inches higher than
the handkerchief, served as *** * each side. gulliver.
3. any prominence, or rising part.
beneath a ledge of rocks his fleet he hides,
the bending brow above, a safe retreat provides.
lephorse. m. s. sled and hors...] a sumpter horse.
lef. m. s. slie, french. j
1. dregs; sediment ; resuse: commonly lees,
my cloaths, my sex, exchang'd for thee,
i'll mingle with the people's wretched lee. prior.
2. [sea term ; supposed by skinner from l’eau, french..] it is
generally that §e which is opposite to the wind, as the lee
shore is that the wind blows on. to be under the lee of the
shore, is to be close under the weather shore. a leeward ship
; on that is not fast by a wind, to make her way so good as
she might. to lay a ship by the lee, is to bring her so that
all her fails may lic against the masts and shrowds flat, and the
wind to come fight on her broadside, so that she will make
little or no way. djo.
if we, in the bay of biscay, had had a port under our lee,
that we might have kept our transporting ships with our men
of war, we had taken the indian fleet. raleigh.
the hollanders were before dunkirk with the wind at
north west, making a lee shore in all weathers. raleigh.
unprovided of tackling and victualling, they are forced to
sea by a storm; yet better do so than venture splitting and
sinking on a lee ao. king charles.
him, haply slumb'ring on the norway foam,
the pilot of some small night-founder'd skiff,
deeming some island, oft, as seamen tell,
with fixed anchor in his scaly rind,
moors by his fide under the leo, while night
invests the sea. c
the pass o by his lee they lay,
e passing winds through their tor -*-* &gt; 1 …
o: n. s. e. saxon.] &amp; n canvass play. dryden.
i. so professor of the art of healing : whence we
a leech, the which had great insight
in that discase of grieved &amp;nto,
and well could cure the same ; his name was patience.
stensor’ iro c),
her words prevail'd, and then the . s.” &amp;een.
his cunning hand 'gan to his wounds to lay,
and all thin; else the which his art did teach. fa. ©w.
physick is their bane. *~,
the learned laches in despair depart,
and shake their heads, desponding of their art
do o : will not vain receipts obtrude: -
af to complaints the - - -
to some o: crisis. y wait upon the ill,
- he hoary wrinkled leech has watch'd a :1: .
*::::::: health-restoring herb and o toil'd,
ried out his painful skill in vain.
- a skilful leach
o had wrought this bless-d do ;
his was arbuthnot was yelept. gao’s pas?, rol
2. so o water serpent, which fastens on o
s the blood : it i 1.1 i s-
less safe, whence o o blood where the lancet is
i drew blood by leeches behind hi ear.
sticking like leeches, till th -
without remorse insatiably. ey burst with blood,
drydon.
milton.
dryden.
drydon.
rowe.
isosoman.
roscom.mow.
to leec
leech. v. a. [from the noun...] to treat with medicament
leechcraft.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e. f.
l e g
or,
5,
le'echcraft. n.s. sleech and craft.] the art of healing.
we study speech, but others we persuade:
we leechcraft learn, but others cure with it.
leef, adj. [lieve, leve, dutch..] kind ; fond.
whilome all these were low and left,
and lov'd their flocks to feed ;
they never strove to be the chief,
and simple was their weed. spensor's pastorals.
leek. m. s. [leac, saxon; loock, dutch; leechk, erse, porrum,
latin.] a plant,
know'st thou fluellen 2–yes.
—tell him i'll knock his leek about his pate,
upon st. david's day. shakespeare.
leck to the welsh, to dutchmen butter’s dear. gay.
we use acrid plants inwardly and outwardly in gangrenes;
in the scurvy, water-cresses, horse-radish, garlick, or leek pot-
tage. floyer on huanours.
leer. m. s. [pleane, saxon.]
1. an oblique view.
i spy entertainment in her; she gives the leer of invitation.
shakspeare’s asary i/ives of iłindsor.
aside the devil turn’d
for envy, yet with jealous leer malign
ey’d them askance. milton.
2. a labour'd cast of countenance.
damn with faint praise, concede with civil leer. pope.
i place a statesman full before my fight;
a bloated monster in all his geer,
with shameless visage, and perfidious leer. swift.
to leer. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to look obliquely; to look archly.
i will leer upon him as he comes by ; and do but mark the
countenance that he will give me. shakesp. henry iv.
i wonder whether you taste the pleasure of independency, or
whether you do not sometimes leer upon the court. swift.
2. to look with a forced countenance.
bertran has been taught the arts of courts,
to gild a face with smiles, and leer a man to ruin. dryden.
lee s. n. s. [lie, french..] dregs ; sediment: it has seldom a
fingular.
the memory of king richard was so strong, that it lay like
lees at the bottom of men's hearts; and if the vessel was but
stirred, it would come up. bacon's henry vii.
if they love lees, and leave the lusty wine,
envy them not their palates with the swine. b. johnson.
those lees that trouble it, refine
the agitated soul of generous wine. dryden.
to leese. v. a. [lson, dutch.j. to lose : an old word.
then sell to thy profit both butter and cheese,
who buieth it sooner the more he shall legs. tussor,
no cause, nor client fat, will chev'ril loose,
but as they come on both sides he takes fees;
and pleaseth both : for while he melts his grease
for this, that wins for whom he holds his peace. b. johns.
how in the port our fleet dear time did less,
withering like prisoners, which lie but for fees. donne.
leet. n. s.
leete, or leta, is otherwise called a law-day. the word
seemeth to have grown from the saxon leoe, which was a
court of jurisdiction above the wapentake or hundred, com-
prehending three or four of thcm, otherwise called thirshing,
and contained the third part of a province or shire : these
jurisdictions, one and other, be now abolished, and swallowed
up in the county court. cowel.
who has a breast so pure,
but some uncleanly apprehensions
keep leets and law-days, and in sessions sit
with meditations lawful ? shakespeare's othello.
you would present her at the lect,
because she bought stone jugs, and no seal’d quarts. shak.
le'eward. adj. [lee and peasib, saxon.] towards the wind.
see lee.
the classicae were called long ships, the onerariae round,
because of their figure approaching towards circular: this
figure, though proper for the stowage of goods, was not the
fittest for failing, because of the great quantity of leeward
way, except when they sailed full before the wind. arbuth.
let no statesman dare,
a kingdom to a ship compare ;
left he should call our commonweal
a vessel with a double keel ;
which just like ours, new rigg’d and man'd,
and got about a league from land,
by change of wind to keward side,
the pilot knew not how to guide. swift.
lift. participle preter. of leave.
alas, poor lady! desolate and left ;
i weep myself to think upon thy wor's. shakespeare.
had such a river as this been lost to itself, to have found its
way out from among the alps, whatever windings it had
made, it must have formed several little seas. addison.
were 1 lost to myself, i would rather aim at instructing
than diverting; but if we will be useful to the world, we must
take it as we find it. addison's speciator.
davies. left. adj. [lufte, dutch; levus, latin.] sinistrous; not right.
that there is also in men a natural prepotency in the right,
we cannot with constancy affirm, if we make observation in
children, who permitted the feedom of both hands, do oft-
times confine it unto the left, and are not without great diffi-
culty restrained from it. brown's pulgar errours.
the right to pluto's golden palace guides, -
the left to that unhappy region tends,
which to the depth of tartarus descends. dryden.
the gods of greater nations dwell around,
and, on the right and left, the palace bound;
the commons where they can.
a raven from a wither'd oak,
lost of their lodging was oblig'd to croak:
that omen lik’d him not. dryden.
the left foot naked when they march to fight, -
but in a bull's raw hide they sheathe the right. dryden.
the man who struggles in the fight,
fatigues left arm as well as right. prior.
left-handed. adj. [left and hand..] using the left-handra.
ther than right.
the limbs are used most on the right-side, whereby custom
dryden.
helpeth; for we see, that some are lift-handed, which are .
such as have used the left-hand most. bacon.
for the seat of the heart and liver on one side, whereby
men become left-handed, it happeneth too rarely to counte-
nance an effect so common : for the seat of the liver on the
left-side is very monstrous. brown's wulgar errours.
left-handed ness. n. s. [from left-handed.] habitual use of
the left-hand.
although a squint loft-handednes;
b'ungracious; yet we cannot want that hand. donne.
leg. m. s. [seg, danish ; leggur, islandick.)
i. the limb by which we walk; particularly that part between
the knee and the foot.
they haste; and what their tardy feet deny'd,
the trusty staff, their better leg, supply'd, dryden.
purging comfits, and ants eggs,
had almost brought him off his legs. hudibras.
such intrigues people cannot meet with, who have nothing
but logs to carry them. addison's guardian.
2. an act of obeisance; a bow with the leg drawn back.
at court, he that cannot make a leg, put off his cap, kiss
his hand, and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap.
- shakoff. all's well that ends wo.
their horses never give a blow,
but when they make a leg, and bow. hudibrar.
if the boy should not put off his hat, nor make *gs very
gracefully, a dancing-master will cure that defeoł. locke.
he made his leg, and went away. swift.
3. to sland on his own legs. to support himself.
persons of their fortune and quality could well have stood
upon their own legs, and needed not to lay in for countenance
and support. collier of friendship.
4. that by which any thing is supported on the ground: as, the
leg of a table.
legacy. m. s. [legatum, latin.]
legacy is a particular thing given by last will and testament.
- cowes.
if there be no such thing apparent upon record, they do as
if one should demand a legacy by force and virtue of some
written testament, wherein there being no such thing speci-
fied, he pleadeth that there it must needs be, and bringeth argu-
ments from the love or good-will which always the teslator
bore him; imagining, that these, or the like proofs, will con-
vict a testament to have that in it, which other men can no-
where by reading find. hooker.
fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
how to cut off some charge in legacies. shosh. j. cesar.
good counsel is the best legacy a father can leave a child.
l’estrange.
when he thought you gone
to augment the number of the bless'd above,
he deem'd 'em legacies of royal love;
nor arm’d, his brothers portions to invade,
but to defend the present you had made. dryden.
when the heir of this vast treasure knew,
how large a legacy was left to you,
he wisely ty'd it to the crown again. dryden:
- leave to thy children tumult, strife, and war,
portions of toil, and legacies of care. prior,
legal. adj. [legal, french; leges, latin.]
1. done or conceived according to law.
whatsoever was before richard i. was before time of me-
mory; and what is since is, in a legal sense, within the time
of memory. hale's hist. of the common law,
2. lawful; not contrary to law.
3. according to the law of the old dispensation.
his merits
to save them, not their own, though legal, works. milton,
legality.
4.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">i
|
o
!
|
t
o
o
* *
*
l e g
leo a'lity. n.s. [legalite, french.] lawfulness.
to lega liz e. v.a. [legaliser, french ; from legal.] to au-
thorize; to make lawful.
if any thing can legalize revenge, it should be injury from
an extremely obliged person: but revenge is so absolutely the
peculiar of heaven, that no consideration can impower, even
the best men, to assume the execution of it. south.
le"gally. adv. [from legal.] lawfully; according to law.
a prince may not, much less may inferior judges, deny
justice, when it is legally and competently demanded. taylor.
le'gatary. m. s. [legataire, french; from tegatum, latin.]
1. one who has a legacy left.
an executor shall exhibit a true inventory of goods, taken
in the presence of fit persons, as creditors and legataries are,
unto the ordinary. ayliffe.
2. belonging to a legate of the roman see.
all those you have done of late,
by your power legatine within this kingdom,
fall in the compass of a praemunire. shakespeare.
lega’t in e. adj. [from legate.] made by a legate.
when any one is absolved from excommunication, it is
provided by a legatine constitution, that some one shall publish
such absolution. ayliffe's parergon.
le gate, n. s. [legatus, latin; legat, french ; legato, italian.]
1. a deputy; an ambassador.
the legates from th’ aftolian prince return :
sad news they bring, that after all the cost, -
and care employ'd, their embassy is lost. dryden's zneid.
2. a kind of spiritual ambassador from the pope ; a commissioner
deputed by the pope for ecclesiastical affairs.
look where the holy legate comes apace,
to give us warrant from the hand of heav'n. shakesp.
upon the legate's summons, he submitted himself to an ex-
amination, and appeared before him. atterbury.
legate'e. m. s. [from ligatum, latin.] one who has a legacy
left him.
if he chance to 'scape this dismal bout,
the former legatees are blotted out. dryden’s juvenal.
my will is, that if any of the above-named legatees should
die before me, that then the respective legacies shall revert to
myself. swift.
legation. n. s. [legatio, latin.] deputation; commission;
embassy.
after a legation ad res repetendas, and a refusal, and a de-
nunciation or indiction of a war, the war is no more confined
to the place of the quarrel, but is left at large. bacon.
in attiring, the duke had a fine and unaffected politeness,
and upon occasion costly, as in his legations. isotton.
lega tor. n.s. [from lego, latin.] one who makes a will,
and leaves legacies.
suppose debate
betwixt pretenders to a fair estate,
bequeath'd by some legator's last intent.
le gend. m. s. [legenda, latin.]
1. a chronicle or register of the lives of saints.
legend, being grown in a manner to be nothing else but
heaps of frivolous and scandalous vanities, they have been
even with disdain thrown out, the very nests which bred them
abhorring them. hooker.
there are in rome two sets of antiquities, the christian and
the heathen ; the former, though of a fresher date, are so em-
broiled with fable and legend, that one receives but little satis-
faction. addison on italy.
2. any memorial or relation.
and in this legend all that glorious deed
read, whilst you arm you; arm you whilst you read. fairf.
3. an incredible unauthentick narrative.
who can show the legends, that record
more idle tales, or fables so absurd 2 blackmore.
it is the way of attaining to heaven, that makes profane
scorners so willingly let go the expectation of it. it is not
the articles of the creed, but the duty to god and their neigh-
bour, that is such an inconsistent incredible legend. bentley.
4. any inscription; particularly on medals or coins.
compare the beauty and comprehensiveness of legend, on
ancient coins. addison on medals.
le ger. m. s. [from legger, dutch. to lie or remain in a
place..] any thing that lies in a place; as, a leger ambassa-
dor; a resident; one that continues at the court to which he
is sent ; a leger book, a book that lies in the compting house.
lord angelo, having affairs to heav'n,
intends you for his swift ambassador,
where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
i’ve giv'n him that,
which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
of leidgers for her sweet. shakespeare's cymbeline.
if legier ambassadors or agents were sent to remain near the
courts of princes, to observe their motions, such were made
choice of as were vigilant. bacon.
who can endear
thy praise too much thou art heav'n's leiger here,
working against the states of death and hell. herbert.
dryden.
shakespeare.
l e g
he withdrew not his confidence from any of those who at-
tended his person, who, in truth, lay leiger for the covenant,
and kept up the spirits of their countrymen by their intelli-
gence. clarendon.
i call that a lodger bait, which is fixed, or made to rest, in
one certain place, when you shall be absent; and i call that
a walking bait which you have ever in motion. // alton.
leger dema 1 n. m. s. [contracted perhaps from legerete de main,
french.j slight of hand; juggle; power of deceiving the
eye by nimble motion; trick; deception; knack.
he so light was at legerdemain,
that what he touch'd came not to light again. ihallerd.
of all the tricks and legerdomain by which men impose upon
their own souls, there is none so common as the plea of a good
intent 10n. south.
legerity. m. s. [legerete, french.] lightness; nimbleness;
quickness. a word not in ese.
when the mind is quicken'd,
the organs though defunct and dead before,
break up their drowsy grave, and newly move
with casted slough and fresh ligerity. shakes care.
i e'gged. adj. [from leg.j. having legs; furnished with legs.
le gible. m. s. [legibilis, latin.]
1. such as may be read.
you observe some clergymen with their heads held down
within an inch of the cushion, to read what is hardly legible.
swift.
2. apparent; discoverable.
people's opinions of themselves are legible in their counte-
nances. thus a kind imagination makes a bold man have
vigour and enterprize in his air and motion; it stamps value
and significancy upon his face. collier.
le gibly. adv. [from legille.] in such a manner as may be
read.
legion. [legio, latin.]
1. a body of roman soldiers, consisting of about five thousand.
the most remarkable piece in antoninus's pillar is, the
figure of jupiter pluvius sending rain on the fainting army of
marcus aurelius, and thunderbolts on his enemies, which is
; greatest confirmation possible of the story of the christian
egion.
addison.
2. a military force.
she to foreign realms
sends forth her dreadful legions. philips.
3. any great number.
not in the legions
of horrid hell, can come a devil more damn'd. shakoff.
the partition between good and evil is broken down ; and
where one fin has entered, legions will force their way through
the same breach. rogers.
legionary. adj. [from legion.]
1. relating to a legion.
2. containing a legion.
3. containing a great indefinite number.
too many applying themselves betwixt jest and earnest,
make up the legionary body of error. brown.
lorios. n, s, [from legislator, lat..] the act of giving
aw s.
pythagoras joined legislation to his philosophy, and, like
others, pretended to miracles and revelations from god, to
give a more venerable sanction to the laws he prescribed.
littleton on the conversion of st. paul.
legislative, adj. [from legislator.) giving laws; lawgiving.
their legislative frenzy they repent,
enacting it should make no precedent. denham.
the poet is a kind of lawgiver, and those qualities are pro-
per to the legislative style. dryden.
legislator. m. s. [legislator, latin; legislatour, french.]
a lawgiver; one who makes laws for any community.
it spoke like a legislator: the thing spoke was a law. south.
heroes in animated marble frown,
and logislators seem to think in stone. pope.
legislature. m. s. [from legislator, latin.] the power that
makes laws.
without the concurrent consent of all three parts of the
legislature, no law is, or can be made. hale's com. law.
in the notion of a legislature is implied a power to change,
repeal, and suspend laws in being, as well as to make new
laws. addison.
by the supreme magistrate is properly understood the legis-
lative power; but the word magistrate seeming to denote a
single person, and to express the executive power, it came to
pass that the obedience due to the legislature was, for want of
considering this easy distinction, misapplied to the administra-
tion. swift's sentiments of a ch. of england man.
legi’t ima cy. m. s. [from legitimate.]
1. lawfulness of birth.
in respect of his legitimacy, it will be good.
2. genuineness; not spuriousness.
the legitimacy or reality of these marine bodies windicated,
i now inquire by what means they were hurried out of the
qccas, //o3dward's natural history.
legitimate.
a liffe.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e i
c
legitimate. adj. [from legitimus, lat, legitime, frehch.j
born in marriage; lawfully begotten. -
legitimate edgar, i must have your land;
oo:: love is to the bastard edmund. shakespeare.
an adulterous person is tied to make provision for the chil-
dren begotten in unlawful embraces, that they may do no in-
jury to the legitimate, by receiving a portion. taylor,
to leg, timate. v. a. [legitimer, fr. from the adjective.]
1. to procure to any the rights of legitimate birth.
legitimate him that was a bastard. ayliffe's parergon.
2. to make lawful.
it would be impossible for any enterprize to be lawful, if
that which should legitimate it is subsequent to it, and can
have no influence to make it good or bad. decay of piety.
leg1oti mately. adv. [from legitimate.]
1. lawfully.
2. genuinely.
by degrees he rose to jove's imperial seat,
thus difficulties prove a soul legitimately great. dryden,
legitimation. n. j. [legitimation, french; from legitimate.]
1. lawful birth.
i have disclaim'd my land;
legitimation, name, and all is gone:
then, good my mother, let me know my father. shakesp.
from whence will arise many questions of legitimation, and
what in nature is the difference betwixt a wife and a concu-
bine. - locke.
2. the act of investing with the privileges of lawful birth.
le guame. {". s. [legume, french ; legumen, lat..] seeds
legu’amen. not reaped, but gathered by the hand; as,
beans : in general, all larger seeds ; pulse.
some legumens, as peas or beans, if newly gathered and
distilled in a retort, will afford an acid spirit. boyle.
in the spring fell great rains, upon which ensued a most
destructive mildew upon the corn and legumes. arbuthnot.
legu'm inous. adj. [legumineux, french; from 1egumen.] be-
longing to pulse ; consisting of pulse.
the properest food of the vegetable kingdom is taken from
the farinaceous seeds : as oats, barley, and wheat; or of some
of the siliquose or leguminous ; as, peas or beans. arbuthnot.
le isurably. adv. [from leisurable.] at leisure ; without tu-
mult or hurry.
let us beg of god, that when the hour of our rest is come,
the patterns of our dissolution may be jacob, moses, joshua,
and david, who leisurably ending their lives in peace, prayed
for the mercies of god upon their posterity. hooker.
leisurable, adj. [from leisure.] done at leisure: not hur-
lied; enjoying leisure.
a relation inexcuseable in his works of leisurable hours, the
examination being as ready as the relation. , brown.
letsure. m. s. [loisir, french.] -
1. freedom from business or hurry; a vacancy of mind; power
to spend time according to choice.
a gentleman fell very sick, and a friend said to him, send
for a physician ; but the sick man answered, it is no matter;
for if i die, i will die at leisure. bacon's apophthegms.
where ambition and avarice have made no entrance, the
desire of leisure is much more natural than of business and
case. temple.
you enjoy your quiet in a garden, where you have not
only the leisure of thinking, but the pleasure to think of no-
thing which can discompose your mind. dryden.
2. convenience of time. ,
we'll make our leisures to attend on yours. shakesp.
they sunmon'd up their meiny, strait took horse;
commanded me to follow, and attend
the lefture of their answer.
- o happy youth !
for whom thy fates reserve so fair a bride:
he figh'd, and had no leisure more to say,
his honour call'd his eyes another way. dryden's ovid.
i shall leave with him that rebuke, to be considered at his
leisure. locke.
3. want of leisure. not used. -
more than i have said, loving countrymen;
the losure and enforcement of the time
forbids to dwell on. shakespeare's richard iii.
le'isu rely. adj. [from leisure.] not hasty; deliberate; done
without hurry.
he was the wretchedest thing when he was young,
so long a growing, and so leisurely,
that, if the rule were true, he should be gracious. sha&amp;sh.
the earl of warwick, with a handful of men, fired leith
and edinburgh, and returned by a leisurely march. hayward.
the bridge is human life: upon a leisurely survey of it, i
found that it consisted of threescore and ten intire arches. add.
leisu rely. adv. [from leisure.] not in a hurry; slowly;
deliberately.
the belgians hop'd, that with disorder'd haste,
our deep-cut keels upon the sands might run;
or if with caution leisurely we past,
their numerous gross might charge us one by one, dryd.
vol. ii.
o
shakesp. king lear.
we descended very leisureș, my friend being careful td
y sy, my 3 - - -
count the steps. addison,
le man. m. s. [generally supposed to be laimant, the lover,
french; but imagined by junius, with almost equal proba-
bility, to be derived from left, dutch, or leop, saxon, beloved
and man. this etymology is strongly supported by the an:
tient orthography, according to which it was written leveman.]
a sweetheart; a gallant; or a mistress. hanmer.
hold for my sake, and do him not to dye ;
but vanquish'd, thine eternal bondslave make,
and me thy worthy meed unto thy liman take. spensor.
a cup of wine,
that’s brisk and fine,
and drink unto the leman mine. shaks. henry iv,
le'mma. m. s. [xapop.: ; lemme, french..] a proposition previ-
ously assumed. -
lemon. m. s. [limon, french; limonium, low latin.]
1. the fruit of the lemon-tree.
the juice of lemons is more cooling and astringent than
that of oranges. - arbuthnor.
the dyers use it for dying of bright yellows and lemon
colours. - mortimer.
bear me, pomonas
to where the lemon and the piercing line,
with the deep orange, glowing through the green,
their lighter glories blend. - thomson,
2. the tree that bears lemons. -
the lemon tree hath large stiff leaves; the flower consists
of many leaves, which expand in form of a rose: the fruit
is almost of an oval figure, and divided into several cells, in
which are lodged hard seeds, surrounded by a thick fleshy
substance, which, for the most part, is full of an acid juice.
there are many varieties of this tree, and the fruit is yearly
imported from lisbon in great plenty. miller.
lemonate. n.s.. [from lemon.] liquor made of water, sugar,
and the juice of lemons.
thou, and thy wife, and children, should walk in my
gardens, buy toys, and drink lomonade. arhith. j. ball.
to leni). v. a. preterite, and part. pass, lent. [a-nan, saxon;
leemen, dutch.] -
1. to afford or supply, on condition of repayment.
in common worldly things ’tis call’d ungrateful
with dull unwillingness to pay a debt,
which, with a bounteous band, was kindly lent;
much more to be thus opposite with heav'n. shaks).
thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor land
him thy victuals for increase. lev. xxv. 37.
they dare not give, and e'en refuse to send,
to their poor kindred, or a wanting friend. dryden.
2. to suffer to be used on condition that it be restored.
i'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power to give it from
inc. shakesh. all's well that ends well.
the fair blessing we vouchsafe to send;
nor can we spare you long, though often we may lend.
dryden to the dutches of ormond.
3. to afford; to grant in general.
covetousness, like the sea, receives the tribute of all rivers,
though unlike it in lending any back again. decay of piety.
painting and poesy are two sisters so like, that they lend to
each other their name and office: one is called a dumb possy,
and the other a speaking picture. dryden's dufresnoy.
from thy new hope, and from thy growing store,
now lend assistance, and relieve the poor. dryden's pers.
cato, lend me for a while thy patience,
and condescend to hear a young man speak. addison.
cephisa, thout -
wilt lend a hand to close thy mistress’ eyes.
le'nder. n.s.. [from land. j
1. one who lends any thing.
2. one who makes a trade of putting money to interest.
let the state be answered some small matter, and the rest
left to the lendor; if the abatement be finals, it will not dis-
courage the lender ; he that took ten in the hundred, will
sooner descend to eight than give over this trade. bacon.
whole droves of lendor, croud the bankers doors
to call in money. dryden’s spanish fryar.
interest would certainly encourage the leader to venture in
such a time of danger. addisori.
length. m. s. [from lenz, saxon.]
1. the extent of any thing material from end to end; the
longest line that can be drawn through a body. -
there is in ticinum a church that is in length one hundred
feet, in breadth twenty, and in heighth near fifty: it re-
porteth the voice twelve or thirteen times. bacon.
2. horizontal extension. -
mezentius rushes on his foes,
and first unhappy acron overthrows ;
stretch'd at his length he spurns the swarthy ground. doyd.
3. comparative extent; a certain portion of space or time: in
this sense it has a plural. -
- large lengths of seas and shores co-o'-
between my father and my mother lay. shakso. k. john.
15 h to
a. philips.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o l e n
l e n
to get from th' enemy, and ralph, free;
left danger, fears, and foes, behind, -
and beat, at least, three longt's the wind.
time glides along with undiscover'd haste,
the future but a length beyond the past. dryden's ovid.
4. extent of duration or space. -
what length of lands, what oceans have you pass'd,
what storms sustain'd, and on what shores been cast dryd.
having thus got the idea of duration, the next thing is to
get some measure of this common duration, whereby to judge
of its different lengths. locke.
5. long duration or protraction.
may heav'n, great monarch, still augment your bliss
with length of days, and every day like this. dryden.
such toil requir'd the roman name,
such length of labour for so vast a fame. dryden's afneid.
in length of time it will cover the whole plain, and make
one mountain with that on which it now stands. addison.
6. reach or expansion of any thing.
i do not recommend to all a pursuit of sciences, to those
extensive lengths to which the moderns have advanced.
- - watts's improvement of the mind.
7. full extent; uncontracted state.
if laetitia, who sent me this account, will acquaint me
with the worthy gentleman's name; i will insert it at length
in one of my papers. addison's speciator.
8. distance.
he had marched to the length of exeter, which he had
some thought of besieging. clarendon.
, end; latter part of any assignable time.
churches purged of things burdensome, all was brought at
the length unto that wherein now we stand. hooker.
a crooked stick is not straitened unless it be bent as far on
the clear contrary side, that so it may settle itself at the length
in a middle state of evenness between them both. hooker.
10. at length.. [an adverbial mode of speech. it was for-
merly written at the length.] at last; in conclusion.
at length, at length, i have thee in my arms,
though our malevolent stars have struggled hard,
and held us long asunder. dryden's king arthur.
to le’ngthen. v. a. [from length.]
1. to draw out; to make longer; to elongate.
relaxing the fibres, is making them flexible, or easy to be
lengthened without rupture. arbuthnot on aliments.
falling dews with spangles deck'd the glade,
and the low sun had lengthen'd every shade. pope.
2. to protract; to continue.
frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
which bars a thousand harms, and lengthens life. shakesh.
break off thy fins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by
shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy
tranquility. dan. iv. 27.
it is in our power to secure to ourselves an interest in the
divine mercies that are yet to come, and to lengthen the course
of our present prosperity. atterbury's sermons.
3. to protract pronunciation. -
the learned languages were less constrained in the quan-
tity of every syllable, beside helps of grammatical figures for
the lengthening or abbreviation of them. . dryden.
4. to lengthen out. [the particle out is only emphatical.]
to protract; to extend.
what if i please to lengthen out his date
a day, and take a pride to cozen fate?
i’d hoard up every moment of my life,
to lengthen out the payment of my tears. dryden.
it lengthens out every act of worship, and produces more
lasting and permanent impressions in the mind, than those
which accompany any transient form of words. addison.
to le'ng then. v. n. to grow longer; to increase in length.
one may as well make a yard, whose parts lengthen and
shrink, as a measure of trade in materials, that have not
always a settled value. locke.
still 'tis farther from its end;
still finds its error lengthen with its way. prior.
le'ngthwis e. adv. [length and wise.] according to the length,
in a longitudinal direction.
lenient. adj. [leniens, latin.]
1. assuasive; softening; mitigating.
in this one passion man can strength enjoy;
time, that on all things lays his lenient hand,
yet tames not this ; it sticks to our last sand. pope.
2. with of.
huilibras.
dryden's aur.
consolatories writ
with study’d argument, and much persuasion sought,
lenient of grief and anxious thought. milton's agonistes.
3. laxative; emollient. -
oils relax the fibres, are lenient, balsamick, and abate acri-
mony in the blood. arbuthnot on aliments.
lenient. m. s. an emollient, or assuasive application.
1 dressed it with lenients. wiseman's surgery.
to le nify. v. n. [lenfier, old french; lenia, latin.] to
assuage; to mitigate. -
used for squinancies and inflammations in the throat, it
seemeth to have a mollifying and lenifying virtue. bacon.
all soft'ning simples, known of sov’reign use,
he presses out, and pours their noble juice;
these first infus'd, to lenify the pain,
he tugs with pincers, but he tugs in vain. dryden.
* le'nitive. adj. [lenitif, fr. senio, lat.] assuasive; emollient.
some plants have a milk in them ; the cause may be an
inception of putrefaction : for those milks have all an
acrimony, though one would think they should be lenitive.
bacon.
there is aliment lenitive expelling the foeces without stimu-
lating the bowels; such are animal oils. arbuthnot.
lenitive. n.s. -
1. anything medicinally applied to ease pain.
2. a palliative.
there are lenitives that friendship will apply, before it
would be brought to decretory rigours. south's sermons.
lenity. m. s. [lenitas, lat.] mildness; mercy; tenderness;
softness of temper.
henry gives consent,
of meer compassion, and of lenity,
to ease your country. shakespeare's henry vi.
lenity must gain
the mighty men, and please the discontent. daniel.
albeit so ample a pardon was proclaimed touching treason,
yet could not the boldness be beaten down either with severity,
or with lenity be abated. hayward.
these jealouses
have but one root, the old imprison'd king,
whose lenity first pleas'd the gasing crowd:
but when long try d, and found supinely good,
like aesop's log, they leapt upon his back. dryden.
lens. n. s. from resemblance to the seed of a lental.
a glass spherically convex on both sides, is usually called a
lens; such as is a burning-glass, or spectacle-glass, or an ob-
ject glass of a telescope. newton's opticks.
according to the difference of the lenses, i used various dis-
tances. newton's opticks.
lent, part, past. from lend.
by jove the stranger and the poor are sent,
and what to those we give, to jove is lent. pope's odys.
lent. m. s. [lenzen, the spring, saxon.] the quadragesimal
fast; a time of abstinence; the time from ashwednesday to
easter.
lent is from springing, because it falleth in the spring; for
which our progenitors, the germans, use glent. camden.
lenten, adj. [from lent.] such as is used in lent; sparing.
my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertain-
ment the players shall receive from you. shakesp. hamlet.
she quench'd her fury at the flood,
and with a lenten sallad cool'd her blood.
their commons, though but coarse, were nothing scant.
dryden's hind and panther.
lent1'cular, adj. [lenticulaire, french..] doubly convex; of
the form of a lens. -
the crystalline humour is of a lenticular figure, convex on
both fides. ray on creation.
lentifor m. adj. [lens and forma, latin.] having the form
of a lens.
lent1'ginous. adj. [from lentigo..] scurfy; furfuraceous.
lentigo. m. / [latin.] a freckly or scurfy eruption upon
the skin; such especially as is common to women in child-
bearing. &amp;sincy.
le'nt1l. n.s. [lens, latin; lentille, french.] a plant.
it hath a papilionaceous flower, the pointal of which be-
comes a short pod, containing orbicular seeds, for the most
part convex; the leaves are conjugated, growing to one mid-
rib, and are terminated by tendrils. amiller.
the philistines were gathered together, where was a piece
of ground full of lentiles. 2 sam. xxiii. 1 1,
le'ntisck... n. s. slentiscus, latin ; lentisue, french.j lentis:
wood is of a pale brown, almost whitish, resinous, fragrant
and acrid : it is the tree which produces mastich, esteemed
astringent and balsamick. hill.
lentisek is a beautiful evergreen, the mastich or gum of
which is of use for the teeth or gums. mortimer’s hosh.
le’ntitude. n.s.. [from lentus, foil sluggishness; slow-
ness. - dic7.
le'ntner. m. s. a kind of hawk.
i should enlarge my discourse, to the observation of the
haggard, and the two sorts of lentners. j/alton's angler.
lentor. m. s. [lentor, latin; lenteur, french.]
1. tenacity; viscosity.
some bodies have a kind of lentor, and more depe&amp;tible na-
ture than others. bacon.
2. slowness; delay; sluggish coldness.
the lentor of eruptions, not inflammatory, points to an
acid cause. - arbuthnot on diet.
3. [in physick.] that fizy, viscid, coagulated part of the
blood, which, in malignant fevers, obstructs the capillary
vessels, 9;sincy.
len rous.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e s
l e s
le’ntous. adj. [lenius, latin.] viscous; tenacious; capable
to be drawn out.
in this spawn of a lentous and transparent body, are to be
discerned many specks which become black, a substance more
compacted and terrestrious than the other; for it riseth not in
distillation. brown.
le'od, n. j. leod signifies the people; or, rather, a nation,
country, &amp;c. thus, lecdgar is one of great interest with the
people or nation. gibson's camden.
le"of... n. s. leofdenotes love; so leofwin is a winner of love ;
leofan, best beloved: like these agapetus, erasmus, philo,
amandus, &amp;c. gibson's camden.
lesos in e. adj. [iconinus, latin.]
1. belonging to a lion ; having the nature of a lion.
2, leonine verses are those of which the end rhimes to the
middle, so naumed from leo the inventor: as,
gloria factorum temere concealitur horum.
le'or ard. m. s. [leo and pardus, latin.] a spotted beast of
rt w.
prey sheep run not half so tim’rous from the wolf,
or horse or oxen from the leopard,
as you fly from your oft-subdued slaves. shakoff. henry vi.
a leopard is every way, in shape and actions, like a cat:
his head, teeth, tongue, feet, claws, tail, all like a cat's :
he boxes with his fore-feet, as a cat doth her kittens; leaps
at the prey, as a cat at a mouse ; and will also spit much
after the same manner: so that they seem to disser, just as a
kite doth from an eagle. grew's alouseum.
before the king tame leopard, led the way,
and troops of lions innocently play. dryden.
leopf r. m. s. [opra, leprosus, latin. j one infected with a
leprosy.
i am no loathsome loper; look on me. shakespeare.
the liper in whom the plague is, his cloaths shall be sent.
lev. xiii. 45.
le'pero u.s. adj. [formed from leproar, to make out a verse.]
causing leprosy ; infected with leprosy ; leprous.
upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
with juice of curfed hebenon in a viol,
and in the porches of mine ears did pour
the leperous distilment. shakespeare's hamlet.
leopor in e. adj. [l parinus, lat.] belonging to a hare; having
the nature of a hare.
lep rosity. n.s.. [from leprous.] squamous disease.
if the crudities, impurities, and leprosties of metals were
cured, they would become gold. bacon’s nat. hisł.
leoprosy. m. s. slopra, latin ; lopro, french..] a loathsome
distemper, which covers the body with a kind of white scales.
itches, blains,
so all the athenian bosoms, and their crop
be general leprosy. shakesp. timon of athens.
it is a plague of leprosy. lev. xiii. 3.
between the malice of my enemies and other mens mis-
takes, i put as great a difference as between the itch of no-
velty and the leprosy of disloyalty. king charles.
authors, upon the first entrance of the pox, looked upon
it so highly infectious, that they ran away from it as much
as the jews did from the leprosy. joseman's surgery.
le'prous. adj. [lepra, latin; lepreux, french..] infected with
a leprosy.
the filly amorous sucks his death,
by drawing in a leprous harlot's breath. donne.
lere. n.s. laere, saxon ; leere, dutch..] a lesson ; lore ; doc-
trine. obsolete. this sense is still retained in scotland.
the kid pitying his heaviness,
asked the cause of his great distress;
and also who, and whence, that he were,
though he that had well yeond his lore,
thus melled his talk with many a teare. spensor.
le’rry.. [from lere.] a rating ; a lecture. rustick word.
less. a negative or privative termination. [lear, saxon ; loos,
dutch..] joined to a substantive, if implies the absence or
privation of the thing expressed by that substantive: as, a
withs; man, a man without wit ; chiloloss, without children;
fatherless, deprived of a father; pennyless, wanting money.
less. adj. [lear, saxon.] the comparative of little : opposed
to greater, or to so great; not so much ; not equal.
mary, the mother of james the les. asar. xv. 40.
he that thinks he has a positive idea of infinite space will
find, that he can no more have a positive idea of the greatest
than he has of the least space; for in this latter we are capable
only of a comparative idea of smallness, which will always
be loss than any one whereof we have the positive idea.
locke.
all the ideas that are considered as having parts, and are
capable of increase by the addition of any equal or loss parts,
afford us, by their repetition, the idea of infinity. locke.
'tis loss to conquer, than to make wars cease,
and, without fighting, awe the world to peace. hallifax.
less. m. s. not so much ; opposed to more, or to as much.
they gathered some more, some less. exod. xvi. 17.
thy servant kncw nothing of this, les, or more. 1 sam,
yet could he not his closing eyes withdraw,
though less and loss of emily he saw. dryden,
less, adv. in a smaller degree; in a lower degree.
this opinion presents a less merry, but not los dangerous,
temptation to those in adversity. 19ecay of piety.
the loss space there is betwixt us and the object, and the
more pure the air is, by so much the more the species are
preserved and distinguished ; and, on the contrary, the more
space of air there is, and the less it is pure, so much the more
the object is confused and embroiled. dryden.
their learning lay chiefly in flourish ; they were not much
wiser than the loss pretending multitude. collier on pride.
the loss they themselves want from others, they will be
jos careful to supply the necessities of the indigent. smar.
happy, and happy still, she might have prov’d,
were she less beautiful, or loss belov’d. pope's statius.
le'ss e f. m. s. the person to whom a lease is given.
to le'ss f. n. v. a. [from loss.]
i. to make less; to diminish in bulk.
2. to diminish the degree of any state or quality; to make less
intense.
kings may give
to beggars, and not lesson their own greatness. denham.
though charity alone will not make one happy in the other
world, yet it shall liffon his punishment. calamy’s sermons.
colle&amp;t into one sum as great a number as you please, this
multitude, how great foever, lossoms not one jot the power of
adding to it, or brings him any nearer the end of the inex-
haustible stock of number. locke.
this thirst after fame betrays him into such indecencies as
are a losoning to his reputation, and is looked upon as a weak-
ness in the greatest characters. addison's speciator.
nor are the pleasures which the brutal part of the creation
enjoy, subject to be losened by the uneasiness which arises
from fancy. atterbury's sermons.
3. to degrade; to deprive of power or dignity.
wwho seeks
to lesson thee, against his purpose serves
to manifest the more thy night. milton’s par. l3/?.
st. paul chose to magnify his office, when ill men conspired
to lesson it. atter bury's sermons.
72 le'ss en. v. n. to grow less; to shrink; to be diminished.
all government may be esteemed to grow strong or weak,
as the general opinion in those that govern is seen to losin or
increase. ! ‘l emple.
the objection lessons much, and comes to no more than this,
there was one witness of no good reputation. atterbury.
le’ss e.r. adj. a barbarous corruption of less, formed by the
vulgar from the habit of terminating comparatives in er;
afterwards adopted by poets, and then by writers of prose,
till it has all the authority which a mode originally erroneous
can derive from custom.
what great despite doth fortune to thee bear,
thus lowly to abase thy beauty bright,
that it should not deface all other loser light? fa. qx.
it is the lesser blot, modesty finds,
women to change their shapes than men their minds. sh.
the mountains, and higher parts of the earth, grow lesser
and loser from age to age : sometimes the roots of them are
weakened by subterraneous fires, and sometimes tumbled by
carthquakes into caverns that are under them. burnet."
cain, after the murder of his brother, cries out, every
man that findeth me shall slay me. by the same reason may a
man, in the state of nature, punish the loser breaches of that
law. locke.
any heat promotes the ascent of mineral matter, but more
especially of that which is subtile, and is consequently move-
able more easily, and with a losser power. j/codward.
the larger here, and there the liffor lambs,
the new-fall'n young herd bleating for their dams. pope,
le'ss er. adv. [formed by corruption from less.]
some say he's mad; others, that loser hate him,
do call it valiant fury. shakspeare's macbeth.
le'ss es. n.s. [laisies, french..] the dung of beasis left on the
ground.
lesson. m. s. [legon, french ; leio, latin.] .
1. any thing read or repeated to a teacher, in order to improve-
ment.
i but repeat that lesson
which i have learn’d from thee.
2. precept; notion inculcated.
. this day's ensample hath this lesson dear
deep written in my heart with iron pen,
that bliss may not abide in state of mortal men. fa. qo.
be not jealous over the wife of thy bosom, and teach her
not an evil losson against thyself. ecclus, ix. i.
3. portions of scripture read in divine service. *y-
notwithstanding so eminent properties, whereof lossons are
happily destitute; yet lossons being free from some inconveni-
encies whereunto sermons are most subjec, they may, in this
respe&amp;t, no less take, than in other they must give the hand
which betokeneth pre-eminence. hooker.
4. tune
denham's sophy.
:
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e. t.
l e t
4. tune pricked for an instrument.
those good laws were like good losins set for a flute out of
tune; of which lossons little use can be made, till the flute be
made fit to be played on. davies on ireland.
5. a rating le&amp;ture.
she would give her a losson for walking so late, that should
make her keep within doors for one fortnight. sidney.
to le’sson. v. a. [from the noun..] to teach; to instruct.
even in kind love, i do conjure thee,
to losson me. shakesp. two gentlemen of perona.
well hast thou lesson'd us, this shall we do. shakesp.
children should be seasoned betimes, and lessoned into a
contempt and detestation of this vice. l’estrange's fables.
le'ssor. n.s. one who lets any thing to farm, or otherwise,
by lease.
lords of the world have but for life their lease,
and that too, if the lossor please, must cease. denham.
if he demises the glebe to a layman, the tenant must pay
the small tithes to the vicar, and the great tithes to the lossor.
aliff's parergon.
lest. conj. [from the adjective least.]
1. this particle may be sometimes resolved into that not, mean-
ing prevention or care left a thing should happen. -
forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed, left if he
should exceed, then thy brother should seem vile, deut. xxv.
aleft they faint
at the sad sentence rigorously urg’d,
all terror hide. milton.
my labour will sustain me, and left cold
or heat should injure us, his timely care
milton.
hath unbefought provided. -
king luitprand brought hither the corps, left it might be
abused by the barbarous nations. addison on italy
2. it sometimes means only that, with a kind of emphasis.
one doubt
persues me still, left all i cannot die,
left that pure breath of life, the spirit of man,
which god inspir’d, cannot together perish
with this corporeal clod. milton.
le'ster cock. m. s. they have a device of two sticks filled with
corks, and crossed flatlong, out of whose midst there riseth a
thread, and at the same hangeth a sail ; to this engine, termed
a leslercock, they tie one end of their boulter, so as the wind
coming from the shore filleth the sail, and the sail carrieth the
boulter into the sea, which, after the respite of some hours,
is drawn in again by a cord fastened at the nearer end. carew.
to let. v. a. [lazan, saxon.]
1. to allow; to suffer; to permit.
nay, nay, quoth he, let be your strife and doubt. fairf.
where there is a certainty and an uncertainty, let the un-
certainty go, and hold to that which is certain. bp. sanderson.
on the croud he cast a furious look,
and wither'd all their strength before he spoke;
back on your lives, let be, said he, my prey,
and let my vengeance take the destin'd way. dryden.
remember me; speak, raymond, will you let him
shall he remember leonora 2 dryden's spanish fryar.
we must not let go manifest truths, because we cannot
answer all questions about them. collier.
one who fixes his thoughts intently on one thing, so as to
take but little notice of the succession of ideas in his mind,
lets slip out of his account a good part of that duration. locke.
a solution of mercury in aqua fortis being poured upon
iron, copper, tin, or lead, dissolves the metal, and lets go the
mercury. newton's opticks.
2. a sign of the optative mood used before the first and impera-
rative before the third person. before the first person singular
it signifies resolution, fixed purpose, or ardent wish.
let me die with the philistines. judges.
thomson.
. here let me sit,
and hold high converse with the mighty dead.
3. before the first person plural, let implies exhortation.
rise ; let us go. mark.
shaksp.
let us seek out some desolate shade.
4. before the third person, singular or plural, let implies permission.
let euclid rest, and archimedes pause. milton.
5. or precept.
let the soldiers seize him for one of the assassinates. dryd.
6. sometimes it implies concession.
o'er golden sands let rich paeolus flow,
or trees weep amber on the banks of po,
while by our oaks the precious loads are born,
and realms commanded which those trees adorn. pope.
7. before a thing in the passive voice, let implies command.
let not the objects which ought to be contiguous be sepa-
rated, and set those which ought to be separated be apparently
so to us; but let this be done by a small and pleasing diffe-
rence. dryden's dufresnoy.
8. let has an infinitive mood after it without the particle to, as
in the former examples.
but ene submissive word which you let fall,
will make him in good humour with us all.
dryden.
the seventh year thou shalt let it rest, and lie still. exod.
9. to leave: in this sense it is commonly followed by alone.
they did me too much injury, -
that ever said i hearken'd for your death.
if it were so, i might have let alone
th’ insulting hand of douglas over you. shakespeare.
the publick outrages of a destroying tyranny are but
childish appetites, let alone till they are grown ungovernable.
- l’estrange's fables.
let me alone to accuse him afterwards. dryd. sp. fryar.
this is of no use, and had been better let alone: he is
fain to resolve all into present possession. locke.
nestor, do not set us alone till you have shortened our
necks, and reduced them to their antient standard. addison.
this notion might be set alone and despised, as a piece of
harmless unintelligible enthusiasm. rogers's sermons.
1c. to more than permit; to give.
there's a letter for you, sir, if your name be horatio, as
i am let to know it is. shakespeare's hamlet.
ii. to put to hire; to grant to a tenant.
solomon had a vineyard at baal hamon ; he lot the vine-
yard unto keepers. cant. viii. 11.
nothing deadens so much the composition of a piclure, as
figures which appertain not to the futject: we may call them
figures to be let. dryden's dufreshoy.
she let her second floor to a very genteel man. tatler.
a law was enacted, prohibiting all bishops, and other eccle-
fastical corporations, from letting their lands for above the
the term of twenty years. swift.
12. to suffer any thing to take a course which requires no in-
pulsive violence. in this sense it is commonly joined with a
particle. -
she let them down by a cord through the window. jo/h.
launch out into the deep, and lot down your nets for a
draught. luke, v. 4.
zet down thy pitcher, that i may drink. gen. xxiv. 14.
the beginning of strife is as when one litteth cut water.
- - prev. xvii. 14.
as terebration doth meliorate fruit, so doth pricking vines
or trees after they be of some growth, and thereby looting
forth gum or tears. bacon's natural hyory.
and if i knew which way to do't,
your honour safe, i'd let you out. hudibrar.
the letting out our love to mutable objects doth but en-
large our hearts, and make them the wider marks for fortune
to be wounded. boyle.
my heart finks in me while i hear him speak,
and every slacken'd fibre drops its hold;
like nature letting down the springs of life. dryden.
from this point of the story, the poet is let down to his tra-
ditional poverty. pope's essay on homer.
you must let it down, that is, make it softer by tempering
it. a/oxon's mechanical exercise.
13. to permit to take any state or course.
finding an ease in not understanding, he let loose his
thoughts wholly to pleasure. sidney.
let reason teach impossibility in any thing, and the will of
man doth let it go. hooker.
he was let loose among the woods as soon as he was able to
ride on horseback, or carry a gun. addison's spe.7ator.
14. to let blood, is elliptical for to let out blood. to free it
from confinement; to suffer it to stream out of the vein.
be rul’d by me;
let's purge this choler without letting blood. shakespeare.
his antient knot of dangerous adversaries
to-morrow are let blood at pomfret castle, shakespeare.
hippocrates let great quantities of blood, and opened several
veins at a time. arbuthnot on coins.
15. to let blood, is used with a dative of the person whose
blood is let.
as terebration doth meliorate fruit, so doth litting plants
blood, as pricking vines, thereby letting forth tears. bacon.
16. to let in. to admit. o
let in your king, whose labour’d spirits
crave harbourage within your city walls. shakeshare.
roscetes presented his army before the gates of the city, in
hopes that the citizens would raise some tumult, and let him
- - knolley's hissary of the turks.
what boots it at one gate to make defence
and at another to let in the foe,
fffeminately vanquish’d milton's agon;?.
the more tender our spirits are made by religion, the
more easy we are to let in grief, if the cause be innocent.
1/2.
taylor.
they but preserve the ashes, thou the flame,
true to his sense, but truer to his fame,
fording his current, where thou find it it low,
denham.
let's in thine own to make it rise and flow.
to give a period to my life, and to his fears, you’re wel-
conse ; here's a throat, a heart, or any other part, ready to let
in death, and receive his commands. 19enham.
17. if a noun follows, for let in, let into is required.
it
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e. t
l e. v.
les
it is the key that lets them into their very heart, and en-
ables them to command all that is there. south's sermons.
there are pictures of such as have been distinguished by
their birth or miracles, with inscriptions, that let you into the
name and history of the person represented. addison.
most historians have spoken of ill success, and terrible
events, as if they had been let into the secrets of providence,
and made acquainted with that private conduct by which the
world is governed. addison.
these are not mysteries for ordinary readers to be let into:
addison.
as we rode through the town, i was let into the characters
of all the inhabitants; one was a dog, another a whelp, and
another a cur. addison's freeholder.
18. to let in, or into. to procure admission.
they should speak properly and correctly, whereby they may
let their thoughts into other mens minds the more easily. locke.
as soon as they have hewn down any quantity of the rocks,
they let in their springs and reservoirs among their works.
addison on italy.
19. to let off. to discharge. originally used of an arrow
dismissed from the gripe, and therefore suffered to fly off the
{tring: now applied to guns.
charging my pistol with powder, i cautioned the emperor
not to be afraid, and then let it off in the air. swift.
20. to let out. to lease out ; to give to hire or farm.
to let. v. a. [jezzan, saxon.]
1. to hinder; to obstruct ; to oppose.
their senses are not letted from enjoying their objects: we
have the impediments of honour, and the torments of con-
science. sidney.
to glorify him in all things, is to do nothing whereby the
name of god may be blasphemed; nothing whereby the sal-
vation of jew or grecian, or any in the church of christ,
may be let or hindered. hooker.
leave, ah, leave off, whatever wight thou be,
to let a weary wretch from her due rest,
and trouble dying soul's tranquillity fairy queen.
wherefore do ye let the people from their works go you
unto your burdens. exod. v. 4.
the mystery of iniquity doth already work; only he who
now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way. 2 thos.
i will work, and who will let it? isa. xliii. 11.
and now no longer letted of his prey,
he leaps up at it with enrag’d desire,
o'erlooks the neighbours with a wide survey,
and nods at every house his threatening fire. dryden.
2. to let, when it signifies to permit or leave, has let in the pre-
terite and part. passive ; but when it signifies to hinder, it has
detted; as, multa me impedierunt, many things have letted me.
introduction to grammar.
to let. v. m. to forbear ; to withold himself.
after king ferdinando had taken upon him the person of a
fraternal ally to the king, he would not let to counsel the
king. bacon's henry vii.
let. m. s. [from the verb.] hindrance; obstacle; obstruc-
tion; impediment.
the secret lets and difficulties in public proceedings are in-
numerable and inevitable. płooker.
solyman without let presented his army before the city of
belgrade. knolles's history s the turks.
it had been done e'er this, had i been consul;
we had had no stop, no let. ben. johnson's catiline.
just judge, two lets remove; that free from dread,
i may before thy high tribunal plead. sandys on job.
to these internal dispositions to fin add the external oppor-
tunities and occasions concurring with them, and removing
all lets and rubs out of the way, and making the path of de-
struction plain before the sinner's face; so that he may run his
course freely. south.
let, the termination of diminitive words, from lyze, saxon,
little, small; as, rivulet, a small stream ; hamlet, a little village.
le tha’r gick. adj. [lthargique, fr. from lethargy..] sleepy by
disease, beyond the natural power of sleep.
vengeance is as if minutely proclaimed in thunder from
heaven, to give men no rest in their fins, till they awake from
the lethargick sleep, and arise from so dead, so mortiferous a
state. hammond's fundamentals.
let me but try if i can wake his pity
from his lethargick sleep. denham's sophy.
a legarthy demands the same cure and diet as an apoplexy
from a phlegmatic case, such being the constitution of the
sethargick. arbuthnot on diet.
leth a r gickness. m. s. [from lethargick.] morbid sleepiness;
drowsiness to a disease.
a grain of glory mixt with humbleness,
cures both a fever, and lethargickness. herbert.
lethargy. m. s. [anjagosz; lethargie, french..] a morbid
drowsiness; a sleep from which one cannot be kept awake.
the lethargy must have his quiet course;
if not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
breaks out to savage madness.
shakespeare.
vol. ii, esp
though his eye is open, as the morning's,
towards lusts and pleasures; yet so fast a lethargy
has seiz'd his powers towards publick cares and dangers,
he sleeps like death. denham's sophy;
europe lay then under a deep lethargy ; and was no other-
wise to be rescued from it, but by one that would cry mightily.
arterbury.
a lethargy is a lighter sort of apoplexy, and demands the
same cure and diet. arbathnot on diet.
leth argied. adj. [from the noun..] laid asleep; entranced.
his motion weakens, or his discernings
are lethargied. shakespeare's king lear.
lethe. m. s. [ an on..] oblivion; a draught of oblivion.
the conquering wine hath steept our sense
in soft and delicate lethe. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
her wat'ry labyrinth, which who so drinks
forgets both joy and grief. moon,
letter. m. s. [from let.]
1. one who lets or permits.
2. one who hinders.
. one who gives vent to anything; as, a blood-letter.
letter. m. s. [lettre, french ; litera, latin.]
1. one of the elements of syllables.
a superscription was written over him in letters of greek,
latin, and hebrew. luke, xxiii. 38.
thou whoreson zed thou unnecessary letter / shakesp.
2. a written message; an epistle.
they use to write it of the top of letters. shakespeare.
i have a letter from her
of such contents as you will wonder at, shaos care.
when a spaniard would write a letter by him, the indian
would marvel how it should be possible, that he, to whom he
came, should be able to know all things. abbot.
the asses will do very well for trumpeters, and the hares
will make excellent letter carriers. l’e/irange's fables.
the stile of letters ought to be free, easy, and natural; as
near approaching to familiar conversation as possible: the two
best qualities in conversation are, good humour and good breed-
ing; those letters are therefore certainly the best that shew the
most of these two qualities. //al/h.
mrs. p. b. has writ to me, and is one of the best letter
writers i know ; very good sense, civility and friendship, with-
out any stiffness or constraint. swift.
3. the verbal expression; the literal meaning.
touching translations of holy scripture, we may not dis-
allow of their painful travels herein, who strictly have tied
themselves to the very original letter. hooker.
in obedience to human laws, we must observe the letter of
the law, without doing violence to the reason of the law, and
the intention of the lawgiver. taylor's holy living.
those words of his must be understood not according to the
bare rigour of the letter, but according to the allowances of
expression. - south's sermons.
what since the pretor did my fetters loose,
and left me freely at my own dispose,
may i not live without controul and awe,
excepting still the letter of the law
4. letters without the singular: learning.
the jews marvelled, saying, how knoweth this man letters,
having never learned john, vii. 15.
5. any thing to be read.
good laws are at best but a dead letter. addis. freeholder.
6. type with which books are printed.
the iron ladles that letter founders use to the casting of
printing letters, are kept constantly in melting metal. moxon.
to letter. v. a. [from letter.] to stamp with letters.
i observed one weight lettered on both sides; and i found
on one side, written in the dialeot of men, and underneath it,
calamities; on the other side was written, in the language bf
the gods, and underneath, blesfings. addison.
lettered. adj. [from letter.] literate; educated to learning.
a martial man, not sweetened by a lettered education, is
apt to have a tineture of sourness. collier on pride.
lettu ce. n. s. [la'luca, latin.]
the species are, common or garden lettuce ; cabbage let-
tuce; silesia lettuce; white and black cos; white cos; red
capuchin lettuce. - 44'iller.
fat colworts, and comforting purseline,
cold lettuce, and refreshing rosemarine. spensor.
lettuce is thought to be poisonous, when it is so old as to
have milk. bacon’s natural history.
the medicaments proper to diminish milk, are lettuce,
urslane, endive. wiseman's surgery.
levant, adj. [levant, french.] eastern.
thwart of those, as fierce
forth rush the levant, and the ponent winds,
eurus and zephyr. milton's paradis, loft.
le’va n.t. n.s. the east, particularly those coasts of the modi-
terranean east of italy.
lewa tor. m.s. [latin.]. a chirurgical instrument, whereby
depressed parts of the skull are lifted up.
1 5 i some
dryden's persus.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">i, e. v.
l e. v.
*
l
s:
-
o
*
o
.
some surgeons bring out the bone in the bore ; but it will
be safer to raise it up with your levator, when it is but lightly
retained in some part. j/ijeman's surgery.
leu cop hl hoc macy. m. s. ssrom locophlegmatick.] paleness,
with viscid juices and cold sweatings.
spirits produce debility, flatulency, fevers, leucophlegmacy,
and dropsies. arbuthnot on aliznents.
leucophiego: a tick, adj. [??ox3; and otyuz.] having
such a constitution of body where the blood is of a pale co-
lour, viscid, and cold, whereby it stuffs and bloats the habit,
or raises white tumours in the feet, legs, or any other parts;
and such are commonly asthmatick and dropsical. ..ouincy.
asthmatic persons have voracious appetites, and for want of
a right sanguification are leucophlegmatick. arbuthnot.
lep'ee. m. s. [french.]
1. the time of rising.
2. the concourse of those who croud round a man of power in
a morning.
would'st thou be first minister of state;
to have thy levees crouded with resort, -
of a depending, gaping, servile court dryden's juvenal.
none of her sylvan subjects made their court,
levees and couchees pass'd without resort. drydon.
level, adj. [lapel, saxon.]
1. even ; not having one part higher than another.
the doors
discover ample spaces o'er the smooth
and level pavement. amilton.
the garden, feated on the level floor,
she left behind. dryden’s boccace.
2. even with ahy thing else; in the same line with any thing.
our navy is addressed, our pow'r collected,
and ev’ry thing lies level to our wish. shakesp. henry iv.
now shaves with level wing the deep. a/ilton.
there is a knowledge which is very proper to man, and
lies level to human understanding, the knowledge of our crea-
tor, and of the duty we owe to him. tillotson.
3. having no gradations of superiority.
be lovel in preferments, and you will soon be as level in
your learning. - bently.
7, le've l. v. o. [from the adjective.]
1. to make even; to free from inequalities: as, he levels the walks.
2. to reduce to the same height with something else.
less bright the moon,
but opposite in level'd west was set. milton.
he will thy foes with filent shame confound,
and their proud structures level with the ground. sandys.
3. to lay flat.
we know by experience, that all downright rains do ever-
more diffever the violence of outrageous winds, and beat
down and level the swelling and mountainous billows of the
sea. raleigh.
with unresisted might the monarch reigns, -
he levels mountains, and he raises plains;
and not regarding diff'rence of degree,
abas'd your daughter, and exalted me. dryden.
4. to bring to equality of condition.
reason can never assent to the admission of those brutish
appetites which would over-run the soul, and level its superior
with its inferior faculties. decay of piety.
5. to point in taking aim ; to aim.
each at the head
level’d his deadly aim. milton.
one to the gunners on st. jago's tow'r,
bid 'em for shame level their cannon lower. dryden.
iron globes which on the victor host
level'd with such impetuous fury smote. milton.
the construction i believe is not, globes level"d on the host,
but globes level’d smote on the host.
6. to direct to any end,
- the whole body of puritans was drawn to be abettors of
all villainy by a few men, whose designs from the first were
levelled to destroy both religion and government.
7. to suit to proportion. .
e behold the law
and rule of beings in your maker's mind:
and thence, like limbecks, rich ideas draw,
to fit the levell'd use of humankind.
to le' v e l. v. n.
1. to aim at ; to bring the gun or arrow to the same dire&amp;tion
with the mark.
the glory of god, and the good of his church, was the
thing which the apostles aimed at, and therefore ought to be
the mark whereat we also level. hocker.
2. to conjecture ; to attempt to guess.
i pray thee overname them; and as thou namest them i will
describe them; and, according to my description, level at my
atte‘tion. shakesp. merchant of penice.
3. to be in the same direetion with a mark.
he to his engine flew,
plac’d near at hand in open view,
and rais'd it till it levell'd right,
against the glow-worm tail of kite.
drydon,
hudibras.
swift.
4. to make attempts; to aim.
ambitious york did lect at thy crown. s}a}o are.
5. to efface distinction or superiority; as, infamy is always try-
ing to level. -
lew el. m. s. [from the adjective.]
1. a plane; a surface without protuberances or inequalities.
after draining of the level in northamptonshire, innume-
rable mice did upon a sudden arise. hale's original of asao.
those bred in a mountainous country oversize those that
dwell on low levels. sandys's travels.
2. rate; standard; customary height.
love of her made us raise up our thoughts above the ordi-
nary level of the world, so as great clerks do not did, in our
conte chce. sidney.
the praises of military men inspired me with thoughts above
my ordinary level. 19 ydon.
3. suitable or proportionate height.
it might perhaps advance their minds so far
above the level of subjection, as
to assume to them the glory of that war. daniel.
4. a state of equality.
the time is not far off when we shall be upon the lol, i
am resolved to anticipate the time, and be upon the level with
them now : for he is so that neither seeks nor wants them.
atterbury to pope.
providence, for the most part, set us upon a loves, and ob-
serves proportion in its dispensations towards us.
a dison's spolator.
i suppose, by the stile of old friends, and the like, it must
be somebody there of his own level; among whom his party
have, indeed, more friends than i could wish.
5. an instrument whereby masons adjust their work.
the level is from two to ten feet long, that it may reach
over a considerable length of the work: if the plumb-line
hang just upon the perpendicular, when the level is set flat
down upon the work, the work is level ; but if it hangs on
either side the perpendicular, the floor or work must be raised
on that side, till the plumb-line hang exactly on the perpen-
dicular. aloxon's adechanical exercises.
6. rule; plan; scheme : borrowed from the mechanick level.
be the fair level of thy actions laid,
as temp'rance wills, and prudence may persuade,
and try if life be worth the liver's care. prior.
7. the line of direction in which any missive weapon is aimed.
i stood i' th' level
of a full charg’d confederacy, and gave thanks
to you that choked it. shakspeare's henry viii.
as if that name,
shot from the deadly lovel of a gun,
did murther her. sag. romeo and juliet.
thrice happy is that humble pair,
beneath the level of all care,
over whose heads those arrows fly,
of sad distrust and jealousy.
8. the line in which the fight passes.
fir’d at first fight with what the muse imparts,
in fearless youth we tempt the heights of arts;
while from the bounded level of our mind
short views we take, nor see the lengths behind. poe.
le'v eller. m. s. [from level.]
1. one who makes any thing even. -
2. one who destroys superiority; one who endeavours to bring
all to the same state of equality.
you are an everlasting leveller; you won't allow encourage-
ment to extraordinary merit. co."ier on pride.
le'v eln ess. n.s.. [from level.]
1. evenness; equality of surface.
2. equality with something else.
the river tiber is expressed lying alone, for so you must
remember to draw rivers, to express their levens, with the
earth." peacham.
le' v en. m. s. slovain, french. commonly, though less pro-
perly, written leaven; see leaven,
1. ferment; that which being mixed in bread makes it rise and
ferment. -
2. anything capable of changing the nature of a greater mass.
the matter fermenteth upon the old leven, and becometh
more acrid. 14 seman's surgery.
the pestilential levains conveyed in goods. -4 tutor.
le'v er. m. s. [sevier, french.]
the second mechanical power, is a balance supported by a
hypomochlion; only the centre is not in the middle, as in
the common balance, but near one end ; for which reas n it
is used to elevate or raise a great weight; whence come the
name lever. ifarris.
have you any leavers to list me up again, being down
shakes care’s hory iv.
some draw with cords, and some the monster drive
with rolls and levers. 1}enham.
in a lever, the motion can be continued only for so short a
space, as may be answerable to that little distance betwixt the
fulciment and the weight: which is always by so much lesser,
- as
swift.
waller.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l e v
l i a
*.
l,
as the disproportion betwixt the weight and the power is
greater, and the motion itself more easy. j/ilk. asath. a sagick.
some hoisting leavers, some the wheels prepare. dryden.
le’ve ret. [lievret; french..] a young hare.
their travels o'er that silver field does show,
like track of leverets in morning snow. //aller.
le’ve t. m. s. [from lever, french..] a blast on the trumpet;
probably that by which the foldiers are called in the morning.
he that led the cavalcade, ar
wore a sowgelder’s flagellet,
on which he blew as strong a levet; -
as well-fee'd lawyer on his breviate. hudoras.
le’ve rook. n.s. [larene, saxon.] this word is retained in
scotland, and denotes the lark.
. the smaller birds have their particular seasons; as, the
leverook. !/alton’s angier.
if the lufft fan 'twill smoore aw the levercoks. scotch prov.
lev iable. adj. [from levy.] that may be levied.
the sums which any agreed to pay, and were not brought
in, were to be leviable by course of law. bacon's henry vii.
leviathan. m. s. snob.] a water animal mentioned in
the book of job. by some imagined the crocodile, but in
post, generally taken for the whale.
we may, as bootless, spend our vain command
upon th’ enraged soldiers in their spoil,
as send our precepts to the liviathan,
to come ashore. shakes care's henry v.
canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook 2 job.
more to embroil the deep; leviathan,
and his unwieldy train, in dreadful sport -
tempest the loosen’d brine. thomson's i/inter.
to le vicate. v. a. [la'vigo, latin.]
1. to rub or grind to an impalpable powder.
2. to mix till the liquor becomes smooth and uniform.
the chyle is white, as consisting of salt, oil, and water,
much levigated or smooth. arbuthnot on aliments.
levig ation. m. s. [from livigate.]
levigation is the reducing of hard bodies, as coral, tutty,
and precious stones, into a subtile powder, by grinding upon
marble with a muller; but unless the instruments are ex-
tremely hard, they will so wear as to double the weight of .
the medicine. - &amp;#inty.
levit e. m. s. [levita, latin, from levi.]
1. one of the tribe of levi ; one born to the office of priest-
hood among the jews.
in the christian church, the office of deacons succeeded in
the place of the levites among the jews, who were as minis-
ters and servants to the priests. ayliff's parergon.
2. a priest: used in contempt.
lev 1 tica l. adj. [from levite.] belonging to the levites;
making part of the religion of the jews.
by the levitical law, both the man and the woman were
floned to death ; so heinous a crime was adultery. ayliffe.
le'vity. m. s. [levitas, latin. j
1. lightness; not heaviness: the quality by which any body
has less weight than another.
he gave the form of levity to that which ascended ; to that
which descended, the form of gravity. raleigh.
this bubble, by reason of its comparative levity to the
fluidity that encloses it, would ascend to the top. bentley.
2. inconstancy; changeableness.
they every day broached some new thing; which restless
levity they did interpret to be their growing in spiritual per-
fe&amp;tion. h234, r. .
where wigs with wigs, with sword-knots sword-knots
strive,
beaus banish beaus, and coaches coaches drive,
this erring mortals levity may call. pope.
3. unsteadiness; laxity of mind.
i unbosom'd all my secrets to thee;
not out of levity, but over-pow'r'd
by thy request.
4. idle pleasure; vanity.
he never employed his omnipotence out of livity or often-
milton's agonjes.
tation, but as the necessities of men required. calaiy.
5. trifling gaiety ; want of seriousness.
- our graver business frowns at this levity. słakoff care.
hopton abhorred the licence, and the levities, with which
he saw too many corrupted. carendon.
that spirit of religion and seriousness vanished, and a spirit
of levity and libertinism, infidelity and profaneness, started up
in the room of it. atterbury’s sermons.
to lev y. v. a. [sever, french.] -
1. to raise; to bring together: applied to men.
he resolved to finish the conquest of ireland, and to that
end levied a mighty army. davies on ireland.
2. to raise, applied to war. this sense, though asilion's,
seems improper.
they live in hatred, enmity, and strife,
among themselves, and levy cruel wars. milton.
3. to raise: applied to money.
- levy a tribute unto the lord of the men of war. numb.
instead of a ship, he should levy upcn his county such a sum
of money. caron on.
levy. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the act of raising money or men.
they have already contributed all their superfluous hands,
and every new levy they make must be at the expence of their
forms and commerce. adaison's state of the j/or.
2. war raised.
treason has done his worst : nor steel, nor poison,
malice domestick, foreign levy, nothing
can touch him further shakespeare's a macbeth.
lew d. adj. [laenade, saxon.]
1. lay; not clerical ; from leod, people. it is sometimes gross;
ignorant. obsolete.
for lewyd men this book i writ. bisop großad.
so these great clerks their little wisdom shew
to mock the lewd, as learn'd in this as they. ixavies.
2. wicked ; bad; dissolute.
if some be admitted into the ministry, either void of learn-
ing, or lewd in life, are all the rest to be condemned :
jorgist.
before they did oppress the people, only by colour of a
lewd custom, they did afterwards use the same oppressions by
warrant. davies on ireland.
3. lustful; libidinous.
he is not lolling on a lovd love bed,
but on his knees at meditation. sha's care's rich. iii.
then lewd anchemolus he laid in dust,
who stain’d his stepdame's bed with in pious lust. drydin.
lew dly. adj. [from sewd. j
i. wickedly ; naughtily.
a sort of naughty persons, lewdy bent,
have prastis'd dangerously against your state. shaky?.
2. libidinously ; lustfully.
he lov’d fair lady eltred, lewdly lov’d.
whose wanton pleasures him too much did please,
that quite his heart from guendeline remov’d. spessor.
so lewdly dull his idle works appear,
the wretched texts deserve no comments here. dryden.
lew dness. n. s. [from lewd.] lustful licentiousness.
suffer no lewdness, nor indecent speech,
th’ apartment of the tender youth to reach. dryd, jow.
damianus's letter to nicholas is an authentick record of the
lewdnesses committed under the reign of celibacy. a terbury.
lew dster. n.s.. [from lowd.] a lecher; one given to criminal
pleasures.
against such lewdiers, and their lechery,
those that betray them do no treachery. soare.
lei/is d'or. m. s. [french.) a golden fonch coin, in va-
lue twelve livres, now settled at seventeen shillings. dic.
lexico grapher. m. s. [as?...ov and o: *::icographe,
french..] a writer of dictionaries; a hamless drudge, that
busies himself in tracing the original, and detailing the signi-
fication of words.
commentators and lexicographers acquainted with the syriac
language, have given these hints in their writings on scrip-
ture. j/atts's improvement of the a. nd.
lexico graphy. m. s. sasaz; and y:zo...] the art of prac-
tice of writing dictionaries.
lexicon. m. n. [asozev.] a dictionary ; a book teaching
the signification of words.
though a linguist should pride himself to have all the
tongues that babel cleft the world into, yet if he had not
studied the solid things in them as well as the words and lexi-
cons, yet he were nothing so much to be esteemed a learned
man as any yeoman competently wise in his mother dialect
only. assistan.
ley. m. s. -
ley, lee, lay, are all from the saxon lea;, a field or pasture,
by the usual melting of the letter 3, or g. gibson’s carn.
l1 ablf. m. s. [liable, from lier, old french..] obnoxious ;
not exempt; subject: with to.
but what is strength without a double share
of wisdom vast, unwieldy, burthensome,
proudly secure, yet liable to fall
by weakest subtleties. asion's agoni?es.
the english boast of spenser and milton, who neither of
them wanted genius or learning; and yet both of them are
liable to many censures. dryden's juveral.
this, or any other scheme, coming from a private band,
might be liable to many defects. swift.
l1ar. m. s. [from lie. this word would analogically be lier;
but this orthography has prevailed, and the convenience of
distinction from lier, he who lies down, is sufficient to con-
firm it..] one who tells falshood; one who wants veracity.
she's like a liar, gone to burning hell!
* i was i that kill'd her. - soukoffeare's colo.
he approves the common liar, fame,
who speaks him thus at rome. shaoff. ant. and co.
i do not reject his observation as untrue, much less con-
demn the person himself as a liar, whensoever it seems to be
contradicted. e 5*,
1 hy
|
s
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i b
l i b
+
o
* *
i t
*
•
,
o
on
!
i
|
. -
: " .
|
- l
o
's
o
f
1.
, , a
i
*
s
* s
o
* ,
o
is
;
,
thy better soul abhors a liar's part,
wise is thy voice, and noble is thy heart.
lisa r d. adi.
1. mingled roan. • markham.
2. liard in scotland denotes gray-haired; as, he's a liard old
pope's ooy.
in all.
l1b ation. m. s. [liato, latin.]
1. the act of pouring wine on the ground in honour of some
deity. - -
in digging new earth pour in some wine, that the vapour
of the earth and wine may comfort the spirits, provided it be
not taken for a heathen sacrifice, or libation to the earth.
bacon's natural history.
2. the wine so poured. . . . . "
they had no other crime to object against the christians,
but that they did not offer up libations, and the smoke of sacri-
fices, to dead men. stillingfleet on rom. idolatry.
the goblet then she took, with nectar crown'd,
sprinkling the first libations on the ground. dryden's aon.
libbard. m. s. [liebard, german ; leopardus, lat.] a leopard.
make the libbard stern,
leave roaring, when in rage he for revenge did yearn.
spenser's fairy queen.
the libbard and the tiger, as the mole
rising, the crumbled earth above them threw. milton.
the torrid parts of africk are by piso resembled to a lib-
bard's skin, the distance of whose spots represent the disperse-
ness of habitations, or towns of africk. brerewood.
libel. n.s. [libellus, latin; libelle, french.]
1. a satire; defamatory writing ; a lampoon.
are we reproached for the name of christ? that ignominy
serves but to advance our future glory; every such libel here
becomes panegyrick there. decay of piety.
good heav'n that sots and knaves should be so vain,
to wish their vile resemblance may remain s :
and stand recorded, at their own request,
to future days, a libel or a jest. dryden.
2. [in the civil law.] a declaration or charge in writing against
a person exhibited in court.
to li'bel. v. n. [from the noun..] to spread defamation ;
written or printed: it is now commonly used as an active
verb, without the proposition agains?.
sweet scrauls to fly about the streets of rome:
what’s this but libelling against the senate shakespeare.
he, like a privileg'd spy, whom nothing can
discredit, libel; now gains each great man.
to li'bel. v. a. to satirise; to lampoon.
is the peerage of england dishonoured when a peer suffers
for his treason f if he be libelled, or any way defamed, he
has his scandalum magnatum to punish the offender. dryden.
but what so pure which envious tongues will spare
some wicked wits have libelled all the fair. pope.
li's eller. n.s.. [from libel.] a defamer by writing ; a lam-
pooner.
our common libellers are as free from the imputation of
wit, as of morality. dryden's juvenal.
the squibs are those who, in the common phrase, are called
dibellers and lampooners. tatler.
the common lite/ers, in their invectives, tax the church
with an insatiable desire of power and wealth, equally com-
mon to all bodies of men. swift.
l1(bellous. adj. [from libel.] defamatory.
it was the most malicious surmise that had ever been brew-
ed, howsoever countenanced by a libellous pamphlet. wotton.
l1(beral. adj. [liberalis, latin ; liberal, french.]
1. not mean; not low in birth; not low in mind.
2. becoming a gentleman.
3. munificent ; generous; bountiful; not parsimonious.
her name was mercy, well known over all,
to be both gracious and eke liberal. spens, fa. queen.
sparing would shew a worse fin than ill doctrine.
men of his way should be most liberal, -
they're set here for examples. shakesp. henry viii.
needs must the pow'r –
that made us, and for us this ample world,
be infinitely good, and of his good
as liberal and free, as infinite.
the liberal are secure alone;
for what we frankly give, for ever is our own.
granville.
*
donne.
milton.
4. it has of before the thing, and to before the person.
there is no art better than to be liberal of praise and com-
mendation to others, in that wherein a man's self hath any
perfection. - bacon's essays.
several clergymen, otherwise little fond of obscure terms,
are, in their sermons, very liberal of all those which they find
in ecclesiastical writers, as if it were our duty to understand
them. swift.
liberatity. m. s. [liberalitas, latin; liberalite, french..]
munificence; bounty; generosity; generous profusion.
why should he despair, that knows to court
with words, fair looks, and liberality 2 shakespeare.
- f
such moderation with thy bounty join,
that thou may’s nothing give that is not thine;
that liberality is but cast away,
which makes us borrow what we cannot pay.
l'eer ally. adv. [from liberal.]
1. bounteously; bountifully; largely.
if any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of god, that giveth
to all men liberally, and upbraideth not. james, i. 5.
2. not meanly; magnanimously.
li'bertine. m. s. [livertin, french.]
i. one unconfined; one at liberty.
when he speaks,
the air, a charter'd libertine, is still ;
and the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears,
to steal his sweet and honied sentences. shakoff. hen. v.
2. one who lives without restraint or law.
man, the lawless libertine, may rove,
free and unquestion'd. rowe's jane shore.
want of power is the only bound that a libertin puts to his
views upon any of the sex. clarisa.
3. one who pays no regard to the precepts of religion.
they say this town is full of couzenage,
disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,
and many such like libertines of fin. shakespeare.
that word may be applied to some few libertine, in the
audience. collier's piew of the stage.
4. [in law; libertinus, latin.] a freedman; or rather, the son
of a freedman.
some persons are forbidden to be accusers on the score of
their sex, as women; others on the score of their age, as pu-
pils and infants; others on the score of their condition, as
/ibertines against their patrons. ayliffe's parergon.
li'bertine. adj. [libertin, french..] licentious; irreligious.
there are men that marry not, but chuse rather a libertine
and impure single life, than to be yoked in marriage.
bacon.
might not the queen make diligent enquiry, if any person
about her should happen to be of libertine principles or morals.
swift's project for advancement of religion.
li'bertinism. n.s. [from libertine.j irreligion; licentiousness
of opinions and practice.
that spirit of religion and seriousness vanished all at once,
and a spirit of liberty and libertinism, of infidelity and profane-
ness, started up in the room of it. atterbury's sermons.
l1berty. n.s. [liberte, french; libertas, latin.]
1. freedom, as opposed to slavery.
my master knows of your being here, and hath threatened
to put me into everlasting liberty, if i tell you of it; for he
denham,
swears, he'll turn me away. shakespeare.
o liberty! thou goddess, heav'nly bright !
profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight,
eternal pleasures in thy presence reign. • addison.
2. exemption from tyranny or inordinate government.
justly thou abhorr'st
the son, who, on the quiet state of man,
such trouble brought, affecting to subdue
rational liberty; yet know withal,
since thy original lapse, true liberty
is lost, which always with right reason dwells.
3. freedom, as opposed to necessiy.
liberty is the power in any agent to do, or forbear, any
particular action, according to the determination, or thought
of the mind, whereby either of them is preferred to the other
locke.
as it is in the motions of the body, so it is in the thoughts
of our minds : where any one is such, that we have power
to take it up, or lay it by, according to the preference of the
mind, there we are at liberty. locke.
4. privilege ; exemption; immunity.
his majesty gave not an intire country to any, much less did
he grant jura regalia, or any extraordinary liberties. davies.
5. relaxation of restraint: as, he sees himself at liberty to chuse
his condition.
license they mean, when they cry liberty. milton.
6. leave; permission.
i shall take the liberty to consider a third ground, which,
with some men, has the same authority. locke.
lib 1'dinous. n.s. [libidinosus, latin.] lewd ; lustful.
none revolt from the faith; because they must not look upon
a woman to lust after her, but because they are much more
restrained from the perpetration of their lusts. if wanton
glances and libidinous thoughts had been permitted by the gos-
pel, they would have apostatized nevertheless. bentley.
lib 1'dinously. adv. [from libidinous.] lewdly ; lustfully.
l1 bral. adj. [libralis, latin.] of a pound weight. dier.
libraria n. m. s. [librarius, latin.]
i. one who has the care of a library.
2. one who transcribes or copies books.
charybdis thrice swallows, and thrice resunds, the waves :
this must be understood of regular tides. there are indeed
but two tides in a day, but this is the error of the librariant.
broome's notes on the odyssey.
li'brar x.
a silton.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i c
l i c
on.
on
ls.
ch.
ess
co.,
sle-
ned
!”.
27,
li'brary. n.s. [librarie, french. j a large colle&amp;ion of books,
publick or private. -
then as they 'gan his library to view,
and antique registers for to avise,
there chanced to the prince's hand to rise -
an antient book, hight briton’s monuments. fa. qu.
i have given you the library of a painter, and a catalogue
of such books as he ought to read. dryden's dufresnoy.
to li'brate. v. a. [libro, latin.] to poise ; to balance; to
hold in equipoise. -
libra rion. m. s. [libratio, latin; libration, french.]
1. the state of being balanced.
this is what may be said of the balance, and the libration,
of the body.
their pinions still
in loose librations stretch'd, to trust the void
trembling refuse. thomson's spring.
*... [in astronomy.] .
libration is the balancing motion or trepidation in the fir-
mament, whereby the declination of the sun, and the latitude
of the stars, change from time to time. astronomers like-
wise ascribe to the moon a libratory motion, or motion of tre-
pidation, which they pretend is from east to west, and from
north to south, because that, at full moon, they sometimes
discover parts of her disk which are not discovered at other
times. these kinds are called, the one a libration in longi-
tude, and the other a libration in latitude. besides this, there
is a third kind, which they call an apparent libration, and
which consists in this, that when the moon is at her greatest
elongation from the south, her axis being then almost perpen-
dicular to the plane of the ecliptick, the sun must enlighten
towards the north pole of the moon some parts which he did
not before, and that, on the contrary, some parts of those
which he enlightened towards the opposite pole are obscured ;
and this produces the same effe&amp;t which the libration in lati-
tude does. dicf. trev.
those planets which move upon their axis, do not all make
intire revolutions; for the moon maketh only a kind of libra-
tion, or a reciprocated motion on her own axis. grew.
libratory. adj. [from libro, lat.j balancing ; playing like
a balance.
lice, the plural of loose.
red blisters risisg on their paps appear,
and flaming carbuncles, and noisome sweat,
and clammy dews, that loathsome lice beget;
till the slow creeping evil eats his way. dryden's wirgil.
l1(cf bane. m. s. slice and lane..] a plant.
li'cense. m. s. slicentia, latin; licence, french.)
1. exorbitant liberty; contempt of legal and necessary restraint.
some of the wiser seeing that a popular licence is indeed the
many-headed tyranny, prevailed with the rest to make musi-
dorus their chief. sidney.
taunt my faults
with such full licence, as both truth and malice
have power to utter. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
they baul for freedom in their senseless moods,
• and still revolt when truth would set them free;
licence they mean, when they cry liberty. milton.
the privilege that antient poets claim,
now turn'd to license by too just a name. roscommon.
though this be a state of liberty, yet it is not a state of
licence; though man, in that state, have an uncontroulable
liberty to dispose of his person or possessions, yet he has not
liberty to destroy himself. locke.
2. a grant of permission.
they sent some to bring them a licence from the senate.
judith, xi. 14.
those few abstract names that the schools forged, and put
into the mouths of their scholars, could never yet get admit-
tance into common use, or obtain the licence of publick appro-
bation. locke.
we procured a licence of the duke of parma to enter the
theatre and gallery. addison on italy.
3. liberty; permission.
it is not the manner of the romans to deliver any man to
die, before that he which is accused have the accusers face to
face, and have licence to answer for himself. acti.
to l1 cfns e. v. a. [licencier, french.j
1. to permit by a legal grant.
wit's titans brav'd the skies,
and the press groan'd with licens'd blasphemics. pope.
2. to dismiss; to send away. not in use.
he would play well, and willingly, at some games of
greatest attention, which shewed, that when he listed he could
license his thoughts. isotton.
liocess er. n.f. [from license..] a granter of permission; com-
monly a tool of power.
lice's r1ate. m. s. [sicentiatus, low latin.]
1. a man who uses license. not in use.
the licentiates somewhat licentiously, lest they should pre-
judice poetical liberty, will pardon themselves for doubling or
rejesting a letter, if the sense fall aptly. camden.
vol. ii.
dryden's dufresnoy.
2. a degree in spanish universities. -
a man might, after that time, sue for the degree of a licen-
tiate or master in this faculty. ayliff.’s parergon.
to lice ntiate. v. a. [licentier, french.] to permit; to
encourage by license.
we may not hazard either the stifling of generous inclina-
tions, or the licentiating of anything that is coarse, l’estrange.
lice ntious. n.s. [licencieux, french; licentiosus, latin.]
1. unrestrained by law or morality.
later ages pride, like corn-fed steed,
abus’d her plenty, and fat swoln encrease,
to all licentious lust, and 'gan exceed
the measure of her mean, and natural first need. fa. qu.
how would it touch thee to the quick,
should'st thou but hear i were licentious *
and that this body, consecrate to thee,
with ruffian lust should be contaminate :
2. presumptuous; unconfined.
the tyber, whose licentious waves,
so often overflow'd the neighbouring fields,
now runs a smooth and inoffensive course. roscommon.
lice’ntiously. adv. [from licentious...] with too much liberty;
without just restraint.
the licentiates somewhat licentiously, will pardon themselves.
- camden's remains.
lice'n'riousness. m. s. [from licentious.] boundless liberty;
contempt of just restraint.
one error is so fruitful, as it begetteth a thousand children,
if the licentiousnes, thereof be not timely restrained. raleigh.
this custom has been always looked upon, by the wisest
men, as an effect of licentiousness, and not of liberty. , swft.
during the greatest licentiousness of the press, the character
of the queen was insulted. - swift.
lich. n.s. [lice, saxon.] a dead carcase; whence lichwake,
the time or act of watching by the dead; lichgate, the gate
through which the dead are carried to the grave; lichfield,
the field of the dead, a city in staffordshire, so named from
martyred christians. salve magna parens. lichwake is still
retained in scotland in the same sense.
li'chowl. m. s. [lich and owl.] a sort of owl, by the vulgar
supposed to foretel death. -
to lick. v. a. slicean, saxon; lecken, dutch.]
1. to pass over with the tongue.
aesculapius went about with a dog and a she-goat, both
which he used much in his cures; the first for licking all ul-
cerated wounds, and the goat's milk for the diseases of the
stomach and lungs. temple.
a bear’s a savage beast;
whelp'd without form, until the dam
has lick'd it into shape and frame. hudibras.
he with his tepid rays the rose renews,
and licks the drooping leaves, and dries the dews. dryden.
i have seen an antiquary lick an old coin, among other
trials, to distinguish the age of it by its taste. addison.
2. to lap ; to take in by the tongue.
at once pluck out
the multitudinous tongue; but let them not lick
the sweet which is their poison. shakespeare's coriolanus.
3. to lick up. to devour.
now shall this company lick up all that are round about us,
as the ox licketh up the grass. numb. xxii. 4.
when luxury has lick'd up all thy pelf,
curs'd by thy neighbours, thy trustees, thyself:
think how posterity will treat thy name. pope's horace.
lick. n.s.. [from the verb.] a blow; rough usage: a low
word.
he turned upon me as round as a chafed boar, and gave
me a lick across the face. dryden.
l1(ckerish. {* [lıccepa, a glutton, saxon. this seems to
li'ckero u.s. $ be the proper way of spelling the word, which
shakespeare.
has no affinity with liquour, but with like.] *
i. nice in the choice of food. -
voluptuous men sacrifice all substantial satisfaction to a
liquorish palate. l’estrange.
2. eager; greedy to swallow ; eager not with hunger but
ust. -
g it is never tongue-tied, where fit commendation, whereof
womankind is so lickerish, is offered unto it. sidney.
strephon, fond boy, delighted, did not know
that it was love that shin’d in shining maid;
but lick’rous, poison'd, fain to her would go. sidney.
certain rare manuscripts, sought in the most remote parts
by erpenius, the most excellent linguist, had been left to his
widow, and were upon sale to the jesuits, liquoris' chapmen
of all such ware. j/otton.
in vain he profer'd all his goods to save
his body, destin'd to that living grave ;
the liquorish hag rejects the pelf with scorn,
and nothing but the man would serve her turn. dryden.
in some provinces they were so liquorish after man's flesh,
that they would suck the blood as it run from the o
oske.
15 k 3. nice;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i e
l. i e -
3. nice; delicate; tempting the appetite. this sense i doubt.
would'st thou seek again to trap me here
with sickerish baits, fit to ensnare a brute? milton.
lock er 1shness. n.s.. [from lickerish.] niceness of palate.
licoric e. m. s. [yaox#32; liquoricia, italian.] a root of
sweet taste.
liquorice root is long and slender, externally of a dusky red-
dish brown, but within of a fine yellow, full of juice, and of
a taste sweeter than sugar; it grows wild in many parts of
france, italy, spain, and germany. the inspislated juice of
this root is brought to us from spain and holland; from the
first of which places it obtained the name of spanish juice.
hill's materia medica.
lictor. m. s. [latin.] a beadle that attended the consuls to
apprehend or punish criminals.
saucy lictors
will catch at us like strumpets. shakesp. ant, and cleopatra.
proconsuls to their provinces
hasting, or on return, in robes of state,
lietors and rods the ensigns of their power.
democritus could feed his spleen, and shake
his sides and shoulders till he felt 'em ake;
though in his country-town no liciors were,
nor rods, nor ax, nor tribune. dryden's juvenal.
lid. m. s. splib, saxon; lied, german.]
1. a cover ; anything that shuts down over a vessel; any stopple
that covers the mouth, but not enters it.
hope, instead of flying off with the rest, stuck so close to
the lid of the cup, that it was shut down upon her. addison.
2. the membrane that, when we sleep or wink, is drawn over
the eye.
do not for ever with thy veiled lids,
seek for thy noble father in the dust.
our eyes have lids, our ears still ope we keep.
that eye dropp'd sense distinct and clear,
as any muse's tongue could speak;
when from its lid a pearly tear
ran trickling down her beauteous cheek.
the rod of hermes
to sleep could mortal eye-lids fix,
and drive departed souls to styx :
that rod was just a type of sid's,
which o'er a british senate's lids
could scatter opium full as well,
and drive as many souls to hell. swift.
lie. m. s. slie, french.] any thing impregnated with some
other body; as, soap or salt.
chamber-lie breeds fleas like a loach. shakespeare.
all liquid things conco&amp;ted by heat become yellow ; as,
lye, wort, &amp;c. peacham on drawing.
lie. n.s. slize, saxon.]
i. a criminal falshood.
—thou liest, abhorred tyrant; with my sword
i’ll prove the lie thou speak’it. shakespeare's macbeth.
a lye is properly an outward signification of something con-
trary to, or at least beside, the inward sense of the mind; so
that when one thing is signified or expressed, and the same
thing not meant or intended, that is properly a lye. south.
truth is the object of our understanding, as good is of our
will; and the understanding can no more be delighted with a
aye, than the will can chuse an apparent evil. dryden.
when i hear my neighbour speak that which is not true,
and i say to him, this is not true, or this is false, i only con-
vey to him the naked idea of his error; this is the primary
idea: but if i say it is a lie, the word lie carries also a secon-
dary idea; for it implies both the falshood of the speech, and
my reproach and censure of the speaker. watts's logick.
2. a charge of falshood: to give the lie, is a formulary phrase.
that lie shall lye so heavy on my sword,
that it shall render vengeance and revenge;
till thou the lie giver, and that lie, rest
in earth as quiet as thy father's skull.
shakespeare's richard ii.
st is a contradiction to suppose, that whole nations of men
should unanimously give the lie to what, by the most invin-
cible evidence, every one of them knew to be true. locke.
men will give their own experience the lye, rather than
milton.
shakesp. hamlet.
davies.
prior.
admit of any thing disagreeing with these tenets. locke.
3. a fiction. this sense is ludicrous.
the cock and fox, the full and knave imply;
the truth is moral, though the tale a lie. dryden.
7% li e. v. m. eleozoan, saxon; liegen, dutch..]
1. to utter criminal fałshood. -
i know not where he lodges; and for me to devise a lodg-
ing, and say, he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in
mine own throat. shakspeare's othello.
if a soul ye unto his neighbour in that which was delivered
him to keep, he shall restore. lev.
should lye against my right job, xxxiv. 6.
2. to cohibit false represenation.
inform us, will the comp'ror treat 3
or do the prints and paper lie &amp;
swift.
to lie. &amp;. m. pret. i lay; i have lain or lion. [legan, saxon:
liggen, dutch.] - &gt;
1. to rest horizontally,
something else.
2. to rest; to press upon.
death lies on her like an untimely show’r
upon the sweetest flow'r of all the field.
lie heavy on him, earth, for he
laid many a heavy load on thee.
3. to be reposited in the grave.
all the kings of the nations lie in glory, every one in his
own house. isa. xiv. 18.
i will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of
egypt, and bury me in your burying place. gen. xvii. 39.
4. to be in a state of decumbiture.
how many good young princes would do so; their fathers
dying so sick as yours at this time is shakesp. henry iv.
my little daughter lieth at the point of death; i pray thee
come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed. mark.
5. to pass the time of sleep.
the watchful traveller,
that by the moon's mistaken light did rise,
or with very great inclination against
shakespeare.
epitaph on vanbrugh.
lay down again, and clos'd his weary eyes. dryden.
forlorn he must, and persecuted flies;
climb the steep mountain, in the cavern lie. prior.
6. to be laid up or reposited.
i have seen where copperas is made great variety of them,
divers of which i have yet lying by me. boyle.
7. to remain fixed.
the spaniards have but one temptation to quarrel with us2
the recovering of jamaica, for that has ever lien at their
hearts. temple.
8. to reside.
if thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted and if thou
doest not well, sin lieth at the door. gen. iv. 7.
9. to be placed or situated, with respect to something else. f
deserts, where there lay no way. //sdom.
to those happy climes that lie,
where day never shuts his eye. milton.
there lies our way, and that our passage home. dryden.
envy lies between beings equal in nature, though unequal
in circumstances. collier of envy.
the business of a tutor, rightly employed, lies out of the
road. locke on education.
what lies beyond our positive idea towards infinity, lies in
obscurity, and has the undeterminate confusion of a negative
idea. locke.
io. to press upon afflictively.
thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me
with all thy waves. psalms.
he that commits a sin shall find
the pressing guilt lie heavy on his mind,
though bribes or favour shall assert his cause. creech.
shew the power of religion, in abating that particular an-
guish which seems to lie so heavy on leonora. 44d}on.
ii. to be troublesome or tedious. -
suppose kings, besides the entertainment of luxury, should
have spent their time, at least what lay upon their hands, in
chemistry, it cannot be denied but princes may pass their time
advantageously that way. temple.
i would recommend the studies of knowledge to the female
world, that they may not be at a loss how to employ those
hours that lie upon their hands. addison's guardian.
12. to be judicially imputed. -
if he should intend his voyage towards my wife, i would
turn her loose to him; and what he gets more of her than
sharp words, let it lie on my head. shak speare.
i3. to be in any particular state. -
if money go before, all ways do lie open.
the highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth. ia.
the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still. exod.
do not think that the knowledge of any particular subject
cannot be improved, merely because it has lain without in-
provement. so atts's improvement of the mind.
14. to be in a state of concealment.
many things in them lie concealed to us, which they who
were concerned understood at first fight. locke.
15. to be in prison. -
your imprisonment shall not be long;
i will deliver you, or else lie for you.
16. to be in a bad state.
why will you lie pining and pinching yourself in such a
jonesome, starving course of life 2 l'e/orange's fables.
the generality of mankind lie pecking at one another, till
one by one they are all torn to pieces. l’e/orange's falles.
are the gods to do your drudgery, and you lie bellowing
with your finger in your mouth : l'e/irange's paties.
17. to be in a helpless or exposed state. -
to see a hated person superior, and to lie under the anguish
of a disadvantage, is far enough from diversion. collier.
it is but a very small comfort, that a plain man, lying under
a sharp
soakespeare.
shakes. rich. iii:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i e
o:;
sins,
it of
hers
the:
ori,
sk.
a sharp fit of the stone for a week, receives from this fine
sentence. tillotson's sermons.
as a man should always be upon his guard against the vices
to which he is most exposed, so we should take a more than
ordinary care not to lie at the mercy of the weather in our
moral conduct. addison's freeholder.
the maintenance of the clergy is precarious, and colle&amp;ted
from a most miserable race of farmers, at whose mercy every
minister lies to be defrauded. swift.
18. to confist.
the image of it gives me content already; and i trust it
will grow to a most prosperous perfeotion.
—it lies much in your holding up. shakespeare.
he that thinks that diversion may not lie in hard labour,
forgets the early rising, and hard riding of huntsmen. locke.
19. to be in the power; to belong to.
do'st thou endeavour, as much as in thee lies, to preserve
the lives of all men : duppa's rules for devotion.
he shews himself very malicious if he knows i deserve cre-
dit, and yet goes about to blast it, as much as in him lies.
stillingfleet on idolatry.
mars is the warrior's god; in him it lies
on whom he favours to confer the prize. dryden.
20. to be valid in a court of judicature: as, an action lieth
against one.
21. to cost; as, it lies me in more money.
22. to lie at. to importune; to teaze.
23. to lie by. to rest; to remain still.
ev'ry thing that heard him play,
ev’n the billows of the sea,
hung their heads, and then lay by ;
in sweet musick is such art,
killing care, and grief of heart,
fall asleep, or hearing die. shakesp. henry viii.
24. to lie down. ... to rest; to go into a state of repose.
the leopard shall lie down with the kid.
isa. xi. 6.
the needy shall lie down in safety.
isa. xiv. 30.
25. to lie down. to sink into the grave.
his bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie
down with him in the dust. job, xx. 11.
26. to lie in. to be in childbed.
as for all other good women that love to do but little
work, how handsome it is to lie in and sleep, or to louse
themselves in the sun-shine, they that have been but a while
in ireland can well witness. - spenser on ireland.
you confine yourself most unreasonably. come; you
must go visit the lady that lies in. shakesp. coriolanus.
she had lain in, and her right breast had been aposte-
mated. i/is man's surgery.
the doctor has practised both by sea and land, and there-
fore cures the green sickness and lyings in. spectator.
when florimel design'd to lie privately in ;
she chose with such prudence her pangs to conceal,
that her nurse, nay her midwife, scarce heard her once
squeal. prior.
hysterical affections are contracted by accidents in lying in.
arbuthnot on diet.
27. to lie under. to be subject to ; to be oppressed by.
a generous person will lie under a great disadvantage.
smalridge's sermons.
this mistake never ought to be imputed to dryden, but to
those who suffered so noble a genius to lie under necessity. pope.
europe lay then under a deep lethargy, and was no other-
wise to be rescued but by one that would cry mightily. atterb.
28. to lie upon. to become the matter of obligation or duty.
these are not places merely of favour, the charge of souls
lies upon them; the greatest account whereof will be required
at their hands. - bacon’s advice to williers.
it should lie upon him to make out how matter, by undi-
rected motion, could at first necessarily fall, without ever
erring or miscarrying, into such a curious formation of human
bodies. - bently's sermons.
29. to lie with. to converse in bed.
pardon me, basfanio,
for by this ring she lay with me. shakosheare.
30. it may be observed of this word in general, that it com-
monly implies something of sluggishness, inaction, or steadi-
ness, applied to persons; and some gravity or permanency of
condition, applied to things.
liff, adj. [kop, saxon; lift, dutch..] dear ; beloved.
obsolete.
my liefs lord, she thus beguiled had,
for he was flesh; all flesh doth frailty breed. fa. q#.
you, with the rest,
causeless have laid disgraces on my head;
and with your best endeavour have stirr'd up
my liosoft liege to be mine enemy. shakesp. henry vi.
libf. adv. willingly: now used only in familiar speech.
if i could speak so wisely under an arrest, i would send for
certain of my creditors; and yet to say the truth, i had as
lief have the foppery of fieedom, as the morality of imprison-
ii, cil!. - shakesp. measure for measure.
l1(en, the participle of lie.
lieve. adv. [see lief.] willingly.
liece. adj. size, french; ligio, italian ; itius, low latin.j
1. bound by some feudal tenure; subject: whence liegeman for
subject.
2. sovereign. . [this signification seems to have accidentally
risen from the former, the lord of liege men, being by mistake
called liege lord.]
did not the whole realm acknowledge henry for their king
and liege lord * spenser.
my lady liege, said he,
what all your sex desire is sovereignty. dryden,
so much of it as is founded on the law of nature, may be
stiled natural religion ; that is to say, a devotedness unto god
our liege lord, so as to act in all things according to his will.
grew’s cosmology.
liege. n. s. sovereign; superior lord: scarcely in use. .
o pardon me, my liege / but for my tears
i had forestall'd this dear and deep rebuke.
the other part reserv'd i by consent,
for that my sovereign liege was in my debt. shakespeare.
the natives, dubious whom
they must obey, in consternation wait
till rigid conquest will pronounce their liege. philips.
shakespeare. -
l1(egf man. n.s.. [from liege and man.] a subject: not in use.
this liegeman 'gan to wax more bold,
and when he felt the folly of his lord, -
in his own kind, he 'gan himself unfold. fairy queen:
sith then the ancestors of those that now live, yielded
themselves then subjects and liegemen, shall it not tye their
children to the same subjection ? spenser on ireland.
stand, ho! who is there *
—friends to this ground, and liegemen to the dane. shak.
li'eger. n s. [more proper logier, or ledger.] a resident am-
bassador. -
his passions and his fears
lie liegers for you in his breast, and there
negotiate your affairs. denham's sophy.
one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife.
gen. xxvi. io.
liente'rick, adj. [from sientery.] pertaining to a lientery.
there are many medicinal preparations of iron, but none
equal to the tincture made without acids; especially in ob-
structions, and to strengthen the tone of the parts; as in lion-
terick and other like cales. grew's musæum.
li entery. m. s. [from assov, lave, smooth, and isspor, intoshi-
num, gut ; lienterie, french.] a particular looseness, or
diarrhoea, wherein the food passes so suddenly through the
stomach and guts, as to be thrown out by stool with little or
no alteration. 9;incy.
li'e.r. m. s. [from to lie..] one that rests or lies down; or re-
mains concealed.
there were liers in ambush against him behind the city.
jos. viii. i4.
lieu. m. s. [french.) place; room: it is only used with in :
in lieu, instead. -
god, of his great liberality, had determined, in lieu of
man's endeavours, to bestow the same by the rule of that jus-
tice which best beseemeth him. płooker.
in lieu of such an increase of dominion, it is our business to
extend our trade. addison's freeholder.
speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronounced it to you,
trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of our
players do, i had as lieve the town crier had spoke my lines.
shakspeare’s hamlet.
action is death to some sort of people, and they would as
lieve hang as work. l’e/irange.
lieutenancy. n.s. [lieutenance, french; from lieutenant.]
i. the office of a lieutenant.
if such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenancy, it
had been better you had not kissed your three fingers so oft.
shasespeare's othelo.
2. the body of lieutenants. .
the list of undisputed masters, is hardly so long as the list
of the lieutenancy of our metropolis. fellon on the classick.
lieute(nant, n. s. [lieutenant, french.j
1. a deputy ; one who acts by vicarious authority. .
whither away so fast? -
—no farther than the tower,
we'll enter all together,
and in good time here the lieutenant comes. shakespeare,
i must put you in mind of the lords lieutenants, and deputy
lieutenants, of the counties: their proper use is for ordering
the military affairs, in order to oppose an invasion from
abroad, or a rebellion or sedition at home. bacon.
killing, as it is considered in itself without all undue cir-
cumstances, was never prohibited to the lawful magistrate,
who is the vicegerent or lieutenant of god, from whom he
derives his power of life and death. bramhall agains? hobles,
sent by our new lieutenant, who in rome,
and since from me, has heard of your renown :
i come to offer peace. philips's briton.
2. in
*
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">o
l i f
-
2. in war, one who holds the next rank to a superior of any
denomination ; as, a general has his lieutenant generals, a co-
lonel his lieutenant colonel, and a captain simply his lieutenant.
it were meet that such captains only were employed as have
formerly served in that country, and been at least lieutenant;
there. spensor on ireland.
according to military custom the place was good, and the
lieutenant of the colonel's company might well pretend to the
next vacant captainship. //otton.
the earl of essex was made lieutenant general of the army;
the most popular man of the kingdom, and the darling of the
sword men. clarendon.
his lieutenant, engaging against his positive orders, being
beaten by lysander, alcibiades was again banished. swift.
canst thou so many gallant soldiers see,
and captains and lieutenants slight for me ! gay.
lieutenant ship. m. s. [from lieutenant.] the rank or office
of lieutenant.
life. n.s. plural lives. [lipian, to live, saxon.]
1. union and co-operation of soul with body; vitality; ani-
mation, opposed to an inanimate state.
on thy life no more.
—my life i never held but as a pawn
to wage against thy foes. shakespeare's king lear.
she shews a body rather than a life,
a statue than a breather. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature
that hath life. gen. i. 20.
the identity of the same man consists in nothing but a par-
ticipation of the same continued life, by constantly fleeting
particles of matter, in succession vitally united to the same
organized body. locke.
2. present state; as distinet from other parts of human existence.
o life, thou nothing's younger brother
so like, that we may take the one for t'other'
dream of a shadow ! a refle&amp;tion made
from the false glories of the gay reflected bow,
is more a solid thing than thou !
thou weak built isthmus, that do'st proudly rise
up betwixt two eternities;
yet canst not wave nor wind sustain,
but, broken and o'erwhelm’d, the ocean meets again.
cowly.
when i consider lift, 'tis all a cheat,
yet fool'd by hope men favour the deceit,
live on, and think to-morrow will repay;
to-morrow's falser than the former day;
lies more; and when it says we shall be blest,
with some new joy, takes off what we possest.
strange cozenage none would live past years again,
yet all hope pleasure in what yet remain;
and from the dregs of life think to receive
what the first sprightly running could not give:
i'm tir’d of waiting for this chemick gold,
which fools us young, and beggars us when old. dryden.
howe'er 'tis well that while mankind
through life's perverse meanders errs,
he can imagin'd pleasures find,
to combat against real cares. prior.
so peaceful shalt thou end thy blissful days,
and steal thyself from life by slow decays. pope.
3. enjoyment, or possession of existence, as opposed to death.
then avarice ’gan through his veins to inspire
his greedy flames, and kindle life devouring fire. fa. qo.
their complot is to have my life:
and, if my death might make this island happy,
and prove the period of their tyranny,
i would expend it with all willingness. shakoff care.
nor love thy life, nor hate; but what thou liv'st
live well, how long or short permit to heav'n. milton.
he entreated me not to take his life, but exact a sum of
money.
4. blood, the supposed vehicle of life.
his gushing entrails smoak'd upon the ground,
and the warm life came issuing through the wound. pope.
5. conduct; manner of living with respect to virtue or vice.
his faith perhaps in some nice tenets might
be wrong, his life i’m sure was in the right.
henry and edward, brightest sons of fame,
and virtuous alfred, a more sacred name;
after a life of glorious toils endur’d,
clos'd their long glories with a sigh. pope.
i'll teach my family to lead good lives. mrs. barker.
6. condition; manner of living with respect to happiness and
misery.
such was the life the frugal sabines led ;
so remus and his brother god were bred. dryden's pīrg.
7. continuance of our present state : as, half his life was spent
in study.
broome on the odyssey.
some have not any clear ideas all their lives. locke.
untam'd and fierce the tyger still remains,
and tires his life with biting on his chains. prizr.
8. the living form : opposed to copies.
lifee verlasting.
the administration of this bank is for life, and partly in the
hands of the chief citizens. addison an italy.
that is the best part of beauty which a picture cannot ex-
press, no, nor the first fight of the life. bacon's essays.
let him visit eminent persons of great name abroad, that he
may tell how the life agreeth with the fame. bacon.
he that would be a master, must draw by the life as well as
copy from originals, and join theory and experience together.
collier of the entertainment os books.
9. exact resemblance: with to before it.
i believe no character of any person was ever better drawn
to the life than this. denham.
rich carvings, portraiture, and imag’ry,
where ev'ry figure to the life express'd
the godhead's pow'r, dryden's knight's tale.
he saw in order painted on the wall
the wars that fame around the world had blown,
all to the life, and ev'ry leader known. dryden's aon.
10. general state of man.
studious they appear
of arts that polish life; inventors rare
unmindful of their maker. milton,
all that cheers or softens life,
the tender sister, daughter, friend, and wife, pope.
11. common occurrences; human affairs; the course of things.
this i know, not only by reading of books in my study,
but also by experience of life abroad in the world. 4-han.
not to know at large of things remote -
from use, obscure and subtile; but to know
that which before us lies in daily life,
is the prime wisdom. a silton's paradis. l91.
12. living person.
why should i play the roman fool, and die
on my own sword whilst i see lives the gashes
do better upon them. shakespeare's macbeth.
13, narrative of a life past.
plutarch, that writes his lift,
tells us; that cato dearly lov’d his wife.
14. spirit; briskness; vivacity; resolution.
the helots bent thitherward with a new lift of resolution,
as if their captain had been a root out of which their courage
had sprung. sidney.
they have no notion of life and fire in fancy and in words;
and any thing that is just in grammar and in measure is as good
pope.
oratory and poetry to them as the best. felton.
not with half the fire and life,
with which he kiss'd amphytrion's wife. prior,
15. animal, animated existence; animal being.
full nature swarms with 1so. thomson.
16. system of animal nature.
lives through all life. pope.
17. life is also used of vegetables, and whatever grows and
decays.
li fe blood. m. s. [life and blood.] the blood necessary to life;
the vital blood.
this sickness doth infect
the very lifeblood of our enterprise. shakoff. henry iv.
how could'st thou drain the lifeblood of the child? shak.
his forehead struck the ground,
lifeblood and life rush'd mingled through the wound. dryd.
they loved with that calm and noble value which dwells
in the heart, with a warmth like that of lifeblood. spectator.
money, the lifeblood of the nation,
corrupts and stagnates in the veins,
unless a proper circulation,
its motion and its heat maintains. swift.
an herb. ainsworth.
li'feg iving. m. s. [se and giving.] having the power to
give life.
his own heat,
kindled at first from heav'n's liftgiving fire.
he sat devising death
to them who liv'd ; nor on the virtue thought
of that lifegiving plant. milton's parad's los’.
spensor.
lifeguard. m. s. lise and guard.] the guard of a king's
person.
cowley. li'fe1. ess. adj. [from life.]
1. dead : deprived of life.
i who make the triumph of to-day,
may of to-morrow's pomp one part appear,
ghaftly with wounds, and lifeless on the bier. prior.
2. unanimated; void of life.
was i to have never parted from thy fide 2
as good have grown there still a lifels, rib milton.
thus began
outrage from lifeles; things. milton.
the power which produces their motions, springs from
something without themselves: if this power were suspended,
they would become a lifels, unactive heap of matter. cheyne.
and empty words she gave, and sounding strain,
but senseless, lifelos s idol void and vain. pope.
5 - - 3. wanting
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i f
l i g
so,
0s,
is:
j.
us;
o,
3. wanting power, force, or spirit.
hopeless and helpless doth ægeon wend,
but to procrastinate his lifeless end. shakespeare.
unknowing to command, proud to obey
a lifeless king, a royal shade i lay. prior.
4. wanting or deprived of physical energy.
the other victor-flame a moment stood, -
then fell, and liftles left th' extinguish'd wood. dryden.
li'felesly, adv. [from lifeless.] without vigour; frigidly;
jejunely.
li'felike. m. s. [life and like..] like a living person.
minerva, lifelike, on embodied air
impress'd the form of ipthema the fair. . pope's odyssey.
li'fest ring; n.s. [life and string.] nerve; strings imagined
to convey life.
these lines are the veins, the arteries,
the undecaying lifftrings of those hearts
that still shall pant, and still shall exercise
the motion spirit and nature both impart. 1)aniel.
l1(fetime. n.s. [life and time.] continuance or duration of life.
jordain talked prose all his life-time, without knowing what
it was. addison on medals.
lifewe’ary. adj. [life and weary..] wretched; tired of living.
let me have
a dram of poison, such soon speeding geer
as will disperse itself through all the veins,
that the lifeweary taker may fall dead. shakespeare.
to lift., v. a...[lyffia, swedish ; liffter, danish. i lified, or
lift; i have lifted, or lift.]
1. to raise from the ground; to heave; to elevate; to hold on high.
filial ingratitude
is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
for lifting food to't shakespeare's king lear.
your guests are coming ;
lift up your countenance, as 'twere the day
of celebration of that nuptial. shakesp. winter tale.
propp'd by the spring, it lifts aloft the head,
but of a sickly beauty soon to shed,
in summer living, and in winter dead. dryden.
2. to bear; to support. not in use.
so down he fell, that th' earth him underneath
did groan, as feeble so great load to lift. fairy queen.
3. to rob ; to plunder. whence the term shoplifier.
so weary bees in little cells repose,
but if night robbers lift the well-stor'd hive,
an humming through their waxen city grows. dryden.
4. to exhalt; to elevate mentally. -
my heart was lift up in the ways of the lord.
of orpheus now no more let poets tell,
to bright caecilia greater pow'r is given,
his numbers rais'd a shade from hell,
hers lift the soul to heav'n. pope.
5. to raise in fortune.
the eye of the lord lifted up his head from misery. ecclus.
6. to raise in estimation.
neither can it be thought, because some lessons are chosen
out of the apocrypha, that we do offer disgrace to the word
of god, or lift up the writings of men above it. płooker.
7. to exalt in dignity.
see to what a godlike height
the roman virtues lift up mortal man!
8. to elevate; to swell, as with pride.
listed up with pride. tim. iii. 6.
our successes have been great, and our hearts have been too
much lifted up by them, so that we have reason to humble
ourselves. atterbury.
9. up is sometimes emphatically added to lift.
he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at
one time. 2 sam. xxiii. 8.
arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand. genosis.
to lift. v. n. to strive to raise by strength.
pinch cattle of pasture while summer doth last,
and lift at their tailes ere a winter be past. tosor.
the mind, by being engaged in a task beyond its strength,
like the body strained by lifting at a weight too heavy, has
often its force broken. docke.
lift. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the manner of lifting.
in the list of the feet, when a man goeth up the hill, the
weight of the body beareth most upon the knees. bacon.
in races, it is not the large stride, or high lift, that makes
the speed. bacon's essays.
2. the aet of listing. -
the goat gives the fox a lift, and out he springs. l’esor.
3. effort; struggle. dead lift is an effort to raise what with
the whole force cannot be moved; and figuratively any state
of impotence and inability.
myself and trulla made a shift
to help him out at a dead lift.
mr. doctor had puzzled his brains
in making a ballad, but was at a stand.
and you freely must own, you were at a dead lift. swift.
wol, h. -
2 chron.
addison's cato.
hudibras.
to lig. v. n. [leggen, dutch..] to lie.
4. lift, in scotland, denotes a load or surcharge of any thing;
as also, if one be disguised much with liquor, they say, h.
has got a great lift.
5. [in scottish..]. the sky : for in a starry night they say, how
clear the lift is /
5. lists of a sail are ropes to raise or lower them at pleasure.
li'fter. m. s. [from lift.] one that lifts.
thou, o lord, art my glory, and the lifter up of mine head.
psal. iii. 3.
thou kenst the great care
i have of thy health and thy welfare,
which many wild beasts liggen in wait,
for to entrap in thy tender state. spenser's pastorals.
l1(gament. n. s. [ligamentum, from liga, latin; ligament,
french.]
1. ligament is a white and solid body, softer than a cartilage,
but harder than a membrane; they have no conspicuous cavi-
ties, neither have they any sense, lest they should suffer upon
the motion of the joint: their chief use is to fasten the bones,
which are articulated together for motion, left they should be
dislocated with exercise. &amp;tiny.
be all their ligaments at once unbound,
and their disjointed bones to powder ground. sandys.
the incus is one way joined to the malleus, the other end
being a process is fixed with a ligament to the stapes. holder.
2. [in popular or poetical language.] any thing which con-
nects the parts of the body.
though our ligaments betimes grow weak, -
we must not force them till themselves they break. denh.
3. bond; chain; entanglement,
men sometimes, upon the hour of departure, do speak and
reason above themselves; for then the soul, beginning to be .
freed from the ligaments of the body, reasons like herself, and
discourses in a strain above mortality. addison's speciator.
lig am e/ntal. !" s: [from ligament.] composing a liga-
lig am etntous. ment.
the urachos or ligamental passage is derived from the bot-
tom of the bladder, whereby it dischargeth the watery and
urinary part of its aliment. brown's pulgar errours,
the clavicle is inserted into the first bone of the sternon,
and bound in by a strong ligamentous membrane. joseman.
ligation. m. s. [ligatio, latin.]
1. the aet of binding.
2. the state of being bound.
the slumber of the body seems to be but the waking of the
soul: it is the ligation of sense, but the liberty of reason. add.
ligature. m. s. [ligature, french; ligatura, latin.]
1. anything tied round another; bandage.
he deludeth us also by philters, ligatures, charms, and many
superstitious ways in the cure of diseases. brown.
if you slit the artery, and thrust into it a pipe, and cast a
strait ligature upon that part of the artery; notwithstanding
the blood hath free passage through the pipe, yet will not the
artery beat below the ligature; but do but take off the ligature,
it will beat immediately. ray on creation.
the many ligatures of our english dress check the circula-
tion of the blood. spediator.
i found my arms and legs very strongly fastened on each
side to the ground; i likewise felt several slender ligatures across
my body, from my arm-pits to my thighs. gulliver's trav.
2. the act of binding.
the fatal noose performed its office, and with most strict
ligature squeezed the blood into his face. arbuth. j. bull,
any stoppage of the circulation will produce a dropsy, as
by strong ligature or compression. arbuthnot on dict.
3. the state of being bound. not very proper. -
sand and gravel grounds easily admit of heat and moisture,
for which they are not much the better, because they let it
pass too soon, and contract no ligature. mortimer's husb.
light. n. s. [leopt, saxon.]
1. that material medium of sight; that body by which we see :
luminous matter.
light is propagated from luminous bodies in time, and
spends about seven or eight minutes of an hour in passing
from the sun to the earth. newton's opticks.
2. state of the elements, in which things become visible : op-
posed to darkness.
god called the light day; and the darkness he called night.
genesis.
so alike thou driv'st awa
light and darkness, night and day. carew.
3. power of perceiving external objects by the eye: opposed
to blindness. -
my strength faileth me ; as for the light of mine eyes, it
also is gone from me. salmi.
if it be true that light is in the soul,
she all in every part, what was the fight *
to such a slender ball as th’ eye confin'd,
so obvious and so easy to be quench'd,
and not as feeling through all parts diffus'd,
that she might look at will through ev'ry pore milton,
15 l 4. day.
= -i- or oil –
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i g
l i g
.
#. day.
ere the third dawning light -
return, the stars of morn shall see him rise
out of his grave, fresh as th’ dawning light. milton.
. life.
5 infants that never saw light. job.
swift roll the years, and rise the expected morn;
o spring to light, auspicious babe be born! pope.
6. artificial illumination. r.
seven lamps shall give light. numb.
7. illumination of mind; instruction; knowledge. -
of those things which are for direction of all the parts of
our life needful, and not impossible to be discerned by the
light of nature itself, are there not many which few mens na:
tural capacity hath been able to find out? . hooker.
light may be taken from the experiment of the horse-tooth
ring, how that those things which assuage the strife of the
spirits, do help diseases contrary to the intention desired.
bacon's natural history.
i will place within them as a guide
my umpire conscience, whom if they will hear
light after light well us’d they shall attain, -
and to the end persisting safe arrive. milton.
i opened ariosto in italian, and the very first two lines gave
me light to all i could desire. dryden.
if internal light, or any proposition which we take for in-
spired, be conformable to the principles of reason, or to the
word of god, which is attested revelation, reason warrants
it. - - locke.
the ordinary words of language, and our common, use
of them, would have given us light into the nature of our ideas,
if considered with attention. r locke.
the books of varro concerning navigation are lost, which
no doubt would have given us great light in those matters.
arbuthnot on coins.
8. the part of a picture which is drawn with bright colours, or
in which the light is supposed to fall.
never admit two equal lights in the same picture; but the
greater light must strike forcibly on those places of the picture
where the principal figures are ; diminishing as it comes
nearer the borders. - dryden's dufresnoy,
9. reach of knowledge; mental view. - ...
light, and understanding, and wisdom, like the wisdom of
the gods, was found in him. dan. v. ii.
we saw as it were thick clouds, which did put us in some
hope of land, knowing how that part of the south sea was
utterly unknown, and might have islands or continents that
hitherto were not come to light. bacon's nat. history.
they have brought to light not a few profitable experi-
ments. bacon's natural history.
io. point of view ; situation; direetion in which the light falls.
frequent consideration of a thing wears off the strangeness
of it; and shews it in its several lights, and various ways of
appearance, to the view of the mind. south.
it is impossible for a man of the greatest parts to consider
any thing in its whole extent, and in all its variety of lights.
speciator.
an author who has not learned the art of ranging his
thoughts, and setting them in proper lights, will lose himself
in confusion. addison's speciator.
11, publick view ; publick notice. -
why am i ask'd what next shall see the light;
heav'ns ! was i born for nothing but to write : pope.
12. the publick.
grave epistles bringing vice to light,
such as a king might read, a bishop write. pope.
13. explanation.
i have endeavoured, throughout this discourse, that every
former part might give strength unto all that follow, and
every latter bring some light unto all before. hooker.
we should compare places of scripture treating of the same
point: thus one part of the sacred text could not fail to give
light unto another. locke's essay on st. paul’s epistles.
14. any thing that gives light; a pharos; a taper; any lumi-
nous body.
that light we see is burning in my hall;
how far that little candle throws his beams,
so shines a good deed in a naughty world. shakespeare.
then he called for a light, and sprang in, and fell down
before paul. aci;, xvi. 29.
i have set thee to be a light of the gentiles, for salvation
unto the ends of the earth. aci;, xiii. 47.
let them be for signs,
for seasons, and for days, and circling years;
and let them be for lights, as i ordain
their office in the firmament of heav'n,
to give light on the earth. milton.
i put as great difference between our new lights and ancient
truths, as between the sun and a meteor. glanville.
several lights will not be seen,
if there be mething else between ;
the murderer rising with the light killeth the podr. job.
men doubt because they stand so thick i' th' sky, -
if those be stars that paint the galaxy. cowly,
i will make some offers at their safety, by fixing some
marks like lights upon a coast, by which their ships may avoid
at least known rocks. temple.
he still must mourn
the sun, and moon, and ev'ry starry light,
eclips'd to him, and lost in everlasting night. prior.
light. adj. [leohe, saxon.]
1. not tending to the center with great force; not heavy.
hot and cold were in one body fixt,
and soft with hard, and light with heavy mixt. drydon.
these weights did not exert their natural gravity till they
were laid in the golden balance, insomuch that i could not
guess which was light or heavy whilst i held them in my hand.
addison's speciator.
2. not burdensome; easy to be worn, or carried, or lifted; not
on crous.
horse, oxen, plough, tumbrel, cart, waggon, and wain,
the lighter and stronger the greater thy gaine. 7 offer.
it will be light, that you may bear it -
under a cloke that is of any length. skakoffeare.
a king that would not feel his crown too heavy, must
wear it every day; but if he think it too light, he knoweth
not of what metal it is made. bacon's essays.
3. not afflictive ; easy to be endured.
every light and common thing incident into any part of
man's life. hooker.
light suff'rings give us leisure to complain,
we groan, but cannot speak, in greater pain. drydon.
4. easy to be performed; not difficult. -
well pleas'd were all his friends, the task was light,
the father, mother, daughter, they invite. drydon.
5. easy to be acted on by any power.
apples of a ripe flavour, fresh and fair,
mellow'd by winter from their cruder juice,
light of digestion now, and fit for use. dryden's juvenal.
6. not heavily armed.
paulus bachitius, with a company of light horsemen, lay
close in ambush, in a convenient place for that purpose.
anoles.
7. active; nimble.
_he so light was at legerdemain,
that what he touch'd came not to light again. stensor.
asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe. 2 sam. ii. 18.
there stamford came, for his honour was lame
of the gout three months together;
but it prov'd, when they fought, but a running gout,
for heels were lighter than ever. denham.
youths, a blooming band;
light bounding from the earth at once they rise, -
their feet half viewless quiver in the skies. pop’, o.'s.
8. unencumbered; unembarrassed ; clear of impediments.
unmarried men are best masters, but not best subjects; for
they are light to run away. bacon.
9. slight : not great.
a light error in the manner of making the following trials
was enough to render some of them unsuccessful. boyle.
io. not dense; not gross.
in the wilderness there is no bread, nor water, and our sou!
loatheth this light bread. numb. xxi. 5.
light fumes are merry, grosser fumes are sad,
both are the reasonable soul run mad. dryden.
ii. easy to admit any influence; unsteady; unsettled; loose.
false of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand. , shakspeare.
these light vain persons still are drunk and mad
with surfeitings, and pleasures of their youth. davier.
they are light of belief, great listeners after news. howell.
there is no greater argument of a light and inconfiderate
person, than profanely to scoff at religion. tillotson.
12. gay; airy; wanting dignity or solidity; trifling.
seneca cannot be too heavy, nor plautus too light.
shakespeare.
forgive
if fictions light i mix with truth divine,
and fill these lines with other praise than thine. fairfax.
13. not chaste; not regular in conduct.
let me not be light,
for a light wife doth make a heavy husband. sha, offeare.
14. [from light, n.s.) bright; clear.
as soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away.
gen. xliv. 3.
the horses ran up and down with their tails and mains on a
light fire. anoles.
15. not dark; tending to whiteness.
in painting, the light and a white colour are but one ard
the same thing : no colour more resembles the air than white,
and by consequence no colour which is lighter. dryden.
two cylindric bodies with annular sulci, found with sharks
teeth, and other shells, in a light coloured clay. 1; 24-vard.
light. adv. [for lightly, by colloquial corruption.] lightly ;
cheaply.
shall<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i g -
l i g
shall we set light by that custom of reading, from whence
so precious a benefit hath grown 2 hooker.
to light. v. a. [from light, n.s.] -
1. to kindle; to inflame; to set on fire; to make flame.
swinging coals about in the wire, throughly lighted them.
- boyle.
this truth shines so clear, that to go about to prove it, were
to light a candle to seek the sun. glanville.
the maids, who waited her commands,
ran in with lighted tapers in their hands. dryden.
be witness, gods, and strike jocasta dead,
if an immodest thought, or low desire,
inflam'd my breast since first our loves were lighted. dryden.
absence might cure it, or a second mistress
light up another flame, and put out this. addison's cato.
2. to give light to ; to guide by light. -
a beam that falls,
fresh from the pure glance of thine eye,
lighting to eternity. . . . crashaw.
ah hopeless, lasting flames' like those that burn
to light the dead, and warm th’ unfruitful urn. pope.
3. to illuminate; to fill with light.
the sun was set, and vesper to supply -
his absent beams, had lighted up the sky. dryden.
4. up is emphatically joined to light.
no sun was lighted up the world to view. dryd. ovid.
5. [from the adjecive.] to lighten; to ease of a burthen.
land some of our passengers,
and light this weary vessel of her load. fairy queen.
to light. v. n. [lickt, chance, dut, preter. lighted or light, or lit.]
1. to happen to find ; to fall upon by chance: it has on before
the thing found. -
no more settled in valour than disposed to justice, if either
they had lighted on a better friend, or could have learned to
make friendship a child, and not the father of virtue. sidney.
the prince, by chance, did on a lady light,
that was right fair, and fresh as morning rose. spensor.
haply, your eye shall light upon some toy
you have desire to purchase. shakespeare.
as in the tides of people once up, there want not stirring
winds to make them more rough ; so this people did light upon
two ringleaders. - bacon’s henry vii.
of late years, the royal oak did light upon count rhodo-
phil. - - - howel's wocal fores.
... the way of producing such a change on colours may be
easily enough lighted on, by those conversant in the solutions
of mercury. - - boyle on colours.
he sought by arguments to sooth her pain;
nor those avail'd : at length he lights on one,
before two moons their orb with light adorn,
if heav'n allow me life, i will return. dryden.
truth, light upon this way; is of no more avail to us than
error; for what is so taken up by us, may be false as well as
true; and he has not done his duty, who has thus stumbled
upon truth in his way to preferment. - locke.
whosoever first lit on a parcel of that substance we call
gold, could not rationally take the bulk and figure to depend
on its real essence. locke.
as wily reynard walk'd the streets at night,
on a tragedian's mask he chanc'd to light,
turning it o'er, he mutter'd with disdain,
how vast a head is here without a brain addison.
a weaker man may sometimes light on notions which have
escaped a wiser. //atts on the mind.
2. to fall in any particular dire&amp;tion: with on.
the wounded steed curvets; and, rais'd upright,
lights on his feet before: his hoofs behind
spring up in air aloft, and lash the wind. dryden's zn.
3. to fall; to strike on : with on.
he at his foe with furious rigour smites,
that strongest oak might seem to overthrow ;
the stroke upon his shield so heavy lights,
that to the ground it doubleth him full low. spensor.
at an uncertain lot none can find themselves grieved on
whomsoever it lighteth. - hooker.
they shall hunger no more; neither shall the sun light on
them, nor any heat. rev. vii. 16.
on me, me only, as the source and spring
of all corruption, all the blame lights due. milton.
a curse lights upon him presently after: his great army is
utterly ruined, he himself slain in it, and his head and right
hand cut off, and hung up before jerusalem. south.
4. [alsopran, saxon.j to descend from a horse or carriage.
when naaman saw him running after him, he lighted down
from the chariot to meet him. 2 kings, v. 21.
i saw 'em salute on horseback,
beheld them when they lighted, how they clung -
in their embracement. shakesp. henry viii.
rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw isaac, she
lighted off the camel. gen. xxiv. 64.
the god laid down his feeble rays, -
then lighted from his glittering coach. swift.
5. to settle; to rest; to stoop from flight.\
i plac'd a quire of such enticing birds, * * * * *
that she will light to listen to their lays. shakespeare,
...then as a bee which among weeds doth fall,
which seem sweet flow’rs, with lustre fresh and g
she lights on that, and this, and tasteth all,
but pleas'd with none, doth rise and soar away. davies.
, plant trees and shrubs near home, for bees to pitch on at
their swarming, that they may not be in danger of being lost
for want of a lighting place. mortimer’s husbandry.
to li'ghten. v. n. [pro, ligz, saxon.]
1. to flash, with thunder.
- - this dreadful night,
that thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars -
as doth the lion: shakespeare's julius casar.
- although i joy in thee,
i have no joy of this contract to-night;"
it is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden, -
too like the light'ning, which doth cease to be -
ere one can say it lightens. . .
the lightning that lighteneth out of the one part under heal
ven, sheweth unto the other part. -
2. to shine like lightning.
yet looks he like a king: behold his eye,
as bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
controlling majesty. shakesp. richard ii.
3. to fall to light. - -
o lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us, as
trust in thee. -
to l1(ght en. v. a. [from light.]
1. to illuminate; to enlighten.
upon his bloody finger he doth wear • -
a precious ring, that lightens all the hole. shakesearc.
...q light, which mak'st the light which makes the day,
which sett'st the eye without, and mind within;
lighten my spirit with one clear heav'nly ray,
which now to view itself doth first begin.
a key of fire ran all along the shore,
and lighten’d all the river with a blaze. dryden.
nature from the storm
shines out afresh; and through the lighten’d air
a higher lustre, and a clearer calm,
diffusive tremble. thomson's summer.
2. to exonerate; to unload. [from light, adj.] -
the mariners were afraid, and cast forth the wares that
were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them. jon, i. 7.
3. to make less heavy.
long since with woe
nearer acquainted, now i feel by proof,
that fellowship in pain divides not smart,
ay,
--
luke, xvii. 24.
we do put our
common prayer.
davies.
nor lightens aught each man's peculiar load. milton.
- - strive
in offices of love how we may lighten
. each other’s burden. milton.
4. to exhilarate; to cheer. . .
- a trusty villain, very oft, -
when i am dull with care and melancholy,
lightens my humour with his merry jest. sha's ear.
the audience are grown weary of continued melancholy
scenes; and few tragedies shall succeed in this age, if they are
, not lightened with a course of mirth. dryden.
li'ght er. n.s.. [from light, to make light.] a heavy boat into
which ships are lightened or unloaded. . .
they have cock boats for passengers, and lighters for bur-
then. - carew's survey of cornwall.
. he climb'd a stranded lighter's height, -
shot to the black abyss, and plung’d downright. pope.
lighter man. n.s. [lighter and man.] one who manages a
lighter.
*ore much shipping is employed, whatever becomes of
the merchant, multitudes of people will be gainers; as ship-
wrights, butchers, carmen, and lightermen. child.
lightf1'ngered. adj. [light and finger.] nimble at convey-
ance; thievish. - - - -
lightfoot. adj. [light and foot.] nimble in running dr
dancing; active.
him so far had born his lightfoot fleed,
pricked with wrath and fiery fierce disdain,
that him to follow was but fruitless pain. fairy queen.
...and all the troop of lightfoot naiades
flock all about to see her lovely face. sponsor.
light foot. n.s. venison. a cant word.
lic hthe aded. adj. [light and head.]
1. unsteady ; loose; thoughtless; weak. - ".
the english liturgy, how piously and wisely soever framed,
had found great opposition; the ceremonies had wrought only
upon lightheaded, weak men, yet learned men excepted against
some particulars. - carendon.
2. delirious; disordered in the mind by disease.
licht he’adedness. n. s. deliriousness; disorder of the mind.
lic hthe arted. adj. [light and heart. 1 gay; merry ; airy ;
cheerful.
light house.
shakesp. romeo and juhot.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i g
lichthouse. n.s. sight and house..] an high building, at
the top of which lights are hung to guide ships at sea. -
he charged himself with the risque of such vessels as carried
corn in winter; and built a pharos or lighthouse. . arbuthnot.
build two poles to the meridian, with immense lighthouses
| || - , on the top of them. arbuthnot and pope.
|| lightlescoed. adj. [light and leg.]. nimble; swift. ..
- lighligged pashas got the middle space. sidney.
lightless. adj. [from light.] wanting light 3 dark.
lightly. adv. [from light.]
1. without weight.
this grave partakes the fleshly birth,
which cover lightly, gentle earth.
2. without deep impression.
the soft ideas of the cheerful note,
lightly receiv'd, were easily forgot. prior.
3. easily; readily; without ... of course.
if they write or speak publickly but five words, one of
* , ; them is lightly about the dangerous estate of the church of
- england in respea of abused ceremonies. hooker.
- believe’t not lightly that your son
|
o
-
ben. johnson.
will not exceed the common, or be caught
with cautelous baits and practice. shakesp. coriolanus.
short summer lightly has a forward spring. shakesp.
4. without reason.
*. flatter not the rich; neither do thou willingly or lightly
. ." appear before great personages. taylor's guide.
* , . let every man that hath a calling be diligent in pursuance
o of its employment, so as not lightly, or without reasonable
l,
! occasion, to neglect it. taylor's holy living.
… ' 5. without dejection; cheerfully.
bid that welcome
o which comes to punish us, and we punish it,
seeming to bear it lightly. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
o 6. not chastely.
if i were lightly disposed, i could still perhaps have offers,
| that some, who hold their heads. higher, would be glad to
to accept. swift's story of an injured lady.
7. nimbly ; with agility; not heavily or tardly:
methought i stood on a wide river's bank ;
on '' t when on a sudden, torismond appear'd,
!. - gave me his hand, and led me lightly o'er;
. . . . leaping and bounding on the billows heads,
till safely we had reach'd the farther shore. dryden.
8. gaily; airily; with levity; without heed or care.
lic htmi’ndep, adj. [light and mind.] unsettled; unsteady.
he that is hasty to give credit is lightminded. eccl. xix. 4.
li'oh t n ess. n.s.. [from light.]
1. want of weight; absence of weight: the contrary to heavins.
l some are for masts of ships, as fir and pine, because of
their length, straightness, and lightness. bacon's nat. hist.
- suppose many degrees of littleness and lightnes; in particles,
so as many might float in the air a good while before they fell.
burnet's theory of the earth.
2, inconstancy; unsteadiness.
for, unto knight there is no greater shame,
than lightness and i. in love. fairy queen.
of two things they must chuse one; namely, whether they
would, to their endless disgrace, with ridiculous lightness, dis-
miss him, whose restitution they had in so importunate man-
ner desired, or else condescend unto that demand. płooker.
as i blow this feather from my face,
obeying with my wind when i do blow,
and yielding to another when it blows,
commanded always by the greatest gust ;
such is the lightness of you common men.
. unchastity; want of conduct in women.
is it the disdain of my estate, or the opinion of my lightness,
that emboldened such base fancies towards me sidney.
- can it be,
that modesty may more betray our sense,
than woman's lightness s shakesp. measure for measure.
4. agility; nimbleness.
light nisg. n.s.. [from lighten, lightening, lightning.]
1. the flash that attends thunder.
lightning is a great flame, very bright, extending ever
way to a great distance, suddenly darting upwards, and there
ending, so that it is only momentaneous. aauschenbroek.
sense thinks the lightning born before the thunder;
what tells us then they both together are : davies.
salmoneus, suff'ring cruel pains i found
for emulating jove; the rattling sound
of mimick thunder, and the glitt’ring blaze
of pointed lightnings, and their forky rays. dryden's zn.
no warning of the approach of flame,
swiftly, like sudden death, it came 3
like travellers by lightning kill’d,
i burnt the moment i beheld. granville.
2. mitigation ; abatement. [from to lighten, to make less heavy.]
how oft when men are at the point of death,
have they been merry which their keepers call
a lightning before death. slakesp. i&amp;omeo and juliet.
shakespeare.
we were once in hopes of his recovery, upon a kind mes.
sage from the widow ; but this only proved a lightning before
death. addison's speciator.
lights. n.s.. [supposed to be called so from their lightness in
proportion to their bulk.] the lungs; the organs of breath-
ing: we say, lights of other animals, and lungs of men.
the complaint was chiefly from the lights, a part as of
no quick sense, so no feat for any sharp disease. hayward.
lightsome. adj. [from light.]
1. luminous; nor dark; not obscure; not opake.
neither the sun, nor any thing sensible is that light itself,
which is the cause that things are lightsome, though it make
itself, and all things else, visible; but a body most enlightened,
by whom the neighbouring region, which the greeks call
aether, the place of the supposed element of fire, is affected and
qualified. raleigh.
white walls make rooms more lightsome than black. bacon.
equal posture, and quick spirits, are required to make co-
lours lightsome. bacon's nat. history.
the sun
his course exalted through the ram had run
through taurus, and the lightsome realms of love. dryden.
2. gay ; airy; having the power to exhilarate.
it suiteth so fitly with that lightsome affection of joy, where-
in god delighteth when his saints praise him. hooker.
the lightsome passion of joy was not that which now often
usurps the name; that trivial, vanishing, superficial thing,
that only gilds the apprehension, and plays upon the surface of
the soul. south.
li'ghtsom eness. n.s.. [from lightsome.]
1. luminousness; not opacity; not obscurity; not darksome-
ness.
it is to our atmosphere that the variety of colours, which
are painted on the skies, the lightsomeness of our air, and the
twilight, are owing. cheyne's philosophical principles.
2. cheerfulness; merriment; levity.
lic na’.oes. n.s. [lignum aloes, latin.] aloes wood.
the vallies spread forth as gardens by the river's side, as
the trees of lignaloes which the lord hath planted, and as cedar
trees beside the water. numb. xxiv. 6.
l1 gneous. adj. [ligneus, latin ; ligneux, french..] made of
wood; wooden; resembling wood.
it should be tried with shoots of vines, and roots of red
roses; for it may be they, being of a more signeous nature, will
incorporate with the tree itself. bacon's nat. hist.
ten thousand seeds of the plant harts-tongue, hardly make
the bulk of a pepper-corn: now the covers, and the true
body of each seed, the parenchymous and signeous part of both,
and the fibres of those parts, multiplied one by another, afford
a hundred thousand millions of formed atoms, but how many
more we cannot define. grew.
lignu41/1 iae, n.s. [latin.] guiacum; a very hard wood.
ligure. n.s. a precious stone.
the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. exod.
like. adj. [lic, saxon; liik, dutch.]
1. resembling; having resemblance.
whom art thou like in thy greatness
his son, or one of his illustrious name,
how like the former, and almost the same ! dryd, aen.
as the earth was designed for the being of men, why might
not all other planets be created for the like uses, each for their
own inhabitants : bentley.
this plan, as laid down by him, looks liker an universal
art than a distinct logick. baker on learning.
2. equal; of the same quantity.
more clergymen were impoverished by the late war, than
ever in the like space before. spratt.
3. [for likely..] probable; credible.
ezek. xxxi. 2.
the trials were made, and it is like that the experiment .
would have been effectual. bacon's natural history.
4. likely; in a state that gives probable expe&amp;tations. this is,
i think, an improper, though frequent, use.
if the duke continues these favours towards you, you are
like to be much advanced. shakspeare's twelfth night,
he is like to die for hunger, for there is no more bread.
jor. xxxviii. q.
the yearly value thereof is already increased double of that
it was within these few years, and is like daily to rise higher till
it amount to the price of our land in england. davies.
hopton resolved to visit waller's quarters, that he might
judge whether he were lite to pursue his purpose. clarendon.
many were not easy to be governed, nor like to conform
themselves to strict rules. clarendon.
if his rules of reason be not better suited to the mind than
his rules for health are fitted to our bodies, he is not like to be
much followed. baker on learning.
like. n.s. [this substantive is seldom more than the adjective
used elliptically; the like for the like thing, or like person.]
1. some person or thing resembling another.
he was a man, take him for all in all,
i shall not look upon his like again.
shakoff. hamlet.
every like is not the same, o caesar.
sia'ospare.
7 hough<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i k
though there have been greater fleets for number, yet for
the bulk of the ships never the like. bacon's j/ar with spain.
albeit an eagle did bear away a lamb in her talons, yet
a raven endeavouring to do the like was held entangled.
hayward,
one offers, and in offering makes a stay ;
another forward sets, and doth no more ;
a third the like. daniel's civil war.
his desire
by conversation with his like to help,
or solace his defeots. milton's paradis, loft.
two likes may be mistaken. l’estrange.
she'd study to reform the men,
or add some grains of folly more,
to women than they had before;
this might their mutual fancy strike,
since ev'ry being loves its like. - swift.
2. used with had; near approach ; a state like to another state.
a sense common, but not just : perhaps had is a corruption
for was.
report being carried secretly from one to another in my
ship, had like to have been my utter overthrow. raleigh.
lik f. adv.
1. in the same manner; in the same manner as: it is not always
easy to determine whether it be adverb or adjective.
the joyous nymphs, and lightfoot fairies,
which thither came to hear their musick sweet,
now hearing them so heavily lament, -
like heavily lamenting from them went. spensor.
like as a father pitieth his children, so the lord pitieth
them that fear him. . psal. ciii. 13.
are we proud and passionate, malicious and revengeful ? is
this to be like-minded with christ, who was meek and lowly
tillotson.
what will be my confusion, when he sees me
neglected, and forsaken like himself? philips.
they roar'd like lions caught in toils, and rag’d:
the man knew what they were, who heretofore
. . had seen the like lie murther'd on the shore. j/aller.
2. in such a manner as befits.
be strong, and quit yourselves like men. i sam. iv. 9.
3. likely ; probably. a popular use not analogical.
i like the work well, ere it be demanded,
as like enough it will, i’d have it copied.
to like. v. a. [lican, saxon; liken, dutch. j
1. to chuse with some degree of preference.
as nothing can be so reasonably spoken as to content all
men, so this speech was not of them all liked. knolles.
he gave such an account as made it appear that he liked the
design. - clarendon.
we like our present circumstances well, and dream of no
change. atterbury.
2. to approve ; to view with approbation, not fondness.
though they did not like the evil he did, yet they liked him
that did the evil. sidney.
he grew content to mark their speeches, then to marvel at
such wit in shepherds, after to like their company. sidney.
he proceeded from looking to liking, and from liking to
loving. o sidney.
- for several virtues -
i have lik'd several women; never any
with so full soul. sha's care's tompos'.
- i look’d upon her with a soldier’s eye;
that liked, but had a rougher task in hand
than to drive liking to the name of love. shakespeare.
scarce any man passes to a liking of fin in others, but by first
practising it himself. south.
beasts can like, but not distinguish too,
shakspeare.
nor their own liking by reflection know. , dryden.
3. to please ; to be agreeable to. now disused.
well hoped he, ere long that hardy guest,
if ever covetous hand, or lustful eye,
or lips he laid on thing that lik'd him best,
should be his prey. spenser's fairy queen.
say, my fair brother now, if this device
do like you, or may you to like entice. hubberd’s tale.
this desire being recommended to her majesty, it liked her
to include the same within one entire lease. bacon.
he shall dwell where it liketh him best. deut.
there let them learn, as likes them, to despise
god and messiah. milton's paradise lost.
to lik e. v. m.
1. to be pleased with : with of before the thing approved.
obsolete. - -
of any thing more than of god they could not by any
means like, as long as whatsoever they knew besides god, they
apprehended it not in itself without dependency upon god.
- - hocker.
the young soldiers did with such cheerfulness like of this
resolution, that they thought two days a long delay. knolles.
2. to chuse; to list; to be pleased. -
the man likes not to take his brother's wife, deut:
vol. ii.
he that has the prison doors set open is perfeotly at liberty,
because he may either go or stay, as he best likes. locke.
li'kelihood.
£o. $n.s. (from hey..]
i. appearance; shew. obsolete.
what of his heart perceive you in his face,
by any likelihood he show'd today?
—that with no man here he is offended.
2. resemblance; likeness. obsolete.
the mayor and all his brethren in best sort,
like to the senators of antique rome,
go forth and fetch their conqu'ring caesar in.
as by a low, but loving likelihood,
were now the general of our gracious empress,
as in good time he may, from ireland coming,
how many would the peaceful city quit,
to welcome him. shak's care's honry v.
there is no likelihood between pure light and black dark-
ness, or between righteousness and reprobation. raleigh.
3. probability; verifimilitude; appearance of truth. -
as it noteth one such to have been in that age, so had there
been more, it would by likelihood as well have noted many. hook.
many of likelihood informed me of this before, which hung
so tottering in the balance, that i could neither believe nor
misdoubt. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
it never yet did hurt, -
to lay down likelihood, and forms of hope. shakes care.
as there is no likelihood that the place could be so altered,
so there is no probability that these rivers were turned out of
their courses. raleigh's hist. of the i/orld.
where things are least to be put to the venture, as the
eternal interests of the other world ought to be ; there every,
even the least, probability, or likelihood of danger, should be
provided against. - south.
there are predictions of our saviour recorded by the evan-
gelists, which were not completed till after their deaths, and
had no likelihood of being so when they were pronounced by
our blessed saviour. madison on the chrisiian religion.
thus, in all likelihood, would it be with a libertine, who
should have a visit from the other world: the first horror it
raised would go off, as new diversions come on. atterbury.
l1(kely. adj. [from like.] -
1. such as may be liked; such as may please. obsolete.
these young companions make themselves believe they love
at the first looking of a likely beauty. sidney.
sir john, they are your likely men; i would have you
served with the best. shakoff. henry iv.
2. probable; such as may in reason be thought or believed ;
such as may be thought more reasonably than the contrary :
as, a likely story, that is a credible story.
li kely. adv. probably ; as may reasonably be thought.
while man was innocent, he was lkey ignorant of nothing
that imported him to know. glanville's scopsis.
to li'ken. v. a. [from like..] to represent as having resem-
blance; to compare. - - -
the prince broke your head for likening him to a finging
man of windsor. shakesp. henry iv.
for who, though with the tongue
of angels, can relate ; or to what things
liken on earth conspicuous, that may lift
human imagination to such heighth
of god-like power
l1(ken ess. m. s. [from like.]
1. resemblance; similitude.
o they all do live, and moved are
to multiply the likeness of their kind. spensor.
a translator is to make his author appear as charming as he
can, provided he maintains his character, and makes him not-
unlike himself. translation is a kind of drawing after the
life, where there is a double sort of likings, a good one and a
shakespeare.
*
milton's paradis? loft.
bad one. dryden.
there will be found a better likens, and a worse; and the
better is constantly to be chosen. - drydon.
2. form; appearance.
never came trouble to my house in the likenes of your
grace; for trouble being gone, comfort should remain. shak.
it is safer to stand upon our guard against an enemy in the
likenes of a friend, than to embrace any man for a friend in
the likeness of an enemy. l’estrange.
3. one who resembles another; a copy; a counterpart.
poor cupid, sobbing, scarce could speak,
indeed mamma, i did not know ye:
alas! how easy my mistake
i took you for your likeness cloe. prior.
li'k ewise, adv. [like and wise.] in like manner; also ; more-
over ; too. s
jesus said unto them, i also will ask you one thing, which
if ye tell me, i likewise will tell you by what authority i
do these things. matt. xxi. 24.
so was it in the decay of the roman empire, and likewise
in the empire of almaigne, after charles the great, every
bird taking a feather. - - - bacon's essays.
15 m - spirit
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i m
l i m
-
o
o
------
spirit of vitriol poured to pure unmixed serum, coagulates
it as if it had been boiled. spirit of sea-salt makes a perfect
coagulation of the serum likewise, but with some different
phaenomena. arbuthnot on aliments.
li’king. adj. [perhaps because plumpness is agreeable to the
fight.] plump; in a state of plumpness.
i fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and
your drink; for why should he see your faces worse liking,
than the children which are of your sort: dam. i. 10.
li'king. m. s. [from like.]
1. good state of body; plumpness. - - -
i’ll repent, and that suddenly, while i am in some liking ;
i shall be out of heart shortly, and then i shall have no
ftrength to repent. shakspeare's henry iv.
their young ones are in good liking ; they grow up with
corn. job, xxxix. 4.
cappadocian slaves were famous for their lustiness; and, be-
ing in good liking, were set on a stall when exposed to sale, to
shew the good habit of their body. dryden's notes to pers.
2. state of trial.
the royal soul, that, like the lab'ring moon,
by charms of art was hurried down ;
forc’d with regret to leave her native sphere,
came but a while on liking here.
3. inclination.
why do you longer feed on loathed light,
or liking find to gaze on earthly mold : fairy queen.
li'king. m. s. [from the verb.] delight in ; pleasure in :
with to. -
there are limits to be set betwixt the boldness and rashness
of a poet; but he must understand those limits who pretends
to judge, as well as he who undertakes to write: and he who
has no liking to the whole, ought in 16ason to be excluded
from censuring of the parts. dryden.
li'l ach. m. s. [lilac, lilis, french.j a tree. -
the white thorn is in leaf, and the lilach tree. bacon.
dryden.
l1 lied. adj. [from lily.] embellished with lilies.
nymphs and shepherds dance no more
by sandy ladon’s lilied banks. -
lily. m. s. silium, latin.] - -
there are thirty-two species of this plant, including white
lilies, orange lilies, red lilies, and martagons of various forts.
al ziller.
- milton.
oh i had the monster seen those lily hands
tremble, like aspen leaves, upon a lute,
and make the silken strings dclight to kiss them ;
he would not then have touch'd them for his life shakoff.
shipwreck’d upon a kingdom where no pity!
no friends ! no hope no kindled weep for me !
almost no grave allow'd me ! like the lily,
that once was mistress of the field, and flourish'd,
i’ll hang my head, and perish. shakesp. henry viii.
arnus, a river of italy, is drawn like an old man, by his
right side a lion, holding forth in his right paw a red lily, or
flower-de-luce. peacham on drawing.
take but the humblest lily of the field;
and if our pride will to our reason yield;
it must by sure comparison be shown,
that on the regal seat great david's son,
array'd in all his robes, and types of pow'r,
shines with less glory than that simple flow’r. prior,
for her the lilies hang their heads, and die. pope.
lily-daf fodil. m. s. [lilio-narcissils.] a foreign flower.
l1 ly-hyacinth. n.s. [lilio-hyacinthus.]
it hath a lily flower, composed of six leaves, shaped like the
flower of hyacinth: the roots are scaly, and shaped like those
of the lily. there are three species of this plant; one with a
blue flower, another white, and a third red. miller.
lily of the valley, or may lily, n. s. [silium convallium.]
he flower consists of one leaf, is shaped like a bell, and
divided at the top into six segments; the ovary becomes a soft
globular fruit, containing several round seeds. it is very
common in shady woods. amiller.
lily of the valley has a strong root that runs into the
ground. mortimer’s husbandry.
lily li'v er ed. adj. [lily and liver.] whitelivered; cowardly.
a base, lijlivered, action-taking knave. shakesp. king lear.
li'mature. m. s. [limatura, lat..] filings of any metal; the
particles rubbed off by a file.
lim b. m. s. [lim, saxon and scottish ; lem, danish..]
1. a member; a jointed or articulated part of animals.
a second hector, for his grim aspect,
and large proportion of his strong knit limbs. shakesp.
o! that i had her here, to tear her limb meal shakesp.
now am i come each limb to survey,
if thy appearance answer loud report. milton's agonisłes.
2. [limbe, french ; limbus, latin.] an edge; a border. a
philosophical word.
by moving the prisms about, the colours again emerged out
of the whiteness, the violet and the blue at its inward limb,
and at its outward limb the red and yellow, newton.
to limb. v. a. [from the noun.]
*
1. to supply with limbs.
as they please,
they limb themselves, and colour, shape, and size
assume, as likes them best, condense, or rare. 4milton.
2. to tear asunder; to dismember.
li'mbeck. m. s. [corrupted by popular pronunciation from
alembick..] a still.
her cheeks, on which this streaming neciar fell,
still'd through the limbeck of her diamond eyes. fairfax.
fires of spain, and the line,
whose countries limbecks to our bodies be, -
canst thou for gain bear
call up, unbound,
in various shapes, old proteus from the sea, -
drain'd through a limbeck to his naked form. milton.
the earth, by secret conveyances, lets in the sea, and sends
it back fresh, her bowels serving for a limbeck. 4% well.
he first survey'd the charge with careful eyes,
yet judg’d, like vapours that from limbeck, rise,
it would in richer showers descend again. dryden.
the warm limbeck draws
salubrious waters from the nocent brood. philipi.
limbe p. adj. [from limb.] formed with regard to limbs.
a steer of five years age, large limb'd, and fed,
to jove's high altars agamemnon led. pope's iliad.
li'mber. adj. flexible; easily bent; pliant; lithe.
you put me off with limber vows. shakes care.
i wonder how, among these jealousies of court and state,
edward atheling could subsist, being the indubitate heir of
the saxon line: but he had tried, and found him a prince of
limber virtues; so as though he might have some place in his
caution, yet he reckoned him beneath his fear. j/otton.
at once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
infect, or worm : those wav'd their limber fans
for wings; and smallest lineaments exact
in all the liveries deck'd of summer's pride. milton.
she durst never stand at the bay, having nothing but her
long soft limber ears to defend her. 44%re on atheson.
the muscles were strong on both sides of the aspera aste.
ria, but on the under side, opposite to that of the cesophagus,
very limber. ray on creation.
li'maer ness. m. s. [from limber.] flexibility; pliancy.
l1 mb.o. n.s. [e., quad sit limbus inserarum. du cange.]
i. a region bordering upon hell, in which there is neither plea-
sure nor pain. popularly hell. o
no, he is in tartar limbo, worse than hell, -
a devil in an everlasting garment hath him,
one whose hard heart is button'd up with steel. slai sa.
oh what a sympathy of woe is this!
as far from help as limbo is from bliss. shakespeare.
- all these up-whirl’d aloft
fly o'er the backside of the world far off,
into a limbo large, and broad, since call’d
the paradise of fools. asiston's paradise ly?.
2. any place of misery and restraint. -
for he no sooner was at large, -
but trulla straight brought on the charge;
and in the self-same limbo put
the knight and squire, where he was shut. hudobras.
friar, thou art come off thyself, but poor i am left in limbo.
- dryden's spanish poyar.
lime. m. s. [lim, 3ely man, saxon, to glue.]
1. a viscous substance drawn over twigs, which catches and en-
tangles the wings of birds that light upon it. -
poor bird i thou’dst never fear the net or lime,
the pitfall, nor the gin. shakespeare's macbeth.
you must lay line, to tangle her desires, -
by wailful sonnets, whose composed rhimes -
should be full fraught with serviceable vows. sloss?.
jollier of this state ... •
than are new-benefic'd ministers, he throws,
like nets or lime twigs, wherefoe'er he gocs,
his title of barrister on every wench. donne.
a thrush was taken with a bush of lime twigs. l'eorange.
then toils for beasts, and lime for birds were found,
and deep-mouth'd dogs did forest walks surround.
--
dryden.
or court a wife, spread out his wily parts -
like nets, or lime twigs, for rich widows hearts. pope.
2. matter of which mortar is made : so called because used in
cement.
there are so many species of lime flone, that we are to un-
derstand by it in general any stone that, upon a proper degree
of heat, becomes a white calx, which will make a great ebulli-
...tion and noise on being thrown into water, falling into a loose
white powder at the bottom. the lime we have in london is
usually made of chalk, which is weaker than that inade of
stone. hill's materia .1/edica.
they were now, like sand without line, ill bound together,
especially as many as were english, who were at a gaze, look-
ing strange one upon another, not knowing who was faithful.
to their side. bacon's henry vii.
as<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i m w
i., f m
o,
ti,
as when a lofty pile is rais'd,
we never hear the workmen prais'd,
who bring the lime, or place the stones,
but all admire inigo jones. swift.
lime is commonly made of chalk, or of any sort of stone
that is not sandy, or very cold. amortimer.
lime tree, or lin den. n.s. [linb, saxon, tilia.]
1. the linden tree.
the flower consists of several leaves, placed orbicularly, in
the form of a rose, having a long narrow leaf growing to the
footstalk of each cluster of flowers, from whose cup rises the
pointal, which becomes testiculated, of one capsule, contain-
ing an oblong seed. the timber is used by carvers and
turners. these trees continue sound many years, and grow to
a confiderable bulk. sir thomas brown mentions one, in
norfolk, sixteen yards in circuit. miller.
for her the limes their pleasing shades deny,
for her the lilies hang their heads, and die. pope:
2. a species of lemon. [lime, french.] -
bear me, pomona' to thy citron groves |
to where the lemon and the piercing lime,
with the deep orange glowing through the green,
their lighter glories blend. thomson's summer.
to lime. v. a. [from lime.]
1. to entangle ; to ensnare.
oh bosom, black as death !
oh limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
art more engaged. shakespeare's hamlet.
example, that so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood,
cannot, for all that, dissuade succession, but that they are
limed with the twigs that threaten them. shakespeare.
the bird that hath been limed in a bush,
with trembling wings misdoubteth ev’ry bush,
and i, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
have now the fatal object in my eye,
where my poor young was lim’d, was caught, and kill’d.
shakespeare's henry vi.
. to smear with lime.
myself have lim'd a bush for her,
and place a quire of such enticing birds,
that she will light to listen to their lays. shakespeare.
those twigs in time will come to be lined, and then you
are all lost if you do but touch them. l'a/trange.
3. to cement. this sense is out of use.
i will not ruinate my father's house,
who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
and set up lancaster. shakesp. henry vi.
4. to manure ground with lime.
encouragement that abatement of interest gave to landlords
and tenants, to improve by draining, marling, and liming.
- child.
all sorts of pease love limed or marled land. mortimer.
li'mek iln. n.s. [lime and kiln.] kiln where stones are burnt to
lime.
the counter gate is as hateful to me, as the reek of a lime
kiln. shakesp. merry wives of windsor.
they were found in a lime kiln, and having passed the fire,
each is a little vitrified. j/oodward.
li'mestos.e. n.s. [lime and stone.] the stone of which lime
is made.
fire stone and lime stone, if broke small, and laid on cold
lands, must be of advantage. mortoner's husbandry.
lime-wa ter. m. s.
lime-water, made by pouring water upon quick lime, with
some other ingredients to take off its ill flavour, is of great
service internally in all cutaneous eruptions, and diseases of the
lungs. hill's materia medica.
he tried an experiment on wheat infused in lime water
alone, and some in brandy and lime water mixed, and had
from each grain a great increase. mortimer's husbandry.
li'mit. n.s. [limite, french ; limitor, latin.] bound; border;
utmost reach.
the whole limit of the mountain round about shall be most
holy. exod. xliii. 12.
we went, great emperor, by thy command,
to view the utmost limits of the land ;
ev’n to the place where no more world is found,
but foaming billows beating on the ground. dryden.
to li mit. v. a. [limiter, french, from the noun.]
1. to confine with certain bounds; to restrain ; to circum-
scribe; not to leave at large.
they tempted god, and limited the holy one of israel.
psal. lxxviii. 41.
2
thanks i must you con, that you
are thieves profest; for there is boundless theft
in limited professions. shakesp. timon of athens.
if a king come in by conquest, he is no longer a limited
monarch. swift.
2. to restrain from a lax or general signification: as, the uni-
verse is here limited to this earth.
limita neous. adj. [from limit.] belonging to the bounds.
- pictionary.
in mitary. adj. [from limit.] placed at the boundaries as a
guard or superintendant.
then, when i am thy captive, talk of chains, -
proud limitary cherub milton's paradise loft,
limitation. n.s. [limitation, french; limitatio, latin.j
1. restriction; circumscription.
limitation of each creature, is both the perfe&amp;icn and the
preservation thereof. hooker; .
am i yourself, - -
but, as it were, in sort of limitation 2 shakesp. jul. cesar;
i despair, how this limitation of adam's empire to his line
and posterity, will help us to one heir. this limitation, in-
deed, of our author, will save those the labour, who would
look for him amongst the race of brutes; but will very little
contribute to the discovery amongst men. eooke:
if a king come in by conquest, he is no longer a limited
monarch; if he afterwards consent to limitations, he becomes
immediately king de jure. swift:
2. confinement from a lax or undeterminate import. -
the cause of error is ignorance, what restraints arid limita-
tions all principles have in regard of the matter whereunto they
are applicable. hooker.
l1(mmer. m. s. a mongrel, ainsworth.
to limn. v. a. [enluminer, french, to adorn books with pic-
tures.] to draw ; to paint any thing.
mine eye doth his effigies witness, -
most truly limn'd, and living in your face. shakespeare.
emblems limned in lively colours. peacham 4
how are the glories of the field spun, and by what pencil
are they limned in their unaffected bravery : glanville.
li'm n e r. m. s. [corrupted from enlumineur, a decorator of books
with initial pictures.] a painter; a picture-maker.
that divers limners at a distance, without either copy or
design, should draw the same picture to an undistinguishable
exactness, is more conceivable than that matter, which is so
diversified, should frame itself so unerringly, according to the
idea of its kind. glanville's scepsi.
poets are liminers of another kind, -
to copy out ideas in the mind; -
words are the paint by which their thoughts are shown,
and nature is their object to be drawn. granville,
l1(mous, adj. [limosus, latin.] muddy; slimy.
that country became a gained ground by the muddy and
limous matter brought down by the nilus, which settled by de-
grees unto a firm land. brown's sugar errours.
they esteemed this natural melancholick acidity to be the
limous or slimy foeculent part of the blood. flyer.
lim p. adj. [limpio, italian. j -
i. vapid ; weak. not in use.
the chub cats waterish, and the flesh of him is not firm,
limp and tasteless. l/alton's angler.
2. it is used in some provinces, and in scotland, for limber,
flexile. -
to li mp. v. n. [limpen, saxon.] to halt; to walk lamely.
an old poor man, -
who after me hath many a weary step
limp'd in pure love. shakesh. as you like it.
son of fixteen,
pluck the lin'd crutch from thy old limping fire. sla.{s}.
how far .
the substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
in underprising it; so far this shadow
doth limp behind the substance. shakespeare.
when plutus, which his riches, is sent from jupiter, he
limps and goes slowly; but when he is sent by pluto, he runs;
and is swift of foot. bacon.
limping death, lash'd on by fate,
comes up to shorten half our date. dryden's horace.
the limping smith observ'd the sadden’d feast,
and hopping here and there put in his word. dryden.
can syllogism set things right
no: majors soon with minors fight:
or both in friendly consort join'd, -
the consequence limps false behind. prior.
li'mpet. n.s. a kind of shell fish. - ainsworth.
li'mpid. adj. [limpide, french ; limpidus, lat.] clear; pure 3
transparent. -
the springs which were clear, fresh, and limpid, become
thick and turbid, and impregnated with sulphur as long as the
earthquake lasts. - woodward's natural history.
the brook that purls along
the vocal grove, now fretting o'er a rock,
gently diffus'd into a limpid plain. thomson's summer.
l1(mpidness. m. s. [from limpid.] clearness; purity.
li’mpingly. adv. [from limp.] in a lame halting manner.
li(my. adj. [from lime.]
1. viscous ; glutinous. -
striving more, the more in laces strong
himself he tied, and wrapt his winges twain
in limy snares the subtil loops annong. spenser.
2. containing lime. e
a human skull covered with the skin, having been bu-
rico
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i n
l i n
- - - or turned into a kind of
ried in some limy soil, wo tanned, grew's museum.
leather. to yield; to give ove"
, sablinnan saxon.] to yield # 19 &amp;
t, lin. v. n. [a unto his foe he came,
resolv’d in mind ** suddenly to win:
ld lin. fairy queen.
or soon to lose before he once won i on the
li'schpin. m. s. an iron pin, that keep” the whee "p.
los [from lingo, latin:l medicine licked up by
tongue. - o
l.o. [lino, saxon.] the lime tree. see lime.
hardbox, and linden of * softer grain. &gt; o
two neighb'ring trees, with wails encompass'd '. *
one a hard oak, a softer linden one. ryden,
line. m. s. slinea, .
itudinal extension. -
i • lo. the planets, upon this principle, must gravitate no
more towards the fun; so that they would not revolve in .
lines, but fly away in direct tangents, till they struck ;..."
other planets. ently.
. a slender string. -
2 well one roman bard; all human things,
of dearest value, hang on slender strings ;
o see the then sole hope, and in design
of heav'n our joy, supported by * line. - - - - i//aller.
a line seldom holds to strein, 9. draws streight in length,
above fifty or sixty feet. moxon's mechanical exercises.
3. a thread extended to direct any operations.
we as by line upon the ocean go
whose paths shall be familiar as the land. dryden.
4. the string that sustains the angler's hook.
victorious with their lines and eyes, r
they make the fishes and the men their prize. j/aller.
5. lineaments, or marks in the hand or face.
long is it since i saw him,
but time hath nothing blurr'd those lines of favour
which then he wore. shakespeare's cymbeline.
i shall have good fortune; go to, here's a simple line of life;
here's a small trifle of wives. shakespeare.
here, while his canting drone-pipe scan'd
the mystic figures of her hand,
he tipples palmestry, and dines
on ail her fortune-telling lines. cleaveland.
6. delineation; sketch.
you have generous thoughts turned to such speculations :
but this is not enough towards the raising such buildings as i
have drawn you here the lines of, unless the direction of all
affairs here were wholly in your hands. temple.
the inventors meant to turn such qualifications into per-
o sons as were agreeable to his character, for whom the line was
drawn. pope's essay on homer.
7. contour; outline. . . -
oh lasting as those colours may they shine,
free as thy stroke, yet faultless as thy lin' pope.
8. as much as is written from one margin to the other: a verse.
in the preceding line, ulysses speaks of nausicaa, yot in-
mediately changes into the masculine gender. broome.
in moving lines these few epistles tell
what fate attends the nymph who loves too well. garth.
9. rank of soldiers.
they pierce the broken foe's remotest lines. addison.
io. work thrown up; trench.
now snatch an hour that favours thy designs,
unite thy forces, and attack their lines. dryden's zheid.
11. mcthod; disposition.
the heavens themselves, the planets, and this center,
observe degree, priority, and place, -
infisture, course, proportion, season, form,
office and custom, in all line of order. shakspeare.
12. extension; limit. - -
eden stretch'd her line
from auran eastward to the royal tow's
of great seleucia, milton's paradis. loft.
13. equator; equinoetial circle.
when the sun below the line descends, - -
then one long night continued darkness joins. crcc.ch.
14. progeny; family, ascending or descending. s
he chid the sisters
when first they put the name of king upon me,
and bade them speak to him; then prophet-like,
they hail'd him father to a line of kings. shakes are.
he sends you this most memorable line, -
in ev'ry branch truly demonstrative,
willing you overlook this pedigree. shakesp. henry v.
some lines were noted for a stern, rigid virtue, savage,
haughty, parsimonious and unpopular ; others were sweet and
affable.
his empire, courage, and his boasted line,
were all prov'd mortal.
a golden bowl
the queen commanded to be crown'd with wine,
the bowl that belus us'd, and all the tyrian line. dryd,
* *
roscommon.
the years
ran smoothly on, productive of a line • 1 -
of wise heroick kings. philips.
15. a line is one tenth of an inch. locke.
16. [in the plural.] a letter: as, i read your lines.
17. lint or flax. - - - - -
#, line. v. a. [supposed by junius from linum, linings being
often made of linen.]
1. to cover on the inside. -
abox lined with paper to receive the mercury that might
be spilt. - - doyle.
2. to put any thing in the inside : a sense rather judicious.
the charge amounteth very high for any one man's purse,
excent lined beyond ordinary, to reach unto. . carew.
her women are about her: what if i do line one of their
hands : shakspeare's cyniboine.
he, by a gentle bow, divin'd -
how well a cully's purie was lin'd. - swift.
3. to guard within. • * -
norwithstanding they had lined some hedges with musque-
teers, they were totally dispersed. clarendon.
4. to strengthen by inner works. -
- lin, and new repair our towns of was -
with men of courage, and with means defendant. shafts.
5. to cover with something soft.
son of fixteen,
pluck the lin'd crutch from thy old limping sire.
- soaks care.
6. to double; to strengthen with hop. -
who lin’d himself with hope,
eating the air, on promise of supply. shakespeare.
my brother mortiner doth stir
about his title, and hath sent for you
to line his enterprise. soft. horry iv.
the two armies were assigned to the leading of two gene-
rals, both of them rather courtiero and assured to the state,
than martial men; yet lined and assisted with subordinate com-
manders of great experience and valour. bacon.
7. to impregnate: applied to animals generating.
thus from the tyrian pastures lin'd with jove
he bore europa, and still keeps his love. creech.
li's face. n. s. (linage, french..] race; fregory 3 family,
ascending or descending.
both the lineage and the certain fire
from which i sprung, from me are hidden yet. . soor.
joseph was of the house and lineage of david. ito, ii. 4.
the tirian cometh forth with all his generation or lineage,
the males before him, and the females following him; and
if there be a mother from whose body the whole lineage is
descended, there is a traverse where the fitteth.
men of mighty fame,
and from th’ immortal gods their lineage came. dryden,
no longer shall the widow’d land bemoan
a broken lineage, and a doubtful throne,
but boast her royal progeny's increase,
and count the pledges of her future peace. adaon.
. . this care was infused by god himself, in order to ascertain
the descent of the messiah, and to prove that he was, as the
prophets had foretold, of the trfbe of judah, and of the lineage
of david. moro.
z at to - - - - - -
lineal. adj. [linealis, from linea, latin.] -
1. composed of lines; delineated.
when any thing is mathematically demonstrated weak, it
is much more mechanically weak; errors ever occurring more
easily in the management of gross materials than linkal designs.
//otton's architecture.
*
bacon.
2. descending in a direet genealogy.
to re-establish, de facto, the right of lineal succession to
paternal government, is to put a man in possession of that go-
vernment which his fathers did enjoy, and he by lineal succes-
son had a right to. - locke
3. hereditary; derived from ancestors.
oo: be o: if france in peace permit
ur iust and lineal ent’rance 1, 2, ... /&gt;
4- allied . o ce to our own. shakesp. k. joln.
geen isabel, his grandmoth
was a dio."o. ii., v.
o that your brows my laurel had sustain'd y v.
well had been depos'd if you had reign'd:
the father had descended for the son : •.
a for only you are lineal to the throne.’ dryden
li'neally. adv. [from lineal.] in a direct line. jaco.
if he had been the person upon whom the crown had
lineal, and rightfully descended, it was good law. clarendon.
*o. j. [lineament, french; lineamentum, latin.]
&gt; iminating mark in the form.
- - noble york
found that the issue was not his begot:
which well appeared in his lineaments,
being nothing like the noble duke, my father. shałoff.
- -- six wings he wore, to shade
his lineament; divine.
44ilton's paradis. loff.
man
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- -
l i n
l i n -
"t,
- man he seems
fin all his lineaments, though in his face
the glimpses of his father's glory shine. paradis? reg.
there are not more differences in mens faces, and the out-
ward lineaments of their bodies, than there are in the makes
and tempers of their minds; only there is this difference,
that the distinguishing characters of the face, and the
lineaments of the body, grow more piain with time, but the pe-
culiar physiognomy of the mind is most discernible in children.
locke.
i may advance religion and morals, by tracing some few
lineaments in the character of a lady, who hath spent all her
life in the practice of both. swift.
the utmost force of boiling water is not able to destroy the
structure of the tenderest plant: the lineaments of a white lily
will remain after the strongest decoction. arbuthnot.
linear. adj. [linearis, latin.] composed of lines; having the
form of lines. - -
where-ever it is freed from the sand stone, it is covered
with linear striae, tending towards several centers, so as to
compose flat stellar figures. j/codward on fossils.
lineat ios. n.s.. [intatio, from linea.] draught of a line or
lines.
there are in the horney ground two white lineations, with
two of a pale red. //oodward.
li'nen. n.f. [limum, latin.] cloth made of hemp or flax.
here is a basket, he may creep in ; throw foul linen upon
him, as if going to bucking. shakspeare.
unseen, unfelt, the fiery serpent skims
between her linen and her naked limbs. dryden’s aeneid.
li'nen. adj. [lineus, latin.]
1. made of linen.
a linen stock on one leg, and a kersey boot hose on the
other, gartered with a red and blue list. shakespeare.
2. resembling linen.
death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine
are counsellors to fear. what soldiers, whey-face : shak.
lin endra'per. m. s. [linen and draper.] he who deals in linen.
ling. n.f. [ling, islandick.]
1. heath. this sense is retained in the northern counties; yet
bacon seems to distinguish them.
heath, and ling, and sedges. bacon's natural history.
2. [linghe, dutch..] . a kind of sea fish.
when harvest is ended take shipping, or ride,
ling, salt fish, and herring, for lent to provide. tusor.
our english bring from thence good store of fish, but espe-
cially our deepest and thickest ling, which are therefore called
island lings. abbot's disc ipt. of the world.
.ling. the termination notes commonly diminution ; as, kit-
ling, and is derived from klein, german, little; sometimes a
quality ; as, firstling, in which sense skinner deduces it from
langen, old teutonick, to belong.
to li'nger. v. n. [from lenz, saxon, long.]
1. to remain long in languor and pain.
like wretches, that have linger'd long,
we'll snatch the strongest cordial of our love. dryden.
better to rush at once to shades below,
than linger life away, and nourish woe.
2. to hesitate ; to be in suspense.
perhaps thou ling’rest, in deep thoughts detain'd
of th’ enterprize so hazardous and high. paradis. reg.
3. to remain long. in an ill sense.
let order die,
and let this world no longer be a stage
to feed contention in a ling’ring act. shakesp. henry iv.
ye breth’ren of the lyre, and tuneful voice,
lament his lot; but at your own rejoice.
now live secure, and linger out your days;
the gods are pleas'd alone with purcel’s lays. dryden.
your very fear of death shall make ye try
to catch the shade of immortality;
wishing on earth to linger, and to save
part of its prey from the devouring grave. prior.
. to remain long without any action or determination.
we have lingered about a match between anne page and
my cousin slender, and this day we shall have our answer.
shakesp. merry i/ives of i/indsor.
5. to wait long in expeoation or uncertainty.
i must sollicit
all his concerns as mine:
and if my eyes have pow'r, he should not sue
in vain, nor linger with a long delay. dryden's cleomenes.
6. to be long in producing effect.
she doth think, she has strange ling’ring poisons. shakesp.
t, li'nger. v. a. to protract; to draw out to length. out
of use.
i can get no remedy against this consumption of the purse.
borrowing only lingers and lingers it out, but the diseaso, is
pope's odyssy.
incurable. shakesp. henry iv.
she lingers my defires. shakespeare.
let your brief plagues be mercy,
and linger not our sure destructions on.
shakespeare.
v ol. ii. -
lingerer. m. s. [from linger.] one who lingers.
li ngeringly. adv. [from longering.] with delay; tediously:
of poisons, some kill more gently and lingeringly, others
more violently and speedily, yet both kill. - &amp;lla".
ling et. m. s. [from langue: ; lingot, french.] a small mass
of metal.
other matter hath been used for money, as among the la-
cedenyonians, iron lingets quenched with vinegar, that they
may serve to no other use. camden.
lingo. m. s. [portuguese.j language; tongue; speech. a
low cant word.
i have thoughts to learn somewhat of your singo, before i
cross the seas. congreve's jay of the // orld.
lingua’cious. adj. [linguax, latin.j full of tongue; loqua-
cious ; talkative. -
linguadental. adj. [lingua and dens, latin.] uttered by
the joint action of the tongue and teeth.
the linguadental; f, v, as also the linguadentals, th, dh, he
will soon learn. holder's elements of speech.
l1 no uist. n.s. [from lingua.] a man skilful in languages.
though a linguis! should pride himself to have all the
tongues that babel cleft the world into, yet, if he had not
studied the solid things in them, as well as the words and
lexicons, he were nothing so much to be esteemed a learned
man, as any yeoman or tradesman competently wise in his
mother dialect only. 4/ilton on education.
our linguist received extraordinary rudiments towards a
good education. addison's speciator.
li'ng wort. n.s. an herb.
l1(niment. n. s. [liniment, french; linimentum, latin.] oint-
ment; balsam ; unguent. - -
the nostrils, and the jugular arteries, ought to be anointed
every morning with this liniment or balsam. harvey.
the wise author of nature hath provided on the rump two
glandules, which the bird catches hold upon with her bill, and
squeezes out an oily pap or liniment, fit for the inunction of
the feathers. ray on creation.
li's ing. m. s. [from line.j -
1. the inner covering of any thing; the inner double of a
garment.
was i deceived, or did a sable cloud -
turn forth her filver lining on the night? milton.
the folds in the gristle of the nose is covered with a lining,
which differs from the facing of the tongue. grew's cosmol.
the gown with stiff embroid’ry shining,
looks charming with a slighter lining. - prior.
2. that which is within. -
the lining of his coffers shall make coats
to deck our soldiers for these irish wars,
link. n.f. [gelencke, german.]
1. a single ring of a chain.
the roman state, whose course will yet go on
the way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
of more strong links asunder, than can ever
appear in your impediment. shakespeare's corio'arus.
the moral of that poetical fiotion, that the uppermost link
of all the series of subordinate causes, is fastence to jupiter's
chair, signifies an useful truth. hale.
truths hang together in a chain of mutual dependance ;
you cannot draw one link without attracting others. glanville.
while she does her upward flight sustain,
touching each link of the continued chain,
at length she is oblig'd and forc'd to sec
a first, a source, a life, a deity. prior.
2. anything doubled and closed together.
make a link of horse hair very strong, and fasten it to the
end of the stick that springs. mortimer's husbandry.
3. a chain; any thing connecting.
nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,
can be retentive to the strength of spirit. shak's care.
i feel i
the link of nature draw me ; flesh of flesh,
bone of my bone thou art. milton's paradis loft.
fire, flood and earth, and air, by this were bound,
and love, the common link, the new creation crown'd.
dryden's knight's tale.
4. any single part of a series or chain of consequences; a grada;
tion in ratiocination; a proposition joined to a foregoing and
following proposition. -
the thread and train of consequences in intelle&amp;ive ratio-
cination is often long, and chained together by divers links,
which cannot be done in imaginative ratiocination by some
attributed to brutes. judge hale.
5. a series: this sense is improper. aidison has used link for chain.
though i have here only chosen this fingle link of martyrs;
i might find out others among those names which are still
extant, that delivered down this account of our saviour in a
successive tradition. addison on the christian religion.
6. [from 2.5%/2;..] a torch made of pitch and hards.
o, thou art an everlasting bonefite light ; thou hast saved
me a thousand marks in links and torches, walking with thes
in the night betwixt tavern and tavern. shakesp. henry iv.
i 5 n whereas
shakes care.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">|
o
o
|
-
-
-
l i n
whereas history should be the torch of truth, he makes her
in divers places a fulginous link of lies. - howel.
round as a globe, and liquor'd every chink,
goodly and great he sails behind his link. dryden.
- one that bore a link
on a sudden clapp'd his flaming cudgel,
hudibras.
like linstock, to the horse's touch-hole.
7. perhaps in the following passage it may mean lamp-black.
there was no link to colour peter's hat. shakespeare.
to link. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to complicate; as, the links of a chain.
descending tread us down
thus drooping; or with linked thunderbolts
transfix us to the bottom of this gulph.
against eating cares,
lap me in soft lydian airs ;
married to immortal verse,
such as the meeting soul may pierce
in notes, with many a winding bought
of linked sweetness long drawn out.
2. to unite; to conjoin in concord.
they’re so link'd in friendship,
that young prince edward marries warwick's daughter.
milton.
milton.
shakespeare.
3. to join ; to connest.
link towns to towns with avenues of oak,
inclose whole downs in walls, 'tis all a joke. pope.
so from the first eternal order ran,
and creature link'd to creature, man to man. pope.
4. to join by confederacy or contract.
they make an offer of themselves into the service of that
eremy, with whose servants they link themselves in so near a
bond. hooker.
be advised for the best,
ere thou thy daughter link in holy band
of wedlock, to that new unknown guest.
blood in princes link'd not in such sort,
as that it is of any pow'r to tye. daniel's civil war.
5. to connect, as concomitant.
new hope to spring
out of despair; joy, but with fear yet link'd. milton.
god has linkt our hopes and our duty together. dec. of pi.
so gracious hath god been to us, as to link together our duty
and our interest, and to make those very things the instances
of our obedience, which are the natural means and causes of
our happiness. tillotson.
6. to unite or concatenate in a regular series of consequences.
these things are linked, and, as it were, chained one to an-
other: we labour to eat, and we eat to live, and we live to do
good; and the good which we do is as seed sown, with refe-
fairy queen.
rence unto a future harvest. płocker.
tell me, which part it does necessitate 2
ill chuse the other; there i’ll link th’ effect;
a chain, which fools to catch themselves project! dryden.
by which chain of ideas thus visibly linked together in train,
i. e. each intermediate idea agreeing on each side with those
two, it is immediately placed between, the ideas of men and
self-determination appear to be connected. locke.
j.1onk boy. } m. s. [link and boy..] a boy that carries a torch to
li'nkman. accommodate passengers with light.
what a ridiculous thing it was, that the continued shadow
of the earth should be broken by sudden miraculous disclusions
of light, to prevent the officiousness of the linkboy / more.
though thou art tempted by the linkman's call,
yet trust him not along the lonely wall.
in the black form of cinder wench she came.
o may no linkboy interrupt their love gay's trivia.
li'nnet. n. s. [linot, french, linaria, latin.] a small singing
bird.
the swallows make use of celandine, the linnet of euphra-
gia, for the repairing of their fight. more's antidote.
is it for thee the linnet pours his throat pope.
linse'ed. m. s. [semen lini, latin.] the seed of flax, which is
much used in medicine.
the joints may be closed with a cement of lime, linseed
oil, and cotton. mortimer's husandry.
l1 ns ey woolsey, adj. [linen and wool.] made of linen and
wool mixed. vile; mean ; of different and unsuitable parts.
a lawless linseywoosie brother,
half of one order, half another. hudibras.
peel'd, patch'd and pyebald, lins.ywoolsey brothers,
grave mummers sleeveless some, and shirtless others.
pope's dunciad.
li'nstock. n.s. [lunte or lente, teutonick, lint and /lock.] a
staff of wood with a match at the end of it, used by gunners
in firing cannon. hanmer.
gay.
the nimble gunner
with lymstock now the devilish cannon touches,
and down goes all before him. shakesp. henry v.
the distance judg’d for shot of ev'ry size,
the lisłocks touch, the pond’rous ball expires.
lint, n.s.. [int.um, latin; lin, welsh and erse.]
drydin.
l i p
1. the soft substance commonly called flax.
2. linen scraped into soft woolly substance to lay on fores.
i dressed them up with unguentum basilici cum vitello ovi,
upon pledgits of lint. histman's surgery.
l1'ntel. m. s. [linteal, french.] that part of the door frame
that lies cross the door posts over head. -
take a bunch of hysop, and dip it in the blood that is in the
bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts. exod.
when you lay any timber on brick work, as lintel; over
windows, lay them in loam, which is a great preserver of tim-
ber. moxon's mechanical exercises.
silver the lintals deep projecting o'er,
and gold the ringlets that command the door.
li'on. n.s. [lion, french ; leo, latin.]
1. the fiercest and most magnanimous of fourfooted beasts.
king richard's firmame was cor-de-lion, for his lion-like
courage. camden's remains.
be lion mettled; proud, and take no care
who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are;
macbeth shall never vanquish'd be. shakesp. macbeth.
the sphinx, a famous monster in egypt, had the face of a
virgin, and the body of a lion. peacham on drawing.
they rejoice
each with their kind, lion with lioness;
so fitly them in pairs thou hast combin'd.
see lion hearted richard,
piously valiant, like a torrent swell’d
with wintry tempests, that disdains all mounds,
breaking away impetuous, and involves
within its sweep trees, houses, men, he press'd,
amidst the thickest battle.
2. a sign in the zodiac.
the lion for the honours of his skin,
the squeezing crab, and stinging scorpion shine
for aiding heaven, when giants dar'd to brave
the threat'ned stars. creech's manilius.
l1(on ess. m. s. [feminine of lion.] a she lion.
under which bush's shade, a lines;
lay couching head on ground, with catlike watch
when that the sleeping man should stir. shałoffeare.
the furious lions,
forgetting young ones, through the fields doth roar. moy.
the greedy liones; the wolf pursues,
the wolf the kid, the wanton kid the browze, dryden.
if we may believe pliny, lions do, in a very severe manner,
punish the adulteries of the liones. ayliffe's parergon.
li on leaf. m. s. ['eontopetalon, latin.] a plant. miller.
li'ox's-mouth.
lion’s-paw.
li'os's-tail.
lion’s-tooth.
lip. m. s. [lippe, saxon.]
1. the outer part of the mouth, the muscles that shoot beyond
the teeth, which are of so much use in speaking, that they are
used for all the organs of speech.
those happiest smiles
that play'd on her ripe lip, seem'd not to know
what guests were in her eyes. shaksp. king lear.
no falshood shall defile my lips with lies,
or with a vail of truth disguise. sandy's paraph, on jo.
her lips blush deeper sweets. thomson's spring.
2. the edge of any thing.
in many places is a ridge of mountains some distance from
the sea, and a plain from their roots to the shore; which
plain was formerly covered by the sea, which bounded against
those hills as its first ramparts, or as the ledges or lips of its
vessel. . burmet's 7 heary of the earth.
in wounds, the lips sink and are flaccid; a gleet followeth,
and the flesh within withers. joseman's surgery.
3. to make a lip. to hang the lip in sullenness and contempt.
a letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven years
health; in which time i will make a lip at the physician.
shakespeare.
obsolete.
pope's odys.
milton.
philips.
n. s. [from lion.] the name of an herb.
to lip. v. a. [from the noun..] to kiss.
a hand, that kings
have lipt, and trembled kissing. shakesp. ant. and cleop.
oh! 'tis the fiend's arch mock,
to lip a wanton and suppose her chaste. shakespeare.
lipla'pour. m. s. [lip and labour.] aetion of the lips without
concurrence of the mind; words without sentiments.
fasting, when prayer is not directed to its own purposes, is
but liplabour. taylor's rule of holy living.
lipo thymous. adj. [assro and $9,0s.] swooning; fainting.
if the patient be surprised with a lipothymous anguor, and
great oppression about the stomach and hypochonders, expc&amp;t
no relief from cordials. harvey on the plague.
lipo"thymy. m. s. [astroup.[2.] swoon; fainting fit.
the senators falling into a lipathymy, or deep swooning,
made up this pageantry of death with a representing of it unto
life. taylor's j/orthy communicant.
in lipothymys or swoonings, he used the frication of this fin-
ger with saffron and gold. brown's pugar erreurs.
* lipped.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i s
!:
of ;
o,
o,
its
£1 pped, adj. [from lip.] having lips.
li'ppitu pe. n.s. [lippitide, french ; lippitado, latin.] bleared-
ness of eyes.
diseases that are infectious are, such as are in the spirits
and not so much in the humours, and therefore pass easily
from body to body; such are pestilences and lippitudes. bacon.
l1(pwisdovt. n. s. llip and wisdom.] wisdom in talk without
practice.
i find that all is but lipwisdom, which wants experience; i
now, woe is me, do try what love can do. . sidney.
li'quable. adj. [from liquo, latin.]. such as may be melted.
liqua"tion. n.s. [from liquo, latin.]
1. the act of melting.
2. capacity to be melted.
the common opinion hath been, that crystal is nothing but
ice and snow concreted, and by duration of time, congealed
beyond liquation. brown's vulgar errours.
to li quate. v. n. [liquo, latin.] to melt ; to liquefy.
if the salts be not drawn forth before the clay is baked, they
are apt to liquate. //oodward on fossils.
liquefa’ction. m. s. [liquesadio, latin; liquefaction, french.]
the act of melting; the state of being melted.
heat dissolveth and melteth bodies that keep in their spirits,
as in divers liquesadion; ; and so doth time in honey, which by
age waxeth more liquid. bacon's natural hislory.
the burning of the earth will be a true liquofacion or disso-
lution of it, as to the exterior region. burnet.
lique fiable. adj. [from liquefy.] such as may be melted.
there are three causes of fixation, the even spreading of
the spirits and tangible parts, the closeness of the tangible
parts, and the jejuneness or extreme comminution of spirits;
the two first may be joined with a nature liquefable, the last
not. - bacon's natural history.
to li quefy. v. a. [liquefier, french ; liquofacia, latin.] to
melt; to dissolve. -
that degree of heat which is in lime and ashes, being a
smothering heat, is the most proper, for it doth neither liquefy
nor rarefy ; and that is true maturation. bacon's nat. hist.
to li quffy. v. m. to grow limpid.
the blood of st. januarius liquefied at the approach of the
saint's head. . addison on italy.
lique scency, n.s. slous entia, latin.]. aptness to melt.
lique'scent. n. s. [liquosceni, latin.] melting.
li quid. adj. [liquide, french ; liquidus, latin.]
1. not solid; not forming one continuous substance ; fluid.
gently rolls the liquid glass. dr. daniel.
2. soft; clear.
her breast, the sug’red nest
of her delicious soul, that there does lie,
bathing in streams of liquid melody. crashaw.
3. pronounced without any jar or harshness.
the many liquid consonants give a pleasing sound to the
words, though they are all of one syllable. diyo, æneid.
let carolina smooth the tuneful lay,
lull with amelia's liquid name the nine,
and sweetly flow through all the royal line. pope's horace.
4. dissolved, so as not to be obtainable by law.
if a creditor should appeal to hinder the burial of his
debtor's corpse, his appeal ought not to be received, since the
business of burial requires a quick dispatch, though the debt
be entirely liquid. ayliffe's parergon.
li'quid. m. s. liquid substance; liquor.
be it thy choice, when summer heats annoy,
to fit beneath her leafy canopy,
quaffing rich liquids. philips.
to lisogidate. v. a. [from liquid..] to clear away; to lessen
debts.
liqui'dity. m. s. [from liquid.]. subtilty; thinness.
the spirits, for their liquidity, are more incapable than the
fluid medium, which is the conveyer of sounds, to persevere
in the continued repetition of vocal airs. glanville.
liquid ness. n. s. [from liquid.] quality of being liquid;
fluency.
oil of anniseeds, in a cool place, thickened into the consist-
ence of white butter, which, with the least heat, resumed its
former liquidness. boyle.
liquor. m. ssiquor, latin; liqueur, french..] .
1. any thing liquid: it is commonly used of fluids inebriating,
or impregnated with something, or made by decoction.
nor envy'd them the grape
whose heads that turbulent liquor fills with fumes. milton.
sin taken into the soul, is like a liquor poured into a vessel;
so much of it as it fills, it also seasons.
2. strong drink; in familiar language.
12 liggo r. v. a. [from the noun..] to drench or moisten.
cart wheels squeak not when they are liquored. bacon.
l1r1con fa(ncy. m. s. a flower.
lisne. n.s. a cavity ; a hollow.
in the line of a rock at kingscote in gloucestershire,
i found a bushel of petrifica cockles, each near as big as m
fisł. hale's origin of mankind.
t lisp. v. n. [slirp, saxon.] to speak with too frequent
south's sermons.
appulses of the tongue to the teeth or palate, like children:
corne, i cannot cog, and say, thou art this and that, like 3
many of these lisping hawthorn buds, that come like women
in mens apparel, and smell like bucklersbury in simpling
time. shaos eare's merry wives of iłzndsor,
, scarce had she learnt to lisp a name
of martyr, yet she thinks it shame
life should so long play with that breath,
which spent can buy so brave a death. crashaw.
they ramble not to learn the mode,
how to be drest, of how to lisp abroad. cleaves and,
appulse partial, giving some passage to breath, is made to
the upper teeth, and causes a lishing sound, the breath being
strained through the teeth. holder's elements of speech.
as yet a child, nor yet a fool to fame,
i lisp'd in numbers, for the numbers came. pope.
lisp. n.s.. [from the verb.] the act of lisping. -
i overheard her answer, with a very pretty lish, o ! stre-
phon, you are a dangerous creature. tatler.
li's per. m. s. [from lip.] one who lisps,
list. m. s. [lisie, french.]
i. a roll ; a catalogue.
he was the ablest emperor of all the list. bacoh.
some say the loadstone is poison, and therefore in the lis's
of poisons we find it in many authors. brown.
bring next the royal list of stuarts forth,
undaunted minds, that rul’d the rugged north. prior.
2. [ lice, french..] inclosed ground in which tilts are run, and
combats fought.
till now alone the mighty nations strove,
the rest, at gaze, without the lifts did stand; .
and threat'ning france, plac'd like a painted jove,
kept idle thunder in his lifted hand. dryden.
paris thy son, and sparta's king advance,
in measur’d lists to toss the weighty lance;
and who his rival shall in arms subdue,
his be the dame, and his the treasure too. pope's iliad,
3. bound ; limit.
the ocean, overpeering of his list,
eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
than young laertes in a riotous head -
o'er-bears your officers. shakespeare's hamlet.
she within lis's my ranging mind hath brought,
that now beyond myself i will not go. daviess
4. [lyrzan, saxon.] desire; willingness; choice.
alas, she has no speech
—too much;
i find it still when i have lift to sleep. shakes). othello,
nothing of passion or peevishness, or lift to contradict,
shall have any bias on my judgment. king charles.
he saw false reynard where he lay full low;
i need not swear he had no lift to crow. dryden.
5. [licium, latin; liffe, french..] a strip of cloth.
a linen stock on one leg, and a kersey boot hose on the
other, gartered with a red and blue lift. shakespeare.
instead of a list of cotton, or the like filtre, we made use of
a siphon of glass. boyle.
a lift the cobler's temples ties,
to keep the hair out of his eyes. swift.
6. a border. -
they thought it better to let them stand as a lift, or mar-
ginal border, unto the old testament. hooker.
to list. v. m. [lyrzan, saxon.] to chuse; to desire; to be
disposed ; to incline.
to fight in field, or to defend this wall,
point what you lish, i nought refuse at all. fairy queen.
unto them that add to the word of god what them lifteth,
and make god’s will submit unto their will, and break god’s
commandments for their own tradition's sake, unto them it
seemeth not good. hooker.
they imagine, that laws which permit them not to do as
they would, will endure them to speak as they lift. hooker.
let other men think of your devices as they liff, in my
judgment they be mere fansies. whitgiste.
now by my mother's son, and that's myself,
it shall be moon, or star, or what i list. shakespeare.
kings, lords of times, and of occasions, may
take their advantage when, and how, they lift. daniel.
when they lift, into the womb
that bred them they return; and howl, and gnaw
my bowels, their repast. milton's paradse loft.
to list. v. a. [from list, a roll.]
1. to enlist; to enrol or register.
for a man to give his name to christianity in those days,
was to lift himself a martyr, and to bid farewel not only to the
pleasures, but also to the hopes of this life. south.
they lift with women each degen'rate name
who dares not hazard life for future fame. dryden's 42n.
2. to retain and enrol soldiers; to enlist.
the lords would, by lifting their own servants, persuade the
gentlemen in the town to do the like. . . clarendon.
the king who raised this wall appointed a million • sol-
ters,
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i s
l i t
diers, who were lifted and paid for the defence of it against the
tartars. temple.
two hundred horse he shall command;
though few, a warlike and well-chosen band,
these in my name are lisled. dryden.
3. [from lift; enclosed ground.j. to enclose for combats.
how dares your pride presume against my laws,
as in a lifted field to fight your cause?
unask'd the royal grant. dryden's knight's tale.
4. [from lift, a shred or border.] to sew together, in such a
sort as to make a particoloured shew.
some may wonder at such an accumulation of benefits, like
a kind of embroidering or lifting of one favour upon another.
wotton's life of buckingham.
5. [contracted from lislen.] to hearken to; to listen ; to at-
tend.
then weigh, what loss your honour may sustain,
if with too credent ear you list his songs;
or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
to his unmaster'd importunity. shakesp. hamlet.
i, this sound i better know :
lift / i would i could hear mo.
l1's ted. adj. striped; particoloured in long streaks.
over his head beholds
a dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow
conspicuous, with three lifted colours gay,
betok’ning peace from god, and cov’nant new. milton.
as the show'ry arch
with lifted colours gay, or, azure, gules,
delights, and puzzles the beholder's eyes. philips.
to li's ten. v. a. to hear; to attend. obsolete.
lady, vouchsafe to liften what i say. shakespeare.
one cried, god bless us ! and, amen the other;
as they had seen me with these hangman's hands,
l:/feming their fear i could not say, amen. shakespeare.
he, that no more must say, is listened more
than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose.
shakspeare.
the wonted roar was up amidst the woods,
and fill'd the air with barbarous dissonance,
at which i ceas'd and listen’d them a while.
to li's ten. v. n. to hearken ; to give attention. .
lisien to me, and if you speak me fair,
i’ll tell you news. shakesp. taming of the shrew.
antigonus used often to go disguised, and listen at the tents
of his soldiers; and at a time heard some that spoke very ill
of him : whereupon he said, if you speak ill of me, you should
go a little farther off. bacon’s apophthogms.
liften, o isles, unto me, and hearken, ye people. isa. xlix.
milton.
when we have occasion to liften, and give a more particu-
lar attention to some sound, the tympanum is drawn to a more
than ordinary tension. holder's elements of speech.
on the green bank i sat, and listen’d long;
nortill her lay was ended could i move,
but wish'd to dwell for ever in the grove. dryden.
he shall be receiv'd with more regard,
and listen’d to, than modest truth is heard. dryden.
to this humour most of our late comedies owe their suc-
cess: the audience liffens after nothing else. addison.
li's tne r. n.s.. [from liften..] one that hearkens: a heark, ner.
they are light of belief, great liftners after news.
- howel.
listeners never hear well of themselves. l’estrange.
if she constantly attends the tea, and be a good listener, she
may make a tolerable figure, which will serve to draw in the
young chaplain. swift.
the hush word, when spoke by any brother in a lodge, was
a warning to the rest to have a care of listeners. swift.
li'stless. adj. [from lift.]
1. without inclination; without any determination to one
thing more than another.
intermperance and sensuality clog mens spirits, make them
gross, liftles, and unactive. tillotson.
if your care to wheat alone extend,
let maja with her sisters first descend,
before you trust in earth your future hope,
or else expect a liftless, lazy crop.
lazy lolling sort
of ever liftles loit’rers, that attend
no cause, no trust. - pope.
i was liftless, and desponding. gulliver’s travels.
2, careless; heedless: with of. o
the sick for air before the portal gasp,
or idle in their empty hives remain,
benumb'd with cold, and liftless of their gain. dryden.
li's t lesly. adv. [from listles;..] without thought; without
attention.
to know this perfeołly, watch him at play, and see whe-
ther he be stirring and active, or whether he lazily and list|sy
dreams away his time. locke on education.
li's tlesness, n, s, [from liftles...] inattention; want of de-
fire.
dryden's wirgil.
*
ben. johnson.
it may be the palate of the soul is indisposed by liftleshes; or
sorrow. taylor.
lit, the preterite of light; whether to light signifies to happen,
or to set on fire, or guide with light.
believe thyself, thy eyes,
that first inflam’d, and lit me to thy love,
those stars, that still must guide me to my joy. southerne.
1 lit my pipe with the paper. addison's spediator.
litany. m. s. [alzvez; litanie, french..] a form of suppli-
catory prayer.
supplications, with solemnity for the appeasing of god's
wrath, were, of the greek church, termed litanies and roga-
gations of the latin. hooker.
recollect your sins that you have done that week, and all
your life-time; and recite humbly and devoutly some peni-
tential litanics. taylor's guide to devotion.
literal. adj. [literal, french ; litera, latin.]
1. according to the primitive meaning, not figurative.
through all the writings of the antient fathers, we see that
the words, which were, do continue; the only difference is,
that whereas before they had a literal, they now have a meta-
phorical use, and are as so many notes of remembrance unto
us, that what they did signify in the latter, is accomplished in
the truth. ihooker.
a foundation, being primarily of use in archite&amp;ture, hath
no other literal notation but what belongs to it in relation to
an house, or other building, nor figurative, but what is
founded in that, and deduced from thence. hammond.
2. following the letter, or exact words.
the fittest for publick audience are such as, following a
middle course between the rigour of literal translations and the
liberty of paraphrasts, do with greater shortness and plainness
deliver the meaning. hooker.
3. consisting of letters; as, the literal notation of numbers was
known to europeans before the cyphers.
l1 ter al. m. s. primitive or literal meaning.
how dangerous it is in sensible things to use metaphorical
expressions unto the people, and what absurd conceits they
will swallow in their literals, an example we have in our pro-
festion. brown's wugar errours.
li'l er ally. adv. [from literal.]
1. according to the primitive import of words ; not figura-
tively.
that a man and his wife are one flesh, i can comprehend;
yet literally taken, it is a thing impossible. swift.
2. with close adherence to words; word by word.
endeavouring to turn his nisus and euryalus as close as i
was able, i have performed that episode too literally; that
giving more scope to mezentius and laufus, that version,
which has more of the majesty of virgil, has less of his con-
cis-ness. dryden.
so wild and ungovernable a poet cannot be translated lite-
rally; his genius is too strong to bear a chain. dryden.
liter a lit y. m. s. [from literal.] original meaning.
not attaining the true deuteroscopy and second intention of
the words, they are fain to omit their superconsequences, co-
herences, figures, or tropologies, and are not sometimes
persuaded beyond their literalities. brown.
literati. m. s. [italian.] the learned.
i shall consult some literati on the project sent me for the
discovery of the longitude. - \spediator.
l1(ter ature. m. s. [literatura, lat.] learning; skill in letters.
this kingdom hath been famous for good literature; and
if preferment attend deservers, there will not want. bacon.
when men of learning are acted by a knowledge of the
world, they give a reputation to literature, and convince the
world of its usefulness. addison's freeholder.
lith a r g e. m. s. [itharge, french ; lithargyrum, latin.]
litharge is properly lead vitrifica, either alone or with a
mixture of copper. this recrement is of two kinds, litharge
of gold, and litharge of silver. it is colle&amp;ted from the fur-
naces where silver is separated from lead, or from those where
gold and silver are purified by means of that metal. the li-
tharge sold in the shops is produced in the copper works,
where lead has been used to purify that metal, or to separate
silver from it. hill's materia medica.
i have seen some parcels of glass adhering to the test or cupel
as well as the gold or litharge. boyle.
if the lead be blown off from the filver by the bellows, it
will, in great part, be colle&amp;ted in the form of a darkish
powder ; which, because it is blown off from silver, they call
litharge of silver. boyle.
lith e. adj. ilise, saxon.] limber; flexible; pliant; easily
bent.
th' unwieldy elephant,
to make them mirth, us’d all his might, and wreath'd
his lithe proboscis, 44ilton's paradise los’.
li'then ess. n.s. [from lithe..] limberness; flexibility.
lither... adj. [from lithe..] soft ; pliant.
thou antick, death,
two talbots winged through the lither sky,
in thy despight shall 'scape mortality. shakes care.
[lyon,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i t
2. [lyten, saxon.] bad; sorry; corrupt. it is in the work
of robert of gloucester written luther.
l11 ho'o raphy. m. s.[asso; and ypapw.] the art or practice
of engraving upon stones.
lithomancy. m. s. [alsos and poliz.] predicion by stones.
as strange must be the lithomancy, or divination, from this
stone, whereby helenus the prophet foretold the destruction
of troy. brown's vulgar errours.
lithonorriotick, adj. [a32; and rose2; lithontriptique, fr.]
* any medicine proper to dissolve the stone in the kidneys or
bladder.
litho tomist. m. s. [a34; and ritowo.] a chirurgeon who
extracts the stone by opening the bladder. -
lit hotomy. m. s. [a30s and riuva.] the art or practice of
cutting for the stone.
litigant. m. s. [litigans, latin; litigant, french..] one en-
gaged in a suit of law.
the cast litigant fits not down with one cross verdict, but
recommences his suit. decay of piety.
the litigants tear one another to pieces for the benefit of
fome third interest. l'estrange's fables.
list 1gant. adj. engaged in a juridical contest.
judicial acts are those writings and matters which relate to
judicial proceedings, and are sped in open court at the instance
of one or both of the parties litigant. ayliffe's parergon.
to liticate. v. a. [litigo, latin.] to contest in law; to
debate by judicial process.
to litigate. v. n. . to manage a suit; to carry on a cause.
the appellant, after the interposition of an appeal, still liti-
gates in the same cause. ayliffo's parergon.
litigation. m. s. [litigatio, latin; from litigate.] judicial
contest; suit of law.
never one clergyman had experience of both litigations, that
hath not confessed, he had rather have three suits in west-
minster-hall, than one in the arches. clarendon.
lit1'gious. adj. [litigieux, french.]
1. inclinable to law-suits; quarrelsome; wrangling.
soldiers find wars, and lawyers find out still
litigious men, who quarrels move. donne.
his great application to the law, had not infected his tem-
er with any thing positive or litigious. addison.
2. disputible ; controvertible.
in litigious and controverted causes, the will of god is to
have them to do whatsoever the sentence of judicial and final
decision shall determine. hooker.
no fences parted fields, nor marks, nor bounds,
distinguish'd acres of litigious grounds. dryden's georg.
lit1'giously. adv. [from litigious. j wranglingly.
liti'gious ness. m. s. from litigious.] a wrangling disposi-
tion; inclination to vexatious suits. w
litter. m. s. [litiere, french.]
1. a kind of vehiculary bed; a carriage capable of containing a
bed hung between two horses.
to my litter strait;
weakness possesseth me. shakespeare's king john.
he was carried in a rich chariot litterwise, with two horses
at each end. bacon's new atlantis.
the drowsy frighted steeds,
that draw the litter of close curtain'd sleep. milton.
here modest matrons in soft litters driv'n,
in solemn pomp appear. dryden's fneid.
litters thick besiege the donor's gate,
and begging lords and teeming ladies wait
the promis'd dole. , dryden's juvenal.
2. the straw laid under animals, or on plants.
to crouch in litter of your stable planks.
take off the litter from your kernel beds.
their litter is not toss'd by sows unclean.
dryden's virgil.
shakspeare.
e velyn.
3. a brood of young.
i do here walk before thee like a sow that hath overwhelmed
all her litter but one. shakesp. henry iv.
refle&amp;t upon that numerous litter of strange, senseless opi-
nions, that crawl about the world. south.
a wolf came to a sow, and very kindly offered to take care
of her litter. l’estrange.
full many a year his hateful head had been
for tribute paid, nor since in cambria seen:
the last of all the litter 'scap'd by chance,
and from geneva first infested france.
4. a birth of animals.
fruitful as the sow that carry'd
the thirty pigs at one large litter farrow'd.
5. any number of things thrown fluttishly about.
strephoh, who found the room was void,
stole in, and took a strict survey
of all the litter as it lay. swift.
to liott er. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to bring forth: used of beasts, or of human beings in abhor-
rence or contempt.
then was this island,
save for the son that she did litter here,
vol. ii.
dryden.
dryd, juv.
a freckled whelp, hag-born, not honour'd with -
a human shape. shakespeare's tempeft.
my father named me autolycus, being littered under mer-
cury, who, as i am, was likewise a snapper up of unconsidered
trifles. shakesp. winter's tale.
the whelps of bears are, at first littering, without all form
or fashion. - hakewill on providence.
we might conceive that dogs were created blind, because
we observe they were littered so with us. brown.
2. to cover with things negligently, or sluttishly scattered
about. -
they found ,
the room with volumes litter'd round. swift.
3. to cover with straw.
he found a stall where oxen stood,
but for his ease well litter'd was the floor.
4. to supply cattle with bedding.
little. adj. [comp. less, superlat. least 3 leitels, gothick;
lyzel, saxon.]
i. small in extent, -
the coast of dan went out too little for them. josh. xix.
2. not great ; small; diminutive ; of small bulk.
he sought to see jesus, but could not for the press, because
he was little of stature. luke, xix. 3.
his son, being then very little, i considered only as wax, to
be moulded as one pleases. locke.
one wou’d have all things little; hence has try’d
turkey poults, fresh from th' egg, in batter fry'd. king.
3. of small dignity, power, or importance.
when thou wast little in thine own fight, wast thou not ,
made the head of the tribes : i sam. xv. 17.
he was a very little gentleman. clarendon.
all that is past ought to seem little to thee, because it is so
in itself. taylor’s guide to devotion.
4. not much ; not many.
he must be loosed a little season. revelations.
a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
dryden.
to sleep; so shall poverty come upon thee. proverbs.
and now in little space
the confines met. milton.
by sad experiment i know
how little weight my words with thee can find. milton.
a little learning is a dang'rous thing,
drink deep, or taste not the pierian spring. pope,
5. some ; not none: in this sense it always stands between the
article and the noun.
i leave him to reconcile these contradictions, which may
plentifully be found in him, by any one who will but read
with a little attention. locke.
little. m. s.
i. a small space.
much was in little writ; and all convey'd
with cautious care, for fear to be betray'd.
2. a finall part; a small proportion.
he that despiseth little things, shall perish by little and little.
ecclus.
the poor remnant of human seed which remained in their
mountains, peopled their country again slowly, by little and
1:ttle. bacon's new atlantis.
by freeing the precipitated matter from the rest by filtra-
tion, and grinding the white precipitate with water, the mer-
cury will little by little be gathered into drops. boyle.
i gave thee thy master’s house, and the house of israel and
judah ; and if that had been too little, i would have given
such and such things. 2 sam. xii. 8.
they have much of the poetry of mecaenas, but little of
his liberality. dryden's preface to all for love.
nor grudge i thee the much that grecians give,
nor murm'ring take the little i receive. dryden's homer.
there are many expressions, which carrying with them no
clear ideas, are like to remove but little of my ignorance. locke.
3. a slight affair.
as if 'twere little from their town to chase,
i through the seas pursued their exil'd race. dryd. an.
i view with anger and disdain,
how little gives thee joy or pain:
a print, a bronze, a flow'r, a root. prior.
4. not much.
these they are fitted for, and little else.
little. adv. '
1. in a small degree.
the received definition of names should be changed as little
as posfible. watts's logick.
2. in a small quantity.
the poor sleep little.
3. in some degree, but not great.
where there is too great a thinness in the fluids, subacid
substances are proper, though they are a little astringent.
arbuthnot on aliments:
dryden.
cheyne,
otway.
4. not much.
the tongue of the just is as choice silver; the heart of the
wicked is little worth. prov, x. 20.
15 o finding
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i v
l i v
- - - - * . ho
finding him little studio” she c
with ... qualities of youth ; as,
se rather to endue him
dancing and fenging.
wotton.
- , this parallel is little better.
that poem was infamously bad; this p dryden's dufresnoy.
otherwise little fond of obscure terms,
- fall those which they
ery liberal of a swift.
several clergymen,
et in their sermons west v
find in ecclesiastical writos; -
lttieness. n.s.. [from little.]
1. smalness of bulk: -
all trying, by a love of littleness,
to make abridgments, and 9 draw to less ; d
even that nothing which at first we were: d ...
we may suppose a great may degrees of littlenos an o t-
ness in these earthy particles, so as many of them o, o2t
in the air. burnet’s ‘l heary.
2. meanness; want of grandeur. - -
2 the english and french, in verse, are forced to raise their
language with metaphors, by the pompousness of the .
phrase, to wear off any jiulios; that appears in the poo". ar
parts. addison on italy.
3. want of dignity. - d t
the angelick grandeur, by being concealed, oes o,
awaken our poverty, nor mortify our littlenes, so much, as i
it was always displayed. - collier of envy.
lorroral. j. a. slitioris, latin.] belongs".” the shore.
i.orgoy. n.f. [x1apyiz; liturgie, french-l form of prayers ;
formulary of publick devotions. - -
we are not admit any such form of liturgy, *. either
appointeth no scripture at all, or very little to be read in the
church. hooker.
the blessedest of mortal wights began to be importuned, so
that a great part of divine liturgy was addressed solely to her.
howel.
it is the greatest solemnity of prayer, the most powerful
liturgy and means of impetration in this world. taylor.
t. live. v. n. [lypian, lyrizan, saxon.]
1. to be in a state of animation; to be not dead.
is’t night's predominance, or the day's shame,
that darkness does the face of earth intomb,
when living day should kiss it? shakespeare's macbeth.
to save the living, and revenge the dead,
against one warrior's arms all troy they led. dryden.
2. to pass life in any certain manner with regard to habits ;
good or ill, happiness or misery.
o death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man
that liveth at rest' ecclus xli. i.
dr. parker, in his sermon before them, touched them so
near for their living, that they went near to touch him for his
life. - hayward.
the condition required of us is a conjuneture of all gospel
graces rooted in the heart, though mixed with much weak-
ness, and perhaps with many fins, so they be not wilfully lived
and died in. hammond.
a late prelate, of a remarkable zeal for the church, were
religions to be tried by lives, would have lived down the pope,
and the whole consistory. atterbury.
if we ad by several broken views, we shall live and die in
misery. addison's speciator.
if we are firmly resolved to live up to the dictates of reason,
without any regard to wealth and reputation, we may go
through life with steadiness and pleasure. addison.
3. to continue in life.
our high-plac'd macbeth
shall live the lease of nature, and pay his breath
to time and mortal custom. shakespeare.
* - see the minutes how they run;
how many makes the hour full complete,
how many hours bring about the day,
how many days will finish up the year,
how many years a mortal man may live. shakoff care.
the way to live long must be, to use our bodies so as is
most agreeable to the rules of temperance.
- - - ray on the creation.
4. to live emphatically; to be in a state of happiness.
what greater curse could envious fortune give,
than just to die when i began to live?
. now three and thirty rolling years are fled
since i began, nor yet begin to live.
live while you live, the epicure would say,
and snatch the pleasures of the present day;
aïve while you live, the sacred preacher crics,
and give to god each moment as it flies:
lord, in my views let both united be,
i live to pleasure when i live to thee.
5. to: isempt from death, temporal or spiritual.
o statutes and judgments, if a man do, he shall live in
... ." lev. xviii. k.
li he died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we hi
ive together with him. 1 thes, v
6. to remain undestroyed. • w. i o.
it was a miraculous providence that could make a vessel, so
dryden.
brown.
dodderidge.
o
2. vivacity; sprightliness.
ill manned, live upon so : that kept it from being dashed
against the hills, or overwhelmed in the deeps. . burnet.
mark how the shifting winds from west arise,
and what collected night involves the skies!
nor can our shaken vessels live at sea, .
much less against the tempest force their way. dryden.
7. to continue ; not to be lost. - -
mens evil manners live in brass, their virtues
we write in water. shakesp. henry viii.
§onds which address the ear are lost and die
in one short hour; but that which strikes the eye
lives long upon the mind; the faithful sight
engraves the knowledge with a beam of light.
the tomb with manly arms and trophies grace.
there high in air memorial of my name
fix the smooth oar, and bid me live to fame. pope,
8. to converse ; to cohabit: followed by with.
the shepherd swains shall dance and sing,
for they delight each may morning.
if these delights thy mind may movo,
then live with me, and be my love.
9. to feed. -
those animals that live upon other animals have their flesh
more alkalescent than those that * upon vegetables. arbuth.
16. to maintain one's self; to bo supported. -
a most notorious thief; lived all his life-time of spoils and
robberies. spenser.
they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the temple. i cor. ix. 13.
his goods were all seized upon, and a small portion thereof
appointed for his poor wife to live upon. knolles.
the number of soldiers can never be great in proportion to
that of people, no more than of those that are idle in a coun-
try, to that of those who live by labour. temple.
he had been most of his time in good service, and had
something to live on now he was old. - temple.
11. to be in a state of motion or vegetation.
in a spacious cave of living stone,
the tyrant aeolus, from his airy throne,
with pow'r imperial curbs the struggling winds. dryden.
cool groves and living lakes
jwatts.
sagır.
give after toilsome days a soft repose at night. dryden.
12. to be unextinguished.
pure oil and incense on the fire they throw:
these gifts the greedy flames to dust devour,
then on the living coals red wine they pour. dryden.
live. adj. [from alive.]
1. quick; not dead.
if one man's ox hurt another that he die, they shall sell the
live ox, and divide the money. exod.
2. active; not extinguished.
a louder found was produced by the impetuous eruptions
of the halituous flames of the saltpetre upon casting of a live
coal upon it. boyle.
li'v el ess. adv. [from live.]. wanting life; rather, lifelos.
description cannot suit itself in words,
to demonstrate the life of such a battle,
in life so lively; as it shews itself. shakesp. henry v:
li've lihood. n. s. [it appears to me corrupted from live.ode.]
support of life; maintenance ; means of living.
ah! luckless babe born under cruel flir,
and in dead parents baleful ashes bred ;
full little weenest thou what sorrows are,
left thee for portion of thy livelihood / fairy queen.
that rebellion drove the lady from thence, to find a `
hood out of her own estate. carendon.
he brings disgrace upon his character, to submit to the
picking up of a livelihood in that strolling way of canting and
begging. . . l'estrange.
it is their profession and livelihood to get their living by
practices, for which they deserve to forfeit their lives. south.
they have been as often banished out of most other places;
which must very much disperse a people, and oblige them t;
seek a livelihood where they can find it. aliso spectator.
trade employs multitudes of hands, and furnishes the poorest
of our fellow-subjects with the opportunities of gaining an
honest livelihood: the skilful or industrious find their account
in it. - so...”. i'..
li'v eliness. n. s. [from lively.] addison's freeholder.
i. appearance of life.
that liveliness which the freedom of the pencil makes ap-
po, may seem the living hand of nature. dryden', dufros.
xtravagant young fellows, that have livelines; - -
come sometimes to be set right, and so ... "...'.
o but tame and low spirits very seldom attain to any
ining. lock t ion.
li velodf, nos. [live and lode, from lead; the o too.
life.] maintenance; support; livelihood. -&gt;
she gave like blesfing to each creature
as well of worldly livide as of life," "
that there might be no difference nor strife. hubberd.
l1 v elong.
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l i v
l i v.
o:
olo,
; :
or,
ot;
13,
to ji
o,
il ty
jun-
opt,
fied
"…,
}*.
jo
io,
the
ili’velong: adj. [live and long.]
1, tedious ; long in passing.
many a time, and oft,
have you climb'd up to walls and battlements,
your infants in your arms; and there have sate
the livelong day, with patient expectation
to see great pompey pass. shakesp. julius caesar.
the obscur'd bird clamour'd the livelong night. shakesp.
young and old come forth to play,
on a sun-shine holiday,
till the livelong day-light fail. milton,
seek for pleasure to destroy
the sorrows of this livel»ng night. prior.
how could she sit the livelong day,
yet never ask us once to play swift.
2. lasting; durable. not used.
thou, in our wonder and astonishment,
hast built thyself a livel»ng monument. milton.
li'vely. adj. [live and like.]
1. brisk; vigorous ; vivacious.
but wherefore comes old manoa in such haste,
with youthful steps much livelier than ere while
he seems ; supposing here to find his son, -
or of him bringing to us some glad news 2 milton's ag.
2. gay ; airy.
dulness delighted, ey'd the lively dunce,
rememb'ring she herself was pertness once. pope.
form'd by thy converse, happily to steer
from grave to gay, from lively to severe. pope.
3. representing life.
since a true knowledge of nature gives us pleasure, a lively
imitation of it in poetry or painting must produce a much
greater. dryden's dufresnoy.
4. strong; energetick.
his faith must be not only living, but lively too; it must
be brightened and stirred up by a particular exercise of those
virtues specifically requisite to a due performance of this .
south.
the colours of the prism are manifestly more full, intense
and lively, than those of natural bodies. newton's opticks.
imprint upon their minds, by proper arguments and reflec-
tions, a lively persuasion of the certainty of a future state. atter.
li'v elily.
l1 v ely. {ado.
1. briskly; vigorously. o
they brought their men to the slough, who discharging
lively almost close to the face of the enemy, did much amaze
them. hayward.
2. with strong resemblance of life. -
that part of poetry must needs be best, which describes
most lively our actions and passions, our virtues and our vices.
dryden's prof. to his state of innocence.
li'v er. m. s. [from live.]
i. one who lives.
be thy affections undisturb’d and clear,
guided to what may great or good appear,
and try if life be worth the liver's care. prior.
2. one who lives in any particular manner with respest to vir-
tue or vice, happiness or misery.
the end of his descent was to gather a church of holy
christian livers over the whole world. hammond's fund.
if any loose liver have any goods of his own, the sheriff is
to seize thereupon. spensor on ireland.
here are the wants of children, of distracted persons, of
sturdy wandering beggars and loose disorderly livers; at one
view represented. - alterbury,
3. [from pere, saxon.] one of the entrails.
with mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come :
and let my liver rather heat with wine,
than my heart cool with mortifying groans. shakespeare.
reason and respect
make livers pale, and luftihood dejected.
li've rcolour, adj. [liver and colour.] dark red.
the uppermost stratum is of gravel; then clay of various
colours, purple, blue, red, livercolour. //oodward.
li'v erg row n. adj. [liver and grown.] having a great liver.
i enquired what other casualties was most like the rickets,
and found that livergrown was nearest. graunt.
li've r-vort. n.s. [liver and wort ; lichen..] a plant.
that sort of liverwort which is used to cure the bite of
mad dogs, grows on commons, and open heaths, where the
grass is short, on declivities, and on the sides of pits. this
jpreads on the surface of the ground, and, when in perfeotion,
is of an ash colour; but, as it grows old, it alters, and be-
comes of a dark colour. miller,
live ry. m. s. [from livrer, french.]
1. the aet of giving or taking possession.
you do wrongfully seize hereford's right,
call in his letters patents that he hath
by his attorneys general to sue
his livery, and deny his offered homage.
2. release from wardship.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
- had the two houses first sued out their livery, and once effec=
tually redeemed themselves from the wardship of the tumults,
i should then suspect my own judgment. k. charles.
3. the writ by which possession is obtained.
4. the state of being kept at a certain rate.
what livery is, we by common use in england know well
enough, namely, that it is an allowance of horse meat; as
they commonly use the word stabling, as to keep horses at
divery ; the which word, i guess, is derived of livering or
delivering forth their nightly food; so in great houses, the
livery is said to be served up for all night, that is, their even-
ing allowance for drink; and livery is also called the upper
weed which a serving man wears; so called, i suppose, for
that it was delivered and taken from him at pleasure: so it
is apparent, that, by the word livery, is there meant horse
meat, like as by the coigny is understood man's meat. some
say it is derived of coin, for that they used in their coignies
not only to take meat but money; but i rather think it is de-
rived of the irish, the which is a common use amonst landlords
of the irish to have a common spending upon their tenants,
who being commonly but tenants at will, they used to take
of them what victuals they list; for of victuals they were wont
to make a small reckoning. spensor on ireland.
5. the cloaths given to servants.
my mind for weeds your virtue’s livery wears. sidney.
perhaps they are by so much the more loth to forsake this
argument, for that it hath, though nothing else, yet the name
of scripture, to give it some kind of countenance more than
the pretext of livery coats affordeth. h.cker.
i think, it is our way,
if we will keep in favour with the king,
to be her men, and wear her livery. shakesp. rich. iii.
yet do our hearts wear timon's livery,
that see i by our faces. shakesp. timon of athens.
ev'ry lady cloath’d in white,
and crown'd with oak and laurel ev'ry knight,
are servants to the leaf, by liveries known
of innocence. dryden’s flower and leaf.
on others int’rest her gay liv'ry flings,
int’rest that waves on party-colour'd wings;
turn'd to the sun she casts a thousand dyes, -
and as she turns the colours fall or rise. dunciad.
if your dinner miscarries, you were teized by the footmen
coming into the kitchen; and to prove it true, throw a ladle-
ful of broth on one or two of their liveries. * swift.
6. a particular dress; a garb worn as a token or consequence of
any thing.
of fair urania, fairer than a green,
proudly bedeck'd in april's livery. sidney.
mistake me not for my complexion
the shadow’d livery of the burning sun,
to whom i am a neighbour, and near bred. shakos.
at once came forth whatever creeps the ground, .
inscet, or worm: those wav'd their limber fans,
for wings, and smallest lineaments exact,
in all the liveries deck'd of summer’s pride,
with spots of gold and purple, azure, green. milot.
now came still evening on, and twilight grey
had in her sober livery all things clad. a/ilt. par. los!,
li'v e r y man. n. s. [livery and man.]
1. one who wears a livery; a servant of an inserior kind.
the witnesses made oath, that they had heard some of the
liverymen frcquently railing at their mistress. arluthnot.
2. [in london.j a frceman of some standing in a company.
l1 v es. m. s. [the plural of life.] -
so short is life, that every peasant strives,
in a farm house or field, to have three lives. dzmos.
livid. adj. [lividus, latin ; livide, french..] discoloured,
as with a blow; black and blue.
it was a pestilent scwer, not seated in the veins or humours,
for that there followed no carbuncles, no purple or livid spots,
the mass of the blood not being tainted. baczn.
upon my livid lips bestow a kiss :
o envy not the dead, they feel not bliss' dryden.
they beat their breasts with many a bruising blow,
till they turn'd livid, and corrupt the snow. dryden.
livio dity. m. s. [lividite, french ; from livid.] discoloura-
tion, as by a blow.
the signs of a tendency to such a state, are darkness or
lividity of the countenance. arbuthnof on aliment.
li'v ing. participial adj.
1. vigorous; active: as, a living faith.
2. being in motion; having some natural energy, or principle
of action: as, the living green, the living springs.
li'v in g. m. s. [from live. } -
1. support; maintenance; fortune on which one lives. -
the arcadians fought as in unknown place, having no suc-
cour but in their hands; the helots, as in their own place,
*
fighting for their livings, wives, and children. sidney.
all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want
did cast in all that she had, even all her living. mark,
2. power of continuing life. '
3 there<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o a
l o a
there is no living without trusting some body or sher, in
some cases. i’e/irange.
. livelihood. - - -
3 for ourselves we may a living make. hubberd’s tale.
then may i set the world on wheels, when she can spin for
her living. - * ~ * shakespeare.
isaac and his wife, now dig for your life,
or shortly you’ll dig for your living. denham.
actors must represent such things as they are capable to per-
form, and by which both they and the scribbler may get their
living. - dryden's dufresnoy.
4. benefice of a clergyman. -
some of our ministers having the livings of the country of—
fered unto them, without pains, will, neither for any love of
god, nor for all the good they may do, by winning souls to
god, be drawn forth from their warm nests. spenser.
the parson of the parish preaching against adultery, mrs.
bull told her husband, that they would join to have him turned
out of his living for using personal reflections. arbuthnot.
living ly. adv, [from living.] in the living state.
in vain do they scruple to approach the dead, who livingly
are cadaverous, or fear any outward pollution, whose temper
pollutes themselves. brown's wulgar errours.
livre. m. s. [french.] the sum by which the french reckon
their money, equal nearly to our shilling,
lix1'v1a. adj. [from lixivium, latin.]
i. impregnated with salts like a lixivium.
the symptoms of the excretion of the bile vitiated, were a
yellowish colour of the skin, and a lixivial urine. arbuthnot.
2. obtained by lixivium.
helmont conjectured, that lixivial salts do not pre-exist in
their alcalizate form. boyle.
lixis viat e. adj. [lixiviews, french ; from lixivium.] making
a lixivium.
in these the salt and lixiviated serosity, with some portion of
choler, is divided between the guts and the bladder. brown.
lixiviate salts, to which pot-ashes belong, by piercing the
bodies of vegetables, dispose them to part readily with their
tincture. boyle.
l/x1/ium. m. s. [latin.] lye : water impregnated with
alkaline salt, produced from the ashes of vegetables; a liquor
which has the power of extraction.
i made a lixivium of fair water and salt of wormwood, and
having frozen it with snow and salt, i could not discern any
thing more like to wormwood than to several other plants.
boyle.
l1(zard. m. s. [lisorde, french; lacertus, latin.] an animal
resembling a serpent, with legs added to it.
there are several sorts of lizards; some in arabia of a cubit
long. in america they eat lizards ; it is very probable like-
wise that they were eaten in arabia and judaea, since moses
ranks them among the unclean creatures. calmet.
thou'rt like a foul mis-shapen stigmatick,
mark’d by the destinies to be avoided,
as venomous toads, or lizards dreadful stings.
adder's fork, and blind worms sting,
lizard's leg, and owlet's wing. shakespeare's macbeth.
liz ard ital. m. s. a plant. -
liz a r d ston e. n.s. [sizard and some.] a kind of stone.
l.l.d. [legum docior.] a doctor of the canon and civil laws.
lo, interjec7. [la, saxon.] look; see ; behold. it is a word
used to recall the attention generally to some object of fight;
sometimes to something heard, but not properly ; often to
formething to be understood.
lo / within a ken our army lies.
now must the world point at poor catherine,
and say, lo / there is mad petruchio's wife.
lo / i have a weapon,
a better never did itself sustain,
upon a soldier's thigh.
thou did'st utter,
i am yours for ever.
—why lo you now, i’ve spoke to the purpose twice. shak.
for lo! he sung the world's stupenduous birth. roscom.
lo / heav'n and earth combine
to blast our bold design.
loach. n.s. [loche, french.]
the loach is a most dainty fish ; he breeds and feeds in
little and clear swift brooks or rills, and lives there upon the
gravel, and in the sharpest streams: he grows not to be above
a finger long, and no thicker than is suitable to that length:
he is of the shape of an eel, and has a beard of wattels like
a barbel; he has two fins at his sides, four at his belly, and
one at his tail, dappled with many black or brown spots: his
mouth, barbel-like, under his nose. this fish is usually full
of eggs or spawn, and is by gesner, and other physicians,
commended for great nourishment, and to be very grateful
both to the palate and stomach of sick persons, and is to be
fished for with a small worm, at the bottom, for he seldom
rises above the gravel. jwalton's angler.
load. m. s. [plabe, saxon.]
1. a burthen ; a freight; lading, 2
shakesp.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
shakespeare's othello.
dryden's albion.
fair plant with fruit surcharg’d,
deigns none to ease thy lead, and taste thy sweet? milton.
then on his back he laid the precious lead,
and sought his wonted shelter. dryden's nun's tale.
let india boast her groves, nor envy we
the weeping amber, and the balmy tree;
while by our oaks the precious load, are born,
and realms commanded which these trees adorn. pope.
2. weight; pressure; encumbrance.
jove lighten’d of its load
th’ enormous mass, the labour of a god. pope.
3. weight, or violence of blows.
like lion mov’d they laid on load,
and made a cruel fight.
far heavier lead thyself expect to feel
from my prevailing arm.
and mnestheus laid hard load upon his helm.
4. * thing that depresses.
ow a man can have a quiet and cheerful mind under a
great burden and load of guilt, i know not, unless he be very
ignorant. aay on creation.
5. as much drink as one can bear.
there are those that can never sleep without their lead, nor
*"joy one easy thought, till they have laid all their cares to rest
with a bottle. l'e/irange.
the thund'ring god,
ev’n he withdrew to rest, and had his load. dryden.
7o loap. v. a. preterite, loaded; par. loaden or laden. [plaban,
saxon.]
1. to burden ; to freight.
at last, laden with honour's spoils,
returns the good andronicus to rome. shakespeare.
your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a burden to the
beast. isa. xlvi. 1.
2. to encumber; to embarrass.
he that makes no reflections on what he reads, only loads his
mind with a rhapsody of tales, fit in winter nights for the en-
tertainment of others. 12.ee.
3. to charge a gun.
a mariner having discharged his gun, and ioading it sud-
denly again, the powder took fire. // seman.
4. to make heavy by something appended or annexed.
thy dreadful vow, loaden with death, still sounds
in my stunn’d ears. addison's cato.
load. m. s. [more properly lode, as it was anciently written from
loan, saxon, to lead..] the leading vein in a mine.
the tin lay couched at first in certain strakes amongst the
rocks, like the veins in a man's body, from the depth whereof
the main lead spreadeth out his branches, until they approach
the open air. carew's survey of cornwall.
their manner of working in the lead mines, is to follow the
load as it lieth. carew's survey of cornwall.
los ader. m. s. [from load.] he who loads.
towas. n.j. [lode and man.] he who leads the way; a
pilot.
lo'adst ar. m. s. [more properly as it is in maundeville, lode-
star, from la san, to lead..] the poleitar; the cynosure; the
leading or guiding star.
she was the load/lar of my life; she the blessing of mine
eyes; she the overthrow of my desires, and yet the recom-
pence of my overthrow. sidney.
my helice, the load/far of my life. spenser.
o happy fairl
your eyes are load?ars, and your tongue sweet air
more tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear
when wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. shak.
that clear majesty
which standeth fix’d, yet spreads her heavenly worth,
lodestone to hearts, and lode/lar to all eyes. davier.
lo adstone. _n. s. [properly lody? ne or lading/lone. see
loadstar.] the magnet; the stone on which is: mariners
compass needle is touched to give it a direction north and south.
the load/lone is a peculiar and rich ore of iron, found in
large masses, of a deep iron-grey where fresh broken, and
often tinged with a brownish or reddish colour: it is very
heavy, and considerably hard, and its great charasier is that
of affecting iron. this ore of iron is found in england
and in most other places where there are mines of that no.
hill's materia medica.
the use of the loadstone was kept as secret as any of the
other mysteries of the art. swift.
loa f. n.s.. [from plap or lap, saxon.] ~
1. a mass of bread as it is formed by the baker: a loafis thicker
than a cake.
chevy chase.
milton.
dryden.
-
easy it is
of a cut loaf to steal a shive we know. shakspeare.
the bread corn in the town sufficed not for six day.
hereupon the soldiers entered into proportion; and, to give
example, the lord clinton limited himself to a 1of a-day.
hayward.
with equal force you may break a kaf of bread intomo.
and less parts than a lump of lead of the same bigness. digby.
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

2. any
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- l o b
2. any thick mass into which a body is wrought.
your wine becomes so limpid, that you may bottle it with
to, a piece of loaf sugar in each bottle. mortimer.
. loam. m. s. [lim, laam, saxon; limus, latin; from aswyn, a
*4, fen, junius.] fat, unctuous, tenacious, earth; marl.
the purest treasure
is spotless reputation ; that away,
o men are but gilded loam or painted clay. shakespeare.
o, alexander returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth we
make loam ; and why of that loam might they not stop a beer
barrel; shakespeare's hamlet.
#, to lo am. v. a. [from the noun..] to smear with loam, marl,
or clay; to clay.
- the joist ends, and girders which be in the walls, must be
o, loamed all over, to preserve them from the corroding of the
mortar. moxon's mechanical exercises.
* lo'amy. adj. [from loam.] marly.
o, the mellow earth is the best, between the two extremes of
clay and sand, if it be not loamy and binding. bacon.
! - auricula seedlings best like a loamy sand, or light moist
th earth; yet rich and shaded. evelyn's kalendar.
o, - loan. m. s. [plan, saxon.] anything lent; any thing given to
another, on condition of return or repayment.
10: the better such ancient revenues shall be paid, the less need
th her majesty ask subsidies, fifteens, and loans. bacon.
§t. you're on the fret,
because, in so debauch'd and vile an age,
o, thy friend and old acquaintance dares disown
ill, the gold you lent him, and for swear the loan. dryden.
loath. adj. [la s, saxon.] unwilling; disliking; not ready;
not inclined.
these fresh and delightful brooks, how slowly they slide
away, as loh to leave the company of so many things united in
perfection | sidney.
i. with lofty eyes, half lith to look so low, -
she thanked them in her disdainful wise,
ne other grace vouchiased them to show
o of princess worthy. fairy queen.
o when he heard her answers moth, he knew
- some secret sorrow did her heart distrain. fairy queen.
d- to speak so indirectly, i am frth ;
or. i’d say the truth; but to accuse him so, -
*- that is your part. shosh. meas for masure.
ilong doth she stay, as 'oh to leave the land,
s from whose soft side she first did isiue make,
4. she tastes all places, turns to ev'ry hand,
sil her flow'ry banks unwilling to forsake. davies,
then wilt thou not be lath
he to leave this paradise, but shalt possess
of a paradise within thee, happier far ! milton,
to pardon willing, and to punish lath ;
** you strike with one hand, but you heal with both :
: lifting up all that prostrate lie, you grieve
you cannot make the dead again to live. i?’aller.
when æneas is forced to kill lausus, the poet shews him.
1 compassionate, and is lith to destroy such a master-piece of
nature. dryden's dufresnoy.
as some faint pilgrim standing on the shore, o
: first views the torrent he would venture o'er ;
and then his inn upon the farther ground,
: loth to wade through, and lother to go round:
- then dipping in his staff does trial make
how deep it is ; and, sighing, pulls it back.
i know you shy to be oblig'd;
and flii) more leath to be oblig'd by me.
to lo athe. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to hate; to look on with abhorrence.
parthenia had learned both liking and misliking, loving and
dryden.
southern.
loathing. sidney,
they with their filthiness
polluted this same gentle soil long time,
. . that their own mother oath’d their beastliness. spenser.
how am i caught with an unwary oath,
not to reveal the secret which i leath! j/aller.
for thee the lion leath; the taste of blood,
and roaring hunts his female through the wood. dryden.
now his exalted spirit leaths
incumbrances of food and cloaths. swift.
2. to consider with the disgust of satiety.
- izathing the honey'd cakes, i long for bread. cowley.
our appetite is extinguished with the satisfaction, and is
rogers.
succeeded by loathin" and satiety.
3. to see food with dislike.
izaling is a symptom known to attend disorders of the sto-
mach; the core must have regard to the cause. $2.5my.
to loathf. v. n.
1. to create disgust; to cause abhorrence. obsolete.
where i was wont to seek the honey bee,
the grisly toadstool grown there might i see, -
and loothing paddocks lording on the same. sponsor.
2. to feel abhorrence or disgust.
vol. ii.
the fish in the river shall die, and the river slink; and the
egyptians shall loath to drink of the water. exodus.
why do i stay within this hared place,
where every object shocks my long eyes
loather. m. s. [from leath.) one that loaths.
los athful. adj. loath and fall.]
1. abhorring; hating.
which he did with leathsil eyes behold,
he would no more endure.
2. abhorred ; hated.
above the reach of loathful sinful luff,
whose base effect, through cowardly distrust
of his weak wings, dare not to heaven flie.
lo’athingly. adv. [from loath.]
los athly. adj. [from loath.]
hatred.
an huge great dragon, horrible in sight,
bred in the loathly lakes of tartary,
with murd’rous ravin.
the people fear me; for they do observe
unfather'd heirs, and leathly births of nature.
sour-ey'd disdain, and discord shall bestow
the union of your bed with weeds so loothly,
that you shall hate it. shałogaro's 7-mp.os.
lo’athly. adv. [from loath..] unwillingly; without liking
or inclination. -
the upper streams make such haste to have their part of
embracing, that the nether, though lothly, must needs give
place unto them.
lathy opposite i stood
to his unnat' ral purpose. shakesp. king lear.
this shews that you from nature lethy stray,
rowe.
isabbard's tale,
soonsor.
in a fastidious manner.
hateful; abhorred; exciting
fairy qyzen.
shosh.
sidney.
that suffer not an artificial day. donne.
lo'at hness. n.s.. [from loath.] unwillingness.
the fair soul herself
weigh’d between lithness and obedience,
which end the beam should bow. shake?. tomog/?.
should we be taking leave, -
as long a term as yet we have to live,
the lethnos, to depart would grow. sakoff. cymbeline.
after they had sat about the fire, there grew a general
silence and lethness to speak amongst them; and immediately
one of the weakest fell down in a swoon. bacon.
lo'at hso me. adj. [from leath.]
1. abhorred ; detestable.
the fresh young fly
did much disdain to subject his desire
to leathsome sloth, or hours in ease to waste. spensor.
while they pervert pure nature's healthful rules
to leathsome sickness. milton's paradis, loft.
if we consider man in such a loaths me and provoking con-
dition, was it not love enough that he was permitted to enjoy
a being 2 - south.
2. causing satiety or fastidiousness.
the sweetest honey
is loathsome in its own deliciousness,
and in the taste confounds the appetite. shakes care.
lo’ath so meness. m. s. [from loathsome.] quality of raising
hatred, disgust or abhorrence.
the catacombs must have been full of slench and loathsome-
nes, if the dead bodies that lay in them were left to rot in
open nitches. - addison.
loav es, plural of loaf.
democritus, when he lay a dying, caused loaves of new
bread to be opened, poured a little wine into them; and so
kept himself alive with the odour till a feast was past. bacon.
lob. m. s. -
1. anyone heavy, clumsy, or sluggish.
farewel, thou lob of spirits, i'll be gone,
our queen and all her elves come here anon. shałon.
2. lob's pound; a prison. probably a prison for idlers, or
sturdy beggars. -- … *
crowdero, whom in irons bound,
thou basely threw'st into lib’s pound.
3. a big worm. -
for the trout the dew worm, which some also call the lob
worm, and the brandling are the chief. jo alton's arger.
to lop. v. a. to let fall in a slovenly or lazy manner. -
the horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks,
and their poor jades -
lab down their heads, dropping the hide and hips.
shakespeare.
loopy. m. s. [laube, german.] an opening before a room.
his lobbies fill with 'tendance,
rain sacrificial whisprings in his ear,
make sacred even his stirrup. shakesh. tim, of æons.
before the duke's rising from the table, he stood expecting
till he should pass through a kind of looly between that room
hudibras.
and the next, where were divers attending him. j/ction.
try your back stairs, and let the latty wait, -
a stratagem in war is no deceit. king.
15 p. loek.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o c
l o c
-
| -
*
:
o
-
!
s
* .
lobe. n.s. [lobe, french; aoto.j. a division ; a distinet part:
used commonly for a part of the lungs.
nor could the lobes of his rank liver swell
to that prodigious mass, for their eternal meal. drydon.
air bladders form lobuli, which hang upon the bronchia
like bunches of grapes; these lobuli constitute the lobes, and
the lobes the lungs. arbuthnot on aliments.
from whence the quick reciprocating breath,
the lobe adhesive, and the sweat of death. sewel.
lobster. n.s. [lobrzen, saxon.] a crustaceous fish.
those that cast their shell, are the lobster, the crab, and
craw-fish. bacon's natural history.
it happeneth often that a lobster hath the great claw of one
side longer than the other. brown's vulgar errours.
lo’cal. adj. [local, french; locus, latin.]
1. having the properties of place.
by ascending, after that the sharpness of death was over-
come, he took the very local possession of glory, and that to
the use of all that are his, even as himself before had wit-
nessed, i go to prepare a place for you. hooker.
a higher flight the vent'rous goddess tries,
leaving material world, and local skies. prior.
2. relating to place.
the circumstance of local nearness in them unto us, might
haply enforce in us a duty of greater separation from them
than from those other. hooker.
where there is only a local circumstance of worship, the
same thing would be worshipped, supposing that circumstance
changed. stillingfiest.
3. being in a particular place.
dream not of their fight,
as of a duel, or the local wounds
of head, or heel. milton's paradis, loft.
how is the change of being sometimes here, sometimes
there, made by local motion in vacuum, without a change in
the body moved digby on bodies.
loca’lity. n.s.. [from local.] existence in place ; relation of
place, or distance.
that the soul and angels are devoid of . and dimen-
sion, and that they have nothing to do with grosser locality, is
generally opinioned. glanville.
locally. adj. [from local.] with respect to place.
whether things, in their natures so divers as body and spi-
rit, which almost in nothing communicate, are not essentially
divided, though not locally distant, i leave to the readers.
- glanville.
location. n. s. [locatio, latin.] situation with respect to
place; act of placing; state of being placed.
to say that the world is somewhere, means no more than
that it does exist; this, though a phrase borrowed from place,
signifying only its existence, not location. locke.
loch. n. s. a lake. scottish.
a lake or lo, h, that has no fresh water running into it, will
turn into a stinking puddle. cheyne's phil. principles.
lock. m. s. sloc, saxon, in both senses.]
1. an instrument composed of springs and bolts, used to fasten
doors or chests.
no gate so strong, no lock so firm and fast,
but with that piercing noise flew open quit or brast. f. qu.
we have locks to safeguard necessaries,
and pretty traps to catch the petty thieves. shakespeare.
as there are locks for several purposes, so are there several
inventions in locks, in contriving their wards or guards. moxon.
2. the part of the gun by which fire is struck.
a gun carries powder and bullets for seven charges and dis-
charges: under the breech of the barrel is one box for the
powder; a little before the lock, another for the bullets; be-
hind the cock a charger, which carries the powder to the fur-
ther end of the lock. grew's 4/usaeum.
3. a hug; a grapple. -
they must be practised in all the locks and gripes of wrest-
ling, as need may often be in fight to tugg or grapple, and to
close. milton on education.
4. any inclosure.
sergesthus, eager with his beak to press
betwixt the rival gally and the rock,
shuts up th' unwieldy centaur in the lock. dryden's aeneid.
5. a quantity of hair or wool hanging together.
well might he perceive the hanging of her hair in locks,
some curled, and some forgotten. sidney.
a goodly cypress, who bowing her fair head over the water,
it seemeth she looked into it, and dressed her green locks by
that running river. sidney.
his grizly locks, long growen and unbound,
disordered hung about his shoulders round. spensor.
the bottom was set against a lock of wool, and the sound
was quite deaded. bacon.
they nourish only a lock of hair on the crown of their
heads. - sandys's travels.
a lock of hair will draw more than a cable rope. grew.
behold the locks that are grown white
beneath a helmet in your father's battles. addison's cato.
two locks that graceful hung behind
in equal curls, and well-conspir'd, to deck
with shining ringlets her smooth iv'ry neck. pope.
6. a tuft.
i suppose this letter will find thee picking of difies, or
smelling to a lock of hay. adaon's spectator.
to lock. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to shut or fasten with locks.
the garden, seated on the level floor,
she left behind, and locking ev'ry door,
thought all secure. dryden.
2. to shut up or confine, as with locks.
i am lockt in one of them;
if you do love me, you will find me out. shakespeare.
we do lock
our former sample in our strong-barr'd gates. shakoff.
then seek to know those things which make us bles,
and having found them, lock them in thy breast. denham.
the frighted dame
the log in secret lock'd. dryden's ovid.
if the door to a council be kept by armed men, and all such
whose opinions are not liked kept out, the freedom of those
within are infringed, and all their acts as void as if they were
locked in. dryden's eneid.
one conduces to the poet's completing of his work; the
other slackens his pace, and locks him up like a knight-errant
in an enchanted castle. dryden's dedicat. to the æn.
the father of the gods
confin'd their fury to those dark abodes,
and lock'd'em safe within, oppress'd with mountain loads.
o dryden's ancid.
if one third of the money in trade were locked up, must not
the landholders receive one third less : locor.
always lack up a cat in a closet where you keep your china
plates, for fear the mice may steal in and break them. swift-
your wine lock'd up,
plain milk will do the feat.
3. to . fast.
eath blasts his bloom, and locks his frozen eyes. gay.
to lock. v. n. 2 ozen eyes. gay
1. to become fast by a lock.
for not of wood, nor of enduring brass,
doubly disparted it did lock and close,
that when it locked, none might through it pass.
fairy queen.
pope's horace.
2. to unite by mutual insertion.
either they lock into each other, or flip one upon another's
surface; as much of their surfaces touches as make them
cohere. boyle.
locker. m. s. [from lock.] anything that is closed with a
lock ; a drawer.
i made lockers or drawers at the end of the boat. r. crus.
locket. m. s. [loquet, french j a small lock; any catch or
spring to fasten a necklace, or other ornament.
where knights are kept in narrow lists,
with wooden lockets 'bout their wrists.
lo'ckram. m. s. a sort of coarse linen.
the kitchen malkin pins
her richest lockram about her reeky neck,
clamb'ring the walls to eye him. shakesp. coriolanus.
lockron. n. j. a kind of ranunculus. -
locomotion, n.s. [ocus and matus, lat.] power of change-
ing place. c
. all progression, or animal locomotion, is performed by draw.
ing on, or impelling forward, some part which was before at
quict. brown's pulgar errours.
locomotive. adj. [focus and moveo, lat.] changing place;
having the power of removing or changing place.
i shall consider the motion, or locomotive faculty of animals.
derham's physico-theology.
in the night too oft he kicks,
or shows his locomotive tricks. prior.
an animal cannot well be defined from any particular, or-
ganical part, nor from its locomotive faculty, for some adhere
to rocks. arbuthnot on aliments.
locus t. n.s. [locusia, latin.] a devouring infect.
the hebrews had several sorts of locusis, which are not
known among us: the old historians and modern travellers
remark, that loco/?s are very numerous in africk, and many
places of asia; that sometimes they fell like a cloud upon the
country, and eat up every thing they meet with. moses de-
scribes four sorts of locus’s. since there was a prohibition
against using locusis, it is not to be questioned but that these
creatures were commonly eaten in palestine, and the neigh-
bouring countries. calmet.
to-morrow will i bring the locus's into thy coast. exod.
air replete with the steams of animals, rotting, has pro-
duced pestilential fevers; such have likewise been raised b
great quantities of dead locus’s. arbuthnot on air.
locus t-tree. m. s.
the locus-tree hath a papilionaceous flower, from whose
calyx arises the pointal, which afterwards becomes an uni-
capsular
hudibrar.
jianner-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o d
o,
capsular hard pod, including roundish hard seeds, which are
surrounded with a fungous stringy substance. miller.
lodest a r. see loadstar.
lod estone. see lo adstone.
to lodge. v. a. [logian, saxon; loger, french.]
1. to place in a temporary habitation.
when he was come to the court of france, the king stiled
him by the name of the duke of york; lodged him, and accom-
modated him, in great state. bacon's henry vii.
2. to o a temporary dwelling; to supply with harbour for
a night.
ev'ry house was proud to lodge a knight. dryden.
3. to place; to plant.
when on the brink the foaming boar i met,
and in his side thought to have lodg'd my spear,
the desp'rate savage rush'd within my force,
and bore me headlong with him down the rock. otway.
he lodg’d an arrow in a tender breast,
that had so often to his own been prest. addison's ovid.
in viewing again the ideas that are lodged in the memory,
the mind is more than passive. locke.
4. to fix; to settle.
by whose fell working i was first advanc'd,
and by whose pow'r i well might lodge a fear
to be again displac'd. shakespeare.
i can give no reason,
more than a lodg’d hate, and a certain loathing
i bear antonio. shakespeare's merch. of venice.
5. to place in the memory.
this cunning the king would not understand, though he
lodged it, and noted it, in some particulars. bacon's h. vii.
6. to harbour or cover.
the deer is lodg’d, i’ve track'd her to her covert;
rush in at once. addison's cato.
7. to afford place to.
the memory can lodge a greater store of images, than all
the senses can present at one time. cheyne's phil. principles.
8. to lay flat.
though bladed corn be lodg’d, and trees blown down,
though castles topple on their warders heads. shakesp.
we'll make foul weather with despised tears;
our fighs, and they, shall lodge the summer corn,
and make a dearth in this revolting land. shakespeare.
to lodge. v. n.
1. to reside; to keep residence.
care keeps his watch in ev'ry old man's eye,
and where care lodgeth, sleep will never lie. shakesp.
something holy lodges in that breast,
and with these raptures moves the vocal air
to testify his hidden residence. milton.
and dwells such rage in softest bosom then
and lodge such daring souls in little men pope.
2. to take a temporary habitation.
why commands the king,
that his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
while he himself keepeth in the cold field shakesp.
i know not where he lodges; and for me to devise a lodg-
ing, and say, he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine
own throat. shakespeare's othello.
thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the
people. o samuel.
3. to take up residence at night.
my lords
and soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night. shakesp.
oh, that i had in the wilderness a lodging place, of way-
faring men, that i might leave my people, jeremiah.
here thou art but a stranger travelling to thy country; it is
therefore a huge folly to be afflicted, because thou hast a less
convenient inn to lodge in by the way. taylor.
4. to lay flat.
long cone wheat they reckon in oxfordshire best for rank
clays; and its straw makes it not subject to lodge, or to be
mildewed. mortimer's husbandry.
lodge. n.s. [logis, french.]
1. a small house in a park or forest.
he brake up his court, and retired himself, his wife and
children, into a certain forest thereby, which he calleth his
desart, wherein he hath built two fine lodges. sidney.
i found him as melancholy as a lodge in a warren. shakesp.
he and his lady both are at the lodge,
upon the north side of this pleasant chace, shakespeare.
thus at their shady lodge arriv'd, both stood, -
both turn'd, and under open sky ador'd
the god that made both sky, air, earth. milton.
whenever i am turned out, my lodge descends upon a low-
spirited family. swift.
2. any small house appendant to a greater; as, the porter's
lodge.
lodgement. n.s.. [from lodge; logement, french.]
1. disposition or collocation in a certain place.
the curious lodgement and inosculation of the auditory
incrwcs, derham.
2. accumulation; colle&amp;tion. -
an oppressed diaphragm from a mere lodgement of extrava-
sated matter. sharp's surgery.
3. possession of the enemy's work. *
the military pedant is making lodgements, and fighting
battles, from one end of the year to the other. addison.
lo’ dger. m. s. [from lodge.] -
i. one who lives in rooms hired in the house of another.
base tyke, call'st thou me host? now, i scorn the term;
nor shall my nell keep lodgers. shakespeare's henry v.
there were in a family, the man and his wife, three chil-
dren, and three servants or lodgers. graunt's bills.
those houses are soonest infected that are crowded with
multiplicity of lodgers, and nasty families. harvey.
the gentlewoman begged me to step; for that a lodger she
had taken in was run mad. tatler.
sylla was reproached by his fellow lodger, that whilst the
fellow lodger paid eight pounds one shilling and fivepence half-
penny for the uppermost story, he paid for the rest twenty-
four pounds four shillings and four pence halfpenny. arbuth.
2. one that resides in any place.
look in that breast, most dirty dear;
say, can you find but one such lodger there : pope.
lo'dg ing. m. s. [from lodge.]
1. temporary habitation; rooms hired in the house of another.
i will in cassiq's lodging lose this napkin,
and let him find it. shakespeare's othello.
let him change his lodging from one end of the town to
another, which is a great adamant of acquaintance. bacon.
at night he came
to his known lodgings, and his country dame, dryden.
he defired his fifter to bring her away to the lodgings of his
friend. addison's guardian.
wits take lodgings in the sound of bow. pope.
2. place of residence.
fair bosom fraught with virtue's richest treasure,
the nest of love, the lodging of delight,
the bower of bliss, the paradise of pleasure,
the sacred harbour of that heavenly spright. spensor.
3. harbour; covert.
the hounds were uncoupled ; and the stag thought it better
to trust to the nimbleness of his feet, than to the slender for-
tification of his lodging. sidney.
4. convenience to sleep on.
their feathers serve to stuff our beds and pillows, yielding
us soft and warm lodging. - ray on creation.
loft. n.s. [lloft, welsh; or from lift.] o
1. a floor.
eutychus fell down from the third left. aof.
there is a traverse placed in a loft above, bacon.
2. the highest floor.
to lull him in his slumber soft,
a trickling stream from high rock tumbling down,
and ever drizzling rain upon the loft,
mixt with a murmuring wind. fairy queen,
3. rooms on high.
passing through the spheres of watchful fire,
and hills of snow, and lofts of piled thunder. milton.
a weasel once made shift to slink
in at a corn loft, through a chink. - pope.
lo ftily. adj. [from losty.] -
1. on high ; in an elevated place.
2. proudly; haughtily.
they speak wickedly concerning oppression; they speak
loftily. psal. lxxiii. 8.
3. with elevation of language or sentiment; sublimely.
my lowly verse may loftily arise,
and lift itself unto the highest skies. fairy queen.
lo ftiness. n.s.. [from lofty.] -
1. height; local elevation.
2. sublimity; elevation of sentiment.
three poets in three distant ages born 3
the first in loftines of thought surpass'd,
the next in majesty; in both the last. dryden.
3. pride; haughtiness. - -
augustus and tiberius had loftines; enough in their temper,
and affected to make a sovereign figure. collier.
lo fty. adj. [from lost, or list.]
1. high ; hovering; elevated in place.
cities of men with lofty gates and tow’rs. milton,
see lofty lebanon his head advance,
see nodding forests on the mountains dance. pope's moffah.
2. elevated in condition or character.
thus faith the high and lofty one. isaiah.
3. sublime; elevated in sentiment.
he knew
himself to sing and build the lofty rhime. milton,
4. proud ; haughty. -
the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled. isaiah.
lofty and sour to them that lov’d him not;
but to those men that sought him, sweet as summer.
- shakespeare.
3 man
:
</p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">* -
l o l
l o g
|
to go to log ger heads.
man, the tyrant of our sex, i hate, - - - -
a lowly servant, but a lofty mate. dryden's knight's tale.
loc. m. s. [the original of this word is not known. skinner
derives it from joan, saxon, to lie; junius from ! goe:
dut. sluggish; perhaps the lat. lignum, is the true original.]
1. a shapeless bulky piece of wood.
would the light'ning had
burnt up those hgs that thou'rt injoin'd to pile. shaos?.
the worms with many feet are bred under logs of timber,
and many times in gardens, where no logs are. bacon.
some log, perhaps, upon the waters swam,
an useless drift, which rudely cut within,
and hollow'd first a floating trough became, -
and cross some riv'let passage did begin. drydon.
2. an hebrew measure, which held a quarter of a cab, and
consequently five-sixths of a pint. according to dr. ar-
buthnot it was a liquid measure, the seventy-second part of
the bath or ephah, and twelfth part of the hin. calmet.
a meat offering mingled with oil, and one log of oil. lev.
lo gar1thms. n. j. slogarithme, fr. 2.6%; and 32.3%:..]
logarithms, which are the indexes of the ratios of numbers
one to another, were first invented by napier lord merchi-
son, a scottish baron, and afterwards completed by mr.
briggs, savilian professor at oxford. they are a series of
artincial numbers, contrived for the expedition of calculation,
and proceeding in an arithmetical proportion, as the numbers
they answer to do in a geometrical one : for instance,
o 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
i 2 8 16 32 64 1.28 256 512
where the numbers above, beginning with (o), and arith-
metically proportional, are called logarithms. the addition
and subtraction of logarithms answers to the multiplication and
division of the numbers they correspond with ; and this saves
an infinite deal of trouble. in like manner will the extrac-
tion of roots be performed, by diffecting the logaritons of any
numbers for the square root, and trisecting them for the cube,
and so on. - harris.
logo ats. n. s.
- loggats is the ancient name of a play or game, which is one
of the unlawful games enumerated in the thirty-third statute
of henry viii. it is the same which is now called kittle-
pins, in which boys often make use of bones instead of wooden
pins, throwing at them with another bone instead of bowl-
ing. - hammer.
did these bones cost no more the breeding, but to play at
loggats with them : shakespeare's hamlet.
los go er head. m. s. slogge, dutch, soupid, and head; or, rather
from log, a heavy motionless mass, as blockbead..] a dolt; a
blockhead; a thickscul.
where has been, hal?
with three or four loggerheads, amongst three or fourscore
hogsheads.
says this loggerhead, what have we to do to quench other
people's fires : l'estrange.
7% fall to o to scuffle; to fight without wea-
pons.
a couple of travellers that took up an ass, fell to logger-
heads which should be his master. l’estrange.
lo gger headed. adj. [from loggerhead..] dull; stupid; doltish.
you loggerheaded and unpolish'd groom, what no atten-
dance 2 shakesp. taming of the shrew.
logick. m. s. [logique, french ; logica, latin, from aoyos.]
the art of reasoning. one of the seven sciences.
logick is the art of using reason well in our inquiries after
truth, and the communication of it to others. jwatts's logick.
talk logick with acquaintance,
and praslise rhetorick in your common talk. shakespeare.
by a logick that left no man any thing which he might call
his own, they no more looked upon it as the case of one man,
but the case of the kingdom. clarendon.
here foam’d rebellious logick, gagg’d and bound,
there stript fair rhetorick languish'd on the ground. pope.
los g1cal. adj. [from logick.]
1. pertaining to cgick; taught in logick. -
the heretick complained greatly of st. augustine, as be-
ing too full of logical subtities. - hooker.
those who in a logical dispute keep in general terms, would
hide a fallacy. dryden's prof. to ann, mirab.
we ought not to value ourselves upon our ability, in giving
subtile rules, and finding out logical arguments, since it
would be more perfection not to want them. baker.
2. skilled in logick; furnished with logick.
a man who sets up for a judge in criticism, should have a
clear and logical head. addison's spessator.
too. adv. [from logicall according to the laws of
ogick,
how can her old good man
with honour take her back again?
from hence i logically gather,
the woman cannot live with either. prior.
logic an. a. s. (sogicien, french; logicus, latin.] a teacher
or professor of logick; a man versed in logick.
shakesp. henry iv.
if a man can play the true logician, and have as well judg-
ment as invention, he may do great matters. bacon.
if we may believe our logicians, man is distinguished from
all other creatures by the faculty of laughter. addison.
each staunch polemick stubborn as a rock,
each fierce logician still expelling locke,
came whip and spur. pope's danciad.
a logician might put a case that would serve for an exception.
swift.
the arabian physicians were subtile men, and most of
them logicians ; accordingly they have given method, and shed
subtilty upon their author. baker.
loo man. m. s. [...g. and man.] one whose business is to carry
logs.
s. for your sake
am i this patient logman o' sha's eare's tempes?.
locomach y. m. s. [x,y,zzzz.] a contention in words; a
contention about words.
forced terms of art did much puzzle sacred theology with
distinetions, cavils, quiddities; and so transformed her to a
meer kind of sophistry and logomachy. howel.
lo gwood. m. s.
logwood is of a very dense and firm texture ; is the heart
only of the tree which produces it. it is very heavy, and
remarkably hard, and of a deep, strong, red colour. it grows
both in the east and west indies, but no where so plent fully
as on the coast of the bay of campeachy. hill's 4...at. a1.d.
to make a light purple, mingle ceruse with logwood water.
peachan on drawing.
lo'hock, n. s.
lohock is an arabian name for those forms of medicines
which are now commonly called eclogmas, lambatives, or
linetuses. &amp;uincy.
lhocks and peclora's were prescribed, and venese&amp;tion re-
peated. - 1, jeman's surgery.
lois. m. s. [//wyn, welsh.]
1. the back of an animal carved out by the butcher.
2. loins ; the reins.
my face i'll grime with filth,
blanket my lios. shakesfeare's king lear.
thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb -
thou loathed issue of thy father's loins / shakop. rich. iii.
virgin mother, hail
high in the love of heav'n' yet from my sons
thou shalt procced, and from thy womb the son
of god most high. aloilton's paradise l9/?.
a multitude like which the populous north
pour'd never from her frozen loins, to pass
rhene, or the danaw, when her barbarous sons
came like a deluge on the south. - milton.
t. lotter. v. n. lioteren, dutch.j to linger; to
time carelessly; to idle.
sir john, you loiter here too long, being you are to take
pend
soldiers up in the countries. shakspeare.
- - - whence this long delay
you liter, while the spoils are thrown away. dryden.
mark how he spends his time, whether he unactively losters
it away. locke.
if we have gone wrong, let us redeem the mistake; if we
have loitered, let us quicken our pace, and make the most of
the present opportunity. rogers.
los iterer. m. s. [from loiter.] a lingerer; an idler; a lazy
wretch; one who lives without business; one who is sluggish
and dilatory. - -
give gloves to thy reapers a largess to cry,
and daily to loiterers have a good eye. tosor's hos.
the poor, by idleness or unthriftiness, are riotous spenders,
vagabonds, and loiterers. hayward.
where hast thou been, thou literer 2
though my eyes clos'd, my arms have still been open'd,
to search if thou wert come. - - otway.
providence would only enter mankind into the useful know-
ledge of her treasures, leaving the rest to employ our industry,
that we live not like idle loiterers and truants. more.
ever listless lit’rers, that attend - -
no cause, no trust, no duty, and no friend. pope.
to loll. v. n. [of this word the etymology is not known.
perhaps it might be contemptuously derived from lossard, a
name of great reproach before the reformation; of whom
one tenet was, that all trades not necessary to life are un-
lawful. j
1. to lean idly; to rest lazily against any thing.
so hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me; so shakes and
pulls me. sospeare's othel.
he is not lolling on a lewd love bed,
but on his knees at meditation.
close by a softly murm'ring stream,
where lovers us’d to loll and dream.
to loll on couches, rich with cytron steds,
and lay your guilty limbs in tyrian beds. dryden.
void of care he lolis supine in state, -
and leaves his business to be done by fate. dryd. prof.
shakesp. rich. iii.
hudoras.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
7 but
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">lo n
5,
o
in:
o,
| io-
o'),
but wanton now, and lolling at our gase, -
we suffer all the invet’rate ills of peace. dryden.
a lazy, lolling sort
of ever listless loit’rers. dunciad.
2. to hang out. used of the tongue hanging out in weariness
or play.
the triple porter of the stygian seat,
with lolling tongue lay fawning at thy feet. dryden.
with harmless play amidst the bowls he pass'd,
and with his lolling tongue assay’d the taste. dryden.
to loll. v. a. to put out: used of the tongue exerted.
all authors to their own defeots are blind;
hadst thou but, janus-like, a face behind,
to see the people, when splay mouths they make,
to mark their fingers pointed at thy back,
their tongues loll'd out a foot. dryden's perseus.
by strymon's freezing streams he sat alone,
trees bent their heads to hear him fing his wrongs,
fierce tygers couch'd around, and loll'd their fawningtongues.
dryden's %.
lomp. m. s. a kind of roundish fish.
lon e. adj. [contracted from alone.]
1. solitary, unfrequented ; having no company.
here the lone hour a blank of life displays. savage.
thus vanish sceptres, coronets and balls,
and leave you in lone woods, or empty walls. pope.
2. single; not conjoined or neighbouring to others.
no lone house in wales, with a mountain and a rookery,
is more contemplative than this court. pope.
lo nelin ess. m. s. [from lonely.]
1. solitude; want of company.
the huge and sportful assembly grew to him a tedious lone-
lines, esteeming nobody fince daiphantus was lost. sidney.
2. disposition to solitude.
i see
the mystery of your loneliness, and find
your salt tears head.
lo'nely. adj. [from one.]
1. solitary.
shakespeare.
i go alone,
like to a lonely dragon ; that his fen
makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen. shakesp.
why thus close up the stars
that nature hung in heav'n, and fill'd their lamps
with everlasting oil, to give due light -
to the misled and lonely traveller. milton.
time has made you dote, and vainly tell " .
of arms imagin'd, in your lonely cell. dryden's aneid.
2. addicted to solitude.
when, fairest princess,
you lonely thus from the full court retire,
love and the graces follow to your solitude. rowe.
lori en ess. m. s. [from lone..] solitude; dislike of company.
if of court life you knew the good,
you would leave lonents. donne.
i can love her who loves lonents best. bonne,
lo'nesome. adj. [from lone..] solitary; dismal.
you either must the earth from rest disturb,
or roll around the heavens the solar orb ;
elsewhat a dreadful face will nature wear?
how horrid will these lonesome seats appear? blackmore.
long, adj. [long, french; longo, latin.]
1. not short: used of time.
he talk’d a long while, even till break of day. aeis, xx.
he was desirous to see him of a long season. luke, xxiii.
2. not short: used of space.
empress, the way is ready, and not long. milton.
. having one of its geometrical dimensions in a greater degree
than either of the other.
his branches became long because of the waters. ezek.
we made the trial in a long necked phial left open at the
top. boyle.
4. of any certain measure in length.
women eat their children of a span lang.
these, as a line, their long dimensions drew,
lam. ii. 20.
streaking the ground with sinuous trace. milton.
the figtree spreads her arms, -
branching so broad and long. milton.
a pond’rous mace,
full twenty cubits long, he swings around. pope.
5. not soon ceasing, or at on end. --
man goeth to his long home. eccl. xii. 5.
honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be
long upon the land. exodus, xx. 12.
they open to themselves at length a way
up hither, under long obedience try’d. * milton.
him after long debate of thoughts revolv’d -
irresolute, his final sentence chose. milton.
long and ceaseless hiss. milton.
6. dilatory, -
death will not be long in coming, and the covenant of the
grave is not shewed unto thee. ecclus. xiv. 12.
vol. ii.
7. tedious in narration. -
- chief mast'ry to dissect, -
with long and tedious havock, fabled knights, milton;
reduce, my muse, the wand'ring song,
a tale should never be too long.
8. continued by succession to a great series.
but first a long succession must ensue. a filton.
9. [from the verb, to long.] ... longing; desirous; or perhaps,
long continued, from the disposition to continue looking at
any thing desired.
praying for him, and casting a long look that way, he saw
the galley leave the pursuit.
prior.
sidney.
by ev'ry circumstance i know he loves;
yet he but doubts, and parlies, and casts out
many a long look-for succour. dryden.
io. in musick and pronunciation.] protracted: as, a long note;
a long syllable.
long. adv.
1. to a great length in space.
the marble brought, erects the spacious dome,
or forms the pillars long-extended rows, - -
on which the planted grove and penfile garden grows.
prior,
2. not for a short time.
with mighty barres of long-enduring brass. fairfax.
when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the
mount. - exodus, xix, 13.
the martial ancus
furbish'd the rusty sword again,
resum'd the long-forgotten shield. dryden.
one of these advantages, which corneille has laid down, is
the making choice of some signal and long-expected day,
whereon the aetion of the play is to depend.
so stood the pious prince unmov’d, and long -
sustain'd the madness of the noisy throng. dryden's aeneid.-
the muse resumes her long-forgotten lays,
and love, restor'd, his ancient realm surveys. dryden.
no man has complained that you have discoursed too long on
any subject, for you leave us in an eagerness of learning more.
dryden.
ryden.
persia left for you
the realm of candahar for dow'r i brought,
that long-contended prize for which you fought. dryden.
it may help to put an end to that long-agitated and unrea-
sonable question, whether man's will be free or no : locke.
heav'n restores
to thy fond wish the long-expected shores. pope's odyssey.
3. in the comparative, it signifies for more time; and in the su-
perlative, for most time.
when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark
of bullrushes. exodus, ii. 3.
eldest parents signifies either the eldest men and women
that have had children, or those who have longst had issue.
locke.
4. not soon.
not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind.
acis, xxvii. 14.
5. at a point of duration far distant.
if the world had been eternal, those would have been found
in it, and generally spread long ago, and beyond the memory
of all ages. - tillo son.
say, that you once were virtuous long ago
a frugal, hardy people. philips's briton.
6. [for along ; au long, fr.] all along; throughout: of time.
hem among
there sat a man of ripe and perfect age, -
who did them meditate all his life long. fairy queen,
some say, that ever 'gainst that season comes,
wherein our saviour's birth is celebrated,
the bird of dawning fingeth all night long,
and then they say no spirit walks abroad.
the nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
no fairy takes, no witch hath power to charm, -
so hallow'd and so gracious is the time. shakesp. hamlet.
he fed me all my life long to this day. gen. xlviii. 15.
forty years long was i grieved with this generation. psal.
long. v. m. [.5elang, a fault, saxon.] by the fault; by the
failure. a word now out of use, but truly english.
respective and wary men had rather seek quietly their own,
and wish that the world may go well, so it be not long of them,
than with pains and hazard make themselves advisers for the
common good. hooker.
maine, bloys, poictiers, and tours are won away,
long all of somerset, and his delay. shakesp. henry vi.
mistress, all this coil is long of you. shakespeare.
if we owe it to him that we know so much, it is perhaps
long of his fond adorers that we know so little more. glanv.
to long. v. m. [gelangen, german, to ask. skinner.] to de-
fire earnestly; to wish with eagerness continued: with for or
after before the thing desired.
fresh expe&amp;tation troubled not the land
with any long'd for change, or better state. shakespeare:
15 q. and<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- l o n
l o o
o
t
s
o
t
i
t
and thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them.
deut. xxviii. 32.
if ears, he wished, now he longed fore. fairfax.
the great master perceived, that rhodes was the place the
turkish tyrant longed after. knolles's history.
if the report be good, it causeth love,
and longing hope, and well assured joy. .
his sons, who seek the tyrant to sustain,
and long for arbitrary lords again, -
he dooms to death deserv’d. dryden's ancid.
glad of the gift, the new made warrior goes,
and arms among the greeks, and longs for equal foes. dryd.
else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire,
this longing after immortality? addison's cato.
there's the tie that binds you;
you long to call him father: marcia's charms
work in your heart unseen, and plead for cato. . addison.
nicomedes longing for herrings, was supplied with fresh ones
by his cook, at a great distance from the sea. arbuthnot.
fo stormy seas -
i courted dangers, and i long'd for death. a. philips.
long ani'm ity. m. s. [longanimitas, latin; longanimite, fr.]
forbearance; patience of offences.
it had overcome the patience of job, as it did the meekness
of moses, and surely had mastered any but the longanimity and
lasting sufferance of god. brown's pulgar errours.
that innocent and holy matron had rather go clad in the
snowy white robes of meekness and longanimity, than in the
purple mantle of blood. howel's england's tears.
lo'ng boat. m. s. the largest boat belonging to a ship.
at the first descent on shoar, he did countenance the land-
ing in his longboat. wotton.
they first betray their masters, and then, when they find
the vessel sinking, save themselves in the longboat. l’estrange.
long e^vity. n. / [/ongaevus, latin.] length of life.
that those are countries suitable to the nature of man, and
convenient to live in, appears from the longevity of the natives.
ray on creation.
the instances of longevity are chiefly amongst the abstemi-
ous. arbuthnot on aliments.
longi’m a nous, adj. [longuemain, french ; longimanus, latin.]
longhanded; having long hands.
the villainy of this christian exceeded the persecution of
heathens, whose malice was never so longimanous as to reach
the soul of their enemies, or to extend unto the exile of their
elysiums. brown's pulgar errours.
long1 metry. m. s. [longus and uttp:… ; longimetrie, french.]
the art or practice of measuring distances.
our two eyes are like two different stations in longimetry,
by the assistance of which the distance between two objects is
measured. cheyne's phil. principles.
lo'nging.. n.s. [from long.] earnest defire; continual wish.
when within short time i came to the degree of uncertain
wishes, and that those wishes grew to unquiet longings, when
i would fix my thoughts upon nothing, but that within little
varying they should end with philoclea. sidney.
i have a woman's longing,
an appetite that i am sick withal,
to see great hector in the weeds of peace. shakespeare.
the will is left to the pursuit of nearer satisfactions, and to
the removal of those uneasinesses which it then feels in its
want of, and longings after them. locke.
lo'ngingly. adv. [from longing.] with incessant wishes.
to his first bias longingly he leans,
and rather would be great by wicked means. dryden.
lo'ngish. adj. [from long..] somewhat long.
longitude. n. s. [longitude, french ; longitudo, latin.]
1. length; the greatest dimension.
the ancients did determine the longitude of all rooms, which
were longer than broad, by the double of their latitude.
wotton’s architeff.
the variety of the alphabet was in mere longitude only;
but the thousand parts of our bodies may be diversified by situ-
ation in all the dimensions of solid bodies; which multiplies
all over and over again, and overwhelms the fancy in a new
abyss of unfathomable number. bentley.
this universal gravitation is an incessant and uniform ac-
tion by certain and established laws, according to quantity of
matter and longitude of distance, that it cannot be destroyed nor
impaired. bentley.
2. the circumference of the earth measured from any meridian.
some of magellanus's company were the first that did com-
pass the world through all the degrees of longitude. abbot.
3. the distance of any part of the earth to the east or west of
any place.
davies.
to conclude;
of longitudes, what other way have we,
but to mark when and where the dark eclipses be donnie.
his was the method of discovering the longitude by bomb
vessels. arbuth. and pope's mart. scrib.
4. the position of any thing to east or west.
the longitude of a star is its distance from the first point of
numeration toward the east, which first point, unto the ancients,
was the vernal equinox. brown's julgar erreurs.
longitu dinal. adj. [from longitude; longituding, f rench.]
measured by the length ; running in the longest direction.
longitudinal is opposed to tranverse: these vesiculae are dis-
tended, and their longitudinal diameters straitened, and so the
length of the whole muscle shortened. cheyne.
lo's goy, adv. [from long..] longingly; with great liking.
master, you look’d so longly on the maid,
perhaps, you mark not what's the pith of all. shakesh.
logo e. adj. [from long. j tedious; wearisome by its
ength.
they found the war so churlish and longsom, as they grew
then to a resolution, that, as long as england flood in flate to
succour those countries, they should but consume themselves
in an endless war. bacon's har with spain.
when chill'd by adverse snows, and beating rain,
we tread with weary steps the longsome plain. prior.
lo'ngsu ffering. adj. [long and suffering..] 'patient; not easily
provoked.
the lord god, merciful and gracious, longsoffering, and
abundant in goodness. vodas, xxxiv. 6.
longsu ff erisg. m. s. patience of offence; clemency.
we infer from the mercy and longsoffering of god, that
they were themselves sufficiently secure of his favour.
* rogers.
lo'ngtail. n.s. [long and tail.] cut and long tail : a canting
term for one or another. a phrase, i believe, taken fross
dogs, which belonging to men not qualified to hunt, had their
tails cut.
he will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
aye, that i will come cut and longtail under the degree of
a squire. shakespeare's merry wives of isinjor.
longways, adv. [this and many other words so terminated
are corrupted from wise.] in the longitudinal direction.
this island stands as a vast mole, which lies songways, al-
most in a parallel line to naples. addison on italy.
lo's gwin ded, adj. [long and wind.] long-breathed; tedious.
my simile you minded,
which, i confess, is too long winded. swift.
loog wise, adv. [long and wife.]" in the longitudinal direction.
they make a little cross of a quill, songwise of that part of
the quil which hath the pith, and crosswise of that piece of
the quill without pith. bacon.
he was laid upon two beds, the one joined langwise unto
the other, both which he filled with his length. hasewill.
loo. n.s. a game at cards.
a secret indignation, that all those affections of the mind
should be thus vilely thrown away upon a hand at loo. adaison.
in the fights of loo. pope.
lookily, adj. [kaby and like..] aukward; clumsy. .
the plot of the farce was a grammar school, the master set-
ting his boys their lessons, and a loobily country fellow putting
in for a part among the scholars. l'erang:
logf. n.s. that part aloft of the ship which lies just before the
chess-trees, as far as the bulk head of the castle. sea dics.
to loof. v. a. to bring the ship close to a wind.
looby. m.s. (of this word the derivation is unsettled. skinnar
mentions lapp, german, foolish; and junius, labe, a clown,
welsh, which seems to be the true original, unless it come
from kb.] a lubber; a clumsy clown,
the vices trace
from the father's scoundrel race.
who could give the looby such airs
were they masons, were they butchers ?
lo'or ed. adj. [from alof.j gone to a distance.
she once being loft, antony
claps on his sea-wing, like a doating mallard,
leaving the fight. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
to look. v. n. [locan, saxon.]
1. to direct the eye to or from any object: when the present
object is mentioned, the preposition after look is either an or
at ; if it is absent, we use for; if distant, aster : to was some-
times used anciently for af.
your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
than what you look on now. shaftop. if inter's tal.
the gods look down, and the unnat'ral scene
they laugh at. shakosheare's coriolanus.
abimelech looked out at a window, and saw isaac. gen.
mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that i am not
able to look up. poal. xl. 12.
he was ruddy, and of a beautiful countenance, and goodly
to look to. 1 sam. xvi. 12.
the fathers shall not lock back to their children. jer.
he had looked round about on them with anger. azark, iii.
the state would cast the eye, and look about to see whether
there were any head under whom it might unite. bacon.
fine devices of arching water without spilling, be pretty
things to look on, but nothing to health. bacon's essays.
froth appears white, whether the fun be in the meridian,
or any where between it and the horizon, and from what
place foever the behglders look upon it. boyle on colours.
they'll
swift.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
6
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">—
l o o
l o o
o they'll rather wait the running of the river dry, than take 8. to have any air, mien, or manner.
to pains to look about for a bridge, l’estrange. nay look not big, nor stamp, nor flare, nor fret
. thus pond'ring, he sook’d under with his eyes, i will be master of what is mine own. softwar.
s and saw the woman's tears. dryden's knight's tale. what haste looks through his eyes? -
o u bertran; if thou dar st, look out * - so should he look that seems to speak things strange. shak.
* pon yon slaughter'd host. - - dryden's spanish fryar. give me your hand, and trust me you look well, and bear
o i cannot, without some indignation, look on an ill copy of your years very well. shakespeare's henry iv.
* an excellent original ; much less can i behold with patience c. these, or such, be any aids to us
... . virgil and homer abused to their faces, by a botching inter- - look they as they were built to shake the world,
, preter. - - - dryden. or be a moment to our enterprize : ben. johnson.
15 intellectual beings, in their constant endeavours after true though i cannot tell what a man says; if he will be fin.
-- felicity, can suspend this prosecution in particular cases, till cere, i may easily know what he looks. ' collier.
so they have looked before them, and informed themselves, whe- it will be his lot to look fingular in loose and licentious
o ther that particular thing lie in their way to their main end. times, and to become a by-word. alterbury.
... 3 locke. 9. to form the air in any particular manner, i ardi
o, - there may be in his reach a book, containing pi&amp;ures and 9 beholding. y p » in regarding or
| * discourses capable to delight and instruct him, which yet he i welcome the condition of the time,
ro, may never take the pains to look into. locke. which cannot look more hideously on me,
o towards those who communicate their thoughts in print, than i have drawn it in my fantasy. słakoff. henry iv.
i cannot but look with a friendly regard, provided there is no that which was the worst now least afflicts me:
on! tendency in their writings to vice. addison's freeholder. blindness, for bad i fight, confus'd with shame,
. 3, a solid and substantial greatness of soul looks down with a how could i once look up, or heave the head milton.
generous neglect on the censures and applauses of the multi- these look up to you with reverence, and would be animated
to: tude. addison's speciator. by the sight of him at whose soul they have taken fire in his
- i have nothing left but to gather up the reliques of a wreck, writings. swift to pope.
or, and look about me to see how few friends i have left. 10. to look about one. to be alarmed; to be vigilant.
org - pope to swift. it will import those men who dwell careless to look about
son the optick nerves of such animals as look the same way them ; to enter into serious consultation, how they may avert
h: with both eyes, as of men, meet before they come into the that ruin. decay of piety.
brain; but the optick nerves of such animals as do not look if you find a wasting of your flesh, then look about you,
the same way with both eyes, as of fishes, do not meet. especially if troubled with a cough. harvey on consumptions.
e of - newton's opticks. john's cause was a good milch cow, and many a man sub-
jor. 2. to have power of seeing. sisted his family out of it: however, john began to think it
ited fate sees thy life lodg'd in a brittle glass, high time to look about him. arbuthnot's hist, of j. bull.
and looks it through, but to it cannot pass. dryden. ii. to look after. to attend; to take care of ; to observe
al- 3. to direct the intellectual eye. with care, anxiety, or tenderness.
off. in regard of our deliverance past, and our danger present mens hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those
us. and to come, let us look up to god, and every man reform his things which are coming on the earth. luke.
own ways. bacon's new atlantis. politeness of manners, and knowledge of the world, should
ift, we are not only to look at the bare action, but at the rea- principally be looked after in a tutor. locke on education.
o son of it. - stillingfleet. a mother was wont to indulge her daughters, when any of
t i the man only saved the pigeon from the hawk, that he them desired dogs, squirrels, or birds; but then they must
o might eat it himself; and if we look well about us, we shall find be sure to look diligently after them, that they were not ill used.
of this to be case of most mediations. l’e/?range. locke on education.
col. they will not look beyond the received notions of the place my subject does not oblige me to look after the water, or
o and age, nor have so presumptuous a thought as to be wiser point forth the place whereunto it is now retreated. jwoodw.
* than their neighbours. locke. 12. to look for. to expect.
- every one, if he would look into himself, would find some phalantus's disgrace was engrieved, in lieu of comfort, of
o defe&amp;t of his particular genius. locke. artesia, who telling him she never looked for other, bad him
.*. change a man's view of things; let him look into the future seek some other mistress. sidney.
ot, state of bliss or misery, and see god, the righteous judge, being a labour of so great difficulty, the exact performance
* ready to render every man according to his deeds. locke. thereof we may rather wish than look for. hooker.
o 4. to expect. - thou
o: if he long deferred the march, he must lack to fight another shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
ot. battle before he could reach oxford. clarendon. look for no less than death. shakesp. jointer’s tale.
to: 5. to take care; to watch. if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge
o, look that ye bind them fast. shakespeare. of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for fins, but a
he that gathered a hundred bushels of apples, had thereby certain fearful looking for of judgment. heb. x.
nor a property in them : he was only to look that he used them in dealing with cunning persons, it is good to say little to
's', before they spoiled, else he robbed others. locke. them, and that which they least look for. bacon's essays.
il. 6. to be directed with regard to any object. this mistake was not such as they looked for ; and, though
let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight the error in form seemed to be consented to, yet the substance
before thee. prov. iv. 25. of the accusation might be still insisted on. clarendon.
7. to have any particular appearance; to seem. inordinate anxiety, and unnecessary scruples in confession,
i took the way, instead of setting you free, which is the benefit to be looked for
o, which through a path, but scarcely printed, lay; by confession, perplex you the more. taylor.
and look’d as lightly press'd by fairy feet. dryden. look now for no enchanting voice, nor fear
that spotless modesty of private and publick life, that ge- the bait of honied words. milton.
nerous spirit, which all other christians ought to labour after,
should look in us as if they were natural. spratt.
piety, as it is thought a way to the favour of god; and
fortune, as it looks like the effect either of that, or at least of
prudence and courage, beget authority. temple.
cowards are offensive to my sight;
nor shall they see me do an act that looks
below the courage of a spartan king. dryd. cleomenes.
to complain of want, and yet refuse all offers of a supply,
looks very sullen. burnet's theory of the earth.
should i publish any favours done me by your lordship, i
am afraid it would look more like vanity than gratitude.
drown'd in deep despair,
he dares not offer one repenting prayer:
amaz'd he lies, and sadly looks for death. dryden's juv.
i must with patience all the terms attend,
till mine is call'd ; and that long look'd for day
is still encumber'd with some new delay. dryden’s juv.
this limitation of adam’s empire to his line, will save
those the labour who would look for one heir amongst the race
of brutes, but will very little contribute to the discovery of
one amongst men. locke.
13. to look into. to examine; to sift; to inspect closely ;
to observe narrowly.
addison. his nephew's levies to him appear'd
something very noble may be discerned, but it looketh cum- to be a preparation gainst the polack;
bersome. felton on the clafficks. but better look’d into, he truly found
late, a sad spectacle of woe, he trod
the desart sands, and now he looks a god. pope's odyssey.
from the vices and follies of others, observe how such a
practice looks in another person, and remember that it looks as
ill, or worse, in yourself. //atts.
this makes it look the more like truth, nature being frugal
in her principles, but various in the effects thence arising.
cheyne's philosophical principles.
it was against your highness. shałoff. hamlet.
the more frequently and narrowly we l.2% into the works
of nature, the more occasion we shall have to admire their
beauty. atterbury.
it is very well worth a traveller's while to look into all that
lies in his way. aidson on italy.
14. to look on. to respect; to effectm ; to regard as good
or bad. -
ambitious
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o o
l o o
*
*
!
ambitious men, if they be checked in their desires, become
secretly discontent, and look upon men and matters with an
evil eye. bacon's essays.
if a harmless maid
should ere a wife become a nurse,
her friends would look on her the worse. prior.
15. to look on. to consider; to conceive of ; to think.
i looked on virgil as a succinet, majestick writer; one who
weighed not only every thought, but every word and };
- - ryden.
he looked upon it as morally impossible, for persons infinitely
proud to frame their minds to an impartial consideration
of a religion that taught nothing but self-denial and the §.
6tlth.
do we not all profess to be of this excellent religion ? but
who will believe that we do so, that shall look upon the actions,
and consider the lives of the greatest part of christians.
tillotson.
in the want and ignorance of almost all things, they looked
upon themselves as the happiest and wisest people of the uni-
verse. locke on human underslanding.
those prayers you make for your recovery are to be looked
upon as best heard by god, if they move him to a longer con-
tinuance of your sickness. iłake's prepar. for death.
16. to look on. to be a mere idle spectator.
i’ll be a candle-holder, and look on. shakespeare.
some come to meet their friends, and to make merry;
others come only to look on. bacon's apophth.
17. to look over. to examine; to try one by one.
look o'er the present and the former time,
if no example of so vile a crime
appears, then mourn. dryden's juvenal.
a young child, distracled with the variety of his play-
games, tired his maid every day to look them over. locke.
18. 73 look out. to search ; to seek.
when the thriving tradesman has got more than he can
well employ in trade, his next thoughts are to look out for a
purchase. locke.
where the body is affected with pain or fickness, we are
forward enough to look out for remedies, to listen to every one
that suggests them and immediately to apply them. atter.
where a foreign tongue is elegant, expressive, and com-
pact, we must look out for words as beautiful and comprehen-
five as can be found. felton on the clafficks.
the curious are looking out, some for flattery, some for
ironies, in that poem ; the four folks think they have found
out some. swift to pope.
19. to look out. to be on the watch.
is a man bound to look out sharp to plague himself? collier.
20. to look to. to watch; to take care of.
there is not a more fearful wildfowl than your lion living;
and we ought to look to it. shakespeare.
who knocks so loud at door 2
look to the door there, francis. shakesp. henry iv.
let this fellow be looked to : let some of my people have a
special care of him. shakespeare's twelfth night.
uncleanly scruples fear not you; look to't. shakesp.
know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds.
prov. xxvii. 33.
when it came once among our people, that the state offered
conditions to strangers that would stay, we had work enough
to get any of our men to look to our ship. bacon.
if any took sanctuary for case of treason, the king might
appoint him keepers to look to him in sanctuary. bacon.
the dog's running away with the flesh, bids the cook look
better to it another time. l’estrange.
for the truth of the theory i am in nowife concerned ; the
composer of it must look to that. woodward.
21. to look to. to behold.
to look. v. a.
1. *to seek; to search for.
looking my love, i go from place to place,
like a young fawn that late hath lost the hind,
and seek each where.
2. to turn the eye upon.
let us look one another in the face.
3. to influence by looks.
such a spirit must be left behind!
a spirit fit to start into an empire,
and look the world to law.
4. to look out. to discover by searching.
casting my eye upon so many of the general bills as next
came to hand, i found encouragement from them to look out all
the bills i could. graunt's bills of mortality.
whoever has such treatment when he is a man, will lock out
other company, with whom he can be at ease. locke.
look. inters. [properly the imperative mood of the verb: it is
sometimes look ye.] see lo! behold observe
look, where he comes, and my good man too; he's as far
from jealousy as i am from giving him cause. shakespeare."
look you, he must seem thus to the world: fear not your
advancement. 3. shakespeare.
spensor.
2 kings, xiv. 8.
dryden's cleomenes.
look, when the world hath fewest barbarous people, but such
as will not marry, except they know means to live, as it is
almost every where at this day, except tartary, there is no
danger of inundations of people. bacon’s essays.
lock you ! we that pretend to be subject to a constitution,
must not carve out our own quality; for at this rate a cobler
may make himself a lord. collier on pride.
look. n. s.
1. air of the face; mien; cast of the countenance.
thou cream-fac’d loon,
where got'st thou that goose look 2 shakespeare.
thou wilt save the afflicted people, but will bring down
high looks. psal. xviii. 27.
then gracious heav'n for nobler ends design'd,
their looks erected, and their clay refin'd. j. dryden, jun.
and though death be the king of terrors, yet pain, dis-
grace, and poverty, have frightful looks, able to discompose
most men. - locke-
2. the aet of looking or secing.
then on the croud he cast a furious look,
and wither'd all their strength.
when they met they made a furly stand,
and glar'd, like angry lions, as they pass'd,
and wish'd that ev'ry look might be their lait.
look er. m. s. [from look.]
1. one that looks.
2. look er on. spectator, not agent. -
shepherds poor pipe, when his harsh sound testifies anguish,
into the fair looker on, pastime not passion enters. sidney.
such labour is then more necessary than pleasant, both to
them which undertake it, and for the lookers on. i looker.
my business in this state
made me a looker on here in vicnna;
where i have seen corruption boil and bubble
till it o'er-run the flew. shakesp. 41.6s. fr. masore.
did not this fatal war affront thy coast,
yet sattest thou an idle 1.2%ar on 2 fairfax.
the spaniard's valour lieth in the eyes of the looker on ; but
the english valour lieth about the soldier's heart: a valour of
glory and a valour of natural courage are two things.
the people love him;
the lookers on, and the enquiring vulgar,
will talk themselves to action. denham's sophy.
he wish’d he had indeed been gone,
and only to have stood a looker on. addison's ovid.
lookin g-glass. m. s. [look and gloss.] mirror; a glass which
shews forms refle&amp;ted.
command a mirror hither straight,
that it may shew me what a face i have.
– go some of you and fetch a looking-glass. shakes rare.
there is none so homely but loves a looking-gloss. south.
we should make no other use of our neighbours faults, than
of a looking-glass to mend our own manners by. l’e/irange.
the surface of the lake of nemi is never rushed with the
least breath of wind, which perhaps, together with the clear-
ness of its waters, gave it formerly the name of diana's look-
ing-glas. addison on italy.
loom. m. s. [from glomus, a bottom of thread. minishew. lame
is a general name for a tool or instrument. junius.] the
frame in which the weavers work their cloath.
he must leave no uneven thread in his loom, or by indulg-
ing to any one sort of reproveable discourse hinself, defeat all
his endeavours against the rest. government of the tongue.
minerva, studious to compose
her twisted threads, the web she strung,
dryden.
dryden.
bacon.
and o'er a bom of marble hung. addison.
a thousand maidens ply the purple loom,
to weave the bed, and deck the regal room. prizr.
to loom. v. n. [leoman, saxon.] to appear at sea. skinner.
loom. n. s. a bird.
a loom is as big as a goose ; of a dark colour, dappled with
white spots on the neck, back, and wings; each feather
marked near the point with two spots: they breed in farr
island. grew's musicum.
loos. n.s. [this word, which is now used only in scotland,
is o english word lown.] a sorry fellow; a scoundrel; a
rascal.
thou cream fac’d soon /
where got'st thou that goose look? shakes. macbeth.
the false loom, who could not work his will
by open force, employ'd his flatt’ring skill:
i hope, my lord, said he, i not offend,
are you afraid of me that are your friend ? dryden.
this young lord had an old cunning rogue, or, as the scots
call it, a false loon of a grandfather, that one might call a jack
of all trades. arbuthner's h/. of j. bull.
loop. m. s. [from loosen, dutch, to run.] a double through
yo a string or lace is drawn; an ornamental double or
singe.
nor any skill'd in loops of fing ring fine,
might in their diverse cunning ever dare
with this, so curious network, to compare. somsr.
'make<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o o
lo o
*
o,
do o
::::
*
:
#:
make me to see’t, or at least so prove it,
that the probation bear no hinge, nor loop,
to hang a doubt on. shakespeare's othello.
bind our crooked legs in hoops
ben.
made of shells, with filver loops. johnson.
an old fellow shall wear this or that sort of cut in his
cloaths with great integrity, while all the rest of the world
are degenerated into buttons, pockets, and loops. addison.
loop ed. adj. [from loop.] full of holes.
poor naked wretches, wherefoe'er you are,
that 'bide the pelting of this pitiless storm
how shall your houseless heads and unfed fides,
your loop'd and window’d raggedness, defend you
from seasons such as these ? shakesp. king lear.
loophole. n.s. [loop and hole..] . -
1. aperture; hole to give a passage.
the indian herdsman shunning heat,
shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds ; -
at loopholes cut through thickest shade. milton's par. loft.
ere the blabbing eastern scout
the nice morn on the indian steep,
from her cabin'd loophole peep. milton.
walk not near yon corner house by night ; for there are
blunderbusses planted in every loophole, that go off at the squeak-
ing of a fiddle. dryden's spanish fryar.
2. a shift; an evasion.
needless, or needsul, i not now contend,
for still you have a loophole for a friend. dryden.
loop hole d. adj. [from loophole..] full of holes; full of open-
ings, or void spaces.
this uneasy loopho"d gaol,
in which y” are hamper’d by the fetlock,
cannot but put y' in mind of wedlock. hudibras.
loor d. m. s. sloerd, dutch ; lourdant, french ; lurdan, erse ;
a heavy, stupid, or withess fellow. d. trevaux derives lour-
dant from lorde or lourde, a village in gascoigny, the inhabitants
of which were formerly noted robbers, say they. but dexte-
rity in robbing implies some degree of subtilty, from which
the gascoigns are so far removed, that they are aukward, and
heavy to a proverb. the erse imports some degree of kna-
very, but in a ludicrous sense, as in english, you pretty
rogue; though in general it denotes reproachful heaviness, or
stupid laziness. spenser's scholiast says, loord was wont,
among the old britons, to signify a lord ; and therefore the
danes, that usurped their tyranny here in britain, were called,
for more dread than dignity, lurdans, i.e. lord danes, whose
insolence and pride was so outrageous in this realm, that if it
fortuned a briton to be going over a bridge, and saw the
idane set foot upon the same, he must return back till the
dane was clean over, else he must abide no less than present
death: but being afterward expelled, the name of lurdane be-
came so odious unto the people whom they had long op-
pressed, that, even at this day, they use for more reproach to
call the quartan ague the fever lurdane. so far the scholiast,
but erroneously. from spenser's own words, it significs some-
thing of stupid dulness rather than magisterial arrogance.
macbean.] a drone.
siker, thou's but a lazy loord,
and rekes much of thy swinke,
that with fond terms and witless words
to bleer mine eyes do'st think. spensor's pastorals.
to loos e. v. a. [leran, saxon.]
1. to unbind; to untie anything fastened.
the shoes of his feet i am not worthy to loose. aos.
canst thou loose the bands of orion : job.
who is worthy to loose the seals thereof: rev. v. 2.
this is to cut the knot when we cannot loose it. burnet.
2. to relax. .
the joints of his loins were losed. daniel.
3. to unbind any one bound.
loose him, and bring him to me. luke.
4. to free from imprisonment. -
the captive hasteneth that he may be loosed. isaiah.
he loosa, and set at liberty, four or five kings of the people
of that country, that berok kept in chains. abbot.
5. to free from any obligation. - - *
art thou loosed from a wife 2 seek not a wife. i cor.
6. to free from any thing that shackles the mind.
ay; there's the man, who, lo'd from lust and pelf,
less to the pretor owes than to himself. dryden's perseus.
7. to free from any thing painful. . . -
woman, thou art losed from thy infirmity.
8. to disengage. - * .
when heav'n was nam’d, they loos'd their hold again,
then sprung she forth, they follow'd her amain. dryden.
t. loos e. j. m. to set sail; to depart by loosing the anchor.
ye should have hearkened, and not have losed from o;
£75.
the emperor losing from barcelona, came to the port of
mago, in the island of minorca. - knoller's history.
loft, g thence by night, they were driven by contrary winds
back into his port. - - raleigh.
vol. ii. -
duke.
loose. adj. [from the verb.]
1. unbound; untied.
if he should intend his voyage towards my wife, i would
turn her loose to him; and what he gets more of her than
sharp words, let it lie on my head. shakespeare.
lo! i see four men loose walking. dan. iii. 25.
2. not fast; not fixed.
those few that clashed might rebound after the collision;
or if they cohered, yet by the next conflict might be separated
again, and so on in an eternal vicissitude of fast and loose,
though without ever consociating into the bodies of planets.
bentley.
3. not tight; as, a loose robe."
4. not crouded; not close.
with extended wings a host might pass,
with horse and chariots, rank'd in loose array.
5. wanton ; not chaste.
fair venus seem'd unto his bed to bring
her, whom he waking evermore did ween
to be the chastest flower that ay did spring
on earthly branch, the daughter of a king,
now a loose leman to vile service bound.
when loose epistles violate chaste eyes,
she half consents who filently denies.
6. not close; not concise; lax.
if an author be loose and diffuse in his stile, the translator
needs only regard the propriety of the language. felton.
7. vague; indeterminate; not accurate. *
it is but a loose thing to speak of possibilities, without the
particular designs; so is it to speak of lawfulness without the
particular cases. bacon's holy war.
it seems unaccountable to be so exaet in the quantity of
liquor where a small error was of little concern, and to be so
loose in the doses of powerful medicines. arbuthnot.
8. not strict; not rigid. -
because conscience, and the fear of swerving from that
which is right, maketh them diligent observers of circum-
stances, the loose regard whereof is the nurse of vulgar folly.
hooker.
milton.
fairy queen.
dryden's ovid.
9. unconneeted; rambling. -
i dare venture nothing without a strict examination; and
am as much ashamed to put a loose indigested play upon the
publick, as to offer brass money in a payment. dryden.
vario spends whole mornings in running over loos and un-
connected pages, and with fresh curiosity is ever glancing over
new words and ideas, and yet treasures up but little know-
ledge. watts on the mind:
10. lax of body; not costive.
what hath a great influence upon the health, is going to
stool regularly; people that are very loose have seldom strong
thoughts, or strong bodies. locke on education.
11. disengaged; not enslaved.
their prevailing principle is, to sit as loose from pleasures,
and be as moderate in the use of them, as they can. atterb.
12. disengaged from obligation: commonly with from ; in the
following line with of.
now i stand
loose of my vow; but who knows cato's thoughts addis.
13. free from confinement. -
they did not let prisoners loose homeward. isaiah.
wish the wildest tempests loose; -
that thrown again upon the coast,
i may once more repeat my pain. prior.
14. remiss; not attentive.
15. to break loos e. to gain liberty.
if to break loose from the conduct of reason, and to want
that restraint of examination which keeps us from chufing
the worse, be liberty, madmen and fools are only the freemen.
- - lotke.
like two black storms on either hand,
our spanish army and the indians stand;
this only space betwixt the clouds is clear,
where you, like day, broke loose from both appear. dryden.
16. to let loose. to set at liberty; to set at large; to free
from any restraint.
and let the living bird loose into the open field. lev. xiv.
we ourselves make our fortunes good or bad; and when
god lets loose a tyrant upon us, or a sickness, if we fear to die,
or know not to be patient, the calamity fits heavy upon us.
taylor’s holy living.
in addition and division, either of space or duration, it is
the number of its repeated additions or divisions that alone
remains distinet, as will appear to any one who will let his
thoughts loose in the vast expansion of space, or divisibility of
matter, locke.
if improvement cannot be made a recreation, they must be
let loose to the childish play they fancy; which they should be
weaned from, by being made surfeit of it. locke.
loose. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. liberty; freedom from restraint.
come, and forsake thy cloying store,
and all the busy pageantry
15 r that
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o p
l o r
on
that wise men scorn, and fools adore: -
come, give thy soul a loose, and taste the pleasures of the
poor. dryden's horace.
lucia, might my big swoln heart -
vent all its griefs, and give a loose to sorrow,
marcia could answer thee in fighs. addison's cato.
the fiery pegasus disdains
to mind the rider's voice, or hear the reins;
when glorious fields and opening camps he views, .
he runs with an unbounded loose. prior.
poets should not, under a pretence of imitating the antients,
give themselves such a loose in lyricks, as if there were no con-
nection in the world. felton on the classicks.
2. dismission from any restraining force.
air at large maketh no noise, except it be sharply per-
cussed; as in the sound of a string, where air is percussed by
a hard and stiff body, and with a sharp loose. bacon,
loos ely. adv. [from loose.]
1. not fast; not firmly; easily to be disengaged.
i thought your love eternal: was it ty'd
so loosely, that a quarrel could divide :
2. without bandage.
her golden locks for haste were loosely shed
about her cars.
3. without union or conneetion. -
part loosey wing the region, part more wise -
in common, rang'd in figure, wedge their way. milton.
he has within himself, all degrees of perfection that exist
loosely and separately in all second beings. norris.
4. irregularly. - " .
a bishop, living loosely, was charged that his conversation
was not according to the apostles lives. camden.
5. negligently; carelessly.
we have not losoy through filence permitted things to pass
away as in a drcam. hooker.
the chiming of some particular words in the memory,
and making a noise in the head, seldom happens but when
the mind is lazy, or very loosely and negligently employed.
locke.
dryden's aureng.
fairy queen.
6. unsolidly; meanly; without dignity.
a prince should not be so loosely studied, as to remember so
weak a composition. shakspeare's henry iv.
7. unchastely. - -
the stage how loosely does astraea tread,
who fairly puts all characters to bed pope.
to loose.n. v. n. [from loose.] to part; to tend to separation.
when the polypus appears in the throat, extract it that.
way, it being more ready to loosen when pulled in that direction
than by the nose. * sharp's surgery.
to loos en. v. a. [from loose.] . . . . .
1. to relax any thing tied. . . . . . .
2. to make less coherent. - - . . . .
after a year's rooting, then shaking doth the tree good, by
loosening of the earth. bacon's natural history.
3. to separate a compages. -
from their foundation losing to and fro, "
they pluck'd the seated hills with all their load.
she breaks her back, the loosen’d sides give way, -
and plunge the tuscan soldiers in the sea. dryden's aen.
4. to free from restraint. -
it resolves those difficulties which the rules beget; it laosons
his hands, and assists his understanding. dryden's dufresnoy.
5. to make not costive. . . .
fear looseneth the belly; because the heat retiring towards
the heart, the guts are relaxed in the same manner as fear also
causeth trembling. bacon's natural history.
loose ness. m. s. [from loose.]
1. state contrary to that of being fast or fixed. -** * * . .
the cause of the casting of skin and shell should seem to be
the loosens of the skin or shell, that sticketh not close to
the flesh. bacon's natural history.
2. latitude; criminal levity. - -
a general looseness of principles and manners hath seized on,
us like a pestilence, that walketh not in darkness, but wasteth
- - atterbury.
milton.
*:
at noon-day. .
3. irregularity; negle&amp;t of laws.
he endeavoured to win the common people, both by strain-
-
ed curtesy and by loosons of life. hayward.
4. lewdness; unchastity. -
courtly court he made still to his dame,
pour'd out in looseness on the grassy ground, -
both careless of his health and of his fame. spenser.
5. diarrhoea; flux of the belly.
taking cold moveth loosenos by contraction of the skin and
outward parts. . bacon's natural history.
in pestilent diseases, if they cannot be expelled by sweat,
they fall likewise into looseness. bacon's nat. history.
fat meats, in phlegmatick stomachs, procure loosenes; and
hinder retention. arbuthnot on aliments.
loosest rife. m. s. [lysimachia, latin.] an herb. miller.
to lop. v. a. [it is derived by skinner from laube, german, a
leaf.]
1. to cut the branches of trees.
gentle niece, what stern ungentle hands
bave lopp'd and hew'd, and made thy body bare
of her two branches, those sweet ornaments : shakesp.
like to pillars,
qr hollow'd bodies, made of oak or fir,
with branches loop'd in wood, or mountain fell’d. mist.
the plants, whose luxury was lopp'd,
or age with crutches underprop'd. cleaveland.
the oak, growing from a plant to a great tree, and then
lopped, is still the same oak. locke-
the hook she bore, instead of cynthia's spear,
to lop the growth of the luxuriant year. pope.
2. to cut any thing.
howel.
the gardener may lap religion as he pleases.
so long as there’s a head,
hither will all the mounting spirits fly;
lop that but off. dryden's spanish fryar.
all that denominated it paradise was lipped off by the de-
luge, and that only left which it enjoyed in common with its
neighbour countries. . j/codward's na
rhyme sure in needless bonds the poet ties, * //;
procrustus like, the ax or wheel applies, !/i-
to lop the mangled sense, or stretch it into size.) smith.
lop. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. that which is cut from trees.
or siker thy head very tottie is,
so on thy corbe shoulder it leans amiss;
now thyself hath lost both lop and top,
as my budding branch thou would'st crop. spensor.
nor should the boughs grow too big, because they give op-
portunity to the rain to soak into the tree, which will quickly
sause it to decay, so that you must cut it down, or else both
body and lap will be of little value. martimer.
2. [loopa, swedish..] a flea.
lope. pret. of leap. obsolete.
with that sprang forth a naked swain,
with spotted wings like peacock's train,
and laughing lope to a tree. spensor's pasłoral.
lo'pper. m. j. [from lop.] one that cuts trees.
loopered. adj. coagulated ; as, loppered milk.
thus it is still called in scotland.
logg acious, adj. shquax, latin.]
1. full of talk; full of tongue.
to whom sad eve,
confessing soon; yet not before her judge
bold, or loquacious, thus abash'd reply'd,
in council she gives licence to her tongue,
loquacious, brawling, ever in the wrong.
2. speaking.
blind british bards, with volant touch
traverse loquacious strings, whose solemn notes
provoke to harmless revels.
3. apt to blab ; not secret.
loqua city. n.s. [louacitas, latin.] too much talk.
why loquacity is to be avoided, the wise man gives sufficient
reason, for in the multitude of words there wanteth not fin.
- ray on creation.
too great louacity, and too great taciturnity by fits. arb.
lord. m.s. (plarono, saxon.]
1. monarch ; ruler; governour.
man over man
answorth.
milton.
dryden.
philips.
. he made not lord. a sisten."
of athens he was lord. dryden's knight's wale.
we have our author's only arguments to prove, that heirs
are lords over their brethren. - locke.
they call'd their lord a&amp;eon to the game,
he shook his head in answer to the name. alison.
o'er love, o'er fear, extends his wide domain,
unconquer'd lord of pleasure and of pain. pa. of hu. joshes.
2. master; supreme person. -
- - but now i was the lord
of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
queen o'er myself; and even now, but now,
this house, these servants, and this same myself
are yours, my lord. shakesp. merchant of penice.
3. ^. an oppressive ruler.
. now being assembled into one company, rather without a
ord than at liberty to accomplish their misery, they fall to
division. - - hayward.
* 'tis death to fight, but kingly to controul
lord-like at ease, with arbitrary pow'r,
to peel the chiefs, the people to devour.
4. a husband.
i oft in bitterness of soul deplor’d -
my absent daughter, and my dearer lord. pope's oosy.
5. one who is at the head of any business; an overseer.
grant harvest lord more by a peny or two,
-
dryden.
to call on his fellows the better to doo. tosor's hoff.
6. a nobleman. -
thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord. shakoffeare.
7. a general name for a peer of england.
nor<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o r
l o s
*::::.
ve cp.
suick;
e bon
7./. o,
*ral
wors,
(0
o,
nor were the crimes objected against him so clear, as to
give convincing satisfaction to the major part of both houses,
especially that of the lords. king charles.
8. a baron, as distinguished from those of higher title.
9. an honorary title applied to officers; as, lord chief justice,
lord mayor, lord chief baron.
to lord. v. n. to domineer; to rule despotically: with over
before the subject of power.
unrighteous lord of love! what law is this,
that me thou makest thus tormented be
the whiles she lordeth in licentious bliss
of her free will, scorning both thee and me. spensor.
i see them lording it in london streets. shakespeare.
those huge tracts of ground they lorded over, begat wealth,
wealth ushered in pride. howel's vocal forg/?.
they had by this possess'd the tow’rs of gath,
and lorded over them whom now they serve. milton.
i should choose rather to be tumbled into the dust in blood,
bearing witness to any known truth of our lord, than by a
denial of truths, through blood and perjury, wade to a sceptre,
and lord it in a throne. south.
but if thy passions lord it in thy breast,
art thou not still a slave * dryden's perseus.
the valour of one man th' afflicted throne
imperial, that once lorded o'er the world,
sustain'd. philips.
the civilizers the disturbers say,
the robbers, the corrupters of mankind
proud vagabonds ! who make the world your home,
and lord it where you have no right. philips's briton.
lo'rding. m. s. [from lord..] a little lord; a lord in contempt
or ridicule.
i’ll question you
qf my lord's tricks, and yours, when you were boys.
you were pretty lordings then shakesp. //nter's tale.
to lordings proud i tune my lay,
who feast in bower or hall;
though dukes they be, to dukes i say, -
that pride will have a fall. swift.
lo'rdling... m. s. a diminutive lord. -
traulus, of amphibious breed,
by the dam from lordlings sprung,
by the fire exhal’d from dung. swift.
lo'rdliness. n.s.. [from lordly.] so -
1. dignity; high station.
thou vouchsafest here to visit me,
doing the honour of thy lordliness - - - -
to one so weak. . . shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
2. pride; haughtiness.
lo'r dly. adj. [from lord.]
1. befitting a lord. . - - . . . .
lordly sins require lordly estates to support them. south.
2. proud; haughty; imperious; insolent. . . . . .
bad, as yourself, my lord; . . . -
an’t like your lordly, lord proteclorship !
of me as of a common enemy, so
o shakes eare.
so dreaded once, may now exasperate them, , , ,
i know not: lords are lordlies in their wine. ". . . milton.
expect another message more imperious, "...' ... "... :
more lordly thund'ring than thou well wilt bear. milton.
ev'ry rich and lordly swain, . . . . . . . . . . .
with pride wou'd drag about her chain. ... swift.
lo'rdly. adv. imperiously; despotically; proudly. "
so when a tyger sucks the bullock's blood, -
a famish'd lion, issuing from the wood,
roars lordly fierce, and challenges the food. dryden.
lo'rd ship. m. s. [from lord.]
1. dominion ; power.
- - - -
let me never know that any base affe&amp;tion should get any o
lordship in your thoughts. - - sidney.
it being set upon such an insensible rising of the ground, it
gives the eye lord hip over a good large circuit. . . . sidney.
they which are accounted to rule over the gentiles, exer-
cise lordship over them, and their great ones exercise authority
upon them. -- mark, x. 42.
- needs must the lordship there from virtue slide. fairfax.
2. seigniory ; domain. *
how can those grants of the kings be avoided, without
wronging of those lords which had those lands and lord/hips
given them . . . . spenser on ireland.
there is lordship of the fee, wherein the master doth much
joy, when he walketh about his own possessions. j/otton.
what lands and lordships for their owner know
my quondam barber, but his worship now. dryden.
3. title of honour used to a nobleman not a duke.
i assure your lordship,
the extreme horrour of it almost turn'd me . .
to air, when first i heard it. ben, johnson's catiline.
i could not answer it to the world, if i gave not your lord-
jhip my testimony of being the best husband now living. dry.
4. titulary compellation of judges, and some other persons in
authority and office.
lore. m. s. [from laenan, to learn.] leson; doctrine; in-
struction.
and, for the modest lore of maidenhood
bids me not sojourn with these armed men.
oh whither shall i fly fairfax.
the law of nations, or the lore of war. fairfax.
calm region once,
and full of peace; now toft, and turbulent!
for understanding rul’d not; and the will
heard not her lore / but in subjection now
to sensual appetite. milton's paradise lost.
the subtile fiend his lore
soon learn'd, now milder, and thus answer'd smooth. milt.
lo! rome herself, proud mistress now no more
of arts, but thund'ring against heathen lore. pope.
lor.e. [leonan, saxon.] lost; destroyed. not in use. -
lo'rf l. n. s. [from leonan, saxon.] an abandoned scoundrel.
obsolete.
siker thou speak'st like a lewd lorell
of heaven to deemen so: .
how be i am but rude and borrell,
yet nearer ways i know.
to los ricate. v. a. to plate over.
nature hath loricated, or plaistered over, the sides of the
tympanum in animals with ear-wax, to stop and entangle
any inse&amp;ts that should attempt to creep in there. ray.
#::::::::::/ [lormier, french.] bridlecutter. o
lo'rio t. n.s.. [galgulus.] a kind of bird.
lorn. pret. pass. [of lonian, saxon.] forsaken; lost.
who after that he had fair una lorn,
through light misdeeming of her loyalty.
to lose. v. a. pret. and part, lost. [leoran, saxon.]
1. to forfeit by unsuccessful contest: the contrary to win.
* i fought the battle bravely which i los!,
and lo/l it but to macedonians. dryden.
the lighten’d coursers ran;
they rush'd, and won by turns, and lost the day. dryden.
2. to forfeit as a penalty. in this sense is paradise loft.
fame—few, alas ! the casual blesfing boast,
so hard to gain, so easy to be loft / pope.
3. to be deprived of. -
he lost his right hand with a shot, and, instead thereof,
ever after used a hand of iron. knolles's history.
who conquer'd him, and in what fatal strife
the youth, without a wound, could lose his life. dryden.
4. to suffer diminution of.
the fear of the lord goeth before obtaining of authority;
but roughness and pride is the losing thereof. ecclus x. 21.
if salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted mat.
5. to possess no longer: contrary to keep. -
they have lo/? their trade of woollen drapery. graunt.
no youth shall equal hopes of glory give,
the trojan honour and the roman boast,
spenser's pasłorals.
fairy queen.
admir’d when living, and ador'd when loss. drydon.
we should never lose fight of the country, though some-
times entertained with a distant prospect of it. addison.
6. to miss, so as not to find.
, venus wept the sad disaster -
to . of having loft her fav'rite dove. prior.
7. to separate or alienate. it is perhaps in this sense always used
passively, with to before that from which the separation is
made. - -
but if to honour loft 'tis still decreed
for you my bowl shall flow, my flocks shall bleed;
judge and assert my right, impartial jove. pope's odosy.
when men are openly abandoned, and loss to all shame,
they have no reason to think it hard, if their memory be re-
proached. - - swift.
8. to ruin ; to send to perdition. -
in spite of all the virtue we can boast, -
the woman that deliberates is loff. addison.
9. to bewilder, so as that the way is no longer known.
i will go lose myself,
and wander up and down to view the city. shakespeare.
nor are constant forms of prayer more likely to flat and
hinder the spirit of prayer and devotion, than unpremeditated
and confused variety to distrael and lose it. king charles.
when the mind pursues the idea of infinity, it uses the
ideas and repetition of numbers, which are so many distinct
ideas, kept best by number from running into a confused heap,
wherein the mind loses itself. locke.
but rebel wit deserts thee oft in vain,
loft in the maze of words he turns again. pope.
10. to deprive of.
how should you go about to lose him a wife he loves with
so much passion ? temple.
11. not to employ; not to enjoy,
the happy have whole days, and those they use,
th’ unhappy have but hours, and these they lose. dryden:
to lose these years which worthier thoughts require,
to left that health which should those thoughts inspire. or.
i 2, 1 o
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o s
|
|
12. to squander, to throw away.
- i no more complain,
time, health, and fortune are not los? in vain. pope.
13. to suffer to vanish from view.
like following life in creatures we diffect, -
we loft it in the moment we detect. pope.
oft in the passions' wild rotation tost,
our spring of action to ourselves is lost. pope.
14. to destroy by shipwreck.
the coast
where first my shipwreck’d heart was lost.
15. to throw away; to employ ineffectually.
he has merit, good nature, and integrity, that are too
often loss upon great men, or at least are not all three a match
for flattery. pope's letters.
16. to miss; to part with, so as not to recover.
these sharp encounters, where always many more men are
lost than are killed or taken prisoners, put such a stop to
prior.
middleton's march, that he was glad to retire. clarendon.
17. to be freed from ; as, to lose a fever.
his feely back the bunch has got
which edwin lost before. parnel.
to los e. v. n.
1. not to win.
we’ll hear poor rogues
talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too,
who loses, and who wins; who's in, who's out. shakoff.
2. to decline; to fail.
wisdom in discourse with her
loses discount'nanc'd, and like folly shews. milton.
lo's eable. adj. [from lose..] subject to privation.
consider whether motion, or a propensity to it, be an inhe-
rent quality belonging to atoms in general, and not loseable by
them. boyle.
loosel. m. s. [from lorian, to perish..] a scoundrel; a sorry
worthless fellow. a word now obsolete.
such losels and scatterlings cannot easily, by any sheriff, be
gotten, when they are challenged for any such fact. spenser.
a losel wand'ring by the way,
one that to bounty never cast his mind,
ne thought of honour ever did assay
his baser breast. . fairy queen.
be not with work of losels wit defamed,
ne let such verses poetry be named. hubberd’s tale.
by cambridge a towne i do know,
whose losses by lossels doth shew
more heere then is needful to tell. tuffer's husbandry.
a gross hag!
and, losel, thou art worthy to be hang'd,
that wilt not stay her tongue. shakesh. winter's tale.
lo's er. m. s. [from lose..] one that is deprived of any thing;
one that forfeits any thing; one that is impaired in his posses-
sion or hope: the contrary to winner or gainer.
with the losers let it sympathize,
. for nothing can seem foul to those that win. shakesp.
no man can be provident of his time that is not prudent in
the choice of his company; and if one of the speakers be vain,
tedious, and trifling, he that hears, and he that answers, are
equal losers of their time. taylor's holy living.
it cannot last, because that act seems to have been carried
on rather by the interest of particular countries, than by that
of the whole, which must be a loser by it. temple.
a buil with gilded horns,
shall be the portion of the conquering chief,
a sword and helm shall chear the loser's grief. dryden.
losers and malecontents, whose portion and inheritance is
a freedom to speak. south.
loss. n. s. [from lose.]
1. detriment; privation; diminution of good: the contrary to
at 77. - -
the only gain he purchased was to be capable of % and
detriment for the good of others. ooker.
an evil natured son is the dishonour of his father that begat
him; and a foolish daughter is born to his loss. ecclus.
the abatement of price of any of the landholder's com-
modities, lessens his income, and is a clear loss. locke.
2. miss ; privation.
if he were dead, what would betide of me?
—no other harm but loss of such a lord. -
—the loss of such a lord includes all harms. shakesp.
3. deprivation ; forfeiture. -
loss of eden, till one greater man
restore it, and regain.
4. destruction.
her fellow ships from far her los descry’d;
but only she was sunk, and all were safe beside. dryden.
there succeeded an absolute victory for the english, with
the slaughter of above two thousand of the enemy, with the
los, but of one man, though not a few hurt. bacon.
5. fault; puzzle: used only in the following phrase.
not the least transaction of sense and motion in man, but
milton.
philosophers are at a loss to comprehend. south's sermons.
reason is always striving, and always at a loss, while it is
exercised about that which is not its proper object. dryden.
a man may sometimes be at a loss which side to close with.
baker on learning.
6. useless application.
it would be loss of time to explain any farther our superio-
rity to the enemy in numbers of men and horse. addison.
lost. participial adj. [from lose.] no longer perceptible.
in seventeen days appear'd your pleasing coast,
and woody mountains, half in vapours loft. pope's odsey.
lot. n. s. [hlaut, gothick; plcz, saxon; lot, dutch.]
1. fortune; state assigned.
kala at length concluded my ling'ring lot :
disdain me not, although i be not fair,
who is an heir of many hundred sheep,
doth beauty keep which never sun can burn,
nor storms do turn. sidney.
our own lot is best; and by aiming at what we have not,
we lose what we have already. l'estrange.
prepar'd i stand; he was but born to try
the lot of man, to suffer and to die. pope's odyssey.
2. a die, or anything used in determining chances.
aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the
lord, and the other lot for the scape-goat. lev. xvi. 8.
their tasks in equal portions she divides,
and where unequal, there by lots decides. dryden's virg.
. ulysses bids his friends to cast lots, to shew, that he would
not voluntarily expose them to so imminent danger. broome.
3. it seems in shakespeare to signify a lucky or wished chance.
if you have heard your general talk of rome,
and of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
my name hath touch'd your ears; it is menenius. shakesp.
4. a portion; a parcel of goods as being drawn by lot: as,
what lot of silks had you at the sale :
5. proportion of taxes; as, to pay scot and lot.
lot e tree or nettle tree. m. s. a plant.
the leaves of the lote tree are like those of the nettle. the
fruit of this tree is not so tempting to us, as it was to the com-
panions of ulysses: the wood is durable, and used to make
pipes for wind instruments: the root is proper for hafts of
knives, and was highly esteemed by the romans for its beauty
and use. miller.
lotos. n.s. [latin.] see lote.
the trees around them all their food produce,
lotos, the name divine, nectareous juice. pope's odyssy.
lootien. n.s. [lotio, latin; lotion, french.]
a lotion is a form of medicine compounded of aqueous
liquids, used to wash any part with. §:
in lations in women's cases, he orders two portions of helle-
bore macerated in two cotylae of water. arbuthnot on coins.
lott ery. n.s. [lotterie, fr. from lot..] a game of chance;
a sortilege; distribution of prizes by chance; a play in which
lots are drawn for prizes.
let high-fighted tyranny range on,
till each man drop by lottery. shakesp. julius caesar.
the lattery that he hath devised in these three chests of gold,
silver, and lead, will never be.chosen by any but whom you
shall rightly love. shakesp. merchant of venice.
fortune, that with malicious joy
does man, her slave, oppress,
still various and unconstant still,
promotes, degrades, delights in strife,
and makes a lottery of life. dryden's horace.
every warriour may be said to be a soldier of fortune, and
the best commanders to have a lottery for their work. south.
lova ge. n.s. [levisiicum, latin.] a plant.
loud. adj.
1. noisy; striking the ear with great force.
contending on the lesbian shore,
his prowess philomelides confess'd,
and loud acclaiming greeks the victor bless'd. pope.
the numbers soft and clear,
gently steal upon the ear;
now louder, and yet louder rise,
and fill with spreading sounds the skies. pope's st. caecilia.
2. clamorous; turbulent.
she is loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house. prov.
lo'udly. adu. [from loud.]
1. noisily; so as to be heard far.
%. soldier that philosopher well blam’d,
who long and loudly in the schools declaim'd.
2. co, with violence of voice.
i read above fifty pamphlets, written by as many presbyte-
rian divines, loudly disclaiming toleration. swift.
loudness. n.s. noise; force of sound; turbulence; vehe-
mence or furiousness of clamour.
had any disaster made room for grief, it would have moved
according to prudence, and the proportions of the provoca-
tion: it would not have fallied out into complaint or loudness.
south.
4. ‘le
denham.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o v
l o v
o
k o
| wo
faro,
**
or to:
wii,
, or
o
w044
room.
*}.
th:
toit.
mak: .
ts &amp;
east
so
coli
i:
cat.
inc;
rtici
go
vs.
oil.
rost,
an.
out.
7% love. v. a. slurian, saxon.]
1. to regard with passionate affection, as that of one sex to the
other.
good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
—it is to be made all of fighs and tears;
it is to be made all of faith and service;
it is to be all made of fantasy,
all made of passion, and all made of wishes;
all adoration, duty, and obedience;
all humbleness, all patience, all impatience,
all purity, all trial, all observance.
i could not love i’m sure
one who in love were wise. - cowley.
the jealous man wishes himself a kind of deity to the per-
son he loves; he would be the only employment of her
thoughts. - addison.
2. to regard with the affection of a friend.
none but his brethren he, and sisters, knew,
whom the kind youth prefer'd to me,
and much above myself i lov'd them too. cowley.
3. to regard with parental tenderness.
he that loveth me shall be loved of my father, and i will
love him, and will manifest myself to him. john.
shakespeare.
4. to be pleased with.
fish used to salt water delight more in fresh: we see that
salmons and smelts love to get into rivers, though against the
stream, bacon's natural history.
wit, eloquence, and poetry,
arts which i lov’d. cowley.
he lov'd my worthless rhimes, and, like a friend,
would find out something to commend. cowley.
5. to regard with reverent unwillingness to offend.
love the lord thy god with all thine heart. deut. vi. 5.
love. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the passion between the sexes.
hearken to the birds love-learned song,
the dewie leaves among spenser's epithalam:
while idly i stood looking on,
i found th’ effect of love in idleness.' shakeshcare.
my tales of love were wont to weary you;
i know you joy not in a love discourse. shakespeare.
i look’d upon her with a soldier's eye,
that lik'd, but had a rougher task in hand
than to drive liking to the name of love. shakespeare.
what need a vermil-tinetur'd lip for that,
love-darting eyes, or tresses like the morn ? milton.
love quarrels oft in pleasing concord end,
not wedlock treachery, endang’ring life. milton's agon.
a love potion works more by the strength of charm than
inature. collier on popularity.
you know y' are in my pow'r by making love. dryden.
let mutual joys our mutual trust combine,
and love, and love-born confidence be thine. pope.
cold is that breast which warm'd the world before,
and these love-darting eyes must roll no more. pope.
2. kindness; good-will; friendship.
what love, think'st thou, i sue so much to get
my love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
that love which virtue begs, and virtue grants. shakesh.
god brought daniel into favour and tender love with the
prince. dan. i. 9.
the one preach christ of contention, but the other of love.
phil. i. 17.
by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
have love one to another. john, xiii. 35.
unwearied have we spent the nights,
till the ledean stars, so fam'd for love,
wonder'd at us from above. cowley.
3. courtship. -
demetrius
made love to nedar's daughter helena,
and won her soul. shakesp. midsummer night's dream.
if you will marry make your loves to me,
my lady is bespoke. shakespeare's king lear.
the enquiry of truth, which is the love-making or wooing
of it; the knowledge of truth, the preference of it; and the
belief of truth, the enjoying of it, is the sovereign good of
human nature. bacon's essays.
4. tenderness; parental care.
no religion that ever was, so fully represents the goodness
of god, and his tender love to mankind, which is the most
powerful argument to the love of god. tillotson.
5. liking; inclination to: as, the love of one's country.
in youth, of patrimonial wealth possest,
the love of science faintly warm'd his breast. fenton.
6. object beloved.
open the temple gates unto my love. spensor.
if that the world and love were young,
and truth in every shepherd's tongue;
these pretty pleasures might me move,
to live with thee, and be thy love.
vol. ii.
shakespeare.
the banish'd never hopes his love to see. drydd.
the lover and the love of human kind. pope.
7. lewdness.
he is not lolling on a lewd love bed,
but on his knees at meditation. shakoff. richard iii:
8. unreasonable liking.
the love to fin makes a man sin against his own reason.
taylor's holy living.
men in love with their opinions may not only suppose what
is in question, but allege wrong matter of fast. locke.
9. fondness; concord.
come love and health to all ! -
then i'll fit down: give me some wine; fill full. shakesp.
shall i come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the
spirit of meekness i cor. iv. 21.
10. principle of union. -
love is the great instrument of nature, the bond and cement
of society, the spirit and spring of the universe : love is such
an affection as cannot so properly be said to be in the soul, as
the soul to be in that: it is the whole man wrapt up into one
desire. south,
11. picturesque representation of love.
the lovely babe was born with ev'ry grace:
such was his form as painters, when they show -
their utmost art, on naked loves bestow. dryden's ovid.
i2. a word of endearment.
'tis no dishonour, trust me, love, ’tis none;
i would die for thee. dryden's don sebastian.
13. due reverence to god.
i know that you have not the love of god in you. john.
love is of two sorts, of friendship and of desire; the one be-
twixt friends, the other betwixt lovers; the one a rational, the
other a sensitive love ; so our love of god consists of two parts,
as esteeming of god, and desiring of him. • hammond.
the love of god makes a man chaste without the laborious
arts of fasting, and exterior disciplines; he reaches at glory
without any other arms but those of love. taylor.
14. a kind of thin silk stuff. ainsworth.
this leaf held near the eye, and obverted to the light, ap-
peared so full of pores, with such a transparency as that of a
sieve, a piece of cypress, or lovehood. boyle on colours.
love apple. m. s. a plant. amiller.
love knot. n.s. [love and knot..]. a complicated figure, by
which affection interchanged is figured.
love letter. m. s. [love and letter.] letter of courtship.
have i escaped loveletters in the holyday time of my beauty,
and an i now a subject for them : shakespeare.
the children are educated in the different notions of their
parents; the sons follow the father, while the daughters read
loveletters and romances to their mother. addison's spediator.
low elily. adv. [from lovely..] amiably; in such a manner as
to excite love.
thou look’so
lovelily dreadful. otway's venice preserv'd.
lov'eliness. n. s. [from lovely..] amiableness; qualities of
mind or body that excite love.
carrying thus in one person the only two bands of good-
will, lovelins; and lovingness. sidney.
- when i approach
her lovelines, so absolute she seems,
that what she wills to do, or say,
seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best. amilton.
if there is such a native loveliness in the sex, as to make
them victorious when they are in the wrong, how resistless is
their power when they are on the side of truth addison.
low elor n. adj. [love and lorn.] forsaken of one's love.
the love-lorn nightingale,
nightly to thee her sad song mourneth well. milton,
lovel y. adj. [from love j. amiable; exciting love.
the breast of hecuba,
when she did suckle hector, look'd not lovelier
than heotor's forehead. shakespeare's coriolanus.
saul and jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives,
and in their death they were not divided. 2 sam.
the flowers which it had press'd
appeared to my view,
more fresh and lovely than the rest,
that in the meadows grew. denham.
the christian religion gives us a more lovely character of
god than any religion ever did. 7illotson.
the fair
with cleanly powder dry their hair;
and round their lovely breast and head
fresh flow'rs their ming!'d odours shed. prior.
love mong er. n.s. [love and monger.] one who deals in affairs
of love. -
thou art an old lovomonger, and speakest skilfully, shak,
lover. m. s. [from love.]
1. one who is in love,
love is blind, and lovers cannot see
the pretty follies that themselves commit. shałoffeare.
15 s lct<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o u
l o vv
|
o
-
!
let it be never said, that he whose breast
is fill'd with love, should break a lover's rest. dryden.
2. a friend; one who regards with kindness.
your brother and his lover have embrac'd. shakesp.
i tell thee, fellow,
thy general is my lover: i have been
the book of his good act, whence men have read
his fame unparallel'd haply amplified. shakespeare.
3. one who likes any thing.
to be good and gracious, and a lover of knowledge, are
amiable things. barnet's theory of the earth.
louv er. m. s [from l'ouvert, fr. an opening.] an opening for
the smoke to go out at in the roof of a cottage. spensor.
loves ecret... n.s. [love and secret..] secret between lovers.
what danger, arimant, is this you fear?
or what lovesecret which i must not hear dryden's aur.
lovesick, adj. [love and sick.] disordered with love ; lan-
guishing with amorous desire.
see, on the shoar inhabits purple spring,
where nightingales their lovesick ditty fing.
to the dear mistress of my lovesick mind,
her swain a pretty present has design'd.
of the reliefs to ease a lovesick mind,
flavia prescribes despair. granville.
low e so m.e. adj. [from love..] lovely. a word not used.
nothing new can spring
without thy warmth, without thy influence bear, -
or beautiful or lovesome can appear. dryden's lucretius.
lovesox g. m. s. [love and song.] song expressing love.
poor romeo is already dead
stabb'd with a white wench's black eye,
run through the ear with a lovesong. shakspeare.
lovesong weeds and satyrick thorns are grown,
where seeds of better arts were early sown.
lovesuit. m. s. [love and suit..] courtship.
his lovesiit hath been to me
as fearful as a siege. shakes?eare's cymbeline.
love tale. m. s. [love and tale.] narrative of love.
the lovetale
infected sion's daughters with like heat;
whose wanton passions in the sacred porch
ezekiel saw. milton's paradise loft.
cato's a proper person to entrust
a lovetale with. addison.
lovet hought. n. s. [love and thought.] amorous fancy.
away to sweet beds of flowers,
lovethoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.
ilovetoy. m. s. sove and toy..] small presents given by lovers.
has this amorous gentleman presented himself with any
sovetoys, such as gold snuff-boxes arbuthnot and pope.
lovet rick. m. s. [love and trick.j art of expressing love.
other disports than dancing jollities;
other lovetricks than glancing with the eyes. donne.
lou gh. n.s. [lach, irish, a lake..] a lake; a large inland stand-
ing water.
a people near the northern pole that won,
whom ireland sent from laughes and forests hore,
divided far by sea from europe’s shore.
lough ness never freezes.
lovin g. participial adj. [from love.]
1. kind; affectionate.
so loving to my mother,
that he would not let ev'n the winds of heav'n
visit her face too roughly. shakesp. hamlet.
this earl was of great courage, and much loved of his sol-
diers, to whom he was no less ioving again. hayward.
2. expressing kindness.
the king took her in his arms till she came to herself, and
comforted her with loving words. e/h. xv. 8.
loving kindness. m. s. tenderness; favour; mercy. a scrip-
tural word.
remember, o lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving-
#indnesses. psal. xxv. 6.
he has adapted the arguments of obedience to the imper-
dryden.
dryden's wirgil.
idonne.
fairfax.
phil. trans.
fection of our understanding, requiring us to consider him only
under the amiable attributes of goodness and lovingkindness,
and to adore him as our friend and patron. rogers.
low ingly. adv. [from loving.] affectionately; with kind-
ness.
the new king, having no less lovingly performed all duties
to him dead than alive, pursued on the siege of his unnatural
brother, as much for the revenge of his father, as for the esta-
blishing of his own quiet. sidney.
it is no great matter to live lovingly with good-natured and
meck persons; but he that can do so with the froward and
perverse, he only hath true charity. taylor.
low ing ness. m. s. [from loving.] kindness; affection.
carrying thus in one person the only two bands of good-
will, loveliness and lovingness. sidney.
louis d'or. m. s. [french..] a golden coin of france, va-
lued at about twenty shillings.
shakesp.
if he is desired to change a louis d'or, he must consider of it.
spe:lator.
to lou nge. v. n.[lunderen, dutch j. to idle; to live lazily.
lo'unger. m. s. [from lounge.] an idler.
louse. n.s. plural lice. [lur, saxon ; luys, dutch..] a small
animal, of which different species live on the bodies of men,
beasts, and perhaps of all living creatures,
there were lice upon man and beast. exod. viii. 18.
frogs, lice, and flies, must all his palace fill
with loath’d intrusion. milton.
it is beyond even an atheist's credulity and impudence to
affirm, that the first men might proceed out of the tumours of
trees, as maggots and flies are supposed to do now, or might
grow upon trees; or perhaps might be the lice of some prodi-
gious animals, whose species is now extinct. bentley.
not that i value the money the fourth part of the skip of a
louse. - swift.
to louse. v. a. [from the noun.] to clean from lice.
as for all other good women, that love to do but little work,
how handsome it is to louse, themselves in the sunshine, they
that have been but a while in ireland can well witnesss
spenser on ireland.
you sat and lous’d him all the sun-shine day. swift.
lousewort. m. s. the name of a plant; called also rattle
and cock's-comb. asillor.
lousily, adv. [from lous...] in a paltry, mean, and scurvy way.
lousiness. n.f. [from lousy..] the state of abounding with
lice.
lousy. adj. [from loose.]
1. swarming with lice ; over-run with lice.
let him be daub'd with lace, live high and whore,
sometimes be lousy, but be never poor. drydon's yav.
sweetbriar and gooseberry are only lousy in dry times, or
very hot places. 41crimer’s husbandry.
2. mean; low born ; bred on the dunghii.
i pray you now remembrance on the lousy knave mine host.
a lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries. shakesp.
lout. n.s. [lete, old dutch. mr. lye..] a mean aukward fel-
low ; a bumpkin ; a clown.
pamela, whose noble heart doth disdain, that the trust of
her virtue is reposed in such a lout's hands, had yet, to shew an
obedience, taken on shepherdish apparel. sidney.
this lowt, as he exceeds our lords, the odds
is, that we scarce are men, and you are gods. shakesp.
i have need of such a youth,
that can with some discretion do my business;
for ’tis no trusting to yon foolish lout. shakespeare.
thus wail'd the lauts in melancholy strain. gay's paso.
to lout. v. n. [pluran, to bend, saxon.j to pay obeisance;
to bend; to bow; to stoop. obsolete. it was used in a
good sense.
he fair the knight saluted, louting low,
who fair him quitted, as that courteous was. stensor.
under the sand bag he was seen,
louting low, like a for 'ster green. ben. johnson.
the palmer, grey with age, with count'nance lowting low,
his head ev'n to the earth before the king did bow. drayton.
7% lou t. v. a. this word seems in shakespeare to signify, to
overpower.
i am lowted by a traitor villain,
and cannot help the noble chevalier. shałoff. henry vi.
loutis h. adj. [from lout..] clownish; bumpkinly.
this lautis' clown is such, that you never saw so ill-favoured
a visar ; his behaviour such, that he is beyond the degree of
ridiculous, sidney.
lou rishly. adv. [from lout..] with the air of a clown ; with
the gait of a bumpkin.
low. adi.
1. not high.
their wand'ring course now high, now low, then hid,
progressive, retrograde. milton.
2. not rising far upwards.
it became a spreading vine of low stature.
3. not elevated in place, or local situation.
o mighty caesar i do'st thou lye so low p
are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
shrunk to this little measure? shakesp. julius cæsar.
equal in days and nights, except to those
beyond the polar circles; to them day
had unbenighted shone, while the low sun,
to recompense his distance, in their fight
had rounded still th’ horizon, and not known
or east or west. milton.
whatsoever is washed away from them is carried down into
the lower grounds, and into the sea, and nothing is brought
back. burnet's theory of the earth.
4. descending far downwards; deep.
ezek. xvii. 6.
the lowest bottom shook of erebus. milton.
so high as heav'd the tumid hills, so low,
down sunk a hollow bottom, broad and deep,
capacious bed of waters. milton.
his<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o w
low
olot.
re:
sido
w.
ic,
ło,
o,
ot)
ht
ro,
his volant touch
instinet through all proportions low and high,
fled and pursu'd transverse the resonant fugue. milton,
5. not deep; not swelling high 5 shallow : used of water.
as two men were walking by the sea-side at low water, they
faw an oyster, and both pointed at it together. l'e/irange.
it is saw ebb sure with his accuser, when such peccadillo's
are put in to swell the charge. atterbury.
6. not of high price : as, corn is low.
7. not loud; not noisy.
as when in open air we blow,
the breath, though strain'd, sounds flat and low :
but if a trumpet take the blast,
it lifts it high, and makes it last. jwaller.
the theatre is so well contrived, that, from the very deep
of the stage, the lowest sound may be heard distinctly to the
farthest part of the audience; and yet, if you raise your voice
as high as you please, there is nothing like an echo to cause
confusion. addison on italy.
8. in latitudes near to the line.
they take their course either high to the north, or low to
the south. abbot's descript. of the world.
9. not rising to so great a sum as some other accumulation of
particulars.
who can imagine, that in sixteen or seventeen hundred
years time, taking the lower chronology, that the earth had
then stood, mankind should be propagated no farther than
judaea 3 burnet's theory of the earth.
no. late in time: as, the lower empire.
11. dejected; depressed.
his spirits are so low his voice is drown'd,
he hears as from afar, or in a swoon,
like the deaf murmur of a distant sound. dryden.
though he before had gall and rage, -
which death or conquest must assuage;
he grows dispirited and law,
he hates the fight, and shuns the foe. prior.
12. impotent; subdued.
to be worst,
the lowess, most dejected, thing of fortune,
stands still in esperance.
why but to awe,
why but to keep ye low and ignorant. milton's par. loft.
to keep them all quiet, he must keep them in greater awe
and less splendor; which power he will use to keep them as
law as he pleases, and at no more cost than makes for his own
pleasure. graunt's bills of mortality.
13. not elevated in rank or station; abject.
he wooes both high and low, both rich and poor. shakesp.
try in men of low and mean education, who have never
elevated their thoughts above the spade. locke.
14. dishonourable; betokening meanness of mind: as, low
tricks.
yet sometimes nations will decline so low
from virtue, which is reason, that no wrong
but justice, and some fatal course annexed,
deprives them of their outward liberty,
their inward lost. milton.
15. not sublime; not exalted in thought or diction.
he has not so many thoughts that are low and vulgar, but,
at the same time, has not so many thoughts that are sublime
and noble. addison's speciator.
in comparison of these divine writers, the noblest wits of
the heathen world are low and dull. felton on the clafficks.
16. submissive ; humble ; reverent.
i bring them to receive
from thee their names, and pay their fealty
with low subjection. milton.
from the tree her step she turn'd,
but first low reverence done, as to the pow'r
that dwelt within. milton.
low. adv.
1. not aloft; not on high.
there under ebon shades and low-brow'd rocks,
as ragged as thy locks,
in dark cimmerian desert ever dwell. milton.
my eyes no object met
but low-hung clouds, that dipt themselves in rain,
shakspeare.
to shake their fleeces on the earth again. dryden.
no luxury found room
in low-rooft houses, and bare walls of lome. dryden.
vast yellow offsprings are the german's pride;
but hotter climates narrower frames obtain,
and low-built bodies are the growth of spain. creech.
we wand'ring go through dreary wastes,
where round some mould'ring tow'r pale ivy creeps,
and low-brow’d rocks hang nodding o'er the deeps. pope.
2. not at a high price; meanly. it is chiefly used in compo-
sition. -
proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
the confident and over-lusty french:
do the low-rated english play at dice? shakoff. henry v.
this is the prettiest low-born lass, that ever
ran the greenford; nothing she does or seems,
but snacks of something greater than herself, - -
too noble for this place. shakespeare's winter's tale,
whenever i am turned out, my lodge descends upon a low-
spirited creeping family. swift.
corruption, sike a general flood,
shall deluge all; and av’rice creeping on,
spread like a low-born mist, and blot the sun. pope.
3. in times approaching towards our own.
in that part of the world which was first inhabited, even as
low down as abraham's time, they wandered with their flocks
and herds. |locke.
4. with a depression of the voice.
lucia, speak low, he is retir'd to rest. addison's cato.
5. in a state of subjection.
how comes it that, having been once so low brought, and
thoroughly subjected, they afterwards lifted up themselves so
strongly again f spenser on ireland.
to low. v. a. [from the adjective.] to sink; to make low.
probably misprinted for lower.
the value of guineas was lowed from one-and-twenty shil-
lings and sixpence to one-and-twenty shillings. swift.
to low. v. n. [plonan, saxon. the adjective low, not high,
is pronounced lo, and would rhyme to no : the verb low, to
bellow, lou; and is by dryden rightly rhymed to now..] to
bellow as a cow.
doth the wild ass bray when he has grass or loweth the ox
over his fodder job, vi. 5.
the maids of argos, who, with frantick cries,
and imitated lowings, fill'd the skies. roscommon.
fair io grac'd his shield, but io now,
with horns exalted stands, and seems to low. dryden.
had he been born some simple shepherd’s heir,
the lowing herd, or fleecy sheep his care. prior.
low bell. m. s. [/aeye, dutch ; leg, saxon; or log, islandick,
a flame, and bell.] a kind of fowling in the night, in which
the birds are weakened by a bell, and lured by a flame into
a net. lowe denotes a flame in scotland; and to lowe, to
flame.
low e. the termination of local names.
lowe, loe, comes from the saxon pleap, a hill, heap, or
barfow ; and so the gothick haiw is a monument or barrow.
gilson's camden.
to low er. v. a. [from low.]
1. to bring low ; to bring down by way of submission.
as our high vessels pass their wat'ry way,
let all the naval world due homage pay;
with hasty reverence their top-honours lower,
confeffing the asserted power. prior,
2. to suffer to fink down. -
when water issues out of the apertures with more than or-
dinary rapidity, it bears along with it such particles of loose
matter as it met with in its passage through the stone, and it
sustains those particles till its motion begins to remit, when
by degrees it lowers them, and lets them fall. a 'oodward.
3. to lessen; to make less in price or value.
the kingdom will lose by this lowering of into.est, if it
makes foreigners withdraw any of their money. locke.
some people know it is for their advantage to lower their in-
terest. child on trade.
to low er. v. m. to grow less; to fall; to sink.
the present pleasure,
by revolution low'ring, does become
the opposite of itself. shakes). ant. and cleopatra.
to lowe r. v. m. [it is doubtful what was the primitive mean-
ing of this word: if it was originally applied to the appear-
ance of the sky, it is no more than to grow low, as the sky
seems to do in dark weather: if it was first used of the coun-
tenance, it may be derived from the dutch loeren, to look
askance: the ow founds as ou in hour; in the word lower,
when it means to grow, or make low, the ow sound as o in
more.]
1. to appear dark, stormy, and gloomy; to be clouded.
now is the winter of our discontent
made glorious summer by this sun of york;
and all the clouds that lowered upon our house,
in the deep bosom of the ocean buried. shaks). rich, iii.
the low'ring spring, with lavish rain,
beats down the slender stem and bearded grain. dryden.
when the heavens are filled with clouds, and all nature
wears a lowering countenance, i withdraw myself from these
uncomfortable scenes. addison.
the dawn is overcast, the morning low'r,
and heavily in clouds brings on the day. addison's cato.
if on swithin's feast the welkin laurs,
and ev'ry penthouse streams with hasty show’rs,
twice twenty days shall clouds their flecces drain. gay.
2. to frown; to pout; to look fullen.
there was diana when aetaron saw her, and one of her
foolish nymphs, who weeping, and withal lowering, one might
see the workman meant to set forth tears of anger, *
c
3 -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l o w
l o y
on
he mounts the throne, and juno took her place,
but fullen discontent sat low'ring on her face;
then, impotent of tongue, her silence broke,
. thus turbulent in rattling tone she spoke. dryden.
lowe r. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. cloudiness; gloominess.
2. cloudiness of look. - -
philoclea was jealous for zelmane, not without so mighty
a lower as that face could yield. sidney.
lowe ringly. adv. [from lower.] with cloudiness; gloomily.
lower most. adj. [from low, lower, and mos...] lowest.
plants have their seminal parts uppermost, living creatures
have them lowermoff. bacon’s natural history.
it will also happen, that the same part of the pipe which
was now lowermosi, will presently become higher, so that the
water does ascend by descending; ascending in comparison to
the whole instrument, and descending in respect of its several
parts. jwilkins's daedalus.
low land. n.s. [low and land.] the country that is low in
respect of neighbouring hills; the marsh.
what a devil is he
his errand was to draw the lowland damps,
and noisome vapours, from the foggy fens,
then breathe the baleful stench with all his force. dryden.
no nat’ral cause she found from brooks or bogs,
or marshy lowlands, to produce the fogs. dryden.
low lily. adv. [from lowly.]
1. humbly; without pride.
2. meanly; without dignity.
low liness. n.s.. [from lowly.]
1. humility; freedom from pride:
lowlings is young ambition's ladder,
whereto the climber upward turns his face. shakoffeare.
the king-becoming graces,
as justice, verity, temp'rance, stableness,
bounty, persey’rance, mercy, lowliness,
devotion, patience, courage, fortitude;
i have no relish of them. shakespeare's macbeth.
eve,
with lowlines; majestick, from her seat,
and grace, that won who saw to wish her stay,
rose. milton's paradise loft.
if with a true christian lowlines of heart, and a devout fer-
vency of soul, we perform them, we shall find, that they will
turn to a greater account to us, than all the warlike prepara-
tions in which we trust. atterbury.
2. meanness; want of dignity; abject depression.
they continued in that lowliness until the division between
the two houses of lancaster and york arose. spenser.
the lowliness of my fortune has not brought me to flatter
vice; it is my duty to give testimony to virtue. drydon.
lowly. adj. [from low.]
1. humble; meek; mild.
take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for i am meek
and lowly in heart. . matt. xi. 29.
he did bend to us a little, and put his arms abroad: we of
our parts saluted him in a very lowly and submissive manner, as
looking that from him we should receive sentence of life or
death. bacon's new atlantis.
with cries they fill'd the holy sane;
then thus with lowly voice ilioneus began. dryden.
the heavens are not pure in his fight, and he charges even
his angels with folly; with how lowly a reverence must we
bow down our souls before so excellent a being, and adore a
nature so much superior to our own | rogers.
2. mean; wanting dignity ; not great.
for from the natal hour distinetive names,
one common right the great and lowly claims. pope.
3. not lofty; not sublime.
for all who read, and reading not disdain,
these rural poems, and their lowly strain,
the name of varus oft inscrib'd shall see. dryd. silenus.
lowly. adv. [from low.]
1. not highly ; meanly; without grandeur; without dignity.
i will shew myself highly fed, and lowly taught; i know
my business is but to the court. shakespeare.
'tis better to be lowly born,
and range with humble livers in content,
than to be perk’d up in a glist'ring grief,
and wear a golden sorrow. shakesp. henry viii.
2. humbly; meekly; modestly.
heav'n is for thee too high
to know what passes there; be lowly wise:
think only what concerns thee, and thy being. milton.
- another crowd
preferr'd the same request, and lowly bow’d. pope.
low n. m. f. [liun, irish ; len, dutch, a stupid drone..] a
scoundrel; a rascal. not in use.
king stephen was a worthy peer,
his breeches cost him but a crown,
he thought them fixpence all too dear,
and therefore call'd the taylor lown. shakespeare.
lowness. n.s. [from low.]
1. contrariety to height; small distance from the ground.
they know
by th’ height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth,
or foizon follow. shakesp. ant. and cleopatra.
the lowns of the bough where the fruit cometh, maketh
the fruit greater, and to ripen better; for you shall even see,
in apricots upon a wall, the greatest fruits towards the bottom.
bacon's natural history.
in gothick cathedrals, the narrowness of the arch makes
it rise in height, the lowness opens it in breadth. addison.
2. meanness of character or condition, whether mentas or
external.
nothing could have subdu'd nature
to such a lowns, but his unkind daughter. shakespeare.
now i must
o: the young man send humble treaties,
nd palter in the shift of lowness. shake -
3. want of rank; want .." speare
the name of servants has of old been reckoned to imply a
certain meanness of mind, as lowness of condition. south.
4. want of sublimity; contrary to loftiness of stile or senti-
incint.
his stile is accommodated to his subject, either high or
low; if his fault be too much lawns, that of persius is the
hardness of his metaphors. dryden.
5. submissiveness.
the people were in such lownes of obedience as subjects
were like to yield, who had lived almost four-and-twenty
years under so politick a king as his father. bacon.
6. depression; dejection.
hence that poverty and lowness of spirit to which a king-
dom may be subject, as well as a particular person. swift.
low thooghted, adj. [low and thought.] having the thoughts
with-held from sublime or heavenly meditations; mean of
sentiment; narrow mindedness. -
above the smoak and stir of this dim spot,
which men call earth, and with lowthoughted care,
strive to keep up a frail and feverish being. milton,
o grace serene " oh virtue heav'nly fair
divine oblation of lowthoughted care
fresh blooming hope, gay daughter of the sky,
and faith our early immortality pope.
lowsp1 rited, adj. [low and spirit..] dejeded; depressed; ot
lively; not vivacious; not sprightly.
severity carried to the highest pitch breaks the mind; and
then, in the place of a disorderly young fellow, you have a
lowspirited moped creature. locke.
oxopro mick. m. s. [xoz3; and dowo;..]
loxodromick is the art of oblique sailing by the rhomb,
which always makes an equal angle with every meridian;
that is, when you sail neither directly under the equator, nor
under one and the same meridian, but across them: hence
the table of rhumbs, or the transverse tables of miles, with
the table of longitudes and latitudes, by which the sailor may
practically find his course, distance, latitude, or longitude, is
is called loxodromick. harris.
loyal. adj. [loyal, french.]
1. obedient; true to the prince.
of gloster's treachery,
and of the loyal service of his son,
when i inform'd him, then he call'd me sot. shakoff.
the regard of duty in that most loyal nation overcame all
other difficulties. knolles.
loyal subjects often seize their prince,
yet mean his sacred person not the least offence. dryden.
2. faithful in love; true to a lady, or lover.
hail wedded love 1 by thee
founded in reason loyal, just, and pure. milton.
there laodamia with evadne moves,
unhappy both ! but loyal in their loves. dryden's znaid.
loyalist. n.s.. [from loyal..] one who professes uncommon
adherence to his king.
the cedar, by the instigation of the loyalis's, fell out with
the homebians. howel's wocal fores?.
loyally, adv. [from hyal.] with fidelity; with true adhe.
rence to a king; with fidelity to a lover.
the circling year i wait, with ampler stores,
and fitter pomp, to hail my native shores;
then by my realms due homage would be paid,
for wealthy kings are loyaly obey'd. pope's odysy.
loy alty. m. s. [loiaulte, french.] -
1. firm and faithful adherence to a prince.
though loyalty, well held, to fools does make
our faith meer folly; yet he that can endure
to follow with allegiance a fall'n lord,
does conquer him that did his master conquer. shakes.
he had never had any veneration for the court, but only
such loyalty to the king as the law required. clarendon.
abdiel faithful found
unshaken, unseduc’d, unterrify'd,
his loyalty he kept. milton.
for<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">lu b
l u c
*
mako
sen
potom
hilo,
mos
o,
*
so
tolo
*
so
gig
is to
o,
§3.
went
o
kn g-
o ji.
ugh's
in of
to,
lo,
ser-
for loyalty is still the same,
whether it win or lose the game;
true as the dial to the sun,
although it be not shone upon. hudibras.
2. fidelity to a lady, or lover. - - -
lw'ze noe. a. s. [osenge, french. of unknown etymology.]
1. a rhomb.
the best builders resolve upon reetangular squares, as a
mean between too few and too many angles ; and through the
equal inclination of the sides, they are stronger than the rhomb
or losenge. wotton's architecture.
2. lozenge is a form of a medicine made into small pieces, to be
held or chewed in the mouth till melted or wasted.
3. a cake of preserved fruit: both these are so denominated
from the original form, which was rhomboidal.
lp. a contraction for lord/hip. -
lu’bbard. n. / [from lubber.] a lazy sturdy fellow. -
yet their wine and their victuals those curmudgeon lubbards
lock up from my fight, in cellars and cupboards. swift.
lu’bber. m. s. [of this word the best derivation seems to be
from lubbed, said by junius to signify in danish fat..] a sturdy
drone; an idle, fat, bulky losel; a booby.
- for tempest and showers deceiveth a many,
and ling’ring lubbers loose many a penie. taser's huso.
these chase the smaller shoals of fish from the main sea into
the havens, leaping up and down, puffing like a fat lubber out
of breath. carew's survey of cornwall.
they clap the lubber ajax on the shoulder,
as if his feet were on brave heołor's breast,
and great troy shrinking. shakesp. troil. and crossida.
a notable lubber thou reportest him to be. shakesp.
tell how the drudging goblin sweat;
his shadowy flail hath thresh'd the corn,
that ten day labourers could not end ;
then lies him down the lubber fend. milton.
venetians do not more uncouthly ride,
than did your lubber state mankind bestride. dryden.
how can you name that superannuated lubber 2 congreve.
lu’bberly. adj. [from lubber.j lazy and bulky.
i came at eaton to marry mrs. anne page; and she'as a
great lubberly boy. shakespeare.
lu bberly. adv. aukwardly; clumsily.
merry andrew on the low rope copies lubberly the same
tricks which his master is so dexterously performing on the
high. bryden's dedication.
lu. m. s. a game at cards.
ev’n mighty pam who kings and queens o'erthrew,
and mow’d down armies in the fights of lu. pope.
to lu'b rica te. v. a. [from lubricus, lat.] to make smooth
or slippery; to smoothe.
there are aliments which, besides this lubricating quality,
stimulate in a small degree. arbuthnot on aliments.
the patient is relieved by the mucilaginous and the sapona-
ceous remedies, some of which lubricate, and others both lubri-
cate and stimulate. sharp's surgery.
to lu'br1c1tate. v. n. [from lubricus, latin.] to smooth;
to make slippery.
lubri city. m. s. [from lubricus, latin; lubricite, french.]
1. slipperiness; smoothness of surface.
2. aptness to glide over any part, or to facilitate motion.
both the ingredients are of a lubricating nature; the muci-
lage adds to the lubricity of the oil, and the oil preserves the
mucilage from inspissation. ray on creation.
3. uncertainty; slipperiness; instability.
the manifold impossibilities and lubricities of matter cannot
have the same conveniences in any modification. more.
he that enjoyed crowns, and knew their worth, excepted
them not out of the charge of universal vanity; and yet the
politician is not discouraged at the inconstancy of human
affairs, and the lubricity of his subject. glanville's apology.
a state of tranquillity is never to be attained, but by keep-
ing perpetually in our thoughts the certainty of death, and the
lubricity of fortune, l’estrange.
4. wantonness; lewdness. -
from the letchery of these fauns, he thinks that satyr is
derived from them, as if wantonness and lubricity were essential
to that poem which ought in all to be avoided. dryden,
i,u'brick, adj. [lubricus, latin.] - - - -
1. slippery 5 smooth on the surface.
- a throng
of short thick sobs, whose thund'ring volleys float
and roul themselves over her lubrick throat,
in panting murmurs. crashaw.
2. uncertain ; unsteady. -
i will deduce him from his cradle through the deep and
lubrick waves of state, till he is swallowed in the gulph of fata-
lity. wotton.
3. wanton; lewd. [lubrique, french.]
why were we hurry'd down
this lubrick and adult'rate age;
nay, added fat pollutions of our own,
o
o t'encrease the steaming ordures of the stage drydon,
vol. ii,
4.
lu'br1cous, adj. clubricus, latin.]
1. slippery; smooth. - i- “
. the parts of water being voluble and lubricous as well as
fine, it easily infinuates itself into the tubes of vegetables, and
by that means introduces into them the matter it bears along
with it. woodward's nat. hist.
2. uncertain.
the judgment being the leading power, if it be stored with
lubricous opinions instead of clearly conceived truths, and per-
emptorily resolved in them, the practice will be as irregular as
the conceptions. glanville's scepsis.
lu brification. m. s. [lubricus and fo, latin.] the aa cf
smoothing. -
a twofold liquor is prepared for the inundion and lubrifica-
tion of the heads of the bones; an oily one, furnished by the
marrow ; a mucilaginous, supplied by certain glandules seated
jn the articulations. -
lubrifa’ction. m. s. [lubricus and facio, latin.] the aet of
lubricating or smoothing. -
the cause is lubrifaaion and relaxation, as in medicines
emollient; such as milk, honey, and mallows. bacon.
luce. n. s. [perhaps from lupus, latin.] . a pike full grown.
they give the dozen white luces in their coat. shakesp.
lu'cent. adj. [lucens, latin.] shining; bright; splendid.
i meant the day-star should not brighter rise,
nor lend like influence from his lucent seat. ben. johnson.
a spot like which perhaps
astronomer in the sun's lucent orb,
through his glaz'd optick tube yet never saw. milton.
lu'cid. m. s. [lucidus, latin; hucido, french.]
1. shining; bright; glittering.
- over his lucid arms
a military vest of purple flow'd ; . . .
livelier than meliboean. - - milton.
it contracts it, preserving the eye from being injured by too
vehement and lucid an object, and again dilates it for the
apprehending objects more remote in a fainter light. ray.
if a piece of white paper, or a white cloth, or the end of
one's finger, be held at the distance of about a quarter of an
inch, or half an inch, from that part of the glass where it is
most in motion, the electrick vapour which is excited by the
friction of the glass against the hand, will, by dashing against
the white paper, cloth, or finger, be put into such an agita-
tion as to emit light, and make the white paper, cloth, or fin-
ger, appear lucid like a glow-worm, newton.
the pearly shell its lucid globe unfold,
and phcebus warm the rip'ning ore to gold. pope.
2. pellucid; transparent.
on the fertile banks
of abbana and pharphar, lucid streams.
moon's paradis. loft.
on the transparent side of a globe, half silver and half of a
transparent metal, we saw certain strange figures circularly
drawn, and thought we could touch them, till we found our
fingers stopped by that lucid substance. gulliver's trav.
3. bright with the radiance of intellect; not darkened with
madness. -
the long dissentions of the two houses, which, although
they had had lucid intervals and happy pauses, yet they did
ever hang over the kingdom, ready to break forth. bacon.
some beams of wit on other souls may fall,
strike through and make a lucid interval;
but shadwell's genuine night admits no ray,
his rising fogs prevail upon the day. dryden.
i believed him in a lucid interval, and desired he would
please to let me see his book. tatler.
a few sensual and voluptuous persons, may, for a season,
eclipse this native light of the soul; but can never so wholly
fnother and extinguish it, but that, at some lucid intervals,
it will recover itself again, and shine forth to the conviction
of their conscience. - - bentley.
luci'dity. m. s. [from lucid.] splendor; blightness. dia.
luci'ferous. adj. [lucifer, latin.] giving light; affording
means of discovery.
the experiment is not ignoble, and luciferous enough, as
shewing a new way to produce a volatile salt. boyle.
luci'fick, adj. [lux and facio, latin.] making light; pro-
ducing light.
when made to converge, and so mixed together; though
their lucifick motion be continued, yet by interfering, that
equal motion, which is the colorifick, is interrupted.
grew,
luck, n. s. [geluck, dutch.]
1. chance; accident; fortune; hap; casual event.
he forc’d his neck into a nooze, -
to shew his play at fast and loose;
and when he chanc'd to escape, mistook
for art and subtlety, his luck. hudibras:
some such method may be found by human industry or
luck, by which compound bodies may be resolved into other
fubstances than they are divided into by the fire. boyle,
2. fortune, good or bad.
15 t glad
ray on creation.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l u d
l u k
-
glad of such luck the luckless lucky maid,
a long time with that savage people staid,
to gather breath in many miseries.
farewel, good luck go with thee.
i did demand what news from shrewsbury.
he told me, that rebellion had ill luck,
and that young harry percy's spur was cold, shakspeare.
that part of mankind who have had the justice, or the luck,
to pass, in common opinion, for the wisest, have followed a
very different scent. temple.
such, how highly soever they may have the luck to be
thought of, are far from being israelites indeed. south.
the guests are found too num’rous for the treat,
but all, it seems, who had the luck to eat,
swear they ne'er tasted more delicious meat. tate's juv.
lu'ckily. adv. [from lucky.) fortunately; by good hap.
it is the pencil thrown luckily full upon the horse's mouth;
to express the foam, which the painter with all his skill could
not form. dryden's dufresnoy.
it happens luckily for the establishment of a new race of
kings upon the british throne, that the first of this royal line
has all high qualifications. - addison.
lu'ck in ess. n. s. [from lucky.] good fortune; good hap ;
casual happiness. - -
he who sometimes lights on truth, is in the right but by
chance; and i know not whether the luckins of the accident
spensor.
shakespeare.
will excuse the irregularity of his proceeding. locke.
lu'ckless. adj. [from luck.] unfortunate ; unhappy.
glad of such luck, the luckless lucky maid, .
a long time with that savage people staid, -
to gather breath in many miseries. fairy queen.
never shall my thoughts be base,
though luckles, yet without disgrace. suckling.
what else but his immoderate just of pow'r,
dryden.
pray'rs made and granted in a suckless hour
lu'cky. n.s.. [from luck; geluckig, dutch..] fortunate ; happy
by chance.
but i more fearful, or more lucky wight,
dismay’d with that deformed, dismal sight,
fled fast away.
perhaps some arm more lucky than the rest,
may reach his heart, and free the world from bondage. add.
lu'crative. adj. [lucratif, french; lucrativus, lat.] gainful;
profitable; bringing money.
the trade of merchandize being the most lucrative, may
bear usury at a good rate; other contracts not so. bacon.
the disposition of ulysses inclined him to pursue the more
dangerous way of living by war, than the more lucrative me-
thod of life by agriculture. - broome.
lucre. m. s. [lucrum, latin.] gain; profit; pecuniary ad-
vantage. in an ill sense.
malice and lucre in them -
have laid this woe here. shaksp. cymbeline.
they all the sacred mysteries of heav'n
to their own vile advantages shall turn,
of lucre and ambition. milton's paradise l3/?.
a soul supreme in each hard instance try’d, -
above all pain, all anger, and all pride, - -
the rage of pow'r, the blast of publick breath, -
the lust of lucre, and the dread of death. pope.
loos. adj. [lucrum and fero, latin.] gainful; pro-
table.
silver was afterwards separated from the gold, but in so small
a quantity, that the experiment, the cost and pains considered,
was not lucriferous. - boyle.
lucri fick. adj. [lucrum and facio, latin.j. producing gain.
luc tatign. n.s. [lucior, latin.] struggle; effort; contest.
fairy queen.
“to luscu brate. v. a, [lucubror, lat.] to watch; to study
by night. -
lucu bration. m. s. [lucubratio, latin.] study by candle-
light; nocturnal study; any thing composed by night.
thy lucubrations have been perused by several of our friends.
tatler.
lucu bra'tory, adj. [lucubratorius, from lucubror, lat.] com-
posed by candle-light.
you must have a dish of coffee, and a solitary candle at
your side, to write an epistle lucubratory to your friend. pope.
lu'culent, adj. [luculentus, latin.] -
1. clear; transparent; lucid. this word is perhaps not used
in this sente by any other writer.
and luculent along
the purer rivers flow.
2. certain; evident.
they are against the obstinate incredulity of the jews,
the most luculent testimonies that christian religion hath.
hooker.
lut2icrous. adj. [ludicer, lat.] burlesque; merry; spor-
tive; exciting laughter.
. . plutarch quotes this instance of homer's judgment, in clos-
ing a ludicrous scene with decency and instruction. broome.
lu'dicrously. adv. [from ludierous.j sportively; in bur-
lesque; in a manner that may excite laughter.
thomson's winter.
lu'dicrous ness. n. s. [from ludicrous.] burlesque; sportive-
ness; merry cast or manner; ridiculousness.
lubification. m. s. [ludificor, latin.] the ad of mocking,
or making sport with another. dic?.
luff. m. s. [in scotland.] the palm of the hand.
to luff. v. n. [or loof.] to keep close to the wind. sea
term.
contract your swelling sails, and hoff to wind. dryden.
to log. v. a. saluccan, saxon, to pull; loga, swedish, the
hollow of the hand.]
1. to hall or drag ; to pull with rugged violence.
will / st you gods ! why this
ill lug your priests and servants from your sides. -
thy bear is safe, and out of peril, y shakes?
though lugg'd indeed, and wounded very ill. hudibrar.
when savage bears agree with bears,
shall secret ones lug saints by th’ ears hudibrar.
see him drag his feeble legs about
like hounds ill coupled: jowler logs him still
through hedges. dryden.
whose pleasure is to see a strumpet tear
a cynick's board, and lug him by the hair. dryden.
either every single animal spirit must convey a whole repre-
sentation, or else they must divide the image amongst them,
and so lug off every one his share. - c colis.
2. to lug out. to draw a sword, in burlesque language. •
but buff and beltmen never know these cares, co
no time, nor trick of law, their action bars;
they will be heard, or they lug out and cut. dryden
to luc. v. n. to drag; to come heavily : perhaps only mis.
printed for lags.
my flagging soul flies under her own pitch,
like fowl in air, too damp, and lugs along,
as if she were a body in a body. -
lug. m. s.
i. a kind of small fish.
they feed on salt unmerchantable pilchards, tag worms
lugs, and little crabs. carew's survey ofco.
2. [in scotland.] an ear.
3. lug, a land measure; a pole or perch.
that ample pit, yet far renown'd
for the large leap which debon did compel
ceaulin to make, being eight lugs of ground. spensor.
lu'gg age. m. s. [from lug.] anything cumbrous and on-
wieldy that is to be carried away; anything of more weight
than value. so
come bring your luggage nobly on your back.
'hat do you mean
to doat thus on such luggage p shakespeare's tempe/-
think not thou to find me slack, or need a ow
thy politick maxims, or that cumbersome
luggage of war there shewn me. milton's par. rogain'd.
ow durst thou with that fullen loggage
o' th' self, old ir'n, and other baggage,
to oppose thy lumber against us? hudibrar.
the mind of man is too light to bear much certainty
among the ruffling winds of passion and opinion; and if the
luggage be prized equally with the jewels, none will be cast out
dryden.
shakes.
till all be shipwrecked. glanville.
a lively faith will bear aloft the mind,
and leave the luggage of good works behind. dryden.
i am gathering up my luggage, and preparing for my jour-
ney. - swift to pope.
lucu'brious. adj. [lugubre, french; lugubris, lat.] mouin-
ful; sorrowful.
a demure, or rather a lugubrious look, a whining tone,
makes up the sum of many mens humiliations. p. of p.
lutcewarm. adj. . [the original of this word is doubted.
warmth, in saxon, is pleos; in old frisick //j; in dutch
liewte; whence probably our luke, to which warm may be
added, to determine, by the first word, the force of the fe-
cond ; as we say, boiling hot.]
1. moderately or mildly warm; so warm as to give only a
pleasing sensation. -
a dreary corse, whose life away did pass,
all wallow'd in his own, yet lukewarm blood,
that from his wound yet welled fresh alas !
may you a better feast never behold,
you knot of mouth friends; smoke and lukewarm water
is your perfection. - shakesp. timon of athens.
bathing the body in lukewarm water is of great advantage to
contemperate hot and sharp humours. //iseman’s slory.
whence is it but from this attrađtive power that water,
which alone distils with a gentle lukewarm heat, will not distii
from salt of tartar without a great heat newton's opticks.
2. indifferent; not ardent; not zealous.
if some few continues, stedfast, it is an obedience so late-
warm and languishing, that it merits not the name of passion.
dryden.
fairy queen.
this sober conduct is a mighty virtue
in lukewarm patriots.
addison's catc.
lu'kewarmly, adv, [from the adjective.]
1. with<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l u m
l u n
run
is:
#3:
f
to so.
}o.
jo:
po
quo
too,
of?
ibis.
duo
is .
l: ;
is
ists,
it.
1. with moderate warmth.
2. with indifference.
luskew armness. n.s.. [from lukewarm.]
1. moderate or pleasing heat.
2. indifference; want of ardour.
some kind of zeal counts all merciful moderation luke-
warmness. king charles.
the dese&amp;t of zeal is lukewarmns, or coldness in religion;
the excess is inordinate heat and spiritual fury. spratt.
go dry your chaff and stubble, give fire to the zeal of your
faction, and reproach them with lukewarmness. swift.
to lull. v. a. [lulu, danish ; allo, latin.j
1. to compose to sleep by a pleasing sound.
there trickled softly down
a gentle stream, whose murmuring wave did play
emongst the pumy stones, and made a sound
to lull him soft asleep, that by it lay. fairy queen.
such sweet compulsion doth in musick lie,
to lull the daughters of necessity. milton.
these lull'd by nightingales embracing slept. milton.
2. to compose; to quiet; to put to rest.
to find a foe it shall not be his hap,
and peace shall lull him in her flow'ry lap. milton,
no more these scenes my meditations aid,
qr lull to rest the visionary maid. pope.
by the vocal woods and waters lull'd,
and lost in lonely musing in a dream, 77 omson's spring.
lu’ll aby. m. s. [lallus, latin. quem nutricum fuisse deum
contendit turnebus, from lull: it is observable, that the
nurses call sleep by, by ; lullaby is therefore lull to sleep.] a
song to still babes.
only that noise heav'ns rolling circles kest,
sung lullaby, to bring the world to rest. fairfax.
philomel, with melody,
sing in your sweet lullaby;
lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby. shakespeare.
if you will let your lady know i am here to speak with
her, and bring her along with you, it may make my bounty
further.
—marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till i come again. shak.
drinking is the lullaby used by nurses to still crying chil-
dren. - locke on education,
lumba go. m. s. slumbi, latin, the loins.] * -
lumbago’s are pains very troublesome about the loins, and
small of the back, such as precede ague fits and fevers : they
are most commonly from fullness and acrimony, in common
with a disposition to yawnings, shudderings, and erratick pains
in other parts, and go off with evacuation, generally by sweat,
and other critical discharges of fevers. ..quincy.
lu"m ber. m. s. [loma, zeloma, saxon, housholdstuff; lom-
maring, the dirt of an house, dutch..] any thing useless or
cumbersome ; any thing of more bulk than value.
the very bed was violated
by the coarse hands of filthy dungeon villains,
and thrown amongst the common lumber. otway.
- one son at home
concerns thee more than many guests to come.
if to some useful art be be not bred,
he grows mere lumber, and is worse than dead.
thy neighbour has remov’d his wretched store,
few hands will rid the lumber of the poor. -
- dryden's juvenal.
if god intended not the precise use of every fingle atom,
that atom had been no better than a piece of lumber. grew.
the poring scholiasts mark; .
wits, who, like owls, see only in the dark;
a lumber-house of books in ev'ry head. pope's dunciad.
t, lu'mber. v. a. [from the noun..] to heap like useless goods -
irregularly.
in rollo we must have so much stuff lumbered together, that
not the least beauty of tragedy can appear. rymer.
to lu'mber. v. n. to move heavily, as burthened with his
own bulk. - -
first let them run at large,
nor lumber o'er the meads, nor cross the wood. dryden.
lu’minary. n. s. [luminare, latin; luminaire, french..]
1. any body which gives light. ".
the great luminary
dispenses light from far.
2. any thing which gives intelligence.
sir john graham, i know not upon what luminaries he
espied in his face, dissuaded him from marriage. wotton.
3. any one that instructs mankind.
the circulation of the blood, and the weight and spring of
the air, had been reserved for a late happy discovery by two
reat luminaries of this island. bentley.
lumination. m. s. [from lumen.]. emission of light. dict.
lu'minous. n.s. [lumineux, french.]
1. shining; emitting light. -
fire burneth wood, making it first luminous, then black and
brittle, and lastly, broken and incinerate. bacon.
dryden. ”
- milton. .
- its first convex divides
the luminous inferior orbs inclos'd,
from chaos. milton;
how came the sun to be laminous * not from the necessity
of natural causes. bentley.
2. enlightened.
#. may, industrious of herself, fetch day,
travelling east; and with her part averse
from the sun's beam, meet night; her other part
still luminous by his ray. milton's paradise losł.
3. shining ; bright.
the most luminous of the prismatick colours are the yellow
and orange: these affect the senses more strongly than all the
rest together. newton's opticks.
lump. m. s. [lompe, dutch.] -
1. a small mass of any matter. -
the weed kal is by the egyptians used first for fuel, and
then they crush the ashes into lumps like a stone, and so sell
them to the venetians. bacon's nat. hisł.
without this various agitation of the water, how could
lumps of sugar or salt cast into it be so perfectly dissolved in it,
that the lumps themselves totally disappear 2 boyle.
a wretch is pris’ner made ;
whose flesh torn off by lumps, the rav'nous foe
in morsels cut. tate.
ev'ry fragrant flow'r, and od’rous green,
were sorted well, with lumps of amber laid between. dryd.
to conceive thus of the soul's intimate union with an infi-
nite being, and by that union receiving of ideas, leads one
into as gross thoughts, as a country-maid would have of an
infinite butter-print, the several parts whereof being applied
to her lump of butter, left on it the figure or idea there was
present need of. - - locke.
2. a shapeless mass.
hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump;
as crooked in thy manners as thy shape. shak. henry vi.
why might not there have been, in this great mass, huge
lumps of solid matter, which, without any form or order, might
be jumbled together ? keil agains? burnet.
3. mass undistinguished.
-
all mens honours
lie like one lump before him, to be fashion'd - - - -
into what pinch he please. shakespeare's henry viii.
it is rare to find any of these metals pure; but copper, iron,
gold, silver, lead, and tin, all promiscuously in one lump.
//oodward's natural h/ory.
4. the whole together; the gross.
if my readers will not go to the price of buying my papers
by retail, they may buy them in the lump. addison.
other epidemical vices are rife and predominant only for a
season, and must not be ascribed to human nature in the lump.
- bentley's sermons.
the principal gentlemen of several counties are stigmatized
in a lump, under the notion of being papists. swift.
to lump. v. a. to take in the gross, without attention to par-
ticulars. -
: the expences ought to be lumped together. ayoff's par.
boccalini, in his political balance, after laying france in
one scale, throws spain into the other, which wanted but very
little of being a counterpoise: the spaniards upon this reckon-
ed, that if spain of itself weighed so well, they could not fail
of success when the several parts of the monarchy were lumped
in the same scale. - - addison.
lu'mpf is h. m. s. slump and fish..] a sort of fish. -
loo. adj. [from lamp.] large; heavy great. a low
word.
nick, thou shalt have a lumping pennyworth. arbuthnot.
lu'mpish, adj. [from lump.] heavy ; gross; dull; unaaive;
bulky.
out of the earth was formed the flesh of man, and therefore
heavy and lumpish. - raleigh's hjo. of the //orld.
sylvia is lumpish, heavy, melancholy. shakespeare.
: love is all spirit: fairies sooner may
be taken tardy, when they night tricks play,
than we ; we are too dull and lumpish. | suckling.
little terrestrial particles swimming in it after the grossest
were sunk down, which, by their heaviness and lumpish figure,
made their way more speedily. - burnet.
how dull and how insensible a beast
is man, who yet wou'd lord it o'er the rest ?
philosophers and poets vainly strove - -
in every age the lumpish mass to move. dryden.
lu'mpishly, adv, [from lumpish..] with heaviness; with stupi-
dity.
lu'mpis hness. m. s. [from the adjective..] stupid heaviness.
lu'mpy. adj. [from lump.j full of lumps; full of compact
masses.
one of the best spades to dig hard lumpy clays, but too
small for light garden mould. mortimer's husbandry.
lu’nac y. m. s. [from luna, the moon.] a kind of madness in-
fluenced by the moon; madness in general. -
3 love<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l u r
*
- - ely madness, and descr"**** well a dark house
..o do o and the reason why they o: o
punished and cured is, that the lunao " so ordinary, t i. the
whippers are in love too. . . shakesp. as you like it.
your kindred shun your house,
as beaten hence by yo"; strange lunaoy. shakespeare.
there is difference of lunacy: i had rather be mad with
him, that, when he had nothing, thought all the ships that
... into the haven his, than with you, who, when you have
jouch coming in, think you have nothing. suckling.
łos. łaj. [lunaire, fr. lunaris, lat.]
1. relating to the moon. - -
they that have . that these years . but o
r oiz. of a month, or tian years, are easily consoo
years, on &gt; gyp o hist. },he world.
then we upon our globe's last verge shall go,
and view the ocean leaning on the sky;
from thence our rolling neighbours wo shall know,
and on the lunar world securely pry. dryden.
2. being under the dominion of the moon.
they have denominated some herbs solar and some lunar,
and such like toys put into great words: bacon's nat. hist.
the figure of its seed much resembles a horseshoe, which
baptista porta hath thought too low a fignification, and raised
the same unto a lunary representation. brown's vulg. errouri.
lu’nary., n.s. [lunaria, latin; lunaire, fr.] moonwort.
then sprinkles she the juice of rue
with nine drops of the midnight dew, -
from lunary distilling. drayton's nymphid.
lunated. adj. [from luna.j. formed like a half moon. -
lj'na rock, adj. [lunaticus, latin.] mad; having the imagi-
nation influenced by the moon.
bedlam beggars, from low farms,
sometimes with lunatick bans, sometimes with prayers,
enforce their charity. shakespeare.
lu’natick. n.s. a madman.
the lunatick, the lover, and the poet,
are of imagination all compact;
one sees more devils than vast hell can hold;
the madman. shakes). midsummer night's dream.
i dare ensure any man well in his wits; for one in the thou-
sand that he shall not die a lunatick in bedlam within these
seven years; because not above one in about one thousand five
hundred have done so. graunt's bills.
see the blind beggar dance, the cripple fing,
the sot a hero, lunatick a king. pope.
the residue of the yearly profits shall be laid out in purchas-
ing a piece of land, and in building thereon an hospital for the
reception of idiots and lunaticks. swift.
luna’rion. n.s.. [unaison, french; luna, latin.] the revo-
lution of the moon.
if the lunations be observed for a cycle of nineteen years,
which is the cycle of the moon, the same observations will be
verified for succeeding cycles for ever. holder on time.
lunch. }*{ [minshew derives it from louja, spanish;
lu'nch eon. skinner from kleinken, a small piece, teuto-
nick. it probably comes from clutch or clunch..] as much
food as one's hand can hold.
when hungry thou stood'st staring, like an oaf,
i slic'd the luncheon from the barley loaf ;
with crumbled bread i thicken'd well the mess. gay.
lune. m. s. [suna, latin.]
1. anything in the shape of an half moon.
a troop of janizaries strew'd the field,
fall’n in just ranks or wedges, lunes, or squares,
firm as they stood. j/atts.
2. fits of lunacy or frenzy; mad freaks. the french say of a
man fantastical or whimsical, il a des lunes.
bestrew them
these dangerous, unsafe lunes i' th' king;
he must be told on’t, and he shall : the office
becomes a woman best. shakesp. jwinter'
. a laish : as, the lune of a hawk. hakesp. jwinter's tale.
hanmer.
lunette. m. s. [french.] a small half moon.
lunette is a covered place made before the courtine, which
consists of two faces that form an angle inwards, and is com-
monly raised in fosses full of water, to serve instead of a fause
braye, and to dispute the enemy's passage: it is fix toises in
extent, of which the parapet is four. trevoux
- lungs. m. s. slungen, saxon; long, dutch..] the lights; the
part by which breath is inspired and expired.
more would i, but my lurgs are wasted so
that strength of speech is utterly denied me." shakespeare
the bellows of his lungs begin to swell, -
nor can the good receive, nor bad expel. dryden
had i a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues yaen.
and throats of brass inspio with iron io"
i could not half those horrid crimes repeat &gt;
nor half the punishments those crimes have met. dryden.
*** - -
lu nced, adj. [from lungs.] having lungs; having the nature
*.
3. to steal privily; to filch ; to pilfer.
lu'rcher. n. s. [from lurch.]
1. one that watches to steal, or to betray or entrap.
#. [lurco, latin.] a glutton; a gormandizer. not used.
of lungs; drawing in and emitting air, as the lungs in an
imal body. - - -
animo. with prepares his hamme. for the stroke,
while the lung’d bellows hissing fire provoke. dryden.
luso-grown, adj. sung and grown.]
the lungs sometimes gow fast to the skin that lines the
breast within ; whence such as are detained with that accident
are lung-grown. harvey on consumptions.
"ngwoot. n.s. [pulmonaria latin.] a plant. . . 44ister.
#: is so. #rench, luna and solaris, latin.]
compounded of the revolution of sun and moon.
lunt. of [lonte, dutch..] the matchcord with which guns
are fired.
lu'pine. m. s. [supin, french ; lupinus, latin.] a kind of
ulse.
it has a papilionaceous flower out of whose empalement
rises the pale, which afterward turns into a pod filled with
either plain or spherical seeds: the leaves grow like fingers
upon the foot stalks. miller.
when protogenes would undertake any excellent piece, he
used to diet himself with peas and lupines, that his invention
might be quick and refined. peacham on drawing.
where stalks of lupines grew,
th’ ensuing season, in return, oy bear
the bearded product of the golden year. dryden's georg.
lurch. n.s. [this word is derived by skinner from sourche, a
game of draughts, much used, as he says, among the dutch;
jur.he he derives from area; so that, i suppose, those that are
lost are left in lorche, in the lurch or box; whence the use of
the word.]
to leave in the lurch. to leave in a forlorn or deserted con-
dition; to leave without help. a judicrous phrase.
will you now to peace incline,
and languish in the main design,
and leave us in the lurch. denham.
but though th' art of a different church,
i will not leave thee in the lurch. hudibras.
have a care how you keep company with those that, when
they find themselves upon a pinch, will leave their friends in
the lurch. l'e/irange.
can you break your word with three of the honestest best
meaning persons in the world? it is base to take advantage of
their simplicity and credulity, and leave them in the lurch at
last. arbuthnot's hi/?. of j. bull.
flirts about town had a design to cast us out of the fashion-
able world, and leave us in the lurch, by some of their late
refinements. addison's guardian.
to lurch. v. n. [loeren, dutch ; or rather from the noun.]
1. to shift; to play tricks.
1 myself, sometimes leaving goodness on my left-hand, and
hiding mine honour in my necessity, and fain to shuffle, to
hedge, and to lurch. shakespeare.
2. to lie in wait: we now rather use lurk.
while the one was upon wing, the other stood lurching upon
the ground, and flew away with the fish. l'estrange.
to lurch. v. a. slurror, latin.]
1. to devour; to swallow greedily.
too far off from great cities may hinder business; or too
near lurcheth all provisions, and maketh every thing dear.
bacon.
2. to defeat; to disappoint. a word now used only in bur-
lesque. [from the game lurch..]
he waxed like a sea;
and, in the brunt of seventeen battles since,
he lurcht all swords o' th' garland. shakesp. coriolanus
god never designed the use of them to be continual ; to
putting such an emptiness in them, as should so quickl &gt; o
and lurch the expectation. §.
this is a sure rule, that will never deceive or lurch the fin-
cere communicant. south
his thefts some tradesman spies,
swift from his play the scudding lurcher flies;
whilst ev'ry honest tongue stop thief resounds. gay.
2. a dog that watches for his game.
i cannot represent those worthies more na
turally than under
the shadow of a pack of dogs, made up of ... and
setters. tatler
ure. m. s. [leurre, french; lore, lutch.]
1. something held out to call a hawk.
my faulcon now is sharp and passin r
and, till she stoop, she so .. o;
for then she never looks upon her lure. 'shafoor,
this lure she cast abroad, thinking that this fame o
would draw, at one time or other, some birds to strike upon it.
- - bacon's henry vii.
.#. estate to an heir, is as a lure to all the birds of pre
round about to seize on him. #.
‘i his<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">- --—
uti,
at are
use of
co,
than
libra,
when
ds in
ang,
: be:
t ge d
rth:
hor.
i list
ria,
!, ini
o, ty
ar,
rao,
i to)
co,
lon,
b.f.
onto
fil
off,
fin.
&amp;:
mi
l u s
this stiffneck'd pride, nor art nor force can bend,
nor high-flown hopes to reason's lure descend. donham.
a falc'ner henry is, when emma hawks;
with her of tarsels, and of lure; he talks. prior,
2. any enticement; any thing that promises advantage.
how many have with a smile made small account
of beauty, and her lures, easily scorn’d
all her assaults, on worthier things intent? milton.
luxury
held out her lure to his superiour eye,
and griev'd to see him pass contemptuous by. madden.
70 lure. v. m. [from the noun..] to call hawks.
standing near one that lured loud and shrill, i had suddenly
an offence, as if somewhat had broken, or been dislocated in
my ear, and immediately after a loud ringing. bacon,
7% lu re. v. a. to attract; to entice; to draw.
as when a flock
of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote,
against the day of battle, to a field
where armies lie encamp'd, come flying, lur’d
with scent of living carcasses. milton's paradis. loft.
a man spent one day in labour, that he might pass the
other at ease ; and lured on by the pleasure of this bait, when
he was in vigour he would provide for as many days as he
could. temple.
should you lure
from this dark haunt, beneath the tangled roots
of pendant trees, the monarch of the brook,
behoves you then to ply your finest art. thomson.
volumes on shelter'd stalls expanded lie,
and various science lures the learned eye.
lu'rip, adj. [luridus, latin.] gloomy; dismal.
slow settling o'er the lurid grove,
unusual darkness broods. thomson's summer.
to lur. k. v. n. [probably lurch and lurk are the same word.
see lurch. j. to lie in wait ; to lie hidden; to lie close.
far in land a savage nation dwelt,
that never tasted grace, nor goodness felt;
but like wild beasts, lurking in loathsome den,
and flying fast as rochuck through the fen,
all naked. fairy queen.
milbrook lurkoth between two hills, a village of some eighty
houses, and borrowing his name from a mill and little brook
running there through. carew's survey of cornwall.
they lay not to live by their worke,
but theevishly loiter and lurke. tosor's hosandry.
if finners entice thee, consent not ; if they say, let us jay
wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent. prov. i. 11.
the wife, when danger or dishonour lurks,
safest, and seem liest by her husband stays. azilton.
see
the lurking gold upon the fatal tree.
the king unseen
lurk'd in her hand, and mourn’d his captive queen;
he springs to vengeance. pope.
i do not itork in the dark: i am not wholly unknown to
the world: i have set my name at length. swift.
lu'rker. m. s. [from lurk.) a thief that lies in wait.
lu'rking place. n. s. [lark and place..] hiding place; secret
place.
take knowledge of all the lurkingplaces where he hideth
himself. - i sam. xxiii. 23.
lu’scious. adj. [from delicious, say some ; but skinner more pro-
bably derives it from luxurious, corruptly pronounced.]
1. sweet, so as to naufeate,
2. sweet in a great degree.
the food that to him now is as luscious as loches, shall
shortly be as bitter as coloquintida. shakesp. othell.
with brandish’d blade rush on him, break his glass,
gay's trivia.
not used.
dryden's aneid.
and shed the luscious liquor on the ground. amilion.
blown roses hold their sweetness to the last,
and raisins keep their loscious native taste. dryden.
. pleasing; delightful.
he will bait him in with the liscious proposal of some gain-
ful purchase. south.
lusciously, adv. [from luscious.] sweet to a great degree.
lu’scious n ess. n. s. (from listicus.] immoderate sweetness.
can there be greater indulgence in god, than to embitter
sensualities whose lusciousnes intoxicates us, and to clip wings
which carry us from him : decay of piety.
peas breed worms by reason of the lusciousnes; and sweetness
of the grain. martimer's husbandry.
lu's ern. n.f. [lupus cervarius, latin. a lynx.
lush. adj. of a dark, deep, full colour, opposite to pale and
faint; from loosche. hanmer.
how lush and lusty the grass looks? how green shaf.
lusk, adj. [lishe, french.] . idle ; lazy; worthless. dic.
lu’s kish. adj. [from lusk..] somewhat inclinable to laziness or
indolence. -
lu’s kishly, adv. [from luffish.) lazily ; indolently.
lu's kishn ess. adv. [from lushish..] a disposition to laziness.
spenser.
vol. ii,
l us
luso'r rous, adj. [lsorius, latin.] used in play; sportive,
things more open to exception, yet unjustly condemned as
unlawful , such as the lusorious lots, dancing and stage-plays.
bishop sanderson,
lu’sory. adj. [osorius, latin.] used in play.
there might be many entertaining contrivances for the in-
struction of children in geometry and geography, in such al-
luring and lusory methods, which would make a most agreeable
and lasting impression. // atts on the mind,
lust. m.s. fourt, saxon ; luft, dutch.] -
1. carnal desire.
this our court, infeołed with their manners,
shews like a riotous inn, epicurism and ly?
make it more like a tavern or a brothel,
than a grac'd palace. shakspeare's king lear,
/...//, and rank thoughts. shosheare’s cymoeline.
they are immoderately given to the lu/l of the flesh,
making no conscience to get bastards.' abbot.
when a temptation of /u/? assaults thee, do not resist it by
disputing with it, but flie from it, that is, think not at all of
it. 7aylor’s holy living.
2. any violent or irregular desire.
i will divide the spoil; my lost shall be satisfied upon them.
exodus, xv. 9.
the ungodly, for his own luff, doth persecute the poor :
let them be taken in the crafty wiliness they imagined. psal.
virtue was represented by hercules: he is drawn offering
to strike a dragon; by the dragon are meant all manner of
los's. peacham on drawing.
all weigh our ads, and whate'er secons unjust,
impute not to necessity, but lu/?. dryden's ind. emp.
the luff of lucre. pope,
3. vigour; active power; lustiness. not used.
trecs will grow greater, and bear better fruit, if you put
salt, or lecs of wine, or blood, to the root: the cause may be,
the increasing the list or spirit of the root. bacon.
to ltist'. w. n.
1. to desire carnally.
inconstant man, that loveth all he saw,
and lu/led after all that he did love. rosoommon,
2. to desire vehemently.
giving sometimes prodigally ; not because he loved them
to whom he gave, but because he lu/led to give. sidney.
the christian captives in chains could no way move them.
selves, if they should unadvisedly luft aster liberty. knolls,
3. to list; to like. out of use.
their eyes swell with fatness; and they do even what they
lu 7. poi!. lxxiii. 7.
4. to have irregular dispositions, or desires.
the mixed multitude fell a lushing; and the children of
israci also wept, and said, who shall give us flesh to eat
numb.
the spirit that dwelleth in us loseth to envy. jam. iv. 5,
lu’s t ful. adj. [lus? and full.]
1. libidinous; having irregular desires.
turning wrathful fire to lossful heat,
with beastly fin thought her to have defisd. fairy q.
there is no man that is intemperate or lu/lful, but besides
the guilt likewise stains and obscures his soul. tillotson.
2. provoking to sensuality ; inciting to lust. - *
thence his lustful orgics he enlarg’d. //stom,
lu's t fully. adv. [from lossus.] with sensual concupiscence.
j,u’s t fuln ess. n. s. [from losful..] libidinousness.
lu's tihf d. n. s. (from hosly..] vigour; sprightliness; cor.
lu's t 111ood. { poral ability. not now in use.
a goodly personage,
now in his freshest flower of liftyled,
fit to inflame fair lady with love's rage. sensor.
reason and respect
make livers pale, and lu/lihoza dejected, shakspeare.
i'll prove it on his body;
despight his nice fence, and his aetive practice,
his may of youth and bloom of lu/lyhood. shakosłeare.
lu's tily. adv, [from lu/ly..] stoutly; with vigour; with mettle,
i determine to fight lu/lily for him, shakso. henry v.
now, gentlemen,
let's tune, and to it lu/lily a while. shałoszore.
barbarossa took upon hin that painful journey, which the
old king suftily performed. ancies.
he has fought lu/lily for her, and deserves her. southerne.
lu's tiness. n.s. (from lossy..] stoutness; sturdiness; strength;
vigour of body. -
fresh clarion being ready dight,
he with good speed began to take his flight,
over the fields in his frank lu/lings. speoser's munoztoos.
where there is so great a prevention of the ordinary time,
it is the liftings of the child; but when it is less, it is some in-
disposition of the mother. bacon's nat. hist.
cappadocian slaves were famous for their offins, and being
in good liking, were set on a stall to shew the good habit of
their body, and made to play tricks before the buyers, to shew
their activity and strength. dryden's peso.
15 u lu's tl 33.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">l u t
*
lu’s; irss. coff. [from lu/l.] not vigorous; weak. spens:-.
lost r a 1... a j. thyrale, french ; lustralis, latin.] used in
purification.
his better parts by lustral waves refin'd,
more pure, and nearer to athereal mind. garth.
lust ra"rion. m. s. slo/tration, french; lustratio, lat.j puri-
fication by water.
job's religious care,
his sons assembles, whose united prayer,
like sweet perfumes, from golden censors rise;
he with divine iustrations sanetifies. sandys's paraphrase.
that spirits are corporeal seems a conceit derogative unto
himself, and such as he should rather labour to overthrow ;
yet thereby he establisheth the doctrine of lustrations, amulets,
and charms. brown's pulgar errours.
should io's priest command
a pilgrimage to meroe's turning sand ;
through desorts they wou'd seek the secret spring,
and holy water for lustration bring. dryden's juvenal.
what were all their lostrations but so many solemn purify-
ings, to render both themselves and their sacrifices acceptable
to their gods - south's sermons.
by ardent pray’r, and clear liftration,
purge the contagious spots of human weakness;
impure no mortal can behold apollo. prior.
lu’s r e. m. s. [suffre, french.]
1. brightness; splendour ; glitter.
you have one eye left to see some mischief on him.
—lest it fee more prevent it; out, vile gelly where is thy
lysore now : shakspeare's king lear.
to the soul time doth perfeotion give,
and adds fresh store to her beauty still. davies.
the scorching sun was mounted high,
in all its sty', e, to the noonday sky. aïson's ovid.
pass but some fleeting years, and these poor eyes,
where now without a boast some lusore lies;
no longer shall their little honours keep,
but only be of use to read or weep. prizr.
all nature laughs, the groves are fresh and fair,
the sun’s mild /u/'re warms the vital air. pope.
2. a sconce with lights.
ridotta sips, and dances till she see
the doubling lustres dance as quick as she. pope's horace.
3. eminence ; renown.
his ancestors continued about four hundred years, rather
without obscurity than with any great lu/ire. ivotton.
i used to wonder how a man of birth and spirit could en-
dure to be wholly insignificant and obscure in a forcign coun-
try, when he might live with luftre in his own. swift.
4. [from luftre, fr. iu/irum, latin.] the space cf five years.
both of us have closed the tenth losire, and it is time to
determine how we shall play the last act of the farce. bolingbr.
lu's tring. m. s. [from lu/lre.] a shining silk; commonly
pronounced lute/?ring.
lu’s trous. adj. [from luftre.] bright; shining; luminous.
noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin, good sparks and
losirous. shakesp. all's well that ends well.
the more luftraus the imagination is, it filleth and fixeth
the better. bacon's nat. hisł.
lost won t. m. s sh/? and wort.] an herb.
lu’s ty. adj. [lo/?ig, dutch..] stout; vigorous; healthy; able
of body.
this lofty lady came from persia late,
she with the christians had encounter'd oft. sponser.
lf lusly love should go in quest of beauty,
where should he find it fairer than in blanch * shakesp.
we yet may see the old man in a morning,
lifty as health, come ruddy to the field,
and there pursue the chase. otway.
lu'tan is t. n.s.. [from lute.] one who plays upon the lute.
luta'rious. adj. [lutarius, latin.]
1. living in mud.
2. of the colour of mud.
a scaly tortoise-shell, of the lutarious kind. grew.
lute. m. s. [luth, lot, french.)
1. a stringed instrument of musick.
orpheus with his lute made trees,
and the mountain tops that freeze,
bow themselves when he did sing. shakesp. henry viii.
may must be drawn with a sweet countenance, upon his
held a garland of roses, in one hand a lute. peacham.
in a sadly pleasing strain
let the warbling lute complain. pope's st. cecilia.
a lute string will bear a hundred weight without rupture,
but at the same time cannot exert its eliticity. arbuthnot.
- lands of singing, or of dancing slaves,
love whisp ring woods, and lute resounding waves.
dunctad.
2. [from lut, french; lutum, lat..] a composition like clay,
with which chemists close up their vessels.
some temper lute, some spacious vessels move,
these furnaces erect, and those approve. garth.
to lute. v. a. [from the noun..] to close with lute, or che-
mists clay.
take a vessel of iron, and let it have a cover of iron well
luted, after the manner of the chemists. bacon's nat. hi/?.
iron may be so heated, that, being closely lated in a glass, it
shall constantly retain the fire. j/ilkin's asath. a sagi, 4.
lutulent. adj. [jutulentus, latin.] muddy; turb.d.
to lux. v. a. [luxer, french ; luxo, latin.] to put
to luxate. ; out of joint; to disjoint.
consider well the luxated joint, which way it slipped out;
it requireth to be returned in the same manner. //jcman.
descending careless from his couch, the fall
lux’d his joint neck, and spinal marrow bruis'd. philips.
luxa rios. n.s. [from luxo, latin.]
1. the act of disjointing.
2. anything disjointed.
the undue situation, or connexion of parts, in fractures and
luxations, are to be rectified by chirurgical means. flyer.
luxe. m. s. [french, luxius, lat..] luxury; voluptuousness.
not used.
the pow'r of wealth i try’d,
and all the various luxe of costly pride. prior.
luxu(riance. ln. s. [from luxurians, latin.] exuberance;
luxus rian cy. ; abundant or wanton plenty or growth.
a fungus prevents healing only by its luxuriancy. it isoman.
flowers grow up in the garden in the greatest luxuriancy
and profusion. spc&amp;ator.
while through the parting robe th' alternate breast
in full luxuriance rose. thomson’s summer.
luxus riant. adj. [luxurians, lat.] exuberant; superfluously;
plentedus.
a fluent and lauriant speech becomes youth well, but not
age. bacon's effy:-
the mantling vine gently creeps luxuriant. 41ilton-
if the fan y of ovid be luxuriant, it is his character to be
so. dryden's prof. to ovid's epistles.
prune the luxuriant, th' uncouth refine,
but show no mercy to an empty line. pope.
to luxus riate. v. n. [sustarior, latin.] to grow exube-
rantly; to shoot with superfluous plenty.
luxus rious. a j. [uxurieux, fr. luxuriosus, latin.]
1. delighting in the pleasures of the table.
2. administring to luxury.
those whom last thou saw'st
in triumph, and luxurio's wealth, are they
first seen in acts of pi ow.css cninent,
and great exploits; but of true virtue void. milton.
the luxurious board. anon-
3. lustful; libidinous.
she knows the heat of a luxurious bed:
her blush is guiltiness, not modesty. shakspeare.
i grant him bloody,
luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful. shakosłeare.
4. voluptuous; enslaved to pleasure.
luxurious cities, where the noise
of riot ascends above their loftiest tow’rs. milton.
5. softening by pleasure. -
repel the tuscan foes, their city seize,
protect the latians in luxurious ease. dryden.
6. luxuriant; exuberant.
till more hands
aid us, the work under our labour grows
luxurious by restraint. milton's par. loft.
luxus riously. adv. [from luxurious.] deliciously; volup-
tuously.
hotter hours you have
luxuriously pick'd out. shakspeare.
where mice and rats devour’d poetick bread,
and with heroick verse luxuriously were fed. dryden.
he never supt in solemn state;
nor day to night luxuriously did join. dryden.
lu'xury. m. s. [luxure, old french; luxuria, latin.]
1. voluptuousness; addictedness to pleasure.
egypt with aslyria strove
in wealth and luxury. milton.
riches expose a man to pride and luxury, and a foolish ela-
tion of heart. addison's spediator.
2. lust ; lewdness.
urge his hateful luxury,
his bestial appetite in change of lust, -
which stretch'd unto their servants, daughters, wives. so.
3. luxuriance ; exuberance.
young trees of several kinds set contiguous in a fruitful
ground, with the luxury of the trees will incorporate. bacco.
4. delicious fare.
he cut the side of the rock for a garden, and by laying on
it earth, furnished out a kind of luxury for a hermit. adaison.
ly. v. n. [a very frequent termination both of names of places
and of adjectives and adverbs ; when ly terminates the name of
a place, it is derived from leag, saxon, a field. gilson.
when it ends an adjective or adverb, it is contracted fion
lish, like: as, leasily, booke: ; plainly, plainlike. -
8 ly ca'n thrc py.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            end of section.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881106#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section" id="section"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section</h3><div class="page"><div class="pagenum">
          no page number
        </div><p class="text">”,
it ng
so.
to to
via
po,
kuo.
--
a loo,
4.
ort,
or,
r.;
-*
up.
off,
lyca'n thropy. m. s. [lycantropie, fr. a'zzy and 2,382,70;..]
a kind of madness, in which men have the qualities of wild
beasts.
he sees like a man in his sleep, and grows as much the
wiser as the man that dreamt of a lycanthropy, and was for ever
after wary not to come near a river. taylor.
lyk f. adj. for like. spenser.
lying. participial noun, from lie, whether it signifies to be re-
cumbent, or to speak falsely, or otherwise. -
they will have me whipt for speaking true, thou wilt have
me whipt for lying, and sometimes i am whipt for holding my
peace. ; shakespeare's king lear.
many tears and temptations befal me by the lying in wait
of the jews. acis, xx. 19.
lymph. m. s. [lymphe, french; lympha, lat..] water; tran-
sparent colourless liquor. -
when the chyle passeth through the mesentery, it is mixed
with the symph, the most spirituous and elaborated part of the
blood. arbuthnot on aliments.
lymphated. adj. [lymphatus, lat.] mad. dic7.
lymphatick. n.s. [lymphatique, fr. from lympha, latin.]
the lymphaticks are slender pellucid tubes, whose cavities
are contracted at small and unequal distances: they are car-
ried into the glands of the mesentery, receiving first a fine thin
lymph from the lymphatick ducts, which dilutes the chylous
fluid. cheyne's phil. principles.
upon the death of an animal, the spirits may sink into the
veins, or lymphaticks and glandules. floyer.
lympheduct. n. s. sympha and ducius, latin.] a vessel
which conveys the lymph.
the glands,
all artful knots, of various hollow threads,
which lympheduc's, an art'ry, nerve, and vein, -
involv’d and close together wound, contain. blackmore,
lynden tre.e. [tilia, latin.] a plant.
lryx. m. s. [latin.] a spotted beast, remarkable for speed
and sharp fight.
he that has an idea of a beast with spots, has but a con-
fused idea of a leopard, it not being thereby sufficiently distin-
guished from a lynx. locke,
what modes of fight betwixt each wide extreme,
the mole's dim curtain, and the linx's beam. pope.
lyre. m. s. [lyre, fr. lyra, lat..] a harp; a musical instrument
to which poetry is, by poetical writers, supposed to be sung.
with other notes then to th’ orphean lyre, milton.
my softest verse, my darling lyre,
upon euphelia's toilet lay. . . prior.
he never touched his lyre in such a truly chromatick man-
ner as upon that occasion. arburth. and pope's mart. scrib.
ly'rica l. madj. [lyricus, latin; lyrique, french..] pertaining
ly'rick. ; to an harp, or to odes or poetry sung to an harp;
singing to an harp.
all his trophies hung and acts enroll’d
in copious legend, or sweet lyrick song. milton's agonisł,
somewhat of the purity of english, somewhat of more equal
thoughts, somewhat of sweetness in the numbers; in one
word, somewhat of a finer turn, and more lyrical verse, is yet
wanting. dryden.
the lute negle&amp;ted, and the lyrick muse,
love taught my tears in sadder notes to flow,
and tun'd my heart to elegies of woe. pope.
ly'rick. m. s. a poet who writes songs to the harp.
the greatest conqueror in this nation, after the nanner of
the old grecian lyricks, did not only compose the words of his
divine odes, but set them to musick himself. addison.
lyr 1st. [lyri/ies, latin.] a musician who plays upon the
harp.
p his tender theme the charming lyri/? chose
minerva's anger, and the direful woes
which voyaging from troy the victors bore. pope,
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div>

alphasectend
